-'^i

M^%

i>

\ *<t%r- •^^►T v"^^ - ^

i^^X

ADAM AND EVE

IJV Tick AUTHOR OF

'DOROTHY fox; AND 'THE Prescott OF
PAMPHILLOX.'

IX THREE VOLUMES.
VOL. I.

LONDON :
RICHARD BENTLEY AND SON,

J3iibli5hcv5 in (Dil)inari) to ^)cr ^1.tjc5tn the Queen.

1880.

hall Rio his A\'Sc-nrJ.]

in 2009 with funding from

University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign

http://www.archive.org/details/adameve01parr

ADAM AND EYE.

CHAPTER I.

Towards the close of a July
evening, in the upper room of
a house, which stood in one
of London's narrowest thoroughfares, a
woman sat striving to penetrate the
tangled perplexities of her future.

Her hands were idle ; her eyes rested
on a low chair with a rail back and a

VOL. I. 1

patch-work cushion, her mother's chair, in
which she had been wont to see a
tender face and frail, bent figure ; but
now in place of that loved form there rose
before her a solitary mound of newly-turned
earth ; and a sense of her utter
desolation sweeping oyer her, Eve Pascal
flung herself down in an agony of tears,
and let the torrent of her grief run
dry.

Then she arose, stretching out her
arms as if in mute entreaty to some invisible
presence, and took a step nearer
the window, straining her eyes to catch
sight of the sky, the very light of which
was obscured and blotted out by the mass
of chimneys from warehouses and workshops.


From the window, Eve let her gaze
wander round the small room, inconveniently

filled with heavy furniture,
treasured by her mother as bearing testimony
to former thrift and respectable
belongings, for Mrs. Pascal had come of
a family who had seen better days, in
right of which they could never overlook
that their orphan cousin had thrown
herself away on a common seafaring
man who had nothing but his handsome
face and his dare-devil stories to set before
her ; and although the despised husband
never returned from the voyage, during
which Eve was born, the relations
saw in this no cause to restrain their
tongues nor alter their judgment, and the
sore-hearted widow, resenting these continual
potations, gradually withdrew herself
from her family, until not only had
all communication ceased between them,

1—2

but their very existence was no longer
known to her.

As Eve's gaze fell successively on a
tall eight-day clock, with a brass-bound
chest of drawers on one side, and a corresponding
but more bulky set on the other,
she gave an audible sigh.

you'll try and keep the furniture
together, Eve ?' her mother had said.

And Eve had promptly answered,
eyes,' in that spirit which then forbade
her to think of gainsaying the slightest
request which Mrs. Pascal might make ;
the same spirit still filled the girl's heart,
but her mind was troubled, and her
thoughts oppressed, by the narrow loneliness
of the life which, if she remained
here, she saw spread out before her.

Mrs. Pascal had supported herself
by clear - starching and fine - mending ;

she had tauL»'ht her daiio'hter enough to
enable her to gain a Using by the same
employment, but up to the time of her
mother's illness, although never refusing
her assistance, Eve had not taken
kindly to needlework. No sooner, however,
did she feel that the responsibility
of providing for her mother's comfort
depended on her exertions, than she sat
down with the most willing alacrity, and
managed the little business so deftly and
so well, that a great load was lifted from
the widow's heart, and she rested assured
that she might lay aside all anxiety on
the score of her child's future daily
bread.

But the work which had been a pleasure
then, had become an irksome labour now ;
the monotony of the quiet employment
was unendurable. Death had snapped

asunder the bondage to which love had
submitted, and, without any power to
oppose it, the girl's nature asserted itself
and refused to continue longer its course
of uneventful existence. Up to the morning
of the previous day, these longings and
yearnings after freedom had been hopeless,
but an unlooked-for letter had
changed the whole current of events,
and had sent her pent-up thoughts and
wishes hurrying off through a thousand
new and unexplored channels.

This letter had come from her uncle,
her father's half-brother, in answer to a
letter she had sent announcing her
mother's death. Eve had written this
letter in compliance with her mother's
request — a request made because it had
seemed, to Mrs. Pascal's mind, a respect
due to her husband's memory that his

family should be told of her death, and
thereby know that there was one the less
to bear their name.

Beyond the fact that her husband had a
brother and some cousins living in an out-of-the-way
village in Cornwall, Mrs. Pascal
knew nothing of these relations. She
had written to them when the news of
Andrew's death came, telling them that
she was left with one child, a girl ; and
had received a reply that if ' she'd comedown
and live among them, they'd do for
her and the little maid.' Eut the stories
which her husband had told of his native
village, and the life lived there, had
filled the town-bred wife with horror;
and, though she thanked them for their
kind offer, she felt she would sooner
bes: her bread in London than live at
ease with those, who, to use her husband's

words, ' feared neither God nor
devil;

Since this letter, no further communication
had passed between them ; and when
Eve had written her sad announcement,
it was with a strong; feehnof that
in all probability this uncle was long
ago dead, and that (only she had given
her mother the promise) she might well
spare herself the trouble of sending the
letter.

A fortnight passed by, and now an
answer had come, couched in very much the
same words, and containing an offer very
similar to that which, some twenty years
before, Mrs. Pascal had refused : namely
that if Eve would come and see them,
they would make her welcome for as long
as she liked to stay.

As Eve read this letter, her face

flushed with excitement ; for a time the
burden of her grief was lifted oft* her heart,
and her quick imagination carried her at
once to the far-off* village where * the
houses were washed by the waves, the
rocks rose high as mountains, and you
could stand at your door and see the great
ships sail by.'

Eve's pulse quickened at the picture,
for she was a sailor's child, and her inheritance
was the love that is born in the
hearts of those Avhose fathers, and their
fathers before them, have gone down to
the sea in ships, and seen the wonders of
the deep.

Mrs. Pascal's recollections of the stories
her husband had told, had been unwittingly
kept alive by the interest his daughter took
in them. The storms, the wrecks, the tales of
hair-breadth escapes, and of drowned men

which made the mother's heart beat with
fear, filled Eve with excitement, and
wonder that her father should have left
that life for such dull security as they
possessed.

It never occurred to her to propose that
her mother should leave London ; such a
thing would have seemed not only improbable,
but impossible. In those days,
unless some great event befell them,
people lived and died where they
were born ; necessity was the only recognised
obligation for leaving one place
to go to another, and any desire to roam
was looked upon as the offspring of an
ill-regulated disposition. Therefore it was
only at such moments as these that
Eve gave expression to the wish which
leavened her inmost thoughts, and coloured
with romance her idle dreams — to go out

into the world, to see people she had never
seen before, to live some life other than
the daily routine of dull respectability, to
have jo3^s and sorrows springing out of
unforeseen accidents and strange emery



agencies, to be the centre of hopes and
fears. These and a hundred more extravagant
longings had lain smouldering
in Eve's breast, to be set ablaze by
this letter, which seemed to open out the
way leading to the new existence after
which she so greedily thirsted. There was
but one drawback, and that was the knowledge
that, in accepting her uncle's offer,
she would be acting in direct opposition
to her mother's wishes — not her expressed
wishes — for the possibility of such an offer
had never occurred to Mrs. Pascal's mind ;
although, had it done so, she would have
felt perfectly secure that Eve would

never entertain the thought of leavings the
place where she had been brought up and
had friends, to live dependent upon relations
whose ways were more in keeping
with the godless heathens than the respectable
people of a Christian country.

But Eve well knew that, if her
mother where alive, she would never have
ventured to propose the step she now
contemplated, and this fact alone was
weighty enough to set the balance
trembling between this and her future
happiness.

^ What could I do with, the furniture X
she said, with a despondent movement of
her hands.

Perhaps Reuben would take care of
it,' suggested that temporising spirit
always at hand when battle wages between
duty and inclination. ' You need only

go for a time,' insinuated the tempter ;
and the room behind his shop is always
empty.'

Eve frowned ; she admitted the
suggestion, but dished the expedient,
feehno^ she had no riHit to ask a favour
from a man who needed but encouragement
to ask, on his part, a boon which she
could never grant. But the tare of desire
Alas already springing up, choking the resolutions
she had so recently made ; and
before another hour passed by, Eve
was resolved to write and tell her uncle
that she accepted his offer, for a time at
least, and that she would start for Polperro
as soon as she had safely housed, with a
friend, the furniture which her mother
had bidden her keep. Then she took out
her hat, and prepared to get ready to go on
an errand which would take her through

the street, at the far end of which was a
small shop, bearing over ifc the name
of reuben May, Watch and Clockmaker.'


I HE owner of this shop, Reuben
May, was a young man rather
below the middle size, with a
thin, spare figure and an earnest, thoughtful
face ; his complexion was sallow, and
his features by no means good, except his
forehead which was broad and well shaped,
and his eyes which were bright and penetrating.


From boyhood Reuben had shown a
sober, studious disposition, and to this, ashe

grew older, he added an independence
of thought and opinion which attracted
him towards the then fast-increasing body
of Methodists. It was through this
common bond of religious opinion that
Reuben's acquaintance with Mrs. Pascal
had been brought about. They had fallen
into speaking and hand-shaking through
sitting near to each other in the little
chapel which both frequented ; this had
led to walking home together, discussing
the sermon and the minister, until, from
a certain sympathy of thought and opinion,
a feeling of friendship sprung up between
them, and Mrs. Pascal, seeing that the
young fellow had no relations and few, if
any, friends, had invited him to come to
her house, an invitation which Reuben
readily accepted, and had so completely
benefited by that at the time of her death,

next to her daughter, the chief mourner at
the widow's humble grave had been
Reuben M?ty.

When, from necessity. Eve was
obliged to carry home her work, Reuben
would often take her jDlace by the sick
woman's bed, and at such times open his
heart with a frankness he had never before
shown ; tell her of his aspirations, his
failings, and his weaknesses, the strongest
of which he confessed, with some shamefacedness,
to be an overpowering love for
her daughter Eve, which, in spite of
scanty encouragement and small hope of
return, he found himself unable to overcome.


Poor Mrs. Pascal ! it was no slight
task to withhold herself from giving some
small encouragement to the furtherance of
a union, the accomplishment of which had

VOL. I. L, 2

been one of the fondest desires of her heart.
For months her eyes had never fallen on
these two Without the wish coming that
their lives might be united in marriage ;
but the nearer she approached that time
when all earthly interests must be given
up, the firmer grew her conviction that this
wish of her heart had best be abandoned.
Feeling sore at the disappointment, she
had on almost the last occasion of these
confidences told Reuben, that many a
time she had had it in her mind to chide
him for not having more cunning in
his speech to Eve ; and Reuben
had regretfully acknowledged the too
frequent sharpness of a tongue very
prone to give offence, for, unluckily for the
success of Reuben's suit, his love had eyes,
and his religion was in that stage when
zeal is apt to run ahead of discretion.

Did but the suspicion of a shadow come
into her mother's face, and Eve's quick
retort or stinging repartee was swallowed
down and repented of; but she desired
that her words should be as thorns and
nettles to Reuben's outspoken censures and
rebukes ; and if she could but discover she
was causing a smart, fresh fuel was added
to the fire of her tongue. And yet, knowing
this, seeing her motive, and wincing
under her utter disregard of his annoyance.
Eve was dearer to him than all the
world ; his heart craved after her love, and
lay as a stone within him in presence of
any other woman.

As he sat on this June evening close upto
the small window, apparently engrossed
in repairing the cog-wheel of the watch he
held in his hand, any one might have
said, there was a man very far 



moved from the rose-tinted region of
romance. Yet the God-sent gift of love
had been lodged within his breast, and was
spreading its halo over all he saw and did.

Mechanically he turned over his tools
and found the one best suited to his work ;
but even while he did so, he was looking
on a vision in which his heart was no
longer solitary, neither was his lot lonely.
Hand in hand he and his elect walked
through life, and lo ! earth with its toilsome
roads and cloudy skies became paradise
; and as he still dreamed on, a voice
close by awakened him, and, looking up,
the Eve of this Eden stood before
him.

Why, Reuben, you seemed scared,' she
said, smiling at the dazed look on the
young man's face.

And no wonder,' he replied, quickly recovering

himself, ' for I do believe this is
the first time you've ever put foot inside
my place !'

I wanted to have a little talk with
you said Eve, ignoring the slight reproach
which Reuben's words were meant
to convey ; ^ and I thought, as I had to
go out, I'd come round by here and ask
you if you'd much to do this evening ?'

Nothing that'll hinder anything you
may want of me,' returned Reuben,
promptly ; ^ the light's all but gone, and,
anyway, I should have been thinking of
shutting up in the course of a half
hour or so. Could you step inside for the
value of ten minutes ?' he asked, lifting up
the portion of the counter which covered
the entrance partition.

To his surprise Eve stepped through,
and, Reuben having cleared a chair, she

seated herself, while he returned to what
was, after this, but a mere pretence of
finishing his work.

You've a nice-sized room here observed
Eve, taking a critical survey of the
apartment.

Fairish said Reuben, endeavouring to
keep under the thumping of his heart,
which rendered ordinary conversation
somewhat trying.

It would take plenty more than you've
got in it now 1' continued Eve, interrogatively,


Oh yes ! no doubt but it would hold a
thing or two more,' said Reuben, very
fierce with himself for being put out of
countenance by this slim young thing, who
could look at him and his belongings with
the most enviable composure.

He would not allow himself to be

mastered ; it was against all reason that he,
Reuben May, who could hold his own, ah !
and better than his own, with most men he
knew, should be set trembling like an
aspen leaf because of a pale face and a pair
of grey eyes ; the thing was ridiculous,
and, to prove it, he took up one tool after
another, examining them critically, and
whistling the while with an air of the most
abstracted unconcern.

An expression of vexation then of disappointment,
2^^s^Gcl over Eve's face ;
that was not the way men took love.
Surely Reuben could not care for her so
much as she had counted upon, or he
would never sit whistling there, and she
close by.

Although not favourably disposed towards
the lover, Eve coveted the love ;
she wanted to see some one racked with

torture, driven to despair, called into life
by a smile, and killed by a frown. This
was love read by the index of her own
passionate nature, for Eve had nothing
else to teach her ; she knew no experience,
no books to tell her how many a
strange disguise the blind god walks under.
As she felt, Reuben ought to feel, that is,
if he loved her ; and if not, then came the
temptation to make him, and this impulse
made her throw a touch of sadness into her
voice as she said :

In spite of what you say, Reuben, I
see that you are busy to-night, and I
mustn't expect that you are going to give
up your time to me whenever I may want
any little thing of you ; but, you see, I
haven't got anybody, as it were, to go to —
not now.'

But before the snow' came trembling

out, Reuben had recklessly swept away all
his tools, had jumped up, pushed back his
chair, and was making a dash towards the
outer place where he kept the shutters.

I won't be a minute, Eve,' he said.
I haven't got nothing to do, indeed I
haven't ; and then I shall be ready to go
anywhere, wherever sou like, with you. I
ain't busy a bit ; I wasn't doing anything ;
I was only thinking — of — something.'

Eve gave a reassured smile, and
then, seeing he was pausing to know her
wishes, she said :

I do want to have a talk with you, and
I thought, if you wouldn't mind it, we
might go to Holloway, and then I could
speak to you as wee went along.'

Reuben gave a ready acquiescence, and
only detaining Eve while he 
his appearance in keeping with the

honour of the occasion, they started off for
St. Mark's churchyard, in a corner of
which was Mrs. Pascal's humble grave.
Engrossed by the separate interests which
filled their minds, 'they had gone a considerable
distance without a word behoof
exchanged between them. Suddenly
Reuben awoke to this fact, and, doubtful
how his companion might be affected by
it, he cast a somewhat disturbed glance in
her direction ; but, instead of displeasure,
he was reassured with a smile, which
accepting as a good omen, he resolved to
turn to immediate account, and at once
made a desperate plunge by saying :

Love's a queer sort of a thing, Eve,
isn't it r

Queer '?' she said, with a surprised
look ; ' how queer, Reuben X

Why, in its ways it is. It comes to

you whether you will or not, and it settles
on the one it makes choice of, no matter
what you have to say for or against it.'

Oh, I don't think that would ever be
your case ;' and Eve pursed up her
lips and gave a decided shake of her
head. ' You always tell me that every
right-minded person acts from principle,
and has no doubt about choosing right
from wrong ; and of course you speak from
experience.'

Reuben tried to Waive the thrust by
saying :

That's a very good rule, but, you know,
every rule has an exception ;' and he
gave a sigh, as he looked towards her,
which seemed to say the exception in his
case had come now. ^ Only you just look
here, now,' he said, after a few minutes
spent in silent debate as to the best mode

of entering upon the difficulties of his
subject; supposing I was to set you topick
out among all the young women you
see — say at chapel, then — the one you
thought was best fitted to be my wife,
what's the sort of one you'd fix upon, eh ?
Come, give me your idea of the right sort
of woman for me to take !'

Oh, I know exactly returned Eve
promptly, conjuring up a vision of a certain
Samson Walters, whose propriety and
decorum had often been held up to her asa
model which she might fitly follow.
^ She ought to be short and square, with
a little fat face, and light-blue eyes, and
her mouth ought to be buttoned-up so, and
her nose turned up like that.'

Come, never mind her looks laughed
Reuben, forced into recognising the intended
caricature. ' When a man's got

matrimony in his eye, he mustn't only
look skin-deep ; if he does, he deserves the
doll he's sure to get.'

^ Oh, but wait, I'm going on to the rest
for Eve was anxious to do justice to
her rival's peculiarities. ' Only you must
let me draw her my own way, you know.
I'm always obliged to describe the outside
as well as the inside of a person I want
other people to see. Of course she must
have experienced conversion, and so be
able to rebuke those whose hearts are still
levelling in sin, which is certain to be the
case if they don't push back all their hair,
and hide it, like she does, under a hideous
net cap with no border.'

Reuben gave a reproving shake of his
head.

Come, that'll do he said ; ' I know
who you're pointing to, and all I say is, I

wish all women were made out of such
good stuff as Tamsoii Walters is. The
man who calls her wife, I shall call a lucky
chap

^ Then w4iy don't you let that man
be yourself?' said Eve. ' I'm sure, if
you ask her, she couldn't say less than
^' Verily I will " to her dear brother
Reuben.'

And the manner of her mimicry, as she
folded her hands and let drop her eyes, was
so bewitching, that all the reproof Reuben
had ready to say died on his lips ; and
looking at her with eyes which told his
tale far more eloquently than words, he
said :

^ But suppose I don't want her to say
^' yes." Suppose I'm foolish enough to
set my heart on somebody who can tease
me into a rage one minute and set me in a

good temper the next — who one hour I
say I never want to see any more, and the
next I'm counting the minutes that'll bring
the time when we'll meet ao-ain — who
worries and torments me so, that do what
I can, I can't get her out of my head by
night nor day — who's got more faults
than anybody I ever knew, and yet if I
was asked how I'd have her altered, I
could not tell you, for the life of me. Ah,
Eve, you may well laugh !' he exclaimed,
reflection the smile which had
overspread her face ; ' for if I was to talk
from now to next week, I could never
make you know the great fool you've
made and are still making of me.'

^ I V the smile turned into an expression
of the most bewildered astonishment ;
why, what have I got to do with it,
E-euben V

What have you got to do with it ?
as if you didn't know all the time I was
talking about you — that's just one of your
teasing ways; why, the minute I began
you knew what was sticking in my throat
and wouldn't come out. You've known
for twelve months and more what I've
been wanting to say, only that I saw the
foolishness of it ; and, as far as that goes,
I see it still, but I can't get over it. Oh,
Eve ! you're as the very apple of my
eye !' he said, with increasing earnestness.
Sometimes I think it must be the allurements
of the devil, and then I'm for putting
it down to the workings of the Almighty ;
anyway, all I know is, I can't battle
against it any longer — it's mastered me
altogether ; and though I promised your
mother I'd act by you like a brother, and
put aside all the rest, I can't do it,

Eve, that I can't. Unless you'll promise
to settle down into trying to makeup
your mind to marry me, I must go
away far off from here to some place
where I shan't see nor hear of you
again

Eve's heart leaped up in triumph. He
did love her then, and in spite of himself,
too. This man, who was always
teaching and reproving, and trying to be
her master, was after all her slave. Fora
moment every other feeling was swallowed
up in victory — but oily for a
moment — for pity was already near, and
in another instant was clamouring so loud
that Eve had to ask its name before she
could assure herself the voice she heard
was not the subtle voice of love.

Oil, Reuben !' she said, ' why didn't
you tell me all this before ?'

VOL. I. 3

^ I thought you knew it,' he said.

No, I didn't quite know it. I used to
think sometimes that you cared a Httle ;
and then something would come and I'd
think you didn't. Of course I saw you
liked to talk to me and that — but I
didn't know that what you felt was real
love !'

^ Real love ?' he echoed. ' What do
women know about real love ? A little
dribbling fondness for somebody who can
make them pretty speeches, that's all they
feel. While I — I've wrestled with love
as 'twere a oiaiit, and the o^iant has
thrown me so that I lie on the ground
helplesS;, and whether 'tis best to hope for
life or death from ^^ou, God knows — I
don't !'

And he stood for a few moments all but
mastered by his emotion. A little sigh

escaped Eve, and the sound seemed to
arouse Reuben, and bring him back to
the present.

Mine's a queer kind of courting,
Eve,' he said, looking up and meeting
her troubled face. ' 1 know I ain't saying
a bib what I ought to, to you, but for all
that I've got it in my heart to try to make
you comfortable ; and you should have all
I could give you, and not more to do than
you'd a mind to do. As far as I could
make it, your life should go easy with you,
Eve.'

Easy with me ?' she cried contemptuously
; ' as if I cared for sitting still all
my life— doing nothing, seeing nothing,
beincr nothing I'

It ain't a bad sort of life though. Eve.
I don't see that a woman wants much
more.'

3—2

Oh, don't you ! But there, it's no good
you and me beginning to argue, Reuben) ;
or I should say I don't see how a man
can want so Httle as to sit indoors all day
over the mending of a few clocks and
watches. Oh, if I'd been a man, do you
think I'd have been contented to be nothing
more than a clockmaker ?'

Who says I'm contented to be nothing
but a clockmaker ?' said Reuben, quickly.
^ 'Isn't because I'm not one of your bloodthirsty
chaps with a nose for powder and
an eye always cocked for seeing daylight
through my fellow-creatures, that I'm contented
to sit quiet by and see the world go
round me. I often believe that if it wasn't
for you, Eve, I should have turned my
mind on something else long before this.'

Do you ? she said, with surprise.
Why, what else could you do, Eeuben ?'

What else could I do V he repeated.
Well, a good many things that I don't
think small of, though I don't suppose any
would make me cut a much better figure
in jour eyes.'

For a minute Eve did not answer, then,
she said :

I've been thinking: whether I couldn't
be of some use to somebody. I've heard
dear mother tell of women who have
worked wonders, and done good among
people who wouldn't hear a word from a
man.'

Ah, they were women of your mother's
sort, though,' said Reuben, seizing on this
opportunity for retaliation. ' You ain't a
bit like her in any way.'

Of course, I know I'm not half so
good,' said Eve, not over-pleased with this
candour, ' nor never shall be.'

Never !' said Reuben, decisively. ' Soit
wouldn't be of any use your trying anything
of that sort. You might be seeming
to convert a man so long as he lead some
hopes of marrying you, but,' he added,
take my word for it, it wouldn't last
longer than that.'

Oh, I know you've a very poor opinion
of what women can do.' said Eve.

No, I haven't,' replied Reuben ; ' that
is, so long as they do well what they were
ordained for — sitting in their own houses.
mending the clothes, and tending the
children.'

And he gave a little inward chuckle over
the nettle he was proving himself to
Eve.

For a moment Eve was bent on finding
an equally smart retort, but a sudden
thought told her that she held a

sharper weapon to pierce Reuben with,
than the mere bandying of words could be.
So, affecting her most placid smile, she
said blandly :

Thank you, Reuben, for showing me
the life your wife will have to lead. I'm
much obliged for the offer, but you'll excuse
me saying that the situation wouldn't
suit me.'

Oh, very well,' said Reuben, trying to
smother his love, in his vexation with himself
and his anger against her ; ' then my
course is chalked out for me very clear.
Off I go — the farther away the better — to
some place where I can't ever see or hear
of you again.'

And as he jerked out the words, he
involuntarily turned to see how such an
appalling announcement was affecting her.
Not very much, apparently, for the smile

had become more triumphant, as, seizing
the opportunity, she pointed her sharpest
arrow by saying :

Please don't do anything rash on my
account, particularly as there's no need for
it, for the thing I had to tell you was that
I'm going away myself. My uncle in
Cornwall has written up for me to go
down there and Hve with him among my
father's people.'

But you won't go ?' exclaimed Reuben,
forgetting all his own lately-vaunted resolutions.


Why shouldn't I go V said Eve. ' IVe
nothing nor nobody to keep me where
I am.'

'But said Reuben, ' haven't you heard
your mother speak of them as a wild
rough lot who she shuddered to think of ?
Nonsense, Eve, what would a girl like

you do amongst such a set as you'd find
there V

Do ? A great deal of good, perhaps ;
and if not she added, seeing the look
^vhich came into Reuben's face, ' what
harm could they do me V

What harm could they do you V he
repeated slowly. ' Why, Eve, surely you
know that next to doing bad deeds yourself,
comes the lending countenance to
them who do .them. As I heard Howell
Harris say, '^ As well eat the devil, as the
broth he's boiled in." '

I've only promised to go down and
see them,' said Eve, somewhat disturbed
by Reuben's plain speaking. ' I needn't
stay more than a year, unless I like.
Come,' she continued, seeking reassurance,
^ there can't much harm happen in a year,
Reuben V

*More than you think,' he replied
gravely.

Then, after standing for a minute silent,
he burst out with :

A whole year 1 — never to see you —
speak to you — know where you are, or
what you're turning to ? — oh ! it's cruel —
cruel ! Why should Providence deal so
hard with me ? What have I ever done
that all my heart should be set like
this upon one who doesn't care a brass
button for its love or its hate V

The tone of these words, and the look of
anguish E-euben's face wore as he spoke
them, touched Eve's, and she said :

Oh, Reuben, don't say that ; it isn't
kind — after all you've done for me, too. I
do care for you very much, but how was
I to know what you felt ? Why didn't
you speak to me like this before ? Then,

I don't know, it might have been different ;
but instead of that you've always spoken
to me so off-hand-Hke, that I thought you
fancied love was a thing to be ashamed
of.'

^ Well, and so my love did make me
ashamed,' returned Reuben, fiercely ; ' and
well it might, when I saw it was only
made a lauo-hinir-stock and a deer of.
Why, haven't I seen you turn up your
nose if by chance I so much as mentioned
the word love ?'

The colour came up into Eves face,
and, with a little confusion, she answered :

Indeed, Reuben, if I seemed to do that,
'twas only pretending, and for fear you
should guess some of the silly thoughts
I have in my head when I sit romancing.'

Oh, hang romancing !' exclaimed Reuben,
pettishly ; ^ it's death and destruction to

truth and commonplace sober reality.
Life's too short, and time's too precious to
be spent in picturing up a pack of beaux
and dandies that '

Oh, you don't understand me, Reuben,'
said Eve, hopelessly.

^No, nor I never shall while you're up
there in the clouds ; though sometimes I
think ' — and he turned on her face a look
saddened, yet full of admiration — ' that
it's the most fitting place for such an angel
as you seem to me.'

'Who's romancing now, I should like
to know ?' exclaimed Eve, her vanity
touched by Reuben's rarely acknowledged
tribute to her good looks.

Why me, of course ! Oh, you've but
to pull the right string, and your puppet
will dance to whatever tune you choose to
play. Though, so far as romance goes,

'tis an old ehiiin of mine, and until thinking
of you drove out all chance of thinking
of anything else from my precious head,
has helped me to get through many a dull
day.'

Eve gave a little smile of amused
content ; she had never before so much
enjoyed a walk with Reuben. Her tickled
vanity set her pity in motion, and she
began to feel so much compassion that it
made her quite sorry to think she was
going away from him. It seemed, too, so
hard to crush all this despair — to take
away from him all plea for suffering anymore.


What could she do to adjust matters to
a better balance ? Aslc him to wait ? Tell
him she would give him his answer at the
end of the year when she came back %
Acting on this suggestion, Eve spoke at

once, fearing, if lie hesitated, that the
whisper of a conscience which disapproved
this action would make itself heard, and
she should be forced into being honest,
and obliged to give Reuben now his final
No

Therefore it happened that when they
parted that evening, an understanding had
been entered into between them, that,
though there was no engagement on either
part, each was bound, in case of change,
to render an account of his or her feelings
to the other.

OW, under ordinary circumstances,
and once secure that he possessed
her love, Reuben would
have willingly served his seven years for
Eve, feeling a certain satisfaction that there
was to be a f)ei'iod of probation, during
which time he should be able to regain
that mastery over himself which this present
all-absorbing state of love seemed to
have completely wrested from his grasp.
Reuben prided himself on his calm unemotional

temperament, and it chafed him
not a little to find his native subverted and
his volition destroyed because of a fair face
whose smile or frown made his joy or sorrow.
His reason yet remained sufficiently
independent, and often in his calmer
moments the conviction was still forced
upon him that, seeing how widely Eve's
principles and opinions differed from his
own, his sensibility ought to have continued
subservient to his judgment, and,
until he had convinced her that her way
of viewing things was false, and her
arguments unsound, he ought never to
have urged her to become the partner of
his home.

Disputation was Reuben's forte, and it
was a matter of great wonderment to many
why he did not give up his business, which
was not over successful, and adopt the vocation

of a lay preacher, for which he seemed
so evidently suited.

Reuben often dwelt upon this possibility
himself, and ^^'as somewhat surprised that
he should feel so lukewarm towards a calling,
which in others had for him many
attractions ; but the secret of his indifference,
perhaps, lay in this fact, that for
him to be a preacher seemed an easy
matter, a thing at hand to be taken up any
day, while the business by which he earned
his daily bread had not, so fur, proved a
happy choice. If he gave it up. Fate,
Providence, or whatever name we give to
the power which orders the everyday events
of our life, would have proved too strong for
him, and he would have to confess himself
defeated, and defeat of any kind was most
unpalatable to Reuben May ; indeed, so far
as his personal concerns went, it was a word

VOL. I. 4

to which he would give no meaning ; he had
no tolerance for failure, and no pity for those
who failed. Why should people fail ? he
had never failed, and nobody had ever
helped him. Both his parents had died
when he was a boy, leaving him to shift
for himself, and so good a shift had he
made that, since that time, he had, unaided
and alone, supported himself, taught himself,
apprenticed himself, and had finally,
by his own exertions, scraped together the
small sum needed to open his little shop
with.

His argument was, that what others had
done he could do, and what he had done
others could do ; a reasoning which outsteps
vanity to fix its standard on self-approbation.


The magnet which attracted and drew
together the sympathies of Reuben and

Eve was, that within the nature of each
lay a vein of enthusiasm and aspiration
which carried them beyond the daily
round of their everyday lives. Both had
strong* wills, fervid temperaments, and
vivid imaginations, more or less warped
by the cramping influence from which
they suffered, in being constantly surrounded
by a narrow sphere of persons
who looked on all that lay beyond the
grasp of their own stunted reasons as
something reprehensible and not respectable.


Even Mrs. Pascal, good, worthy woman
as she was, had not entirely escaped this,
bias ; and when, at times. Eve would
open wide her heart and speak from out
its fulness, the mother would be troubled
at her child's strange fancies, and would
cast about to find where the mistake lay

4—2

in her bringing up, that she had turned
out so widely different from those models
after whom she would fain have fashioned
her speech and her thoughts, as she had to
her utmost done her cap and her gown.

Reuben, too, knowing that he had never
been able to get up the slightest interest
in those demure virgins from amid whose
ranks his choice should necessarily have
fallen, revenged himself by chiming in
with Mrs. Pascal, praising their sedate
appearance and demure behaviour, and
ignoring the fact that in external propriety,
at least, Eve differed but very little
from the rest of the young women among
whom, at chapel or meeting, she was
seated.

Mrs. Pascal's naturally shy, retiring
disposition had been against her making
many friends ; and as — though a constant

attendant at the chapel — she had never
summoned up enough resolution to become
a member until her illness, though known
to all the congregation by sight, and sufficiently
intimate with most of chem to exchange
hand-shaking, but very few had
ever seen her in her own home.

As soon, however, as it became known
that she was dangerously ill, she was the
object of constant and unremitting attentions,
and scarce a day passed without a
visit from one or other of her friends.

But the conversation which soothed and
calmed the weary spirit of the sick woman
was torture to poor Eve ; the hope raised
of that bright world unseen fell like a
funeral knell upon her ears ; the glories
of that land beyond the grave, to which
her mother now was hastening, she would
not listen to, because her eyes were fixed

upon the grave itself, and the great desolation
she saw there blotted all else beyond
from out her view.

Looking from the level of declining
middle age, good, worthy people, as these
were, no longer see the whirlwinds which
scatter and destroy youth's golden sands ;
their blood grown torpid, their affections
lukewarm, they fail to recognise the
throes which usher in the birth of calm
endurance.

When Eve, in the strength of her
passionate love, wrestled with the dread
enemy whose shadow already rested on
her mother's face, they called it presumption
; and when, seeing his visible presence
draw near, the girl, in the helpless
agony of mute despair, threw up her arms
to — if but for an instant — avert the fatal
dart, the action was denounced as an implied

defiance of Almighty Will. Misapplied
rebukes, untimely reasoning, and
comfortless platitudes were showered on
her to no purpose : ' Leave me alone, only
leave me alone 1' she would moan to those
who had left their work or their pleasure
for the sole purpose of carrying out the
good that in their hearts they constantly
desired to do. It was neither their fault
nor hers that they could not understand
her, and she could not tolerate them ; yet
the breach produced scandal on one side,
and vexation and disquietude . on both.

It was during this time that the chord
between Reuben and Eve had first truly
vibrated ; Houben's sympathy was as dumb
as Eve's sorrow, and because he sat
silently by, neither attempting to console
her anguish nor curb its outbreak, his
was the only presence she could tolerate

But this preference shown, and shown fora
man too, was but a further aggravation
of Eve's already numerous offences.
Neither did Reuben May, although a
favourite, altogether escape his share of
censure ; but though Reuben was pretty
certain of the animadversions he was
bringing down upon himself, they in noway
influenced his conduct, for, added to
the attraction which Eve possessed for
him, the affection in which he had held
Mrs. Pascal had been all but filial, and in
itself had prompted him to watch over
each trifling detail of the humble funeral
which Eve had entrusted to his care ;
and when the poor girl found strength
to thank him for his solicitude, finding
some comfort in the thought that
all was carried out as her mother would
have desired. Reuben was doubly repaid

for the trouble he had taken, and the small
hoard of savings which, on his own partlie
had expended.

A novice in the ways of love, Reuben
did not knows that one of the surest tests
of the strength of his lay in the fact, that
never at any former moment, when her
beauty had been most radiant and her
spirits most brilliant, had Eve seemed half
so dear to his heart as she was during
those dark days of sorrow when, with
swollen eyes and tear-stained face, she sat
unmindful of his presence, hardly heeding
when he came or when he went. He forgot
then all the vanity for which he used to
chide her, all the inconsistencies for which
he had been wont to condemn her ; he only
felt that if she would remain helpless all
her days so that he might Avait upon her
and work for her, he asked no better lot,

and a hope that she might give him the
right to do this began to be strengthened
as he saw that he was the one person to
whom she timed. When she felt that
support was needed, she clung to Reuben
for it. When the time came that she
thirsted for consolation, it was at his hand
she sought it. She listened to his counsel
and acted on his advice, trusting everything
to his guidance, until — the elasticity
natural to youth gradually asserting itself
■ — she began to feebly struggle back to the
every-day life of the present and the
feverish hopes for the future.

Mrs. Pascal had been dead nearly six
months now, and though the abiding loss
of her mother was as fresh and green to
Eve as when she first saw her, yet, during
the weeks which had elapsed since her
visit to Reuben May, she had regained a

considerable portion of her health and her
energy.

Her visit to Polpcrro was now a settled
fact, and Eeuben had agreed to house
her furniture until she came back to
claim it.

This past time, with its interchange of
letters, its suspense, its anxieties, had
been one of great excitement to Eve, and
surely its outpour of sweets and bitters, atone
time set suddenly flowing, at another
as suddenly checked, had well-nigh distracted
Reuben May.

But now all was settled, every arrangement
made, and nothing more remained to
be done but to sit idly down and wait for
the hour of departure.

The order of her journey, and the means
by which it might be accomplished, had
been left entirely to her uncle, and a couple

of days since a sailor-looking man had
come to say that the Mary Jane of Fowey
was now unfading at Oates' Wharf, and
her captain had bid him run up and say,
that he'd been asked by Zebedee Pascal
at Polperro to convoy round a niece of his
that he'd find in London ready and waiting
to go with him, that the captain's name
was Triggs, and if all went well the Mary
Jane would get under weigh on Sunday
morning about four o'clock, so that miss
had best come aboard the night before.
Eve, having already received notice that
Captain Triggs of the Mary Jane was
to be her escort, accepted the invitation,
and was now waiting for Reuben's
arrival to accompany her down to the
wharf.

Those who have made a first solitary
venture out into the world will perhaps

know the contending emotions which were
stirring within Eve. Later on, when Beseems
one long journey, with few or
many resting-places, the whole matter is
altered, and we know that nothing will be
nearly as good or as bad as we anticipate ;
our expectations grow more moderate
and are not so easily damped ; our regret
is less keen, but more lasting Eve's
feelings had reached the stare when all
else is versed in the seat longinus to begone,
and the dread of going. Naturally
affected by external surroundings, the
sight of the furniture disarranged, huddled
together, and swathed for protection in bits
of carpet and such like wrappings, filled
her with melancholy ; a melancholy which
seemed shared in by the cat, who sat
miserable and disconsolate on the tied-up
bed, giving pantomimic mews which had

no sound, but much sadness. The window-was
curtailed, the fireplace untidy and
choked with torn-up paper and useless
rubbish ; the sea-chest, turned for the occasion
into a table, was littered with the
remnants of that last meal which Reuben
had impressed upon her it was necessary
she should fortify herself with ; the rush
candle standing on the mantelshelf near,
just gave enough light to deepen the
shadows and darken the corners into fit
lurking-places for imaginary terrors.

Eve's courage seemed to die within her ;
her heart grew troubled and reproachful.
Could she be doing wrong ? Ought
she to have stayed working at her lace-mending,
as her mother had wished her todo
? Did it not seem as if she was forsaking
that mother in thus going away from all,
that while they were together had grown

familiar 1 True it was that she could no
longer see her, hear her speak, listen to
her words ; but she could go to the grave
where she was laid, and in sweet commune
there feel such a depth of rest and peace
as never came at any other time. For oft
beside that daisies mound a spirit seemed
to stand, and there, 'twas not the breeze
that stirred the air, but the soft rustle of
angelic wings. When she was gone, would
that dear presence hovering come, and
watch, and watch in vain, for her who
had left it lonely and alone ? The
thought pierced Eve like au arrow, and,
overcome by quick remorse, she flung
herself down and wept so passionately
that, though Reuben, who had just
mounted the stairs, knocked sharply
before entering, she neither stirred nor
spoke. He opened the door : it needed

but the sight of her bowed figure beside
the old chair, with her face hidden down in
the seat where her mother had always
sat, to tell him what was giving rise to
the struggle through which Eve was passing.
The vision of past days when he
was sure to find the two in loving company,
the dear motherly face, the cheerful tidy
room, all came crowding before him, and
contrasted bitterly with the present grief
and discomfort. A mist swam before
Reuben's eyes, and he made an involuntary
pause. Unknown to himself, the next few
moments would decide one of those 
which, few or many, come to all
our lives, and his hand held the balance ;
his next action, nay, almost his next word,
would fix the future. How will he act %
what will he say \

Alas, poor Reuben 1 had he loved less

he would have ventured more, but great
love is seldom venturesome ; held back by
a thousand emotions, it stands trembling
on the threshold over which a more
selfish passion strides triumphant. Untutored
in love's ways, ignorant of the
arts by which it is ensnared, Reuben
was guided by a compassion so tender,
that his heart let its own anguish
and its great yearning be swallowed up
in the one desire to spare his beloved
pain and keep her from suffering. Gulping
down the torrent which sprang to his
lips, he sounded the knell to his fate by
saying, in a forced tone of commonplace
surprise :

Come, come. Eve ; why, what are you
thinking of ? I thought to find you ready
and waiting for me ; it won't do, you know,
to drive things off to the last minute,

VOL. I. 5

or if so ' and the rest of the sentence was

drowned by the noise he made in unnecessarily
dragging a box from one side of the
room to the other, after which, expending
a further surplus of energy in giving vigorous
pulls to sundry stray pieces of rope,.
Reuben turned to find Eve standing up
ready and waiting.

At sight of her wan face all his firmness
seemed to desert him, and involuntarily
stretching out his hand he laid it on her
shoulder.

^ Eve,' he said, *" my dear one, if you
could see my heart torn in two to see you
suffer !'

But the sympathy had come too late,
the recoil had been given ; those first few
words had turned the depth of feeling back
upon herself, and the heart which lay cold
and dull within Eve no longer felt reproach

for herself, nor craved sympathy for
her siifterino'.

I'm quite ready now she said, with a
Httle movement which told Reuben more
effectually than words that his small show
of affection was displeasing to her. ' I've
said good-bye to everybody, I'll take these
small things down, and tell the man to
come, and you'll help him with the boxes
on to the truck ?'

Then ain't you coming up again X

No ; I shall go slowly on, and you can
overtake me ;' and, without another look
at him, or at the room she was leaving,
Eve went downstairs and passed out of the
house into the street.

Oh ! for how many a weary night and
day was that walk to dwell in Reuben's
memory ; the starless sky, the silent gloom
of the ail-but deserted streets seemed to

5—2

shadow forth the unknown future, while
every onward step but widened the barrier
which had insensibly sprung up between
him and Eve, who moved along mechanically
with her face impassible, and
her manner so distant and cold, that the
last fond words which lay crowded on
Reuben's lips were chilled before he found
courage to speak them.

But if anything is to be said it must be
said at once, for the bridge has been crossed,
the last turning made, and the dark, silent
river is near, bearings on its waters a small
forest of masts, one of which belongs to the
little barque which is to carry Eve away.

Away ! the thought flashed before
Reuben as if he only noah, for the first
time, realised that they were going to part;
all the pain, fear, dejection that lay scattered
over the last two months seemed to

crowd itself into the anguish of this
present moment, a great shadow of foreboding
rose up to encompass him, a cloud
of desolation spread its gloom around him,
and, nerved by the keenness of this agony,
he seized Eve by the sleeve.

'Isn't too late !' he gasped ; ^ Eve,
for the love of God don't go to this place I
No, I can't tell you what it is,' he added,
in answer to the frightened look of amazement
with which she stopped to regard
him : * but something's come over me all
of a sudden that, if we part now, we part
for ever ; the words seem set ringing in my
ears, and pull at my heart-strings like a
passing bell. There's still time to turn
back ; it needs only a word from you,
Eve !' he pleaded.

But Eve's eyes were turned from his,
gazing away far beyond him.

Did the balance of destiny again
tremble 1 if so, it was only for an instant ;
for before Reuben had time to urge more,
her face quivered, her whole frame relaxed,
and, with a voice full of sadness, she
sighed out despondingly :

'Tis too late now, Reuben — too late, too
late !'

And the words had scarce left her lips
when some one from behind touched
Reuben on the shoulder, and a man came
forward, who said :

If I'm not signalising the wrong party
by mistake, my name is Triggs, and forrard
lies the Mary Jane!

And after this, save for the commonplace
' Good-bye ' of friends, there was no
further leave-taking ; but when the
morning dawned, and by its light the little
vessel slowly stole away, a woman's eyes

were vainly strained towards the shore,
striving to pierce the mist which hung
around, and hid from view a man who,
waiting, stood until the creeping day
lifted the veil and showed him a blank of
water.

Then Reuben knew the little ship had
gone, and as his heart sank down it
seemed to bid farewell to Eve for ever.

HE little barque which was carrying
Eve away from her home
and its early associations was
bound for Fowey, between which place
and London Captain Triggs traded.

On her way to Fowey, some few miles
further up the coast, the Mary Jane would
have to pass Polperro, but as it would not
be possible for her to lay to, or land her
passenger, it had been agreed that
Eve was to go on to Fowey, at which

place her uncle would probably be found
waiting to receive her.

Many an hour had Eve passed in
pleasant anticipations of her coming
journey, and how it was to be made, indulging
her imagination by picturing the
three or four days of perfect idleness, Ashen
there would be nothing to do but sit and
watch the rolling sea, and feel the ship
ride gaily o'er the dancing waves.

Alas, poor Eve ! a very different experience
was hers to tell, when, towards
the close of the fourth day, she emerged
from the tiny cabin, out of which, since
the time they had lost sight of land, she
had never stirred, and feebly struggled
upon deck to find they were already inside
Fowey harbour, and nearing the qua'' at
which she supposed they intended toland.


The day had been wet and stormy, and
the mists hung heavy and thick over the
crooked, winding streets of Fowey, and
the wooded heights of its opposite
shore.

At any other time Eve would have
been struck with the new beauty of the
scene around her ; but now, weary in body
and sick at heart, all her thought was, had
her uncle come, and how much further was
there to go \ Would this shouting and
bawling to ' cast off' and ^ hold on ' never
cease ? The babel of strange sounds
which naturally accompanies most nautical
efforts seemed to daze Eve's untutored
senses, and she had just begun to relinquish
all hope of this state of confusion
ever coming to an end, when the welcome
voice of Captain Triggs sounded in her
ears, saying :

I half fancy your uncle lia'n't come, or
he'd be aboard afore now, I reckon.'

Perhaps he does not know that the vessel
has got here yet,' said Eve, * and if not, whatever
shall I do V she added anxiously, the
last remnant of endurance vanquished by the
fear of spending another night on board.

'Well, he'd calculate on our being here
some time to-day, though I 'sects he'd
reckon on us getting' in a brave bit earlier
than us has, by which raison us may find
nn stuck fist at the King o' Prussia's ;
howsomever, you'ni all right now, for
my house is only over to Polruan there,
and my missis 'full make 'ee comfortable for
the night, and you can go on in the morning,
you know.'

Thank you,' said Eve, faintly, 'but I
should like to make sure first that uncle
has not come.'

Miss, miss ; all right, usll rin up to
Mrs. Webber's to dance ; I can go with
'ee now so come 'longs and he held out
his hand to help her down from the cask
upon which, in order to get out of the way
she had seated herself. ^ Steer clear o'
they ropes he said, as they crossed the
deck, after which poor Eve, abandoning
herself to the certainty of a watery
plunge, came with a flop down into one of
the several small boats which lay bobbing
about near enough to form an unsteady
sort of bridge across to land.

^ There us is, you'd right 'nus now !'
exclaimed Triggs cheerily, as Eve paused
for an instant at the top of the few
steps to take breath. ^ I'll warrant you
won't be in no hurry to volunteer for the
next voyage,' he added, laughing, as he
caught sight of her pale face. ' Why, you

be a poor hand on the waiter surely, I
don't believe that you've so much as held
your head up for five minutes since us
started.'

I feel just as if I was on board the
ship now,' said Eve, trying to steady
her staggering footsteps. * I do hope that
I shall find my uncle here, I am longing
to be at my journey's end.'

^ Well, I hardly know \\hat to say till
I've bin inside, but I half fancy if he'd
come, us should ha' sin un about somewheres
afore this,' and he turned to take
another scrutinising look around before
entering the inn, in front of which they
now stood.

It was an odd, queer-looking place, even
in those days reckoned out of date and old-fashioned.
Irregular stone pillars raised
it some twelve feet from the Ground

making it necessary, in order to gain the
door, that you should mount a perilously
steep flight of steps, up which, with an
alacrity familiarity alone could have
rendered safe. Captain Triggs ran, giving
an unnecessary duck of his head as he
passed under the swinging signboard on
which was depicted the once universally
popular Prussian hero.

A minute or so elapsed, and then
he emerged ao^ain, this time bidding
to * come on,' as it was ^ all right,'
in accordance with which invitation
she followed his direction, and stepped
from across the threshold into a room
which by contrast looked so bright and
cheerful that, with a sigh which seemed to
relieve her burdened spirit of half its
weight, she sank down into the nearest
empty chair.

Why, Who have 'ee got there then,
Cape Triggs ? demanded a voice which
proceeded from a railed-ofF portion of the
farther end of the room ; '■ 'tis never she
that Sammy Tucker's bin ain' about — he
spoke as if her was a little maid. Why,
do 'ee go near to the fire, my dear, you
looks all screened with the cold and as
wisht as can be.'

Here, take a drop o' that,' said one of
the men, pushing a glass of steaming grog
towards her, while the others moved up on
the settle so as to leave the nearest seat to
the fire vacant. 'Don't be afeard of it,
*tis as good a drop o' spirits as ever was
paid toll for — eh, Mrs. Webber '?' and he
gave a significant wink towards the buxom
landlady, whose jolly rubicund face, and
stout though not ungainly figure, was quite
in keeping with its background of ornamental

kegs, glasses, and bottles, filled with
cordials and liquors seldom seen except in
houses frequented by wealthy and well-to-do
people.

The fear of giving offence made Eve
raise the glass to her lips, but the smell,
forcibly reminding her of the remedies
which had been pressed upon her during
her recent voyage, so overcame her that
she was obliged to hastily set it down with
a faintly-spoken apology that she wasn't
feeling very well, as she had only just
come off the sea.

Have 'ee come with Cape Triggs,
then ? not all the way, for sure V

eyes, I've come all the way from
London.'

Have 'ee though ! and where be going'
to — who's your folks here, eh V

^ I'm going to Polperro,' replied Eve,

somewhat amazed at her interlocutor's outspoken
curiosity. ^ I have an uncle living
there.'

Her's own niece to Zebedee Pascal,'
broke in the landlady, Who, having by this
time learnt from Captain Triggs all he
knew of Eve's history, was unwilling
that the first batch of news should be
given out by any other than herself ; ' her
mother died and her's left all alone, and
Zebedee's wrote to her to come down to
Polperro, and bide with they so long as
ever her likes, or for good and all if her's
so minded to. He'd ha' come for her himself,
but they ain't a landed yet ; so he's sent
word in by Sammy Tucker that her's to
go back with he. 'Twas never thought
they'd be so late in, so Sammy was all
ready to start by four o'clock ; though now,

VOL. I. G

when 'tis nigh 'pon the stroke o' six, he
ain't to be found no place.'

^ Why, I knows where he's to said one
of the audience. ^ I seed un, as I come up
along, sitting' into my cousin Joe's ;' and,
moved by the look of weary anxiety ou
Eve's face, he added, ' Why, if 'ee likes,
I'll run and see if he's there now, shall I ?
and tell un to look spry too, for 'ain't
every day he's got the chance o' carrying
such a good-lookin' young Avoman up
behind un.'

The compliment, half-sheepishly spoken,
brought the colour into Eve's pale face,
and it deepened as the eyes of each
one present were turned in her direction.


^ 'Tis a party-faced maid, surely,' was
buzzed about the room, until the landlady,
out of pity for Eve's confusion, gave a

dexterous twist to the conversation by
saying,

I can't whither lier on any o' the Pascal
folks, though, they're all such a dark-featured
lot ; 'ceptin' 'tis Adam, and he's as
fair as he's scanty.'

A general nod had just given consent
to the truth of these remarks, when the
man who had volunteered to fetch Eve's
escort arrived, accompanied by him and
Captain Triggs, who had run down to take
another look at how things were 2foin2f on
on board the Mary Jane, and lend a hand
in bringing up Eve's box.

Well, here you be at last, then,' exclaimed
Mrs. Webber, with a nod of remonstrance
at Sammy Tucker's unexplained
absence ; ' 'tis a hunted to one her hasn't
gone to Poh'uan afore this — slipping' off and
nobody able to tell where you're to. I

G— 2

wouldn't ha' bin in your shoes, I can tell
'ee, if you'd a had to shaw sour face to
Joan Hocken and nothing' better than
empty sacks behind 'ee.'

A general laugh was caused by this
sally, followed by a few more home-thrusts
at Sam Tucker's expense, which made him
not sorry to seem engrossed in the ceremony
of an introduction, which Captain
Triggs briefly effected by giving him a
lurch in Eve's direction, as he said :

^ There lies yer cargo, Sammy ; and my
advice is, get it aboard and up stick and
away so quick as you're able,'

^ Hope I see 'ee well, miss said Sam,
trying to recover his equilibrium, after
falling against two men whose heads he
had brought rather sharply together.

I say, young chap, where might you bea
steering to, eh '?' exclaimed one ; while the

other, with a very decided anathema,
hoped that he might have no more of that
sort of game, or he'd know the reason why
words spoken in a tone which made
Eve move with greater alacrity than
she had before thought possible, and,
nodding a shy farewell to those around
her, she hastily moved from her seat out
to the space in front of the bar, where
another five minutes had to be spent in
declining the various cordials which Mrs.
Webber was bent upon fortifying her with.
Then the horse had to be brought round,
the boxes carried to a place of safety until
some boat was found to convey them to
Polperro, and finally Captain Triggs put
in his head and announced all ready for
starting.

But I'm never to go like that ?* exclaimed
Eve, aghast at seeing nothing

but the small horse on which Sam Tucker
was already mounted. ^ Oh, I can't !
Why, I should be certain to fall off ; I was
never upon a horse in my life !'

^ No reason why you shouldn't begin
now, my dear laughed the landlady, who
had accompanied Eve to the door. ' Why,
what be feared of? Bless the maid, 'tis
only to hold tight on by Sammy, and you'll
be right enuf !'

But my box ! how's that to go ? Oh,
I thought surely they'd have sent a
cart !'

^ A cart ?' echoed a voice from among
the party, all of Avhom had come from
within to witness Eve's departure. ^ I
say, Sammy, how many carts has thee
got to Polperro, eh ?'

Why, wan,' answered Sammy, stolidly.

And when you wants he, you puts un

in a boat and pulls un round, don't
'beer

This observation seemed to aiibrd much
merriment, which Mr. Tucker not relishing,
he called out :

Come, miss ! us must be thinking' about
going', you know.'

Miss, that you must,' said Captain Triggs,
decisively. * Now put your foot there, and
I'll give 'ee a hoist up,' and, suiting the
action to the words, he all but sent Eve
over the other side.

This little lurch, as the captain called
it, was, however, soon remedied ; and
before Eve had time to enter another
protest, the horse, weary of standing, put
an end to the matter by setting off with a
very tolerable amount of speed, and away
they went clattering along the narrow
length of North Street, Eve far too

frightened to be able to think of anything
beyond how best she might keep tight hold
of her companion.

At length, to her momentary relief, they
stopped, but only for a moment; for Sammy,
discovering that the ferryboat was on the
point of starting, gave vent to some vigorous
halloos, which he kept up, until by dint of
Gee up's,' ' Come hither, then,' and
'Woa's,^ they at last found themselves
safely standing in the capacious ferryboat.


Be 'ee going to get down X asked the
ferryman.

But before Eve could answer, his companion
bawled out :

Noa, noa ! let be where her is ; the
water's coming' in so fast we'd knee-deep
here already.'

Her's gotten a leak in her some place

said the first man, by way of apology for
his mate's impetuosity. ' I can't think
where 'tis to though, and us haven't time to
lay her up by daylight to see neither ; but
I reckon us had better do so 'fore long,
or 'er'll carry us all to bottom. Her's
drawing water now most powerful
strono'/

Wa-al,you went get no toll from we, 'less
you car's us safe,' piped a chorus of women's
voices from the stern, where they sat
huddled together, trying to keep their feet
out of the water which flowed in with
every length the boat took. ' The young
woman up there's got the best of it, I
think.'

And so her seemeth to think, too,' said
the outermost of the party, ' to look how
her's holding' on to un. Why, do 'ee think
you'd going' to lost un in crossing', my

dear X she said, addressing Eve, who heard
her words, although she heeded not,
for life must be secured, though it were
by holding on with might and main to
Sammy Tucker's back.

So the women laughed, and Sammy
simpered, but Eve neither spoke nor
relaxed her hold until they were out of
the boat, up the steep hill, and fairly jogging
quietly along what seemed, by comparison,
a level road.

Then Eve ventured to turn her eyes
from her companion's dusty coat, and cast
them timidly around. Even in the open
country the light had by this time begun
to fade away, so that between the high
narrow hedges, along Which their road lay,
it was grey and shadowy. Mile after mile
was passed, with nothing more to be seen
than walls of tangled briars and brush-avoid,

whose out-stretched trails Eve had
constantly to shrink back from.

Sometimes a gate or opening would
disclose the undulating country beyond,
the white mists hanofino* thick and low
over the slopes of turnips or stubble.
Fortunately for her, her companion was
not given to loquacity, so that, except
when by a wave of his short stick he
signified that this farm was Poljan, and
that Withers, or that the dark object
rising: on the rig[lit was Lansallos Church,
'Where they all lies buried to,' he preserved
a merciful silence, thus affording
Eve the full liberty of inwardly groaning
at the misery she endured, by being jolted
over the rough stones with which the
old pack-horse road was promiscuously
strewn.

It seems a very long way,' she said

at last, as, after reaching the foot of a
particularly steep descent, they seemed
about to enter a valley shut in by what,
to Eve, looked like mountains. ' Is that
the sea ?' she added eagerly, as a sound
of water fell upon the ear.

'■ The say !' repeated Sammy ; * Lor'
bless 'ee, there ain't no say here ; that's
the water,' he explained, raising his voice,
for the stream seemed, for a minute, to be
running a race with them. ' Up back
there,' and his unexpected turn nearly
sent Eve into the road, 'the mill is.
That's where I lives to, with Joan's mother:
her married my feather — only feather's
dead now, so th' mill's mine. Uncle
Zebedee's wife was Joan's mother's sister,
so that's why her lives with un ; and
as you'd his niece, too, they axed me to
bring 'ee home. They didn't think we'd

bin so late in, d ee see ? or I reckon they'd
ha' sent word for 'ee to bide the night at
Mrs. Webber's.'

Interested in this explanation of her
new family ties, and the relation they
bore to one another. Eve was about to
inquire if she should see Joan, and what
she was like, when Sammy, catching sight
of the distant lights, was fired by the
laudable ambition of making a good entry
into the village which they were now
fast approaching; and giving a vigorous
application of his stick, away went the
horse past a row of houses, through the
open hatch-doors of which, Eve caught
glimpses of domestic interiors and social
groups, evidently disturbed by the horses's
clatter, for at the sound they jumped up,
peered out into the darkness, and flung
after them an inquiring ' Good-night V

Miss, good-night ; 'tis only me !' roared
Sammy, an answer which was apparently
satisfactory, as the next *" good-nights '
sounded more hearty and cheerful.

Then a sudden narrowing of the road,
and they were in the street — had turned
a corner — forded a stream — and, oh, welcome
finale! had come to their journey's
end ; and before Sammy could apply the
knob of his stick, the house-door had
opened, a stream of light from within was
sent out into the street, discovering a girl,
who, after a moment's hesitation, ran to
the horse's side, tip-toed up to seize hold
of Eve's hands, exclaiming, in a pleasant
voice, as she did so :

Why, is this Eve ? I'm Joan Hocken,
so we'd kind o' cousins, you know ! Why,
whatever have they bin coin' with 'ee till
this time o' night ? I was looking for 'ee

hours agone. There, wait till us gets a
stool, my dear, and then you'll be able
to step down easy.'

Eve tried to return this greetings with
as much cordiality as she could command,
but no great strain was put upon
her, for Joan asked a dozen questions, without
waiting for half of them to be answered,
and by the time Eve had managed tO'
extricate herself and her garments, had
stepped down and stretched her cramped
limbs, Joan was in full possession of all that
had taken place during the state of expectancy
which had preceded her arrival.

Take care o' the step,' said Joan,
pushing open the hatch-door for Eve
to enter, while she lingered behind to aima
few parting arrows at Sam Tucker, in
whom Joan's presence seemed to have
aroused the power of continued laughter.

The opportunity thus afforded, Eve
spent in casting a look round the room, a
moderately-sized one, but unusually narrow
for its length. A cheerful fire burnt on the
hearth, and the light of its fierce bright
blaze played on the walls, one side of
which was taken up by an elaborately-furnished
dresser, while in an opposite
corner stood a capacious glass cupboard.
The rest of the furniture was of a fashion
far above anything Eve had expected to
see, so that, without being able to bestow
much separate notice on the things individually,
the effect produced was a sudden
thought that her uncle must be much
better off than she had imagined him to be;
this made her wonder where he was, and
Joan coming in at the moment, she said :

Isn't Uncle Zebedee at home ? Shan't
I see him to-night V

*No, the boats is away, and us don't
'spect no news of em 'til tomorrow or next
day, so us two '11 have to put up with wan
'other's company 'til then, and ofttimes
after, if you bides here, which I hope,' she
added, smiling, ' you will, when you comes
to know us a bit better.'

Eve looked up to show that she appreciated
this kindly speech, and their
eyes meeting, they let them linger for an
instant, while each made a shy inspection
of the other's personal appearance.

Joan was a bright-faced, good-looking
girl, with quick dark eyes and a white skin
which no exposure seemed able to tan ; she
was rather below the middle height, and
had a round compact figure which was set
off to advantage by her quilted petticoat
and handsome coloured chintz gown, the
style and pattern of which had immediately

VOL. I. 7

caught Eve's notice ; the handkerchief, too,

which was tucked into her bodice was

many degrees finer than anything Eve

possessed ; and to crown all, the cap which

she wore was actually trimmed with real

French lace. In the surprise caused by the

sight of such an unexpected display, Eve

entirely forgot what Joan's face was like,

while Joan, who generally took in the

complete costume of any one before her,

had not even noticed that Eve's dress

was plain after a fashion very unusual in

those parts. Her eyes were still resting

admiringly on the face before her, struck

by its being quite unlike any she had

ever seen ; the delicately cut features, the

fair yet not white skin, the deep-set

eyes with their drooping fringe of black

lashes, all had a separate charm for

Joan.

Don't 'ee never have no colour V she
said, putting the question which arose to
her mind.

Colour !'

'Miss, in yer cheeks, T mean.'

Oh no !' and Eve put up both her
hands as if trying to remedy the defect.
^ I don't know how it is she
said, ' that I'm so pale and sallow-looking.'


Sailer ! do 'ee call it V laughed Joan ;
I wishes I was sailer, then. I believe if
I was to drink Avhole tubs o' vinegar — and
I have drunk quarts,' she nodded emphatically
— ' I should still have a colour like a
piney. But there, you may get your health
better away from the town ; and if so, you
won't want to go back never no more,
will 'ee V

The coaxiniTf tone of voice said so much

7—2

more than the words, that Eve, unused
to the sweet singing cadence of a West-country
voice, felt grateful to the girl for
her kindly feeling.

If they're all like you, I'm sure I shall
like to stay as long as you want me to,'
she said, with a little quaver ; ' but there's
uncle to know yet. I'm such a stranger to
you all,' she sighed, ^ that I don't know
anything about anybody, who they are,
nor nothing.'

^ Oh, that's soon made straight !' exclaimed
Joan, well pleased at any opportunity
that allowed her tongue to run.
You sit down there now,' and she pulled
forward a large stuffed elbow-chair, ^ and
have your tay and that comfortable, and
I'll tell 'ee all about our folks. First
there's Uncle Zebedee — well, there's only
one o' his sort going', so 'twould be waste o'

time to tell up about he. He'll be better to
'ee than twenty fathers, though Adam's
got no cause to say that. Adam's his son,
us two maidens 's cousin.'

Who's Adam V asked Eve, more for
the sake of showing a polite attention
than out of any particular interest she felt
in the conversation, for the sense of ease
produced by the comfortable seat and refreshing
tea was beginning to take effect ;
a lazy indifference to anything that did not
necessitate exertion was stealing over her,
and though she repeated, ' Oh, my cousin
is he ?' it came upon her as a fact of no
importance, and just after that there came
a blank for a moment, and then the room
here suddenly changed to the one she had
left behind, and it was no longer Joan but
Reuben May sitting opposite to her ; a
jerk of her nodding head, and this transformation

was upset; and Eve opened her
eyes with a sudden stare which made Joan
burst into a laugh as she jumped up,
saying :

Why, I declare you've bin to sleep, and
no wonder too, poor saw, after the time
you've had of it. Come 'longs, and let's
be off to bed, and I'll tell 'ee the rest tomorrow.'


Don't think that I was asleep,' said
Eve, making an effort to rouse herself; ' I
only shut my eyes for a minute, but I
heard all you were saying.'

Joan laughed doubtingly.

I did indeed,' urged Eve. * 'Twas something
about Adam — he's my cousin, isn't
her

'■ 'Miss, that's all right,' laughed Joan ;
then, stooping to pick up Eve's cloak
and hood, she looked in her face for a

moment, gave a little pinch to her cheek,
and said, as she did so, ' and I wonder
whatever he'll think of his new-found
relation V

HE next morning Eve awoke to
find that much of her fatigue
was gone, and in its place a
languid depression was left, often the
sequence to an undue amount of exertion.
She got up and dressed herself, but the
feeling still had possession of her; so
that, when on going downstairs the
woman, who did the rough work of the
house, told her that Joan had just stepped
out for a few minutes — ' Her said herd

be back in half an hour to most — '
Eve, with the hope that the air might
freshen her, decided that she too would
go for a little stroll. Finding herself
outside the house, she stood for a few
moments debating which would be the best
way to go — up or down ? or across over
the narrow bridge under which the brook,
swollen by recent rain, was impetuously
flowing ? It could not matter much, and,
influenced by the novelty of walking across
the water, she retraced the street by which
on the previous night she had made her
entry into the village. Here it struck her
that it would be a pity to go over exactly
the same ground again, so at the corner
she turned her steps up the hill, until some
yards farther on, the road becoming again
divided, she took the left-hand path, and
found herself all at once in the midst of a

labyrinth of houses, some of which went
up steps, some went down ; some were
tolerably large, others barely more than
huts. But however the external part of
their dwellings might differ, the inhabitants
seemed actuated by one spirit, which led
them to leave off doing whatever they
might be about, run to the door, and openly
stare at the stranger. ^ Comet last niofht,'
^ Sammy Tucker ' Zebedee Pascal's own
niece,' where whispers which came floating
past Eve as she hurried on, rather put
out of countenance by finding herself the
object of such general observation. At
another time she would have been far less
affected, but now her spirits were low and
uneven, and it was an unspeakable relief to
her to find herself past the houses and
between a lonsf low shed which formed
part of a building-yard, and a heap of

piled-up, roughly hewn blocks of stone, over
which some children where running, too
engrossed in their play to pay any heed to
Eve.

How foolish of me to take notice of
such things,' she said to herself, reprovingly;
and then the feelings of loneliness came
over her again with redoubled strength.
She would not admit to herself that she
was regretting that she had left her home,
and, with a determination to give no place
to such a doubt, she tried to busy herself
by thinking if the room would be all right
and her furniture safe, and Reuben kind
to the cat, which, though an animal he
abominated, he had promised to take care
of for her sake.

For her sake ! Yes, Reuben would do
most things that she asked him : he was
indeed a dear, kind friend to her, and she

almost wondered what she could want
altered in him. He loved her, did all he .
could to please her, only asked for her to
care for him in return ; and did she not do
that ? A tenderness, such as she had
never felt before, stole into Eve's heart. It
was as if the yearnings which from afar
Reuben was sending after her were being
answered ; an instant more and an echo
would carry back to him the open-sesame
to her love, of whose birth that soft
fluttering sigh seemed the herald.

Surely nobody was watching her ! Eve
looked up with the coy bashfulness of
a maiden who fears she has betrayed
her secret, and at the sight which met
her eyes a cry of sudden surprise escaped
her, for there lay the sea, the vast,
dashing, wave-ridden sea, which must be
spreading out away far beyond that hill

which, overhanging, hid it from her
sight. A moment's pause, and then at
full speed, with a pent-up impatience,
which made her avert her eyes so that
she might look no more until she had
reached the top, and could command the
whole, Eve ran forward, never stopping
until, the height reached, she stood with
an awed face, and, slowly turning, gazed
upon the scene spread out before her.

To right, to left, around, above, below,
the sea and sky mirrored each other,
both vast and fathomless and blue, save
where they mingled, and together framed
themselves within a belt of silvery light.

A tremor ran through the girl's slight
frame, her whole body quivered with
emotion ; the glory of that longed-for sight
mastered her, its grandeur overpowered
her, and, clasping her hands, she flung herself

down against the slope and let her
tears come unrestrained until, her sobs
abating, her heart seemed eased, and she
was able to look around her with returning
calmness.

From the point on which she stood nota
habitation was to be seen ; the cliffs,
which, grass-crowned and green, were
kissed by the clouds above, ran broken
and bare down to the sea below, their grey
base lapped and washed by the foaming
waves ; the wind, soft but cool, told
tales of having lingered by the gorse and
played among the thyme, a fresh scent
from which came up in sweet reproach,
trodden under by the footsteps, Eve was
at length unwillingly obliged to turn
towards the house.

With many a lingering look behind,
slowly she came along until, some halfway

down the steep descent, the little
village opened into view.

Many a year has passed away since
Eve Pascal stood arrested by the beauty
of that scene. Towns have dwindled
into hamlets, villages have been turned
into cities ; in not a few places the very
face of the earth is so changed that men
would stand strangers on the spot where
they lived and died, but not so here ;
a street added to, a road made, a few houses
more or less, and Polperro now is as Pol-pedro
then — quaint, picturesque, and hidden
from the world around. Clustered on the
ledges of the rock ' the village couched
between two steep hills,' forming the entrance
to a narrow, winding valley, shut in
by high slopes with craggy summits. Asa
foreground spreads out the sea, its force
held back on one side by the hill descending

headlong into its water, and on the
other by the peak whose pinnacles stand
towering black and bare.

All this is still the Polperro of to-day,
but the people are changed into a quiet,
simple fishing folk, with nothing but a dim
memory — fast fading out — of those men
and women of a bygone day who made
and broke laws according to the code they
themselves had instituted ; were bound together
by their given word which none
had ever broken ; punished a thief, and
scorned a lie, with hearts as honest and
consciences as clear as if they had never
heard of a free-trader, and were ignorant
of what was meant by a ^ good run of
goods.'

Sheltered from observation, with a safe
and commodious harbour, most difficult of
approach save to the amphibious population

who had been reared amid its rocks,
Polperro seemed marked out as a stronghold
for the life of daring deeds and hairbreadth
escapes in which the hardy, reckless
sailors of that time revelled.

The rage for excitement then manifested
in London and the great towns by a pervading
spirit of gambling, highway-robbery,
and betting, had spread itself into
the country under cover of poaching, and
reached the coasts in the shape of smuggling
; and how could a pursuit be dishonest
or disgraceful in which, if all did not bear
the risks, none refused the benefits ?

The rector and the magistrate drank the
brandy, their wives and daughters wore the
lace, and gossiped over the tea ; even the
excise officer shouldered the tub laid at his
door, and straightway became blind to all
that was going on around him. tl

VOL. I. 8

could hardly need more than this to
satisfy minds untutored and consciences
not burdened by scruples, that, though
their trade might be unlawful, the offence
was venial; and so universally had this
spirit worked and spread in Polperro, that
at the time when Eve came among*
them, by whatever trade they might call
themselves, a common interest bound the
whole community together : the farmer,
the miller, the smith, the shopkeeper, each
had his venture ; the serving man or maid
brought his or her hoards the child its
little nest-egg, trusting it to the keeping
of those who were sure to turn the slender
store to fortunate account.

The aged and infirm watched the sign of
a land of goods with eager interest, for
the workhouse and parish relief was unknown,
and those past labour supported

themselves by the sale of articles brought
to them free of freight.

If Eve's father had ever entered into
any details of this life, from which a press-gang
had taken him, and to which his
early death had prevented him returning,
Mrs. Pascal had never thought fit to repeat
them to her daughter ; and when Eve
left London it was with the conviction that
she was going to her uncle, a fisherman,
whose means she expected to find slender,
and his abode as humble as the one she
was leaving behind her.

Weakened by fatigue as on the previous
night her powers of observation were, she
could not help being struck by the visible
marks of superiority in the furniture, and
a plenty amounting to extravagance on the
table. Then Joan's dress and lace cap only
increased the bewilderment, so that, though

8—2

politeness checked its utterance, her mind
was full of curiosity, which she felt she had
no right to satisfy by taking advantage of
Joan's evident weakness for giving information.


Until the previous evening when the
two girls met. Eve had known nothing
about Joan, except that her uncle's letter
had said that she wouldn't be alone in the
house, as his late wife's niece lived there
and looked after things for him. For some
reason the idea which Eve had formed in
her mind about this niece was that she
must be a sober, sedate, middle-aged person;
and it was no small relief to her to
find that she had been completely mistaken,
and had for a companion the bright, merry-faced
girl who now, as she reached a
before unperceived bridge, darted towards
her, exclaiming :

Well, for certain I thought you'd ruu
home agen, or was pinky-laid or something.
Why, wherever had 'ee got to ? When I
went away I left 'ee sleeping as fast as a
top.'

Is it late ? have I been long ?' asked
Eve. ^ Oh I I am sorry ; I didn't think
I'd stayed hardly a minute after I'd got to
the top, but it is so lovely — oh I I could
spend my day looking at it.'

^ Looking at it !' repeated Joan ; ' looking
at what \ Where have 'ee been to the top
to ? Why, the maid's mazed she laughed;
there's nothing' up there to look at.'

Nothing to look at !' exclaimed Eve,
reproachfully, ^ and the beautiful lovely sea
all around you '?'

Well, but if there is, there's nothing'
'pon it. Awl, my dear, if you'd so fond
of looking out and watching the say, wait

a bit 'til the boats is coming' in, that's the
time ; and 111 tell 'ee what we'll do this
afternoon, if so be you'd so minded — us'll
go up top o' Hard Head, and if us catches
sight of 'em coming' in, we'll run down so
fast as can and tell the news, and you shall
have highly for telling it. Why, don't 'ee
know what nimbly is, then V she said,
seeing by Eve's face that she did not understand
her. ' 'Tis the present you gets
for being the first to bring word that the
boats be in sight, then they knows 'tis all
right,' and she nodded her head significantly
; ' some o' the women are such poor
sails, always faint-hearted, and thinking
their men's certain to be took.'

Took where V asked Eve, innocently.


But instead of answering her, Joan only
said laughingly :

Oh ! away, any place, back o' beyond
or somewheres near it ; but come 'longs
home, do, or 'twill be dinner-time afore
breakfast's over.'

At breakfast the bountiful supply which
appeared again raised Eve's surprise, and
she could not refrain from saying, in a voice
which betrayed her wonderment :

Are we going to have tea again f

Yes,' said Joan. ' Why, don't you like
it?'

Oh ! I like it, only it's so dear.'

Not in this place,' interrupted Joan ;
if we minded to we might be drinking tay
all day long, ah ! and not only tay, but rum
and brandy, as much as you like to call for.
It's only to ask and to have, and cut and
come af^ain, in uncle's house.'

I didn't think to find things any way
like that,' said Eve, ' I thought,' she

added, hesitatingly, 'that uncle would be
more the same as most working folks are,
not over well-to-do.'

Oh, isn't he though !' returned Joan,
with an evident pride of relationship.
'Why, besides his two boats, he's got a
farm and land, and houses too, and this
house stuffed from top to bottom with
everything you can tell up about. Silver
plate, Indji china, and glass, and I don't
know what all ; nice pickings for Adam's
wife, whenever he chooses to take one T
she added, with satisfaction at the visible
surprise her communication Alas producing.


^ Adam isn't married, then '?' said Eve.

^ No, there's a chance for you ;' and Joan
gave a little laugh, followed by a grave-toned
^ and a very good one too, if th'
other men look at 'ee with my eyes.

Adam's one that over-valleys everything
he hasn't got, and never cares a button for
what's his'n ; but there, he's spoilt, ye know,
by all the maidens here running' after un, and
ready to go down on their bended knees if
he but so much as holds up his finger to 'em.
I'd never let no man say that o' me,' she
said, the quick colour mantling into her
face. ' I'd die for his love 'fore I'd be
kept alive by his pity ; that's what my
mother calls my masterful spirit, thoughts
she said, trying to divert Eve's attention
from thinking that her declaration was influenced
by any personal feeling.

'Yes, till last nis^ht I didn't know
you'd got a mother,' said Eve. ^ Uncle
Zebedee wrote in his letter that a niece
kept house for him, so I thought perhaps
you were like I am,' and she glanced down
at her black dress.

Well, I don't know that I'm much
better off. Father was Uncle Zebedee's
chum, and mother was Aunt Joanna's sister,
so when father died, and mother married
again, Aunt Joanna took me, and somehow
I don't seem as if I belonged to
mother ; and I'm very glad I don't, neither,
for I couldn't abide to be pitched among
such a Methodic lot as she's married
into.'

My mother was very drawn towards
the Methodists,' said Eve gravely ; ^ she
didn't live to be a member of them, but she
dearly loved going to their chapel.'

Well, I don't mind the chapel-going,
cos' o' the hymn-singing' and that ; it passes
the time Sundays, 'specially come winter,
when, 'ceptin' 'tis for a wedding' or a
funeral, t' seems ridiculous to toil all the
way up to church. But there, I'm done

with the Methodius now; I shan't never
have no opinion o' they agen.'

And for why V asked Eve.

Well, I'll tell 'ee for why : what right
has wean o' their preachers from Gwennap
pit, a man as had never set foot in Pol-pedro
before, to spy out uncle and fix upon
un to make a regular set at, tellin' up 'bout
the smugglers and all Mr. Wesley had
wrote agen 'em. Mr. Wesley may be all
very well, but he isn't everybody ; and if so
be he says what they puts down to un,
why, all I can say is, 'twas better he was
minding' his own business.'

But what need uncle take offence for V
said Eve ; then, with a quick resolve
to set her doubts at rest, she added : ' I
can't see what it had to do with him.
Uncle hasn't got anything to do with the
smuggling, has he V

Well, that's best known to uncle his self
said Joan, rising from the table. ^ Only
mind this, Eve : whenever you hear
people talking anything against what they
don't know no thin' about, you just tell 'em
that you've got a uncle and cousin as
never did a thing they was ashamed of
in their lives. And to be set 'pon like that,
in a chapel, too, where you'd forced to sit
still with yer mouth shut ; 'twas no wonder
that uncle sword he'd never set foot inside
no such place agen — though 'tis very hard
'pon me, after having' got un to go there —
and now, Sundays, 'tis drink, drink, as
bad as ever.'

Eve's heart sank within her ; a thousand
undefined fears took possession of
her mind casting their shadows on her
troubled face, which Joan, quick to note,,
tried to clear away by sayings :

A\vli ! YOU know ^vhat men be when a
passel of 'em gets together, and there's
nothing' more to do but telhn' up th' old
stories over and over again ; then, every
time they can't think of nothing' else, 'tis
empty their glasses. And uncle's one who's
all very well so long as he's had nothing', or
he's had enough ; but betwixt and between
you might walk with yer head in yer hand,
and then 'wouldn't be right. Jerrem's th'
only wan that can manage un at they
times and such.'

^ Jerrem !' repeated Eve, ^ who's he —
another cousin ?'

Well, yes and no ; everybody belongs to
Jerrem, and he belongs to nobody.'

Why, how can that be '?' laughed Eve.

Why, 'cos he can't claim blood with
none o' us here, nor, so far as he knows,
with none no place else. He was washed

ashore one Christmas Eve in th' arms of a
poor nigger-black, who never fetched the
shore ave. 'Twas more than twenty year
agony;, on a terrible night o' weather ; the
coast for miles was strewed with wrecks. I
can t tell 'ee how many ships was washed
ashore in Whitsun Bay, and all about
up to there. To one of 'em the poor
black man must ha' belonged, and tried to
save his life and the child's too ; though
he couldn't ha' bin his own neither, for
Jerrem's skin's as clear as yours or mine.
He was naught but a baby like, I've heard
'em say, and couldn't spake a word. Oh I
but Aunt Joanna she did love him dearly,
though ; 'twas she give un the name o'
Christmas, through it being Christmas Day
when ole Uncle Jeremy, what used to live
to the Point, ruined in and dropped un in
her lap. " There, missis," he says, '' I've a

broiled 'ee a Christmas box." So they
took and called hin Jeremiah Christmas,
and that's his name to this very day ; and
he don't awn to no other, only we calls un
Jerrem for short. Poor aunt, I've a heard
her tell scores o' times o' the turn she got
when she saw 'twas a baby that th' ole chap
had dropped.'

Had they got any children of their
own, then V

Awl, yes ! Adam was a good big boy,
able to talk and rin about ; and the little
toad had got a jealous heart inside un then,
for the minnie he seed aunt kissing' and
huggins' the baby, he sets up a screech, and
was for flying at un like a tiger-cat ; and to
aunt's dying' day he could never abide
seen' her make much o' Jerrem.'

That wasn't showing a very nice disposition,
though,' said Eve.

Well, no, no more it was ; still I've
often wished aunt would do other than she
did, and not be so looked up with Jerrem's
€oaxin' ways as she was, for, with all his
kissing and cosmetic of her, when her was
lain low, poor saw, 'twas easy to see
which heart had been most full of love for
her. But there, we'd all as we was made,
ye know, some to show and some to
feet;

Though the two girls spent
most of the afternoon on Hard
Head and the heights around,
nothing was to be seen of the expected
vessels, a disappointment which, Joan
seeming to feel, Eve tried to get up
some small show of having a share in,
although in reality it was a relief to her
that nobody was coming to intrude upon,
perhaps to dispel, her present state of
happiness — a happiness so complete that
VOL. I. 9

she felt as if she had been suddenly
transported into the land of her dreams
and fancies, only that this reality exceeded
the imagination in a tenfold degree.


In the beginning, at each turn she would
seize Joan by the arm, and excitedly make
a fresh demand upon her sympathy, until,
finding that Joan only laughed at such
enthusiasm about a scene which familiarity
had robbed of its beauty, Ev^e relieved
herself by giving vent to long-drawn sighs
of satisfied content. With something of
that rapture akin to which the caged bird
hails its newly-gained freedom, did this
town-bred maiden gaze upon the unbroken
space before her.

Whichever side she turned, her eyes fell
on a scene, every feature of which was
new to her. Landward, the valley with

its sloping craggy sides. Seaward, the
broad blue belt of waters, out into which
the distant headlands stretched with the
shadowy dimness of an unknown land.
Overhead, the sun shone hot and bright, so
that Joan, languid and drowsy, threw herself
down and gave way to her inclination
to doze ; while Eve, well pleased to have
her quiet, sat silent and rapt in the beauty
around her.

Not a sound came to break the stillness,
save when the gulls went soaring overhead
with croaking cries, or the bees
grew noisy over the nodding thistles.
Surely in such a place as this sin and
sorrow must be unknown, for, with those
one loved on earth, Who could be sorrowful
here % This thought was still in her mind,
when Joan, suddenly awakened, proposed
they should descend ; and, after stopping

9—2

to cast a last look from the Chapel
Rock, they took their way back to the
village.

Oh my, what steps !' exclaimed Eve,
as she prepared to follow Joan down a
worn-away flight, roughly cut out of the
solid rock.

^ Fine place for patterns, my dear,'
laughed Joan, as, having recklessly
reached the bottom, she stood waiting,
inwardly tickled at Eve's cautious
descent.

The sound of voices had by this time
brought to the door of a cottage, situated
at the top of the landing-place, an old
woman, dio, after giving a short-sighted
scrutiny to Joan, said :

Awl, it be you, be it ? I couldn't
think whatever gimlet 'twas coming'. How
be 'ee, then V

Oh, all right said Joan. ' Are you
pretty well V

Miss, there ain't much amiss wi' me. I's
ever so much better than I war thirty year
agone. I don't wear no bonnet now,
nor no handkerchief, nor that ; and I can
see without no spectacles. Awl, bless
'ee, if 'wasn't for my legs I should be
brave, but they swells terrible bad ; and
that's where I'm going' to, if so be they'll
car' me so far, to Allan beach there, to
walk 'em down a bit 'pon the pebbly shore :
the doctor says 'tis the thing to do, and
the more rubble the better. Who be you,
then?' she said, as Eve landed herself
on the flat beside them.

'Tis Uncle Zebedee's niece from London,'
answered Joan, with becoming pride
in her City connection.

Awl, whether she be or no ! wa-al,

you'd come to the right place here for
maidens — men to marry and money to
spend. Awl, I wishes I was young agen.
I'd tell 'ee 'bout it, and me as could carme
two gallons o' spirits and a dollup o'
tay, besides lace and cheney, and was
gnawed up to Plymouth and for miles
round. Why, I've bin to the clink afore
now she said triumphantly : ^ and they
threatened me with Bodmin Gaol dance,
but not afore I'd marked my man, bless
'ee : he car'd Poll Potter's score on his
body to his grave, I'll warrant 'em he
did.'

^ Ah, you've bin one o' the right sort,
Poll,' said Joan ; ' folks now ain't what
they used to be in your day.'

No, tine-abby, not they,' returned the
old woman, contemptuously; 'tis all for
sticking' herself up for fine madams, now;

dressing' out and that. This is the thing — '
and she caiioht hold of the lace on Joan's
kerchief — ' and ruffle sleeves, forsooth !
Shame upon 'ee, Joan, and yer uncle too,
for letting' 'ee ^vear such fal-deals ; and
Zebedee a sensible man as knows the
worth o' such, for over a guinea a yard
and more !'

It hasn't got nothing' to do with Uncle
Zebedee,' said Joan, with a toss of her
head ; ' 'twas Adam gave 'em to me,
there now,' and she passed her hand
gently over the delicately texture frill
which shaded her somewhat over-coloured
elbows.

^ A bit o' sweetheart', was it ? But
there, don't 'ee trust to 'un Joan, he
isn't a-thinking' of you, take my word
for that ;' and she raised her voice to
call after Joan, who, at the first words

of warning, had ran down the remaining


Don't you make too sure o' that !' Joan
called back, turning round under pretence
of seeing that Eve was coming.

'All right, only don't you nayther,^
said the old woman, emphatically. ' So
you be his child V she said, looking at
Eve as she passed by ; * and a nice
rapskallion rogue he war,' she added, with
a sigh ; ' but for a' that I was mazed after
un, though he couldn't abide me — more's
the pity, per aps, for he might ha bin alive
now, though that's nothing' much, neither.
'Tis a poor tale of it when 't comes to
naught else but lookin on ; if 't wasn't for
the little they brings me, freight free, and
the bit o' haggle I has o'er it, I'd as soon
be out of it as here.'

The concluding sentence of these reflections

was lost upon Eve, as lie had
already overtaken Joan, whose flushed
face betrayed the annoyance old Poll's
words had caused.

Why, Joan, I do believe you're a sly
one,' said Eve, ' and that, for all you say,
Adam's more than a cousin to you.'

No, indeed he's not,' replied Joan,
quickly ; ^ so don't take that into yer
head, Eve. You'll soon hear from all
around who's got a soft place for me, but
'isn't Adam, mind ; folks brought up
together from babies never turn into lovers,
somehow.'

Don't you think so ?' said Eve. ^ Oh,
I don't know that ; I've heard tell of
several who've thought different, and have
married.'

Have 'ee ? What, people you've
snowed 1* said Joan, earnestly ; ^ they

who've always lived together in one house
as we've done! I should like to hear
about 'em, if 'twas only out of curiosity's
sake.'

But unfortunately, when put to the test,
Eve was unable, by further experience,
to substantiate her statement, and could
only repeat that, though she couldn't
bring their histories clearly to her mind,
she felt certain she had heard of such
people ; and Joan shook her head disappointedly,
saying, in an incredulous
voice :

Ah, I can't credit it ; it doesn't seem
likely to me that ever such a thing could
come to pass.'

And she turned aside to speak to a
comely-looking woman, who came out to
the door of a near-by house which they
were passing.

Well, Joan, who've 'ee got there 1' she
called out.

While Eve, in order to allow of the
question being freely answered, turned to
look at the quaint weather-beaten pier.
Fortunately it was high water, and the
unsightly deposits, often offensive to the
nose as well as the eyes, were hidden from
view.

Everything seemed bathed in sunlight,
and pervaded by a soft drowsy quiet. A
group of aged men leaned over and against
the bridge, enjoying a chat together ; some
boys lounged about the neighbouring rocks,
and seemingly played at catching fish ;
with these exceptions the whole village
seemed delivered up to women.

'Ain't much of a place to look at now,'
said a voice near.

And turning, Eve found it came from

the woman belonging to the house into
which Joan had by this time entered.

Polperro's a proper poor wisht place
when the boats is out.'

'Why, are there more boats than are
here now ?' asked Eve.

What dree mane — than these here ?
Why, bless the maid, how do 'ee think
they'd to reach Guernsey and places in
such like as they ? Why, did 'ee never see
a lugger ? No ? well, then, us has got
something' to show 'ee for all you've come
fra London.'

Oh, you've many things here that I
wouldn't change for all the sights London
can show,' said Eve, promptly.

We have % Why, what be they, then ?'
^ The country and the sea all around,
and everything so still and quiet. I was
thinking, as I sat looking out upon it all

up on top there, that the people here
must be forced to be very good !'

My life !' exclaimed the woman, turning
round to Joan, ' 'tis time her was cut
for the simples. Why, do 'ee know,' she
said, addressing Eve, That there ain't

a place far nor near that's to But

there,' she interrupted, ' I won't tell 'ee.
Ill only ax 'ee this much — come down here
this time next week, and tell me what ye
thinks of it then. Still and quiet, and
forced to be good !' she repeated. ' Well,
I'm blest I why, was 'ee born innocent, or
have 'ee bin took so all of a sudden V

Poor Eve blushed confusedly, feeling,
without knowing how, that she had
been guilty of displaying some unusual
want of sense ; while Joan, annoyed at
her being so openly laughed at, exclaimed
angrily :

Don't take no notice o' what she says.
Eve ; she's always telling tip a passel o'
nonsense. And so 'tis just what Eve
says,' she added, sympathetically ; ^ a
stooped old place half its time, with nobody
to see, and nothing to look at. If uncle
don't come by tomorrow, we two '11 go to
Looe or Fowey, or somewheres ; we won't
die o' the dismal in this old dungeon of a
hall. Why t' lodgers 'ud be better than
nobody, I do declare !'

'Tis so well to wish for t' pressing,
while you'd 'bout it,' laughed the woman;
sand I don't know but you oughtn't give
'em a welcome neither, if they'd only find
their way up to Crumplehorne and fall in
With our Sammy a-twiddlin' his thumbs.
Have 'ee took her up to see yer mother
yet V she asked, jerking her finger towards
Eve, whose attention was by this time

completely engrossed in examining the
contents of the well-furnished dresser. ^ I
say she said, answering Joan's pout and
shake of the head, ' there'll be a pretty
how-de-do if you don't ; her was down
here sighing and groaning' her insides out
'cos somebody's ha' told her they seed 'ee
to the wrastlin match. As I said, '' Why,
what be 'ee making' that noise about, then?
There was as honest women there as your
Joan, or her mother afore her." I can't
a got patience with anybody setting' their
selves up so, 'cos they chance to come fra
Bodmin. " Power wa-alls and a turnkey,"
as old Bungey said, when they axed what
he'd seed there ; and that's party much
about it, I reckon, leastwise With most
that makes that journey. Still, if I was
you, Joan, I'd take her up, 'cos her knows
her's here ; Sammy's a-told her that.'

Joan spent a few minutes in reflection,
then she said :

Eve, what d'ye say '? wilt 'ee go up
and see mother V

Eh, Joan! mother — what, your mother?
Yes, I should like to very much. I was so
taken up with all this beautiful china,' she
said, apologetically, ' that I wasn't Hastening
to what you were talking about.'

Doesn't her clip her words V said the
hostess, who was a relation to Joan on the
father's side. ' 'Tis a party way o' talking'
though, and's all of a piece with her.
You've a lost somebody, my dear, haven't
'ee ?' she asked, looking at Eve's black
Grown.

eyes, my mother,' said Eve, surprised
at the tone of sympathy the questioner
was able to throw into her voice.

Ah, that's a sore loss, that is. I've a

lost my awn mother, so I can tell. Poor
old saw ! I thinks I see her now !
When we chiltern had bin off, nobody
knows how long, and her worritin' and
thinking' us was to bottom o' say, her d come
out with a girt big stick and herd leather
us till her couldn't stand, and call us all
the raskil rogues her could lay her tongue
to. I often thinks of it now, and it brings
back her words to me. ^^ You may find
another husband," herd say, '^ or have
another child, but there's never but the
wan mother." And some o' that chane^'^
there was hers. Weil, that very cup and
sacer you'd lookin' at now belonged to
she ! and so you take it, my dear, and
keep it. No ! nonsense, but you shall,.
now !' for Eve was protesting against accepting
such a present. ' 'Twill only get
broke up into sheds here ; and if her was

VOL. I. 10

alive, you'd a bin welcome to th' whole
dressers, her was such a free - handed
woman I Cheney, tay, liquor, no matter
what — so long as she'd got, she'd give.'

'■ I think you must take after her said
Eve, rather embarrassed by such unexpected
generosity ; ^ but T really feel as
if I was taking advantage of your good-nature.
I shall be afraid to admire anything
again, though that'll be a hard
thing to do in a place like this, where
everybody's got such lots of lovely
things.'

Oh, 'won't be long afore you'll have
as good as any one ; for, for sure, they'll
never let 'er go back agen. So you'd better
write to the laws you've left behind and
tell 'em so to dance.'

Eve gave a shake of her head, which
served the double duty of disowning the

impeachment of a beau, and bidding
farewell ; and the two girls turned up
the street, and only waiting to deposit
Eve's cup in a safe keeping-place,
they took their way towards Crumple-horne.


The road recalled to Eve's recollection
the way by which she had come,
though it seemed impossible that it was
only on the previous evening that she had
traversed it for the first time. The varied
scenes she had looked upon, the sensations
she had passed through, had spread the
day over a much longer space of time than
that occupied by twenty-four hours. Already
Joan had made her feel as if she
was a friend whom she had known for
years. Even the people whom she
casually met broke the ice of first acquaintanceship
by such a decided plunge,

10—2

that she was at once at home with them.
Altogether a new phase of life had opened
for her, and had suddenly swallowed up
her anxieties about the present, and her
regret about the future.

During the whole day, since the early
morning, not one thought of Reuben had
entered her mind ; a test, had she been
given to analyse her feelings, of her perfect
contentment. For as long as Eve
was happy, Reuben would be forgotten;
let disappointment or regret set in, and
her thoughts veered round to him.

Why, you've turned silent all to once,'
said Joan, tired of her own five minutes'
reflections.

I was thinking,' said Eve.
What about ?' asked Joan.

Why, I was thinking that I couldn't
believe 'twas no more than last niofht I

passed by here — oh! with such a heavy .
heart, Joan !' and at the remembrance her
eyes swam with tears.

And for why V said Joan, in some
surprise.

Oh, because I began to feel that I was
coming to where you'd all be strange tome
; and I wondered whether I'd done
right in leaving my own home Adhere
mother and me had lived together so
long.'

Hadn't 'ee any else to leave behind but
the thoughts o' your mother V interrupted
Joan, practically.

No.' Then, feeling this was not quite
true, she added : ' That is, nobody that I
minded much — not that I cared to leave.
I had somebody that didn't like me going,
and begged me to stay — but that was only
a friend.'

^ A friend ?' repeated Joan incredulously
^a friend that ticket closer than a
brother, I reckon. Come now, you may
so well tell me all about it ; I'm sure to
get at it sooner or later. What's his name,
ehr

Oh, I don't mind tellin' you his name,'
laughed Eve. ' Reuben May, that's his
name ; but 'isn't he I want to speak of
'tis you, Joan, for making' me feel so at
home all at once. I shall never forget it,
never I'

And as she turned her face toward Joan,
the drops which had trembled in her eyes
fell on her cheeks.

Why, what nonsense next !' exclaimed
Joan, impulsively threading her arm
through Eve's, and hugging it close
up to her ; ' as if anybody could help
being kind to 'ee. 'Tis only to look in your

face, and you can't do no other ; and
mind, 'tis none o' my coin's that you'd
here,' she continued, following out her
own train of thought. ' I was that set
agent your coming', as you never did. I
couldn't abide the thoughts of it. Adam,
and me too, took on with uncle ever so,
when he would have 'ee come ; but 'twas
no use, there was no turning' un ; and now
I wouldn't have it otherwise for ever
so. You'd so altogether different to
what I looked for ; I thought you'd
be mimpin' and mincing', and that nothing'
'ud please 'ee, and you'd be cutting' up a
Dido with everything and everybody ;
'stead o' which 'tis as if I'd know'd 'ee all
my life, and you'd bin away and come
back agen.'

Oh, I am so glad,' said Eve, laughing
in the midst of her tears ; ' for when

you've lost everybody, as I have, something
in your heart seem always pining after
people's love

^ Which you mostly gets, I reckon,'
said Joan, smiling. 'tis that innocent
sort o' look you'd got, and yer mild way
o' sjieakin', that does it, I 'sects. But you
must pluck up a spirit afore the men ' —
for Eve had been telling her how entirely
unaccustomed she was to any but
female companionship — ^ and be ready with
an answer afore they speak, so impudent
as some of 'em be. They know 'tis no use
tr3dn' it on with me, though. I gives 'em
so good as they brings, any day ; and
that's what men like, you knov/ — plenty
o' courage, and a woman that isn't afraid
o' anything or anybody ; for, no matter
how I feel, I'd die afore I'd show any
fear.'

But I should show the fear, and die
too said Eve.

Not a bit of it,' laughed Joan ; ' I'll
give 'ee a lesson or two so that you shan't
know yourself for the same.' Then, suddenly
stopping and drawing down her face,
she said : ' But '' there's a time for everything,"
said Solomon the wise, and that
time ain't now, for there's the mill, and 'tis
in here that my mother lives. And
Eve,' she continued, turning round in
the act of giving the gate a hoist preparatory
to swinging it open, ' if so be
mother should begin about uncle and they,
don't you take no heed, 'cos what she
says doesn't lie deeper down than her
tongue, and she only says it to keep in
with the chapel-folks.'

Eve was spared the awkwardness of
any reply, by having to bestow all her

attention on picking her steps through
the mud by which the gate was surrounded,
for from most of the people carrying their
corn to be ground, and not unfrequently
waiting about until the process was accomplished,
the approach to the mill
was seldom or never anything but a
slough, of a consistency varying with the
state of the weather. A few yards on
this miry path turned off to the right,
leaving a tolerably free space of well-washed
pebbles, in the midst of which was
the dwelling-house, the door of which was
conveniently placed so that it commanded
a full view of the out gate. In a straight
line with this door, the upper half of
which, after the prevailing fashion, was
left open, a little round table was set, and
behind this table Eve, drawing nearer,
perceived an elderly person, whom she

supposed must be Mrs. Tucker. But, not-standing
that by this time the two girls
were close by, Mrs. Tucker's face continued
immovable, her eyes fixed, and
her fingers knitting away as if no mundane
object could possibly engross such steadfast
attention.

The gaze so completely ignored the
presence of her visitors, that by the time
Joan had got up to the door, Eve had
found ample time to take a critical survey
of Mrs. Tuckers personal appearance,
which formed such a contrast to Joan's,
that it was difficult to reconcile it with
the close relationship which existed between
them.

Mrs. Tucker seemed tall, flat, and bony ;
her dress was drab, her kerchief black, and
her cap, under which her hair was all
hidden, was fashioned after the model of

a Quaker's. Still her face, though stern,
was not unpleasing, and its form and
features were, on the whole, better
modelled and more delicately cast than
her daughter's.

Well, Joan !' she said at length, with
a, touch of displeasure in her voice.

Well, mother !' answered Joan, with a
corresponding modicum of defiance.

Then there was a pause, during which
Joan evidently waited for her mother
to say something to Eve, but this hope
being vain, she was forced into saying,
with a trifle more aggression :

'Ain't you going' to say nothing' to
Eve, mother ? I brought her up purpose,
fancying' you'd like to see her, p reaps,
and 'ud be put out if I didn't.'

And stepping on one side, she threw
Eve into the foreground, and obliged

her to advance with the timid air of one
who is uncertain of her welcome.

I don't know why I should be expected
to know people afore I've heard their
names,' said Mrs. Tucker, stiffly ; ' but, if
this is Eve — ^vhy — how do you find
yourself?' and she made just sufficient
pause between the two parts of her sentence
to give the idea that the greeting,
prompted by politeness, had been curtailed
by principle.

^ I feel better to-day,' said Eve, growing
confused under the scrutiny she was
undergoing.

My son-in-law, Samuel, told me that
you seemed very tired by your
journey.'

Yes,' answered Eve, feeling her indifferent
treatment of Samuel might bethe
cause of this cool greeting ; ' I fear he

thought me but poor company. I hardly
spoke a word all the way.'

Well, if you'd nothing' to say, 'tis so
well to hold yer tongue ; as I tell Joan,
'tis but a poor clapper that's allays on the
tinkle. Why didn't you come up to dinner
then, Joan ?' she said, turning to her
daughter. ' We oughtn't have got dainties
to set Eve down to, but we've allays got
something' to eat, thank the Lord.'

I couldn't tell but what uncle might
be home, and we can't stay now long, for
they may be in any hour.'

Ah, then uncle hasn't seen Eve yet ? I
should say he'd be disappointed not to find
her more featured like her father's family.'

'■ I don't know why he should be, then,'
said Joan, sharply. ' I can't tell who she's
featured after, but somebody a sight better-looking
than any o' the Pascal lot.'

That's as people see said Mrs. Tucker,
grimly.

Oil yes,' returned Joan, recklessly ;
'tis free thought, and free speech, and
free trade here, and long life to it, I
says.'

And ^vhat do you say, Eve V asked
Mrs. Tucker.

Eve can't say anything' about what
she don't know nothing', can ye, Eve '?'
said Joan ; ' but as far as she's sin, she
likes the place dearly, and the people too,
and she don't intend to go back to London
never no more.'

Oh, Joan, Joan ! don't say that !' exclaimed
Eve, trying to give a more pleasant
turn to the discord which was evidently impending
between the mother and daughter.

While Mrs. Tucker said :

'Tis early days to make up your mind,

seeing you haven't sin yer uncle yet, nor
he you. Joan allays forgets that there's
more than she has got a voice in matters.'

No, Joan don't, mother ; and you'll see
that there'll be more than uncle and me
begin' her to stay. Adam hasn't seed her
yet,' and the girl looked up with an expression
of defiance.

That's true,' replied Mrs. Tucker, without
altering a tone or a feature ; ^ Eve
has got to see both the laws — Adam and
Jerrem, too. 'Tis to be hoped you'll take
to Jerrem, Eve,' she said, glancing in
Joan's direction, 'or your uncle will be
sore put out ; he seems to have got his
heart set 'pon you and Jerrem making' a
match of it.'

He hasn't done nothing' o' the sort,' returned
Joan, fiercely ; ' and 'isn't right in
you to say so, mother, 'cos uncle, in a joke-like,

said something' in a laughing way,
but he didn't mean it no more for Jerrem
than he did for Adam ; and, as Eve
hasn't sin neither of 'em, 'tis as Hkely she
takes to one as t'other, and more when she
knows 'twould be disappointing' me, for I
loves Jerrem dearly, Eve, and I don't care
who knows it, neither.'

'■ I think if I was a young pusson, I
should wait 'til I was axed afore I was so
very free in offering my company to anybody,'
said Mrs. Tucker, worked at last
into some show of anger.

Oh, no need for that,' laughed the
irrepressible Joan. ' So long as we understands
each other, whether Jerrem tells me
or I tells he, it comes to the same thins :
and, now that we've had our hasforle out,
mother, I think 'tis so well us goes ;' and
she jumped up, but so heedlessly that the

VOL. I. 11

tucked-up train of her gown caught in the
handle of a neighbouring cupboard-door,
and she had to stand still while Eve
endeavoured to disentangle it.

^ There's one thing I'm glad to see,' said
Mrs. Tucker, taking note of the two girls
as they stood side by side, ^ and that is,
that Eve's clothes is consistent, and I
hope she's got the sense to keep 'em so,
and not be a-bedizenin' herself out withall
manner o' things as you do, Joan.
I'm fairly forced to close my eyes for the
dazzle o' that chintz. Whatever you canJbe
thinking o' herself to go dressing up in that
rosy-tory stuff, I don't know. Does it
never enter yer poor vain head that yer
miserable body will be ate up by worms
some day *?'

They won't eat it up any the more 'cos
o' this chintz gown, mother. Ain't it

sweet and party ?' she added, turning to
Eve. ' 'Tis a rale booty, that 'tis ; there
isn't the like of it in the place. 'Twas give
to me a Christmas present,' she added
significantly, while the displeasure deepened
in Mrs. Tucker's face, so that Eve tried
to throw a little reproof into the look she
gave Joan, for she saw plainly enough that
mother and daughter were at cross-purposes
about somebody, and Joan was bent upon
teasing.

Whether Joan noticed the expression,
she could not tell ; but, after a
minute's pause, she broke out passionately,
saying :

How can 'ee find it in yer heart to act
as ye do, mother, never having' a good
word or a quid thought for a j^oor saw
who hasn't nobody to cling to natural-like
'{ Any one 'ud think the religion you'd

11—2

allays preaching up would teach 'ee better
than that.'

Everybody in theh^ palace, that's my
matter,' said Mrs. Tucker, whose stolid
manner was vividly contrasted with her
daughter's excitable temperament ; ' and
the place o' strangers ain't that o' chiltern.
Now, 'tis of no use biding' here to cavil,
Joan,' she continued, seeing that Joan was
about to answer her. ' I've used the same
words to your aunt, and your uncle too,
scores o' times, and said then, as I say
now, that a day may come when their
rues it ; and all I pray for is that my misgiving'
mayn't come to pass.'

Miss ; well, I think you may let that
prayer bide now, mother 1' exclaimed Joan ;
there's plenty else things to pray for
besides that, and people too. There's me ;
you've always got me on hand, you know.'

I don't forget you, Joan ; you may
make your mind easy o' that,' said Mrs.
Tucker.

Well, here's Eve, you can give her a
turn now.'

Very like I might do Vv'orsc, for I dare
swear Eve ain't beyond needing guidance
more than other young maidens.'

^ No, indeed said Eve ; ' none of us are
too good, and I often have the wish to be
different from what I am.'

Ah, 'ain't much good if you don't go
no further than wishing said Mrs. Tucker;
so far as within' goes, you might sit there
and wish you was home, but you wouldn't
be a step the further near to it.'

That's true,' broke in Joan, ' for I've
bin within' myself home this hour and
more, and so I should think had Eve,
too.'

Oh, I dare say said Mrs. Tucker. * I
know very well that I'm no great company
for young folks ; but a time may come —
when I'm dead and gone and moulding my
grave, though you may both be left behind
to prove that the words I've a spoke is
true ; for we all do fade as a leaf, and are
born to sorrow as the sparks flies upwards;'
and with this salient remark, Mrs. Tucker
allowed the two girls to depart, Joan fairly
running, in her anxiety to be out of the
place, the further gate of which she
flung open with such force that it closed
behind them with a swinging noise that
seemed to afford her much relief, and she
gave vent to a loud sigh, saying :

^ Now, Eve, isn't mother too much for
anybody? She just works me up till I
could say anything. There, don't 'ee look
like that at me, 'cos 'tis her fault so much

as mine. She knows what I am and what
sets me up, and yet that's the very thing
she pitches on to talk about.'

I fancy you say things, though, that
vex her too,' said Eve, smiling.

But Joan did not return the smile ; her
face grew more cloudy as she said :

Perhaps I do — I dare say; but you don't-know
all the ins and outs. Some day, happen,
I may tell 'ee — 't all depends.' And she
gave another sigh. ' But 'tis shameful to set
Adam up agen Jerrem, and that mother's
sure to do if ever she finds the chance.
She'd tell another story if she'd got to live
with 'em both, and was allays train' to set
all straight between the two, as I am : and
Jerrem so madcap and feather-brained ashe
is, and Adam like a bit o' touch-paper
for temper.'

I half think I shall like Jerrem better

than I shall Adam said Eve, with a sly
look, intended to rouse Joan from her
grave mood.

Do 'ee ?' said Joan, v/ith a smile which
began to chase away the cloud from her
face. 'But no ; you haven't seen the two
of 'em together yet, Eve. When you do,
I'll wager 'tis Adam you'll choose.'

Eve shook her head.

I'm never one to be taken by looks,'
she said. ' Besides, if he was everybody's
choice, why isn't he yours — eh, Mrs.
Joan V

Joan feigned to laugh, but in the midst
of the laugh she burst out crying, sobbing
hysterically as she said :

Oh, because I'm nothing' but Cousin
Joan, to be made much of when there's
nobody else, and forgot all about if another's
by !'

Eve stood amazed. This sudden shifting
mood Alas a mystery to her; she hardly
knew what to say or do. Surely her
speech could not have pained Joan 1 if so,
how ? and why ? She was still hesitating,
and thinking what comfort she could offer,
when Joan raised her head with the visible
intention of saying something — but ina
moment her attention vias arrested ;
she took two or three steps forward, then,
apparently forgetful of all else, she exclaimed
:

It must be they ! Yes, there's another !
Quick, Eve ! run, 'tis the boats ! One o'
'em's in sight, and most like 'tis uncle's !
If we don't look sharp they'll be in 'fore
we can get home.'

10 AN in front, Eve within speak-insistance
behind, the two
girls made all haste to reach
the village, where Joan's anticipations
were confirmed by the various people with
whom, in passing, she exchanged a few
words.

Coming within sight of the house, a
sudden thought made her turn and say :

^ Eve, wouldn't 'ee like to see 'em
coming' in, eh ? There's lio^ht enough left if
us looks sharp about it.'

Eve's lack of breath obliged her to
signify her ready assent by several nods,
which Joan rightly interpreting, off she
ran in advance to leave a few necessary
directions about supper ; after which she
joined Eve, and together they hurried
on towards a small flat space just under
the Chapel rock, where a group of people
were already assembled.

The sun was sinking, and its departing
glory hung like a cloud of fire in
the west, and flecked the sea with golden
light ; the air was still, the water calm,
and only rippled where the soft south-west
breeze came full upon it.

Several small vessels lay dotted about
but standing out apart from these were two
of larger size and different rig, one of
which just headed the other.

'Tis uncle's in front,' said a weatherbeaten

old fellow, turning round to Joan,
who, for Eve's convenience, had taken
her stand on the rising hillock behind.
^ T' hindermost one's the Stamp and

Go:

Never fear, the Lottery '11 never
be t' hindermost one,' said Joan, boastfully.


Not if Adam's to helm,' laughed another
man near : ' he'd rather steer to ^ kingdom
come' first, then make good land
.second.'

^ And right he should, and why not V
exclaimed Joan ; ' t' hasn't come to Adam's
luck yet to learn the towns they play on
second fiddles.'

Noa, that's true,' replied the man, ^ and
'tis to be hoped 't never will ; t' ud come
rather hard 'pon un up this time o' day, I
reckon.'

I 'spoke uncle's had word the coast's all
clear,' said Joan, anxiously.

Awl, he kno^vs what he's about. Never
fear uncle ; he can count ten, he can. He
wouldn't be rinnin in, in broad day, too,
without he could tell how the coast's

lying.'

Why don't they sail straight in ?' asked
Eve, following with great interest each
movement made.

'Cos if they hugged the land too tight
they'd lose the breeze,' said Joan. ' Her
don't know nothing' 'bout vessels,' she said,
apologising for Eve's ignorance. ^ Heres
only just comet here ; her lives up to
London.'

Awl, London, is it !' was echoed round,
while the old man who had first spoken,
wishing to place himself on a friendly 
with the new arrival, said :

^Awli, if 'tis London, I've a bin to
London too, I have.'

^ What, Having there ?' asked Eve
Wa-al, that's as you may choose to call
it : t'warn't much of a life, though,
shovellin' up mud in the Thames river fra'
morning' to night. Ho wsomdever, that's what
they sot me to do, ^' for chain' the King's
revenues," ' he quoted, with a comical air of
bewilderment. ' Chain' 1' he repeated,
with a snort of contempt, ' that's a voice
word to fling at a chap vur try in' to git a
honest living' ; but there, they'd forced to say
sommat, I 'spoke, though you mayn't spake,
mind. Lord no ! you nun stand by like
Haphazard, and get hanged for saying'
nothing' at all.'

Joan, look ! why, they've got past !'
exclaimed Eve, as the foremost of the
two vessels, taking instant advantage of a

piifF of wind, gave a spurs and shot past
the mouth of the little harbour. ^ Isn't it
in here they've got to come ?'

All right ; only you Avait,' laughed
Joan, ' and see how he'll bring her round.
There, didn't I tell 'ee so !' she exclaimed
triumphantly. ' Where's the Stamp and
Go now, then V she called out, keeping her
eyes fixed on the two vessels, one of which
had fallen short by a point, and so had got
under lee of the peak, where she remained
with her square brown sail flapping helplessly,
while the other made her way towards
the head of the outer pier. ' Now
'tis time for us to be off. Eve. Come
along, or they'll be home before us.'

And, joining the straggling group who
were already descending, the two girls
took their way back to the house, Joan
laughing and vaunting the seamanship of

her cousin, while Eve lagged silently
behind with sinking spirits, as the prospect
of meeting her new relations rose vividly
before her. Putting together the things
she had heard and seen, the hints dropped
by Joan, and the fashion in which the
house was conducted, Eve had most unwillingly
come to the conclusion that her
uncle gained his living by illicit trading,
and was, indeed, nothing less than a
smuggler — a being Eve only knew
by name, and by some image which
that name conjured up. A smuggler,
pirate, bandit — all three answered to an
ancient, black-framed picture hanging up
at home, in which a petticoated figure,
with a dark, beringleted face, stood
flourishing a pistol in one hand and a
cutlass in the other, while in the sash
round his waist he displayed every other

impossible kind of weapon. Surely her
uncle could be in no way like that, for such
men were always brutal, bloodthirsty ;
and she, so unused to men at all, what
would become of her ? among: a lawless
crew, perhaps, whose drunken orgies might
end in quarrels, violence, murder

Ah !' and the terrified scream she gave
sent Joan flying back from the few yards
in advance to see Eve shrinking timidly
away from a young fellow who had run up
behind and thrown his arm round her
waist.

Why, for all the world, 'tis Adam !' exclaimed
Joan, receiving a smacking kiss
from the offender, who was laughing
heartily at the fright he had occasioned.
Why, Eve, what a turn you give me,
to be sure ! Here, Adam, this is cousin
Eve. Come here and shake hands with

VOL. I. 12

un, Eve. Where's uncle ? is he ashore yet ?
We've bin watching' of 'ee coming' in. Why,
Eve, you'd all of a trimble ! Only do 'ee feel
her hand ; she's shaken' all over like a leaf.'

^ 'Twill pass in a minute,' said Eve,
vexed that she had betrayed her nervousness
; ' 1 was thinking, that was the
reason.'

I'm sure I never meant to frighten
you,' said Adam, who, now that the group
of bystanders had moved on, began offering
an apology ; ' I took her for one o' the
maidens here, or I shouldn't ha' made so
free.'

Oh, you'll forgive him, won't ye. Eve f

I hope so,' said Adam ; ' 'won't do to
begin our acquaintance with a quarrel,
will it \ And I haven't told ye that we're
glad to see ye, or anything yet he added,
seeing that Joan had hastened on, leaving

them together, ' though there's not much
need for saying' what I hope you know
already. When did you come, then. Cousin
Eve, eh V

Yesterday

Oh ! you didn't get in before yesterday ?
and you came in the Mary Jane with Isaac
Triggs V

'Yes

Eve had not sufficiently recovered herself
to give more than a direct answer,
and as she still felt dreadfully annoyed at
her silly behaviour, she had not raised her
eyes, and so could not see the interest with
which her companion was regarding her ;
in fact, she was hardly attending to what
he said, so anxious was she to find the
exact words in which to frame the apology
she, in her turn, was bent on making.
There was no further time for deliberation,

12—2

for already Adam had pushed open the
door, and then, as he turned, Eve got
out :

'You mustn't think I'm very silly,
cousin, because I seem so to-night ; but I
ain't accustomed ' and she hesitated.

To have a young man's arm around
your waist '?' he said slyly.

That wasn't what I vas going to say ;
though, as far as that goes, nobody ever
did that to me before.'

Is that true X he laughed. Then he
called out, ' Here, Joan, bring a candle.
Cousin Eve and I want to see each
other ; we don't know what we're like to
look at yet.'

In a minute,' answered Joan, appearing
in less than that time with a candle in her
hand ; * there, if you'd in a hurry, I'll be
candlestick,' and she put herself between

the two, holding' the hit above her head.
Now, how d'3^e find yourselves, good
people, eh ? so good-looking, or better than
you thought ?'

Ah ! that's not for you to know, Mrs.
Pert,' laughed Adam ; ' but stay, we've
got to kiss the candlestick, haven't
we ?'

That's as you please,' said Joan, holding
up her face to Eve, who was bending
down to fulfil the request when Adam
caught hold of her, saying :

Come, come, 'tis my turn first ; it's
hard if a cousin can't have a kiss.'

But Eve had drawn herself back with a
resolute movement, as she said :

I don't like being kissed by men ; 'isn't
what I've been used to.'

.well, but he's your cousin,' put in
Joan ; ' a cousin ain't like another man ;

though there's no great harm in anybody,
so far as I see.'

But Adam turned away, saying :

Let be, Joan ; I'm not one to force myself
where I'm not wanted.'

Fortunately, before any awkwardness
could arise from this slight misunderstanding,
a diversion was caused by the entrance
of Uncle Zebedee, whose genial, good-tempered
face beamed as he took in the
comfortable room and family group.

Well, Joan,' he said, as Joan ran forward
to meet him, ' and who's this ? not
poor Andrew's little maid, to be sure I
"Why, I'm glad to give 'ee welcome, my
dear. How be 'ee % when did 'ee come ?
Has her bin good to 'ee, eh ? give 'ee
plenty to ate and drink. I'll into her if she
hasn't, the wench !' and he pulled Joan
lovingly towards him, holding back Eve

with the other hand so that he might
take a critical survey of her. ^ I say,
Joan, what do 'ee say ? 'tis a party bit o'
goods, ain't it ?'

Joan nodded assent.

Why, who's her Hke, eh % not her poor
father — no, but somebody I've know'd.
"Why, I'll tell 'ee — my sister Advice that was
drownded saving another maid's life, that's
who 'tis. Well, now I never ! to think o'
Andrew's maid been like she ! Well, she
was a regular picture, she war, and so good
as she war handsome.'

That shows us both comes o' one
family,' said Joan, rubbing her rosy cheek
against the old man's weather-stained
visage.

Not a bit of it,' he laughed ; * but I'll
tell 'ee what, she's got a touch of our Adam
here, so well as been' both named together,

too. My feather, poor ole chap, lie couldn't
abide his name himself noways, but us two
lads, Andrew and me, us allays sword
that our chiltern, whether boys or maids,
'cordon as they com'd must, should be
Adams and Eves, and us kept our words,
the both of us, ye see. Here, Adam I
he called, ' come hither, lad, and stand up
beside thy cousin. I want to take measure
of 'ee together, side by side.'

But Adam, though he must have heard
neither answered nor came in ; and after
waiting for a few minutes, his father, byway
of apology, premised to Eve that
he had gone up to ^ titivate a bit ; ' while,
jerking his finger over his shoulder, he
asked Joan, in a stage aside, ^ If the wind
had shifted anyways contrary.'

Joan shook her head, answering in a low
voice that it would be all right, and she

would run out and hasten in the supper ;
and some ten minutes later, while Eve
was detailing to her uncle some of the
events of her past life — how her mother and
she had lived, and how they had managed
to support themselves — Adam reappeared,
and Uncle Zebedee, pointing to a seat
near, endeavoured to include him in the
conversation ; but whether Eve's past
history had no interest for her cousin, or
whether he had not quite overlooked her
small rebuff, she could not decide. At any
rate, he seemed to be much more amused
by teasing Joan, and as Joan was by no
means unwilling to return his banter while
she moved about and in and out the room,
the two carried on a very smart fire of
rough joking, which gradually began to interest
Uncle Zebedee, so that he left off
talking to listen ; and very soon Eve

found herself at liberty to indulge her
hitherto restrained curiosity, and take a
critical survey of Adam, who lounged on a
chest opposite, with his whole attention so
apparently engrossed by Joan, as to render
it doubtful whether the very existence of
such a person as Eve had not entirely
escaped his recollection.

Certainly, Adam was a man externally
fitted to catch the fancy of most women,
and nettled as Eve was by his seeming
indifference to herself, she tried in vain
to discover some fault of person to which
she could take objection ; but it was of
no use battling with the satisfaction her
eyes had in resting on such perfection,
heightened by the gratifying knowledge
that between them an evident likeness existed.
Adam had the same fair skin, which
exposure had tanned but could not redden ;

his hair, although of a warmer tint, was of
a shade similar to her own ; his eyes were
greys his brows and lashes dark.

Absorbed in trying to compare each
separate feature, Eve seemed lost in
the intensity of her gaze, so that when —
Adam suddenly looking round — their eyes
met (during one of those lapses for which
Time has no measurement) Eve sat
fascinated and unable to withdraw her
gaze. A kindred feeling had apparently
overcome Adam too, for — the spell broken
he jumped up and, with something between
a shake and a shiver, walked abruptly
to the far end of the room.

Here, Adam,' called out Joan, who
had stepped into the outer kitchen, ' don't
'ee go out now, like a dear. I'm just
takin' the things up ; supper won't be a
minute afore it's in, and if it's put back

now 'twill all be samsawed and not worth
eaten.'

And, to strengthen her entreaty, she
hastened in and set on the table a substantial,
smoking-hot pie.

Why, wherever now has Eve got
to ?' she exclaimed, looking round the
room. ^ I left her sitting' there not a
minute agone

Eh ? what ? who's gone ?' exclaimed
Uncle Zebedee, roused from a cat's sleep
in which, with a sailor-like adaptation of
opportunity, he was always able to occupy
any spare five minutes.

^ I think she ran upstairs,' said Adam ;
'here, I'll call her,' he added, intercepting
Joan as she moved towards the door,
which, from the innermost portion of the
room, led to the upper part of the house.
Cousin Eve !' he called out, * Cousin

Eve ! supper's waiting', but we can't begin
till you come down.'

Miss, and bear a hand like a good maid
chimed in Uncle Zebedee, ' for we haven't
had nothing' to spake of to lane our teeth
'pon this last forty-eight hours or so ; and I
for one am pretty sharp set, I can tell 'ee.'

This appeal being irresistible, Eve
hastened down, to find Adam standing so
that, when she put her hand on the door
handle, he, under the pretence of opening
it to a wider convenience, put his handover
hers, leaving Eve in doubt
whether the unnecessary pressure Alas the
result of accident or an attempt at reconciliation.
One thing was evident, Adam was
bent on thoroughly doing the honours of
the table ; he made a point of assisting
Eve himself; he consulted her preference,
and offered the various things to her,

attentions which Eve, as a stranger and a
guest thought herself, from the son of the
house, perfectly entitled to, but which
Joan viewed with amazement, not liking,
as it was Adam, to interfere, but feeling
confident that Eve must be very embarrassed
by a politeness not at all current
in Polperro, where the fashion was for the
men to eat and drink, and the women to
sit by and attend upon them.

But Adam was often opposed to general
usage, and any deviation was leniently
accepted by his friends as the result of his
having been schooled at Jersey— a circumstance
that Joan considered he was now bent
upon showing off, and noting that, do or
say what he might, Eve would not raise
her eyes, she pitied her confusion, and
good-naturedly tried to come to her rescue
by endeavouring to start some conversation.

Did 'ee try to reason with Jerrem,
Adam V she asked, reverting to a portion
of their previous talk.

Reason !' he answered pettishly, ' what
good is there in anybody reasoning with
him

Awl, but he'll always listen to a soft
word,' said Joan, pleadingly ; ' you can lead
Jerrem anyways by kindness.'

Pity you weren't there, then, to manage
him,' said Adam, in not the most pleasant
tone of voice.

^ Well, I wish you had bin there, Joan,'
said Uncle Zebedee, decisively, ' for I ain't
half well pleased at the boy been' left behind
; he'll be getting' into some mischief
that 'won't be so aise to free un from. I'd
rather be half have spoke to un sharp
myself', he heads minds anything' I says to
un, he does.'

'Tis a pity then you've held your tongue
so long,' said Adam, whose face began to
betray signs of rising displeasure. ' I only
know this, that over and over again
you've said that you wouldn't run the risk
of been' kept waiting' about when he knew
the time for starting'. Why, no later than
the last run you said that if it happened
agen you'd go without him.'

Miss, miss — 'tis true I said so,' said the old
man, querulously ; * but he gnawed I didn't
mane it. How should I, when I've bin a
youngster myself', and all of us to Madam
Parrot's, dancing' and fiddling' away like mad ?
"Why, little chap as I be,' he added, looking
round at the two girls with becoming
pride, ''t 'as taken so many as six t' hold me;
and when they've a-gotten me to the boat
they've had to thraw me into the water
till I've bin a' but drownded 'fore they

could knack a bit o' sense into me. But
what of it all ? why, I be none the worse
for matter o' that, I hopes

Adam felt his temper waxing hot within
him, and having no wish that any further
display of it should be then manifested, he
rose up from the table, saying it was time
he ran down to the boat aofain : and old
Zebedee, warned by an expressive frown
from Joan, swallowed down the remainder
of his reminiscences, and kept a discreet
silence until the retreating footsteps of his
son assured him that he could relieve himself
without fear of censure.

'Tis along of his been' a scholar, I
repose r he exclaimed, with the air of one
seeking to solve a perplexity, ' but he's
that agen anybody been' the worse o' a drap
o' liquor as never was.'

Jerrem's one that's too easily led astray,'

VOL. I. 13

said Joan, by way of explaining to Eve
the bearings of the case, ' and, once away,
he forgets all but what's going on around
un ; and that don't do, ye know, 'cos when
he's bin told that they'd to start at a certain
time he ought to be there so well as the
rest, 'specially as he knows what Adam
is

Miss, and that's the whole rights of it,'
returned Zebedee, with a conclusive nod ;
^ Maister Adam goes spain' up about last
time. ^' And mind, we ain't again' to wait
for no wan," ' — and the imitation of his son's
voice conveyed the annoyance the words
had probably given — ' and the boy's blind
was got up. 'Tis more than strange that
they two, brought up like brothers, can't
never steer wan course. I'd rather than
twenty pound that this hadn't happened
he added, after a pause.

But how corned 'ee to go when you
gnawed he wasn't there X asked Joan.

I never gnawed he wasn't there replied
the okl man. ' I can't think how
'twas,' he said, scratching his head in the
effort to assist his memory ; 'I'd a bin upto
Reynolds's, takin' a drap wi' wan or two,
and, somehow, I don't mind about nathan
much more, till us was well past the
Spikes ; and then, after a time, I axed for
the lad, and out it all comes.'

And what did 'ee say 1' said Joan.

Wa-al, what could I say ? no thin' that
'ud fetch un back then. 'Sides, Adam kept
flinging' it at me how that I'd a said las'
time I didn't wait agen. But what if I
did ? I gnawed, and he gnawed, and Jerrem
gnawed, 'twas nathan more than talk.
Moreover which, T made sure he'd ha'
come with Zeke Johns in the Stamp and

13—2

Go. But no, they hadn't a laid eyes on
un, though they started a good bit after
we.'

He's sure to get on all right, I repose V
said Eve, questioningly.

Awl, he can get on fast enough if he's
a minded to. 'Ain't that I'm thinking' on, 'tis
the bad blind a set brewing' 'twixt the two of
'em. If I only gnawed how, I'd send una
bit o' my mind in a letter,' he added,
looking at Joan.

Wa-al, who could us get to do it, then ?
There's Jan Curtis,' she said reflectively,
^ only he's to Looe ; and there's Sammy
Tucker — but Lord ! 'twould be all over the
place, and no holding mother anyways; she'd
be certain to let on to Adam.'

It mustn't come to Adam's ears,' said
Zebedee, decisively. ' Can't 'ee think o'
nobody else scholar enuf 1'

^ If it's nothing but a letter, I can write,
Uncle Zebedee,' said Eve rather shyly,
and not quite clear whether Joan did or
did not possess the like accomplishment.


Can 'ee though !' exclaimed Uncle
Zebedee, facing round to get a better view
of this prodigy ; while Joan, with a mixture
of amazement and admiration, said :

Not for sure ? Well I never ! And
you'll do it too, won't 'ee V

With all my heart, if uncle will tell me
what to say.'

But mind, not a word before Adam,
Eve,' said Joan, hastily ; * 'cos, if he's
minded, he can write a hand like copperplate.'


And 'ee thinks two of a trade wouldn't
agree, is that it V laughed Zebedee.

Joan shook her head.

Never you mind she said, ' but only
wait till next Valentine's day's a come and
won't us two have a rig with somebody
that shall be nameless !'

Only hark to her !' chuckled old Zebedee,
answering Joan's significant look by the
most appreciative wink. ^ Ah ! but hera
good-hearted maid he said, addressing
Eve ; ' and he added, with a confidential
application of his hand to his mouth, * if
but they as shall be nameless would
but voo her through my eyes, her should
curl up her hair on her wedding' night in
five-pound notes, as her blessed aunt, my
poor missis, did afore her, dear saw'

S soon as the supper was cleared
away, Joan began to set on the
table glasses, pipes, and spirits.
Uncle's sure to bring two or three back
with un,' she said ; ' and if all's ready
there'll be no need for Ave to hurry back.'
Eve gave a questioning look.
Why, us is going' down 'long to see
what's up,' said Joan. * There's sure to be
coin's somewheres or 'other. Besides,
you haven't sin none o' the chaps as yet ;

and as we don't mean to lose 'ee now us
have got 'ee, the sooner that's done the
better.'

Isn't it rather late ?' asked Eve, smiling
at Joan's insinuations.

Late ! laws no ; 'tis only just gone
eight, and the moon's risiu' as bright as
day. Get along, like a dear, and fetch
down your cloak. Mine's here to

hand.'

Eve offered no more opposition. She

had no objection to a stroll, and determined
in her own mind that she would
try and beguile Joan into extending their
ramble as far as the cliff-side.

She came downstairs to find Joan
already standing in the street chatting
to a group of girls who, like herself,
were out seeking for amusement.

^ Here she is 1' said Joan, intimating by

her tone that the former conversation lead
related to Eve. Whereupon several of
Joan's more immediate intimates came
forward and shook the new-comer by the
hand, while others murmured something
polite about ' been' very glad to make her
acquaintance ;' and together they all set off
in a friendly fashion, exchanging words
with everybody they met or passed, and
addressing so many of them as uncle this
or aunt that, that Eve could not refrain
from asking if she was related to any of
them.

Miss, to all of 'em,' laughed one of the
girls, Ann Lisbeth Johns by name.
Why, didn't 'ee knows us was all aunts
and cousins here ? You'd best be careful,
I can tell 'ee, for you'd fallen 'mong
a resr'lar nest o' kindred.'

I'm very glad to hear it,' said Eve

politely. ' I hope I may like those I don't
know as well as those I do ;' and she gave
a squeeze to Joan's arm, through which
her own was threaded.

'Ain't her got party ways ?' said one of
the girls admiringly to another. ' I
wonder what Adam thinks of her ?' and,
turning, she said to Joan, ' Has her seed
Adam yet V

Joan nodded her head.

Wall, what does he think of her ?'

I don't think he's had any opportunity
of giving his opinion,' laughed Eve, relieving
Joan from the necessity of answering
Avhat she thought must be an embarrassing
question.

Awl, bless 'ee,' returned the girl, ^ you
don't want Adam to spake ; 'tis actions is
louder than words with he, and no mistake.
Where's he to-night, then, Joan ?

Zekiel told me they wasn't main' to land
Tore morning.'

Gone up to leave word to Killigarth,
I reckon,' said Joan. ' There don't seem
much going' on here,' she added, looking
round with a disappointed expression.
'Tis a proper dead-and-alive set-out,
surely.'

Oh no, Joan. Why, I was thinking
what a change, and wondering wherever
all the people had come from.'

Oh, 'isn't nothing' now. You should
see it sometimes — the place is like a fair.
There's fiddling' and dancing', and wrastlin',
and all sorts going' on ; you can't hear
yourself spake for the noise. Now
there ain't so much as a fight to look
at

'The boats was in so late,' said Ann
Lisbeth, ' there's scarce bin time to hear of

it yet awhiles. 'Twill be better in an
hour's time.'

Supposing we went for a walk till
then put in Eve.

Would 'ee like it V asked Joan, anxious
that Eve should be amused.

Far better than anything else .'

^ All right, then ; we'll go. Ann Lisbeth,
you'll come too ?'

And joining arms, the three were about
to turn towards the Talland side, when
they were met by the old woman who had
spoken to them in the morning.

^ Hullo, Poll 1 Why, where be you
bound for V said Joan.

Who be you ?' exclaimed the woman, in
her gruff, harsh voice. what, Joan
Hocken, is it V and seizing Joan by the
shoulder, she peered into her face. there,'
she added, apparently satisfied, and letting

go her hold. ' What's this they'd tellin'
up 'bout Jerrem, as has bin left behind ?
Ain't true that that Adam started without
un a purpose, eh V

I don't know that 'twas a purpose
said Joan. * But Jerrem snowed the time
o' starting' same as brothers did ; and when the
time was up, and no Jerrem, why, they comet
without un. But 'ain't likely Adam 'd got
more to do with it than others had.'

*They that can smaller such words as
they needn't fear that lies 'full choke em
returned Poll, contemptuously. ^ Why,
now, you knows better than to say if
Adam hadn't bin so willed, either wan
aboard the Lottery ha' durst to lave the
boy behind. But 'twill come home to un
yet ; he'll try on his masterful waj^s too

often. And mind this, Joan Hocken '

But Joan had turned aside.

I don't want to hear no more o' your
talk she said snappishly. ^ I believe
you've bin drinking' ; that's what 'tis.'

'Where to, then?' retorted old Poll,
fiercely. ' Who's to bring a poor ole saw
like me a drap o' liquor, 'ceptin' tis Jerrem?
and he left behind, what promised that this
time I should ha' tay and brandy too, and
was a-bringing it, like he allays does.'

Oh, well, I dare say Adam '11 find
something' for 'ee,' said Joan.

^ Somnus for me !' exclaimed Poll ;
curses and oaths, that's all I ever gets
from he. Lord ! but I pays un they back
agen,' she added, brightening up at the
recollection of her powers. ' I can scarce
so well as ever he can. Drinking', is it,
I've bin X and her voice chant-ed into a
whine. ' Wait till you'd up seventy-four,
Joan Hocken, and see then if you hasn't

glad o' a mouthful o' spirits to keep life
in yer insides ; but want T may 'fore any
but Jerrem 'ud think to trade me ; and he
a left, too !'

^ There, come long, do !' exclaimed the
impetuous Joan. * Now, what '11 'ee have %
I'll stand treat for it, so say the word ;
what's it to be ?'

*Why, now, will 'ee, sure 'muff ? Awl, but
you'd a dear saw, Joan Hocken, that you
be ; and you shall have a baw so handsome
as he's lucky, and so I tell 'ee/ And
talking as she went, she turned a little to
the right, leading the way towards a small
public-house, with a hanging board announcing
it to be the sign of the Three
Pilchards, which was lighted up in certain
anticipation of an increased run of business.


Now, don't 'ee hinder we,' exclaimed

Poll, in remonstrance to some men
gathered near, one of whom laid familiarly
hold of Ann Lisbeth. ^ Us is a-going' inhere
to have a drap o' drink together.'


One word for us and two for herself,'
laughed Joan. ^ There, get along in and
have what you're a mind to, Poll. I'm
going' to stand treat,' she said, in explanation.


^ Noa, I can't like that way o' coin' it
at all,' said Poll, trying to expostulate by
her gestures more than her words. ' Wall,
won't wan of 'ee come ? You come, my
dear,' she said, catching hold of Eve.
Miss nov, do 'ee, 'cos I gnawed yer
feather.'

No, no,' said Joan, decisively ; ' let Eve
be. We're going' for a walk, and 'twill be
too late if we stop. Besides, you ain't in no

hurry — stop, to be sure, and you'll get
something' more give to 'ee.'

Only hark to her,' exclaimed old Poll,
well pleased at the cheering prospect.
'Awl, 'tis a thousand pities I ain't a
ransom' young sailor chap, I'd see if Joan
Hocken should go begging for a husband' ;
but Lord, nowadays men's such a poor lot,
with no more spirit in 'em than a Portage.
I'm main glad I had my time afore
any such was born.'

This last speech set them all laughing,
in the midst of which the girls turned to
cross the bridge, so as to get by the
Warren to the cliff. As they passed by
the houses they received several invitations
to 'step in a bit,' to all of which Joan
answered, ' later on they would, but now
they were going' for a little walk.'

There's a goodish lot gone by,' said one
VOL. I. 14

woman, who was standing at her door ; ' I
don't know whether 'tis wrastUn' or fighting'
they'd up to, sommat or 'other's going' on
there ; anyways Lawes Como's in it.'

Oh, my dear life ! here, Joan, let's come
on !' exclaimed Ann Lisbeth, who took a
very lively interest in the movements of
Mr. Lawes Clio.

But if it's a fight,' said Eve, ' hadn't we
best go back f

Why for, then ? So long as they fights
fair I'd so soon see 'em fight as wrestle,
wouldn't you, Joan ?'

^ Depends 'pon who 'tis,' said Joan, philosophically.
'ain't no fight. Eve she
continued ; ^ and wrastlin's only play, you
know.'

Thus encouraged, Eve proceeded on
towards a crowd which they now caught
sight of, assembled together on a small flat

space of ground not far off from the .


The moon vas at its full, and its light
made all around easily discerned. Joan
first ducked her body to try and get a peep
between the taller people's legs, then she
gave a jump to see if she could catch a
glimpse of anything over their heads ; and
both these endeavours proving futile, she
announced it as her opinion that if they
didn't try and elbow in they might as well
have stayed at home.

Ann Lisbeth was by no means loth to
use the necessary exertions, and the three
soon found themselves — in considerable
advance of the outer circle — pausing to
take breath before they attempted a further
passage of arms with a formidable-looking
opponent in the shape of a thick sturdy
girl standing in front of them.

14—2

Who's t'other one V asked Joan.

A Looe chap,' returned the gh'l ; * I
hasn't a heard what he's called, but he
might so well ha' stopped home, he's a bin
thawed twice afore, and now all the sense
is knocked out of 'im, and he les bleeding'
like a bullock.'

Oh dear !' cried Eve, but the exclamation
was quite lost on her two companions,
whose fresh whetted cariosity urged
them to more vigorous efforts ; so that
while they pressed forward Eve found little
difficulty in slipping her arms from under
theirs, and turning her exertions in an
opposite direction, she soon found herself
outside again, and free to follow her own
desires.

She did not wish to go back without
Joan, and it was not pleasant to
stand loitering on the outskirts of a crowd,

SO she determined to walk a little distance
on alone: the cliff.

A knot of men, sitting and standing
about a rough seat hollowed in the rock,
determined her upon taking the lower path,
and, without looking in their direction, she
Walked on, her pace gradually slackening
as she got beyond fear of observation.

How calm and still the water looked !
Eve was just beginning to drink of the
fulness of this new phase of its beauty,
when a voice behind her said :

Cousin Eve, is that you V

Oh, Cousin Adam !' and her tone and
face showed that his presence was by no
means unwelcome.

'Why, how is it you're all by yourself?
Where's Joan got to that you're alone ?'

Oh, she's not very far ofi*. We were
both together till just this minute. There's

a fight or something going' on, and she's
just stopped to look at it. Somebody said
one of them was bleeding, and that was
enough for me. I didn't wait to see anymore.'


Adam laughed.

^ Why, you're never such a coward as to
be afraid of a drop of blood V he said.
'Not you!'

Indeed, but T am. If anybody but
cuts their finger I feel faint.'

That's nice stuff to make a sailor's wife
out of,' said Adam.

I'm not going to be a sailor's wife,' returned
Eve, promptly.

Oh, indeed ! how do you know that ?
I repose some of your fine London chaps
have stolen a march upon us. Never
mind ; we'll manage to give 'em the go-by.
All's fair in love and war, you know.'

I don't iu the least know what you
mean,' said Eve, trying to assume a very
indifferent tone. ' But I've no doubt Joan
will be looking for me by this time, so I'd
best 2:0 back.'

I wouldn't advise you to,' said Adam,
standing so that without pushing she could
not well pass him. * 'T won't be over for a
good half-hour yet, take my word for it ;
and Joan won't come away till it's ended.
There's plenty of time to walk to the end
twice over before 3^ou'Jl catch sight of her ;
that is, if you've a mind to go.'

Oh, I want to go very much,' replied
Eve ; ' but there's no need for me to take
you,' she added demurely. ' I don't mind
a bit going by myself

All right, then ; I'll go back,' said
Adam.

^ Yes. do.'

But the words did not come out very
readily, for Eve had certainly not expected
to be taken literally. Before she had
time to turn, Adam had burst into a laugh.

^ So that's the way the London dandies
treats the maidens, is it ? Well, they're a
nice lot to choose from, instead of a good,
honest sailor chap, who'd live and die for
ye. Now, you take my advice, Cousin
Eve : send him a mitten ; give him
'^ turnips," as they say hereabouts, and
leave it to me to find somebody else to
stand in his shoes

You're very kind, upon my word,' said
Eve, laughing ; ' more like a father than a
cousin. But, thanking you all the same,
Cousin Adam, when I am on the look-out,
and that won't be yet awhile, I think I'd
as soon choose for myself

All right ; so long as he isn't one of

your counter-jumping', tape-measuring' town
fellows, I'll give my consent. But there, I
needn't waste words ; for I'll bet a guinea,
before twelve months is past you won't
own you ever saw a man who wasn't a
sailor. Why, if you'd bin a man, what
would you have bin ? Why, a sailor of
course, aboard the Lottery, eh V

And get left behind, like the young
man you wouldn't wait for at Guernsey,'
said Eve.

But the speech was not out of her mouth
before she repented making it, for Adam's
face clouded over.

I only served him right,' he said.
He's always up to some fool's game or
'other, which those, who ought to know
better, look over, because he's hail fellow
with every one he meets. That was all
very well years ago, but it doesn't do nowadays

; and 'cos I see it, and try to keep
things up a little, nothing's bad enough to
say of me. 'Isn't of much use train' to
alter things while the old man's alive ; but
if some of them don't learn to spell obeij
before they die, I'm a Dutchman.'

They had by this time reached the projecting
flat, and Eve, wishing to turn the
conversation into a more pleasant channel,
proposed that they should stand for a few
minutes and look around them.

^ Isn't it most lovely?' she said. 'I
didn't think any place in the world could
be so beautiful.'

Yes ; 'tis a pretty look-out enough
now said Adam, ' with the moon shining
on the sea like silver, and the stars
twinkling' out all over the sky ; but, by the
Lord ! it can put on an ugly face sometimes.
I've seen the sea dashing up over

where we're standing' now, and the Avind
driven' dead on the land, and a surf no
vessel could live in. Ah 1 'tis time to
think o' saying' your prayers then, for
you're within hail of kingdom come, and
no mistake.'

How dreadful !' said Eve, with a
shudder, as she conjured up the scene.
It wouldn't be half as dreadful if the sea
looked as it does now. I seem as if I
shouldn't hardly mind jumping into it a bit.'

Shouldn't you V said Adam, throwing
his arm round her waist and impelling her
to the brink of the cliff; ' s pose we try it
together V

Eve gave a terrified cry ; and drawing
her back, Adam said, in a soothing tone :

Why, what a little coward it is, to be
sure ! Did you think I meant to throw you
over V

Of course I didn't said Eve, recovering
herself ; ^ it was only because I was
startled. I shouldn't have minded else.
I should like to look over.'

Come along, then ; I'll hold you tight
enough ;' and he allowed Eve to bend forward
so that she could see the gleaming
surf as it rippled and lapped the rocks
below.

Eve gave a sigh of satisfaction.
^ I feel,' she said, 'as if I could stand
like this for ever.'

So do I,' said Adam.

I don't want to go indoors. '

Neither do I.'

Nor to speak or say a word.'

^No.' —

Only to look, and look, and look !'
And her voice died away with the last
word, and she seemed to abandon herself

to the full enjoyment of the scene before
her. It was one which might well absorb
every thought. The vast unbroken mirror
of waters, over which the moon flung the
great mantle of her light — the fleecy
floating clouds — the tall dark cliffs, behind
which lay shadowed the little town. At
another time Eve would have had neither
eyes, nor ears, nor thoughts for anything
but this ; but now, overpowering these surroundings
came a tremulous emotion from
within ; a something new which was sweeter
than pleasure and keener than pain ;
which made her long to speak, and yet
dread to break the silence. Another
moment passed ; the spell grew stronger.
Then a warm breath stirred the air
close to her cheek, and, with a sudden
effort, Eve gave a dexterous movement
which freed her from Adam's arm, and

placed lier at a little distance from his
side.

It's quite time we went back she said,
in an altered voice. ^ Joan must have
been wondering, for ever so long, where
I've got to.'

The wonder is you ain't at the bottom
of the cliff,' said Adam, surlily. ^ The
next time you think o' being so nimble,
I'd advise you to choose some safer place
than here.'

YE and Adam walked back in
comparative silence. The fight
was over ; the crowd dispersed ;
and as neither of them displayed any wish
to join the revelry which, on and about
the quay, was now in full-swing, they took
their way home by a different road.

Eve was vexed and angry with herself —
unduly so, she thought — for she could not
help losing Joan, neither could she help
Adam following her ; and as for the rest

she did not know what else she could have
done. It was all Adam's fault. She
wished he would leave her to herself.
She could see they should never agree,
and the sooner he found out that she
wasn't sfoino^ to let him take such free
ways with her, the better friends they'd
be.

As for Adam, he looked the picture of
ill-humour, and the expression on bis handsome
face was anything but a pleasant
one ; and his thoughts, taking, as they did,
the form of a volley of expletives, were
the more bitter and lasting because he
would not give free vent and expression to
them.

The house reached, he pushed open the
door, saying, as he let Eve pass in :

I told you Joan wouldn't put herself
out. There she is.'

And there, as he said, dimly discernible
through a cloud of smoke, in the midst
of several men, sat Joan, before her a glass
of a smoking compound, a large bowl of
which occupied the place of honour on the
table.

Oh ! so you've come at last !' she said,
as Eve entered.

Yes. Didn't you wonder what had
become of me, Joan ? I was so afraid
you'd be frightened to think where I'd got
to.'

Not I,' said Joan, recklessly ; * when
I got out they told me where you was
gone, and that Adam had gone after
ee.

Oh : then why didn't you come, too V
said Eve, in an aggrieved tone ; ^ I hadn't
gone but a very little way.'

'Cos two's company and three's trump

I. 15



very, my dear ; ain't it, Adam ? You'd ha'
told me so if she hadn't ; that's the best o'
been' cousins, you can speak your mind so
free.'

'- There, Adhere be going' to sot to, my
dear ?' interrupted Uncle Zebedee, feeling,
according to his expression, that there was
a screw loose somewhere ; ^ here, bide a
bits here,' and he pulled her down on his
knee. ' Messmates,' he said * this is my
poor brother Andrew's daughter, comet a'
the ways fro' London to live wi' her old
uncle, and keep that raskil Joan in order.
What do 'ee say to drinking' her good health
and a welcome home to her, eh f

Without replying, the company filled
their glasses, and, one of them giving the
signal by nodding his head towards Eve,
the rest followed his example, took a good
drink, and then, to signify their unqualified

assent to a remark by their leader, that he
wouldn't mid ' a soo more o' her sort
been' shipped to this port,' rapped their
pipe-stems vigorously on the table.

Now 'tis your turn to make a speech,
said Uncle Zebedee.

Her wants to wet her whistle first,'
said the weather-beaten old fellow nearest
to her, judging Eve's hesitation by the
own cause which alone could influence his
loquacity. ^ Here, Joan, get a glass for
her.'

No, no, Joan, don't ! I'll '

Take a drap out o' mine,' he interrupted
gallantly, pushing his jorum of grog in
front of her. ' Don't fear to take a good
pull. I'm a moderate man myself' ; I never
exceeds the wan glass.'

That's true,' replied a sour-faced man
with one eye ; ' only, somehow, you

15—2

manages not to see the bottom o' he while
there's a drap standing' in the bottle.'

Then 'tis we won't go home till morning*
this time,' said Uncle Zebedee heartily, ' for
there's lashing's more than's put 'pon table ;
so at it with a will, my boys, for you may
walk a deck-seam after a tub o' such stuff as
this is. Come, Adam lad,' he added, turning
to his son, ^ make a pitch somewheres -,
can't 'ee find room for un beside o' you,,
Joan ?'

No, I'd rather have his room than his
company,' said Joan, getting up to fetch
some more glasses ; then, catching Eve's
rather wistful gaze following her, she
selected one with bright-coloured flowers
painted on it, saying, as she set it before her :

There, that putty one's for you !'

Eve's face brightened at what was evidently
intended as a peace-offering. She

took the glass, expressing her admiration
of it; and, having it in her hand, there was
no further good in protesting against its
behoof filled.

'Tis quite a ladies' tipple, this said the
visitor who was doing the honours of the
punch-bowl. ' Here, Joan, my dear,
hand over your glass agen. You've only
had a thimbleful.'

Joan did as she was desired, and then
Eve's neighbour said :

o

*' Come, we hasn't a had your speech yet,
you know.'

Oh ! I can't make a speech,' laughed
Eve. * 1 — I can only say I'm very much
obliged to everybody.'

Waal, that'll do,' said the old fellow,
approvingly ; 'I'm not wan for many
words myself, I likes a soo here and a soo
there, turn and turn about ; give all a

chance, and pass the grog round — that's
what I calls behaviour in good company.
Now then, Hasten to what the maid's got to
say he said, bringing down his fist on the
table, and thereby setting everything on it
in a jingle, ^Zebedee's niece is a-going to
spake.'

Thus signalled out for observation, there
was nothing for it but to repeat her former
words, and having got out : ' I feel very
much obliged to everybody,' Eve turned
her blushing face round to her uncle, unaware
that Adam was behind, and that he,
as well as his father, could see her pretty
air of shy embarrassment.

^ Hear ! hear I Well said !' roared out old
Zebedee, reassuringly, giving her cheek at
the same time a hearty, sounding kiss
while Adam exclaimed, with ill-suppressed
irritation :

Why don't you let lier sit down like the
rest, father ? — there's chairs enough for all,
surely ;' and he pointed to a vacant chair
next to Joan, of which, with a nod to
Uncle Zebedee, Eve took possession
leaving Adam to seat himself at a little
distance off.

Without further remark, Adam plunged
into conversation with the guest who happened
to be his neighbour ; Eve entered
into an explanation with Joan ; and the rest
of the company returned to their grog and
pipes, and the repetition of their oft-told
tales of privateering, press-gang ad ventures,
and escapes from French prisons. Eve's
interest had just been aroused by one of
these narratives, when Joan, noting that
her glass remained untouched, pushed it
significantly towards her. Eve waited for
an instant, and then pushed it back again ;

but Joan would not be denied, and the
were still engaged in this pantomime when
Adam, who had apparently been watching
them, said dictatorially :

Let be, Joan ! Why do you press, if
she don't want to drink it ?'

Thinking he Alas annoyed at her noncompliance,
Eve said :

Yes ; I'm sure it's very good, but I'm
not used to such things. I don't know
that I ever tasted spirits in my life.'

Well, taste that, then,' said Adam.

She shook her head.

^ Do,' said Adam, entreatingly. ^ To
oblige me, put your lips to it.'

^ Oh, well, I don't mind doing that,' said
Eve, raising the glass to her mouth.

^ Now,' he said, turning it so as to drink
from the same place, ' I'll finish it for you ;'
but before he could carry out his intention.

Joiiii, whose face had suddenly blazed up
with colour, knocked the glass out of his
hand, and before he had time to recover
his surprise, her own and its contents were
shed to the other end of the room.

I say, what's the row there V exclaimed
Uncle Zebedee. ' Why, Joan, what's come
to 'ee maid, that ^^oure smashing' up the
glasses ? 'tis either early for that sort o'
game yet awhiles.'

Best to take a drap more,' said the distributer
of the punch. ' There's no poor
like a hair o' the dog that bit 'ee.'

^ 'Isn't nothing' but a bit o' skylark',
uncle,' said Joan, ashamed of her outburst
of temper. ' You ain't offended, Eve, are
you

Xo, I'm not offended,' said Eve, who
sat aghast and dumb foundered at such
reckless breakage.

I haven't angered you, Adam, have I ?
said poor Joan, humbly.

Certainly not,' said Adam coldly. ' If
you haven't angered Eve, you haven't
angered me. You've broke two glasses,
that's all'

Oh, darn the glasses !' said Zebedee,
who saw there was some antagonism between
the two. ' You'd welcome to break
all the glasses in the house, if it phases 'ee —
only let's have pace and quietness, and
somnus to drink out of

Suppose somebody gives us a song,'
said Zekiel Johns. ' Here, Joan,' he
added, by way of throwing oil on the
troubled waters, ' come, strike up '^ Polly
Oliver" — us hasn't a had she for a brave
bit.'

Joan felt in little mood for singfinof, but
after causing this temporary disturbance,.

some amends for it was due from her ; so
without more delay than was occasioned by
the request that she would not begin until
pipes and glasses were made ready for
undisturbed enjoyment, she commenced.
The tune, though not unmusical, was
somewhat monotonous — a defect compensated
for by the dramatic pathos of
the narrative, and Eve was soon completely
engrossed in the fortunes of the
girl who, in order to follow her lover, had
donned male attire.

*Now Polly being sleepy, her hung down her head,
And asked for a candle to light her to bed,'

sang Joan, when open flew the door, and
on its threshold stood a tall gaunt figure,
whose sudden appearance seemed to strike
consternation into all present. Glasses
were overturned, pipes thrown down. Some

of the men sprang to their feet — all was
instant confusion.

What news, Jonathan V hastily exclaimed
Adam, who had advanced to meet
the new-comer. ^ Where are ye come
from V

Liskeard/ answered the man. ' I was
'obliged to give 'em the double by coming'
that ways. Word's passed along that you
be looked for with a fine rin o' goods.'

H'm, I thought us was safe this time,
anyhow,' exclaimed Zebedee. ' Now, how
did they come to know that, I wonder T

'But they can't tell that we're in yet,
surely V said one of the men.

Noa ; they'd thinking' you'll make the
land sometime tomorrow. The cruiser's
to get under weigh 'bout daybreak, and
the lodgers is to come on here and be
ready for 'ee ashore.'

Then there's no time to be lost,' said
Adam, decisively. ' Wc must land as soon
as we can, and after that make ourselves
scarce

Some more talking ensued, during
which hats were found, lanterns produced
and trimmed, and then the two girls and
Jonathan were left alone.

They ain't going to sea again, are
they V Eve ventured to ask.

Not yet awhile,' said Joan ; ' they've
got something' to do to the boats first. But
you must go ofii* to your bed. Eve. You
ain't used to sitting' up late.'

No ; let me keep you company, Joan.
I'd rather do that than go to bed,' pleaded
Eve.

Joan hesitated.

I think best not this time,' she said.
I fancy uncle 'ud rather you was to bed

when he comes back agen ; and Jonathan
'11 be here, you know. You ain't gong
yet awhiles, I repose, Jonathan ?

Noa, not I. I wants sommat to
ate, I does. Got any mate-pasties or
that put by, Joan Hocken ? 'tis no good
hiding' things frae me.'

^ Here, you haven't spoke to my cousin
yet ?' said Joan, laughing.

'What, she said Jonathan, who had
drawn a chair to the fire, over which he
sat cowering. ' What's her called ? I've
a seed she some where' s afore. I don't
like her looks at all, I doesn't.'

^ There, that ain't no way mannerly,'
said Joan, intimating by a look towards
Eve and a tap on her forehead, that
Jonathan was weak in the head.

Has her got any money V he asked,
suddenly turning round.

I don't know,' said Joan. ' You have
though, haven't ye V

A bag full !' exclaimed Jonathan.
Go widen guineas I and half-guineas and
crowns I' he added, with an unction that
showed that the very mention of their
names was a positive enjoyment to him.

No pound-notes for you, Jonathan, eh !'
said Joan.

No, I believe 'ee,' chuckled Jonathan.
^ They don't dare to give me such.'

Now you'd going' to tell me where you
keep 'em all to, this time V said Joan,
trying by her banter to keep him quiet,
until she and Eve had set the room a little
straight.

Jonathan shook his head.

I shan't tell 'ee nothing', not while her's
here,' he said, jerking his elbow in Eve's
direction. ' Herd go and blab, and be the

ruin o' us all, her would. Can't 'ee send
her home, Joan V

Don't take no notice of un,' Joan said
in an undertone. ' He ain't got his wits
about un like me, so he says just what
comes into his head. Ill soon stop his
mouth, though ;' and she went into the
kitchen and lifted down the best part of a
large pie. ^ Now what else is there ?' she
said reflectively, ' for when he sets to, that
won't go far. His head can't stand drink —
it drives un mad,' she added in explanation
to Eve's look of amazement, ' so he makes
it up with vitals ; and if he could ate the
same meal twice over in every house in
the village, he'd be welcome, for the good
service he does us all.'

Eve only waited until Jonathan's meal
was spread before him, and then, yielding
to a further entreaty from Joan, she rather

reluctantly went oft* to bed ; half induced
by Joan's assurance that she intended very
soon to follow.

I shall only wait till they've had all
they want she called out, sand then I
shall come too, Eve.'

Eve determined that though she went

o

to bed, she would not go to sleep, a resolution
which she kept for fully ten minutes
after her head was on her pillow, and
which she was not certain she had for
more than a few moments broken when,
some hours later, she started up to find
Joan's place beside her still vacant. J
must have been sleeping, she thought, and
then, as consciousness returned, she be^mn
to feel that, instead of a doze, her sleep had
been one of some duration. She sat up
and listened : not a sound could she hear.
The room was dark, the house quite still. A
VOL. I. IG

feeling of undefined fright took possession
of her. Surely Joan had not gone out ;
they would never leave her in the house
alone. What was to be done ? She had
no light, and no means of getting one, for
those were the days of tinder-boxes and
brimstone matches, and with even these
appliances, few, save the prudent housewife,
provided themselves against emergencies.


Growing desperate, Eve slipped out of
bed, and listened with sharpened attention.
Not a sound save that which came from
the clocks, whose measured tick, tick,
seemed mocking the nervous thumping of
her heart.

Something must be done — she could not
go back to bed again ; so, groping about,
she found her gown, and then her
cloak, and hastily throwing these on, she

cautiously crept down the stairs to the
door Which opened on the sitting-room.
There was evidently a light, for its
glimmer came through the chinks of the
door. Timidly she laid her fingers on the
latch ; it lifted, but she pushed in vain.
The door would not yield ; it was bolted on
the outside. Pausing to recover this
surprise. Eve braced up her trembling
courage, and then she turned and remounted
the stairs, her heart no longer
fluttering, and most of her fears ousted
from their place by a sudden determination
to find out the reason of this mystery.
Leading from her bedroom was another
door and a passage from which stairs led
down to the kitchen below. Along by this
way Eve crept. To her amazement the
kitchen, though empty of people, was
nearly filled with furniture, between the

IG— 2

various articles of which she stepped her
way, and then catching full sight of the
room beyond, she paused. Surely no !
that wasn't the place she had been sitting
in % — bare and stripped of everything.
Why the very walls were gone, and in
their place, arranged one above another,
stood rows of small barrels. The floor
was strewed with ropes and tools, the fire
was out, and candles flared in the wind
which came in at the half-open hatch of
the door.

Eve stood bewildered, not knowing
whether to go forward or back ; but
another instant decided her, for in front
of the hearthstone, close by where, on the
previous night, she had sat, emerging from
below, a head slowly appeared, and another
glance showed her that the face was the
face of Uncle Zebedee. Eve caught her

breath. This then must be smuggling,
and without further thought she turned,
flea up the stairs, jumped into bed, and
hid her head under the clothes.

With returning calmness, however, came
the recollection, that if Joan came up, the
-dress and cloak would betray her ; so she got
up and put them back into their place, and
then again lay down to listen and wait —
not long — before the noise assured her the
furniture was being replaced. Then, after
an interval, came a buzz of voices, but not
until a faint glimmer of grey had crept
into the room did Eve hear the bolt
undone, footsteps ascending the stairs, and
Joan coming stealthily in. Involuntarily
Eve shut her eyes, nor though Joan
seemed to have brought over a candle to
look at her, did she open them, determining
that while Joan was engaged in

undressing she would pretend to be
aroused, and awaken. But there was no
opportunity afforded for the carrying out
of this deception, for Joan having satisfied
herself concerning her companion, merely
set down the candle, blew it out, and
threw herself, dressed as she was, on the
bed.

HE sun was streaming into the
window Avhen Eve awoke with
a sudden confused recollection
of something having happened. She started
to find Joan sitting on the edge of the
bed, rubbing her half-open eyes.

Why, Joan she exclaimed, ^ whatever
time can it be ? And do you know how
you went to sleep last night ? You never
undressed yourself

'No,' said Joan, drowsily, 'I know I

didn't. What with one thing and 'other,
I couldn't get the rids of 'em till ever so
late, and then I was so tired I'd no heart
to take my things off.'

Look at your nice gown said Eve,
vexed that the pretty chintz should present
such a bedraggled appearance.

Miss, I selects 'tis in a proper cram,'
returned Joan ; * but there, I can't help
it. I must put on something else, I
repose.'

Oh, I'll soon iron it out for you,' said
Eve ; ' so let's make haste and get our
breakfast over. I repose uncle and Cousin
Adam have gone ?'

Joan by a nod of her head intimated
that they had.

What, to Guernsey again V asked
Eve.

To Guernsey ! no,' said Joan : ' not

near so far. They'll be home again tomorrow,
or maybe next day.'

But what made them go so sudden ?'

Well,' said Joan, ' I don't know that
you'd be much the wiser if I was to tell
"see, Eve ; still, I don't see how you're to
bide here without some word been said.
Uncle was for trusting' 'ee altogether, only
Adam wouldn't have it. He said 'twas
enough for you that they was gone out
pilot'. Now you know, Eve, I'm
measuring' you by my own bushel, and
I know such talk wouldn't take me in,
more particular as I've got to ask 'ee to
tell anybody that comes that you've never
cast eyes on 'em.'

*Adam must think I'm silly,' said
Eve, indignantly.

I don't know what he thinks,' replied
Joan. ' I only know I ain't going' to follow

out his bidden' without seen the reason
for it, no more than anybody else's ; besides,
there's nothing' that I see to hide from 'ee^
nor to be ashamed to tell 'ee of What
uncle brings he buys and pays honest
money for, and if there's a risk in bringing
it, why he takes that risk ; and if that
isn't having a right to keep it if he can,
why I don't know nothing' about it, that's
all'

But what is it that he does bring X
said Eve.

^ Why, spirits to be sure. 'Tis like this :
they says, ^' Here, you must pay booty."
No," uncle says, '^ I won't — I'll bring it
booty free." Well, he does so, and if he
can land it safe, well and good ; 'tis his to
sell or to drink, or to do what he like
with. But if the excise gets scent of it,
down they come and tries to seize it all

and if they do seize it, 'tis gone, and so's
the lives of any they catches with it. Sono
blame to 'em, if they'd took hard, when
each man knows the bit o' hemp's ben
growed to make the rope his neck's to
swing by.'

Oh, Joan !' exclaimed Eve, ' not hung I
you don't mean that they'd hang them !'

Miss, but they would. They hanged ole
Israel J ago. twas long afore any o' our
times, but uncle minds it. His feather — why
your grandfather, then — was one o' they
who went up to London with Israel's wife
to try if they couldn't get un off; but
'wasn't o' no good.'

What did his poor wife do ?' said Eve,
sympathetically. ' Wasn't she in a dreadful
way X

Well, I don't know,' laughed Joan ;
they do say her stayed waiting outside

the gaol-doors all night, and in the morning',
'stead o' bidden' un a last farewell, as they
all thought herd corned to do her pushes
into his hand a red cotton handkerchief.
^' There," her says, '^ take thicker and gie
me thicker, for sure thee doesn't want a
silk neckerchief to be hanged in." '
What a dreadful woman, Joan !'
No, her wasn't — her didn't leave no
stone unturned to get un off ; but, as her
said, her knew then 'twas no more good ; so
what call was there to waste more than
had bin 'pon un V

Well,' said Eve gravely, ^ I'd rather
live on dry bread and water, Joan, than
have any one get their living in such a way
as that. Why, I should never know a
minute's peace. Each time they went
away I should never expect to see them
again.'

So you think,' laughed Joan, ' but
you'll very soon get over that, and make
as sure of their been' back as if they was
coming' by the mail-coach. Oh, it doesn't
do to be faint-hearted about anything !
What is to be will be, I say, so there's no
need to run out to meet trouble on the
road. But, remember,' she added, changing
her voice to a graver toiiO, ^ you've a
part to act to-day. Eve ; and if the lodgers
comes to search, you must carry on with
them, as if there wasn't such a things as a.
keg to be found for twenty miles around.'

But is there any hidden near here ?'
asked Eve, determined to test how far
Joan's confidence would extend.

Come 'long down with me,' said Joan,
and I'll show 'ee. Now, you see these
walls,' she continued, after they had
reached the sitting-room, which was rearranged

in the same order in which Eve
had first seen it. ' Well, the sides here
and there are hollow, and will open behind
this,' and she pointed to a recess in which
stood a chest. ' There's a hiding-place,
and there's another underneath the floor.
They're all full o' liquor now, but when
they'd empty again you shall see 'em. I'll
get uncle to show 'em to 'ee, for it takes
more than my strength to get 'em open.'

Eve smiled. Turning, she took hold of
Joan's hand.

No need for that,' she said. ' I've seen
them already.'

You have !' exclaimed Joan. ^ Why,
when ?'

Last night.' And Eve related her adventures,
and how in her fright she had
had her curiosity satisfied.

Well, I never did !' said Joan, in amazement

; ' only to think now, if I hadn't told
'ee, what a sly one you'd ha' took me for !'

No, I don't know that— but I am glad
you trusted me, Joan. I don't think anybody
need ever fear to do that.'

So I knew when I told 'ee,' said Joan,
promptly ; ^ and though I listened to what
Adam said, I made up my mind all the
time to folio' out my own mind. Women
knows one another a deal better than the
men ever finds 'em out, and right they
should to.'

T shan't forget Mr. Adam's opinion of
me for one while,' said Eve, huffily. ' I
am sure I ought to be very much obliged
to him for thinking so ill of his own
cousin.'

I don't know that I ever saw un think
quite so much of any one before,' answered
Joan, looking wistfully at her. '■ Oh !'

she exclaimed passionately, biting her
lips, and drawing in her breath, ' I'd
forgive anybody who'd make him mad in
love, so that he'd no hold over himself, but
just showed what a fool he was whether
one or twenty stood by.'

Hasn't he ever cared for anybody
then f asked Eve.

Not he,' said Joan ; ' there ain't ne'er a
one in Polperro good 'nus for un. There's
they you'll hear tell up, that Adam said
this and told 'em the other ; but what if he
did ? He hadn't got no nankin' in it, and
so they oft to know by this time.'

Then I don't think he has any right to
act so said Eve, pleased to make a hole of
the slightest flaw in Adam's conduct. ' I
haven't much opinion of those who try to
mislead others. Everybody ought to say
what they mean, and mean what they say.*

The earnestness with which this sentiment
was delivered seemed to amuse Joan, and,
beginning to laugh, she said :

I shall set you to talk to Jerrem when
he comes back. 'Tis he's the raskil withall
the maidens 'bout here ; and that minds
me. Eve, 'bout that letter you said you'd
write. Will 'ee do it some time today'


Yes, of course I will, if you'll tell me
what uncle wants to say.'

Well, uncle thinks 'tis best it came
from me like, warning' un not to take no
notice, 'cos nothing' more than a trick was
meant, and saying' he's not to stop loitering
there, but to come across back home to
dance in anything' he can get passage in.
And,' she added, after a minute's reflection,
to soften it down a bit, you might say
that we're all well — and that you'd here,

VOL. I. 17

and have wrote the letter. That'll do, won't

itr

Capitally said Eve ; ^ the best way-will
be for me to write out what you've
said as I think, and then when it's done,
read it out loud to you

This plan meeting with Joan's approval,
Eve sat down, and as soon as the necessary
materials were supplied, commenced the
epistle, which she worded as though it
came from Joan. This pleased Joan
mightily, and she stood leaning over Eve,
watching her fold up the letter, and direct
it to Jeremiah Christmas, at Louis
Reynolds's, Guernsey.

'Now you shall seal it yourself,' said
Eve, when all else was completed.

Well then, I must look for my thimble,'
said Joan, delighted that some portion of
the performance was to be really her owen,
'cos I haven't got no seal.'

Oh, but I have; said Eve ; ' I'll run
and fetch it.'

The seal was one which had hung on a
watch that Eeuben May had taken in
exchange. It was of little value, but the
old French motto, Amour avec loiatdtey had
struck Reuben, and he had begged Eve to
accept it.

The circumstance of its being Avant
brought the donor to Eve's mind, and as
she turned over her small hoard of treasures,
seeking it, her conscience smote her for her
forgetfulness of her friend. Since the
morning after her arrival she could not
remember having cast a single thought in
his direction. These were not the days of
universal letter-writing, so that though Eve
had promised to send Reuben a letter, and
tell him how she found herself among her
new relations, she did not intend, neither

17—2

did he expect her, to write this until she
was thoroughly settled down. Still, she
had never thought fresh faces could have
so completely driven him from her mind,
and she was trying to find some excuse
for her apparent heartlessness, when there
came a sudden clatter of horses' hoofs.

Eve, they'd here ! the lodgers ! Comedown
!' called out Joan, hurriedly.

Eve ran down with a scared face.

^ Oh, Joan ! What am I to say ?'

Why, nothing' ; seem as indifferent as
you can. I didn't talk about it a purpose,
'cos you shouldn't go working yourself up.
Just seem to take it all off-hand, and as if
you thought it like their impudence to
come nigh the place ;' and the sound
drawing close to, she caught up the towel
she had a little time before laid down, and
went on with her employment of washing

the breaktast-thiiigs. Another minute, and
the rap of something heavy sounded against
the door.

Come in !' cried Joan.

Rap, rap, rap ! sounded more vigorously.

Come in!' repeated Joan, in a louder tone.

Shan't you open the door V whispered
Eve.

Joan was going to shake her head, but
just at this moment the hatch was flung
open, and a man's voice said :

I don't know whether you want me to
come ito your house horse and all, young
woman ? taking it for granted by the voice
that the speaker was a woman, and a young
woman.

I don't want neither you nor your
loss,' returned Joan ; ' so if you'd waiting'
for a welcome from me, you'd both like to
take root in the place where you be.'

Ah, I see; you know what we're after.'

'Glad to hear I'm so sharp retorted
Joan. '■ I s pose they've told 'ee 'twas a
complaint that's catching', that you'd all
come pelting' down here along.'

We've come to catch something that
it's no use your hiding, Mrs. Pert laughed
the man, a good-looking sergeant ; ' and
we've a warrant to search the house in the
King's name.'

^'Tis very much to his Majesty's credit
to be so curious about such humble folks,'
said Joan, with a look of saucy defiance.
'■ Perhaps you'll ask un' to send word next
time, then we'll be a little better prepared
for 'ee.'

Oh !' laughed the man, 'we take things
as we find them ; so pray, ladies, don't disturb
yourselves on our account.'

Oh! are they going upstairs?' exclaimed

Eve, starting up, as the party having entered
and divided, one of them opened the door
which led to her room. * My ! and I've
left my workbox open, and the things all
about.'

Well, go up with 'em,' said Joan. ' I
don't know what they'd here for, but I
repose 'ain't to demand our scissors and
thimbles.'

I should be very sorry to demand anything
but a kiss from two such pretty
lassies,' said the sergeant, who had remained
in the room, bestowing a look of
most undisguised admiration on Eve.

If you'll come upstairs with me,' he
added, addressing her, * you'll see that
nothing of yours shall be touched.'

At a glance from Joan, Eve rose up to
go ; and then remembering that the letter
lay on the table, she reached back to take

it up, but the soldier's quick eye had anticipated
her.

'Allow me,' he said, catching it from
under her hand, and reading the direction :
'jeremiah Christmas — Louis Reinhold's
Guernsey." Oh ! so Jeremiah's at
Guernsey is he \ I've got a friend going
there, and he'll be proud to take this for
you ;' and he made as if about to put the
letter into his pocket.

Eve held out her hand.

'Give it back to me,' she said ; ' there's
things in it,' she added shyly, ' I shouldn't
care for anybody else to see.'

All the more reason why I should take
care of it,' replied the young man ; only too
well pleased to detain anything which
might afford an opportunity of feeding the
admiration the sight of Eve had filled him
with.

*No, but it isn't anything to do with
anybody here.'

Why, is it a love-letter then ? and is
Jeremiah your sweetheart ?'

'Don't answer him, Eve,' exclaimed
Joan, with pretended Indignation. * Let it
go — I would ; 'won't take 'ee much trouble
to write another. Far rather that, than
spend words on such as think they'd coin
a fine morning's work, to try and cower
two lorn maidens whilst their men's all out
o' the way.'

Oh no, they're not,' said the sergeant
with a derisive smile. * We shall come upon
the men presently, hiding under the straw,,
or in the cupboards, or up the chimney,
stored away with the kegs.'

Why, now, if somebody mustn't ha' split
'pon 'em,' said Joan, with a gesture of
mock fear.

Here ! Dick, Bill, Tom !' she cried, * do
'ee come 'long down ; the lodgers is sent
to sweep the chimneys, my dears.'

I don't think you can be one of this
place,' said the soldier, seeming to take no
heed of Joan's banter. ^ You haven't got such
a saucy tongue as most of the young women
about here. Where might you come from?'

From London,' answered Eve, hoping
to propitiate her interlocutor. ' I have
only been here a week.'

And how many sweethearts have you
got in that time ?'

Not any — there hasn't been any to

have. Besides, if there had, I ' and

hesitating, she cast a wistful glance at the
letter, exclaiming, ' Oh, do give it to me !'
with such an irresistible look of entreaty,
that the sergeant held the letter towards
lier, saying :

I don't know that I've any right to
keep it, though before I give it up I must
know the name of its pretty owner. What
are you called V

My name is Eve.'

Eve,' he repeated dubiously.

Lss, and my name's Tiresome,' called
out Joan. ' Come, I gnawed you was
dying' to know what I be called, only
you'd too sheep-faced to ax the question.'

I'll tell you what it is — ' he began, but at
that moment the soldier from upstairs came
down, and, without waiting to conclude
his speech, he turned hastily round, saying
to Eve : ' Now I am going upstairs, so will
you come and look after this work-box V

Joan made a movement to let them
pass, and Eve, taking the hint, followed
the sergeant upstairs. The plan of search
seemed to be arranged so that while a certain

number of the party were told off for
the actual hunting about, the remainder
were left to guard the rooms and the
various exits and entrances of the house.
In order that each one should stand his
chance of discovery and be free from all
suspicion of bribery and connivance, the
men constantly changed posts, and so it
happened that all had to run the gauntlet
of Miss Joan's cutting remarks and sharp.
speeches ; but they had a soldierly weakness
for a saucy tongue with a pretty face,,
and took all she had so complaisantly,
that a strict disciplinarian might have accused
them of a decided lack of zeal in the
performance of their duty. For want of
knowing what else they could do, they
stamped on the boards of the floors,,
opened the cupboards, pushed about the
chairs and tables, made dives in and under

the beds, and then, wondering if they were
not there, where on earth they could be,
began and did the very same thing over
and over again.

In their hearts they wished the runners
rather than themselves were set after this
sort of game. It was not the business
they cared to be up to, and would only
turn all the people against them ; which
would not be so pleasant, seeing that nota
landlord in Fowey, Looe, or Liskeard
ever kept a score against a soldier.
However, it would not do to be too
lenient in their bearing ; so, to keep up
appearances, each fresh comer knocked
about the things, flung ogden the doors, and
made grand discoveries of heaps of straw
which turned out to be stored apples, and
mysterious barrels which proved only salted
pilchards.

The same thing, with slight variations,
was gone through in each house they
entered ; until about one o'clock the sergeant
decided it was of no use remaining longer.
The goods were not to be found, the men
had evidently not landed, and they
had best get back to Fowey, and
leave the revenue cruiser the glory of a
capture.

Joan, with her elbows leaned on the
door-hatch, stood watching the little party
take their departure.

wish 'ee well, if you'd going she called
out saucily.

Oh, don't break your heart about us,
young woman,' replied one of the men.
We shall be back ao^ain soon ; 'won't belong
before you have the pleasure of our
company again, so keep yer spirits up.'

^ Thank 'ee,' said Joan ; ^ what spirits us

has got, us generally try's to keep, though
'tis a hard matter agen such a known' set
as you lodgers be.'

Ah, you're a saucy wench,' laughed the
sergeant, who had by this time ridden up.
I won't have nothing to say to you, but I
must say good-bye to my pretty friend
Eve. Where has she hidden herself to, eh V
and stooping, he tried to catch sight of her ;
but Eve only drew herself farther back, and
the horse beginning to grow fidgety, the
young fellow had to ride away without
having accomplished his wish.

There, let's run out and have a last look
at 'em,' cried Joan. * Good riddance to
bad rummage !' she called out.

At the sound of her voice the soldier
turned and flung back an answer ; but he
had gone too far, the words could not
reach them.

'I can't tell what 'tis he's say in' of laughed
Joan, her spirits rising as the sound of the
retreating hoofs grew fainter. ' 'Twas something'
'bout you I reckon, Eve,' she added,
as they turned back into the house ; ^ and
hadn't he got something held up in his
hand a-dangling of? Whatever could it
be, I wonder V

OE, some time after the soldiers
had taken their departure all was
bustle and excitement. Neighbours
ran in and out of each other's houses, telling
and hearing of narrow escapes and many
adventures. Friends laughed and joked
over their thoughtlessness or their discretion
; here a stray keg had been dropped
into the pig's bucket, there one caught up
and hopped under the baby in the cradle.
Every one grew bolder, their usual reckless-vol.
I. 18

ness gaining strength as they saw how little
they had to fear from such a set of Johnnie
Raws as the unlucky searchers were universally
voted.

Well, now 'tis most time to think o'
dinner,' exclaimed Joan, sitting down
almost exhausted with chattering and
laughing.

^ Oh, don't let's bother about getting
dinner for us two,' said Eve.

'All right,' replied Joan; 'we'll just
take what's to hand, and then we'll put on
our things and go up along. I want to
see how Ann Lisbeth's folks have got on ;
they'd got more stowed away than we
have.'

But don't they never find any of it V
asked Eve.

Not in the houses, they never have. Back
'longs in the summer there was a pretty

good hind in the standish' corn near Land-avidity,
but though they seized the kegs
they couldn't tell who'd put 'em there

Eve gave a shake of her head. ' I can't
bring my mind to think it's exactly right
she said. ' I wish uncle had nothing*
to do with it. Couldn't he give it up if he

liked r

He could, so far as money goes answered
Joan ; 'but Lord! he never will,
and I don't see neither why he should.
Everybody must get their living' one way or
'other ; and as he often says, 'tis child's
play now compared to the war-time. Then
you never did know when you'd see 'em
again. What with been' pressed into the
king's ships, and taken off to French
prisons, 'twas a terrible time of it.'

Has uncle ever been in prison ?' asked
Eve.

18—2

I should think he had, and never
expected to get out agen neither ; but
they managed it, and he and three others
broke out one night and got clear off. And
'twould make your blood run cold to hear
of all they went through — how they'd to
lie all day long hid away in the ditches,
half dead with hunger and cold ; then as
soon as night came they'd push on, though
where to they couldn't tell, only 'twas towards
the sea.

But how ever did they live through V
said Eve. ' Had they got any money with
them r

Not a penny piece ; and if they had,
'wouldn't ha' been o' any use, for they
couldn't spake the tongue, and mustn't ha'
gone night a shop, 'cos o' been' gnawed
as prisoners o' war wherever they showed
their faces.'

How did they manage, then V
Well, Uncle says to this day 'tis more
than he can tell ; but manage they did, and
to reach the water-side too ; and then they
watched and watched, and at last a boat
comes in sight, with a young French chap
robin' his sweetheart, and making for the
shore. Well, they lands ; and then, by what
uncle could make out, the maid persuaded
the young man to see her a bit on her
way home. So he looks round, and seeing
the coast clear and nobody nigh, he hauls
up the boat, stows away the oars, and off
they goes ; and then 'twas oh, be joyful !
and no mistake, with th' other poor
sails. They didn't take long afore they
was out o' their hiding-place, afloat, and
clean out o' sight o' land and everybody
'pon it ; and there they was tossing' about for
I can't tell 'ee how long, and had given up

all for lost, and made sure to the bottom of
the say they must all go, when all to dance
a vessel hove in sight, and after a bit picked
'em up ; and somehow the cape — though
'twas a French privateer — was got over toland
'em at Jersey, and from there they goton
to Plymouth, and so comet back safe
and sound after all.'

^ Oh !' exclaimed Eve, ' after one escape
like that, I'd never have gone to sea again
never !'

Lor' bless 'ee, miss, you would,' said
Joan, decidedly. ' Why, only see what a
meddling life 'tis for a man to be stopping'
ashore week in and week out. He grows
up a regular cake, like that Sammy Tucker
o' our, one side half baked and t'other forgot
to be turned. Here, I say, Eve,' she
exclaimed, with sudden emphasis, ' us'll have
to go up and see mother agen, or else the

place won't hold her. I wonder her hasn't
bin down before now ; her's generally putty
nimble when any thin' o' this sort's going' on.'
She doesn't approve of it at all, does
she V said Eve.

So she says returned Joan.
But why should you think she says what
she doesn't mean, Joan ?'

Because she don't act consistent — no
more don't none of 'em up there. Mother's
very high and mighty in her talk 'gainst
smuggled goods and free-train', but she'd
be in a nice quandary if she didn't get her
tea cheap, and her spirits for next to
nothing' ; and after arguing' with me for the
whole afternoon 'pon the sin and wickedness
o' such ways, he'll say, '' Mind, Joan,
the next lot o' cheney uncle gets I wants a
match to my plates, an' you can set a bowl
or so aside for me to look at." '

What, does uncle bring china too?' said
Eve.

Not exactly bring it said Joan, ' but he
often gets it out o' the homeward-bound
Indiamen and ships coming up Channel.
They'd glad enough to get rids of it before
the Custom-house gentry catches sight of
it. There was some talk of their Qfettinof
something' this time. I wish they may,
then we should come in for pickin's.'

Eve smiled.

^ Why, what should I do with china ?' she
said.

^ Oh, but 'isn't only cheney. There's
chintz, and silk, and crape shawls, and lots
of beautiful things. We'd find 'ee something'
you'd know what to do with : 'sides,
you ain't always going' to wear black, you
know ; and some o' the chintz is sweet and
pretty, sure 'nus '

1 shan't leave off my black for many a
long day to come, if ever,' said Eve, gravely.
Why,' she added, smiling, ' I shouldn't
know myself for the same in such finery as
you wear, Joan.'

Oh. wait a bit,' said Joan, significantly.
Time 'nil tell. We shall see what we
shall see.'

No,' returned Eve, resolutely ; ' you'll
never see any difference in me. I ain't one
to change. What you see me to-day you'll
find me tomorrow.'

The necessity for going into the kitchen
to seek what remained for this substitute
for dinner created a diversion in the conversation.
Some minutes elapsed, and
then Joan reappeared, laden with the remnants
of a squab-pie, some potted conger,
and a couple of good-sized apple-pasties.


There, this '11 do she said, setting the
dishes down on the table which Eve had
made ready. ' I don't want much, do
you V

No ; T could have gone till tea-time,'
said Eve.

Oh, I think us 11 have our tea out
some place, 'twill make a change ; and
there's lots has asked me to bring 'ee.'

This decided, they sat down to their
meal, laughing and chatting with that
unflagging loquacity which is natural to
young girls with light hearts and unclouded
spirits. The events of the morning
were still naturally uppermost in their
minds, and Joan commenced rallying Eve
on the evident impression she had made
on the young sergeant.

I never thought he'd ha' given 'ee the
letter agen,' she said. ^ Oh my ! I did

have a turn when I seed it in his
hand;

So had I !' said Eve. ' I made certain
he was going to put it in his pocket.'

So he was, till you give him that innocent
look;' and Joan tried, by casting
down her eyes and raising them again, to
give a comical imitation. ' Lord,' she
laughed, ' I wish to goodness I could doit
! Wouldn't I gammon 'em all !'

But I didn't mean nothing particular
protested Eve. ' I only looked up quite
natural.'

Natural or no, it melted his heart, or
whatever lodgers has got in the room of
it.'

I think you're all too hard on the poor
soldiers,' said Eve. ' If they do come
searching, 'isn't on their own account ; 'tis
only because it's their duty.'

Oh, well then, let 'em take then duty
some place else, laughed Joan ; ' for in
Polperro 'tis spirits booty free, and men.
free o' booty.'

I think the men certainly make free
enough said Eve.

Why, how V returned Joan. ' You
haven't hardly seen any of 'em yet,
'ceptin'/ she added, after a pause, ' 'tis
Adam. Was it he you was meaning', Eve V

Eve blushed.

Oh, I don't know that I meant him in
particular, though I do think he makes
much more free than he need to.'

In what way ? Do 'ee mean by
offering' to kiss 'ee V

Well, yes.'

But you let un when you two was out
together last night ?' said Joan, half questioningly.


No, indeed I didn't replied Eve, decidedly.


What, didn't he try to ?' continued
Joan.

Whatever he may have tried he didn't
get,' said Eve, the colour heightening on
her face.

Well, I never did !' exclaimed Joan. ' I
wouldn't ha' believed any maid alive could
ha' baffled Adam !'

Why not '?' and Eve assumed an expression
of great surprise. ^ Can't you refuse
him what you don't want to give him ?'

Oh !' said Joan, with lauo:hinof bitterness,
' I'm his cousin, my dear. He don't
ask no thin' o' me — what he wants he
takes.'

I'm his cousin too,' said Eve, setting
her mouth firmly, ' but he'll never do that
with me.'

Ali, don't you make too sure o' that
said Joan. ' Others ha' thought the same
afore noah, but Adam's proved one too many
for 'em.'

'- You speak as if everybody must give
way to Adam,' exclaimed Eve. ^ Why,
Joan, quite as good men as Adam have
been forced into falling in love, and with
no hope of having it returned neither.'

Miss, but had they got his ways f said
Joan, doubtfully. ^ If so, I've never met
none of 'em.'

^ Nonsense,' said Eve, contemptuously.
^ Why, you told me yourself that most of
the girls cared for Jerrem more than they
did for Adam, and by your manner I
thought so did you.'

Well, I believe I do sometimes, only
that — but there !' she cried, breaking off
impatiently, * tis o' no use talking' nor

train' to show the wliy nor wherefores, but
unless I'm very much mistook, 'fore you're
many months older you'll find it out for
yourself.'

Eve ofave a confident shake of her head.
If your head don't ache, Joan, till you seeme
running to Mr. Adam's beck and call,
you'll be pretty free from pain, I can tell
you. I'm not at all one to be taken by a
man's courting ; and if I had been, you and
me would never have met, for up to the
last minute of my coming away somebody
was begging and praying, and all but going
on their knees to me to keep me in London.'

And you wouldn't stay V said Joan,
immediately interested in the confidence.

Eve shook her head.

Didn't 'ee care for un then ? Was that
the reason of it ?'

Oh, I cared for him, and I care for him

now ; and don't think, for goodness and
kindness to me, I shall ever meet his fellow
anywhere. But somehow I couldn't love
him, and the more he strove, the more shut
against him I seemed to get.'

H'm !' said Joan, with surprised perplexity
; ' still I don't see, 'cos you couldn't
like he, that that's to hinder 'ee from caring
for Adam. Wan thing is certain, though,'
she added, 'there's no fear if you shuts yourself
against he, of his striving over much.
The boot's on the other leg with Adam.'

Eve laughed. ' There's no need of our
wasting words on talking about what's
so little like to happen ; and if we're going
out, I think 'tis time to go. So I'll run up
sand put on my things ; shall I V

Yes, do,' said Joan ; adding, as
Eve was turning from the table : ^ Was
the wan who wanted 'ee to stop in

London, he you was telling me about before
— Reuben May — eh, Eve ?'

^ Oh, you mustn't ask no more questions
said Eve ; * I'm not going to give any
names.'

Come, you might so well,' said Joan,
coaxingly. ' I shouldn't tell nobody, and
I always have a sort o' feeling' for they that
places their love at the wrong door.'

To be left till called for,' laughed Eve,
saucily.

Oh, I can see that you're a hardhearted
one,' said Joan, as she pushed
back her chair and rose from her seat. ^ I
only wish,' she sighed, ' that I could be the
same. I believe things would ha' gone ever
so much smoother than they have.'

'Well, I haven't asked any questions,'
said Eve, ' and I don't mean to, either. I
shall wait till Jerrem comes home, and I

VOL. I. 19

see you and him and Adam together ; then,
I suppose, it Avon't take long to tell who is
Mr. Eight;

T don't know that laughed Joan. ' Wan
thing is certain, 'twill ^vXi^ soon be
known who is Mr. Wrong — there'll be no
mistaken' that. But that minds me 'bout
the letter ; don't let's forget to take un
with us, and on our way I'll give it to
Witty Cox, to take within to Looe tomorrow.
We didn't put the seal to it, did
we?'

No. I'd just gone up for it ;' and Eve
felt in her pocket, and then began looking
among the things on the table.

What be looking for ?' asked Joan ;
there's the wax and the candle.'

I'm looking for the seal,' said Eve. ' I
know I brought it down with me.'

Isn't it in your pocket % You didn't

slow it to me. I never saw you with
it.'

I'd just got it ill my hand when you
called upstairs,' said Eve ; '■ and I remember
I didn't wait even to put back the till
of the box. I jumped up off my knees and
ran down, and I'd got it in my hand
then.'

'Well, perhaps you took it up agen.
Pin up and see.'

Eve ran up, but in a few minutes she
returned with the little box in her hand.

^ I've turned everything upside down,
and taken the things out one by one she
said, beginning to repeat the fruitless
operation, ' but there's no sign of the seal.
Besides, I feel certain, now, that I laid it
down 'pon the table.'

Lord !' exclaimed Joan, giving vent to
a fear that had crossed both their minds,

19—2

that impudent rascal of a lodger has never
taken it, to be sure ? But don't 'ee know, I
told 'ee I saw un dangling' a something' in
his hand.'

Oh, Joan r

My dear, depend on it that's where 'tis
gone — so you may make your mind easy,
then. For goodness gracious' sake, don't 'ee
tell Adam ; he'd vow we'd bin up to some
games with un, and the very sight of a
seducer's coat drives un as mad as a bull.'

'Oh, bother, Adam !' said Eve, in a vexed
tone ; ' 'tis losing the seal I care for. I
wouldn't have parted with it for anything.'

Why, was it a keepsake from your poor
mother T

No, not from her, but from a friend. I
valued it very much.'

Did he give it to 'ee. Eve V

I don't know who you mean by he,' said

Eve, refusing to accept Joan's evident
meanings • ' but there's no secret as to the
giver. 'Twas given me by the only friend'
and she laid unnecessary stress on the
word — ^ I had in London.'

Eeuben May put in Joan, filling up
the slight pause which Eve had made.

Yes, Reuben May. 'Twas he gave it
to me.'

Was it his first gift X asked Joan.

His first and his last,' said Eve, smiling.
'You forget that people there haven't got
money to be so free with as they have here,
Joan. Reuben was like mother and me,
had to work for every penny he spent.'

What's his trade, then 1'

A watch and clock maker,' said Eve,
with becoming pride ; ^ and very clever he
is at it too. Mother always said if E-euben
couldn't make anything go, 'twas no use

anybody else trying. But there, he's the
same with everything,' added Eve, distance
holding a magnifying-glass over Reuben's
oft-despised superiority. * His reading's
like listening to a sermon, and his writing's
beautiful and like print, 'tis so easy to read ;
and as for kno wince about things, I don't
believe you could ask him a single question
but he'd find an answer for it.'

^ And yet with all that you couldn't
bring your mind to care for un. No, now ' —
and Joan held up her hands to drive away
all denial — ^ 'tis o' no manner o' use your
saying ^^No," for I'm as certain that 'tis
Reuben May you was speaking' of as if you
was both standing' before me together.'

^ Oh, well, if that's the case, there's no
more good in me speaking,' said Eve.

Not a bit,' answered Joan. ' If you was
to talk till tomorrow, I should only think

the same. Now, ain't I right V she said,
throwing back her head and looking at Eve
with smiHng entreaty.

I'm not going to say '' Yes." '

Well, but you won't say ''No," ' persisted
Joan.

Eve turned away.

Ah !' cried Joan, clapping her hands, ' I
knew I was right, from the moment you
spoke his name. I felt a sort o' drawn' towards
un, so perhaps, after all, things '11 come
rio'ht between 'ee.'

They're quite as right as I want them
to be,' said Eve, decisively.

'Oh, of course. When the love's all
t'other side, 'tis wonderful how contented
folks can be. As for he, poor saw,
I dare say his heart's too heavy for his
body. Well, if it'll do un any good, he's
got my pity — and seemingly my luck too,'

she added, with a sigh. ' But here, come
'long — let's finish the letter, and as we
haven't got a seal, we'll make shift with a
thimble. There !' and she surveyed the
blot of red wax with eminent satisfaction
— ' that'll make it safe. Stop, though,
I must drop a kiss,' and down fell the wax
again. ' That's from me. Now, to make
it fifty both sides alike, there's one from
you.'

Oh, you silly thing !' exclaimed Eve.
You forget I don't know him, and he don't
know me.'

'Well, repose he don't, what o' that?
'Twill taste the sweeter. 'Sides, I shall tell
'un that anyways he's got the start o'
Adam there, and had the first kiss after
all.'

I declare I won't wait another
moment,' exclaimed Eve, with feigned

impatience. ^ If you don't come at once,
Joan, I'll go without you. The afternoon
will be gone before we've left the
house.'

loan led the way towards Talland
Lane, but before turning out of
the green they were stopped by
a voice calling :

Joan, Joan Hocken, my dear, do 'ee
want any think to Plymouth or thereabouts
V

^ Who is it ?' said Joan, turning to catch
sight of a comely, middle-aged woman who
had just stepped out from one of the neighbouring
houses. ^ Oh, you, Jochabed V

Miss, my dear ; I was just coming' your
ways, 'cos, if all goes well, us starts by
three tomorrow morning', for we's got a
tidy load this time

Who be 'ee goiii' to, then X asked
Joan.

Jochabed cast a look of inquiry towards
Eve, which Joan answered by saying :

All right, 'tis Uncle Zebedee's brother
Andrew's daughter.'

Is it, sure ? Ah I heard herd come.
And how do 'ee find herself, my dear X she
said, turning to Eve.

Very well, thank you.'

Her likes the place, then V

'Yes,' answered Joan, 'though what
with wan thing: and t'other, us has bin all
in a uproar since her's been here.'

Ah, sure !' said the woman ; ' what a
how-de-do they gentry kicked up this

morning' ! I see 'em into your house making'
more free than welcome.'

Miss, that they did, and no mistake
laughed Joan.

And what for ever they comes I can't
think continued Jochabed, 'for they
allays goes back the same, neither wiser
nor heavier. I wish to goodness they
dratted excise men would learn a lesson
from the same book.'

Nonsense ! you ain't 'feared o' any o'
they,' said Joan ; ' why, you and Aunt
Captain 'ud take the shine out o' a dozen
men o' they sorts.'

'No, no, now, I can't say that laughed
Jochabed, who had a particularly musical
voice ; ' and I'm sure, whatever folks says,
they as knows me best can testify that
'ain't in me to lay a finger's weight on
man, woman, nor cheeld, 'less I'm forced toit.

And I was never more for pace and
quietness than that very morning' when us
met a party, who shall be nameless, on
Pattern Cleaves ; and more than that, upto
the last I holds in his hand a little
passel that I keeps by me done up for anything
sudden-like. But no, he wouldn't
let his fingers close 'pon it. Now, I says,
don't 'ee go standing' like the mayor o'
Market Jew, in your own light ; but words
were lost 'pon un. Have it he Avould, and
have it he did ; and they .mys he never
stirred in his bed for days, which I can
well credit, for my poor arms ached sore if
his body didn't.'

'There's a Trojan for 'ee, Eve!' exclaimed
Joan, tapping Jochabed on the
arm ; ' that's something' like been' able to
take yer own part, isn't it, for a woman to
give a man — an excise man, mind 'ee —

such a drubbing' that he's 'shamed to report
he met her, and for fear it should get
■wmd never formed against her, though
he saw the spirit — didn't he, Jochabed ?'

Lor' bless 'ee, miss, my dear ; what was to
hinder un ? when the skins was busted so
that they dripped 'till the liquor ran like
waster ? then that soaked through to the
tay, and that give way. You never in all
yer days saw such a set out as 'twas, and I
was a regular object, too, but nothing' to he,
poor saw ! Waal, I did feel for un, that's
the truth ; a man looks so foolish to be
mauled by a woman, and his face a
slumber all over* — but whatever could 1
do % As I said to un, my chiltern's
mouths must be filled so well as your ; but
'tis no use to stop and bandy words with a
man who thinks he's no need to take ^*No"
for an answer. But there, I'm keeping'

you, my dears, and myself too,' she added
apologetically.

No, you ain't,' said Joan ; ' we'd only
ofoin' so far as Ann Lisbetli's, and then
down to Talland Bay, and back home by
cliff for Eve to look at the say. Her's
mazed 'bout the say,' she added, in an
amused tone.

Well I never ! Whether she be or no,'
and Jochabed regarded Eve with increased
interest ' 'tis a bountiful sight, surely ;
and though I was born and reared by it as
you may say, I was never tired o' lookin
at it, 'ceptin' 'twas when my baw, as was
a man-o'-war's-man, was outward-bound ;
then I used to wish there'd never bin no
say made.'

Then your husband is a sailor ?' said
Eve, by way of making a remark.

Wa-al no, not exactly, my dear ; he's a

sawyer — or, to speak more proper, he was.
But he ain't nothing' now, dear saw ; he's in
leben, I hopes — a good dale better off
than any o' we. Miss, for the dropsy took
un off like the snuff of a candle, and he
was gone in three weeks ; that's twenty
years agone. When I married un, you
might ha' took a lease o' his life — not that
I minded that then, for I didn't valley un
not the snap o' my finger. My heart was
set 'pon the man I told 'ee of

And how was it you didn't marry him,
then ?' asked Eve.

^ Why, so I meant to ; but as he was
coming' from Fowey — for my folks lived to
Lansallos then — out jumps a gang o' pressmen
and carr's un off then and there. And
if 't hadn't bin for Joshua Balls, us
shouldn't never ha' gnawed for years what
had comet of un ; but it happened Joshua

was crooked down behind a hedge, and
saw all of it from beginning' to ending.
Awl, when they told me, I was like anybody
mazed, I was, and no wonder neither,
for there was my furniture got, and my
clothes ready, down to the very ring — miss,
same wan I's got 'pon my finger now, and
no man. Howsomever, I hadn't got
long to wait for he, for the very next
Monday, as that was on the Friday, up
comes Sylvester Giles — he'd bin casting
sleeps-eyes that way afore — and talks me
over; so that 'fore the week was out I
give in, and let un stand in t'other man's
shoes. Ah, take my word for 't,' she
added, with an assured nod of her head,
that, so far as wedlock goes, what is to
be will be ; for marriages is made in leben,
and can't be marred on earth ; and the
ricrht Jack 'full have his Jill, though 't 'as
VOL. I. 20

gone so far, as another man buying' for his-self
the ring t'other tu^o's to be wedded
with.'

Lors, I wonder whether any man's
bought the ring that 'full marry me, then X
laughed Joan.

There's a plenty 'ud be proud, and
happy too, if so be you have 'em to buy
'ee wan, for each o' your ten fingers,' said
Jochabed, admiringly, ' and no blame to
'em, neither ; for, says Solomon the Wise,
A good wife's a good prize ;" and, if
they comes to me for a character, I'll tell
'em they'll search the place round for fifty
miles and more, but they won't find two
Joan Pockets. And the longer you knows
her, my dear,' she said, turning to Eve,
^ the stronger you'll love her.'

I feel sure of that,' replied Eve, taking
the hand which Jochabed held out, for

they had by this time reached a gateway
into which she was about to turn.

You ha' net o-ot a bit the look o' the

o

maidens hereabouts,' continued Jochabed ;
and yet her face don't seem strange.
Hers like somebody I's a gnawed. Who
is it, Joan V

I can't tell,' said Joan, ' less 'tis Adam
you 'm thinking' of.'

You've a said it — that's who 'tis,' said
Jochabed, decisively. ^ Wa-al, my dear,
'ain't speaking' ill o' nobody's face to feature
'em with Adam, is it ? Only I says to you
as I says to he, booty's only skin deep, and
hansom' is as hansom' does.'

During' these last words Jochabed had
opened the gate and gone through ; she
now only waited to say, ' Then you can't
mind nothing' you want this time 1' and to
hear Joan's answer before she turned down

20—2

a narrow path leading to a field, at the
farther end of which was an opening by
which she could reach her cottage.

How far is Plymouth ?' asked Eve, as
the two girls stood watching Jochabed's
retreating figure.

Twenty miles or so.'

And will she walk all that way 1' asked
Eve.

Yes. Oh ! 'ain't nothing much of a
walk that,' said Joan ; ' only she'll carry
four skins o' spirit and a good doUup o'
tea.'

Skins of spirit % Why not put it in a
bottle ?'

'Cos she carries it all about her,' replied
Joan. 'You couldn't sling a parcel o'
bottles about 'ee.'

Oh ! then doesn't she have a basket f

Why no, unless 'tis to put some

trumpery in she makes out to be selling' o' ;
'cos she don't want nobody to know what
she's carrying', and they that buys from her
buys on the sly. 'Tis all under the same
flag, my dear, free trade and no booty ;
but come on, we're close to Ann Lisbeth's
now, though 'tis ten to one if we finds herat
home, we've took such a time in
coming.'

True enough, when they reached the
cottage they found Mrs. Johns (Ann
Lisbeth's mother, an invalid, and through
rheumatism constantly confined indoors)
alone. Ann Lisbeth had left an hour
before, to do some errands. She had gone
down the steps by Mrs. Martin's house,
through to the Warren, and by this
means the friends had missed each
other.

How's she coming' back V asked Joan.

Mrs. Johns did not well know ; Ann
Lisbeth had told her not to wait tea, as
most like she should stop and take hers at
her cousin's, Polly April's.'

Oh ! all right then,' said Joan ; ' we're
going' there, so we shall all meet ;' and after
a little more gossip about the adventures
of the morning, and how fortunate it was
that they had not cleaned up the place, so
that the littering mess the soldiers made,
tramping over everything, was not of
any consequence, the two girls took their
departure, and continued their walk up the
steep lane, stopping every now and again
to pick a few of the blackberries which
hung in tempting profusion. Above these
stood bushes covered with scarlet hips, in
and out of which twined the honeysuckle
with just here and there a late blossom
standing sickly-looking and alone ; these

and the long trails of briony, gay with
ruddy berries, proved sore temptations to
Eve, who lagged behind, gathering here and
there, while Joan carried on her steady
plunder of the blackberries.

There,' she cried at length, ^ if I go on
like this I shan't be able to eat a bit o' tay ;
so come on, Eve — do. I say,' she added,
picking her way across a tiny stream which
spread over the path from a fern-sheltered
basin ito which a spring came dripping
down, ' take care, or our shoes and stockings
won't be fit to be looked at.'

'That's a pity for those that wear
buckles,' laughed Eve.

Uncle gave 'em to me,' said Joan,
putting her feet together and surveying
them with visible satisfaction ; * they're
rale silver ; they was poor aunt's. He's
got another pair put by for Adam's wife,

he says, * 'Tis much better he gave 'em to
you, so I'll tell un.'

No, no, I don't want them,' said Eve.
I like to see other people in such things,
but I don't care for them at all for myself ;
besides,' she added, with a touch of resentment
rankling towards Adam, ' I should
be very sorry to deprive Adam's wife of
anything.'

Nonsense,' laughed Joan. ' Take all
you can get ; that's my maxim. And as for
hoarding' up and latin' by for Adam's wife,
who we never saw, and perhaps may never
come, is what I call folly, and so I tell
uncle. Nobody 'full thank un for it, and
least of all Adam.'

No, I shouldn't think he was overburdened
with gratitude,' said Eve, sarcastically.


I don't know that,' said Joan ; ' but

'tis this with Adam ever since he was born,
he's had all he wanted almost fore he'd
asked for it. Nobody's ever gainsay
un in a single things. Aunt and uncle
and my mother, and lots more, think his
ditto was never made, 'til I believe he's
got it in his head that the world only
goes round to please he and his fancies.'

And yet people don't seem so very fond
of him,' said Eve.

No, they ain't ; they're afeard of un,
and that's the truth ; and in wan way I
don't wonder at it neither, for he ain't content
that you should know that he's better
than yourself, but he must make 'ee feel it
somehow.'

Indeed ! I can't see that he's any
better than other people,' exclaimed
Eve.

Oh, but he is, though,' said Joan.

He knows more — is a better scholar,
perhaps,' continued Eve ; ' but — • — '

That ain't all,' interrupted Joan. ' 'Tis
in other things 'sides scholar'. He don't
give way to drinking ; ain't mixed up with
no cockfighting', nor fighting' o' no sort ;
nothing' o' that's any pleasure to he.
Then in the sharing', whether their faces
or their backs is to un, 'tis all one to
Adam ; there's your, and that's his, and
no more nor less is made of it.'

^ But that's only honest, Joan.'

Miss, I know that ; still he needn't make
em feel like a pack o' hates, 'cos one or
two's a happened now and then not to
know t'other from which. He's terrible
hard that way ; once slip, and down you
stay with Adam.'

Well, I don't like people who deceive
and shuffle, myself,' said Eve.

Ah said Joan, ' some's as God made
'em, and brothers as the devil finds 'em ;
but Adam acts as one who made himself
perfect, and can keep himself the same.'

Of course that's going too far,' said
Eve. ' Still, I think we've got a great
deal in our own hands, you know, Joan,
and I have not much patience with people
who go wrong, for it always seems to me
they might have helped it if they'd tried
to. Mother and me used often to argue
about that ; for no matter how bad anyone
was, poor dear, she'd always find something
to excuse them by.

But I thought your mother was so religious,'
said Joan, with some surprise.

^ So she was : but there's nothing against
religion in that, Joan, is there V

Miss, my dear ; 'tis a good deal against
the religion I sees carried on here. If you

was to ask my mother and they, herd tell
'ee that o' Sundays, when the chapel-doors
was shut, 'tis Glory Hallelujah to they inside,
and fire and brimstone to whoever's
out; though, somehow, I can't never bring
my mind to believe that's what the Bible
means it to be.'

Why, of course not,' said Eye ; ^ you've
only to read for yourself to know that.
You've got a Bible, Joan, haven't you ?'

^ There's wan at home,' said Joan, evasively.


Is there ? Where ? I don't think I've
seen it.'

^ No, you haven't ; 'tis kept locked up in
the chest n' drawers, 'long o' some o' poor
aunt's things. She bought un afore Adam
was born, so uncle don't like un read in,
'cos 'twould get thumbed so ; the binding's
beautiful, and 'tis as good as new. I

don't repose it's been opened half-a-dozen
times.*

Eve vas silent for a few minutes ; and
just as she was about to renew the conversation
they came to a orate, which Joan
opened and passed through, saying the
path was now so narrow that they would
have to walk in single file. This extremely
narrow lane opened into a good-sized
turnip-field, where Eve's attention was
caught by a sight of the old manor-house,
with its arched doorways and granite-mullions
windows.

'That's Killigarth,' said Joan. 'Ain't
it a ancient old place ! How would 'ee like
to live there. Eve, eh V

I'd rather live down by the sea,' said
Eve.

Would 'ee, sure 'nus ? Awl, but that's
a splendid place inside continued Joan.

There's one room big enough to turn a
coach-and-four inside, with Adam and
Eve, and all of 'em, plastered up on the
ceiling ; and outside there's a hedge so
high, and so broad, that you can walk four
abreast a-top of it, out so far as a summerhouse
overlooking' the sea. There ain't
much of the summer-house left now, but
the hedo^e is there all right.'

Such an unusual curiosity naturally occasioned
some surprise ; and Joan was still
endeavouring to give satisfactory answers
to Eve's numerous questions concerning it,
when they began to descend the steep hill
leading down to Talland Bay.

^ Ah !' exclaimed Eve, giving vent to a
deep-drawn sigh of satisfaction as the
sweep of Talland Bay and beach came into
sioiit. ' This is the sort of view I like,
Joan; I could stand looking at this for ever.'

Well, better ask Arbell Thomas to let
'ee live with she. That's her house, down
there ; do 'ee see, close in by the lime-kilns
?'

^ And is that the church you go to X

Very seldom ; whenever any of us
goes to church, 'tis to Lansallos ; leastwise,
that's where we'd bound to go, 'cos we'd
in Lansallos parish.'

Eve gave a despairing shrug.

I shall never understand it,' she said ;
the place is all Polperro, isn't it ?'

Of course it is !'

Well, but yet you keep on calling it
Talland and Lansallos.'

And for this reason,' said Joan, stooping
to rake together four or five loose
stones. ^ Now, look here, suppose we say
these stones is Polperro, now, and she made
a division with a clear space between the

two heaps ; ' this we'll call the brook — that
divides two parishes. All this side is Gallant,
and they must go to Talland church
to be married and buried ; all that side is
Lansallos, and must be married and buried
in Lansallos church. Now do 'ee understand
r

Eve went over the explanation to herself
; then she said :

'Yes, I think I do understand now.'

All right, then. Before we go on I want
to ask Arbell if she's got any ducks fit
for killing', 'cos if so, us'll have a couple.'

You don't want me for that, do you ?'
said Eve ; ' so, while you go in there, let me
wait here — shall I ?'

Very well,' said Joan. ' Then don't
come through the gate, 'cos we haven't got
time to go no farther, and I won't be a
minute or two 'fore I'm back agen.'

So saying, she pushed open the gate, let it
swing behind her, and disappeared towards
the cottage, leavings Eve to become more
familiar with the scene around her. A
patchwork of fields spread out and ran
down to the cliffs, which sloped towards a
point where they overhung the sea, and
shadowed the little pebbly beach below.
Not a tree was in sight, so that Eve's
eyes wandered across the unbroken line of
undulating land until they rested on the
hillock-raised tower of the old grey church,
beneath whose shelter lay the dead, whose
plaintive dirge the sea seemed softly singing;
and straightway a mist gathered before
Eve, and the eyes of her heart looked
upon a lonely grave in a far-off city churchyard.
was it possible that little more
than a week had passed since she stood
bidding farewell to that loved spot ? If
VOL. I. 21

SO, time had no span, but must be
measured by the events it chronicled.
Only a week ! yet her life seemed already
bound ujD in fresh interests, her feelings
and sympathies entangled in a host of new
doubts and perplexities. Affections hitherto
dormant had been aroused, emotions she
had not dreamed of quickened. It was as
if she had dropped into a place kept vacant
for her, the surroundings of which were
fast closing in, shutting out all beyond and
obscuring all that had gone before ; and at
this thought the memory of her mother
was hugged closer to her heart, while the
sight link which bound her to Reuben May
seemed turned into a fetter.

He ought never to have taken such a
promise from me,' she said, with all the
ingenuousness of one-sided love.

Then, after a few moments' pause, moved

by some impulse, she ran across the green
slope which hedged the cliff, and bent over;
but the place where on the previous night
she had stood with Adam was hidden
from view, and turning, she walked slowly
back, wondering; what could have made
her Lavish to look at that particular spot.

Certainly not any feeling of love
she had towards Adam, for the thought
that Adam was the one who would not
trust her stung her with a sharpness
which made the desire for revenge come
keen, and the thought of it seem sweet.
And out of her vivid imagination she
swiftly conjured up an image of Adam,
humbled and enslaved ; and as she stood
still, enjoying her pictured triumph, the
click of the gate recalled her wandering
senses, and turning round she was met by
Joan, who said :

21—2

^ Let's get back as quick as can, for
Arbell says one o' the boats is in ; and one
o' the CKrao's told her that word had come
o' somebody having' seed Jeremy

^ Oh ! then what a pity we sent the
letter !'

'Yes; 1 forgot all about that said
Joan. 'But never mind, Witty can't
have took it yet. So on our way home
we'll call and tell un we wants the letter
back agen ; we needn't say for wdiy, only
that we've a changed our minds, and there's
no call to send un now.'

END OF VOL. I.

BILLING AJS'D SONS, PRINTERS AND Electrometer, GUILDFORD.

S. <k H.

yrn-i

Ws^t

se";-^fe'"'i?«

#i^jr:*:«f^

M^i^z%W^

mmm'^m^^

'\'^.i'L^''^^-m:

V*

• ."-.t'Cv .• .<^Cv .'^^^

BY THE AUTHOR OF

DOROTHY FOX,' AND 'THE Prescott OF
Pavillon.'

IN THREE VOLUMES.
VOL. IL

LONDON :
RICHARD BENTLEY AND SON,

Jlttblishcrs in (Ordinary to ~g)zx ^Hitjcstt) the Queen.

1880.

\ All Rights Rcsej-vcd.]

in 2009 with funding from

University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign

http://www.archive.org/details/adameve02parr

ADAM AND EYE.

CHAPTER I.

HE news from Jerrem turned out
nothing more than a vao^ue report
that he had been seen at
Jersey, waiting, it was said, to return by a
vessel which traded to Weymouth. The
man who brought the news belonged to
the Stamp and Go, which had just arrived,
and word had been sent to Joan by Ezekiel
Johns, her captain, that she was not to
expect Uncle Zebedee till she saw him, as
VOL. II. 22

they intended waiting in the chops of the
Channel for an East Indiaman, which they
had learnt from the Plymouth pilots was
already overdue.

This prolonged absence of the men
would afford a good opportunity for accepting
the numerous invitations which Eve's
arrival had occasioned; and more than a
week passed away, during which the two
girls kept up a constant round of junketing
tea-drinkings, and as several of these
outings were at a little distance from home,
Eve soon became quite familiar with the
neighbourhood, and talked glibly of Pes
Landaviddy, Mizzen, and many other
places, the names of which, but a short
time before, had sounded unintelligible and
strange to her ears. Fortunately for her
preconceived ideas as to the right way of
spending Sunday, an invitation had come
from Joan's mother, Mrs. Tucker, asking

them to spend that day at the mill ; and
though Joan felt most reluctant to undergo
such a severe penance, not seeing her
way to a refusal, she was forced to
accept.

The certainty that they would have to
go to chapel in the evening was a sufficient
excuse in Joan's mind for not going therein
the morning ; and she overruled Eve's
proposal of walking to Lansallos Church
by saying they wouldn't be back in time
for dinner, besides which — strongest of
arguments in Joan's eyes — there wouldn't
be nobody there to see ; and therefore
Eve was beguiled into believing the best
thing they could do would be, after having
their breakfast and setting all straight,
to walk down to the quay, so as to
draw breath before being stuffed up with
they mill lot,' as Joan very irreverently
styled the friends to whom on

22—2

Sundays Mrs. Tucker usually offered her
hospitality.

I puts all I got 'pon my back whenever
I goes to chapel,' said Joan, in explanation
of the various adornments with which
she Alas loading her attractive little person.
I loves to see 'em stare and then give a
rashly look at mother ;' and she turned up
her bright dark eyes in imitation of these
scandalised sympathisers.

^ But what does your mother do ?' said
Eve, half inclined (by the lack of assurance
she knew she should feel in accompanying
Joan) to sympathise with Mrs.
Tucker.

Why, enjoys it, to be sure ! Don't
mother hang down her head, so much as to
say, "" See what a trial I's got, and look
how I bears it !" '

^ Nonsense !' laughed Eve ; ' I dare say
she's very proud of you all the time. I

know she added, checking her laugh with
a sigh, ' my dear mother was of me ; she
never thought there was anybody looked
like me.'

Well, she was pretty right there,' said
Joan ; ' and if you'd only smarten yourself
up with a bit o' colour, you'd look a right-down
beauty ; miss, that you would ! I do
hope mother won't die ; if 'tis only for that
I should hate to wear nothing' but a black
gown.'

'■ Oh no, you wouldn't,' said Eve, gravely.
I used to think the same ; but now I
wouldn't change it for the richest gown
you could give me.'

Joan shook her head.

No, I hates black,' she persisted ;
adding, as she took a more critical survey
of Eve, ^ Adam will have it you'd too
pale, but I tell un, no such thing ; 'tis only
the black that makes 'ee look so.'

Adam's very kind 1' said Eve, piqued
at this candour. ^ Isn't there anything else
about me that he can find fault with V

Oh, you mustn't take no notice o' he !'
replied Joan ; ' he's always contrary 'bout
maidens' looks, trying to pick 'em to
pieces, and find all the faults he can with
'em. I don't believe he can help it. I
believe some is born to see crossways.'

And in her mind Joan thought Adam
one of these, for to her surprise he had
pooh-poohed her admiration of Eve, and
contended against the great claim to good
looks which Joan put in for her.

^ For all he may say, I'd be willing' to
change with her, though,' thought Joan,
as, turning from the glass, her eyes fell on
Eve, already arrayed in her black hat and
grey duffle cloak ; and this, after the reflection
which Joan had just had of her
bright little self, was certainly no small

compliment — a compliment which was not
paid to Eve by many of the girls with
whom, in their walk to the quay and then
to Chapel Rock, they chanced to meet ;
for Joan was a general favourite, and her
style of dress, according to Polperro tastes,
was perfection — everything of the best, and
plenty of it. So, as the little figure pattered
down the street, looking like some bright-plumage
d bird, her van i by was tickled by,
Why, where be you off to, Joan ? Well,
you'd dressed out, and no mistake 1'
Here, I say, Joan, step in and let's have
a look at 'ee 1 Awl, you be lookin' smart,
for sure !' But Joan was deaf to all entreaties
; she walked on through the street
and past the houses, which, except that
they were more than usually filled with
idle loungers, presented none of the
orderly appearance usually conspicuous on
Sundays, neither did any air of calm quiet

rest upon the place or people ; on the contrary,
they seemed unusually noisy and
uproarious : the same bustle pervaded the
quay, the same smell of fish-cleaning
offended the nose ; and though Eve could
not point to any one, and say they were
actually working, yet she saw no reason to
suppose they had by any means laid aside
their everyday vocations.

^j the rock they found the men
grouped together, discussing the probability
of a change of weather, the signs of
the fish rising, and the manoeuvres of Old
Boney ; the youngsters were indulging in
rough practical jokes and skylarking, until
Joan and Eve making their appearance,
their attention was at once directed towards
them. But, tr}^ as they might, Joan
was equal to their banter or their compliments,
both of which she managed to pay
back, much to her own satisfaction and

their amusement ; till at last, induced by
Eve's showing that they should be late
for dinner, she consented to take her departure
; and, forbidding her admirers to
come farther than the steps, she there
bade them adieu, and left them to decide
among themselves that Joan Hocken was
a sweet and party dear, and worth twenty
o' that stuck-up London concern, with her
pasty face and mim ways.

I reckon we'd best step out a bit,' said
Joan, now fully alive to the danger of
keeping the dinner waiting. ^ What a
bother 'tis having' to toil all the ways to
Crumplehorn ! I'd sooner any day than
Sunday at mother's.'

^ I don't know,' said Eve ; ' I'm rather
glad we're going there. I've been used,
you know, to spend my Sundays very
quietly — to church or chapel and back,
morning and evening.'

Lors r exclaimed Joan, ' there was a
good deal o' the same thing in that, wasn't
there % Didn't 'ee get tired of it at all,
Eve?'

No ;' then, remembering how often she
had grown weary over the dull monotony
of the day, whose perfect rest was irksome
to her vigorous youth, she added, * or if I
did, I'd give a good deal if they'd but come
back again now, Joan.'

Poor dear 1' said Joan, touched by the
tearful voice; but never mind, next Sunday
us'll go to church if you cares for it — to
Talland Church, and come home by the
cliff all alongside by the sea : you'll like
that, won't 'ee ?'

Eve squeezed the hand which Joan put
into hers, and after a little silence she said :

But don't think that I'm not happy
here, Joan. I feel so different that I can
hardly tell myself for the same. I seem

to be so at home here, so as not to care for
anybody but those I've got round me.'
Awl, come, that ain't fair said Joan.

" When from William I parted,
I vowed I'd keep true."

Oh lors !' she exclaimed, stifling her voice.

I forgot 'twas Sunday, and that we're close

to mill, where ' — and she folded her hands

and cast down her eyes with a prim look of

propriety —

"Maidens should be mild and meek,
Swift to hear and slow to speak." '

After which, flinging open the gate, she
gave Eve a sudden push which sent her
forward with a most undignified bounce
into the presence of Mrs. Tucker, who was
standing at the door ready to receive them.

Oh, here you be then,' said Mrs. Tucker,
with, as Eve thought, a shade of disappointment
in her voice. ' I didn't expect
'ee yet awhiles ; I was on the look-out for
Mr. Blame and Susanna. I never expects

Joan to be in time ; I always says
'wouldn't be Joan if folks wasn't kep'
waiting' while dinner's spoiling.'

'And it ain't Joan now, mother,' said
her daughter, promptly. ' You've got to
thank Eve for seen' me. I shouldn't ha'
hove in sight for another half-hour to come
if 't hadn't bin for she.'

'Well, one thing is, if I'd took the
trouble to walk so far as the corner, I
should ha' know'd you was coming,' retorted
Mrs. Tucker. i'm bound to say
nobody who wasn't denied the blessing' o'
eyesight but must see you, if 'twas a mile
away, Joan. I can't think,' she added,
taking advantage of the opportunity afforded
by following the girls into the
house to give their dress a critical survey,
^ why, if you'd so wrapped up in Eve as
you pretends to be, you don't take what
she wears for a pattern.'

Why how can I do that, and you Vin'
all the whiles X said Joan, with an air of
injured innocence. ' You ain't wan tin to
see me in mourning' for 'ee fore you'd dead,
be 'ee V

Death ain't no subject for cutting' jokes
upon,' said Mrs. Tucker, supplying a
rebuke for lack of a retort ; ' and as there'll
be friends present, I do hope you'll be a
little becoming' in your talk, Joan, on a
Sabbath day of all others.' Then, without
giving Joan time to reply, she began inquiring
about Uncle Zebedee and Adam,
and how long they were likely to be absent.
*And what do ye think o' your cousin.
Eve 1' she asked.

I have seen so little of him,' said Eve,
evasively.

Why, they only come home, as you may
say, to go away agen,' explained Joan.
Eve didn't see nothing' of Adam but the
one evening.'

Mrs. Tucker sighed :

^ Ah !' she said, * I saw the lodgers go
past, and come back again

^ Miss ; no wiser than they was afore,
though,' laughed Joan.

Don't laugh, Joan said her mother.

'Why, you wouldn't have me cry 'cos
they was balked, would 'ee ?'

They won't alius be balked,' said Mrs.
Tucker ; ' luck don't last for ever, and the
sins of the father often falls heavy on the
chiltern.'

Oh, well,' retorted Joan, ' if Adam's
back ain't bowed down with nothing' heavier
than the sins uncle's lay 'pon it, he'll walk
upright to the end of his days. But there,
mother,' she added, catching sight of Eve's
face, ' don't let's begin a cavil — that ain't
becoming' o' Sundays, nor no other days ;
and Eve here's bin lookin' forward to spend
the day with 'ee, 'cos hers bin allays used
to quiet Sundays.'

This discernment on the part of Eve as
to the visible difference between the two
households, diverted Mrs. Tucker from her
dismal forebodings into questioning her
guest on the usual habits of herself and
her mother, until the arrival of Mr. and
Mrs. Blarney engrossed her attention, and
Eve and Joan were left to their own devices.
Too thorough a housekeeper to
allow her mind to wander from the dinner,
which, having provided, she wished to see
appreciated, Mrs. Tucker's next efforts
were centred on helping the dishes to the
best advantage, and proportioning the
supply to each persons requirements; a
task so onerous that, the meal over, she was
not sorry to be left quietly alone with her
elderly friends, and therefore raised no
objection to her stepson Sammy accompanying
Joan and Eve into the orchard,,
where he was directed to find a sheltered

spot, that they might sit down and enjoy
the apples which lay in yellow heaps undermost
of the trees. The two girls occupied
the gnarled root of a withered trunk,
while Sammy, having ascertained that the
grass was too ' lady ' for him to sit down
upon, took up his position at the nearest
tree which he leaned against, chewing the
-end of a flower-stalk, and casting looks of
sidelong admiration at Joan.

Here, where's your knife to V exclaimed
Joan, stretching out her hand for a fresh
apple which she selected with particular
care ; ^ I wants to skin one. Did 'ee ever
try that. Eve '?'

Try what,' said Eve, recalling her
drowsy attention.

Why, to skin a apple without a-breakin '
it, and throw the peeling' over yer shoulder
to see what letter it makes % I'm going'
to do this wan;' and she began to carefully

set about the task. * Whatever letter
comes is the first letter o' your sweetheart's
name. There she exclaimed, giving the
requisite twirl before jerking the apple-peel
over her shoulder. * Look, Eve, what
is it, eh V

Well, I can hardly tell,' said Eve ; ' 'tis
something like a C, and yet it's like a Q.'

^ I knows 'tis a S,' and Sammy directed
an unmistakable leer towards Joan.

A S spells Ass,' said Joan, snappishly.

Naw, it don't,' sniggered Sammy ;
't wants another S for he.'

Well, then, you go and stand there
said Joan, * then 'twill be all complete, word
and pictor too. Here, I'm full,' she added,
chucking away the apple in disgust. ^ Now
what else could we do ? Ain't there no
place else for us to go to, eh, stupid ?'

There's the mill,' suggested Sammy,
'but he ain't a coin' nothing', you know.'

VOL. II. 23

shiver mind, for want o' better let's
have a look at 'un. Have 'ee ever seen the
inside of a mill, Eve ?'

Eve never had, and, though perfectly
ignorant of what she was to see, expressed
her desire of seeing it ; and up they got,
Joan leading them by a way that should
avoid Mrs. Tucker interposing her dictum
against such an adventure. A gap in the
orchard hedo^e brought them to a field of
rank grass, at the far end of which was the
stream which ran down to the mill-wheel,
where Eve was for stopping to gaze at the
fringe of maiden-hair and the great clumps
of hart's-tongue which peeped out amid
the blackness of the crevices. The clumsy
key, red with rust, hung on a nail outside
the small door, which, for the greater convenience
of dropping down the sacks, had
a sliding shuttered entrance. Sammy took
down the key, and then deliberately took

off his coat and waistcoat and hung them
on the nail

Why, what do you do that for ?' said
Eve.

'Cos of the flour,' said Joan, an apprehension
creeping over her that she had
made rather a fooHsh proposal. However, as
they had o't so far they might as well goon
; but as a precaution she added, * Best
take your gown up around 'ee, Eve. I
shall put mine over my head,' and she
suited the action to her words.

Seeing them thus prepared, Sammy
opened the door — whish-heh ! — and up rose
a cloud of flour-dust.

They's rats, I reckon,' he said, leading
the way into an all but dark space, with nothing
visible except white sacks and barrels.

Oh I I hope there ain't any rats here
now,' exclaimed Eve ; ' I can't bear rats.'

Can't 'ee V said Sammy, with some 



prise. ' Us caught five and twenty here
last week, and they's no thin' to what
there's up aloft.'

Then I shan't go there said Eve, preparing
to beat a retreat. ' Joan !' But Joan,
who was already half-way up the ladder
which opened into the upper story, called
out :

^ Nonsense, Eve ! don't pay no heed to
wdiat he says. Come along with roe.'

Wan at a time,' interposed Sammy, ^ 'cos
Bill Wyatt's a put his — ' but before Sammy
could get out the word ' foot,' a cloud of
dust was thrown into the air, and the heels
of two shoes were sticking through the
ladder. Eve gave a scream, Sammy sprang
forward, but too late. Joan, not having been
warned in time, had missed her footing on
the broken rung of the ladder, and being
encumbered by the careful enveloping of
her gown, had tumbled headlong into a

cask of flour. To recover her was the
work of a minute, and before the cloud had
time to disperse or Eve could advance near
enough to offer her assistance, Joan, only
waiting to give herself a hasty shake, had
attacked the unlucky Sammy like a fury,
nor did she stop until forced to do so by
want of breath ; then, as if this explosion of
her temper had expended her wrath, she
burst into a fit of laughter, exclaiming :

I say, what do I look like ? whatever
will mother say % No, my dear saw], don't
'ee, for goodness' sake, come night me ;
'tis enough for one of us to look like a
flour-bag.'

^ Oh, Joan, you ain't hurt ?' said Eve.

Lord, no, I ain't hurt ; but I've a made
that great lutterputch feel the weight o' me
hand, though. Don't you come a near me,'
she called out to Sammy, who stood 
his arms together in his vain endeavour

to free himself from the flour, ' or I won't
leave a whole bone in yer ugly body.'

What had we best do 1' said Eve.
You're covered all over; your hair's as full
of flour as if 'twas powdered.'

I can't tell what to do,' said Joan, hopelessly
; * I shouldn't mind if 'wasn't for
mother, but there'll be no stopping' of her.
Here, I'll tell 'ee what 'tis,' she exclaimed,
with sudden inspiration ; ^ I must make out
that I'm hurt somewheres in my insides,
and every time she opens her mouth to
spake, I'll raise a groan. Here !' she called
out to Sammy. * You be ofl* in, and tell
mother I've called down in the millhouse,
and you think I'm hurt terrible bad.'

Sam hesitated for a moment, but a movement
forward from Joan sent him away
like a rocket, and before Eve could suggest
any more truthful evasion by which Mrs.
Tucker's anger could be averted to their

dismay she was seen running towards them,
with Mr. and Mrs. Blarney following in
the rear. ^ So well be killed for a sheep asa
lamb,' said Joan, with a doleful look at
the sorry plight of her smart dress ; so
down she flopped on the stones, by which
manoeuvre Mrs. Tucker's first view of her
was half lying on the ground, with her face
as white as her own kerchief.

Now Sammy — wise in his generation —
had merely popped his head in at the door
and curtailed his announcement into :
Joan's down by the mill : her's hurt herself
terrible bad ;' and by the time Mrs.
Tucker had got to the door, Sam had disappeared,
leaving her fears to increase with
each step she took, until at the sight of
Joan pale and prostrate they culminated in
an outburst of motherly tenderness, which
made her rush forward, throw her arms
round her daughter, and exclaim :

^ Ali, my dear ! whatever have 'ee done
to yourself?' and when a minute after
Joan extricated herself from the embrace,
it was to see the tears trickling down her
mother s face.

Mother, don't 'ee ; I ain't hurt a bit*"
cried Joan. ^ I would go into the mill, and
I fell smack through the ladder into a cask
of flour. Miss, you may scold now so much as
you will, I don't care a bit ; for I wouldn't
ha' believed afore you cared half so much
for me.'

Mrs. Tucker turned to Eve, who tried
to give some further explanation ; then she
asked Joan again if she was sure she hadn't
hurt herself anywhere, and finally suggested
they should go in and see if they
couldn't rid her of the flour ; but in all this
she gave her daughter no word of reproach.


Whatever shall I do about going' ta

chapel V said Joan, as the clock warned
them it was time to get ready. ' I've
brushed till my arms ache, but my things
is still like a millard's/

I'll stay home with you,' said Eve.

Will 'ee ? that's a dear ; and,' she added,
with a propitiatory look towards her mother,
us'll have down the big Bible and read
chapters verse by verse.'

'Tis very good of you to offer. Eve
said Mrs. Tucker, * but I've bin to a place
o' worship once to-day, and you haven't, so
I'll stop with Joan, and you go off to
chapel with Mrs. Blame.' And so the
matter was settled, and as Joan said when
they finally returned home : ' There's what
you do thhik and what you don't think, for
if anybody 'ed a told me that 'stead o'
shown' off to chapel, I should ha' sat at
home quiet with mother, I wouldn't ha
believed it.'

And she seemed to have enjoyed the
evening said Eve.

Awl, well ! I don't know about that
replied Joan, doubtingly. ^ I dare say her
wished herself to chapel, but I didn't ; for
mother's a bountiful reader, and the Bible's
a wonderful Book.'

HE next week passed away and
another was nearly at its close,
and yet Joan and Eve remained
alone — no tidings had come of the Lotteries,
Joan was not in the least uneasy, yet she
kept wondering what could be the reason
of their unexplained delay, until, having
come to the end of all other conjectures,
she finally settled down to the belief that
they must have given up the Indiaman,
and gone across to Guernsey. However,
one afternoon, as the two girls were discussing

the advisability of accepting an
invitation from Ann Lisbeth to join her
and her cousin Jessie, the door opened, and
in walked Adam.

Ah he said, in answer to the visible
surprise his sudden appearance had created,
I thought I should catch you napping.
You didn't expect to see me, did you ?'

^ No, indeed we didn't,' said Joan, who
had jumped up and ran forward to meet
him ; ^ but I'm so glad you'd come,
Adam 1 Why, where's uncle ? Wherever
have 'ee bin to all this long whiles ? I
thought you was never coming' back no
more. Why, however could the boat have
come in, and me not to know it !'

There isn't any boat in yet,' said
Adam.

What, uncle not come ?'

No ; he won't be here till tomorrow,
or perhaps next day. A pilot boat landed

me at Plymouth, then I rode so far as
Looe, and walked the rest.*

During this speech Adam had advanced
towards Eve, had taken her hand, and, to
her annoyance, while he was speaking still
kept hold of it ; after one ineffectual effort
at withdrawal, she let it remain passive,
until, having finished what he was saying
to Joan, he turned, and for the first time
looking fixedly at her, said :

Well, Cousin Eve V

Well, Cousin Adam V

You haven't said that you're glad to
see me yet.'

Oh, haven't I ? but surely you do not
need me to say so ?'

Yes, but I do said Adam, tightening
his hold of her hand. ' Now, look up at
me and say, '^ Adam, I'm glad you've
come back." '

Eve did as she was bidden, and raising

a perfectly expressionless face, said, as a
parrot might :

Adam, I'm glad you've come back

That's right,' he laughed, giving her a
somewhat significant shake of the head ;
then, turning to Joan, he asked if she
wasn't going to give him something to eat.

^ What would 'ee like V said Joan ; ' us
has had our dinners, and I was waiting' for
the kettle to boil to make a cup) o' tay.'

^ That'll suit me exactly. I don't want
nothing much as yet ; I had some sort of a
meal at Looe.'

Joan went into the kitchen to make her
preparations, and Adam, taking a chair,
seated himself at a little distance from
Eve.

Have you been for any more moonlight
rambles '?' he said, after he had sat watching
her for a few minutes.

No,' answered Eve, opening her workbox,

and searching in it for the materials
to do some darning.

How is that ?' and he edged the chair
a bit nearer.

Because I haven't cared to, I s pose,'
said Eve, assuming an air of indifference,
which visibly contrasted with the great
interest she took in finding the various
articles for her needlework.

You're very busy there,' continued
Adam, and Eve knew by his voice that
he must be leaning over the table towards
her. ' What is it you are about, eh V

Darning the crown of my cap she
said, endeavouring to appear as composed
as she desired to be.

Let me see ;' his hand was stretched
out until it touched hers.

There's nothing to see in it ; it's only a
common cap-crown,' she said, holding it out
for his inspection.

Adam took hold of the piece of net,
fingering it with an air of abstraction,
while he kept his eyes fixed on Eve, who,
knowing that in another minute Joan
would reappear, wished from her heart
that he would move himself farther away.
Raising her eyes with an effort, for, strive
as she would. Eve had only been able to
meet Adam's gaze with simulated composure,
she said :

When you've quite done with that, I
shall be glad to go on with my work

Where's the lace for it ?' said Adam,
seemingly struck by a sudden inspiration.


Lace ! it hasn't got any lace ;' and Eve
snatched the cap away from him.

But you'd like it to have lace ?' said
Adam. * Come, now,' he added, ' all
women love lace, don't they '?'

I don't know about all women,' she

said. ' I suppose many do, or I shouldn't
have got a having by mending lace

All, I forgot that. Then you must bea
bit of a judge. Wait a minute, now,
and I'll bring you down some I've got upstairs
that I brought home from France
with me. You shall tell me what you
think of that !'

As fetching this involved moving from
his present close proximity, Eve made no
opposition, and he had only just got out of
the room when Joan appeared, bringing
the tea-things. The kettle was found to
be boiling, so that when Adam returned
the two girls were seated at the table. At
siofht of Joan Adam's face chant-ed : when
he had gone upstairs he had forgotten the
probability of her coming back. However,
there was no help for it now. The lace
was in his hand, so, with no seeming em-vol.

II. 24

embarrassment, he threw it on the table
before Eve, saying as he did so :

There, is that good for anything ?'

The lace was a piece of Brussels point
of the rarest make and finest description.


My dear life T exclaimed Joan, as Eve
held it up. ' Wherever did 'ee get that,
Adam ? Why, 'tis like a spider's web !'

Yes,' said Eve, examining the delicacy
of the groundwork and the evenness of the
stitches ; ^ isn't it lovely '?'

^ Ah !' and Adam gave a deep-drawn
breath ; ^ then it's the right sort of thing,
is it ? They told me 'wouldn't be easy to
match it this side of the Channel.'

^ I don't think I ever saw anything so
perfect !' continued Eve, carrying on her
inspection with the enjoyment of a connoisseur.
' Look at that stitch, Joan, and
the one there !'

And the colour !' put in Joan. ' Awl,
'tis downright splendid !'

Then you like it ? said Adam, addressing
Eve.

Like it !' returned both of the girls ;
'it's beautiful!'

Ain't there two pieces ?' said Adam,
leaning over to put aside the paper.

^ Yes, but all the same pattern ; it's the
cap and ruffles, you know,' explained Eve,
spreading the first piece out preparatory to
folding it.

Then it's worth having ? said Adam.

Joan was going to answer, but happening
to look up, she saw that his question was
pointedly addressed to Eve.

What r said Eve.

Should you think it's worth having ?

Certainly ; if I were you I should lock
it away most carefully,' replied Eve, speaking
very rapidly, and giving a rather

24—2

hurried twist to the paper in which the
lace now lay folded.

Then he said, shutting her hand upon it
and gently pushing it towards her :

^ Keep it for your cap. I brought it
down on purpose for you.'

For me, Adam ? Oh no !' and Eve
gave a decisive shake of the head. ^ I
couldn't think of taking it. You forget
how different my dress is. I shouldn't
presume to wear lace Hke that ; besides, if
I did — I — anyway, thank you for offering
it, but I could not accept such a gift from
you.'

'^ And for what reason V he said. ^ Joan
accepts presents from me, and why not you

Oh, Joan's quite different to me.'

Not at all ; a cousin's a cousin, whether
by mother or father.'

^ Yes, I know ;' and Eve hesitated, as
she strove to find the right words in which

to frame her denial. ^ I feel you mean it
very kindly, and I am much obliged to
you ; but I cannot take it ;' and she put
the lace, which Adam had again opened
and unrolled, resolutely over to his
side.

Why, what nonsense it is, Eve !' put in
Joan ; ' if Adam didn't wish 'ee to take it,
he wouldn't offer it to 'ee.'

Oh, she means to take it !' said Adam,
with a little incredulous laugh. * You
women are all alike. All the time you're
saying No, you only mean Yes.'

Indeed,' said Eve, nettled by the imputation,
' I think you'll find me an exception
to that rule.'

Adam shook his head.

Oh, there's no need to argue about
it,' she said quietly ; ^ but there's your
lace.'

He pushed it back ; Eve allowed it to

stay for a moment, then she put it away
from her with a more determined movement.


^ Come, nonsense, Eve !' he said, in a
tone of rising vexation. ' The thing isn't
worth half the fuss you've made about it
already. The lace isn't of any use to me ;
I don't wear ruffles and cap-borders, but
I like to see my women-folk in them, so
take it and say no more about it ;' and
with the air of one who had disarmed
further opposition, he turned to Joan and
said, ' Well, and how did you get on after
we left ?

Capital r replied Joan. ' The lodgers
was a fresh lot, and such a set o' jolly
greens as you never cast eyes upon ! All
they could think of was rain' up and
down stairs, and opening' and shutting' the
cupboard doors.'

what did Eve think of it all?' he

said, wondering by what explanation
Joan had satisfied her naturally aroused
curiosity.

Eve behaved herself beautiful said
Joan. ' She did good service, I can tell 'ee,
and kept the sharpest of 'em by her side
all the time.'

Why, how was that V said Adam,
quickly.

I'm sure I can't tell,' replied Joan, ^ 't
couldn't ha' bin for what he seed to look
at in her,' and she cast a pleasant glance
over to Eve.

I hope, Joan, that you don't make too
free with those men,' said Adam, sharply ;
'tis all very well to be ready with an
answer, but you should '

Oh, teach your granny !' said Joan ;
don't tell me ! If I don't know how to
trade a passel o' lodgers and throw 'em off
the scent, I don't know who should, and

bin up to the game ever since I Alas five
year old.'

Adam gave a meaning frown, which
Joan answered by saying in a low
voice :

No ; now it's o' no good trying to mask
the thing from her ; she knows all about it.
Why, now, how was I to help tellin' her?'
she added, seeing his displeasure. ^ Tis all
very well to talk, but unless anybody's a
born full, they knows if you hadn't got
sommat to hide, nobody wouldn't be sent
to seek it ; 'tis foolishness train' to make a
mystery of a thing that's so plain to see
as the news on yer face.'

Oh, I might have known you'd make a
mess of it,' he said, pushing back his chair
from the table, and going to the mantelpiece
to help himself to a paper spill, a
bundle of which was stuck into the arm of
a Chelsea shepherd.

Take no notice whispered Joan, as she
and Eve rose to clear away the tea-things.
I 'sects he wanted to tell 'ee himself.
T repose you'll be ready for some supper,
Adam T she said.

^ Well, I repose I shall,' he answered,
without turning round. * I told you I
hadn't had a regular dinner ; they'd only
some salt pork to give me at Looe.'

All right, then I'll try and see what I
can get for 'ee.' And going into the kitchen,
she said to Eve : * I'm going' to run down
to Barrett's for a minute, and see what
they've got. I'm blessed if I know what to
give un : whatever 'tis, 'tis certain to bethe
wrong: thins: ;' and she crossed her
fingers to signify the state of Adam's
temper.

I shouldn't put myself out about him,'
said Eve, with a contemptuous little movement
of her lips.

No, I believe you wouldn't said Joan,
^ and I'll be bound he'd ate whatever you
set before un. But there, as I've made my
bed so I must lie upon 'en ;' and having by
this time provided herself with a basket
and a dish, she opened the door and went
out. Eve finished washing the tea-things,
lingering over them as long as she could ;
and then, as these, together with the spoons
and teapot, were kept in the sitting-room,
she took them in, put them in their place,
opened the door and was on the first step
going upstairs, Avhen Adam called out :

^ Eve, don't leave that lying about here,'
and he pointed to the small packet on the
table ; ' take it up with you, and put it
away in your box.' His voice betrayed the
temper he was trying to subdue, making
his words seem more like a command than
an entreaty.

I have told you, Adam,' said Eve, turning

round, * that I'm not going to accept
the lace.'

And why not ? Why shouldn't you
accept the lace ? Are you going to tell me
that no man's ever given you a present before
— is that it, eh V

No, it isn't it !' she said, her face
reddening at the allusion he made.
Although such a question hasn't anything
to do with it ; it's enough for you that,
though I'm much obliged to you, I'd rather
not accept it.'

^ Oh, indeed I Then you can take presents
from others, but you can't from your
own cousin. I ought to be very much
obliged to you for the distinction you
make.'

Oh, it isn't always that we've such a
high opinion of our own relations,' retorted
Eve. ' Sometimes we think they ain't
worthy of being trusted, and refuse to let

them be told what they happen to know
already.'

^ You know ! how did you know V

simply because after what took place
the other evening, before I went to bed,
my wonder was aroused so that when I
awoke and found everything silent, and
Joan not there, I got frightened and crept
downstairs. Yes,' she continued, with a
laugh at the expression on his face, ' 'twas
a pity, as you took the trouble to lock one
door, you hadn't remembered there was
another way down.'

Now this accusation, which from Eve
was but a bow drawn at a venture, went
home, for Adam had actually locked the
door in question.

Confound your woman's curiosity !' he
said, with a half-confused laugh ; then
coming towards her, he added : 'But you
mustn't be vexed with me for that, Eve ; it

wasn't for want of trust that I wouldn't
have you told. I can't explain it now, but
some da" when we're quietly together, I'll
make it all clear to you.'

^ Of course,' she said, in an aggrieved
tone, ' it's not pleasant to feel you're in
the house of those who can't put confidence
'

Xo, no ! Now, my dear girl,' he interrupted,
^ you are quite on the wrong
tack there ; don't think any more of it in
that way. I'm sure,' he added, in a softened
tone, ^ if I've vexed you, I am very
sorry. Come, Eve !' and he laid his hand
on her shoulder. * Come, I can't say more
than that, can I V

^ No,' she said.

Then you'll forgive me ; won't you V
Yes.'

And we're friends again now ; ain't
we V

I suppose so.'

You suppose so ! Now look into my
face and tell me so ;' and he put his hand
under her chin, and with a gentle force
raised her face almost to a level with his
own. ' Now I shan't let you go,' he said,
until you look at me. Oh, I'm in no
hurry — I have plenty to look at here ;' and
Eve felt his eyes more bent upon her ashe
began, with assumed interest, to study
her downcast face. ^ How dark your eyelashes
are !' he said ; ' and you haven't a

bad nose, and if your mouth were ' but

here Eve's risibility threatened to overcome
her, and hoping to hide the dawning
smile which was making her lips quiver,
she tried to free herself, saying as she gave
her head a little twist :

Adam, I wish you wouldn't.'

Wouldn't what?' and while her chin was
tilted a trifle farther up, the hand which

was laid on her arm tiirlitenecl its
hold.

'Now don't be silly, Adam and Eve
made another fruitless attempt at a
strut-ale.

^ How silly V he said.

Oh, Adam !' and this time the voice
and the face pleaded together, ^ please let
me go ; do !'

Why should I let you go ?' he said,
bending forward until his face all but
touched hers. * Eh, tell me that V

Because,' and Eve felt the whole of
her strength had flown to her heart, the
rapid beating of which seemed to choke her
further utterance. ' Because '

Because what V and Adam's voice was
changed to a whisper, which seemed to give
the echo to her ovm emotion.

Because you've ' but before the

sentence could be finished, Eve had flown

upstairs and was listening to Adam saying
:

What the devil do you come in like
that at the door for ?'

^ Why, what do 'ee mane ?' exclaimed
Joan. ' Come into the door for ! do 'ee
want folks to come down the chimney, then ?
Lord, we'd turned cervical all to dance,
I should think ; but there,' she continued,
swinging the cupboard door and making
a great clatter with the things, ^ you
needn't put herself out that I'm going' to
be wan in the way. I've got to get supper
ready ;' and she slammed the kitchen door
after her with a force that shook all the
windows and doors in the house. Filled
by a sense of vexation. Eve hesitated as to
what she should do ; she felt a little shamefaced
about just then confronting Joan, not
being quite sure whether or not she had
seen her. Still, to go down and sit alone

with Adam, she would not ; so she fidgeted
about the room in uneasy indecision, until
to her great relief the front door opened
and closed, and she heard Adam leave the
house, then she plucked up courage to go
downstairs and say :

^ Let me help you, Joan ?'

Xo, there's nothing to help in,' returned
Joan, rather curtly ; ' 'sides which Tacitly
is here to do all that's wanted.'

Are you going to make a pie V asked
Eve, seeing Joan take off her worked
muslin apron and substitute in its stead a
large Holland wrapper.

Yes, us 'uU want some for tomorrow.'

But you needn't do them now,' said
Eve.

So well do that as anything' else,' replied
Joan.

Then let me peel the apples f

No ; now I'd rather you'd go inside and

VOL. II. 25

sit down, Eve and Joan tried to take the
apple-basket from her.

'And I'd rather stay here with you,
Joan.'

Well, I don't want 'ee,' said Joan ; ' and
if Adam comes back, he'll fancy I've set
'ee to work to spite un.'

Adam can think what he pleases,' said
Eve ; ^ but if I don't stay here I shan't sit
in there with him.'

I'm sure he or anybody else is welcome
to do what pleased 'em best, and as pleases
'em best, for me,' continued Joan, forced
by the presence of Tabithy to make the
allusions to her grievance rather enigmatical,
' only nobody likes to be sword
at for welkin' in at the door when they'd
as innocent as a babe unborn that they'd
not wanted.'

Well, don't say you weren't wanted by
me, Joan.'

I don't say nothing' about you. I

wasn't ' but the sound of the raised latch

made her silent, and through the now open
kitchen door they saw Adam come in,
move about the room, go upstairs, come
crown again and finally enter the kitchen.
Now, I don't want Eve here,' said Joan ;
so if she's amended to go, she'll only be
doing what I've axed her to from the first.'

Adam laughed.

I should take advantage of that, Eve,'
he said ; ' it's a pity to intrude yourself
where you're not wanted.'

Then perhaps,' said Eve, ' you'll go, for
Joan and I were getting on very well
alone.'

Oh, all right,' and off he went.

I wish to goodness / could give 'en a
slap with my tongue,' said Joan ; ^ I can
with most of 'em, but he puts me in that
passion that when I can't find words to

25—2

LIBRARY

UNiVERSITY OF llffNni!?

answer 'en in, I could fly at 'en like a
tiger-cat.'

Well, he's gone now,' said Eve, ' and
let's hope he won't come back till supper-time.'
But the hope was vain ; in less than
half an hour Adam was back again, trying
by a dozen artifices to get Eve into the
sitting-room ; but no, away from Joan's
side she would not stir, and Joan seemed
bent on making enough pies and pasties to
victual a fleet. At last his temper could
stand it no longer, and upon Eve distinctly
refusing to allow him any opportunity of
speaking to her alone, he flung himself out
of the house with a heartily expressed wish
that he hadn't been such a fool as to leave
Plymouth.

^ There, don't let's have no more of it,'
said Joan, as she listened to his departing
footsteps ; * if he comes back agen, go in
and sit with 'en like a dear. 'Tis o' no use

contending', if he's made up his mind toit;



Isn't it !' said Eve ; ' that's the way
you've spoilt him, Joan. A pretty thing if
he's to have his way always ; he won't from
me, I can tell him.'

Joan gave an audible sigh.

What a world it is !' she said dolefully,
as she dusted her arms free from the flour
preparatory to washing her hands and
taking off her cooking-apron. ' Here, let's
go and sit in thither room, Eve. We may
just so well, for I've got no heart to do
nothing' more this evening ; and Tabithy'll
bring in the supper things when we'd
ready for 'em.'

Thus it happened that when, about an
hour later, Adam returned, he found the
two girls sitting together chatting by the
light of the fire. He came back in no
better humour than when he went ; indeed,

his irritability was increased by the knowledge
that something against which he had
striven had proved too strong for him, and
that he had been almost forced against his
will to return. In his effort to seem cool
and indifferent, his voice sounded rasping
and harsh.

What, sitting in the dark still V he said,
for want of some other remark. ' How is
it you haven't got a candle yet, eh V

Joan pushed back her chair, as if intending
to get a light.

There, you needn't move ; I can reach
it :' and leaning across her over to the
mantel-piece he took down the candlestick,
but in stepping back managed to catch ,
so that several of the articles
which lay upon it were swept off on to the
ground, and among them the unfortunate
lace. ' The end of this will be to get
thrown into the fire,' he said, picking up

the parcel and tossing it into Eve's
lap.

That would be a pity,' said Eve ;
though nobody 'ud be to blame for it but
yourself. I've given it back to you several
times already, I can't do more than that ;'
and with no attempt to refold it, she threw
it with what looked like an air of contempt
on the table.

Then you don't mean to take it '?'

^No.'

'Not after — what — I said — to you
stammered Adam, his temper rising with
each word.

You have not said anything that I
know of which should make me change
my mind,' replied Eve.

If you don't take it up this minute, I'll
pitch it all into the fire,' said Adam.

It's your own to do what you like with
said Eve. ' I shan't interfere to prevent you.*

Joan uttered a cry, but already the delicate
gossamer was swallowed in the flame
which leaped up to receive it.

'There's the ruffles said Eve, pushing
the remaining pieces towards him.

^ Oh, Eve, I do call that a downright
sin r exclaimed Joan, as another flame
darted up. ' How can 'ee be so aggravation
to un ! To give back a hasty answer's one
thing, but to go pouring' oil on fire is ill-becoming
any woman.'

I wish you'd ' but before Adam

could thunder forth the rest of his sentence
a voice at the door called out :

Why, bee all deaf or dumb or what,
that you can't answer folks knocking your
doors down ? Why, that's never Adam !
Awl !' and the tone altered into one between
apology and disappointment. ' I
didn't know you was back, Adam ; I comet
to ax 'em if they was minded to walk with

me part ways to Listen and back, for company
for Jessie here.'

My being home is nothing against that
said Adam ; ' all the better. If Jessie
wants company, I repose I shall do as well
as another.'

Well, I never !' exclaimed Ann Lisbeth,
turning to the girl Who was trying to
screen herself behind her, and who was the
buxom daughter of a well-to-do farmer.
Hark to that, Jessie ! Do 'ee hear what
he says % Take him to his word : I would.'

Jessie's face beamed with delight. In
-common with many another, to secure the
preference of Adam was the ambition of
her life. Taking it for granted that the rest
of the party would follow, she made no
hesitation of accepting his unexpected offer,
and in a few minutes, accompanied by him,
left the house.

What do 'ee say, Eve ?' said Joan.

Do *ee think us had best to go too ? Us
has had a regular rumpus all round she
added, in explanation to Ann Lisbeth.

^ Well, then, do 'ee come longs for a
walk,' argued her friend; * there's nothing'
more like to set 'ee all straight agen than
that

CHAPTER III.

NN Lambeth's advice wa
taken ; and the three girls, with
their arms linked together in a
friendly fashion, followed Jessie and Adam
up the Lansallos road, past Landaviddy,
and on as far as the point where the road
is joined by the one which leads by Lang-reek
and Crumplehorne. Ann Lisbeth.
and Joan sustained the conversation ; Eve
only paying enough attention to enable her
to drop in a word here and there, and so
escape her silence attracting their notice.

Don't let's seem to be train' to catch
them up,' Joan had said, soon after starting.
I've had enough o' Adam's black looks
for one evening' ;' and after that they had
slackened their pace, and walked leisurely,
as best suited their convenience.

The night was dark, the sky cloudy, the
road muddy and long ; and Eve, unused to
the roughness of country lanes, began to
grow tired and weary.

Have we very much farther to go ?' she
asked, her voice giving utterance to her
feelings.

Why, no,' said Joan ; ' and considering
us has got to go all the ways back agen
home, I don't see why us shouldn't turn to
once. Jessie don't want to say nothing'
more to you, I repose, Ann Lisbeth 1'

Lord, no !' laughed Ann Lisbeth. ' I'll
be bound for it by this time her's a forgot
there's anybody else in the world but Adam.

Won't it be sickly to hear her !' she added,
with a fjice of disgust. ' 'Twill be Adam
this, and Adam that, till I shall get to
hate the very sound o' his name

She may thank her stars he was in his
tantrums to-night,' said Joan, ' or he'd ha'
seed her to Jericho afore he'd offered to
see her home.'

Do 'ee think so V said Ann Lisbeth,
dubiously. ' Well, then, he didn't ought
to go stuffing' the maid up as he does, if so
be he ain't ha' got no main' in it ; 'cos her
books in all he says for gospel truth.'

More fool she, then !' replied Joan, decisively.
* Her's got to do no more than
open her eyes and her ears, to know that
he's a done the same by a good many afore
it comet to her turn. Why, look to Christy
Pope and Sally Tadd ; he's never carried
on the quarter with Jessie that he has with
they, and a score more that I could name ;

SO if hers made a Jinny-ninny of, there's
only herself to thank foret.'

Do 'ee think us'll keep 'em waiting' upto
farm gate, 'section' us to come on ?' suggested
Ann Lisbeth.

^ If so, they'll be waiting in vain,' returned
Joan, wheeling round decisively;
^ so come along, let's go home by Crumple-horne
— 'tis shorter ;' and away they went,
gossiping as before, only that, on the supposition
that Eve felt tired, she was left to
"the more undisturbed possession of her own
thoughts.

^ Here, I say, Joan !' exclaimed Ann
Ijisbeth, as they came within sight of a
gate which led up to a farmhouse, hidden
by the high hedge from view, ^ I wants to
ask Mrs. Claims about some butter. Would
'ree mind running' in for a minute to see if
her's got it ready ?'

Well, I'm afeard Eve's more tired than

she owns to said Joan ; ' I've felt her
hmpin' for a brave bit

I can't think what I've done to my
foot !' said Eve ; ' and it almost feels as if
I'd turned it somehow, but if '

^ Xo, no replied Joan ; ^ us'll stay here
while Ann Lisbeth runs in ; 'won't take
her but a few minutes

Away went Ann Lisbeth through the
gate, and Joan and Eve were left standing
in the narrow steep lane.

Lord, what a time her's gone !' exclaimed
Joan, going forward to see if there
was any sign of their companion's approach.
I'd a had all the butter in the place 'fore
this / and she undid the gate, and held it
half open in lier anxiety.

Here, Joan, Joan !' called out a voice
from within, ' come in for a minute ; do
'ee, like a dear I Here's somebody wanting'
to spake to 'ee.'

Yes, you go, Joan,' said Eve ; ' do f
you won't be long, and I'll wait here till
you come out.'

Joan went inside, and Eve heard her
greeted by a clamour of voices. Feeling
her foot growing more painful, she went to
the gate and leaned on it for support. Her
heart was heavy and her thoughts troubled :
her anger against Adam had given place
to dissatisfaction with herself It was not
that she repented refusing the lace, but she
felt she had no right to refuse it in such an
ungracious manner ; it was giving way to
unnecessary temper, and causing unnecessary
strife, for, after all, if he hadn't
thought something of her, he wouldn't have
offered her such a handsome present ; and
Eve sighed despondingly as she told herself
he wasn't likely to look over it in a
hurry. She wished she knew how best to
propitiate him. Should she tell him how

sorry she felt ? say to him that she hoped
he would forget her uiicousiiily behaviour ?
Her mind was full of compunction, ready
to make any apology ; her heart softened
and humbled ; when suddenly her ear
caught the rapid approach of footsteps ; she
turned quickly round — it was Adam ; and
as quickly she had resumed her position,
and was again leaning over the gate.
There was a moment's pause ; if the footsteps
had gone on, assuredly Eve would
have run after them ; but the hesitation
determined the balance of power in her
favour, and the next instant Adam was
standing beside her. Neither of them
spoke. Eve silent because her courage
was rising ; Adam, because his was failing.

I suppose,' he said, jerking out his
words as if forced into saying them, ' it
doesn't matter a bit to you whether we're
good friends or bad ; so I don't know why

VOL. II. 26

I should mind. But, somehow, mind I do,'
he added, altering his position so that he
might catch the expression of her now composed
face.

Did the mischievous imps, who had so
often egged Adam on to tantalise unrequited
love, now gloat in triumph at the
pitfall into which he in his turn was being
lured ? for with all the quickness of a
woman's appreciation of her situation, Eve
seized her advantage, and at once assumed
her former demeanour of cool indifference.

Eve !'

Adam.'

Oh, don't speak like that !' and he
stamped his foot impatiently ; ' as if you
didn't care a button whether I stay here
or go away ; whether I speak or hold my
tongue. I know that this evening I didn't
do as I ought to have done, that I let my
confounded ill-temper get the better of me ;

but you know I had some reason ; you
know that I was put out and tantalised
past bearing by one thing and the other ;
and seeing that it was you who '

Hush !' she said, as a sudden noise
suggested that Joan and Ann Lisbeth were
coming to join them; they've only gone
in to ask Mrs. Como something, and left
me here because my foot pains me so. I
think I must have strained it she continued,
putting it out.

Your foot !' and in a second he was
kneeling on the ground with his hand under
her shoe. ' What, this one ? How did you
do it V he said. ' Does it ache much ?
You are not used to such rough walking,
perhaps ; that's it.'

I hardly know / and she made an effort
to stand upon it. ' Oh dear !' she exclaimed,
flinching with the pain ; ^ how shall
I manage to hobble home V

26—2

Oh, I'll get you home fast enough
said Adam, growing quite cheerful at the
prospect of her probable dependence. ^ If
you'll take hold of me, and lean all your
weight on my arm, I'll wager you shall
reach home safely enough.'

But ain't you very tired already T suggested
Eve.

Tired ! no. What should I be tired
with V

Why, you've had Jessie to '

Oh, Jessie be — bothered ! I only offered
to go with her because — well, hoping it
would vex you.'

Vex me ! why, how could it possibly
vex me V and Eve opened her eyes in innocent
astonishment.

I don't know,' he said ; ^ only I know
I'd give a "good deal to be able to vex you,
or please you, or even put you in right-down
regular passion, so that it would make

you think of me a bit different to other
people

Dear me, what a time they're staying !'
said Eve abruptly, declining to take any
notice of this last speech.

'There it is!' he sighed; 'that's it!
You're tired of me in five minutes.'

Hardly so soon as that,' said Eve ; and
either the softened intonation of her voice
or the look she turned upon him made
Adam exclaim :

Eve, let me run in and tell them we're
going on. Yes ; do, now ! Rawes Clio's
home, and he's certain to walk back with
Ann Lisbeth. Only think, if you wait for
them, how late we shall be ! and with you
not able to do more than limp home 1'

Do you think they'd mind V said Eve,
hesitating.

blind ! no ;' and, waiting for no further
permission, he opened the gate, and was in

the house and back aofain before Eve had
more than the to wonder if she ought to
have allowed him to go.

It's all right,' he said ; ' Rawes is there,
and Barnabas Tadd, and they're all coming
together. I told them not to hurry, because
you would be forced to walk very
slow. Will you have my arm V he asked ;
or shall I take your hand V

Eve held out her hand, Adam took it ;
and they so proceeded on their way, picking
their steps with a caution which precluded
much being said in the way of conversation.
At length, however, the bottom
of the hill was reached, and the road
became more even, so that there was a
possibility of talking.

I remember this road now,' said Eve :
'tis the same one I came here by, up on
the horse behind young Mr. Tucker.'

Is it V replied Adam, with the abstracted

air of one who makes a remark because
he feels something is expected of him.

Yes ; and we shall come to the turning
to the mill presently, shan't we '?' said Eve,
apparently desirous of airing her topographical
knowledge.

Yes.'

I dare say it's a very pretty road by
day and Eve looked up at the high overhanging
hedges ; ^ but it's so dreadfully
dark now ! Isn't it dark 1'

Dark !' echoed Adam, after a minute's
pause. ^ Yes, perhaps it is, rather ;' there
was another pause, during which Eve wished
that Adam would talk, or that she could
think of something else to say ; these
periods of silence were embarrassing.

Isn't it a pity there's no moon 1' she
said, looking up at the sky, murky and
dark, with only a glimmering star here and
there visible.

What for ?' said Adam. ' Why should
you want the moon ?'

Oh, because we could see our way so
much better !'

I know every step of the way blindfolded
said Adam ; ' there's quite as much
light as I want. And as for you he added,
drawing her closer to him, ' there's no need
for you to see : you couldn't slip with me
near you.'

Oh, couldn't I ! I'm not so sure of
that she said, with a half-nervous laugh.
Why, you've almost let me slip two or
three times already.'

^ Not a bit of it !' he replied stoutly ;
^ that wasn't slipping : I only caught hold
of you to be ready in case you might slip.'

That's very good 1' laughed Eve. ' I'm
afraid you must be nervous.'

I shouldn't wonder but I am,' he said,
bending down so that Eve felt he was looking

into her face. ' How ought you to feel
when you are nervous V

'How !' repeated Eve, who at that moment
needed but to give the description by her
personal feelings. ' Why, you seem in a
sort of tremble all over, and your heart is
in such a flutter that you can all but hear
it beating.'

That's exactly how mine feels now,
then,* said Adam.

Really !' and Eve tried to steady her
voice to its usual tone. ' I wonder Avhat it
can be with '?'

Do you want to know ?' said Adam ;
and the whisper he spoke in seemed to
quicken Eve's every vein. 'Shall I tell you?'

No, no !' she cried. ' I don't want to

hear — Adam — I ' but the rest of the

sentence was smothered ; and when Eve
spoke again it was to say, * Adam, I'm
very angry indeed with you I'

^ No, Eve, not angry !' and Adam's voice
was penitence itself. ^ Don't say that I
How could I help it, when the others will
be here in a minute ? And you said you
didn't know how to repay me.'

That didn't mean you were to pay yourself
replied Eve, trying to assume a most
offended air ; for, strange to say, she did
not feel nearly as angry with Adam as she
desired to.

Well, I'm sure I'll return it if you'll '

but Eve drew back with a determined
movement.

Now, Adam, I won't allow any more of
this. If you're going to walk home with
me, you must behave yourself.'

Well, I will,' he said. ' Only you
mustn't be angry. You must say you forgive
me.'

Eve stood for a moment hesitating, then
without looking up, she said :

Well, I'll forgive you now, if you promise
never to do so agciin ; for, remember,
next time I really shall be very angry indeed
with you.'

The rest of the party now coming up,
Adam accepted these conditions ; and,
joining company, they walked along together,
singing snatches of such songs as
had a chorus in which they could all take
part. Between times the men spoke of
their vessels, and how they had been employed.
Barnabas had a share in a pilchard
sean, and was therefore well up in fishing
news. Bases, who belonged to Ezekiel
John's boat, was anxious to know when
their next trip might be expected. Adam
had their late luck with the Indiaman to
relate. They had done very well, he said ;
and he thought by tomorrow, or the next
day at the latest, the Lottery would manage
to run it ashore.

How was it you didn't stay aboard her,
then '?' asked Barnabas.

Oh, I'd had enough of being away
replied Adam, giving Eve's hand a significant
squeeze. ^ Besides, there was a little
business to be done at Dock with the landlord
of the Blue Boar; so I got Jan Gregg,
the pilot, to land me at Plymouth, and
from there I got on.'

Didn't see nothing of Jerrem, I repose V
said Bases.

Adam shook his head.

What a chap that is !' continued Rawes.
I wonder, now, where he's sloping away
his time to '?'

^ I told 'ee that Key Oliver said he'd
ha' heard that he'd left for Jersey Island,
meaning to cross for Weymouth — didn't
I V said Joan, addressing Adam.

Yes ; but as Captain Trethewy left
Jersey the same day we set sail from

Guernsey, I don't see how it could have
bin true

Have 'ee got any pretty things this
time, Adam f asked Ann Lisbeth, desirous
of changing the topic. * Any chintz or
musHns or that ?'

'No, nothing much beyond the china,*
said Adam. ' That 'minds me I must lookup
Dickey Snobnose tomorrow. I repose
you haven't none o' you seen him about
nowheres, have ye ?'

Yes, they have said Joan. ' He was
no later than yesterday to Jocha^bed Giles's,
'section' to hear you was in ; but Jochabed
had just met Eve and me going' to Bridles,
so she told 'en 'twould be o' no use going' to
our house.'

H'm !' said Adam ; ' I wish I could see
him to-night or tomorrow — 'twould save a
vast deal o' bother. I wonder whether
she'd know where he's to be found for the
next day or two?'

Very like,' said Joan ; ' 't all events, us
can go in and see ; 'ain't above five
minutes out o' the way down by Ann 


Adam looked at Eve.

^ No,' lie said. ' We'll get home first,
and then I'll run down afterwards. I can
see her foot's paining her.'

It's walking on it, I s'pose/ said Eve ;
adding, in a vexed tone, ' I'm so sorry to be
keeping all of you !'

Stuff a' nonsense !' exclaimed Joan.
There ain't nothing' to be sorry for, except
'tis for yourself. Shall I go on, Adam V
she asked. * We might just so well, and
leave you and Eve to folio'. I'll be home
then so quick as you, or just after; and
there'll be no needs for you toiling' down all
that ways.'

Adam looked his thanks for such undeserved
good-nature ; and after bidding them

Good-night !' the rest of the party started
off, leaving Eve and Adam to come on at
a slower pace.

Do you know, I think I must take my
shoe off said Eve, quite hot with the pain
caused her by the exertion of trying to
keep up with the others, who, forgetful of
her foot, had by degrees quickened into
their ordinary pace.

^ No, don't do that,' said Adam ; * it will
be ever so much worse when you put it on
again. Suppose you rested here for a
minute. You might sit down,' he added,
seeing they were close by the low wall
which divided Jowter's park from the road.

Eve gladly accepted the offer ; the pain
of her foot was making her feel sick and
faint.

You may depend you have given it a
sprain,' said Adam ; ' I can hardly feel the
ankle-bone. Wait for a minute 1 I'll

loosen the shooting — that'll ease you a
little ;' and he commenced trying to untie
the rather complicated knot of ribbon.

'• Oh, never mind untying it. If you've
got a knife, cut it I' exclaimed Eve, impatient
with pain.

And in another moment not only was
the string cut, but, unable to resist the certainty
of increased relief, the shoe, too, was
off, lying on the ground.

'• Oh, how good that is !' she sighed. ' I
felt as if my foot must burst.' \

Yes, I know what it is,' said Adam,
sympathetically. ^ I gave my foot an ugly
twist once, coming along the rocks from
Playdy Beach.'

Ah, I don't wonder there ; but here in
the road, I can't think how it happened !'

I only wonder it hasn't happened before,'
said Adam ; ' such a little tiny foot as it is T

Come, it's of no use trying to take me

\

in with your flattery,' said Eve. ' I've
been told all about you already

What do you mean, all about me V

^ Why, what a regular flirt yoa are, and
how you try to make the girls think you
are dying for them one week, and laugh at
at them for it the next. Ah ! you see, I
know all about you,' she laughed, triumphantly.


Don't you give credit to any such lies,'
said Adam, energetically ; ' 'cos it isn't true.
I don't say I haven't carried on a bit with
the maidens about, like other chaps ; but,
as for meaning anything by it, nothing
could be further from my thoughts. But
that's the way with the women ; they're
never contented unless they think you
mean twenty times more than you
say.'

And that's not your case, then V
laughed Eve. ' What you say you mean,

VOL. II. 27

and what you mean you say, eh — i&
that it r

Not always ; lately, if I'd been let, I
should have said a great deal more than I
have said. I've meant what 'isn't easy
perhaps to put into words.'

Come, come !' said Eve, quickly, ' now
you're getting out of your depth again ;
and it's quite time we were getting back,
so give me my shoe !' and she held out
her foot — and a very good-looking foot it
was, clothed in its well-fitting grey knitted
stocking.

Women of all classes were careful over
the appearance of their feet in those days,
when a pretty foot Alas reckoned hardly
second to a pretty face.

The shoe was produced, but all fruitless
were the endeavours to get it on. Adam
turned down the heel, held open the sides,
while Eve pulled at it with a vigour which

might have done credit to Cinderella's
rivals, but all to no effect. The shoe didn't
go on, and the shoe wouldn't go on.

^ "Whatever's to be done f she exclaimed,
in dismay.

You can't walk home without your
shoe,' exclaimed Adam.

But I must,' continued Eve.

Your foot would be cut to pieces,' said
Adam. 'There's but one thing to be
done,' he added, after a moment's pause,
I must carry you.'

Oh no !' said Eve. ' Carry me I absurd
nonsense !'

Then how are you to get back X

I can't think.'

Nor I either ; so come along. It's perfectly
dark, nobody '11 see you ; and, if they
do, what's the odds ?'

But you've no idea how heavy I am.'

Oh, a tidy weight, I've no doubt ; but

27—2

I can get up most places with a couple of
kegs slung to me, so I'll have a try, and
at the worst I can but drop you in the
road, you know.'

Eve urged many more scruples, but, as
while making them she mounted the wall
and arranged her dress, Adam gave them
no heed; he directed her to lean her weight
well over his shoulder and not to talk, and
then off they set, Eve feeling far more at
her ease than she had conceived possible
under so trying a situation.

^ Don't you think I'd best walk now V
said she, as Adam rested for a moment
before the little street leading up to Gallant
lane.

No : how could you ? the road's worse
here than where we are come from. You
don't want to walk, do you V

No ; only I'm afraid of your being
tired.'

Tired !' he Said, resuming his burden ; ' I
should Uke to carry you to the world's end

And instead of reproving this idle wish,
Eve only said, ' Put me down before you
open the door — in case anybody should be
inside.'

Fortunately, with the exception of two
men who passed them with a stolid ' goodnight,'
they met no one. The night was
dark, and on dark nights few people who
had not a necessity cared to venture abroad ;
added to this, the air blew keen, so that
most of the hatch-doors were closed, and
the only gleam of light came from the red-curtained
windows of the two public-houses
which they passed on their
way.

I really don't know how to thank you,
Adam said Eve, earnestly; for, the little
bridge crossed, she knew they were now
close by the house.

'■ So you said before he replied, meaningly.


No, but really now,' persisted Eve; 'this
is quite different, you know

Oh, never mind said Adam ; 'I'm content
to take the same payment

Now, Adam,' and Eve gave him a reproving
look.

Come, that's pretty well,' he said, ' considering
that if I'd been minded to I might
have helped myself at every step we
took.'

'Twas good for you, though, you didn't,'
said Eve, as, having reached the door, she
slid down on to the step.

Was it V he answered her absently ;
then with a sudden impulse, for his hand was
on the latch, he turned, and whispering said :
Eve, what should you call it if all of a
sudden seeing and talking to, and being
near to, one person seemed more than anything

else in the world — should you call it
love r

I don't know,' she flattered ; ' I don't

know anything: about ' but before she

could o'er out the word, the door from
within was burst open by Joan, who exclaimed,
in an excited voice :

'\Tell,here you be at last, poor souls! come
along in with 'ee, do. There's somebody
waiting' to see 'ee ; who dree think — eh,
Adam? Why, 'tis old Jerrem ; miss, that's
who tis. When I corned back I found un
sitting' down waiting' for us.'

And having thus far intercepted the
meeting, she now drew on one side and admitted
to view a young man, who came
forward, and, holding out his hand, said
in an awkward, constrained manner :

^ Weel, Adam, here I am at last ; and
how's the land lying with you X

jO Joan's great satisfaction Adam
i accepted the hand which JaTem
"""" proffered, exchanged a fev indifferent
remarks, and then by degrees
sank down into that distant coolness more
fatal to the re-establishment of friendship
than an open rupture is. In answer to
some questions put by Joan, Jerren said
that he had left Jersey on the previous
Sunday and had come across in th Long
Bet, of Cawsand, a vessel apparently engaged
in the same free trade as the lottery.

He spoke of the places he had visited
and the people ho had seen, but beyond
these and like remarks no mention ^Yas
made as to his absence, or the cause of
his being left behind. Eve, who had
expected to find in Jerreni another stalwart
sailor, was surprised to see a short
slim young fellow with a pleasant face and
an irresistible flow of spirits, with which at
once he seemed to infect every one but
Adam ; who, notwithstanding the efforts
made by Joan and Eve, continued to sit
silent and glum, answering the direct questions
put to him, but refusing to be drawn
into the general conversation.

This moodiness, however, was no check
to Jerrem, who rattled away during the
whole of supper-time with a volubility
which increased as the two girls, finding
their efforts fruitless, resigned themselves
to being amused, and gradually became so

engrossed with their merriment and banter
that during long lapses of time Adam and
his ill-humour were forgotten. At length
the pushing back of his chair with unnecessary
violence recalled them to a sense
of his presence, after which he got up,
took a cigar from his pocket, and leaning
across for the candle, held it while he proceeded
to take a liofht.

Why, you ain't going out, Adam, to be
sure?' exclaimed Joan, now fully alive to
the offence they had given.

What !' said Adam, continuing to puff
away at his cigar.

You ain't going out, not now ?' repeated
Joan.

Yes, I am !' he said, waiting to set down
the candle before he gave the answer.
'Why? is there any reason why I shouldn't
go?'

'No, no reason,' said Joan; 'only 'tis

getting' so late, and eve two shall be off to
bed almost directly.'

Oh ! indeed '?' and Adam's face expressed
the astonishment he desired to
imply. ^ Really, I thought from present
appearances that you were settled for the
night.'

And why not ?' put in Jerrem. ' I for
one am ready to make a night of it.
Come, what do ee say to a brew o' good
punch — eh, Joan ? Where's the grog to ?
out with it, my maid, and let's draw round
the fire and have a song ;' and throwing his
arm round Joan's waist, he trolled out in
an uncommonly musical voice :

" 'Twas landlady Meg that made such rare flip ;
Pull away, pull away, my hearties I
At Tapping she lived, at the sign o' the Ship,
Where tars met in such jolly parties.

Parties — where tars " '

but the remainder of the chorus was

drowned by the clang of the house-door, as
Adam slammed it violently after him.

O Lord, there's the fat in the fire
agen !' exclaimed Joan, despondingly.

Never mind — what's the odds so long as
you're happy ?' laughed Jerrem, paying no
more heed that the door had been slammed
by Adam's exit, than if its bolts and bars
had been shaken by a gust of wind.

Happy !' echoed Joan, in a tone of
vexation. ' Miss, that's all very fine for you ;
but Eve and me's had so much o' it as us
can carry in wan day, haven't us. Eve?
He'd scarce so much as set foot inside the
doors afore he beo^an with his tantrums.'

Blamed out o' Plymouth in a contrary
wind,' suggested Jerrem, who continued to
busy himself in stirring the fire, putting on
the kettle and getting out fresh glasses.

I wish to goodness, then, 'twould blow
un back agen,' sighed Joan ; ' there or

anywheres, so long as he'd stay 'till he felt
a bit more peaceable. I declares you may
so well try to walk on the edge o' a knife,
as hope to please him when he's in one o'
these boundaries.'

But what on earth could have anchored
him now V exclaimed Eve ; ' he seemed so
sorry that he'd been out of temper, he
quite begged my pardon about it.'

^ Then, I say, Joan, let's you and me ax
of un to beg our pardons, shall us V said
Jerrem, with a comical look. ' Lors, come
along, do,' he added, pointing to a low
chair Which he had placed for her next his
own ; ' or afore we gets settled us'll have
un back agen. So out with the liquor, anyways
; and if wee can't get punch, give us a
drop o' grog.'

Joan placed the bottles on the table,
taking out at the same time the little
flowered glass which she had previously
given to Eve.

What do 'ee think V she said, as she set
it in front of her, ' till her corned here, her
never so much as tasted spirits o' no kind ;
and now,' she added, judging the surprise
she must be occasioning in her hearer,
^ hers only just put her lips to it, so 'tis no
good o' mixing' nothing' worth drinking for she.'

All right,' said Jerrem, ^ you leave that
to me. I know the sort o' brew that tickles
the maiden's fancy. You won't say no to
what I'll make for ye, miss.'

Miss,' laughed Joan. ^ Why, call her
Eve, to be sure, Jerrem ; hers so mucha
cousin to 'ee as I be, and,' she continued
assuming to whisper, ' sent a kiss to 'ee,
too, on that letter you haven't a got,
same as I did.'

Oh, Joan, how can you !' exclaimed Eve,
her face getting very red and confused.

Come, I like that cried Joan ; ^ how
could you % 'Tis truth, though, a regular

smacking' one, too, so big round as so' — and
she pouted up her lips into a rosy button,
which to Jerrem looked so irresistible that,
deferring the payment he evidently intended
making to Eve, he made a dart
at Joan, thereby affording an opportunity
for Eve to escape, which she, utterly
unmindful of her foot, managed to effect
by running up the stairs, which opened out
behind her.

^ He'll be down ao^en in a minute, I
reckon,' said Joan. But so Long as Joan
stayed, Jerrem was perfectly indifferent as
to what Eve might do ; and, resuming
his seat and his grog, he tried to entice
Joan to sit down by his side, but of no
avail, for Joan, remembering the hurt foot,
insisted on taking the candle to run upstairs
and see what Eve was about ; and
when some minutes later she returned, she
informed Jerrem that Eve had gone up for

good and all, and that she'd only comedown
to say good-night to him.

Oh, good-night,' said Jerrem; and Joan,
knowing by his voice that he was not very
pleased, endeavoured to propitiate him by
making some remark which led to an
answer, and gradually expanded into a
gossip, the principal topics being Eve and
Adam ; and Joan had just commenced a
whispered account of how Adam had burnt
the lace, when a footstep close outside the
door made her exclaim : ' I say, here he
comes ; I'm bothered if he shall know that
her ain't here too !' and with a sudden
movement she blew out the candle, so that
when Adam opened the door it was to find
the room empty, while the still bright wick
and the scampering of footsteps told him
that it was only at his approach that the
happy party had taken flight. He drew
a chair over to the fire, and flung himself

down in no enviable mood, debating what
course he should take. His strong desire
was to make Jerrem come down, and then
and there have a settlement of the long
array of aggravations which for months
had been smouldering between them. He
regretted beyond measure that he had
accepted his hand, a thing he had resolved
not again to do ; only that, coming upon
him suddenly as he had done, the desire to
avoid another outbreak before Eve had
made him first waver, and finally give way,
and his reward had been that from the
moment Jerrem appeared Eve had had
eyes and ears for no one else. Might he
not have known it would be so 1 had he
ever cared for the affection of any thing or
person, but Jerrem had stepped in between
them ? That birthright of mother's love
which, whole and undivided, should have
been his and only his, Jerrem had stolen
VOL. II. 28

from him ; that first place in his father's
heart Jerrem had ousted him from, so that
the want of tolerance he often showed
towards the old man's failings sprang as
much from wounded vanity as from
wounded morality. Did he single out a
companion, Jerrem lured him away; if he
made an acquaintance, Jerrem captivated
him from his side ; the very dog that
Adam called his own, Jerrem could entice
from his heels ; and if he chose to put forth
his arts among the croak, Adam's sound
reasoning and common-sense arguments
were as idle words poured into deaf
ears.

Was this to go on for ever ? and as the
question rose up in his mind, before his
eyes there shaped itself a face which,
though but lately seen, had so mirrored
itself in Adam's heart that its presence
seemed reflected in every thought — its

power felt in every action. Hitherto he
had refused to ask the name of this spell,
which by turns galled him like a yoke and
then hung lightly as a chain of roses ; but
now his ears tingled with the sound, and
every pulse that beat proclaimed its name
was love. And was this news-born happiness
to be wrenched away and torn aside
by one whose shallow nature had no
depths to shelter more than a passing
passion ? No ; no, a thousand times no.
Rather Avould he pluck his heart outby
the roots than run the risk of such
a cano-er, the dim shadow of which so
frenzied him that, unmindful of all else
but the tumult of his thoughts, he started
from his chair and paced the room with
hurried steps, while those above, listening
to the sound, drew each their own conclusions
: Joan's cup of bitterness sweetened by
the thought that at last Adam could be

28—2

made to suffer ; Eve's heart swelling with
delight as she grew more conscious of her
power; Jerrem's weak nature quickened
into firm resolve that if Adam was fairly
caught, he'd have a game with Eve too ;
and repay the many stings which Adam's
way of doing right so often made him
smart and writhe under. Headstrong,
impetuous, led by any one he was with,
kind-hearted to a fault, generous to excess,
Jerrem's virtues led him into more evils
than most men's vices do. He was as
Ava in the hand of friend or foe, and was-easily
persuaded to follow the lead of the
companion who humoured him most completely.
Adam prided himself on never
having stooped to gain an influence over
Jerrem, a very false matter of granulation ;
as, had he done so, he might have turned
him from much folly and many a vicious
habit. For Jerrem, rattle-brained as he

seemed, had enough good sense to perceive
and even to admire — althouofhhe could not
emulate — Adam's good qualities, and a word
of persuasion from him would have often
conquered where a dictatorial rebuke only-inflamed.
Latterly their differences had
been more open and more frequent, and
the discord kept up by Jerrem's habit
of shirking all allusion to an unpleasant
subject, and positively refusing, when the
cause of offence had once passed by, to
give or receive any further explanation
of it.

Jerrem could part with a man one day in
the middle of a towering rage, and meet him
the next with a pleasant smile, a shake of
the hand, as if nothing had happened ; a
great proof, as his friends thought, of a
forgiving disposition, while, in reality, the
disposition to forgive was very trifling in
comparison with his inability to retain ; he

could no more keep up anger than he could
maintain silence, prudence, or any of those
numerous ^ new leaves ' which he resolved
to turn over one hour and forgot all about
the next.

Adam, on the contrary, had no power to
throw off an annoyance ; it rankled and
stuck by him until the matter of it was
cleared ujd or atoned for; and though a
year might elapse before an opportunity
occurred, when it did occur his mind reverted
at once to the quarrel, and his
manner betrayed the consciousness of its
presence. Born with that love of his native
place which reigns supreme in every true
Cornishman's heart, Adam's early ambition
had been full of schemes for the prosperity
and regeneration of Polperro ; and as year
by year these aspirations faded away, in the
certainty that nothing short of a miracle
could change either place or people, he grew

to have less sympathy for failings he had
no share in, and less toleration for follies
he had no temptation to.

Noting his unpopularity, it stung him
to the quick to see the difference made between
Jerrem and himself Jerrem welcomed,
made much of, screened, confided
in, while he was only sought when an
arbitrator was needed ; never welcomed
except some advice was wanted ; seldom
trusted, but when betrayal elsewhere Alas
feared — a popularity utterly valueless
while Jerrem held the stronghold of favour,
for the jealous heart has in no way
changed since envious Human counted allas
nought so long as Mordecai the Jew sat
at the king's gate.

*twas all alonzo his head behoof
crammed up with a passel o' book-larnin,'
was the verdict pronounced on Adam by
the Polperro folk, who, while they showed

no predilection for his society, could not
refrain from compassionate him. A man
who didn't, seemingly, care much for badger-baiting,
dog-fighting, rat-hunting, wouldn't
drink, and seldom fought, what rational
enjoyment was there left for him ? So well
not make money at all, as not to know how
to spend it when you had made it. '^ 'Twas a
complete judgment on old Zebedee's pride,"
they said, '^ and prettily he was pain'
for it now, 'stead o' bringing' up the boy in
the way he should go. For to stick by his
boat and stand by his cargo, fight fair and
die game, was all the larnin' a Polperro
lad needed ; and if that machin didn't
make a man of him, nothing' to be learnt
out of books would."

]Distracted by thoughts which
even in sleep still held possession
of his mind, Adam gladly

hailed the dawn, and, rising with it, went
out soon after to see if as yet there was
any news of the Lottery. He was anxious
to secure the immediate services of Dicky
Snobnose, an itinerant vendor of earthenware
— or dome, as it is thereabouts called
who was usually engaged to dispose of
the smuggled porcelain, which, as ' rale
Injee Chinee,' was held at that time in

great repute. Lostwithiel was the usual
market, and thither, concealed away under
coarse basins and jugs, Dicky carried it
himself : or, if of too weighty a load for his
basket, packed it carefully in the paniers
of the sturdy donkey which he carefully
led along.

Adam found that the fisher portion of
the village was already astir, and round
and about the quay various preparations
were in progress. The sea was smooth,
and encircled by a dark blue ridge of
boundary, over which clouds — heavy and
lowering — spread out in a leaden stretch
towards the shore, there to meet the mists
which still hung thick, clinging to the cliffs,
and obscuring all but their tall heads
from view. The few boats which the
dawn had found close in shore had
managed to round the Peak, and now
lay dotted here and there about the little

harbour, waiting to clear out the fish
which they had been best part of the
night engaged in catching. The men
lounged over the sides, calling to one
another, hearing and telling of their hick,
or their hick of it. The boys swung idly
on the bowsprits, daring their fellows to
various feats of venture. The lookers-on
gazed idly from the quay, giving, now and
again, vent to an abstracted whistle, in the
vague hope of bringing the wind and
bettering the stagnation of affairs.

Placing himself on a vantage-point,
Adam addressed the man nearest within
hearing, and making a trumpet of his
hands, shouted out an inquiry whether he
had seen or heard any word of the Lottery.
No, he had not, but he'd pass the word
and ask if the others had ; the result of
which was an answer returned that the
Lottery was just outside, only waiting fora

bit of a breeze to bring her in. His
supposition thus confirmed, Adam determined
to seek Dicky Snobnose without
further delay, and going across to the
Three Pilchards, he found that word had
been left on the previous evening that
Dicky had gone to Lansallos, where he
would remain until the next day.

The morning was clearing up, with a
promise of brightness, so without doubt
the Lottery would make all speed to get in ;
and as Adam had made arrangements for
their store of spirits to be taken away, it
was expedient to get the more fragile cargo
off their hands with as little delay as
possible. His best plan would be to set
off for Lansallos at once, and as he should
have to pass the mill on his way, he could
easily get breakfast with his aunt, and
thus avoid the unpleasantness which
might not improbably attend another

home-meal. ^y crossing the Green he
escaped again passing the house, and came
at once upon the road to Crumplehorne,
his pace quickening as the recollection of
the previous night's walk rose \x^ vividly
to disturb him. Already over Hard Head
the sun had made a rift in the sky. The
hoar-frost, changed into drops of dew,
hung trembling on each blade of grass ;
the slowly dispelling mist curled itself
into long wreaths of smoke, which, creeping
up the hillside, vanished into space ;
the dripping leaves held up their heads ;
the shivering birds set up a feeble chirrup,
and Adam, touched by soft memories and
the cheering prospect of a brighter day,
felt the gloom which had oppressed him
lifted up, his spirits heightened ; and,
throwing off the shadows which had
hitherto clouded his face, he was able to
present himself before Mrs. Tucker with a

manner which gave rise to no suspicion on
her part that she was indebted to aught
else but the convenient situation of the
mill for the pleasure of his visit.

'- Well, I'm sure !' she said, as they
seated themselves at the well spread table.
'Wouldn't have bin not expecting' so very
much if Joan and Eve had got up for
once and give 'ee yer breakfast 'stead o'
latin' in their beds till nobody knows when ;
but there, young people's all alike now — up
when they oft to be abed, and abed when
they oft to be up.'

Well, they were kept up a bit late last
night,' said Adam, by way of excuse ; ' one
thing was that we were late home for
coming back from seeing Jessie Brandon ;
on her way Eve managed to give a twist
to her foot.'

swell, I hope to goodness, then, that
Joan had got some lily-leaves to lay to it ;

thoiio^li 'twould be nothing more than I
should look for to be told herd nothing' in
the house to fly to.'

I don't know, I'm sure, what they did
to it,' said Adam, carelessly ; ' it seemed
rather bad at first, but I repose the pain
went off, for she didn't appear to be doing
anything to it.'

'All' said Mrs. Tucker, with a little
nod of contempt : ' I've allays heard say
that town folks is capital hands at crying'
out afore they'd hunted. What do 'ee
think o' yer cousin then, Adam V

Adam felt devoutly thankful that, under
cover of arranging the contents of his plate
(which his aunt in her hospitality had over-bountifully
filled), he could avoid meeting
her scrutinising orate.

^ Oh, I think she's well enough, so far as
maidens go,' he said at length.

Ah, you may well say as far as they go,'

repeated Mrs. Tucker ; ' for there's but few
o' them worth much, I believe, nowadays,
and I'm often checked from finding' more
fault with Joan than I do, by the thought
that where you see one better there's twenty
that's worse.'

'Oh, Joan's well enough,' said Adam,
heartily; 'nobody need find much fault
with her. If half the women in the world
Averse as good as Joan, there'd be double as
many men with lighter hearts.'

'Well, I shouldn't wonder if you only
speak the truth there,' returned Mrs.
Tucker, complacently; 'for 'tis more her
heedless ways than any harm that her's
got in her, and for that reason I'm pleased
to see Eve so steady, and not one o' your
fly-away giles, such as I could name a
dozen for here ; rather too steady, I fancy,
for the carrying' out o' uncle's scheme.'

Scheme ! what scheme V asked Adam.

Why, don't 'ee mind uncle's saying' that
she and Jerrem must make a match of it ?

Jerrem ! ' repeated Adam, sharply ;
'father ud much better hold his tonsure
about such things. Jerrem can find a wife,
I dare say, without father helping him to
look for one.'

Oh, well, there was no harm meant,'
returned Mrs. Tucker ; ' and so far as that
goes, I was so much in fault as your
father. For Eve's a unprovided-for girl, you
know, Adam, and as Jerrem's made to
share in everything' pretty much as if he
was a son, I don't see, for my part, why he
shouldn't have the keeping' o' one o' the
family for it.'

He's welcome, so far as I go, to all
father chooses to do for him,' said Adam ;
but if I'm to be asked, I'd rather he
looked out for a wife somewheres else. I

VOL. II. 29

think our family's had pretty well enough
of him without that.'

x\h ! and so do I too replied Mrs.
Tucker, bristling up. ^ There's a way o'
coin' things, and a way o' overdoing' things,
and Jerrem's feet was never measured for
the shoes he stands in ; but there, your
poor mother was as blind as ever your
father is, and, if 'tis possible, more wrapped
up, so that I never got nothing' but black
looks from both of 'em if ever I said a
word against it.'

He's been made too much of altogether,'
said Adam, conclusively. ^ However, I
repose if parents choose to set up a stranger
before their own son they've a right to;
only let it end there. I wouldn't advise
Jerrem to try on any more of these cutting-out
games with me.'

And I don't wonder at 'ee saying' so.

then,' said Mrs. Tucker, sympathetically ;
^ for the trodden worm will turn.'

Ah ! I don't know that there's much o'
the worm about me,' laughed Adam, grimly;

but there's a touch of a tar-brush which '
might make a man think twice before he
fell foul of me.' And, rising from the
table, he pushed back his chair and put an
end to the conversation by saying that he
should have to be off now.

And you'll tell Joan not to forget that
I haven't got a match to my basin yet,'
said Mrs. Tucker, as Adam nodded his
good-bye.

Best come down and match it yourself,'
said Adam ; * and Sam here may stand a
chance of that neckerchief I heard promised
him so long ago— eh, Sammy 1'

Sammy's callow countenance expressed
his approbation. Following Adam out, he
said :

29—2

^ I was amain' to come down. Not
about the handkerchief, though,' he added,
with a chuckle.

What then ?' said Adam, absently.
To see Eve,' replied Sammy. ' Cape
Triggs to Fowey axed me if so be he give
it to me, whether or no I'd give it to she,
and I said "' Miss, I would." '

You would what ?' said Adam, turning
round so sharply that Sammy, who always
walked a step or two behind, was forced to
avoid him by giving a sudden dodge on
one side.

Why — why,' stammered Sammy, '• tell
her 'bout the chap to London, how he's
allays again' to un ain' if hers a got down
all safe and that, and whether her likes it
or no, and whether her ain't soon acomin*
back agen, and so on.'

What's he called ? asked Adam.

Nothing' that I knows by ; but her can

tell 'ee, 'cos lie seed her aboard the Mary
Jane J

Here, you come along with me said
Adam, holding the gate open to make
sure of Sam passing through. ' Now,' he
said authoritatively, ^ tell me from the
beginning what did Cape Triggs say, eh X

Sammy, who held Adam in the greatest
awe, began to feel very uncomfortable.

'Wasn't no fault o' mine he whined
out in an injured tone.

Who said it was V said Adam, testily.
Fault of yours, of course not ; nobody's
finding fault With you. All I want to
know is, what did Triggs say V

Awl !' said Sammy, greatly relieved.
*Well then, so far as I can, I'll tell 'ee
how it was.'

And with a large amonut of circumlocution
he related that Captain Triggs had
told him to tell Eve that the young man

who saw lier off had been down twice to
the wharf to inquire if he'd heard any
word of how she was getting on, and that
he, Captain Triggs, had promised him that
if he got a chance he'd send and tell her
that a few lines from herself would be
acceptable.

And that was all ?' said Adam, fixing
a searching gaze on Sammy.

Sammy nodded his head.

Every word,' he said decisively.

^ All right I Then, now look here r
don't you say anything about it, but leave
it to me to tell her myself, and I'll see you
get your neckerchief all right ; and, if you
can keep a silent tongue, something else
that I've got stowed away somewheres at
home.'

I won't quit a single ward to no living'
saw,' said Sammy, solemnly, his face
beaming with anticipation. ' I reckon,' he

added, ^vitll a confidential wink at Adam,
that thuck'ee chap's her baw, don't
you V

Adam did not answer, but the look
which came into his face as he made a
half-step forward sent Sammy back into
the hedge, where he remained, apparently
paralysed, until with an effort at control
Adam swung himself round, and rapidly
walked away, heedless of aught but the
tumult of emotion which the slightest
word of Eve seemed now to stir up Within
him.

Ever since this fever had set in, Adam
had been torn by a hundred doubts and
contradictions. While absent, the idle
moments of each day seemed spent in
testing the sincerity of this sudden passion.
Was it real? would it last ? Until
the weight of fear that another mis^ht
step in had cast down the scale and left

no further room for doubt or reason, the
balance had seemed undecided. But now,
added to Adam's former anxiety, had
come the suspicion conjured up by Sammy
Tucker's tale.

Surely it could not be that Eve had left
her heart behind, already given to another's
keeping. The thought turned Adam sick.
Ke calling to his mind the words he once
had jested on, about her never being a
sailor's wife, he asked himself, could there
be more in this than he had thought ? An
ugly look came into Adam's face, and fora
while he let a battle rage between a
voice which said no girl would look at him
as she had looked unless she held her love
in her own keeping, and one that argued
with a bitter sneer that women were alike
and all were false. Yes, all but Eve ; for
love soon triumphed over doubt, and growing
pitiful, called reason to its aid, which

quickly showed that after all this man in
London might be but a friend, that is, on
Eve's part ; for with the bias of a lover s
mind, Adam refused to think that any
man could look on Eve's face and not
grow covetous that she should be his own,
and for this reason he would show her that
the answering of inquiries like these had
best be left in other hands than hers ; and
then, out of the talk that would arise from
this, the task of warning her would prove
an easy one, and her friend's case become
a peg on which to hang the cautions he
wished to give, although he shrunk from
naming Jerrem as the cause of these being
given.

Adam was still seemingly engrossed in
these reflections when instinct made him
stop, and he found himself in front of a
long rickety gate, leading to the rather
decayed-looking farmhouse at which it

was Dicky Snobnose's habit to stay. For
several minutes Adam had to stand still,
trying to pull himself back into the everyday
things of life. Why was he here ?
what had he come for ? But before the
questions were well asked, the errand was
recalled, and he was able to put the necessary
inquiries to the girl who was somewhat
lazily watching the scramble for food
between two lean, long-bodied pigs.

Here I be, maister shouted a voice
beyond ; and, turning, Adam saw Dicky
making towards him through the accumulation
of slush and dirt with which the
house was surrounded.

Adam began to give his instructions
under the hope that Dicky, supposing he
had merely come to deliver these, would
allow him to depart without accompanying
him — a vain delusion, soon dispelled by
the assurance that he snowed he should

be wanted, and so had been taking it easy
until he was fetched; and, seeing the
companionship unavoidable, with as good
a show of grace as could be given by
sullen acquiescence, the two men set off at
a brisk pace on their road back to Polperro.
Dicky, a short, thick-set fellow between
forty and fifty, had his sturdy person
rendered conspicuous by a startling waistcoat
of red-and-yellow-flowered velvet, the
make of which, as regarded flaps and
pockets, carried one back for at least half
a century. Dicky was a general favourite,
and, on account of the store of gossip he
was always in possession of, accustomed to
be treated with no ordinary consideration.
His itinerant calling afforded him grand
opportunities of collecting news, and they
had not gone far before, with the good
natured intent of enlivening the walk, he
beofan retail ino^ some of these to Adam,

but all to no purpose ; Adam evinced not
the slightest interest, and as it gradually
began to dawn upon Dicky that his eloquence
was being thrown away, he too
relapsed into silence.

I believe I was roused up a trifle too
early this morning,' said Adam, by way of
apology.

Awl r returned Dicky, ' I was a
reckoning' that 'twas sommat after that
fashion. It don't seem to accord with 'ee
overmuch, neither.'

No,' said Adam ; ' I had a stiffish day.
yesterday, and I expect I shan't have
much time for keeping' my hands in my
pockets to-day.'

For why, thin V

Oh ! 'isn't the china. I know you can
manage all that, but they're coming' to
clear the liquor off from our place.'

Awl !' and Dicky drew in his breath

in signification of his appreciation. ' Them's
the times ! I minds been' at plenty of 'em
afore now — brandy — rum — so much and
more than you like to call for ; nothing'
scarce but water. That's what's uji, is
it V he added, with visible vexation.
Sons ! but I wishes I warn t starting' ; it's
'nus to make anybody poor tempered to
know they'd mission' such a game as that's
like to be.'

I wish the whole concern was at the
devil !' exclaimed Adam, passionately, the
thought of how Eve might be affected by
such coarse revelry coming with all its
force before him.

Devil !' echoed Dicky ; ^ how civil I
Awl, my dear!' he continued reprovingly,
you might find somefin' wus to wish he
than a cargo o' good liquor. Why, what
dree mane by such words — eh V

Mean, that I'm sick o' this everlasting

drinking said Adam ; ^ what good does it
do to a man V

Wa-all, that depends on how you
carries what you takes said Dicky, sententiously.
' I know you'd but a poor
ship to pub a good cargo into, though why
it should be so, seen' you was abroft up toit,
I can't say. But there he added, after
some reflection, ' 'tis the same with mate
as 'tis with drink — some can't abide thicker
and t'other man can't touch thicker ; now
I'm none o' that sort, thank the Lord for
it, I'm a regular pictor, I be : I can ate
and drink anything, I can, and that's as
it should be, and what man was intended
for

Rom the time she discovered
Adam s absence, Eve had felt
very uneasy. She had awoke
with the desire of being propitiatory, and
had come downstairs determined to make
some amends for the now repented of
behaviour of the previous night. As
Adam was the earliest riser in the house,
no surprise was felt at his being already
out of doors, but when the hour of breakfast
came — had passed — and yet no sign of
Adam, Eve hazarded various surmises as

to what could have possibly become of him,
surmises which Joan dismissed with the
comforting assurance that wherever he was
he was all right, as with all his tantrums
he'd never yet been known to quarrel
with his meat.

Disposed to be critical, Eve could not
refrain from thinking that Joan took the
matter somewhat too indifferently, and at
the same time she felt rather vexed with
her for being so engrossed by Jerrem's
wants and Jerrem's rattle for as such, in
her present mood, she designated the
light-hearted conversation with which he
ao^ain tried to entertain them. Eve was
in no humour for fun and banter, and the
continuous flow of joke and laughter jarred
upon and ruffled her temper. It was
with a sigh of positive relief that she at
length saw Jerrem take his departure,
only, however, to return again some ten

minutes later, with the welcome intelligence
that the Lottery was coming in, and
was already in sight. Full of excitement
at the news, Joan caught up her hat to
run out and o^et first sio-ht of Uncle
Zebedee ; but although pressed to accompany
her. Eve declined, pleading her lame
foot as a reason for keeping quiet.

Seeing she had stayed at home for the
sake of rest, Eve mio;ht have been expected
to remain sitting quietly still ;
instead of which, no sooner did she feel
herself relieved from observation, than she
got up and began wandering hither and
thither with a purposeless air — fidgeting
first with one thing and then another; sometimes
listening, sometimes starting ; until,
finally, she went over to the window, and
leaning against it, stood peering out with
looks of anxious expectancy. Suddenly
the inconsistency of this behaviour seemed

VOL. II. 30

to strike her, and with a resolute movement
she turned away, found her workbox,
took out her work, and seated herself,
with the evident determination of
forcing herself to employment. The
occupation, associated as it was with
home, sent her thoughts thither — an undefined
feeling of emotion seemed to stir
her inmost self, as, threading the mazes of
that bygone life, memory brought back
the past, and with it the thought of
Reuben May — the love he had shown — the
hopes he had formed — the promises they
had exchanged. ' I'll write at once,' she
thought, the recollection of the delayed
letter coming to her aid, sand tell him now
that already 1 know I never shall go back
away from here again, because ' — and here
a pause came, and either that she saw or
sought a solution to her motives, she sat
dreaming on, with half-closed eyes, her

hands, from Avhicli the work soon slipped,
idly resting in her lap.

Deaf to the noises that were going on
around, Eve was roused by a fresh sound
a hand had been laid upon the latch.
She started up — it was Adam.

Oh, Adam ! why, wherever have you
been ? we couldn't think what had become
of you she exclaimed, in stammering confusion.


Isn't there any word of father yet V
said Adam, in a voice that sounded harsh
and abrupt, while his eyes, which ignored
her presence, looked round the room, as if
expecting his question to be answered by
some one else.

Yes ; the ship's coming in,' said Eve,
and Joan and Jerrem have gone to look
at her.'

'■ Are you by yourself, then ?' asked
Adam, without any modulation of his voice.

30—2

'Yes, but 1 can get you whatever you
want ; the things are all here for your
breakfast — shall I make some ready for
you ?'

Adam vouchsafed no answer, but turning
at once to a man who, she now saw, had
been standing behind him, he said something
which Eve could not hear ; then, without
casting so much as a look in her direction,
he stepped backwards, and pulled to the
door; after Which, to Eve's amazement,
she saw him and his companion pass by
the window.

Was it possible that he was gone %

Eve ran to the side of the window which
commanded the longest stretch, and craned
her neck to look after them. Yes, they
were no looser in sio^ht, and at the fact the
tears of disappointment rose into her eyes.

Why was he treating her like that ?
What had she done to offend him %

Under the fear of his displeasure Eve's
heart sank as it had never done before ; for
though she had had a presentiment that he
was not pleased, she had in no way expected
to see the grave change betrayed in Adam's
face and voice. Could it be because of
this or that ?

Eve was racking her brain with fifty
suggestions, wien click went the latch.

Adam had returned, and this time, closing
the door after him, he drew the bolt and
fastened it ; then he came over and stood in
front of Eve, not speaking to her, but looking
with an expression which made her
throw aside her coyness, and say :

Oh, Adam, I'm so glad you have come
back ! You ain't angry with me, are you %
When you went away without speaking like
that,^I thought I had offended you.'

And if you had said Adam, half questioningly,
' you wouldn't care ?'

You have no right to say that — unless
she added, raising her soft brown eyes to
his face, ^ you want to make me say that I
should care.'

Adam threw his arms round her, and
holding her so that he could look into her
face, he said :

'- Give me your promise to come outwith
me sometime this evening ; 'tis no use
beginning to ask what I want to now, because
the others will be back at any minute.
But so soon as this bustle is over, promise
me that you'll listen to what I've got to
say ; I must tell it to you before you sleep
to-night ; 'twould send me wild to pass
another twenty-four hours like this last
has been.'

It must not be for very far,' said Eve,
by way of not seeming too ready to comply ;
because, though my foot isn't painful, it is
stiff.'

I'll see you shan't go too far,' said Adam,
straining to keep down by commonplace
replies the words he longed to speak.
'Tis hard to bring myself to stay till then
he added, relieving a little of his pent-up
emotion by a long-drawn sigh; ^ only I'm
fearing' that the rest will come. Ah 1' he
exclaimed, as Joan's voice was heard outside
: ' here they are — I was sure they
wouldn't be long. So 'tis this evening, remember,
and that seals the promise.'

Oh — ' but Eve had to swallow down
the remainder of her protest, for — the bolt
having been quietly drawn — the door
opened and admitted Joan, who, followed
by Dicky Snobnose, had come back to put
the things aside, and get a clear space
ready for the arrival of the china. The
expression upon Adam's face, combined
with the information which Dicky had just
imparted, satisfied Joan that nothing more

than the hope of doing a good stroke of
business had caused Adam's absence, and
without hesitation she said :

'Why, Adam, whatever made 'ee start
off like that this morning' without a bite or
sup inside 'ee ? There wasn't no occasion
for it. I'm sure you'd only got to
say the word and breakfast 'ud ha' bin
ready.'

Oh, I took care of myself said Adam,
cheerily ; ^ I had a capital breakfast up to
mill, with yer mother. I wanted to see
her, so it all fitted in.'

There, now,' exclaimed Joan ; ' didn't I
tell 'ee he wouldn't forget number wan ?
Eve,' she said, turning to Adam, ' would
keep on thinking' you'd started off to Looe,
or gone back to Dock or somewheres ; her
couldn't ate her own breakfast, 'cos I
believe her thought you'd got none.'

Adam stole a glance which told his

gratitude, while Eve, with a little confusion,
said :

Oh, I suppose it's from being in London
that I can't bear people to be away
without knowing where they are. There,'
she added, laughing, ' they would have
sent the bell-man after you, and had you
cried.'

lord save us from they London ways !'
said Dicky, with an ominous shake of the
head. 'I've bin hearing' a goodish bit o' talk
o' late about the things they goes on with up
there, and I can't say it 'sickly chimes in
with my woos o' what's right and fifty.
But there,' he added, catching sight of
Adam's face, * that's ain pardon, miss,
for been' so would as to spake my mind
afore you, who's comet frae the place ;
tho' I essay, if the truth was spoken,
you'd glad enough to be where you ain't
scrooge up for elbow-room, and 's able to

draw a breath o' air without waiting' your
turn to do it in. A^wh, 'wouldn't suit meat
all, that wouldn't ; and so long as King
George don't send word he can't do no
longer without me noways, you won't
catch Dicky I up to London.'

^ Uncle's all but in,' said Joan, turning
to Adam ; ' and Jerrem's waiting' down to
quay, so that they'll bring the things ois to
once. I didn't count 'pon this rout-out
coming' yet whiles, for don't 'ee mind, Eve,
'tis to-day us promised we was to go up to
Aunt Hepzibah's.'

Well, why not go then X returned
Adam ; '■ there's nothing' to keep you here.'

'What! and uncle just comet back!
Well, you'd a nice one, I must say. Who's
going' to look after folks, and see they have
all they wants to ate and drink ? — not you,
I'll lay a wager.'

You're pretty right there,' said Adam ;

but because you care to be here is no
reason for Eve staying. It'll be nothing to
suit her taste, I'm sure of that, and I'd
very much rather she was out of it all ;
isn't fitting company for women.'

Lord save us !' exclaimed Joan, her
quick temper rising ; ' how mighty particular
we'd glowed all to dance ! The time
ain't so very far off when nothing' could be
done right if Joan wasn't here to look
after it all. Not fitting' company for women !
well I never ! What dree call me then ?
Ain't I a woman, that you've looked
all this time to find out who 'tis fit to
know and who 'isn't % Things is coming' to
a nice pass, I think.'

Oh, Joan !' exclaimed Eve ; ^ you
mustn't take it like that. Adam means
us both, of course. Why, didn't you tell
me yourself what quarrelling and fighting
went on when these men came to take

away the spirits ? You said you'd give anything
to be out of it all.'

^ Saying's wan thing and main' it's another
said Joan, sulkily ; ^ but there, go
if you like. T don't want to hinder 'ee ;
and you can tell Aunt Hepzibah that
Adam's sent 'ee up, 'cos you shan't be
hunted by the company we keeps down
here. I'm sure,' she added, turning round
to Adam fiercely, ' I wonders you let her
bide so much with me. I shouldn't, if I
was you.'

Oh, Joan !' and Eve's voice and face
expressed the pain these hasty words gave
her. ' I'm sure you don't mean what you
say.'

^ Miss I do, every word, and no wonder
neither. I knew you'd cheney and I'm
cloak without he ramming' it down my
throat all dav honos.'

Adam gave a little shake of the head

towards Eve, as if to say Joan's present
disposition was hopeless ; and feeling things
might right themselves better if he was
absent, he said something about the Lottery,
and stepped out to stroll down towards the
quay. Dicky, who had been keeping ip
the background, utterly unable to comprehend
the ground of this contention,
watched Adam out of sight, and then
broke out with :

^ Awl, Joan Hocken, my dear, you'd
everybody's friend, you be : couldn't 'ee
concave no ways o' putting' the careen
away o' this rashly auld cheney off till tomorrow?
'Tis beyond bearing' to lave now
when such coin's is com in' on ; what dree
say to it, eh 1 I'll answer to be sober
enuf by twelve o'clock to the furthermost,
and that 'ud be heaps o' time to make the
journey in.'

I can't do nothing' to help 'ee,' said
Joan, curtly ; ' 'tis no good ain' me.'

^ Now don't 'ee say that,' continued
Dicky, in his most coaxing voice. ' Come,
now, let's see if us can't scheme it
out together; for 'tis 'nus to send anybody
mazed to know they'd turning' their backs
on such a trade as this. Lors ! I minds
the last wan that I was to, as if 'twas
yesterday. 'Twas up to Capon John's; there
was brandy for the ain', and rum swim-min'
'bout like water. A load o' the kegs
got busted accidental for the suppose, and
'twas catch who could ; some of 'em in
their hands and some in their shoes, till
we was al drunk together, rowlin' 'bout
the roads and singing', and I don't know
what. Nor nobody to tell neither, for
there was nora wan sober 'mono\st us.'

Well, you needn't look for that here,'
said Joan, sharply ; ' Adam '11 keep too
good a look-out for that.'

Miss, I reckon,' said Dicky, with a knowing

wink ; ' that's if he ain't doubled by
Jerrem. Do 'ee mind the trick Maister
Jerrem played last May, when he got un
away and served the quay all round while
he was agone? Awl, simmer! wasn't there
a kick-up when Adam corned back ! he was
poor tempered, and no mistake. And that
minds me,' he exclaimed, with an energetic
movement of his fist, ' I'll seek out Jerk
to dance, and tell un what 'tis I'm
aiming' at. I'll bet a guinea to a brass garden
but, if 'tis to be done, he'll work the oracle
for me.'

Joan waited for him to get clear of the
door, then, going into the front room,
where Eve was sitting, she said :

Don't think nothing o' what I said
just now, Eve ; 'twas only to tease Adam
a bit. I meant 'ee to go to Aunt
Hepzibah's all the time, for you'd only be
in the way here if you was to stay.'

^ Not if I could help you, Joan !'
^ Miss, but you can't help me ; 'sides which
they'd a rough lot, and, as Adam says, not
fit women's company. I'd go too if 'wasn't
for uncle ; but if he gets a little bit overtook,
Adam's got no patience with 'en,
and there's no more trusting' to Jerrem
than if he was a child ; 'sides which, when
the drinks on, they two 's sure to sail in one
boat.'

Int HEPZIBAH's house stood
well up the hill, far enough away
from the village to escape the
hubbub and confusion which, during the
removal of any considerable store of spirit,
was most certain to prevail.

Hidden away in the recesses of a tortuous
valley, amid hills whose steep sides
bristled with tier after tier of bare, broken
rocks, to reach or to leave Polperro by any
other mode than on foot was a task of considerable
difficulty. Waggons were unknown,

VOL. II. 31

carts not available ; and it was only at the
risk of its rider's life and limbs that any
horse ventured along the perilous descents
and ascents of the old Talland road. Out
of these obstacles, therefore, arose the
necessity for a number of men who could
manage the drays, dorsal, and crooks
which were the more common and favoured
modes of conveyance. With the natural
love of a little excitement, combined with
the desire to do as you would be done by,
it was only thought neighbourly to lend a
hand at whatever might be going on ; and
the general result of this sociability was,
that half the place might be found congregated
about the house, assisting to the best
of their ability to impede all progress, and
successfully turn any attempt at work into
confusion and disorder.

To add to this tumult, a keg of spirits
was kept on tap, to which all comers were

made free, so that the crowd grew first
noisy and good-tempered, then riotously
merry and quarrelsome drunk, until occasions
had been known when a general fight
had ensued, the kegs had got burst open
and upset, the men who were hired to deliver
them lay maddened or helpless in the
street, while the spirit, for which liberty
and life had been risked, flowed into the
gutters like so much water.

In vain had Adam, to whom these scenes
afforded nothing but anger and disgust,
used all his endeavours to persuade his
fellow-workers to give up running the
vessel ashore with the cargo in her. The
Polperro men, except under necessity,
turned a deaf ear to his entreaties, and in
many cases preferred risking a seizure to
foregoing the foolhardy recklessness of
openly defying the arm of the law. The
plan which Adam would have seen 



verbally adopted here, as it was in most of
the other places round the coast, was that
of dropping the kegs, shag on a rope, into
the sea, and (securing them by an anchor)
leaving them there until some convenient
season when, certain of not being disturbed,
they were landed and either removed to a
more distant hiding-place, or conveyed at
once to their final destination. But all
this involved immediate trouble and delay,
and the men who, without a complaint or
murmur, would endure weeks of absence
from their homes, the moment those homes
came in sight grew irritable under control
and impatient of all authority.

With a spirit of independence which
verged on rebellion, with an uncertain
temperament in which good and bad lay
jostled together so haphazard, that to calculate
which at any given moment might
come uppermost was an impossibility, these

sons of the sea were hard to lead, and impossible
to drive. Obstinate, credulous,
superstitious, they looked askant on innovation
and hated change, fearing lest it
should turn away the luck which they
vaunted in the face of discretion ; making
it their boast that so many sears had gone
by since any mischance had overtaken the
Polperro folk, that they could afford to
laugh at the soldiers before their faces,
and snap their fingers at the cruisers behind
their backs.

Under these circumstances, it was not
to be supposed that Adam's arguments
proved very effective ; no proposition he
made was ever favourably received, and
this one was more than usually unpopular.
So, in spite of his prejudice against a rule
which necessitated the sequence of riot
and disorder, he had been forced to give in,
and to content himself by using his authority

to control violence, and stem as much
as possible the tide of excess. It was no
small comfort to him that Eve was absent,
and the knowledge served to smooth his
temper and keep down his irritability.
Besides which, his spirits had risen to no
common height, a frequent result of the
reaction which sets in after great emotion,
although Adam placed his happy mood to
the credit of Eve s kind words and soft
glances.

It was late in the afternoon before the
kegs were all got out and safely cleared off;
but at length the last man took his departure,
the visitors began to disperse.
Uncle Zebedee and Jerrem disappeared
with them, and the house was left to the
undisturbed possession of Joan and Adam.

I shall bring Eve back when I come,'
Adam said, reappearing from the smattering
up he had been giving to himself

All right replied Joan, but in such a
weary voice that Adam's heart smote him
for leaving' her sittings there alone, and
"with a great effort at self-sacrifice he said :
Would you like to go too ?*

^ Miss, if I could go two perhaps I should,'
retorted Joan ; ' but as I'm only one,
perhaps I might find myself one in the way.
There, go along with 'ee, do,' she added,
seeing him still hesitate. ' You know if
there'd bin any chance o' my going', you
wouldn't ha' axed me.'

A little huffed by this home-thrust, Adam
waited for nothing more, but turning away,
he closed the door after him, and set off at
a brisk pace up the Lansallos road, towards
Aunt Hepzibah's house.

The light had now all but faded out, andover
everything seaward a cloudy film of
mist hung thick and low ; but this would
soon lift up and be blown away, leaving

the night clear and the sky bright with
the gutter of a myriad stars, beneath
whose twinkling light Adam would tell his
tale of love, and hear the sweet reply ; and
at the thought a thousand hopes leaped
into life, and made his pulses quicken, and
his nerves thrill. Strive as he might,
arrived at Aunt Hepzibah's he could
neither enter upon nor join in any general
conversation ; and so marked was his silence
and embarrassed his manner, that the assembled
party came to the charitable conclusion
that something had gone wrong in
the adjustment of his liquor, and knowing
it was ticklish work to meddle with a
man who, with a glass beyond, had fallen a
drop short, they made no opposition to
Eve's speedy preparations for immediate
departure.

Oh Eve !' Adam exclaimed, giving vent
to deep-drawn sighs of relief, as, having

turned from the farm-gate, they were out
of sight and hearing of the house. ' I
hope you're not vexed with me for
seeming such a fool as IVe been feeling
there. I have been so longing for the time
to come when I could speak to you, that
for thinking of it I couldn't talk about the
things they asked me of

Why, whatever can you have to say of
so much importance X stammered Eve,
trying to speak as if she was unconscious
of the subject he was about to broach, and
this from no coquetry, but because of an
embarrassment so allied to that which
Adam felt, that if he could have looked
into her heart, he would have seen his
answer in its tumultuous beating.

I think you know,' said Adam, softly ;
and as he spoke he stooped to catch a
glimpse of her averted face. ' It's only
what I'd on my lips to say last night, only

the door was opened before I'd time to get
the words out, and afterwards you wouldn't
so much as give me a look, although,'
he added reproachfully, ' you sat up ever so
long after I was gone, and only ran away
when you thought that I was coming.'

^ No, indeed I didn't do that,' said Eve,
earnestly ; * that was Joan who you heard.
I went upstairs almost the minute after
you left.'

Is that really true ?' exclaimed Adam,
seizing both her hands, and holding
them tight within his own. ^ Eve, you
don't know what I suffered, thinking you
were caught by Jerrem's talk, and didn't
care whether I felt hurt or pleased. I lay
awake most of the night, thinking whether
it could ever be that you could care for meas
by some magic you've made me care for
you. I fancied .'

But here a rustle in the hedge made

them both start. Adam turned quickly
round, but nothing vas to be seen.

'Twas most Hke nothing but a stoat ora
rabbit he said, vexed at the interruption;

still 'tis all but certain there'll be somebody
upon the road. Would you mind
crossing over to the cliff? 'tis only a little
bit down the other side.'

Eve raised no objection, and turning,
they picked their way along the field, got
over the gate, and down through the
tangle of gorse and briar to the path
which ran along the Lansallos side of the
cliff. Every step of the way was familiar
to Adam, and he so guided Eve as to
bring her down to a rough bit of rock
which projected out and formed a seat on a
little flat of ground overhanging a deep gully.

There,' he said, in a tone of satisfaction,

this isn't so bad, is it ? You won't feel
cold here, shall you V

No, not a bit,' said Eve.

Then there was a pause, which Eve
broke by first giving a nervous, half-suppressed
sigh, and then saying :

^ It's very dark to-night, isn't it f

Yes,' said Adam, who had been thinking
how he should best begin his subject. ' I
thought the mist was going to clear off
better than this, but that seems to look
like dirty weather blowing up ;' and he
pointed to the watery shroud, behind
which lay the waning moon.

*I wish a storm would come on,' said Eve.
I should so like to see the sea tossing up,
and the waves dashing over everything.'

What, while we two are sitting here V
said Adam, smiling.

No ; of course I don't mean now, this
very minute, but sometime.'

Sometime when I'm away at sea ?' put
in Adam.

Eve gave a little shudder.

Not for the world. I should be
frightened to death if a storm came on
and you away. But you don't go out in
very bad weather, do you, Adam V

'Not if I can help it, I don't,' he
answered. ^ Why, would you mind if I
did ?' and he bent down so that he could
look into her face. ' Eh, Eve, would you V

His tone and manner conveyed so much
more than the words, that Eve felt it
impossible to meet his gaze.

I don't know,' she faltered. ' What do
you ask me for ?'

What do I ask you for f he repeated,
unable longer to repress the passionate
torrent which he had been striving to keep
under. ' Because suspense seems to drive
me mad. Because, try as I may, I can't
keep silent any longer. I wanted, before
I said more, to ask you about somebody

you've left behind you at London ; but it's
of no use. No matter what he may be to
you, I must tell you that I love you, Eve ;
that you've managed in this little time to
make every bit of my heart your own.'

Somebody in London 1' Eve silently
repeated. ^ Who could he mean ? Not
Reuben May ; how should he know about
him?'

The words of love that followed this
surprise seemed swallowed up in her desire
to have her curiosity satisfied and her
fears set at rest.

What do you mean about somebody
I've left in London V she said ; and the
question, abruptly put, jarred upon Adam's
excited mood, strained as his feelings were,
each to its utmost tension. This man she
had left behind then could, even at a
moment like this, stand uppermost in her
mind.

A man, I mean, to whom, before you
left, you gave a promise ;' and this time,
so at variance was the voice with Adam's
former tones of passionate avowal, that,
coupled With the shock of hearing that
word * promise,' Eve's heart quailed,
and to keep herself from betraying her
agitation she was forced to say, with an
air of ill-feigned amazement :

A man I left — somebody I gave a promise
to ? I really don't know what you
mean

Oh yes, you do,' and by this time every
trace of wooing had passed from Adam's
face, and all the love so late set flowing
from his heart was choked and forced back
on himself 'Try and remember some
fellow who thinks he's got the right to ask
how you're getting on among the country
bumpkins ; whether you ain't tired of them
yet ; and when you're coming back. Perhaps,'

he added, goaded on by Eve's continued
silence, ' 'twill help you if I say
'twas the one who came to see you off
aboard the Mary Jane. I suppose you
haven't forgot him T

Eve's blood boiled at the sneer conveyed
in Adam's tone and look. Raising her eyes
defiantly to his, she said :

Forgotten him, certainly not ! If you
had said anything about the Mai^y Jane
before, I should have known directly who
you meant. That person is a very great
friend of mine.'

Friend !' said Adam.

Yes, friend ! the greatest friend I've
got.'

Oh, I'm very glad I know that ; because
I don't approve of friends. The
woman I ask to be my wife must be contented
with me, and not want anything
from anybody else.'

*A most amiable decision to come to
said Eve; ' I hope you may find somebody
contented to be so dictated to.'

I thought I had found somebody
already,' said Adam, letting a softer inflection
come into his voice. ' I fancied that at
least, Eve, you were made out of different
stuff to the women who are always hankering
to catch every man's eye.'

And pray what should make you alter
your opinion ? Am I to be thought the
worse of because an old friend, who had
promised he would be a brother to me,
offers to see me off on my journey, and I
let him come ? You must have a very
poor opinion of women, Adam, or at least
a very poor opinion of me.'

And the air of offended dignity with
which she gave this argument forced
Adam to exclaim :

Oh, Eve ! forgive me if I have spoken
VOL. II. 32

hastily; it is only because I think so much
more of you — place you so much higher
than any other girl I ever saw — that makes
me expect so much more of you. Of course
he continued, finding she remained silent,
^ you had every right to allow your friend
to go with you, and it was only natural he
should wish to do so ; only when a man's
so torn by love as I am, he feels jealous of
every eye that's turned upon you : each
look you give another seems something
robbed from me.'

Eve's heart began to soften ; her indignation
was beginning to melt away.

And when I heard he was claiming a
promise, I '

What promise f said Eve, sharply.

What promise did you give him ?' replied
Adam, warily, suspicion giving to
security another thrust.

That's not to the point,' said Eve. * You

say I gave him a promise : I ask what that
promise was V

'The very question I put to you. I
know what he says it was, and I want to
hear if what he says is true. Surely he
added, seeing she hesitated, ' if this is only
a friend, and a friend who is to be looked
on like a brother, you can't have given him
any promise that if you can remember you
can't repeat.'

Eve's face betrayed her displeasure.

Really, Adam,' she said, ' I know of
no right that you have to take me to task
in this manner.'

No,' he answered ; ' I was going to ask
you to give me that right, when you interrupted
me ; however, that's ver}'- soon set
straight. I've told you I love you, now
I ask you if you love me ? and, if so,
whether you will marry me ? After
you've answered me, I shall be able

32—2

to put my questions without fear of
offence.'

Will you indeed !' said Eve. ' I should
think that would rather depend upon what
the answer may be.'

^ Whatever it may be, I'm waiting for it
said Adam, grimly.

'Let me see, I must consider what it
was I was asked,' said Eve. 'First, if '

Oh, don't trouble about the first ; I shall
be satisfied of that, if you answer the second
and tell me you will accept me as a husband.'


Say keeper.'

Keeper, if that pleases you better.'
Thank you very much, but I don't feel
quite equal to the honour's not so
tired yet of doing what pleases myself, that
I need submit my thoughts and looks and
actions to another person.'

Then you refuse to be my wife ?'

eyes, I do.'

And you cannot return the love I offer
you?'

Eve was silent.

^ Do you hear V he said.

'Yes, I hear.'

Then answer : Have I got your love, or
haven't I V

^ Whatever love you might have had
she broke out passionately, ' you've taken
care to kill.'

Kill !' he repeated ; ' it must have been
precious delicate, if it couldn't stand the
answering of one question. Look here,
Eve, when I told you I had given you my
heart and every grain of love in it, I only
spoke the truth ; but unless you can give
me yours as whole and as entire as I have
given mine, 'fore God I'd rather jump off
yonder rock than face the misery that
would come upon us both. I know what

'tis to see another take what should be
yours — to see another given what you are
craving for. The torture of that past is dead
and gone, but the devil it bred in me lives
still, and woe betide the man or woman
who rouses it.'

Instinctively Eve shrank back ; the look
of pent-up passion frightened her, and
made her whole body shiver.

There, there, don't alarm yourself,' said
Adam, passing his hand over his forehead,
as if to brush away the traces which this
outburst had occasioned : ^ I don't want to
frighten you, all I want to know is — can
you give me the love I ask of you V

I couldn't bear to be suspected,' faltered
Eve.

Then act so that you would be above
suspicion.'

With a person always on the watch
looking out for this and that, so that you

would be afraid to speak or open your
mouth, I don't see how one could possibly
be happy said Eve. ' All you did, all you
said, might be taken wrongly, and when
you were most innocent you might bethought
most guilty. No; I don't think
I could stand that, Adam.'

Very well,' he said coldly ; ^ if you feel
your love is too weak to bear that — and a
great deal more than that — you are very
wise to withhold it from me : those who
have much to give require much in return.'

Oh, don't think I haven't that in me
which would make my love equal yours
any day,' said Eve, nettled at the doubt
which Adam had flung at her. ' If I gave
any one my heart, I should give it all ; but
when I do that, I hope it will be to somebody
who won't doubt me and suspect me.'

Then I'd advise you not to give them
cause to,' said Adam.

And I'd advise you to keep your cautions
for those that need them replied
Eve, rising from where she had been sitting,
and turning her face in the direction of
home.

Oh, you needn't fear being troubled by
any more I shall say said Adam ; ' I'm
only sorry that I've been led to say what
I have.'

^ Pray don't let that trouble you ; such
things, with me, go in at one ear and out at
the other.'

In that case I won't waste any more
words said Adam; 'so if you can keep
your tongue stilly you needn't fear being
obliged to listen to anything I shall say.'

Eve] gave a little scornful inclination of
her head, in token of the accepted silence
between them, and in silence the two commenced
their walk, and took their way
towards home.

CHAPTER VIII.

Except the lonof- surs^inQf roll of
the waves, as in monotonous
succession they dashed and
broke against the rocks, not a sound was
to be heard. The night had grown more
lowering ; the sprinkle of stars was hid
behind the dense masses of cloud, through
which, ever and anon, the moon, with
shadowy face, broke out and feebly cast
down a orhmmeringf liofht. Below, the outspread
stretch of water lay dark and
motionless, its glassy surface cold and

glittering like steel. Walking a little
in the rear of Adam, Eve shuddered asher
eyes fell on the depths, over whose
brink the narrow path they trod seemed
hanging. Instinctively she shrank closer
to the cliff-side, to be caught by the long
trails of bramble which, with bracken and
gorse, made the steep descent a bristly
wall. Insensibly affected by external
surroundings, unused to such complete
darkness, the sombre aspect of the scene
filled her with nervous apprehension; every
bit of jutting rock she stumbled against
was a yawning precipice, and at each step
she took she died some different death.
The terrors of her mind entirely absorbed
all her former indifference and ill-humour,
and she would have gladly welcomed any
accident which would have afforded her a
decent pretext for breaking this horrible
silence. But nothing occurred, and they

reached the open piece of green, and were
close on the crumbHno- ruins of St. Peter s
chapel, without a word having passed
between them. The moon struggled outwith
Greater effort, and to Eve's relief
showed that the zigzag dangers of the path
were past, and there was now nothing
worse to fear than what might happen on
any uneven grassy slope. Moreover, the
buzz of voices was near, and though they
could not see the persons speaking. Eve
knew, by the sound, that they could not
be very far distant. Having before him
the peculiar want of reticence generally
displayed by the Polperro folk, Adam
would have given much to have been in a
position to ask Eve to remount the hill
and get down by the other side ; but under
present circumstances he felt it impossible
to make any suggestion : things must take
their course. And without a word of warning

he and Eve gained the summit of the
raised elevation which forms a sheltered
background to this favourite loitering-place,
at once to find themselves the centre
of observation to a group of men whose
noisy discussion they had apparently interrupted.


Why, 'tis my son Adam, ain't it '?' exclaimed
the voice of Uncle Zebedee ; and
at the sound of a little mingled hoarseness
and thickness Adam's heart sank within
him. ' And who's this he's a got with un,
ehr

'Tis me, Uncle Zebedee,' said Eve,
stepping down on to the flat, and advancing
towards where the old man stood
lounging. •' Eve, you know.'

Awl, Eve, is it '?' exclaimed Zebedee.
Why, how long's t'wind veered round to
your quarter, my maid ? Be you two
sweetheart, then — eh ?'

I've been all day up to Aunt 's,'
said Eve, quickly, trying to cover
her confusion, ' and Adam came to fetch
me back : that's how it is we're together

Wa-al, but he needn't ha' fetched 'ee
'less he'd got a mind for yer company, I
repose,' returned Zebedee, with a meaning
laugh. * Come, come now ! 't 'full never do
for 'ee to try to cobble Uncle Zibedee !
So you and Adam's curtain' be 'ee '?
Wa-al, there's muffin to be said agen that, I
repose V and he looked round as if inviting
concurrence or contradiction. ^ Her's my
poor brother Andrew's little maid, ye know,
shipmates,' and here he made a futile attempt
to present Eve to the assembled
company, 'what's dead — and drownded —
and gone to Davy's locker ; so notwithstanding'
I'd lashing sooner 'twas our
Joan he'd ha' fix'd on — Lord ha' massy !'
he added, parenthetically, * Joan's worth a

horsed o' she — still, what's wan man's
mate's another man's poison; and, howsomever
that lies, I reckon it needn't go for
to hinder me fra' drinking' their healths ina
drap o' good liquor. So come along, my
hearties ;' and making a movement which
sent him forward with a lurch, he began
muttering something about his sea-less
the effect of which Alas drowned in the
shout evincing the ready satisfaction with
which this proposal for friendly conviviality
was hailed.

Eve drew in her breath, trying to gather
up courage and combat down the horrible
suspicion that Uncle Zebedee was not
quite himself — didn't exactly know what
he was saying — had taken too much to
drink. With congratulatory intent she
found herself jostled against by two or
three others near her, whose noisy glee
and uncertain gait only increased her fears.

What should she do ? Where could she
go ? What had become of Adam ? surely
he would not go and leave her amongst

But already her question was answered
by a movement from some one behind, who,
with a dexterous interposition, succeeded
in placing himself between Uncle Zebedee
and herself

Father !' and Adam's voice sounded
more harsh and stern than usual, ' leave
Eve to go home as she likes ; she's not
used to these sort o' ways, and she will not
take things as you mean them.'

Eh ! what ? How not mane 'em T exclaimed
old Zebedee, taken aback by his
son's sudden appearance. ' I ain't a said
DO harm that I knows by; there's no 'fence
in given' the maid a wet welcome, I repose.'

A buzz of dissatisfaction at Adam's interference
inspired Zebedee with renewed
confidence, and with two or three sways in

order to get the right balance, he managed
to bring himself to a standstill right in
front of Adam, into whose face he looked
with a comical expression of defiance and
humour, as he said :

'Why, come long with us, lad, do 'ee, and
name the liquor herself, and see it passes
round free, and turn and turn about ; and
let's hab a song or two, and get up Rosy
Trevor wi' his fiddle, and Zeke Orgall
there 'full dance us a hornpipe,' and he
began a double-shuffle with his feet, adding,
as his dexterity came to a sudden and somewhat
unsteady finish, ^ 'Tis a ill wind that
Mows nobody no good, and a poor heart
what never rejoices

Eve during this time had been vainly
endeavouring to make her escape, an impossibility,
as Adam saw, under existing
circumstances, and this decided him to use
no further argument; but, with his arm

put through this father's, and in company
with the rest of the group, he apparently
conceded to their wishes, and motioning
Eve on, the party proceeded along the
path, down the steps, and towards the
quay, until they came in front of the Three
Pilchards, now the centre of life and
jollity, with the sound of voices and the
preparatory scraping of a fiddle to enhance
the promise of comfort which glowed in
the ruddy reflection sent by the bright
lights and cheerful fire through the red
window-curtain.

Now, father,' exclaimed Adam, with a
resolute grip of the old man's arm, ' you
and me are homeward-bound. We'll welcome
our neighbours some other time, but
for this evening let's say good-night to
them.'

Good-night!' repeated Zebedee; 'how
goodnight ? Why, what 'ud be the main'

VOL. II. 33

o' that ? None o' us ain't again to part
company here, I hopes. We'd all going'
to cast anchor to the same moorings — eh,
mates ?'

No, no, no !' said Adam, impatiently ;
you come along home with me, now.'

Miss, miss ; all right,' laughed the old
man, trying to wriggle out of his son's
grasp ; ^ only not just yet awhiles. I'm
again' in here to drink your good health,
Adam lad, and all here's acomin' with me
ain't us, hearties V

Pack of stuff — drink my health !' exclaimed
Adam. 'There's no more reason
for drinking my health to-night than any
other night. Come along now, father ;
you've had a hard day of it, you know,
and when you get home you can have
whatever you want quietly by your own
fireside.'

But Zebedee, though perfectly good-humoured,

was by no means to be persuaded
; he continued to laugh and writhe
about as if the fact of his detention was
merely a good joke on Adam's part, the
lookers-on abetting and applauding his
determination, until Adam's temper could
restrain itself no longer, and with no very
pleasant explosion of wrath he let go his
hold, and intimated that his father was
free to take what course pleased him most.

That's right, lad !' exclaimed old Zebedee,
heartily, shaking himself together.
You'd a good son, and a capital sailor-man,
but you'd pore company, Adam —
verra pore company.'

And with this truism (to which a general
shout gave universal assent) ringing in
his ears, Adam strode away up the street
with all possible speed, and was standing
in front of the house door when he was
suddenly struck by the thought of what

3a— 2

had become of Eve. Since they had halted
in front of the Three Pilchards, he had
seen nothing of her ; she had disappeared,
and in all probability had made her way
home.

The thought of having to confront her
caused him to hesitate : should he go in ?
What else could he do ? where had he to go ?
So, with a sort of desperation, he pushed
open the door and found himself within
the sitting-room. It was empty ; the fire
had burnt low, the wick of the snuffed
candle had grown long — evidently Eve
had not returned ; and with an undefined
mixture of regret and relief Adam sat
down, leaned his arms on the table, and
laid his head upon them.

During the whole day the various excitements
he had undergone had so kept his
mind on the stretch that its powers of keen
susceptibility seemed now thoroughly exhausted,

and in place of the acute pain he
had previously suffered there had come
a dull, heavy weight of despair, before
which his usual force and determination
seemed vanquished and powerless. The
feeling uppermost was a sense of the injustice
inflicted on him ; that he, who in
practice and principle was so far removed
above his neighbours, should be made to
suffer for their follies and misdeeds, should
have to bear the degradation of their vices.
As to any hope of reclaiming them, he had
long ago given that up, though not without
a certain disappointment in the omniscience
of that Providence which could refuse the
co-operation of his valuable agency.

Adam suffered from that strong belief
in himself which is apt, when carried to
excess, to throw a shadow on the highest
qualities. Outstepping the Pharisee, who
thanked God that he was not like other

men, Adam thanked himself, and fed his
vanity, by the assurance that had the Pol-peto
folk followed his lead, and his advice,
they would now be walking in his footsteps
; instead of which they had despised
him as a leader, and rejected him as a
counsellor, so that, exasperated by their
ignorance and stung by their ingratitude,
he had cast them off and abandoned them
for ever ; and out of this disappointment
had arisen a dim shadow of some far-off
future, wherein he caught glimpses of a
new life, filled with fresh hopes and successful
endeavours.

From the moment his heart had opened
towards Eve, her image seemed to be associated
with these hitherto undefined
longings ; by the light of her love, of her
presence, her companionship, all that had
been vague seemed to take shape and grow
into an object which was real, and a purpose

to be accomplished ; so that now one
of the sharpest pricks from the thorn of
disappointment came of the knowledge
that this hope was shattered, and this
dream must be abandoned. And, lost in
moody retrospection, Adam sat stabbing
desire with the sword of despair.

*Let me be — let me be !' he said, in answer
to some one who was trying to rouse him.

Adam, it's me ; do look up !' and, in
spite of himself, the voice which spoke
made him lift his head and look at the
speaker. ^ Adam, I'm so sorry ;' and Eve's
face said more than her words.

You've nothing to be sorry for,' returned
Adam, sullenly.

I want you to forgive me, Adam,'
continued Eve.

I've nothing to forgive.'

Yes, you have ;' and a faint flush of
colour came into her cheeks as she added,

with hesitating confusion, 'You know 1
didn't mean you to take what I said as
you did, Adam ; because ' — and the colour
suddenly deepened and spread over her
face — 'because I do care for you — very
much indeed.'

Adam gave a despondent shake of his
head.

No, you don't,' he said, steadily averting
his eyes ; ' and a very good thing too. I
don't know who — that wasn't forced to it
would willingly have anything to do with
such a God-forsaken place as this is. I only
know I'm sick of it, and of myself, and
my life, and everything in it.'

Oh, Adam ! don't say that ; don't say
you're sick of life — at least, not now ;' and
she turned her face so that he might read
the reason.

And why not now ?' he asked stolidly.
What have I now that I hadn't before r

'Why, you've got me.'

You ! You said you couldn't give me
the love I asked you for.'

Oh, but I didn't mean it. What I said
was because I felt so hurt that you should
suspect me, as you seemed to.'

I never suspected you — never meant to
suspect you. All I wanted you to know
was that I must be all or nothing.'

Of course ; and I meant that too, only

you but there, don't let's drift back

to that again;' and as she spoke she leaned
her two hands upon his shoulders and
stood looking: down. what I want to
say is that every bit of love I have is
yours, Adam. I am afraid,' she added
shyly, ' you had got it all before ever I
knew whether you really wanted it or
not.'

*And why couldn't you tell me that
before V he said bitterly.

^ Why, is it too late now T asked Eve,
humbly.

Too late ! you know it can't be too
late!' exclaimed Adam, his old irritability
getting the better of him ; then, with a
sudden revulsion of his over-wrought
susceptibilities, he cried : ' Oh, Eve, Eve !
bear with me to-night ; I'm not what I
want to be. The words I try to speak
die away upon my lips, and my heart
seems sunk down so low that nothing can
rejoice it. To-morrow I shall be master
of myself again, and all will look
different.'

I hope so,' sighed Eve, tremulously.
^ Things don't seem quite between us as
they ought to be. I shan't wait for Joan,'
she said, holding out her hand. ' I shall
go upstairs now; so good-night, Adam.'

'Good-night,' he said; then, keeping hold
of her hand, he drew her towards him, and

stood looking down at her with a face
haggard and full of sadness.

The look acted as the last straw which was
to swamp the burden of Eve's grief. Control
was in vain ; and in another instant, with
Adam's arms around her, she lay sobbing
out her sorrow on his breast, and the
tears, as they came, thrust the evil spirit
away. So that when, an hour later, the two
said good-night again, their vows had
been exchanged, and the troth that bound
them plighted ; and Adam, looking into
Eve's face, smiled as he said : ^ Whether
for good luck or bad, the sun of our love
has risen in a watery sky.'

CHAPTER IX.

OST of the actions and events of
our lives are chameleon-lived ;
their colours vary according to
the light by Which we view them. Thus
Eve, who the night before had seen nothing
but happiness in the final arrangement between
Adam and herself, awoke on the
following morning with a feeling of dissatisfaction
and a desire to be critical as to
the rosy hues which seemed then to colour
the advent of their love.

The spring of tenderness, which had burst

forth within her at sight of Adam's limitation
and subsequent despair, lead taken
Eve by surprise. She knew, and had known
for some time, that much within her was
capable of answering to the demands which
Adam's pleading love would most probably
require ; but that he had inspired her with
a passion which would make her lay her
heart at his feet, feeling, for the time, that
though he trampled on it, there it must
stay, was a revelation entirely new and, to
Eve's temperament, rather humiliating.
She had never felt any sympathy with
those love-sick maidens whose very existence
seemed swallowed up in another's
being, and had been proudly confident that,
even when supplicated, she should never
seem to stoop lower than to accept.
Therefore, just as we experience a sense
of failure when we find our discernment
led astray in our perception of a friend, so

now, although she studiously avoided acknowledging
it, she had the consciousness
that she had utterly misconceived her own
character, and the balance by which she
had adjusted the strength of her emotions
had been a false one. A dread ran through
her lest she should be seized hold upon by
some further inconsistency, and she resolved
to set a watch on the outposts of
her senses, so that they might not betray
her into further weakness.

These thoughts were still agitating her
mind when Joan suddenly awoke, and, after
a time, roused herself sufficiently to say :

'• Why, whatever made you pop off in
such a hurry last night. Eve ? I ruined
in a little after ten, and there wasn't no
signs of you nowheres ; and then I come
upon Adam, and he told me you was gone
up to bed.'

Yes,' said Eve ; ' I was so tired, and

my foot began to ache again, so I thought
there wasn't any use in my sitting up any
longer. But you were very late, Joan,
weren't you X

Very early, more like,' said Joan ; ' 'twas
past wan before I shut my eyes. Why, I
come home three times to see if uncle was
back ; and then T wouldn't stand it no
longer, so I went and fetched un

What, not from where he was !'

exclaimed Eve.

Joan nodded her head.
Oh lors !' she said, ' 'ain't the must
time by many ; ^ and,' she added, in a tone
of satisfaction, ' I lets 'em know when
they've brought Joan Hocken down
among 'em. I had Jerrem out, and uncle
atop of 'un, 'fore they gnawed where they
was. Awl, I don't stand beg^ofin' and
pray in', not I ; 'tis "whether or no, Tom
Collins," when I come, I can tell 'ee.'

'Well, they'd stay a very long time
before they'd be fetched by me said Eve,
emphatically.

AAvh, don't 'ee say that now returned
Joan ; ' where do 'ee think there'd be the
most harm in then, sitting' comfortable at
home, when you might go down and 'time
em away, or the going' down and coin' of

itr

I've not a bit of patience with anybody
who drinks,' exclaimed Eve, evading a
direct answer.

Then you'll never cure anybody of it,
tny dear,' replied Joan. ^ You'd like
Adam there, I reckon, wanting' to set
the world straight in one day, and all
the folks in it bottomless side upwards ;
but, as I tell un, he don't go to work
the right way. They that can't steer 'full
never sail; and I'll bet any money that
when it comes to be counted up how many

glasses o' grog's been turned away from
uncle's lips, there'll be more set to the
score o' my coaxing' than ever 'full be to
Adam's bullyraggin'.'

Perhaps so said Eve ; and then, wishing
to avoid any argument into which
Adam could be brought, she adroitly
changed the subject, and only indifferent
topics were discussed until, their dressing
completed, the two girls were ready to
go downstairs.

The first person who answered the summons
to breakfast was Uncle Zebedee,
not heavy-eyed and shamefaced, as Eve
had expected to see him, but bright,
and rosy-cheeked as an apple. He had
been up and out since six o'clock, looking
after the repairs which a boat of his was
laid up to undergo ; and now, as he came
into the house, fresh as a lark, he chirruped,
in a quavers treble —

VOL. II. 34

" Tom Truelove woo'd the sweetest fair
That e'er to tar was kind,
Her face was of a booty rare."

That's for all the world what your n is,'
he said, breaking off to bestow a smacking
kiss on Joan. ' So look sharp, like a good
little maid as you be, and give us sommat
to sit down for ' ; and he drew a chair to
the table and began flourishing the knife
which had been set there for him. Then,
catching sight of Eve, whose face, in her
desire to spare him, betrayed an irrepressible
look of consciousness, he exclaimed, ' Why
they've bin tellin' up that I was a little
over-free in my speech last night about
you, Eve ; is there any truth in it, eh ? I
don't fancy I could ha' said much amiss,
did I ?'

Oh, nothing to signify, uncle.'
'Twas sommat 'bout you and Adam,
wasn't it?' he continued, with a puzzled

air ; ' 'tis all in my head here, trio' I can't
sickly call it to mind. That's the civil o'
been' a little o'ertook that ways he added,
with the assurance of meeting ready
sympathy. '• 'Tis so baffling' to set things
all ship-shape the next morning'. I minds
so far as this, that it had somehow to do
with me holding' to it that you and Adam
was going' to be man and wife ; but if you
axes for the why and the wherefore, I'm
blessed if I can tell 'ee.'

'Why, whatever put such as that into
your head?' said Joan, sharply.

Wa-al the liquor, I reckon,' laughed
Zebedee. 'And somehow or 'other
Maister Adam didn't seem to have overmuch
relish for the notion;' and he screwed
up his face and hugged himself together
as if his whole body was tickled at his
son's discomfiture. ' But there, never
you mind that, Eve,' he added hastily ;

34—2

^ there's more laws than wan to Polperro,
and I'll wager for a half score o' chaps
ready to hab ee without yer waiting' to betook
up by my son Adam.'

Poor Eve ! it was certainly an embarrassing
situation to be placed in, for, with no
wish to conceal her enofaofement, to announce
it herself alone and unaided by
even the presence of Adam, was a task she
naturally shrank from. In the endeavour
to avoid any direct reply, she sat watching
anxiously for Adam's arrival, her sudden
change of manner construed by Zebedee
into the effect of wounded vanity, and by
Joan into displeasure at her uncle's undue
interference. By sundry frowns and nods
of warning, Joan tried to convey her admonitions
to old Zebedee, in the midst of
which Adam entered, and, with a smile at
Eve and an inclusive nod to the rest of the
party, took a chair and drew up to the table.

Surely,' thought Eve, ' he intends
telling them.'

But Adam sat silent and occupied with
the plate before him.

He can't think I can go living on herewith
Joan, even for a single day, and they not
know it and in her perplexity she turned
on Adam a look full of inquiry and meaning.

Still Adam did not speak ; in his own
mind he was casting over the things he
meant to say when, breakfast over and the
two girls out of the way, he would invite his
father to smoke a pipe outside, during the
companionship of which he intended taking
old Zebedee decidedly to task, and, putting
his intended marriage with Eve well to the
front, clinch his arguments by the startling
announcement that, unless some reformation
was soon made, he would leave his
native place and seek a home in a foreign
land. Such words and such threats as

these could not be uttered to a father by a
son save when they two stood quite alone,
and Adam, after meeting a second look
from Eve, shook his head, feeling satisfied
that she would know that only some grave
requirement deterred him from immediately
announcing the happiness which
henceforth was to crown his life. But our
intuition, at the best, is somewhat narrow,
and, where the heart is most concerned,
most faulty; therefore Eve, and Adam too,
felt each disappointed in the other's want
of acquiescence, and inclined to be critical
on the lack of mutual sympathy.

Suddenly the door opened and in walked
Jerrem, smiling and apparently more radiant
than usual, under the knowledge that
he was more than usually an offender.
Joan, who had her own reasons for being
very considerably put out with him, was
not disposed to receive him very graciously.

Adam vouchsafed him no notice whatever.
Uncle Zebedee, oppressed by the sense of
former good-fellowship, thought it discreet
not to evince too much cordiality, so that
the onus of the morning's welcome was
thrown upon Eve, who, utterly ignorant of
any offence Jerrem had given, thought it
advisable to make amends for the pettish
impatience she feared she had been betrayed
into on the previous morning.

Old Zebedee, whose resolves seldom
lasted over ten minutes, soon fell into the
swings of Jerrem's flow of talk : a little
later on, and Joan was forced to put in a
word, so that the usual harmony was just
beginning: to recover itself when, in answer
to a remark which Jerrem had made. Eve
managed to turn the laugh so cleverly back
upon him that Zebedee, well-pleased to see
what good friends they were growing, exclaimed
:

Stop her mouth ! stop her mouth, lad !
I'd ha' done it, when I was your years,
twenty times over 'fore this. Hers too
saucy — too saucy by half, her is !'

Up started Jeremy but Adam was before
him.

I don't know whether what I'm going
to say is known to anybody here already,'
he burst out, but I think it's high time
that some present should be told by me
that Eve has promised to be my wife and
turning, he cast a look of angry defiance
at Jerrem, who, thoroughly amazed, gradually
sank down and took possession of his
chair again, while old Zebedee went through
the dumb show of giving a long whistle,
and Joan, muttering an unmeaning something,
ran hastily out of the room. Eve,
angry and confused, turned from white to
red, and from red to white.

A silence ensued — one of those pauses

when some event of our lives seems
turned into a gulf to separate us from our
former surroundings.

Adam was the first to speak, and, with
a touch of irony, he said :

^ You're none of you very nimble at
wishing us joy, I fancy.'

And no wonder, you've a looked us all
aback so,' said old Zebedee ; ' 't seems tome
I'm forced to turn it round and round
afore I can smaller it for rale right-down
truth.'

Why, is it so very improbable then V
asked Adam, already repenting the abruptness
of the disclosure.

Wa-al, 'twas no later than last night that
you was swearing agen, and cussin everybody
from stem to stern, for so much as
mentioning' it as likely. Now,' he added,
with as much show of displeasure as his
cheery, weather-beaten old face would admit

of, ^ I'll tell 'ee the mind I've got
towards these sort o' games : if you see fit
to board folks in the smoke, why do it, and
no blame to 'ee ; but hang me if I can
stomach 'ee sailing' under false colours !'

There wasn't anything of false colours
about us, father said Adam, in a more
conciliatory tone ; ^ for though I had certainly
spoken to Eve, it was not until after
I'd parted with you last night that she
gave me her answer.'

Awl !' said the old man, only half propitiated.
^ Wa-all, I repose you can settle
your contains without my help ; but I can
tell 'ee this much, that if my Joanna had
took so long afore she could make her
mind up, I'm blamed if her ever should
ha' had the chance o' been' your mother,
Adam, so there.'

Adam bit his lip with vexation.

There's no need for me to enter upon

any further explanations he said ; ' Eve's
satisfied, I'm satisfied, so I don't see why
you shouldn't be satisfied.'

Awl, I'm satisfied enough said
Zebedee ; ^ and so far as that goes, though
I ain't much of a hand at speechifying', I
hopes that neither of 'ee 'nil never have
no raison to repent yer bargain. Eve's a
fine beverly maid, so you'd well matched
there ; and so long as she's ready to listen
to all you say and bide by all you tells her,
why, 'twill be set fair and sail easy.'

^ I can assure you Eve isn't prepared todo
anything of the sort. Uncle Zebedee !'
exclaimed Eve, unable to keep silence any
longer. ' I've always been told if I'd
nothing else I've got the Pascals' temper,
and that, according to your own showing,
isn't very fond of sitting quiet and being
rode over rough-shod.'

The whistle which Uncle Zebedee had

tried to choke at its birth now came out
shrill, long, and expressive ; and Adam,
jumping up, said :

Come, come, Eve, we've had enough of
this ; surely there isn't any need to take
such idle talk as serious matter? If you
and me hadn't seen some good in one
another we shouldn't have taken each
other, I suppose ; and, thank the Lord,
we haven't to please anybody but our two
selves.'

^ Wa-al, 'tis to be hoped you'll find that
task easier than it looks,' retorted Uncle
Zebedee, with a touch of sarcasm, while
Jerrem, after watching Adam go out,
endeavoured to throw a tone of regret into
the flattering nothings he now whispered
by way of congratulation ; but Eve turned
impatiently away from him. She had no
further inclination to talk or to be talked
to ; and Uncle Zebedee having by this

time sought solace in a pipe, Jerrem joined
him outside, and the two sauntered away
together towards the quay.

Left to the undisturbed indulgence of
her own reflections, Eve's mood was no
enviable one — the more difficult to bear
because she had to control the various
emotions struo-o-lmo^ within her. She
felt it was the time for plain speaking
between her and Adam, and rightly judged
that a proper understanding come to at
once would be the safest means of securing
future comfort. Turn and twist Adam's
abrupt announcement as she would, she
could assign but one cause for it, and that
cause was an overweening jealousy ; and
as the prospect came before her of a lifetime
spent in the midst of doubt and suspicion,
the strength of her love seemed to
die away and her heart grew faint within
her. For surely if the demon of jealousy

could be roused by the sight of commonplace
attentions from one who was in every
way like a brother — for so in Eve's eyes
Jerrem seemed to be — what might not be
expected if at any time circumstances
threw her into the mixed company of
strangers % Eve had seen very little of
men, but whenever chance had afforded
her the opportunity of their society she
had invariably met with attention, and had
felt inwardly gratified by the knowledge
that she was attracting admiration ; but
now, if she gave way to this prejudice of
Adam's, every time an eye was turned
towards her she would be filled by fear,
and each time a look was cast in her
direction her heart would sink with
dread.

What should she do % Give him up %
Even with the prospect of possible misery
staring at her. Eve could not say yes; and

before the thought had more than shaped
itself, a dozen suggestions were battling
down the dread alternative. She would
change him, influence him, convert him,
anything but give him up or give in to
him. She forgot how much easier it is to
conceive plans than to carry them out ; to
arrange speeches than to utter them. She
forgot that only the evening before, when,
an opportunity being afforded, she had
resolved upon telling Adam the Avhole
circumstance of Reuben May, and the
promise made between them, while the
words were yet on her lips she had drawn
them back, because Adam had said he
knew that the promise was ' nothing but
the promise of a letter;' and Eve's courage
had suddenly given way, and by her
silence she had led him to conclude that
nothing else had passed between them.
Joan had spoken of the envious grudge

which Adam had borne towards Jerrem,
because he had shared in his mother's heart,
so that this was not the first time Adam
had dropped in gall to mingle with the
cup of his love. The thought of Joan
brought the fact of her unexplained disappearance
to Eve's mind, and, full of
compunction at the bare suspicion of
having wounded that generous heart. Eve
jumped up, with the intention of seeking
her and of bringing about a satisfactory-explanation.
She had not far to go before
she came upon Joan, rubbing and scrubbing
away as if the welfare of all Polperro
depended on the amount of energy she
could throw into her work. Her face was
flushed and her voice unsteady, the natural
consequence of such violent exercise, and
which Eve's approach but seemed to lend
greater force to.

Joan, I want to speak to you.'

'Awl, my dear, I can't listen to no
speaking' now,' replied Joan, hastily, *and
the tables looking as they do.'

But Tabithy always scrubs the tables,
Joan ; why should you do it V

^ Tabithy's arms ain't half so young as
mine, worse luck for me or for she.'

Having by this time gained a little
insight into Joan's peculiarities. Eve
argued no further, but set herself down
on a convenient seat, waiting for the time
when the rasping sound of the brush
would come to an end. Her patience was
put to no very great tax, for after a few
minutes Joan flung the brush along the
table, exclaiming :

Awl, rabbit the ole scrubbing', I must
give over. I believe I've had enuf of it
for this time, 't all events.'

Joan, you ain't hurt with me, are you,'
said Eve, trying to push her into the seat

VOL. II. 35

from which she had just risen. * I wanted
to be the first to tell you, only that Adam
spoke as he did, and took all I was going
to say out of my mouth ; it leaves you to
think me dreadfully sly.'

'Awl, there wasn't much need for tellin'
me said Joan, with a sudden relax of
maimer. ^ When I didn't shut my eyes o'
purpose I could tell, from' the first, what
was certain to happen.'

^ It was more than I could, then,' said
Eve. ^ I hadn't given it a thought that
Adam meant to speak to me, and when he
asked me I was quite taken aback, and
said *'no " for ever so long.'

'What made 'ee change yer mind so
sudden, then '?' said Joan, bluntly.
Eve hesitated.

I hardly know,' she said, with a little
confusion. * I think it was seeing him so
cast down made me feel so dreadfully sorry.'

H'm/ said Joan, ' didn't 'ee never feel
no sorrow for t'other poor chap that wanted
to have 'ee, he to London — Reuben May V

Not enough to make me care in that
way for him, I certainly never did.'

And you do care for Adam, then ?'
I think I do.'

Think r

Well, I am sure I do.'

That's better. Well, Eve, I'll say this
far ' — and Joan gave a sigh before the other
words would come out, ' I'd rather it should
be you than anybody else I ever saw.'

The struggle with which these words
were said, their tone, and the look in
Joan's face, seemed to reveal a state of
feeling which Eve had not suspected ;
throwing her arms round her, she cried out :

Oh, Joan ! why didn't he choose you ?
you would have been much better for him
than me.'

35—2

Lord bless the maid !' and Joan tried
to laugh through her tears, ' I wouldn't
ha' had 'un if he'd axed me. Why, there'd
ha' bin murder 'tween us 'fore a month
was out ; us 'ud ha' bin hung for one 'other.
No ; now don't 'ee take no such stuff as
that into yer head, 'cos there's no sense in
it. Adam's never looked 'pon me not more
than a sister ;' and, breaking down, Joan
sobbed hysterically ; ^ and when you two's
married I shall feel 'sickly as if he was a
brother, and be gladder than e'er a one else
to see how happy you makes un.'

That's if I do make him happy,' said
Eve, sadly.

There's no fear but you'll do that,' said
Joan, resolutely wiping the tears from her
eyes ; ' and 'twill be your own fault if you
hasn't happy too yourself. Eve. Adam's
got his fads to put up with, and his fancies
same as other men have, and a masterful

temper to keep under, as nobody can tell
better than me ; but for rale right-down
goodness, I shouldn't know where to match
his fellow — not if I was to search the place
through ; and, mind 'ee, after all, that's
something' to be proud of in the man you've
got to say Maister to.'
Eve gave a little smile.

But he must let me be mistress, you
know, Joan.'

All right ; only don't you stretch that
too far,' said Joan, warningly, ' or no good
'full come of it ; and be foresight in all
you do, and spake the truth to un. I've
many a time wished I could, but with this
to hide o' that one's, and that to hush up
o' brothers, I know he holds me for a downright
Hard ; and so I am by his measure, I
'sects.'

I'm sure you're nothing of the sort,
Joan,' said Eve ; ' Adam's always saying

how much people think of you. He told
me only yesterday that he was certain
more than half the men of the place had
asked you to marry them

^ Did he '?' said Joan, not wholly displeased
that Adam should hold this
opinion. ' Ah, and ax they may, I reckon,
afore I shall find a man to say '^ Yes " to.'

^ That is what I used to think myself,'
said Eve.

Miss, and so you found it, till Roger put
the question,' replied Joan, decisively.
Then, after a minute's pause, she added,
'What be 'ee going' to do 'bout the poor
saw to London, then — eh ? You must
tell he somehow.'

'Oh! I don't see that,' said Eve. 'I
mean to write to him, because I promised
I would, and I shall tell him that I've
made up my mind not to go back, but I
shan't say anything more ; there isn't any

need for it that I see : at least, not yet
awhile

Best to tell un all argued Joan. ' Why
shouldn't 'ee ? 'Tis the same, so far as
you'd concerned, whether he's killed to
dance or dies by inches.'

But Eve was not to be persuaded.

There isn't any reason why I should,'
she said.

No reason T replied Joan. ' Oh, Eve,
ray dear,' she added, ' don't 'ee let happiness
harden your heart ; if love is sweet
to gain, think how bitter 'tis to lose, and
by all you've told me, you'll forfeit a better
man than most in Reuben May.'

I HE month of December was well
advanced before Eve's letter
had reached Reuben May. It
came to him one morning when, notwithstanding
the fog which reigned around,
Reuben had arisen in more than usually
good spirits — able to laugh at his neighbours
for railing against weather which he
declared was good weather, and seasonable.
The moment the postman entered the
shop his heart gave a great bound — for
who but Eve would write to him ? — and no

sooner had his eyes fallen on the handwriting
than his whole being rejoiced, for
surely nothing but good news could be
heralded by such glad feelings. With
a resolute self-denial, of which on most
occasions Reuben was somewhat proud, he
refused himself the immediate gratification
of his desires, and with a hasty glance laid
the letter on one side, while he entered
into a needlessly long discussion with the
postman, gossiped with a customer, for
whose satisfaction he volunteered a minute
inspection of a watch which might have
very reasonably been put off until the
morrow ; and finally (there being nothing
else by which the long coveted pleasure
could be further delayed) he took u^o the
letter and carefully turned it first this side
and then that, before breaking the seal and
unfolding the paper.

What would it say 1 That she was

coming back — coming home ? But when ?
how soon ? In a month — in a week — now
at once '? In one flash of vision, Reuben
saw the furniture polished and comfortably
arranged, the room smartened up and
looking its best, with a blazing fire and a
singing kettle, and a cosy meal ready laid
for two people ; and then all they would
have to say to one another : on his part
much to hear and little to tell, for his
life had jogged on at a very commonplace
trot, his business neither better nor worse ;
but still, with the aid of the little sum his
more than rigid economy had enabled him
to save, they might make a fair start, free
from all debt and able to pay their way.

These thoughts only occupied the time
which Reuben took to undo the complicated
folds by which, before the days of
envelopes, correspondents endeavoured to
baffle the curiosity of those who sought to

know more than was intended for tlieni.
But what is this ? for Reuben's eyes had
been so greedy to suck up the words that
he had not given his mind time to grasp
their meaning Not coming; back ! never
any — more ! ' 'I Hke the place, the
people, and, above all, my relations, so very
much that I should never be happy now
away from them.'

He repeated the words over again and
again before he seemed to have the least
comprehension of what they meant ; then,
in a stupor of dull despondency he read onto
the end, and learnt that all his hopes
were over, that his life was a blank, and
that the thing he had dreaded so much as
to cheat himself into the belief that it could
never happen had come to pass. And yet
he was still Reuben May, and lived and
breathed, and hadn't much concern beyond
the thought of how he should best send the

things she had left to Polperro — the place
she never intended to leave — the place she
now could never be happy away from.

Later on a hundred wild schemes and
mad desires wrestled and fought, trying to
combat with his judgment, and put to flight
his sense of resolution; but now, as in the
first moment of death, with the vain hope
of realising his loss, the mourner sits gazing
at the inanimate form before him, so Reuben,
holding the letter in his hands, returned
again and again to the words which had
dealt death to his hopes, and told him that
the love he lived for no longer lived for
him. For Eve had been very emphatic in
enforcing this resolve, and had so strongly
worded her decision that, try as he would,
Reuben could find no chink by which a
ray of hope might gain admittance — all
was dark with the gloom of despair,
and this notwithstanding that Adam

had not been mentioned, and Reuben had
no more certain knowledge of a rival to
guide him than the jaundiced workings of
a jealous heart. Many events had concurred
to bring about this blamable reticence.
In the first place, the letter which
Eve had commenced as a mere fulfilment of
her promise, had grown through a host of
changing moods ; for, as time went on,
many a sweet and bitter found its way to
that stream whose course did never yet run
smooth; and could the pages before him
have presented one tithe of these varied
emotions, Reuben's sober nature would have
rejoiced in the certainty that such an excess
of sensitiveness needed but time and opportunity
to wear itself out.

It was nearly two months now since it
had been known all through the place that
Adam Pascal was keeping company with
his cousin Eve ; and the Polperro folk, one

and all, agreed that no good could surely
come of a courtship carried on after such
a contrary fashion — for the two were
never for twenty-four hours in the same
mind, and the game of love seemed to resolve
itself into a war of extremes wherein
anger, devotion, suspicion, and jealousy
raged by turns, and afforded equal occasions
of scandal and surprise. To add to their
original difficulties, the lovers had now to
contend against the circumstances of time
and place, for, during the winter, from most
of the men being on shore, and without occupation,
conviviality and merriment were
rife among them, and from bell-ringing
night, which ushered in Gunpowder-plot,
until Valentine's Day was passed, revels,
dances, or amusements of any kind which
brought people together, were welcomed
and well-attended. With the not unnatural
desire to get away from her own thoughts,

and to avoid as much as was possible the
opportunity of being a looker-on at happiness
in which she had no personal share,
Joan greedily availed herself of every invitation
which was given, or could be got at,
and, as was to be expected, Eve, young,
fresh, and a novice, became to a certain
degree infected with the anxiety to participate
in most of these amusements. Adam
made no objection, and, though he did not
join them with much spirit and alacrity, he
neither by word nor deed threw any obstacle
in their way to lessen their anticipation or
spoil their pleasure, while Jerrem — head,
chief, and master of ceremonies — found in
these occasions ample opportunity for trying
Adam's jealousy and tickling Eve's vanity.
Nettled by the indifference which, from
her open cordiality, Jerrem soon saw Eve
felt towards him, he taxed every art of
pleasing to its utmost, with the determination

of not being baffled in his attempts to
supplant Adam, who, in Jerrem's eyes, was
a man upon whom fortune had lavished
her choicest favours. Born in Polperro
Zebedee's son — heir to the Lottery —
captain of her now in all but name, what
had Adam to desire ? While he, Jerrem,
belonged to no one, could claim no one,
had no name, and could not say where
he came from. Down in the depths of a
heart in which nothing that was good or bad
ever lingered long, Jerrem let this fester
rankle, until often, when he seemed most
gay and reckless, some thoughtless word or
idle joke would set it smarting. The one
compensation he looked upon as given to
him above Adam was the power of attraction,
by which he could supplant him
with others, and rob him of their affection,
so that, though he Alas no more
charmed by Eve's rare beauty than he was

won by her coy modesty, no sooner did
he see that Adam's affection was turned
towards her, than he coveted her love, and
desired to boast of it as being his own.
With this object in view, he began by en-sting
Eve's sympathies with his forlorn
position, inferring a certain similarity in
their orphaned condition, which might well
lead her to bestow upon him her especial
interest and regard ; and so well was this
part played, that before long Eve found herself
learning unconsciously to regard Adam
as severe and unyielding towards Jerrem,
whose misfortune it was to be too easily
influenced. Seeing her strong in her own
rectitude, and no less convinced in the
truth of Jerrem's well-intentioned resolutions,
Adam felt it next to impossible to
poison Eve's ears with tales and scandals of
which her innocent life led her to have no
suspicion ; therefore, though the sight of
VOL. II. 36

their slightest intercourse rankled within
him, he was forced to keep silent, knowing,
as he did, that if he so much as pointed an
arrow, every head was wagged at him, and
if he dared let it fly home, every tongue was
ready to cry shame on his treachery.

So the winter wore away, and as each
day lengthened, Adam found it more
difficult to master his suspicions, to contend
with his surroundings, and to control
the love which had taken complete
hold and mastery of all his senses. With
untiring anxiety he continued to dodge
every movement of Jerrem and Eve — all
those about him noting it, laughing over
it ; and, while they thwarted and tricked
him, making merry at his expense, until
Jerrem, growing bold under such auspicious
countenance, no longer hesitated to throw
a very decided air of love-making into his
hitherto innocent and friendly intercourse.

Shocked and pained by Jerrem's altered
tone, Eve sought refuge in Joan's broader
experience by begging that she would
counsel her as to the best way of putting
a stop to this ungenerous conduct.

x\wh, my dear !' cried Joan ; ' unless
you'd wanting' to see murder in the house,
you mustn't breathe no word of it. 'Tw'ud
be worse than death to Jerrem if t should
ever come to Adam's ears : why, he'd have
his life, if he swung gallows-high for takin'
of it ; so, like a good maid, keep it from
un now, 'cos they'd all on the eve o'
starting', and by the time they comes home
agen Jerrem 'full have forgot all about ee.'

Eve hesitated.

I told him if ever he spoke like that tome
again I'd tell Adam.'

Miss; but you won't do it, though returned
Joan, * 'cos there ain't no main' in what he
says, you know. 'Tis only what he's told

3G— 2

up to scores and hunters o' other maidens
afore, the rapskallion-rogued raskil ! and
that Adam knows, and's had it in his mind
from must along what game he was after.
Us two knows un for what he is, my
dear ; wan best loved where he's least
trusted

It's so different to the men I've ever
had to do with said Eve.

^ Miss, but you never gnawed but wan afore
you comet here, did 'ee ?'

I only knew one man well,' returned
Eve.

Awl, then, you must bide a bit 'fore
you can fathom their deepness,' replied
Joan ; ' and while you'd waiting', I wouldn't
advise 'ee to take it for granted that the
world's made up o' Reuben Mays — nor
Adam Pascals neither ;' and she ran to the
door to welcome a cousin for whose approach
she had been waiting, while Eve, worried

and perplexed, let her thoughts revert to the
old friend who seemed to have quite forgotten
her ; for Reuben had sent no answer
to Eve's letter, and thus had afforded no
opportunity for the further announcement
she had intended making. His silence, interpreted
by her into indifference, had hurt
her more than she liked owning, even
to herself; and the confession of their
mutual promise, which she had intended
making to Adam, was still withheld because
her vanity forbade her to speak of a man
whose affection she had undoubtedly overrated.


Already there had been some talk of the
furniture being sent for, and with this in
view, the next time she saw Sammy Tucker
she asked him if he had been to Fowey
lately, and if he had seen anything of
Captain Triggs.

Sammy, as was his wont, blushed up to

the eyes before he stammered out something
about having met ' un just for a mint
coming' down by Place, 'cos he'd bin up thereto
fetch summit he was going' to carey to
London for Squire Trefry ; but that was a
brave bit agone, so perhaps,' added Sammy,
^ he's back by now, 'cos they was a-startin'
away that evening.'

Eve made no other remark, and Sammy
turned away, not sorry to escape further
interrogation, for it had so happened that
the opportunity alluded to had been turned
by Sammy to the best advantage, and he
had contrived in the space of ten minutes
to put Captain Triggs in possession of the
whole facts of Adam and Eve's courtship,
adding that ^ folks said 'twas a burning'
shame o' he to marry she, and Joan Hocken
forced to stand by and look on, and her s'
(indicating by his thumb it was his stepmother
he meant) ^a looked on terrible bad,

and bin as moody-hearted as could be ever
since

Captain Triggs nodded his head in sympathy,
and then went on his way, with the
intuitive conviction that this bit of news,
which he intended repeating to ' thicker
chap in London,' would not be received
with welcome ; ' however,' he reflected,
'tis allays best to know the worst, so I
shall tell 'un the must time I meets 'un,
which is safe to be afore long, 'cos o' the
ole gentleman,' meaning thereby an ancient
silver watch, through whose medium Captain
Triggs and Reuben had struck up an
intimacy. How Reuben blessed that watch,
and delighted in those ancient works which
would not go, and so afforded him an opportunity
for at least one visit !

Each time the Mary Jane came to
London, Reuben was made acquainted
with the fact, and the following evening

found him in the little cabin, poring over
the intricacies of his antique friend, whose
former capabilities, when in the possession
of his father, Captain Triggs was never
weary of recounting.

Standing behind Reuben, Triggs would
nod and chuckle at each fresh difficulty that
presented itself, delighting in the proud
certainty that after all the London chap
'ud find ^ the ole gentleman had proved wan
too many for he ;' and when Reuben, desirous
of further information, would prepare
his way for the next visit by declaring he
must have another try at him, Triggs,
radiant but magnanimous would answer :

Miss, miss, lad ; do 'ee — come agen ; fortis
aise to see with half a eye that 'ain't
wan look nor two neither that 'full circumnavigate
the insides o' that ole chap, if
'taint to his liken' to be set again."

|T was some weeks after the receipt
of Eve's letter that Reuben,
having paid several fruitless visits
to Kay's Wharf, walked down one afternoon
to find the Mary Jane in, and Captain
Triggs on board. The work of the short
winter's day was all but over, and Reuben
accepted an invitation to bide where he was-and
have a bit of a yarn.

You've bin bad, haven't 'ee ?' Captain
Triggs said, with friendly anxiety, as, seated
in the little cabin, their faces were brought
on a level of near inspection.

Me— bad X replied Reuben. 'No. Why,
what made you think of that ?'

'Cos you m lookin' so rashly about the
gills.'

soh, I was always a hatchet-faced fellow
said Reuben, wondering, as he spoke,
whether his lack of personal appearance
had in any way damaged his cause with
Eve, for poor Reuben was in that state
when thoughts, actions, words, have but
one centre round which they all seem unavoidably
to revolve.

'But you'd fuss than ever, now. I
reckon,' continued Captain Triggs, ' 'tis
through addlin' your head over them clocks
and watches too close, eh ?'

Well, perhaps so,' said Reuben. ' I
often think that if I could, I should like to
be more in the open air.'

Come for a voyage with me, then,' said
Triggs, heartily. ' I'll take 'ee, and give

'ee a shake-down free, and yer mate and
drink for the aitin'. Come, you can't have
fairer than that said now, can 'ee V

A wild thought rushed into E-euben's
mind. Should he go with him ? see Eve
once more, and try whether it was possible
to move her to some other decision ?

You're very kind, I'm sure,' he began,
and I feel very much obliged for such an
offer ; but '

There, 'tis nothing' to be obliged for,' interrupted
Triggs, thinking it was Reuben's
modesty made him hesitate. * We'd a
hand short, so anywise there's a berth
empty ; and as for the vitals, they allays
cooks a sight more than us can get the rids
of So I'm only offering' 'ee what us can't
ate ourselves.'

I think you mean what you're saying,'
said Reuben — ' at least,' he added, smiling,
I hope you do, for 'pon my word I feel as
if I should like very much to go.'

Miss, sure. Come along, then. Us shan't
start afore next week, and you'll be to
Bristol and back 'fore they've had time to
miss 'ee here.'

bristol ?' ejaculated Reuben. * I thought
you were going to Cornwall again.'

^ Not to dance, I ain't ; but wouldn't 'ee
rather go to Bristol ? 'Tis a brave place,
you know. For my part, I'd so soon see
Bristol as London — 'tis pretty much o' the
same look-out here as there.' But while
Captain Triggs had been saying these
words his thoughts had made a sudden leap
towards the truth, and finding Reuben not
ready with a remark, he continued : ' 'Ain't
on no account of the young female you
comet aboard here with, that's making' 'ee
think o' Cornwall, is it 1'

Yes, it is,' said Reuben, bluntly. ' I
want to see her. I've had a letter from
hers and it needs a little talking' over.'

Awl, then I 'sects there's no need forme
to tell 'ee that her's took up with Adam
Pascal. You knows it already V

Reuben felt as if a pike had been driven
into his heart, but his self-command stood
him in good stead, and he said quite
steadily :

Do you happen to know him, or anything
about him V

Awl, miss ; I knows en fast enuf,' said
Triggs, who felt by intuition that Reuben's
desire was to know no good of him, * and a
precious stomachy chap he is. Lord ! I
pities the maid who'll be his missis ; whether
gentle or simple, her's got her work cut out
afore her.'

In what way ? How do ye mean V

Why, he's got the temper o' the old unto
stand up agen, and wherever he shows
his face he must be head and chief, and
must lay down the law, and you must

hearken to act by it, or else look out for
squalls.'

Reuben drew his breath more freely.
And what is he ?' he asked.

^ Wa-all, I reckon he's her cousin, you
know,' answered Triggs, misinterpreting the
question ; ^ 'cos he's ole Zebedee's awnly
son, and the ole chap's got houses and
lands, and I dunno what all. But there, I
wouldn't change with 'em ; for you know
what they be, all alike — a drunken', fighting',
cussin' lot. Lor's, I cudn't stand it, I
cudn't, to be drunk from morning' to night
and from night to morning' ! '

And is he one of this sort V exclaimed
Reuben, in horror. ' Why, are her relations
like that r

They'd all tarred with the wan brush,
I reckon,' replied Triggs. ' If not, they
cudn't keep things going' as they do ; 'tis
the drink cares 'em through with it.

Why, I knows by the little I've a-done that
ways myself, how 'tis. Git a good skinful
o' grog in 'ee, and wan man feels he's five,
and, so long as it lasts, he's got the spirit
and 'nil do the work o' five, too ; then when
'tis beginning' to drop a bit, in with more
liquor — and so go on till the job's over.'

And how long do they keep it up V said
Reuben.

Wa-all, that's more than I can answer
for. Let me see,' said Triggs, reflectively;
there Alas ole Zeke Spry, he was up
eighty-seen, and he used to say he'd never
that he snowed by, and could help, bin to
bed not to say sober, since he'd comet to
years o' discretion — but in that ways he
was only wan o' many ; and after he was
dead 't happened just as t' ole cha^i had
said it wud, for he used to say, " When I'm
looked, folks 'full get up a talk that ole
Zeke Spry killed himself with drink ; but

don't you listen to it' he says, ^^ 'cos' 'ain't
nothing' o' the sort — he died for want o'
breath, that's what killed he ;" and I reckon
he was about right, else there wudn't be
nobody left to die in Polperro.'

Polperro !' said Reuben ; * that's where
your ship goes to V

^ No, not exactly ; T goes to Fowey : but
they hasn't over a step or so apart — a matter
o' six miles, say.'

There was a pause, which Captain Triggs
broke by saying : ^ Miss, I thought whether it
wudn't surprise 'ee to hear 'bout it been
Adam Pascal ; they'd none of 'em overmuch
took with it, I reckon, for they allays
counted on 'im having' Joan Hocken : her's
another cousin, and another nice handful,
by all that's told up.'

Reuben's spirit groaned within him :
Oh, if I'd only known of this before,' he
said, ^ I'd have kept her by force from

going ; or if she would have gone, I'd have
gone with her. She was brought up so
differently he continued, addressing Triggs.
A more respectable woman never lived
than her mother was.'

Awl, so the Pascals all be ; there's
none of 'em but what's respectable and well-to-do.
What I've bin tellin' of 'ee is their
ways, you know; 'taint nothing agen 'em.'

It's quite decided me to go down and
see her, though,' said Reuben. ' I feel it's
what her mother Avould have me do : she
in a way asked me to act a brother's part
to her when she was dying, for she didn't
dream about her having anything to do
with these relations whom she's got among
now.'

Wa-all, 'twas a thousand pities you let
her go then,' said Triggs, * and though
I'm not wanting' to hinder 'ee — for you'd
so welcome to a passage down to Fowey as

VOL. II. 37

you be round to Bristol — still, don't it
strike 'ee that if her wudn't stay here for
yer ain' then, her ain't likely to budge
from there for your ain' now V

I can but try, though,' said Reuben,
'and if you'll let me go when you're
going '

Say no more, and the thing's settled,'
replied Triggs, decisively. ^ I shall come
back to London with a return cargo, which
'full have to be delivered ; another wan
'full be looked in, and that aboard, off us
goes.'

Then the bargain's made,' said Reuben,
holding out his hand ; 'and whenever you're
ready to start you'll find me ready to go.'

Captain Triggs gave the hand a hearty
shake in token of his willingness to perform
his share of the compact ; and the matter
being so far settled, Reuben made his necessary
preparations, and with all the patience

he could summon to his aid, endeavoured to
wait with calmness the date of departure.

While Reuben was waiting in London,
activity had begun to stir again in Polperro.
The season of pleasure was over; the men had
grown weary of idleness and merry-making,
and most of them now anxiously awaited the
fresh trip on which they were about to start.

The first run after March was always an
important one, and the leaders of the various
crews had been at some trouble to arrange
this point to the general satisfaction.

Adam's temper had been sorely tried
during these discussions, but never had he
so well governed it, nor kept his sharp
speech under such good control ; the reason
beinor that at lenolh he had found another
outlet for his wounded sensibility.

AYith the knowledge that the heart he
most cared for applauded and sympathised
with this hopes and his failures,

37—2

Adam could be silent and be calm — to
Jerrem alone the cause of this alteration
was apparent, and with all the lynx-eyed
sharpness of vexed and wounded
vanity, he tried to thwart and irritate
Adam by sneering remarks and covert
suggestions that all must now give way
to him ; it was nothing but ' follow my
leader ' and do and say what he chose —
words which were as pitch upon tow to
natures so readily inflamed, so headstrong
against government, and impatient of everything
which savoured of control ; and the
further misfortune of this was that Adam,
though detecting Jerrem's influence in all
this opposition, was unable to speak of it to
Eve. It was the single point relating to
the whole matter on which the two kept
silent, each regarding the very mention of
Jerrem's name as a firebrand which might
perchance destroy the wonderful harmony

which for the last week or so had reigned
between them, and which to both was so
sweet that neither had the courage to
endanger or destroy it.

At length the day of departure had come,
and as each hour brought the inevitable
separation closer, Eve's heart began to discover
itself more openly, and she no longer
disguised or hid from those around that hero



love, her hordes, her fears were centred upon
Adam.

In vain did Jerrem try, by the most
despairing looks and despondent sighs, to
attract her attention, and entice her to an
interview. Away from Adam's side or,
Adam absent, from Joan s company. Eve
would not stir, until Jerrem, driven into
downright ill-humour, was forced to take
refuge in sullen silence.

It had been decided that the Lottery was
to start in the evening, and the day had

been a busy one ; but towards the end of
the afternoon, Adam managed to spare a
little time, which was to be devoted to Eve
and to saying the farewell which in reality
was then to take place between them.

In order to ensure a certain amount of
privacy, it had been arranged that Eve
should go to an opening some half-way up
Talland Lane, and there await Adam's
approach, which he Avould make by scrambling
up from under the cliff, and so across
to where she could see and come to meet
him.

Accordingly, as soon as five o'clock had
struck, Eve, who had been fidgeting about
for some time, got up and said :

Joan, if Jerrem comes in, you won't tell
where I've gone, will you V

'■ Well, seen' I don't know the whereabouts
of it myself, I should be puzzled,'
said Joan.

I'm goiii' up Talland Lane to meet
Adam faltered Eve ; ' and as it's to say
good-bye, I — we don't want anybody else,
you see

The tremulous tone of the last few words
laude Joan turn round, and looking at
Eve, she saw that the gathered tears were
ready to fall from her eyes. Joan had felt
a desire to be sharp in speech, but the sight
of Eve's face melted her anger at once,
and with a sudden change of manner, she
said :

Why, bless the maid, what's there to
cry about ? You'd a nice one, I just say,
to be a sailor's wife I Lor's, don't let 'em
see that you frets to see their backs, or
they'll be getting' it into their heads next
that they'd somebody and we can't live
without 'em ! They'll come back soon
enough, and a sii^ht too soon for a £food
many here, I can tell 'ee.'

Eve shook her head.

But will they come back ?' she said
despairingly. ' I feel something different
to what I ever felt before — a presentiment
of evil, as if something would happen.
What could happen to them, Joan X

Lord bless 'ee ! don't ax un what could
happen to 'em ? Why, a hunted things —
they could be wracked and drowned, or
catched and killed, or looked and hung;'
then, bursting into a laugh at Eve's face of
horror, she exclaimed, ^ Pack o' stuff, nonsense
! don't 'ee take heed o' no fancies nor
rubbish o' that sort. They'll come back safe
enuf, as they've allays done afore ; nothing's
ever happened to 'em yet, what should
make it now % TVorld ain't acomin' to an
end 'cos you'd come down fra' London
town. There, get along with 'ee, do,' and
she pushed her gently towards the door,
adding, with a sigh, ' 'T would be a poor tale

if Adam was never to come back now, and
it the first time he ever left behind un
anything he cared to see agen.'

Eve soon reached her point of observation,
and under sheer of the hedge she
stood looking with anxious eyes in the
direction from which Adam was to come.
It had been a clear upright day, and the air
blew fresh and cool ; the sky (except to
windward, ^\ here a few white fleecy masses
lay scattered about) was cloudless ; the sea
of a deep indigo-blue, flecked with ridges
of foam, which unfurled and spread along
each wave, crested its tip, and rode triumphant
to the shore. Inside the Peak, over
the harbour, the gulls were congregated,
some fluttering over the water, some riding
on its surface, some flying in circles over
the heights, now green and soft with the
thick fresh grass of spring. Down the spine
of the cliff" the tangle of briar-wood and

brambles, though not leafless, still showed
brown, and the long trails, which were
lifted and bowed down as the sudden
gusts of wind swept over them, looked
bare and wintry.

Eve gave an involuntary shiver, and her
eyes, so quick to drink in each varied
aspect of the sea, now seemed to try and
shut out its beauty from before her.

What should she do if the wind blew
and the waves rose as she had seen them
do of late, rejoicing in the sight, with
Adam by her side ? but with him away, she
here alone — oh, her spirit sank within her ;
and, to drive away the thoughts which
came crowding into her mind, she left her
shelter, and hurrying along the little path,
crossed the cress-grown brook, and was
soon half-way up the craggy ascent, when
Adam, who had reached the top from the
other side, called out :

Hallo ! I didn't think to find you here.
We'd best walk back a bit, or else we shall
be just in the eye of the wind, and it's
coming on rather fresh.'

You won't go if it blows, Adam V and
Eve s face betrayed her anxiety.

Oh, my dear one,' he said kindly, ^ you
mustn't think of the wind's having anything
to do with me ; besides, it's all in our
favour, you know : it'll rock us to sleep all
the sooner.'

Eve tried to smile back as she looked up
at him, but it was a very feeble attempt.

I don't want to feel frightened,' she
said, ' but I can't help it '

Can't help what V

Why, thinking that something may
happen.'

Oh, nonsense!' he said; 'there's nothing
going to happen. It's because you care
for me, you think like that. Why, look at

me — ain't I the same % Before this, I never
felt anything but glad to be off and get
away ; but this time — and he drew a long
sigh, as if to get rid of the oppression — ' I
seem to carry about a lump of lead inside
me, and the nearer it comes to saying
good-bye the heavier it grows.'

This sympathy seemed to afford Eve
some consolation, and when she spoke
again it was to ask, in a more cheerful tone,
how long their probable absence would be %
where they were going ? what time they
would take in getting there ? to all of
which Adam answered with unnecessary
exactness ; for both of them felt they were
talking, for talking's sake, of things about
which they knew all they could know
already. Yet how was it possible, in the
light of open day, when at any moment
they might be joined by a third person, to
speak of that which lay deep down in their

hearts, waiting only for a word, a caress,
a tender look, to give it voice ?

Adam had had a dozen cautions, entreaties,
injunctions, to give to Eve ; he
had been counting through every minute
of the day the time to this hour, and now
it had come, and he seemed to have nothing
to say, could think of nothing, except how
long he could possibly give to remaining.

By J ove !' he exclaimed, as after more
than an hour had slipped away — time
wasted in irrelevant questions and answers,
with long pauses between — when neither
could think of anything to say, and each
wondered why the other did not speak.
By Jove, Eve, I must be off ! I didn't
think the time had gone so quick. We
mustn't start at the furthest later than
eisfht : and if I ain't there to look after
them, nobody 11 think it worth while to be
ready.'

They were back under shelter of the
hedge again now, and Adam (who possessed
the singular quality of not caring to do his
love-making in public) ventured to put his
arm round Eve's waist, and draw her towards
him.

You'll never let me go again,' he said,
without been' able to leave you my wife,
Eve, will you ? 'Tis that I believe is pressing
on me. I wish now more than ever that
you hadn't persisted in saying no all this
long winter.'

I won't say no next time,' she said, while
the hitherto restrained tears began to fall
thick and fast.

Adam's delight was not spoken in words,
and for the time he forgot all about the
possibility of being overlooked.

^ Then, when I come back, I shan't be
kept waiting any longer ?'

'No.'

And we shall be married at once f

eyes.'

Adam strained her again to his heart.

Then come what may,' he said, ^ I shan't
fear it. So long as I've got you, Eve, I don't
care what happens. It's no good,' he said,
after another pause. ' The time's up, and
I must be off. Cheer up, my girl — cheer
up ! Look up at me, Eve — that's a sweetheart
! Now, one kiss more, and after that
we must go on to the gate, and then goodbye
indeed.'

But the gate reached, and the good-bye
said, Eve still lingered.

^ Oh, Adam !' she cried, ' stop — wait for
one instant !'

And Adam, well pleased to be detained,
turned towards her once more.

Good-bye, Adam, God watch over you !'

Amen, my girl — amen ! May He watch
over both of us, for before Him we are one

now, Eve ; we've taken each other, as the
book has it, for better, for worse, for richer,
for poorer, in sickness, and in health.'

Till death do you part,' said the sepulchral
tones of a voice behind the hedge,
and with a laugh at the start he had given
them, Jerrem passed by the gate, and went
on his way.

Several weeks had now passed
by since the bustle of departure
was over, and though no direct
intelligence had come from the absentees, a
rumour had somehow spread abroad that
the expected run of goods was to be one of
the largest ever made in Polperro.

The probability of this fact had been
known to the leaders of the expedition before
they started, and had afforded Adam
another opportunity for impressing upon
them the great necessity for increased
caution.

VOL. II. 38

Grown suspicious at the supineness
which generally pervaded the revenue department,
the Government had decided
upon a complete revolution, and during
the winter months the entire force of the
coast had been everywhere superseded, and
in many places increased. Both at Looe
and Fowey the cutters had new officers and
crews, and the men, inflamed with the zeal
of new-comers, were most ardent to make
a capture and so prove themselves worthy
of the post assigned to them.

While all his comrades had affected to
laugh at these movements, Adam had
viewed them with anxiety, had seen the
graveness of their import, and the disasters
likely to arise from them ; and at length his
arguments had so far prevailed that a little
better regulation was made for the working
of signals and insuring that they should be
given and attended to if required. In case

of danger the rule was to burn a fire on
different heights of the cliff, and small huts
were even erected for that purpose ; but the
lighting these fires was often delayed until
the last moment — what had become everybody's
business was nobody's business — and
secure that, in any case, the cruisers were
no more willing to fight than the smugglers
were wanting to be fought, hazards were
often incurred which, with men whose
silence could not be bought (for up to that
time every crew had had its go-between),
would most certainly have proved fatal.

Upon the present force no influence
could as yet be got to bear, and to prove
the temper of their dispositions, no sooner
was it known to them that three of the
most daring of the Polperro vessels were
absent, than they set to watching the place
with such untiring vigilance that it needed
all the sharpness of those left behind to

38—2

follow their movements and arrange the
signals so that they might warn their
friends without exciting undue suspicions
among their enemies.

Night after night, in one place or another,
the sheltered flicker of the flame
shone forth, as a warning that any attempt
to land would prove dangerous, until word
being suddenly brought that the cruiser
had gone ofl" to Polruan, out went the fire,
and, an answering light showing that at
least one of the vessels was on the watch,
when the morning dawned the Stamp and
Go was in, and her cargo safe under water.
The Lottery, she said, had contrived to
decoy the revenue men away, hoping that
by that means the two smaller vessels
might stand a chance of running in ; but
from their having to part company and
keep well away from each other, the Stamp
and Go — though certain the Cleopatra was
not far off — had lost sight of her.

The day passed away, the evening Hight
had all but faded, when to the watchers
the Cleopatra, with crowded sail and aided
by a south-west wind, was seen trying to
make the harbour, close followed by the
cruiser. The news flew over the place
like lightning', and but a few minutes
seemed to have passed before all Pol-pedro
swarmed the cliffs, each trying to
secure a vantage-point by putting forth
some strong: claim of interest in those onboard.
With trembling hearts and anxious
gaze, the lookers-on watched each movement
of the two vessels, a dead silence
prevailing among them so long as they
both followed in the same course ; but the
instant a clever tack was made by which
the pursuers were baffled, up rose the shout
of many voices, and cries were heard and
prayers uttered that the darkness would
come quickly on and afford their friends a
safe retreat.

Except to such men as steered the
Cleopatra, to enter Polperro harbour
amid darkness and wind was a task
beyond their skill; and knowing this,
and seeing by their adversary's tactics the
near possibility of defeat, the cruiser had
resort to her guns trying to cut away the
Cleopatra s gear, and by that means compel
her to heave-to. But though partly
disabled, the stout little vessel bore onwards,
and night's friendly clouds coming to her
aid, the discomfited cruiser had to withdraw,
within hearing of the triumphant
shouts which welcomed its rival's safety.

With the exception of the Lottery, all
was now safe ; but no fears were entertained
on her account, because, from her
superior size and her well-known fast sailing
qualities, the risks which had endangered
the other two vessels would in no way
affect her. She had merely to cruise outside,

and await, with all the patience her
crew could command, a fitting opportunity
for slipping in, escaping the revenue men,
and turning on them a fresh downpour of
taunts and ridicule.

In proof of this, several of the neighbouring'
fishings-boats had from time to time
seen and spoken to the Lottery; and with a
view to render those at home perfectly at
ease, every now and again one of these
trusty messengers would arrive with a few
words, which would be speedily circulated
amono^ those most interested. The fact of
their absence, and the knowledge that at
any time the attempt to land might be
made, naturally kept every one on the
strain ; and directly night set in, both Joan
and Eve trembled at each movement and
started at every sound.

One night, as, in case of surprise, they
were setting all things in order, a sudden
shuffling made Joan flv to the door.

Why, Jonathan I' she exclaimed, admitting
the man whom Eve had never
seen since the evening after her arrival,
what's up ? "What brings you here,
ehr

I've comet with summit for you,' he
said, casting a suspicious look at Eve.

Well, out with it, then,' said Joan; quickly
adding, as she jerked her head in that
direction, ^ us don't have no secrets from
she.'

Awl, dont 'ee !' returned Jonathan, ina
voice which sounded the reverse of complimentary.
* Wa-all, then, there's what
'tis ;' and he held towards her a piece of
paper folded up like a letter.

Who's it from ? Where did 'ee get un '?'
asked Joan ; while Eve exclaimed, ' Oh,
Joan, see is it from them ?'

I can't stay no longer,' said Jonathan,
preparing to retreat.

But you must stay till we've made out
what this here is,' said Joan.

Jonathan shook his head.

'ain't nothing' to do with what I'm
about he answered, determined not to be
detained ; ' and I've got to run all the
faster 'cos I've comet round this way to
bring it. But Jerreni give it to me,' he
whispered, ' and Adam ain't to be would
nothing' of it ;' and he added a few more
words, which made Joan release her hold
of him and seem as anxious to see him
gone as he was to go.

The first part of the whisper had reached
Eve's ears, and the hope which had leaped
into her heart had been forced back by the
disappointment that Jerrem, not Adam,
had sent the letter. Still it might contain
some news of their return, and she turned
to Joan with a look of impatient inquiry.

I wonder whatever 'tis about,' said

Joan, claiming the right of ownership sofar
as the unfolding the missive went.
'Some random talk or 'other, I'll be
bound she added, with a keener knowledge
of her correspondent than Eve possessed.


I'll warrant he's a nice handful aboard
there 'mongst 'em all, with nothing' to do
but drinking' and dice-thro win' from morning'
to night. Awl laws I' she said, with a
sigh of discontent, as the written pages lay
open before her, ' what's the good o' sending'
a passel o' writing' like that to me ? 't might
so well be double Dutch for aught I can
make out o' any o' it. There ! take and
read it, do 'ee, Eve, and let's hear what he
says — a good deal more 'bout you than me,
I'll lay a wager to.'

Then I don't know why he should said
Eve.

No, nor I neither,' laughed Joan ; * but

there ! I ain't jealous o' he, for as I'm
Jerrem's cut-and-come-agen, his making upto
other maidens only leaves un more relish
for coming' back to the dish he can stick

by.'

Eve's eyes had by this time run over the

carelessly-written, sprawling page of the

letter, and her face flushed up crimson as

she said :

^ I really do wish Jerrem would give

over all this silly nonsense. He has no

business to write in this way to me.'

To you !' exclaimed Joan, snatching
back the letter to look at the outside.
Why, that ain't to you I' and she laid her
finger on the direction. * Come now, 'tis
true I hasn't much of a scholar, but I'm
blessed if I can't swear to my awn name
when I sees un.'

That's only the outside,' said Eve ; ' all
the rest is to me — nothing but a parcel of

silly questions, asking me how he has
offended me, and why I don't treat him as
I used to, as if he didn't know that he
has nobody but himself to blame for the
difference

^ And ain't there nothing' else ? Don't
he send no word to me ?' asked Joan,
ruefully.

Eve, who was only too glad that poor
Joan's ignorance prevented her reading the
exaggerated rhodomontade of penitence and
despair with which the paper was filled,
ignored the first question.

He says,' she said, turning to read from
the page, '' As you won't give me the
opportunity of speaking to you, promise me
that, when we meet, which will be tomorrow
night " Oh ! Joan, can that

be true ? Do you think he means really
tomorrow night ?' then, running her eyes
farther on, she continued : ' Perhaps he

does, for — listen, Joan — '' You mustn't split
on me to Adam, who's cock-a-hoop about
giving you all a surprise ; and there'd bethe
devil to pay if he found out I'd blown
the gaff." '

^ Now, ain't that Jerrem all over ?' exclaimed
Joan, angrily, anything but pleased
at the neglect she had received. *Just
flying' in the face o' everything Adam wants
done. He knows how things has got
abroad afore nobody could tell how ; and
yet, 'cos he's axed, he can't keep a quiet
tongue in his head.'

I tell you what we'll do,' said Eve : ^ not
take a bit of notice of the letter, Joan, and
just act as if we'd never had it; shall
we ?'

Well, I reckon 'twould be the best
way, for I shouldn't wonder but they be
coming,' she added, while Eve, anxious to
be rid of the letter, hastily flung it into

the fire, and stood watching it blaze up and
die out. ' Jonathan gave a hint o' something,'
continued Joan, ' though he never
named no time, which, if he was trusted
with, he knows better than to tell of.'

I wonder they do trust him, though,'
said Eve, ^ seeing he's rather silly.'

Awl, most o' his silly is to serve his own
turn. Why, to see un elsewhere, you'd
say he'd stored up his wits to Polperro, and
left 'em here 'til he gets back agen ; and
that's how 'tis he ferrets out the things he
does, 'cos nobody minds un, nor pays no
heed to un ; and if he does by chance come
creeping' up, or stand nigh, " 'Tis only poor
foolish Jonathan," they says.'

she sun, which came streaming in
through the windows next morning,
seemed the herald of coming
joy. Eve was the first to be awakened,
and she soon aroused Joan. ' It won't
make no difference to them because the
day's fine,' she asked ; ' will it, Joan V

'Not a bit; they don't care a dump
what the day is, so long as the night's
only dark enough, and there'll be no show
o' moon this week.'

Oh, I'm so glad,' said Eve, breaking

out into a snatch of an old song which had
caught her fancy.

^ Awl, my dear, don't 'ee begin to sing,
not till breakfast is over,' exclaimed Joan.
^ " Sing afore you bite — cry afore night." '

Cry with joy, perhaps,' laughed Eve ;
still, she hushed her melody, and hastened
her speed to get quickly dressed, and her
breakfast over. That done with, the house
had to be fresh put in order, while Joan
applied herself to the making of various
pies and pasties ; for ^ You see,' she said,
if they won t all of 'em be just ready for a
jollification this time, and no mistake.'

sand I'm sure they deserve to have
one,' said Eve, whose ideas of merrymaking
were on a much broader scale now
than formerly : it is true she still always
avoided the sight of a drunken man and
ran away from a fight, but this was more
because her feelings were outraged at these

sights, than because her sense of right and
wrong was any longer shocked at the vices
which led to them.

'' 111 tell 'ee what I think I'll do said
Joan, as, her culinary tasks over, she felt at
liberty to indulge in some relaxation ; ' I'll
just run in to Polly April's, and two or
three places near, and see if the wind's
bio wed them any of this news.'

Yes, do,' said Eve, '• and I shall go
along by the Warren a little way, and look
at the sea and that '

^ Lord save the maid!* laughed Joan,
whatever you finds in the say to look at
I can't tell. I know 'tis there, but I never
wants to turn my eyes that way, 'ceptin'
'tis to look at something' 'jon it.'

Wait 'till you've been in a town like I
have for some time,' said Eve.

Wait ! miss, I 'sects 'twill be wait 'fore
my turn comes to be in a town for long.

VOL. II. 39

Awl, but I should just like to go to London,
though she added ; ^ wouldn't I just
come back genteel !' and she walked out of
the door with the imaginary strut such an
importance would warrant her in assuming.
Eve followed, and the two walked together
down Lansallos Street, at the corner of
which they parted — Joan to go to Mrs.
April's, and Eve along by the Warren
towards Talland, for although she had not
told her intention to Joan, she had made
up her mind to walk on to where she could
get sight of Talland Bay.

She was just in that state of hope and
fear when inaction becomes positive pain,
and relief is only felt while in pursuit of an
object which entails some degree of bodily
movement. Joan had so laughed at her
fears for the Lottery ^ that to a great extent
her anxiety had subsided ; and everybody
else seemed so certain that, with Adam's

caution and foresight, nothing could possibly
happen to them, that to doubt their safety
seemed to doubt his wisdom.

During this last voyage Adam had had
a considerable rise in the opinions of the
Polperro folk : they would not admit it too
openly, but in discussions between twos
and threes it was acknowledged that
Adam had took the measure o' they new
revenge chaps from the must, and said they
was a cunning', decateful lot, and not to be
dealt with no ways ;' and Eve, knowing the
opposition he had had to undergo, felt a
just pride that they were forced into seeing
that his fears had some ground, and that
his advice was worth following out.

Once past the houses, and she determined
no longer to linger, but walk on as
briskly as possible ; and this was the more
advisable because the day was a true April
one — sharp showers of mingled hail and

39—2

rain had succeeded the sun, which now
again was shining out with dazzling brightness.


The sea was green and rippled over
with short dancing waves, across which ran
long slanting shadows of a bright violet
hue, reflected from the sun and sky ; but
by the time Eve reached a jutting stone,
which served as a landmark, all this was
vanishing ; and turning, she saw coming up
a swift creeping shadow, which drew behind
it a misty veil that covered up both sea
and sky, and blotted them from view.

Oh my ! here's another hailstorm coming,'
she said; and drawing the hood of her
cloak close over her face, she made all haste
down the steep bit of irregular rock towards
where she knew that, a little way off the
path, a huge boulder would aflbrd her
shelter.

Down came the rain, and with it such a

gust of wind that, stumbling up the bit of
diff on which the stone stood, Ev^e was
almost bent double. Hullo ! Somebody
was here already, and, shaking back her
hood to see who her companion in distress
might be, she uttered a sharp scream of
horror, for the man who stood before her
was no other than Reuben May.

Then you're not glad to see me. Eve ?'
he said, for the movement Eve had involuntarily
made was to put out her hands
as if to push him away.

Eve tried to speak, but the sudden
fright of his unexpected presence seemed
to have dried up her throat and tongue,
and taken away all power of utterance.

*Your old chum, Cape Triggs, asked
me how I should like to take a bit of a
trip with him, and I thought as I hadn't
much to keep me I'd take his offer ; and,
as he's stopped at Plymouth for a day or

SO, I made up my mind to come so far as
here and see for myself if some of what
I've been told is true.'

^ Why, what have you been told ?' said
Eve, catching at anything which might
spare her some of the unpleasantness of a
first communication.

Well, for one thing, that you're going
to be married to your cousin.'

Eve's colour rose, and Reuben, thinking
it might be anger, said :

Don't make any mistake. Eve ; I haven't
come to speak about myself All that's past
and over, and God only knows why I ever
got such folly into my head ;' and Reuben
thought himself perfectly sincere in making
this statement, for he had talked himself
into the belief that this journey was undertaken
from the sole desire to carry out his
trust. * What I've come to do is to speak
to you like a friend, and ask you to tell me

what sort of people these are that you're
among, and how the man gets his Having
that you're thinking of being married to V

Eve hesitated, then she said :

There is no need for me to answer you,
Reuben, because I can see that somebody
already has been talking about them to
you, haven't they V

Yes, they have ; but how do I know
that what they've said is true V

^ Oh, I dare say it's true enough,' she
said ; ' people ain't likely to tell you false
about a thing nobody here feels ashamed
to own to.'

Not ashamed of being drunkards, law-breakers
— thieves !' said Reuben, sternly.

Reuben May 1' exclaimed Eve, flaming
up with indignation, and entirely forgetting
that but a little time before she had held
an exactly similar opinion, 'do you forget
that you're speaking of my own father's

blood-relations — people whore called by
the same name I am ?

'No, T don't forget it, Ev^e ; and I don't
forget neither that if I didn't think that
down here you would soon become ruined,
body and soul, I'd rather cut my tongue
out than it should give utterance to a word
that could cause you pain. You speak of
your father, but think of your mother,
Eve ; think if she could rise ap before you,
could you ask her blessing on what you're
going to do 1'

Eve's face quivered with emotion, and
Reuben, seizing his advantage, continued :

Perhaps you think I'm saying this
because I'm wanting you for myself, but,
as God will judge us, 'isn't that that's
making me speak, Eve and he held out
his hand towards her. ' You've known
me for many a long year now ; my heart's
been laid more bare to you than to any

living creature : do you believe what I'm
saying to you ?'

'Yes, Eeuben, I do,' she answered
firmly, though the tears, no longer restrained,
came streaming from her eyes,
and you must also believe what I say to
you, that my cousin is a man as honest
and upright as yourself, that he wouldn't
defraud any one of the value of a pin's
point, nor take a thing that he didn't think
himself he'd got a proper right to.'

Good God, Eve ! is it possible that
you can speak like this of one who gets his
living by smuggling '?' and a spasm of positive
agony passed over Reuben's face as he
tried to realise the chancre of thought and
feelings which could induce a calm defence
of such iniquity. * What's the difference
whether a man robs me or he robs the
king ? Isn't he stealing just the same V

No — certainly not I' said Eve, quickly.

I can't explain it all to you, but I know
this — that what they bring over they buy
and pay for, and certainly therefore have
some right to

^ Have a right to !' repeated Reuben.
Well, that's good ! So men have a right
to smuggle, have they — and smuggling isn't
stealing ? Come ! I should just like this
cousin of yours to give me half an hour of
his company to argue out that matter in.'

My cousin isn't at home,' said Eve,
filled with a sudden horror of what might
be expected from an argument between
two such tempers as Reuben and Adam
possessed. ^ And if you've only come hereto
argue, whether 'tis with me or with
them, Reuben, 'tis a waste of time that'll dono
good to you, nor any of us.'

Reuben did not speak. He stood, and fora
few moments looked fixedly at her ; then
he turned away, and hid his face in his

hands. The sudden change from cano-er to
sorrow came upon Eve unexpectedly — anything
Hke a display of emotion was so
foreign to Reuben that she could not help
being affected by it, and after a minute's
struggle with herself, she laid her hand on
his arm, saying gently :

Reuben, don't let me think you've come
all this long way only to quarrel and say
bitter things to me ; let me believe 'tis as
you said, because you weren't satisfied, and
felt — for mother's sake — you wanted to bea
friend to me still. I feel now as if I
ought to have told you when I wrote that
I was going to marry my cousin Adam,
but I didn't do it because I thought you'd
write to me, and then 'twould be easier to
si^eak ; and when you didn't take no notice,
I thought you meant to let me go altogether,
and I can't tell you how hurt I felt.
I couldn't help saying to myself over andover

again (though T was so angry with
you I didn't know what to do) — I shall
never have another such friend as Reuben
never.'

Eve's words had their effect, and when
E-euben turned his pale face to her again,
his whole mood was softened.

'Tis to be the same friend I always was
that I've come, Eve,' he said ; ^ only you
know me, and how I can never keep from
blurting out all at once things that I ought
to bring round bit by bit, so that they might
do good, and not give offence.'

You haven't offended me yet,' she said —
^ at least,' she added, smiling in her old way
at him, ^ not beyond what I can look over ;
and so far as I can, and it Avill ease your
mind, Reuben, I'll try to tell you all you
care to know about uncle and — the rest of
them. I'm sure, if you knew them, you'd
like them, you couldn't help it, more particularly

Joan and Adam — if you once saw
those two.'

'And why can't I see them, Eve? It
wouldn't seem so very strange, being your
friend — for that's all I claim to be — sfoinof
there to see you, would it V

No, I don't know that it would ; only '
and here she hesitated — ' whatever you
saw that you didn't like, Reuben, you'd
only speak to me about ? You wouldn't
begin arguing with them, would you V

Reuben shook his head. Then, with a
sudden impulse, he said :

And have you really given all your love
to this man, Eve V

* Yes,' she said, not averting her eyes,
although her face was covered with a quick
blush. .

And, whatever comes, you mean to be
his wife V

I don't mean to be anybody else's wife
she said.

And he — he cares for you ?
If he didn't, be sure I should have
never cared for him.'
Reuben sighed.

Well he said, ^ I'll go and see him. Ill
have a talk with him, and try and find out
what sort of stuff he's made of If I could
go away certain that things ain't as bad as
I feared to find them I should take back a
lighter heart with me. You say he isn't
home now. Is he at sea, then 1'
No, not at sea ; he's close by.'
^ Then you expect him back soon V
Yes ; we expect him back to-night.'
'To-night! Then I think 111 change
my plan. I meant to go back to Plymouth,
and see what Triggs is about to do,
for I'm going round to London with him
when he goes ; but if you're expecting
your cousin so soon, why shouldn't I stop
here till IVe seen him ?

Oh ! but he oughtn't come said Eve,
who in any case had no wish that Reuben
should appear until she had paved the way
for his reception, and, above all things,
desired his absence on this particular occasion.


Well, I must take my chance of that —
unless he added, catching sight of her
face, * there's any reason against my stopping
?'

Eve coloured.

Well,' she said, ' perhaps they oughtn't
care — as they don't know you — about your
being here. You see she added, by way
of excuse, ^ they've been away a long while
now.'

Been to France, I repose,' said Reuben,
in a tone which conveyed his suspicions.

^ No,' replied Eve, determined not to
seem ashamed of their occupation ; ' I
think they've been to Guernsey

Oh, well, all the same, so far as what
they went to fetch. Then they're going
to try and land their cargo, I repose V

I don't know what they may be going
to try and do,' and Eve endeavoured to
imitate the sneer with which Reuben had
emphasized the word, ' but I know that
trying with them means doing. There's
nobody about here,' she added with a borrowed
spice of Joan's manner, ^ would care
to put themselves in the way of trying to
hinder the Lottery.'

'Tis strange, then, that they shouldn't
choose to come in open daylight, rather
than be sneaking in under cover of a dark
night,' said Reuben, aggravating.

^ As it happens retorted Eve, with an
assumption of superior nautical knowledge,
the dark night suits them best, by reason
that at high tide they can come in close to
Down End. Oh ! you needn't try to think

you can hurt me by your sneers at them,'
she said, inwardly smarting under the contempt
she knew Reuben felt. ^ I feel hurt
at your wanting to say such things, but
not at all at what you say. That cant
touch me.'

^ No, so I see,' said Reuben, hopelessly.
Then, after a minute's pause, he burst outwith
a passionate, ' Oh, Eve ! I feel as if I
could take and jump into the sea with you, so
as I might feel you'd be safe from the life.
I'm certain you're going to be dragged
down to ! You may think fair now of this
man, because he's only showed you his fair
side ; but they who know him know him
fur what he is — bloodthirsty, violent, a
drunkard, never sober, with his neck in a
noose, and the gallows swinging over his
head. What hold will you have over one
who fears neither God nor devil ? Yes
but I will speak. You shall listen to the

VOL. II. 40

truth from me for she had tried to interrupt
him. ' It isn't too late, and it's but
fit that you know what others say of him !'

Eve's cano-er had risen until she seemed
turned into a fury, and her voice, usually
low and full, now sounded hard and sharp,
as she cried :

^ Tf they said a hundred times worse of
him, I would still marry him ; and if he
stood on the gallows that you say swings
over his head, I'd stand by his side and says
I was his wife !'

^ God pity you!' groaned Reuben.

I want no pity,' she said, ' and so you
can tell those who would throw it away on
me. Say to them that you sought me out
to cast taunts at me, but it was of no use,
for what you thought I should be ashamed
of I gloried in, and could look you and all
the world in the face,' and she seemed to
grow taller as she spoke, sand say I felt

proud to be a smuggler's wife,' and, turning,
she made a movement as if to go ; but
Reuben took a step so as to impede her.

Is this to be our parting V he said.
Can you throw away the only friend
you've got left X

I don't call you a friend,' she said.

You'll know me for beincv so one day
though, and bitterly rue you didn't pay
more heed to my words.'

Never!' she said proudly. ^ I'd trust
Adam with my life ; he's true as steel.
Now,' she added, stepping on one side, * I
have no more time to stay. I must go
back, so let me pass !'

Mechanically Eeuben moved. Stung
by her words, irritated by a sense of
failure, filled with the sharpest jealousy
against his rival, he saw no other course
open to him than to let her gower Away, and
to go his.

40—2

^ Good-bye, then, Eve,' he said, in a dry,
cold voice.

Good-bye,' she answered.

I don't think, after what's passed, you
need expect to see me again,' he ventured,
with the secret hope that she would pause
and say something that might lead to a
fresh discussion.

I had no notion that you'd still have a
thought of coming. I should look upon a
visit from you as very out of place.'

Oh ! well, be sure I shan't force myself
where I'm not wanted.'

Then you'll be wise to stay away, for
you'll never be wanted where I am !'

And without another glance in his direction,
she walked away, while Reuben stood
and watched her out of sight.

That's ended,' he said, setting his lips
firmly together and hardening the expression
of his naturally grave face. ' That

mad game's finished, and finished so that I
think I've done with sweethearts for as
long as I live. Well, thank God ! a man
may get on very fairly, though the woman
he made a fool of himself for flings back
his love, and turns him over for somebody
else ;' then, as if some unseen hand had
dealt him a sudden thrust, he cried out :
Why did I ever see her ? Why was I
]nate to care for her ? Haven't I known
the folly of it all along, and fought and
strove from the first to get the better of
myself ? and here she comes down and sees
a fellow whose eye is tickled by her looks
and he acts in a week what I've been
begging and praying for years for ; and they
tell } ou that God's ways are just, and that
He rewards the good and punishes the evil;'
and Eeuben's face worked with suppressed
emotion, for in spirit he stood before his
Creator and upbraided Him with, "' Lo I

these many years have I served Thee ;
neither transgressed I at any time Thy
commandments ; and yet this drunkard,
this evil-ever, this law-breaker, is given that
for which in my soul I have thirsted ;' and
the devils of envy and revenge ran by his
side rejoicing, while fate flew before and
lured him on to where opportunity stood
and welcomed his approach.

END OF VOL. II.

Willing A>'D SONS, PRINTERS AND Electrolysis, GUILDFORD.

S. <L- H.

i'^mfv,^-^.(

University OF ILLINOIS-URBANA

^M^

3 0112 084216032

x^n

^^.(iS f^

??Cy>^.^Cv.^.^Cv

m: :

/ ' ^-^^ fl (^^m ft. ^^m ft. '^

v>

;;^^f

Ao^kjt^ ■

ADAM AND EVE

AUTHOR OF 'DOROTHY FOX.

IN THREE VOLUMES.
VOL. HI.

LONDON :
RICHARD BENTLEY AND SON,

|3ublislurs in ©rlinnrij lo %)ix ^^Hnjrstjj the Qntot.

iso.

\^.An Ri-lds Rescived.'\

in 2009 with funding from

University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign

http://www.archive.org/details/adameve03parr

CHAPTER I.

Y the time Reuben May entered
the little town of Looe, he
had come to a decision about
his movements, and how he should can
out his plan of getting back to London.
Not going with Captain Triggs, for the
monotonous inaction of a sailing voyage
would now be insupportable to him ; but by
walking as far as he could, and now and
then, whenever it was possible, endeavouring
to get a cheap hft on the road. His

VOL. III. 41

first step must therefore be to inform Triggs
of his decision, and to do this he must get
back to Plymouth, a distance from Looe of
some fifteen or sixteen miles.

In going through Looe that morning, he
had stopped for a few minutes at a small
inn which stood not far from the beach;
and having now crossed the river which
divides West from East Looe, he began
looking about for this house, intending to
get some refreshment, to rest for an hour
or so, and then proceed on his journey.

Already the town clock was striking six,
and Reuben calculated that if he started
between nine and ten, he should have time
to take another good rest on the road —
which he had already once that day
traversed — and reach Plymouth Barbican,
where the Mary Jane lay, by daybreak.

The inn found, he ordered his meal, and
informed the landlady of his intention.

Why, do 'ee stop here till morning', then !'
exclaimed the large-hearted Cornish woman.
If 'tis the matter o' the money,' she added,
eyeing him critically, ' that's hindering' 'ee
from it, it needn't to, for I'll see us don't
have no quarrel 'bout the price o' the
bed.'

Reuben assured her that choice, not
necessity, impelled his onward footsteps ;
and thus satisfied, she bade him ' Take and
lie down on the settle there inside the bar-parlour
; for,' she added, ' less 'tis the sergeant
over fra Liskeard, 'ain't likely you'll
be disturbed no ways ; and I shall be in and
out to see vou'm all ricrht.'

Reuben stretched himself out, and, overcome
by the excitement and fatigue of the
day, was soon asleep and dreaming of those
happier times when he and Eve had walked
as friends together. Suddenly some one
seemed to speak her name, and though the

41—2

name at once wove itself into the movement
of the dream, the external sound had
aroused the sleeper, and he opened his eyes
to see three men sitting near, talking over
their grog.

With just enough consciousness to allow
of his noticing that one was a soldier and
the other two were sailors, Reuben looked
for a minute, then closed his eyes, and was
again sinking back into sleep, when the
name of Eve was repeated, and this time
with such effect that all Reuben's senses
seemed to quicken into life, and cautiously
opening his eyes, so as to look without being
observed, he saw that it was the soldier
who was speaking.

Young chap, thinks I,' he was saying,
^ you little fancy there's one so near who's
got your sweetheart's seal dangling to his
fob ;' and with an air of self-satisfied vanity,
he held out for inspection a curious little

seal, which Reuben at once recognised as
the same which he himself had given to Eve.

The unexpected sight came upon him
with such surprise, that, had not the height
of the little table served as a screen to
shelter him from view, his sudden movement
must have betrayed his wakefulness.

^ He's a nice one for any woman to be
tied to, he is,' replied the younger of the
two sailors. ' Why, the only time as I
ever had what you may call a fair look at
un, was one niorht in to the Kino o*
Prussia's, and there he was dealing out his
soft sawdor to little Nancy Lagassick, as
if he couldn't live a minute out o' her sio^ht.'

That's about it,' laughed the soldier.
He's one of your own sort there ; you
Jacks are all alike, with a wife in every
port. However he added, and as he
spoke he gave a complacent stroke to his
good-looking face — * he may thank his

stars that a matter of seven miles or so
lays between his pretty Eve and Captain
Van Courland's troop, or there'd have
been a cutting-out expedition that, saving
the presence of those I speak before,' — and
he gave a most exasperating wink — ^ might
have proved a trifle more successful than
such thing's have of late.'

o

Here, I say,' said the sailor, flaming
up at this ill-timed jocularity, ^ p'rap's
you'll tell me what 'tis you're driven' at ;
for I've got to hear of it if you, or any o'
your cloth either, ever made a find yet.
You're mighty 'cute 'bout other folks,
though when the spirits was under yer
very noses, and you searched the houses
through 'twas snowed to be stowed in, you
couldn't lay hold on a single cask. 'Tis
true we mayn't have nabbed the men, but
by jingo if 't has come to us been' made
fools of by the women !'

There now, stash it there,' said his older
comrade, who had no wish to see a quarrel
ensue. ^ So far as I can see, there's no cause
for bounce 'twixt either o' us : though, only
you give us a chance of getting near to
them, sergeant,' he said, turning to the
soldier, ' and I'll promise you shall make it
all square with this pretty lass you fancy,
while her lover's cutting capers under
Tyburn tree.'

A chance 1' repeated his companion,
despondingly ; ' where's it to come from,
and the only one we'd got cut away from
under us by those Hart chaps V

How so, where's the Hart off to, then X
asked the sergeant.

Off to Port Melting,' said the man addressed.
' Nothing but a hoax, I fancy; but
still she was bound to go and so saying he
tossed off the remainder of his grog, and
began making a movement, saying, as he

did so, to his somewhat quarrelsome disposed
shipmate : ' Here, I say, Bill, come
long down to the rendezvous with me, and
if there's nothing' up for to-night, what d'ye
say to stepping round to Paddy Burke's ?
he's asked us to come ever so many times,
you know.'

Paddy Burke !' said the sergeant ; ^ what,,
do you know him ? why, if you're going
there, I'll step so far with you.'

'Well, we're bound for the rendezvous
first,' said the sailor.

All right ; I can find plenty to do while
you're in there.'

Then come along;' and only stopping to
exchange a few words in passing with the
landlady, out they all went, and Reuben
was left alone, a prey to the thoughts which
now came crowding into his mind.

For a few minutes he sat with his arms
resting on the table, as if communing with

himself ; then, starting up as if filled with a
sudden resolve, he went out and asked the
landlady a few commonplace questions,
and finally inquired whereabouts, and in
what direction, did the rendezvous lie ?

Close down by the bridge, the first
house after you pass the second turning.
Why V she said ; ' be 'ee wanting to see
anybody there V

No,' said Reuben ; * I only heard the
fellows that came in there talking about
the rendezvous, and I wondered whether
I'd passed it.'

Why, miss, o' course you did, coming' in.
'Tis the house with the flao- streaming' over
the doorways.'

Reuben waited for no further information.
He said something about not knowing
it was so late, bade the landlady a
rather abrupt farewell, and went his way.

Down the narrow street he hurried.

turned a corner, and found himself in front
of the house indicated, outside which all
was dark. Nobody near, and, with the
exception of himself, not a soul to be seen.
Inside, he could hear voices, and the more
plainly from the top sash of the window
being a little way ojoen. By the help of
the iron stanchion driven in to support the
flag-staff, he managed to get up, steady
himself on the window-sills and take a survey
of the room. Several men were in it,
and among them the two he had already
seen, one of whom was speaking to a person
whom, from his uniform, Reuben took
to be an officer.

The sight apparently decided what he
had before hesitated about, and getting
down, he took from his pocket a slip of
paper— one he had provided in case he
should want to leave a message for Eve —
and rapidly wrote on it these words :

The Lottery is expected at Polperro tonight.
They will land at Down End as
soon as the tide will let them set near

Folding this, he once more mounted the
window-sill, tossed the paper into the room,
lingered for but an instant to see that it
was picked up, then jumped down, ran withall
speed, and was soon lost amid the darkness
which surrounded him.

As he hurried from the house, an echo
seemed to carry to his ears the shout
which greeted this surprise — a surprise
which set every one talking at once, each
one speaking and no one listening. Some
were for going, some for staying away ;
some for treaties it as a serious matter,
others for taking it as a joke.

At length the officer called ' Silence !'
and after a pause, addressing the men present
in a few words, he said that however

it might turn out, he considered that he
should only be doing his duty by ordering
the boats to proceed to the place named,
and see what amount of truth there was in
this somewhat mysterious manoeuvre. If
it was nothing but a hoax, they must
bear to have the laugh once more turned
against them ; but should it turn out the
truth ! The buzz which greeted this bare
supposition showed how favourably his
decision was regarded, and the absent men
were ordered to be summoned without
delay. Everything was got ready as quickly
as possible, and in little over an hour two
boats started, fully equipped and manned,
to lie in ambush near the coast midway
between Looe and Polperro.

While fate, in the shape of Reuben May
had been hastening events towards a
disastrous climax, the course of circumstances
in Polperro had not gone altogether

smoothly. To Eve's vexation, because
of the impossibility of speaking of her
late encounter with Reuben May, she
found, on her return home, that during her
absence Mrs. Tucker had arrived, With the
rare and unappreciated announcement that
she had come to stop and have her tea with
them. The example set by Mrs. Tucker
was followed by an invitation to two or
three other elderly friends, so that between
her hospitality and her excitement, Joan
had no opportunity of noticing any undue
change in Eve's manner or appearance.
Two or three remarks were made on her
pale face and abstracted air, but this more
by the way of teasing than anything else ;
while Joan, remembering the suppressed
anxiety she was most probably trying to
subdue, endeavoured to come to her aid,
and assist in turning away this over-scrutiny
of her tell-tale appearance.

The opportunity thus afforded by silence
gave time for reflection, and Eve, who
had never been quite straightforward or
very explicit about herself and Reuben
May, now began to hesitate. Perhaps,
after all, it would be better to say nothing ;
for Joan was certain to ask questions
which, without betraying the annoyance
she had undergone, Eve hardly saw her
way to answering. Again, it was not impossible
but that Reuben's anger might
relent ; and if so, he would most probably
seek another interview, in which to beg
her pardon.

In her heart Eve hoped and believed
this would be the case ; for, indignantly
as she had defied Reuben's scorn and
flung back his reproaches, they had been
each a separate sting to her, and she
longed for the chance to be afforded
Reuben of seeing how immeasurably above

the general run of men was the one she
had chosen.

Here, I say, Eve !' exclaimed Joan, as
she came indoors from bidding good-bye to
the last departure. ' Come, bear a hand
and let's set the place all straight ; I can't
abide the men's coming home to find us all
in a muddle.'

Eve turned to with a good will, and the
girls soon had the satisfaction of seeing
the room look as bright and cheery as they
desired.

Let's see — ten minutes past 'leben,' said
Joan, looking at the clock. ' I don't see
how 'tis possible for 'em to venture in 'fore
wan, 'less 'tis to Yellow Rock, and they'd
hardly try that. What do 'ee say. Eve —
shall we run up out to cliff, top o' Talland
Lane, and see if us can see any signs of
'emr

Oh, do, Joan !'

And, throwing their cloaks over them,
off they set.

^ Here, give me your hand,' said Joan, as
they reached the gate and entered upon
the path which Eve had last trod with
Adam by her side. ' I know the path
better than you, and 'tis a bit narrow for a
pitch-dark night like this. Take care,
we'd come to the water ; that's right.
Now up we goes till we get a-top, and then
we'll have a good look round us.'

Thus instructed, Eve managed to get on,
and, stumbling up by Joan's side, they
quickly reached the narrow line of level
which seemed to overhang the depths below.

We couldn't see them if they were
there,' said Eve, turning to Joan, who was
still peering into the darkness.

No, 'tis blacker than I thought said
Joan, cheerily; 'that's ever so much help
to 'em, and, hooray ! the fires is out ! Do

'ee see, Eve ? there ain't a spark o' nothing',
nowheres. Ole Jonathan's hoaxed 'em
fine this time ; the gawpuses have looked
it all in, and, I'll be bound, raced off so
fast as wind and tide 'ud carry 'em

'Then they're sure to come, now?' said
Eve, excitedly.

Certain,' said Joan. ' They've seed the
fires put out, and know it means the bait's
swallowed, and the cruiser is ofi". I shouldn't
wonder a bit if they'd close in shore, only
waiting' for the tide to give 'em a proper
draw o' water, so that they may send the
keofs over.'

Should we go on a bit farther,' said
Eve, ' and get down the hill by the
Warren stile ? AYe might meet some of
'em, perhaps.'

Better not said Joan. *To tell 'ee
the truth, 'tis best to make our way
home so quick as can, for I wudn't say

VOL. III. 42

US 'full have 'em back quicker than I
thought.'

Then, let's make haste !' exclaimed Eve,
giving her hand to Joan, while she turned
her head to take a farewell glance in the
direction where it was probable the vessel
was now waiting. * Oh, Joan ! what's
that V For a fiery arrow had seemed to
shoot along the darkness, and in quick succession
came another and another.

Joan did not answer; but she seemed to
catch her breath, and, clutching hold of
Eve, she made a spring up on to the wall
over which they had before been looking.
And now a succession of sharp cracks
were heard, then the tongues of fire darted
through the air, and again all was gloom.

O Lord I' groaned Joan ; ' I hope
'ain't nothing's gone wrong with 'em.'

In an instant Eve had scrambled up by
her side.

What can it be ? What could go
wrong, Joan ?' — but Joan's whole attention
seemed now centred on the opposite cliff,
from where, a little below Hard Head,
after a few minutes' watching, Eve saw a
blue light burning ; this was answered by
another lower down, then a rocket was
sent up, at sight of which Joan clasped
her hands, and cried :

Awl, 'tis they I 'tis they ! Lord save
'em ! Lord help 'em ! They cursed
hounds have surely played 'em false !'

^ What, not taken them, Joan ?'

They won't be taken,' she said fiercely.
Do you think, unless 'twas over their dead
bodies, they'd ever let king's men stand
masters on the Lottery s deck X

Eve's heart died within her, and with
one rush every detail of the lawless life
seemed to come before her.

There they go again !' cried Joan, and

42—2

this time, by the sound, she knew their
position was altered to westward, and somewhat
nearer into land. ' Lord send they
mayn't know their course,' she continued ;
'tis but a point or two on, and they'll
surely touch the Steeple Beef. Awl, you
bloodthirsty cowards ! I wish I'd the pitching'
of every man of 'ee overboard ; 'tis precious
little mercy you'd get from me ! And the
blessed sails to be caught in yer snarin'
traps close into home — night their very
doors, too. Eve, I must go and see what
they means to do for 'em. They'll never
suffer to see 'em butchered whilst there's a
man in Polperro to go out and help 'em.'

Forgetting in her terror all the difficulties
she had before seen in the path. Eve
managed to keep up with Joan, whose
flying footsteps never stayed until she
found herself in front of a long building,
close under shelter of the Peak, which had

been named as a sort of assembling-place
in case of danger.

'Tis they 1' she called out, in breathless
agony, pushing her way through the crowd
of men now hastening up from all directions
towards the capta of the Cleopatra.

^ I'm feared so,' and his grave face bespoke
how fraught with anxiety his fears
were.

^ What can it be, dree think f

^ Can't tell noways. They who brought
us word saw the Hart sail, and steady
watch has been kept up, so that us knows
her ain't back.'

You mains to do something' for 'em V
said Joan.

Never fear but us'll do what us can —
though that's mighty little, I can tell 'ee,
Joan.'

Joan gave an impatient groan. Her
thorough comprehension of their danger

and its possible consequences lent activity
to her distress, while Eve, with nothing
more tangible than the knowledge that a
terrible danger was near, seemed the prey
to indefinite horrors, which took away from
her every sense but the sense of suffering.

By this time the whole place was astir,
people running to this point and that, asking
questions, listening to rumours, hazarding
a hundred conjectures, each more wild
than the other. A couple of boats had
been manned ready to row round by the
cliff. One party had gone towards the
Warren, another to Yellow Bock.

All were filled with the keenest desire
not only to aid their comrades, but to be
revenged on those who had snared them
into this cunningly-devised pitfall. But
amid all this zeal arose the question :
What could they do ?

Absolutely nothing — for by this time the

firing had ceased, the contest was apparently
over, and around them impenetrable
darkness again reigned supreme.
To show any Hghts by which some point of
land should be discovered might only
serve as a beacon to the enemy. To send
out a boat might be to run it into their very
jaws, for surely, were assistance needed,
those on board the Lottery would know that
by this time trusty friends were anxiously
watching, waiting for but the slightest
signal to be given to risk life and limb in
their service.

The wisest thing to be done was to put
everything in order for a sudden call, and
then sit down and patiently abide the
result. This decision being put into effect,
the excited crowd began to thin, and before
long, with the exception of those who could
render assistance, very few lookers-on remained.
Joan had lingered till the last,

and then, urged by the possibility that
many of her house-comforts might be
needed, she hurried home to join Eve, who
had gone before her.

With their minds running upon all the
varied accidents of a fight, the girls, without
exchanging a word of their separate
fears, got ready what each fancied might
prove the best remedy, until, nothing more
being left to do, they sat down, one on each
side the fire, and counted the minutes by
which time dragged out this weary watching
into hours.

Couldn't 'ee say a few hymns or something',
Eve '?' Joan said at length, with a
hope of breaking this dreadful monotony.

Eve shook her head.

'No?' said Joan, disappointedly. 'I
thought you might ha' snowed o' some.'
Then, after another pause, struck by a
happier suggestion, she said : ^ Repose us

was to get down the big Bible and read a
bit, eh — what do 'ee say f

But Eve only shook her head again.

No,' she said, in a hard dry voice. ^ I
couldn't read the Bible now.'

couldn't 'ee? sighed Joan. 'Then,
after all, it don't seem that religion and
that's much of a comfort. By what I'd
heard,' she added, ' I thought 'twas made o'
purpose for folks to lay hold on in times o'
trouble.'

T was close upon three o'clock ;
Joan had fallen into an uneasy
doze, and Eve was beginning to
nod, when a rattle of the latch made them
both start up.

It can't be — miss, it is, though !' screamed
Joan, rushing forward to meet Adam, who
caught both the girls in a close embrace.
Uncle ? uncle V Joan cried.
'AH safe,' said Adam, releasing her,
while he strained Eve closer to his heart.
We're all back safe and sound, and, saving

Tom Brandon and Israel Richard, without
a scratch pon any of us.'

^ Thank God !' sighed Eve ; while Joan,
verily jumping for joy, cried :

But where be they to, eh, Adam ? I
must rin, where ever 'tis, and see 'em, and
make sure of it with my awn eyes.'

I left them down to quay with the rest
they're all together there said Adam,
unwilling to lose the opportunity of securing
a few minutes alone with Eve, and yet
unable to command his voice, so that it
should sound in its ordinary tone. The jar
in it caught Joan's quick ear, and, turning,
she said :

'Why, whatever have 'ee bin about,
then % What's the mainin' of it all ? Did
they play 'ee false, or how X

Adam gave a puzzled shake of the head.

You know quite as much about it as I
do,' he said. 'We started, and got on fair and

right enough so far as Down End, and I was
for at once dropping out the " kegs," as had
been agreed upon to do. at Sandy Bottom.'

^Welir said Joan.

Yes 'twould ha' been well if we'd done
it. Instead of which, no sooner was the fires
seen to be out, meaning, as all thought, that
the Hart was safe off, than nothing would
do but we must go on to Yellow Rock,
which meant waiting for over an hour till
the tide served for it.'

^ But you never give in to 'em, Adam ?'

Give in !' he repeated bitterly ; ^ after
Jerrem had once put the thought into their
heads you might so well have tried to turnstone
walls as get either one to lay a finger
on anything. They wanted to know what
was the good o' taking the trouble to sink
the kegs overboard, when by just waiting'
we could store all safe in the caves along
there — under cliff.'

Most half drunk, I s pose '?' said Joan.

By Jove ! then they'd pretty soon
something to make 'em sober,' reached
Adam, grimly; 'for in little more than
half-an-hour we spied the two boats coming'
up behind us, and 'fore they was well
caught sight of, they'd opened out fire

And had 'ee got to return it?' asked Joan.

Not till they were close up, we didn't,
and then I believe the sight of us would
have been enough ; only, as usual, Mr.
Jerrem must be on the contrary, and let
fly a shot that knocked down the bow-oar
of the foremost boat like a nine-pin. That
got up their blood a bit, and then at it our
chaps went, tooth and nail — such a scrimmage
as hasn't been seen hereabouts since
the Happy-goe Lucky was took, and Wei land
shot in her.'

Lord save us ! however did 'ee manatee
to get off so well V said Joan.

Get off !' he said ; * why, we could
have made a clean sweep of the whole lot,
and all the cry against me now is that I
kept 'em from doing it. The fools ! not
to see that our best chance is to do nothing
more than defend ourselves and not run
our necks into a noose by taking life while
there's any help for it.'

^ Was the man shot dead that Jerrem
fired at ?' asked Eve.

No, I hope not ; or, if so, we haven't
heard the last of it ; for, depend on it, this
new officer, Buller, he's an ugly customer
to deal with, and won't take things quite
so easy as old Ravens used to do.'

You'll be fainting' for something' to eat,'
said Joan, moving towards the kitchen.

No, I ain't,' said Adam, laying a detaining
hand upon her. ^ I couldn't touch
a thing; I want to be a bit quiet, that's all.
My head seems all of a mis-maze like.'

^ Then I'll just ruD down and see uncle
said Joan, ^ and try and persuade 'en to
come home along, shall I T

Adam gave an expressive movement of
his face.

You can try,' he said, ' but you haven't
got much chance o' bringing' him, poor old
chap ! He thinks, like the rest of 'em,
that they've done a fine night's work, and
they must keep it up by drinking to blood
and glory. I only hope it may end there,
but if it doesn't, whatever comes, Jerk
the one who's got to answer for it all.'

While he was saying these words, Adam
was pulling off his jacket, and now went to
the kitchen to find some water with which
to remove the black and dirt from his
begrimed face and hands.

Eve hastened to assist him, but not before
Joan had managed, by laying her
finger on her lip, to attract her attention.

^ For goodness gracious' sake,' she whispered,
' don't 'ee breathe no word 'bout the
letter to un; there'd be worse than murder
'twixt 'em now.'

Eve nodded an assurance of silence, and
opening the door, Joan went out into the
street, already alive with people, most of
them bent on the same errand as herself,
anxious to hear the incidents of the fio^ht
confirmed by the testimony of the principal
actors.

The gathering-point was the sail-house
behind the Peak, and thither, in company
with several friends, Joan made her way,
and soon found herself hailed with delight
by Uncle Zebedee and Jerrem, both of
whom were by this time primed up to
giving the most extraordinary and vivid
accounts of the fight, every detail of which
was entirely corroborated by those who
had been present and those who had been

absent ; for the constant demand made on
the keg of spirits which, in honour of the
victory, old Zebedee had insisted on having
broached there, was beo^innino- to take
effect, so that the greater portion of
listeners were now turned into talkers, and
thus it was impossible to tell those who
had seen from those who had heard, and
the wrangling, laughter, disputes, and congratulations
made such a hubbub of confusion
that the room seemed for the time
turned into a very Pandemonium.

Only one thing all gave hearty assent
to — that was that Jerrem was the hero on
whom the merit of triumph rested ; for, if
he hadn't fired that first shot, ten to one
but they should have listened to somebody
whom, in deference to Zebedee, they refrained
from naming, and indicated by a
nod in his direction, and let the white-livered
scoundrels sneak off with the boast

VOL. HI. 43

that the Polperro men were afraid to give
fight to them. Afraid ! why, they were
afraid of nothing, not they I They'd give
chase to the Hart, board the Looe cutter,
swamp the boats, and utterly rout and
destroy the whole Excise department ; the
more bloodthirsty the resolution i proposed,
the louder was it greeted.

The spirit of lawless riot seemed suddenly
let loose among them, and men who
were usually kind-hearted and, after their
rough fashion, tenderly-disposed, seemed
turned into devils, whose delight was in
violence, and whose pleasure was excess.

While this revelry was growing more
fast and furious below, Adam was still
sitting quietly at home, with Eve by his
side using her every art to dispel the gloom
by which her lover's spirits were clouded —
not so much on account of the recent fight,
for Adam apprehended no such great score

of danger on that head. It was true that
of late such frays had been of rare occurrence,
yet many had taken place before,
and with disastrous results, and yet the
chief actors in them still lived to tell the
tale ; so that it was not altogether that
which disturbed him, although it greatly
added to his former moodiness, which had
originally sprung out of the growing distaste
to the life he led. The inaction of the
time spent in dodging about, with nothing
to occupy him, nothing to interest him, had
turned Adam's thoughts inward, and made
him determine to have done with these ventures,
in which, except as far as the gain
went, he really had nothing in common with
the companions who took part in them ;
but as he very well knew, it was far easier
to take this resolution in thought than
it Alas to put it into action. Once let the
idea of his leaving them get abroad, and

43—2

difficulties would confront him whichever
way he turned ; obstacles would block his
path, and suspicion dodge his footsteps.

His comrades, though not very far-seeing
men, were quite sharp enough to estimate
the danger of losing sight of one who was
in possession of all their secrets, and who
could at any moment lay his finger upon
every hiding-place in their district.

Adam himself had often listened to,
and, in company with others, silently commended,
a story told of years gone by, when
a brother of the owner of the Stamp and Go,
one Heroes Johns, had been pressed into
the king's service, and had there acquitted
himself so gallantly that, on his return, a
commission had been offered to him, which
he, longing to take, accepted under condition
of getting leave to see his native
place again. With the foreboding that the
exchange of circumstances would not be

well received, he seized the opportunity
occasioned by the joy of his return to speak
of the commission as a reward offered to
him, and asked the advice of those around
as to whether he had not best accept it.
Opposition met him on every side. * What !'
they said, ' of his own free-will, put himself
in a place where some day he might be forced
to seize his father's vessel, or swear away
the lives of those he had been born among T
The bare idea was inadmissible ; and when,
from asking advice, he grew into giving his
opinion, and finally into announcing his
decision, an ominous silence fell on those
who heard him, and though he was unmolested
during his stay, and permitted to
leave his former home, he was never known
to reach his ship, aboard which his mysterious
disappearance was much talked of, and
inquiries set afloat to find out the reason of
his absence ; but among those whose name

he bore and whose confidence he had
shared, he seemed to be utterly forgotten.
His name was never mentioned, nor his
fate inquired into ; and Adam, remembering
that he had seen the justice of this treatment,
felt the full force of its reasoning
now applied to his own case, and his heart
sank before the difficulties in which he
found himself entangled.

Even to Eve he could not open out his-mind
clearly, for, unless to one born and
bred among them, the dangers and interests
of the free-traders was a matter quite beyond
comprehension ; so that now, when Eve wa
pleading, with all her powers of persuasion,
that for her sake Adam would give up this
life of reckless daring, the seemingly deaf
ear he turned to her entreaties was dulled
through perplexity, and not, as she believed,
from obstinacy.

Eve, in her turn, could not be thoroughly

explicit. There was a skeleton cupboard, the
key of which she was hiding from Adam's
sight ; for it was not entirely * for her sake '
she desired him to abandon his present occupation
: it was because, in the anxiety she
had recently undergone, in the terror which
had been forced upon her, the glaze of
security had been roughly dispelled, and the
life, in all its lawlessness and violence, had
stood forth before her. The warnings and
denunciations which only a few hours before,
when Reuben May had uttered them, she
had laughed to scorn as idle words, now
rang in her ears like a fatal knell ; the rope
he had said would hang them all was then
a sieve of unsown hemp — since sprung up,
and now the fatal cord Which dangled
dangerously near.

The secret thoughts of each fell like a
shadow between them ; an invisible hand
seemed to thrust them asunder, and, in spite

of the love they both felt, both were equally
conscious of a want of that entire sympathy
which is the keystone to perfect union.

^ You were very glad to see me
come back to you, Eve V Adam asked, as,
tired of waiting for Joan, Eve at length
decided to sit up no longer.

^ Glad, Adam ! Why do you ask V

I can't tell he said. ' I repose it's this
confounded upset of everything that makes
me feel as I do feel, as if,' he added, passing
his hand over his forehead, ' I hadn't a bit
of trust or hope or comfort in anything in
the world.'

I know exactly,' said Eve. ' That's
just as I felt when we were waiting for
you to come back. Joan asked if we should
read the Bible, but I said no ; I couldn't,
I felt too wicked for that.'

Wicked !' said Adam. ' Why, what
should make you feel wicked V

Eve hesitated. Should she unburden
her heart, and confess to him all the fears
and scruples which made it feel so heavy
and ill at ease ? A moment's indecision,
and, the opportunity lost, she said in a
dejected tone :

Oh, I cannot tell ; only that I suppose
such thoughts come to all of us sometimes.'

Adam looked at her, but Eve's eyes were
averted ; and seeing how pale and troubled
was the expression on her face, he said :

You are over tired ; all this turmoil has
been too much for you. Go off now, and
try to get some sleep. Yes ; don't stay up
longer,' he added, seeing that she hesitated.
^ I shall be glad of some rest myself, and
tomorrow we shall find things looking
better than they seem to do now.'

Once alone, Adam reseated himself, and
sat gazing abstractedly into the fire ; then
with an effort he seemed to try and shake

his senses together, to step out of himself
and put his mind into a working order of
thought, so that he might weigh and sift
the occurrences of these recent events.

The first question which had flashed into
everybody's mind was, what had led to this
sudden attack % Had they been betrayed?
and, if so, who had betrayed them % Could
it be Jonathan ? Though the thought wa
at once negatived, no other outsider knew
of their intended movements. Of course,
the matter had been discussed — as all
matters were discussed and voted for or
against — among the crew ; but to doubt
either of them was to doubt one's self
and any fear of betrayal among themselves
was unknown. The amount of baseness
such a suspicion would imply wa
too great to be incurred even in thought.
What, then, could have led to this surprise
% Had their movements been

watched, and this decoy of the cutter
only swallowed with the view of throwing-them
off their guard ?

Adam was lost in speculation, from
which he was aroused by the door beings
softly opened and Joan coming in.

^ Why, Adam, T thought to find 'ee in
bed,' she said. ' Come, now, you must be
dreadful tired.' Then, sitting down to
loosen her hood, she added with a sigh, ' I
stayed down there so long as I could, till
I saw 't wasn't no good, so I corned away
home and left 'em. 'Tis best way, I
believe.'

I knew 'twas no good your going,' said
Adam, hopelessly. ' I saw before I left
'em what they'd made up their minds to.'

Well, perhaps there's a little excuse this
time,' said Joan, not willing to blame those
who were so dear to her ; ' but, Adam,'
she broke out, while her face bespoke her

keen appreciation of his superiority : * Why
can't th' others be like you, awl, my dear ?
how different things ud be if they only
was.'

Adam shook his head.

Oh, don't wish 'em like me,' he said. ^' I
often wish I could take my pleasure in the
same things, and in the same way, that they
do ; I should be much happier, I believe.'

No, now, don't 'ee say that.'

Why, what good has it done that I'm
otherwise ?'

why, ever so much; more than you'll
ever know by a good bit. I needn't go
no further than my awn self to tell 'ee that ;
perhaps you mayn't think it, but I've bin
kep' fra coin' ever so many things by the
thought o' what's Adam say ? and with the
glass in my hand I've set it down untasted
thinking' to myself, 'now you'd action' agen
Adam's wish, you know." '

Adam smiled as he gave her a Rattlesnake
of the hand.

That's how 'tis, you see,' she continued ;
you'd coin good without knawin' of it .'
Then, turning her dark eyes wistfully upon
him, she asked : ' Do 'ee ever think a bit
'pon poor Joan, while you'd away, Adam ?
Come, now, you mustn't shove off from me
altogether, you know ; you must leave mea
donkey little corner to squeeze into by.'

Adam clasped her hand tighter : ' Oh,
Joan,' he said, ' I'd give the world to see
my way clearer than I do now ; I often
wish that I could take you all off to some
place far away, and begin life over again.'

Ah !' said Joan, in a tone of sympathy
to which her heart did not very cordially
respond, ' that 'ud be a capital job, that
would; but you ain't mainin' away from
Polperro '?'

Yes, far away. I've bin thinking' about it

for a good bit : don't you remember I said
something o' the sort to father a little time
back r

Miss, but I didn't know there was anymore
sense to your words than to threaten
un Hke. Awl, my dear !' she said, with a
decided shake of the head, * that 'ud never
do ; don't 'ee get hold o' such a thought as
that. Turn your back upon the place ! why,
whatever 'd they be about to let 'ee do it ?'

Joan's words only echoed Adam's own
thoughts ; still he tried to combat them by
saying : ' I don't see why any one should
interfere with what I might choose to do ;
what odds could it make to them V

Odds !' repeated Joan ; ' why, you'd
hold all their lives in your wan hand. Only
ax yourself the question, where's either one
of 'em you'd like to see take himself off nobody
knows why or where V

Adam could find no satisfactory reply to

this argument ; he therefore changed the
subject by saying :

I wish I could fathom this last business.
'Tis a good deal out o' the course o' plain
sailing. So far as I know by, there wasn't
a living soul but Jonathan who could have
said what was up for to-nights

'Jonathan's right enough said Joan,
decidedly. * I should feel a good deal
more mistrust 'bout some of 'em letting'
their tongues rin too fast.'

There was nobody to let them run fast
to,' said Adam.

Then there's the writing,' said Joan,
trying to discover if Adam knew anything
about Jerrem's letter.

Adam shook his head.

'Isn't nothing o' that sort,' he said. ' I
don't know that, beyond Jerrem and me,
either o' the others know how to write ;
and I said particular that I should send no

word by speech or letter, and the rest must
do the same ; and Jonathan would ha' told
me if they'd broke through in any way,
for I put the question to him 'fore he
shoved off.'

Oh, did 'ee ?' said Joan, turning her eyes
away, while into her heart there crept a
suspicion of Jonathan's perfect honesty.
Was it possible that his love of money
might have led him to betray his old
friends ? Joan's fears were aroused.

'Tis a poor job of it she said, anxiously.
^ I wish to goodness 't had happened to any
o' the rest, so long as you and uncle was
out of it.'

And not Jerrem ?' said Adam, with a
feeble attempt at his old teasing.

Awl, Jerrem's sure to fall 'pon his feet,
throw un which way you will said Joan.
Besides, if he didn't ' — and she turned a
look of reproach on Adam — ' Jerrem ain't

you, Adam, nor uncle neither. I don't
deny that I don't love Jerrem dearly, 'cos
I do ' — and for an instant her voice seemed
to wrestle with the rush of tears which
streamed from her eyes as she sobbed —
^ but for you or uncle, why, I'd shed my
heart's blood like water, miss that I would,
and not think 'twas any such great thing-neither.'


There's no need to tell me that,' said
Adam, whose heart, softened by his love
for Eve, had grown very tender towards
Joan. ' Nobody knows you better than I
do. There isn't another woman in the
whole world I'd trust with the things I'd
trust you with, Joan.'

There's a dear,' said Joan, recovering
herself. ^ It does me good to hear 'ee
spake like that. 'Tis such a time since I
had a word with 'ee that I beo^an to feel I
don't know how wise.'

VOL. III. 44

Well, yes said Adam, smiling, ' 'tis a
ravish spell since you and me were together
by our own two selves. But I
declare your talk's done me more good
than anything I've had to-day. I feel
ever so much better now than I did before.'

Joan was about to answer, when a sound
made them both start and stand for a
moment listening.

'Tis gone, whatever it was said Adam,
taking a step forward. ' I don't hear
nothing now, do you ?'

Joan pushed back the door leading to
the stairs.

No,' she said ; ^ I reckon 'twas nothing
but the boards. However, 'tis time I went,
or I shall be waken' up Eve. Her's a poor
sleeper in general, but what with wan
thing and 'other, I 'sects her's regular
worn out, poor saw, to-night.'

Chapter III.

OKN out and tired as she felt
when she went upstairs, Eve's
mind was so excited by the day's
adventures that she found it impossible to
lull her sharpened senses into anything like
repose, and after hearing Joan come in she
lay tossing and restless, wondering why it
was she did not come up, and what could
possibly be the cause of her stopping so
long below.

As time went on her impatience grew
into anxiety, vrhich in its turn became

44—2

LIBRARY

Universe-nr OF Illinois

suspicion, until, unable longer to restrain
herself, she got up, and, after listening
with some evident surprise at the stairhead,
cautiously stole down the stairs, and
peeped through the chink left by the ill-fitting
hinge of the door into the room.

There isn't another woman in the whole
world I'd trust with the things I'd trust
you with, Joan,' Adam was saying. Eve
bent a trifle further forward. * You've
done me more good than anything I've had
to-day. I feel ever so much better now
than I did before.'

An involuntary movement — giving a
different balance to her position — made the
stairs creak, and to avoid detection. Eve
had to make a hasty retreat, and hurry
back, so that when Joan came upstairs it
was to find her, apparently, in such a profound
sleep that there was little reason to
fear any sound she might make would

arouse her ; but long after Joan had sunk
to rest, and even Adam had forgotten his
troubles and anxieties, Eve nourished and
fed the canker of jealousy which had crept
into her heart— a jealousy not directed towards
Joan, but turned upon Adam for
recalling to her mind that old grievance of
not giving her his full trust.

At another time these speeches would not
have come with half the importance ; it
would have been merely a vexation which a
few sharp words would have exploded and
put an end to, but now, combined with
the untoward circumstances of situation —
for Eve could not confess herself a listener
was the fact that her nerves, her senses,
and her conscience seemed strained to a
point which made each feather-weight
appear a burden.

Filled with that smart of wounded love,
whose sweetest balm revenge seems to

supply, Eve lay awake until the grey light
of day had filled the room, and then, from
sheer exhaustion, she fell into a doze which
gradually deepened into a heavy sleep, so
that when she again opened her eyes the
sun was shining full and strong.

Starting up, she looked round for Joan ;
but Joan had been up for a couple of hours
and more. She had arisen very stealthily,
creeping about with the hope that Eve
would not be disturbed by her movements,
for Adam's great desire was that Eve's
feelings should be in no way outraged by
discovering either in Uncle Zebedee or in
Jerrem traces of the previous night's debauch
; and this, by Joan's help, was
managed so well that when Eve made her
appearance she was told that uncle Zebedee,
tired, like herself, was not yet awake, while
Jerrem, risked up by several nips of raw
spirit, was lounging about in a state of

lassitude and depression, which might
ver' well be attributed to reaction and
fatigue.

Perhaps, if Eve could have known that
Adam was not present, she would have
toned down the amount of cordiality she
threw into her greeting of Jerrem, a greeting
he accepted with such a happy adjustment
of pleasure and gratitude, that to
have shown a difference on the score of
Adam's absence would have been to step
back into their former unpleasant footing.


'Adam's gone out,' said Jerrem, in
answer to the inquiring look Eve was
sending round the kitchen.

Oh, I wasn't looking for Adam,' said
Eve, while the rush of vexed colour denied
the assertion. ' I was wondering where
Joan could be.'

She was in here a minute ago,' said

Jerrem, ' telling fine 'twas a shame to be
idling' about so.'

Why, are you still busy ?' said Eve.

No, nothing to speak of, but what 'uU
wait, and fit it should, 'till I'd spoken to
you. Eve. I ain't like one who's gob the
chance o' coming' when he's minded to,' he
added, 'or the grass wouldn't ha' had much
chance o' grown' under my feet after once
they'd felt the shore. No, now, don't
look put out with me ; I ain't going' to ask
ye to listen to nothing' you don't want to
hear. I've tried to see the folly o' that
while I've bin away, and 'tis all done with and
pitched overboard : and that's what made
me write that letter, 'cos I wanted us two
to be like what we used to be, you know.'

I wish you hadn't written that letter,
though,' said Eve, only half inclined to
credit Jerrem's assertions.

Well, as things have turned out, so do

1/ said Jerrem, who, although he did not
confess it to himself, would have given all
he possessed to feel quite certain Eve
would keep his secret. * You see, it's so
awkward like, when everybody's train' to
ferret out how this affair came about. You
didn't happen to mention it to nobody, I
repose '?' and he turned a keen glance of
inquiry towards Eve.

Me mention it !' said Eve. ' I should
think not. Joan can tell sou how angry
we both were, for of course we knew that
unless Adam had some good cause he
wouldn't have wished it kept so secret.'

And do you think I should have quitted
a word to any living' soul but yourself?'
exclaimed Jerrem. ' I haven't much sense
in your eyes, I know. Eve, but you might
give me the credit o' knowing who's to be
trusted and who isn't.'

What's that about trusting' ?' said Joan,

who now made her appearance. ' I tell see
what 'tis, Mr. Jerrem, you'd not to be
trusted anyhow. Why, what could 'ee ha'
bin thinking' of to go sending' that letter you
did after Adam had spoke to 'ee all % There'd
be a party set out of it, you know, Jeremy
if the thing was to get winded about. I,.
for wan, shouldn't thank 'ee, I can tell 'ee,
for getting' my name mixed up with it, and
me made nothing' better than a cat's-paw
ofl'

Who's going to wind it about X said
Jerrem, throwing his arm round her and
drawing her coaxingly towards him. ' You
ain't, and I ain't, and I'll answer for it Eve
ain't ; and so long as we three keep our
tongues 'atween our teeth, who'll be the
wiser — eh '?'

'Awl, that's all very fine,' returned
Joan, far from mollified, 'but there's
a somebody hasn't a-kept their tongues.

silent ; and who it can be beats me to tell.
Did Jonathan know for certain 'bout the
landing'? or was it only guess work with un?'

I ain't sure — but Jonathan's safe
enough said Jerrem ; ' and so's the rest
too ; 'wasn't through no bobbin', take my
word for that ; 'twas a regular right down
set scheme from beginning' to end, and
that's why I should ha' liked to ha' give
'em a pain' out that they wouldn't ha'
forgot in a hurry. I'd ha' scored their
reckoning' for 'em, I can tell 'ee.'

Awl ! miss, I dare say,' said Joan, with
scornful contempt ; ' you allays thinks you
knows better than they you'd bound to
listen to. Howsomever, when aU's said
and done, I shall finish with the same I
began with — that you'd no right to send
that letter.'

Well, you've told me that afore,' said
Jerrem, sullenly.

Miss, and now I tells 'ee behind retorted
Joan ; ' and to front and to back and
round all the sides, so there.'

Oh, all right !' said Jerrem ; ' have your
talk out, it don't matter to me and he threw
himself down on the settle with apparent
unconcern, taking from his breast-pocket
a letter which he carefully unfolded. ' Did
you know that I'd got a letter give me to
Guernsey, Eve?' he said. *One they'd ha'
kept waiting' there for months for me.'

Eve looked up, and, to her vexation,
saw Jerrem readings the letter which on
her first arrival she had written ; the back
of it was turned towards her, so as to
ostentatiously display the two pledges of
red sealing-wax.

Why, you don't mane to say you've a
sot he P exclaimed Joan, her anger completely
giving way to her amazement.
"Well, T never, after all this long whiles,

and us a train' to stop un, too ! Eve, do
'ee see, he's a got the letter you writ, kisses
and all.'

^ Joan exclaimed Eve, in a tone of
mingled reproof and annoyance, while
Jerrem made a feint of pressing the impressions
to his lips, casting the while a
look in Eve's direction, which Joan intercepting,
she said :

^ Awl ! miss I would — seeing they're so
much mine as Eve's, and you dont know
t'other from which.'

That's all you can tell,' said Jeremy
Miss, and all you can tell, too,' replied
Joan, adding, as the frown on his face betokened
rising anger, ^ there, my dear, you'd
best step inside wi' me, and get a drop more
o' your morning's physic, I reckon.'

^ Physic ?' growled Jerrem, ' I don't want
no physic — least wise, no more than I've
had from you already.'

^ Glad to hear it said Joan. ^ When
you change your mind, which, depend on it,
'full be afore long, you'll find me close to
hand. I must make up a few something's
for this evening,' she said, addressing Eve,
in case any of 'em drops in. Adam's gone
off,' she added, ^ I don't know where, nor
he neither, till his work's done.'

^ Might just so well have saved himself
the trouble,' growled Jerrem.

'No, now, he oughtn't,' replied Joan.
There's spirits enough to wan place and
'tother to float a Indian in, and the
sooner 'tis got the rids of the better, for
'twill be more by luck than good management
if all they kegs is got away unseen.'

^ Oh, of course, Adam's perfect,' sneered
Jerrem. Then, catching sight of Eve's face,
as he watched Joan go into the kitchen, he
added, with a desponding sigh : ' I only
wish I was — but the world's made for some

I repose the more they have the more
they get.'

Eve did not answer ; perhaps she had not
heard, as she was just now engaged in
shifting her position, so as to escape the
dazzling rays of the sun, which came pouring
down on her head. The movement seemed
to awaken her to a sense of the day's unusual
brightness, and, getting up, she went to the
window and looked out.

Isn't it like summer ?' she said, speaking
more to herself than to Jerrem. ' I really
must say I should like to have gone somewhere
for a walk.'

The words, simple in themselves, flung in
their tone a whole volume of reproach at
Adam, for to Eve's exacting mind there
could be no necessity urgent enough to take
Adam away without ever seeing her, or
leaving a message for her.

Well, come out with me,' said Jerrem ;

'there's notion I should Hke better than a
bit of a stroll. I'd got it in my head before
you spoke.'

Eve hesitated.

Perhaps you'in thinking' Adam 'ud blame
'ee for it.'

Oh dear no ! I'm not ! I'm not quite
such a slave to Adam's opinion as that.
Besides she added, feeling she was speaking
with undue asperity, ' surely everybody
may go for a walk without being blamed by
anybody for it — at all events, I mean to go.'

That's right, said Jerrem. ' Here, I
say, Joan, me and Eve's going' out for a
little.'

Going' out ! Where to X said Joan,
coming forward towards the door, to which
he had advanced.

Oh ! round about for a bit— by Chapel
Rock, and out that ways.'

Well, if you goes with her, mind you

comes back with her. D ee hear, now ?
Don't 'ee trust 'un out o' yer sight, Eve,
my dear ; not further than you can see 'un,
nor so far if you can help it.'

You mind yer own business said
Jeremy

If you was to do that you'd stay at
home, then,' said Joan, dropping her voice ;
but that's you all over, train' to put
your finger into somebody else's pie. I
doubt whether 'twill overplus Adam
either,' she added, coming back from watching
them down the street ; ' but there ! if he
and Eve's to sail in one boat, the sooner
he learns, 'won't always be his turn to
handle the tiller, the better.'

It was getting on for three o'clock when
Adam, having completed all the business
he could accomplish on that day, was returning:
home. He had been to the few

VOL. III. 45

gentlemen's houses near, had visited most
of the large farms round, and had found
a good many customers ready to relieve him
of a considerable portion of the spirit which,
by reason of their living so near at hand,
would thus evade much of the danger
attendant on a more distant transfer.

Everyone had heard of the recent attack
on the Lottery, and much sympathy was
expressed, and many congratulations tendered
on account of their happy escape.

Adam was a general favourite, looked upto
and respected as an honest, straightforward
fellow ; and so little condemnation
was felt against the trade carried on, that
the very magistrate consented to take a
portion of the goods, and saw no breach
of his office in the admonition he ofave
to keep a sharp look-out against these
new-comers, who seemed somewhat over-inclined
to show their teeth.

Adam spoke freely of the anxiety he felt
as to the result of the encounter, but very
few seemed to share it. Most of them
considered that, having escaped, with the
exception of strengthened vigilance, no
further notice would be taken, so that his
mind was considerably relieved about the
matter, and his heart felt lighter, and his
pace more brisk, in returning than when
in the morning he had set out on his
errand.

His last visit had been to Mizzen, and
thence, instead of going back by the
road, he struck across to the cliff by a
narrow path known to him, and which
would save him some considerable distance.


The day was perfect — the sky cloudless,
the sea tranquil ; the young verdure of the
crag-crowned cliffs lay bathed in soft sunshine.
For a moment Adam paused, struck by

45—2

the air of quiet calm which overspread everything
around. Not a breath of wind seemed
abroad, not a sail in sight, not a sound to be
heard. A few scattered sheep where lazily
feeding near ; below them a man was tilling
a fresh-cleared patch of ground; far away beyond,
two figures were standing, side by
side.

Involuntarily Adam's eyes rested on
these two, and while he gazed upon
them, there sprang up into his heart the
wish that Eve was here. He wanted her,
wanted to remind her of the promise she
had given him before they parted, the promise
that, on his return, she would no
longer delay, but tell him the day on which
he might claim her for his wife. A minute
more, and, with all speed, he was making
a straight cut across the cliff-side. Disregarding
the path, he scrambled over the
projections of rock, and trampled down the

furze, with only one thought in his mind —
how soon he could reach home.

Where's Eve, Joan X he asked, as,
having looked through taro of the rooms,
he came, still in breathless haste, into the
outer kitchen, where Joan was now busily
enraged in baking her cakes.

Ain't her outside nowheres V said Joan,
wiping her face with her apron to conceal
its expression.

No, I can't see her.'

Awl, then, I reckon they'd not come
in yet ;' and by this time she had recovered
herself sufficiently to turn round and answer
with indifference.

Who's they V said Adam, quickly.

Why, her went out for a bit of a stroll
with Jerrem. They '

But Adam interrupted her.

Jerrem !' he exclaimed. ' Why should
she go out with Jerrem V

Awl, he's right enough now,' said Joan.
He's so sober as a judge, or I wouldn't ha'
suffered 'en night her. Eve thought she
should like a bit of a walk, and he offered
to go with her, and I was very glad of it
too ; for Tabithy wanted to sandy the
floors, so their room was better for we than
their company,'

'Tis very strange said Adam, ' that
Eve can't see^how she puts me out by going'
off anyway like this with Jerrem. I won't
have it he added, with rising anger, ' and
if she's to be my wife she shan't do it
either ; so she'd best choose between us
before things go too far.'

Awl, don't 'ee take it like that,' said
Joan, soothingly. ' 'Wasn't done with no
main' in it. Her hadn't any more
thought o' vein' 'ee than a baby, nor I
neither, so far as that goes, or I should ha'
put a stopper on it, you may be sure.

Why, go and meet 'em. They'd only outby
Chapel Rock. They left word where
they was going' a purpose.'

A Httle mollified by this, Adam said :
^ I don't tell Eve everything, but Jerrem
and I haven't pulled together for a longtime,
and the more we see o' one another
the worse it is, and the less I want him to
have anything to say to Eve. He's always
carrying' on some game or 'other. When
we were at Guernsey, he made a regular set
out of it 'bout some letter that came thereto
him. Well, who could that have been
from ? Nobody we know anything about,
or he'd have said so. Besides, who should
want to write to him, or what business
had he to go bobbin' about which place we
were bound for ? I haven't seen all the
soundings o' that affair clear yet, but I mean
to. I ain't goiu' to be 'jammed in a clench
like Jackson," for Jerrem nor nobody else.'

Joan made no answer. She seemed to
be engaged in turning her crock round,
and while bending down she said :

Well, I should go after 'em, if I was
you. They'd sure not to be very far off,
and I Ml get tea ready while you'd gone.'

Adam moved away. Somewhat reluctant
to go, he lingered about the rooms for
some time, making up his mind what he
should do. He could not help being
haunted by an idea that the two people he
had seen standing were Eve and Jerrem.
It was a suspicion which angered him
beyond measure, and after once letting it
come before him, it rankled so sorely that
he determined to satisfy himself, and therefore
started off down the street, past the
quay, and up by the steps.

Here, where be going' to X called out a
voice behind him.

Without stopping, Adam turned his head.

Oh, Poll, is that you V he said.

Miss.'

^ Have ye seen Eve pass this way ? I
think she'd got Jerrem with her.'

'S pose if I have,' said Poll, with whom
Adam was no favourite ; ' they doesn't
want you. You stay where you be now.
I hates to see anybody a-spilein sport like
that.'

With no very pleasant remark on the
old woman, Adam turned to go on.

Awl, you may rin !' she cried, ' but you
won't catch up they. They was bound
for Nolan Point, and they's past there long
afore now !'

Then the two he had seen were they !
An indescribable feeling of jealousy stung
Adam, and giving way to his temper in a
volley of oaths against old Poll, he turned
back, repassed her, and went towards
home, while she stood 'enjoying his discomfiture,

laughing heartily at it as she
called out :

I hears 'ee. Swear away ! I don't
mind yer cusses, not I. Better hear they
than be deaf !'

moan, you needn't expect me
till you see me' — Joan turned
quickly round, to see Adam
at the door, looking angry and determined
— sand you can tell Eve from me,
that as it seems all one to her whatever
companion she has, I don't see any need
for forcing myself, where I am told I should
only be one in the way.'

Adam !' — but the door was already
slammed, and Joan again left in possession
of the kitchen.

Now there 'tis,' she said, in a tone of
vexation, 'just as I thought : a reg lar piece
o' work made all out o' nothing. Rabbit the
maid ! if hers got the man her wants, why
can't her study un a bit; but somehow
there's bin a crooked stick lying' in her path
all day to-day; her's nipped about something',
I'm positive sure o' that, and they all just
come home too, and everything', and now
to be at daggers drawn with one 'other —
'tis terrible, 'tis.'

Joan's reflections, interrupted by the
necessary attention which her cakes and
pasties made upon her, lasted over some
considerable time, and they had not yet
come to an end when two of the principal
objects of them presented themselves before
her.

Why, wherever have 'ee bin to f she
said, peevishly. * Whatever made 'ee stay
away like this for % action' so foolish, when

you knows, both of 'ee, what a poor temper
Adam's got, if anything' goes contrary
with 'un.

Jerrem shruofo-ed his shoulders, while
Eve, at once assuming an injured air for
such an unmerited attack, said : * Really,
Joan, I don't know what you mean ; old
Poll Potter has just been telling us that
Adam came flying and fuming up her way,
wanting to know if she'd seen us, and then,
when she said where we'd gone to, he used
the most dreadful lano^uao^e to her ; I'm
sure I don't know for what reason. He
chose to go out without me this morning.'

But that was 'bout business,' said Joan.

Oh, business !' repeated Eve ; ' business
is a very convenient word when you don't
want to tell a person what your real errand
is — not that I want to pry into Adam's
secrets, far from it. He's quite welcome to
keep what he likes from me, only I'd rather

he wouldn't tell me half things. I like to
know all or none.'

Joan looked mystified, and Jerrem,
seeing she did not know what to say, came
to the rescue.

i'm sure I'm very vexed if I've been the
cause of anything o' this, Eve,' he said,
humbly.

You needn't be at all vexed — it's nothing
at all to do with you : you asked me to go,
and I said yes. If I hadn't wanted to go I
should have said no. Anyone would think
I'd committed a crime, instead of taking a
simple walk, with no other fault than not
happening to return home at the very same
minute that it suited Adam to come back
at.'

But how is it he's a seed you, if you
haven't a' seed he,' said Joan, fairly puzzled
by this game of cross-purpose ; ' he came
home all right 'nus, and then went off

to see whereabouts he could find 'ee to, and
'bout quartern hour after, back he comes
in a regular pelt, and says : ^' You tell Eve,"
he says, " that I'm not going' to face myself
where I'm told I shan't be wanted.' Awh>
my dear, he'd seed 'ee somewheres,' she
continued, in answer to Eve's shrug of
bewilderment ; ' I could tell that so soon as
ever I'd clapped eyes on 'un.'

And Where's he off to now V said Eve,
determined to have an immediate settlement
of her wrongs.

I can't tell ; he just flung they words at
me and was gone.'

Eve said no more, but with the apparent
intention of taking off her hat went upstairs,
while Joan, bidding Jerrem go and see if
Uncle Zebedee was roused up yet, returned
to her previous occupation of preparing the
tea. When it was ready she called out :

^ Come 'long, Eve !' but no answer was

returned. ^ Tay's ready, my dear.' Still
no reply. ' She can't ha' gone out agen f
thought Joan, mounting the stairs to ascertain
the cause of the silence, which was
soon explained by the sight of Eve flung
down on the bed with her head buried in
the pillow.

Now, whatever be coin' this for V exclaimed
Joan, bending down and discovering
that Eve was sobbing as if her heart
would break. ^ Awl, don't cry noah, there's
a dear, 't 'uU all come straight agen. Why
now, you'll see Adam 'full be back in no
time. 'Twas only through been' balked
when he'd a come back o' purpose to take
'ee out.'

How was I to know that V sobbed Eve.

No, o' course you didn't, and that's
what I told 'un. But, lors ! 'tis in the
nature o' men to be jealous o' one 'other,
and with Adam more particular o' Jerrem,

SO for the future you must humour 'im a
bit, 'cos there's things twixt they two you
don't know nothing' of, and so can't allays
tell when the shoe's pinching' most.'

I often think whether Adam and me
will be happy together,' said Eve, sitting
up and drying her eyes. ' I'm willing to
give in, but I won't be trampled upon.'

And he won't want to trample 'pon 'ee
neither. Only you study un a bit, and
you'll soon learn the measure o' Adam's
foot. Why, 'tis only to see 'un lookin' at
'ee to tell how he loves 'ee,' and Joan successfully
kept down a rising sigh, as she
added, ' Lor's, he wouldn't let a fly pitch
'pon 'ee if he could help it.'

^ If he'd seen us before he came in first,
he'd have surely told you ^' said Eve.

*Awl, he hadn't seen 'ee, then,' said
Joan, ' 'cos, tho' he was a bit vexed, he
wasn't in no temper. 'Twas after he went

VOL. III. 46

out the second time that he must have cast
eyes on 'ee some way. Jerrem wasn't upto
none of his nonsense, was he ?' she asked.
'Cos I knows what Jerrem is. He don't
think no more o' given' 'ee a kiss or that
than he does o' nodding' his head or crooked'
his elbow, and if Adam caught un at that,
it 'ud be enough for he.'

Eve shook her head.

^ Jerrem never takes none of those liberties
with me,' she said. 'He knows 1
won't allow him to. The whole of the
time we did nothing but talk and walk along
till we came to a nice place, and then we
stayed for a little while looking at the view
together, and after that came back.'

'Tis more than I can make out, then,'
said Joan, * 'cos, though I wondered when
you set off whether Adam would 'zactly
relish your been' with Jerrem, I never
thought 'twould put un out like this.'

It makes me feel so miserable said
Eve, trying to keep back her tears, * for
oh, Joan T — and she threw her arms round
Joan's neck — * I do love him very dearly.'

Miss, my dear, I knows you do returned
Joan, soothingly, ' and he loves you, too

Then why can't we always feel the
same, Joan, and be comfortable and kind
and pleasant to one another X

Oh lors ! that 'ud be a regular milk
and water set-out o' it. Xo, so long as
you don't carry on too far on the wan tack,
I likes a bit of a breeze now and then :
it freshens 'ee up and puts new life into
'ee ; but here, come along down now, and
when Adam comes back seem as if nothing'
had happened, and perhaps, seen' you make
so lio^ht of it, 'uU make un dorset all
about it,'

So advised. Eve dried her eyes and
smoothed down her ruffled appearance, and

4G— 2

in a short time joined the party below,
which now included Uncle Zebedee,
Barnabas Tadd, and Zeke League, who
had brought word that the Hart had only
that morning returned to Fowey, entirely
ignorant of the skirmish which had taken
place between the Looe boats and the
Lottery, and that though it was reported
that the man shot had been shot dead,
nothing was known for certain, as it
seemed that the men of Looe station
were not over anxious to have the thing
talked about.

I should think they wasn't, neither,'
chuckled Uncle Zebedee ; ' sneaking'
cowardly lot; they was game enough whiles
they was creeping' up behind; but, lors,
so soon as us showed our faces and they
seed they'd got men to dale with there
was another tale to tell, and no mistake.
I much doubt whether or no wan amongst

'em had ever smelt powder afore our
Jerrem here let 'em have a sniff o' his
mixing' ; 'tis my belief, and I can't a got a
doubt on the matter neither, that if he
hadn't let fly when he did they'd ha'
drawer off and gone away boasting' that
they'd got the best o' it.'

Well, and more's the pity you didn't
let 'em, then,' said Joan. ' I would, I
know. Safe hind's safe find, and you can
never tell when fighting' begins where 'tis
going' to end to.'

It shouldn't ha' ended where it did if
I'd had my way,' said Jerrem.

Awl, well ; there, never mind,' said old
Zebedee. * You'll have a chance ao-en,
never fear, and then we must make 'ee
cape. How's that place 'ee — eh 1'

Jerrem's face bespoke his satisfaction.

Take care I don't hold 'ee to ver word
he said, laughing. ' I've got witnesses,

mind, to prove it — here's Barnabas here,
and Zeke League, and they won't say me
nay, I'll wager, will 'ee, lads ?'

Wa-all, bide a bit — bide a bit !' said
Zebedee, winking in appreciation of this
joke. ' There'll be two or three o' the
oldsters drap in turin' the benin', and
then us '11 have a bit of a jaw together on
it, and weigh sides on the matter.'

As Uncle Zebedee anticipated, the
evening brought a goodly number of
visitors, who, one after another, came
dropping in, until the sitting-room was
pretty well filled, and it was as much as
Eve and Joan could manage to see that
each one was comfortably seated and provided
for.

There were the captains of the three
vessels, with a portion of the crew of each,
several men belonging to the place — all
more or less mixed up with the ventures —

and, of course, the crew of the Lottery, by
no means yet tired of having their story
listened to and their adventure discussed.
Adam's absence was fel to be a great
relief, and each one inwardly voted it as a
proof that Adam himself saw that he'd
altogether made a misspent, and gone
nigh to damage the whole concern. Man
a jerk of the head, or the thumb, accompanied
a whisper that ' he'd a looked his-self
off,' and drew forth the response that
'twas the proper line to pursoo ;' and
feeling they had no fear of interruption,
they resigned themselves to enjoyment
and settled down to jollity, in the very midst
of which Adam made his appearance ; but
the time was passed when his presence or
his absence could in any way affect them,
and instead of the uncomfortable silence
which at an earlier stage might have fallen
upon the party, his entrance was now only

the occasion of hard hits and rough jokes
which Adam, seeing the influence under
which they were made, tried to bear withall
the temper he could command.

Don't 'ee take no notice of 'em said
Joan, bending over him to set down some
fresh glasses. ' They ain't worth yer
anger, not one among 'em. I've kept Eve
out of it so much as I could ; and, after
now, there won't be no need for her
to come in agen ; so you go outside
there. Her's a waiting' to have a word
with 'ee.'

Then wait she may,' said Adam. ' I'm
going' to stop where I am. Here, father !^
he cried. * Pass the liquor this way.
Come, push the grog about ! Last come
first served, you know.'

The heartiness with which this was said
caused considerable astonishment.

Miss, miss, lad,' said old Zebedee, his face

glowing under the effects of hot punch and
the efforts of hospitality. ' That's well
said. Set-to with a will, and you'll catch us
up yet;

During the laughter called forth by this
challenge, Joan took another opportunity of
speaking.

Why, what be 'bout, Adam V she said,
seeing how unlike his speech and action was
to his usual self * Don't 'ee go and cutoff
your news to spite yer face, now ; Eve's
close by here — her's as sorry as anything,
her is ; her wouldn't ha' gone out for twenty
pounds if herd gnawed it.'

I wish you'd hold yer tongue said
Adam ; ' I've told you I'm going' to stop
here ; be off with you, now.'

But Joan, bent on striving to keep him
from an excess to which she saw exasperation
was oroadino' him, made one more
effort.

Awl, Adam !' she said, * do 'ee come
now. Eve '

Eve be '

But before the word had well escaped
his lips Joan's hand was clapped over his
mouth. Too late, for Eve had come up
behind them, and as Adam turned his
head to shake Joan off he found himself
face to face before her, and the look of outraged
love she fixed upon him made his
heart quail within him. What could he
do, what should he say? Nothing now,
for before he could gather up his senses
she had passed him by and was gone.

A sickening feeling came over Adam,
and he could barely put his lips to the
glass which, in order to avert attention, he
had caught up and raised to his mouth.
At a blow all the resolutions he had forced
himself to were upset and scattered, for
he had returned with the reckless determination

of plunging into whatever dissipation
chanced to be going on.

He had roamed about, angry and tormented,
until the climax of passion was
succeeded by an overpowering sense of
gloom, to get away from which he had
determined to abandon himself, and
flinching: all restraint aside, sink down to
that level over which the better part of
his nature had vainly tried to soar.

But now, in the feeliiiQ; of degradation
which Eve's eyes had flashed upon him,
the grossness of these excesses came freshly
before him, and the knowledge that even
in thought he had entertained them made
him feel lowered in his own eyes ; and if
in his eyes, how must he look in hers.

Without a movement, he knew every
time that she entered the room ; he heard
her exchange words with some of those
present, applaud a song of Barnabas Todd's,

answer a question of Uncle Zebedee's, and,
sharpest thorn of all, stand behind Jerrem's
chair, talking to him, Awhile some of the
roughest hits were being made at his own
mistaken judgment in holding back those-who
were ready to have ' sunk the Looe
boats and all aboard 'em.'

In the anguish of his heart Adam could
have cried aloud. It seemed to him that
until now he had never tasted the bitterness
of love nor smarted under the sharp'
tooth of jealousy. There were lapses, when,,
sending a covert look across the table, those
around him faded away, and only Eve and
Jerrem stood before him ; and while he
gazed, a harsh, discordant laugh would
break the spell, and starting, he would find
that it was his own voice which had jarred
upon his ear. His head seemed on fire,,
his senses confused. Turning his eyes upon
the tumbler of grog which he had poured

:Out, he could hardly credit that it still stood
.all but untasted before him. A noisy song
with a rollicking chorus was beings unhand
for a moment Adam shut his eyes,
trying to recollect himself — all in vain.
Everything seemed jumbled and mixed
to Of ether.

Suddenly, in the midst of the clamour, a
!noise outside was heard. The door was
burst violently open, and as violently shut
again by Jonathan, who, throwing himself
with all his force against it, cried out :

They'd coming' — they'd after 'ee — close
by — the soldiers — you'd trapped !'

And exhausted and overcome by exertion
and excitement, his tall form swayed
to and fro, and then fell back in a deathlike
swoon upon the floor.

jOR an instant everyone seemed
paralysed and transfixed in the
position into which upon. Jonathan's
entrance they had started. Then a
sudden rush was made towards the door,
Which several of the strongest blocked up,
while Adam called vainly on them to stand
aside, and give the chance of more air.
Joan flew for water, and Jerrem dashed it
over Jonathan.

There was a minute of anxious watching,
and then slowly over Jonathan's pallid

face the sirens of returning' animation bes^an

o o o

to creep.

'Now, stand back! — stand back from
him do !' said Adam, fearing the effect
of so many faces crowding near would
only serve to further daze his scared
senses. •' What is it, Jonathan, what is it,
lad X he asked, kneeling down by him.

Jonathan tried to rise, and Adam
motioned for Barnabas Tadd to come and
assist in getting him on his feet.

Now, sit down there,' said Adam, ' and
put your lips to this, and then tell us
what's up.'

Jonathan cowered down as he threw a
hasty glance round, the meaning of which
was answered by a general —

'You knows all of us, Jonathan, don't
'beer

Miss,' said Jonathan, breaking into a
feeble laugh ; ' but somehow I'd a sinned

till I'd got 'em all as I fancied to me heels,
close by.'

And Adhere are they, then ?' said Adam,
seizing the opportunity of getting at the
most important fact.

Coming' 'long t' roadway, man by man,
straddled on to their horses' backs. They'd
to take 'ee all, dead or living', search by night
or day. Some o' 'em is come all the
ways fra Plymouth, vowing' and swearing'
they'll have blind for blind ; and that if they
can't pitch 'pon he who fired to kill their
man, every saw aboard the Lottery shall
swing gallows high for un.'

A volley of oaths ran through the room.
Joan threw up her arms in despair, Eve
groaned aloud.

Suddenly there was a movement, as if
some one was breaking from a detaining
hand. 'Twas Jerrem, who, pushing forward,
cried out :

Then I'll give myself up to dance ; nobody
shan't suffer 'cos o' me. I did it, and
I wasn't afeared to do it neither, and no
more I ain't afeared to answer for it now.'

The buzz which negatived this offer, bespoke
the appreciation of Jerrem's magnanimity.


Adam alone had taken no part in it ;
turning, he said sternly :

Do we risk our lives together, then, to
skulk off when danger offers, and leave
one to suffer for all ? Let's have no more
of such idle talk; while things promised
to run smooth, you was welcome to the
boast of having' fired first shot, but now
every man aboard fired it ; and let he who
says he didn't stand out and say it now.'

Fair spoke, and good sense,' said the
men.

then off with you, each to the place
he thinks safest. Jerrem and you, father,
VOL. III. 47

must stay here. I shall go to the mill, and
Jonathan, for the night, you'd best come
along with me

With little visible excitement, and but
few words, the men began to depart — all
of them more or less stupefied by the influence
of drink, which, combined with
this unexpected dash to their hopes and
overthrow of their boastings, seemed to
rob them of all their energy. They were
ready to do whatever they were asked,
go wherever they were told, listen to all
that was said; but anything beyond this
was then impossible. They had no more
power of deciding, proposing, arranging
for themselves, than if they had been a
flock of sheep warned that a ravenous
wolf was near.

The one necessary action which seemed
to have laid hold upon them was that
they must all solemnly shake hands,

and this in many cases they did over
and over again, repeating * each time,
with a warning nod of the head : ^ Well,
mate, 'tis a bad job o' it, this,' until some
of the more collected felt it necessary to
interfere, and urge their immediate departure
; then one by one they stole away,
leaving the house in possession of its usual
occupants.

Adam had already been upstairs to get
Uncle Zebedee — now utterly incapable of
any thought for himself — safely placed ina
secret closet, which was hollowed in the
wall behind the bed. Turning to Jerrem
as he came do^\m, he said :

You can manage to stow yourself away;
only mind, do it at once, so that the house
is got quiet before they've time to get'
here.'

All right,' said Jerrem, doggedly, while
Joan slid back the seat of the settle, turned

47—2

down a flap in the wall, and discovered
the hole in which J erred was to lie concealed.


There ! — there ain't another hiding
like that in all Polperro/ she said.
They may send a whole regiment o'
lodgers afore a man among 'em 'full pitch
on 'ee there, Jerrem.'

And that's the reason why I don't want
to have it said Jerrem. ' I don't see
why I'm to have the pick and choice, and
why Adam's to go ofl" to where they've
only got to search and find.'

^ Well, but 'tis as he says,' urged Joan.
They may ha' got you in their eye
already. Come, 'tis all settled now,' she
continued persuasively ; so get 'longs in
with 'ee, like a dear.'

Jerrem o^ave a look round — Eve
was busy clearing the table ; Adam was
putting some tobacco into his pouch. He

hesitated, then he made a step forward,
then he drew back again, until at last, with
visible effort, he said :

Come, give us yer hand, Adam V

With no affectation of cordiality, Adam
held out his hand.

Whatever comes, you've spoke up
fair for me, and acted better than most
would ha' done, seen' that I've let my
tongue run a bit too fast 'bout you o'
late.'

Oh, don't think I've done any more
for you than I should ha' done for
either one o' the others,' said Adam, not
willing to accept a feather's weight of
Jerrem's gratitude. ^ However he added,
trying to force himself into a greater
show of graciousness, ' here's within' all
may go well with you, as with all of
us.'

Not over-pleased with this cold reception

of his advances, Jerrem turned hastily
round to Joan.

Here, let's have a kiss, Joan ?' he
said.

Miss twenty, my dear, so long as you'll
only be quick 'bout it.'

Eve r

^ There, nonsense now !' exclaimed Joan,
warned by an expression in Adam's face ;
there's no call for no leave-takin' with
Eve, her '11 be here so well as you.'

The words, well intentioned as they
were, served as fuel to Adam's jealous
fire, and for a moment he felt that it was
impossible to go away and leave Jerrem
behind ; but the next instant the very
knowledge of that passing weakness was
only urging him to greater self-command,
although the effort it cost him gave a
hardness to his voice and a coldness to his
manner. One tender word, and his resolve

would be gone — one soft emotion, and to
go would be impossible.

Eve, on her part, with all her love reawakened,
her fears excited, and her
imagination sharpened, was wrought upto
a pitch of emotion which each moment
grew more and more beyond her control.
In her efforts to keep calm, she
busied herself in clearing the table and
moving to and fro the chairs, all the time
keenly alive to the fact that Joan was
hovering about Adam, suggesting comforts,
supplying resources, and pouring
out a torrent of wordy hopes and fears.
Surely Adam would ask — Joan would
think to give them one moment to themselves
? If not, she would demand it ;
but before she could speak, boom on her
heart came Adam's 'Good-bye, Joan.' —
Good-bye !' What can she do now 1 How
bear this terrible parting ? In her efforts

to control the desire to give vent to her
agony, her powers of endurance utterly
gave way. A rushing sound, as of many
waters, came gurgling in her ears, dulling
the voice of some one who spoke from
far off.

^ What are they saying '?' In vain she
tried to catch the words — to speak — to
move ; then gathering up all her strength,
with a piercing cry she tried to break the
spell. The room reeled, the ground
beneath her gave way, a hundred voices
shrieked good-bye, and with their clamour
ringing in her ears, Eve's spirit went down
into silence and darkness. Another
minute and she was again alive to all
her misery ; Joan was kneeling beside her,
the tears streaming from her eyes.

what is it? Where's Adam?' exclaimed
Eve, starting up.

Gone r said Joan ; ^ he said 'twas

better to, 'fore you corned to yourself
agen

Gone ! and never said a word ?' she
cried. * Gone ! Oh, Joan, how could he
how could he ?'

*What would 'ee have un do, then?'
said Joan, sharply ; ' bide dallying' here to
be took by the hounds o' lodgers that's
marching' 'pon us all ? that's fine love, I
will say.' But suddenly a noise outside
made them both start, and stand listening
with beating' hearts until all ao-ain was
still and quiet ; then Joan's quick-roused
anger failed her, and repenting her sharp
speech, she threw her arms round Eve's
neck, crying : ' Awl, Eve, don't 'ee lets
you and me set 'bout quarrelling', my dear,
for if sorrow ain't a-drawin' nigh, my name's
not Joan Hocken. I never before felt
the same way as I do to-night. My spirits
is give way ; my heart seems to have

failed flat down and died within me, and,
be doing what I may, there keeps sounding'
in my ears a nicety-knock like the tap-pin'
on a coffin-lid.'

Once the night on which Jonathan's
arrival had unhinged the
party assembled at Zebedee
Pascal's into such dismay, a week had
passed by — seven days and nights of terror
and confusion.

The determined manner in which the
Government authorities traced out each
clue and tracked every scent struck terror
into the stoutest hearts, and men who had
never before shrunk from danger in any
open form now feared to show their faces.

dared not sleep in their own houses, nor,
except by stealth, visit their own families.
At dead of night, as well as in the blaze
of day, stealthy descents would be made
upon the place — the houses surrounded,
and strict search made. One hour the
streets would be deserted, the next every
corner bristled with rude soldiery, flinging
insults and imprecations on the feeble old
men and defenceless women who, panic-stricken,
stood about vainly endeavouring
to seem at their ease, and keep up a show
of indifference.

One of the first acts had been to seize
the Lottery J and orders had been issued to
arrest all or any of her crew, wherever
they might be found; but as yet no
trace of them had been discovered ; Jerrem
and Uncle Zebedee still lay concealed
within the house, and Adam at the mill,
crouched beneath corn-bins, lay covered

by sacks and grain, while the tramp of the
soldiers sounded in his ears, or the ring of
their voices set his stout heart quaking
with fear of discovery. To men whose
lives had been spent out of doors, with the
free air of heaven and the fresh salt breeze
of the sea constantly sweeping over them,
toil and hardship were pastimes, compared
to this inactivity, and it was little to be
wondered at, that for one and all the
single solace left seemed drink — drink
deadened their restlessness, benumbed their
energies, made them forget their dangers,
sleep through their durance. So that even
Adam could not always hold out against a
solace which helped to shorten the frightful
monotony of those weary days, dragged
out for the most time in solitude and darkness.
With no occupation, no resources,
no companion, ever dwelling on self and
viewing each action, past and present, by

the light of an exaggerated (often a distorted)
vision, Adam grew irritable, morose,
suspicious.

Why hadn't Joan come? Surely there

couldn't be anything to keep Eve away

and if so, might they not send a letter,

a message, or some token to show him

that he was still in their thoughts ? In

vain did Mrs. Tucker urge the necessity of

a caution hitherto unknown ; in vain did

she repeat the stories brought of footsteps

dogged, and houses watched, so that their

inmates dare not run the smallest risk, for

fear of its leading to detection. Adam

turned a deaf ear to all she said, sinking at

last down to the conclusion that he could

endure such suspense no longer, and come

what might, must the next day steal back

home, and satisfy himself how things were

going on. The only concession to her

better judgment which Mrs. Tucker could

gain, was his promise to wait until she had
been in to Polperro to reconnoitre ; for
though, from having seen a party of soldiers
pass that morning, they knew some of the
troop had left, it was impossible to say
how many remained behind, nor whether
they had received fresh strength from the
opposite direction.

I shan't give no more o' they than I sees
the wisdom of reflected Mrs. Tucker, as
primed with questions to ask Joan, and
messages to give to Eve, she securely
fastened the doors preparatory to her
departure. ' If I was to tell up such talk
to Eve, herd be piping off here next
mint, or else sending' back a pack o' silly
speeches that ud' make Adam mazed
to go to she. 'Tis wonderful how took up he
is with a maid he knows so little of But
there, 'tis the same with all the men, I
believe — tickle their eye, and good-bye to

their judgment.' And giving the outer gate
a shake to assure herself that it could not
be opened without a preparatory warning
to those within, Mrs. Tucker turned
away and out into the road.

A natural tendency to be engrossed by
personal interests, together with a life of
narrowed circumstances, had somewhat
blunted the acuteness of Mrs. Tuckers
impressionable sensibilities ; yet she could
not but be struck at the change these last
two weeks had wrought in the aspect of the
place. The houses, wont to stand open so
that friendly greetings might be exchanged,
were now closed and shut; the blinds of
most of the windows were drawn down ;
the streets, usually thronged with idlers,
were all but deserted; the few shops empty
of wares and of customers. Calling to
her recollection the frequent prophetic
warnings she had indulged in about these

evil days to come, Mrs. Tucker's heart
smote her.

Surely Providence had never taken herat
her word, and really brought a judgment
on the place ? If so, seeing her own
kith and kin would be amongst the most to
suffer, it had read a very wrong meaning in
her words ; for it stood to reason, when
folks talked serious-like, they didn't always
stop to measure what they said, and if a
text or two o' Scripture sounded seemly,
'twas fitted in to help their speech out with,
not to be pulled abroad to seek the downright
meaning' o' each word.'

Subdued and oppressed by these and like
reflections, Mrs. Tucker reached Uncle
Zebedee's house, inside which the change
wrought was in keeping with the external
sadness. Both girls looked harassed and
careworn : Joan, now that there was no
further occasion for that display of spirit

VOL. HI. 48

and bravado which before the soldiers she
had successfully contrived to maintain,
utterly broken down and apathetically dejected
; Eve, unable to enter into all the
difficulties, or sympathise in the universal
danger, ill at ease with herself, and irritable
with all around her. In her anxiety to
hear about Adam — what message he had
sent, and whether she could not go to see
him — she had barely patience to listen to
Mrs. Tucker's roundabout details and
lugubrious lamentations, and choosing a
very inopportune moment, she broke outwith
:

What message has Adam sent, Mrs.
Tucker ? He's sent a message to me, I'm
sure. I know he must have !'

Awl, well, if you knows, you don't
want to be told, then,' snorted Mrs.
Tucker, ill pleased at having her demands
upon sympathy put to such sudden flight.

Though don't you think, Eve, that Adam
hasn't got something' else to think of than
sending' love-messages and nonsense o' that
sort ? He's a good deal too much took
up 'bout the trouble we'd all in for that.
He hoped you was all well, and keeping'
yer spirits up, Joan.'

Poor saw !' sighed Joan ; ' I 'sects
he finds that's more than he can do.'

Ah, you may well say that,' replied
Mrs. Tucker, casting a troubled look
towards her daughter's altered face.
'Adam's coin' purity much the same
as you be, Joan — fretting' his insides
out.'

He's fretting, then V gasped Eve
managing to get the words past the great
lump which seemed to choke her further
utterance.

Fretting V repeated Mrs. Tucker, with
severity ; ' but there, why should I V she

48—2

added, as if blaming lier sense of injury,
^ I keeps forgetting' that, compared with
Joan, Eve, yoii'm nothing' but a stranger,
as you may say ; and, though I dare say
I shan't get your thanks for saying it,
still Adam could tell 'ee so well as me,
that fresh faces is all very well in fairweather,
but in times of trouble they
counts for very little aside o' they who's
bin brought up from the same cradle, you
may say.'

Eve's swelling heart could bear no more.
This sense of being set aside, and looked
on as a stranger, was a gall which of late
she had been frequently called upon to
endure; but to have it hinted at that Adam
could share in this feeling towards her —
oh, it was too much ; and rising hastily,
she turned to run upstairs.

'Now there's no call to fly off in no
tantrums, Eve,' said Mrs. Tucker; 'so

just sit down now and listen to what else
IVe got to say.'

But Eve's outraged love could hide itself
no longer ; to answer Joan's mother with
anything like temper was impossible, and
knowing this, her only refuge was in
flight.

I don't want to hear any more you may
have to say, Mrs. Tucker ;' and though
Eve managed to keep under the sharpness
of her voice, she could not control the indignant
expression of her face, which Mrs.
Tucker fully appreciating, she speeded her
departure by the inspiriting prediction,
that if Eve didn't sup sorrow by the spoonful
before her hair was grey, her name
wasn't Ann Tucker.

'Awl, don't 'ee say that,' said Joan.
*You'd over-rabbit with her, mother;
and her only wanting to hear some word
that Adam had sent to her own self

But mercy 'pon us, her must give me
time to fetch my breath !' exclaimed Mrs.
Tucker, indignantly ; * and I forced to fly
off as I did, for fear that Adam should
forestall me, and go coin' something
foolish r

He ain't wanting' to come home ?' said
Joan, hurriedly.

Miss, but he is though. And when us
see they lodgers go past, I thought no
other than he'd a set off then and there.
As I said to un, 'tis true you knows o'
they that's gone, but how can 'ee tell how
many's left behind '?'

Joan shook her head.

They'd all off,' she said ; * every man
of 'em's gone : but for all that, Adam
mustn't come night us, or show his face
in the place* 'Tis held everywhere that
this move is nothing' but a decoy to get
the men out o' hiding ; and that done,

back they'll all come and drop down on
'em

Well, then, I'd best go back to want !'
cried Mrs. Tucker, starting up, ' and try
and put a stop to his coming', tho' whether
he'll pay any heed to what I say, is more
than I'll answer for.'

Tell un,' said Joan, ' that for all our
sakes he mustn't come ; and say that I've
had word that Jonathan's lurk in' nigh
about here some place, so I reckon there's
something' up, and what it is he shall know
so soon as I can send word to un ; say
iliad outfit to tell un 't isn't safe to stir,
'cos he knows that Jonathan would sooner
have prone to he than to either wan here.'

Well, I'll tell un all you tells me to,'
said Mrs. Tucker, with a somewhat hopeless
expression, ' but you know what Adam
is, Joan, when he fixes his mind on anything'
; and I've had the works o' the world

to keep un from coming' already — he takes
such fancies about 'ee all as you never did.
I declare if I didn't know that pVaps he's
a had more liquor than he's used to take o*
times I should ha' fancied un .'


And so he'll be if you gives much
spirit to un, mother,' said Joan, anxiously ;
'tis sure to stir his temper up. But there,'
she added despondingly, '■ what can anybody
do % 'tis all they ha' got to fly to.
There's Jerrem at it fro' morning' to night ;
and as for uncle, dear saul, he's as happy asa
clam at high water.'

Miss ; I reckon,' said Mrs. Tucker, ' it
don't never matter much what goes wrong,
so long as uncle gets his fill o' drink. I've
said scores o' times uncle's joy 'ud never
run dry so long as liquor lasted.'

Ah, well !' said Joan, ^ I don't know
what us should ha' done if there'd ha' bin

no drink to give 'em ; they'd ha' bin more
than Eve and me could manage, I can tell
'ee. Nobody but our own selves, mother,
will ever know what us two maidens have
had to go through.'

You've often lead my thoughts with 'ee,
Joan,' said Mrs. Tucker, her eyes dimmed
by a rush of motherly sympathy for all the
girls must have suffered ; ' and you can
tell Eve (for he'll take it better from you
than from me) that Adam's allays a-thinking'
of her, and begged and prayed that she
wudn't forget un.'

No fear o' that,' said Joan, anxious
that her mother should depart ; ' and mind
now you say, no matter what time 'tis,
directly I's seen Jonathan and knows 'tis
safe for we, somebody shall bring un word
to come back, for Eve and me's longing' to
have a sight of un.'

Charged with these messages Mrs.

Tucker hastened back to the mill, where
all had gone well since her departure, and
where she found Adam more tractable and
reasonable than she had had reason to anticipate.
He listened to all Joan's messages,
agreed with her suspicions, and seemed
contented to abide by her decision. The
johann unvarnished statement which Mrs.
Tucker gave of the misery and gloom
spread over the place affected him visibly,
and her account of the two girls, and the
alteration she had seen in them, did not
tend to dispel his emotion.

As for Joan,' she said, letting a tear
escape and trickle down her cheek, 'tis
heart-breaking' to look at her. Her's terrible
wrapped up in you, Adam, is Joan ; more
than, as her mother, I cares for her to awn
to, seen' how you'd situated with Eve.'

Oh, Eve never made no difference
'twixt us two,' said Adam. Then, after a

pause, he asked, ' Didn't Eve give you no
word to give to me X

Well, no,' said Mrs. Tucker ; then, with
the determination to deal fairly, she added
quickly, * but her was full o' questions
about 'ee, and that 'fore I'd time to draw
breath inside the place.' Adam was silent,
and Mrs. Tucker, considering the necessity
for further explanation removed by the
compromise she had made, continued,
^ You see, what with Jerrem and uncle, and
the drink that goes on, they two poor
maidens is kept pretty much on the go ;
and Eve, never been used to no such ways,
seems terrible harried by it all.'

Harried !' repeated Adam, with ill
suppressed bitterness, ^ and well she maybe
; still I should ha' thought she might
have managed to send, if 'twas no more
than a word back to me.'

NDEK the plea that, notwithstanding
the lateness of the
hour, Jonathan might stir
possibly put in an appearance, Adam
lingered in his aunt's cheerful-looking
kitchen until after the clock had struck
eleven; then he very reluctantly got up,
and, bidding Mrs. Tucker and Sammy
good-night, betook himself to the millhouse,
in which, with regard to his greater
safety, a bed had been made up for him.
Adam felt that, court it as he might.

sleep was very far from his eyes, and
that, compared to his own society, and
the torment of thought which harassed
and racked him each time he found himself
alone, even Sammy Tucker's company
was a boon to be grateful for.
There were times, during these hours of
dreary loneliness, when Adam's whole
nature seemed submerged by the billows
of love ; cruel waves, which would toss
him hither and thither, making sport of
his hapless condition, to strand him at
length on the quicksands of fear, where a
thousand terrible alarms would seize him,
and fill him with dread as to how these
disasters might end. What would become
of him ? how would it fare with Eve and
himself ? where could they go ? what
could they do ? Questions ever swallowed
up by the constantly recurring all-important
bewilderment as to what could

possibly have brought about this dire
disaster.

On this night Adam's thoughts were
more than usually engrossed by Eve ; her
form seemed constantly before him, distracting
him with images as tempting and
unsatisfying as is the desert spring, with
which desire mocks the thirst of the fainting
traveller : at length that relaxation of
strength, which in sterner natures takes
the place of tears, subdued Adam, a
softened feeling crept over him, and shifting
his position, so that he might rest his
arms against the corn-bin near, a deep-drawn
sigh escaped him.

Hist r Adam started at the sound, and
without moving, turned his head and looked
rapidly about him. Nothing was to be seen ;
with the exception of the small radius round
the lantern, all was darkness and gloom.

Hist !' was repeated, and this time

there was no more doubt but that the
sound came from some one close by. A
clammy sweat stood on Adam's forehead,
his tongue felt dry, and so powerless that
it needed an effort to force it to move.

Who's there X he said.
'Tis me — Jonathan.'

Adam caught up the lantern, and turning
it in the direction whence the voice came,
found to his relief that the rays fell upon
Jonathan's face.

Odds rot it, lad !' he exclaimed, ' but
you've give me a turn ! How the deuce
did you get in here, and why didn't ye
come inside to the house over there V

I've a bin scrooge down 'tween these
'ere sacks for ever so long,' said Jonathan,
trying to stretch out his cramped limbs ; * I
reckon I've had a bit o' a nap too, for the
time hasn't a took long in going', and when
I must come 'wasn't altogether dark.'

'Tis close on the stroke o' twelve now
said Adam. ' But come, what news, eh %
Have ye got hold o' anything yet % Are
they devils off for good ? Is that what
you've come to tell me V

Miss ; they's off this time, I fancy said
Jonathan ; ' but 'wasn't that broiled me,
though I should ha comet to tell 'ee o'
that too.'

No ! what is it then ?' demanded Adam
impatiently, turning the light so that he
could get a better command of Jonathan's
face.

'Twas 'cos o' this,' said Jonathan, his
voice dropping to a whisper, so that, though
the words were trembling on his lips, his
agitation and excitement almost prevented
their utterance ; ^ I've found it out — all of it
who bio wed the gaff 'pon us.'

Adam started forward ; his face all but
touched Jonathan's, and an expression

of terrible eagerness came into ibis
eyes.

'T^Yas she !' hissed Jonathan. ^ She —
her from London — Eve !' but before the
name was lyell uttered, Adam had thrown
himself upon him and was grasping at his
throat as if to throttle him ; while a volley
of imprecations poured from his mouth,
denouncing the base lie which Jonathan
had dared to utter. A moment more, and
this fit of impotent rage over, he flung
him violently ofl* and stood for a moment
trying to bring back his senses ; but the
succession of circumstances had been too
much for him — his head swam round, his
knees shook under him, and he had to
grasp hold of a beam near to steady himself.


What for do 'ee serve me like that
then f muttered Jonathan. *I ain't a-tellin'
'ee no more than I've a-heerd and what's

VOL. III. 49

the truth. Her name's all over the place
he went on, forgetful of the recent outburst,
and warming with his narration. ^ Hera
regular bad wan — her s scarred on with
a lodger chap so well as with Jerrem —
hers a '

^ By the living Lord, if you speak another
word I'll be your death !' exclaimed
Adam.

Wa-al, and so you may,' exclaimed
Jonathan doggedly, * if so be you'll lave
me bide 'til I've seed the end o' she.
"Why, what do 'ee mane then ?' he cried, a
sudden suspicion throwing a light on
Adam's storm of indignation, ' Her ain't
nathan' to you, her's Jerrem's maid — her
ain't your maid % Why,' he added, finding
that Adam didn't speak, * 'twas
through the letter I carried from he that
herd got it to blab about ; I wishes my
hand had bin struck off' — and he dashed

it violently against the wooden bin — * afore
I'd touched his letter or his money

What letter V gasped Adam.

Wa-all, I knows you said I wasn't to
take neither wan ; but J erred he coaxes
and persuades, and says you ain't to know
nathan' about it, and 'ain't nathan
in it, only 'cos he'd a got a letter fra'
she to Guernsey, and this was transfer ;
and then I gnawed, 'cos I seed em,
that they was sweetheart and that,
and '

Did you give her that letter V said
Adam, and the sound of his voice was so
strange that Jonathan shrank back and
cowered close to the wall.

Miss, I did he faltered ; ' leastwise I
give un to Joan, but t'other wan had the
rain' in it.'

There was a pause, during which Adam
stood stunned, feeling that everything was

49—2

crumbling and giving way beneath him, that
he had no longer anything to live for,
anything to hope, anything to fear. As one
after another, each former bare suggestion
of artifice now passed before him clothed
in the raiment of certain deceit, he made a
desperate clutch at the most improbable,
in the wild hope that one falsehood at
least might afford him some ray of light,
however feeble, to dispel the horrors of
this terrible darkness.

And after she'd got the letter,' he said,
•' what — what about the rest ?'

'- Why ' twas this way,' cried Jonathan,
his eyes rekindling in his eagerness to tell
the story, ' somebody dropped a bit of
paper into the rendezvous winder, with
writing' 'pon it to say when and where they'd
find the Lottery to. Who 'twas did it,
none knows for certain ; but the talk's got
abroad 'twas a sergeant there, 'cos he'd a bin

brao^ofin' aforehand that he'd o-ot a watch-sale,
and that o' her n.'

Hern !' echoed Adam.

Miss, o' Eve's. And he's allays a-showin
of it off, he is ; and when they axes un questions
he don't answer, but he dangles the
sale front of 'em and says, "What dree
think," he says ; and now he makes his brag
that he shall hab the maid yet, while herman's
a-dancin' gallus-high a top o' Tyburn
tree.'

The blood rushed up into Adam's face,
so that each vein stood a separate cord of
swollen bursting rage.

They wasn't amain' you, ye know,' said
Jonathan ; * 'war Jerrem — her's played
un false, I reckon. Awl !' and he gave a
fiendish chuckle, ^ but us'll pay her out
foret, won't us, eh ? Awnly you give to me
the tickling' o' her orel-pipe,* and he made a
movement of his bony fingers that conveyed

such a hideous embodiment of his
meaning, that Adam, overcome by horror,
threw up his arms with a terrible cry to
heaven, and falling prone he let the
bitterness of death pass over the love that
had so late lain warm at his heart ; while
Jonathan crouched down, trembling and
awe stricken by the sight of emotion which,
though he could not comprehend nor account
for, stirred in him the sympathetic uneasiness
of a dumb animal. Afraid to move
or speak, he remained watching Adam's
bent figure, until his shallow brain, incapable
of any sustained concentration of
thought, wandered off to other interests,
from which he was recalled by a noise, and
looking up he saw that Adam had raised
himself and was wiping his face with his
handkerchief Did he feel so hot, then ?
No, it must be that he felt cold, for he
shivered and his teeth seemed to chatter

as he told Jonathan to stoop down by the
side there, and hand him up a jar and a
glass that he would find ; and this got,
Adam poured out some of its contents, and
after tossing it off, told Jonathan to take
the jar and help himself; for, as nothing
could be done until daylight, they might
as well lie down and try and get some
sleep. Jonathan's relish for spirit once
excited, he made himself tolerably free of
the permission, and before long had helped
himself to such purpose that, stretched in a
heavy sleep, unless some one roused him
he was not likely to awake for some hours
to come.

Then Adam got up, and with cautious
movements stole down the ladder, undid
the small hatch door which opened out on
the mill-stream, fastened it after him, and
leaping across, stood for a few moments
asking' himself what he had come out todo.

He didn't know, for as yet, in the
tumult of jealousy and revenge, there was
no outlet, no gap by which he might drain
off any portion of that passionate fire
which was rapidly destroying and consuming
all his softer feelings. The story
which Jonathan had brought of the betrayal
to the sergeant, the fellow's boastings,
and his possession of the seal, Adam
treated as an idle tale, its possibility
vanquished by his conviction that Eve
could have had no share in it. It was
the letter from Jerrem which was the
damnatory proof in Adam's eyes, the
proof by which he judged and condemned
her ; for had not he himself seen and wondered
at Jerrem's anxiety to go to
Guernsey, his elation at finding a letter
waiting him, his display of wishing to be
seen secretly reading it, and now his ultimate

betrayal of them by sending an
answer to it ?

As for Jerrem, oh I he would deal with
him as with a dog, and quickly send him to
that fate he so richly deserved. It was
not against Jerrem that the depths of his
bitterness welled over : as the strength
of his love, so ran his hate ; and this all
turned to one direction, and that direction
pointed towards Eve.

He must see her, stand face to face with
her, smite her with reproaches, heap
upon her curses show her how he could
trample on her love, and fling her back
her perjured vows — and then '? This done,
what was there left ? From Jerrem he
could free himself. A word, a blow, and
all would be over ; but how with her ?
True, he could kill the visible Eve with his
own hands ; but the Eve who lived in his
love, would she not live there still ? Aye !

and though he flung that body, which
could court the gaze of other eyes than his,
full fathoms deep, the fair image which
dwelt before him would still remain present
to his vision. So that, do what he
would, Eve would live, must live. Live !
Crushing down on that thought came the
terrible consequences which might come of
Jonathan's tale being told — a tale so
coloured with all their bitterest prejudices
that it was certain to be greedily listened
to ; and in the storm of angry passion it
would rouse, everything else would be
swallowed up by resentment against Eve's
baseness, and the fire once kindled, what
would come of it ?

The picture which Adam's heated
imagination conjured up turned him hot
and cold ; an agony of fear crept over him ;
his heart sickened and grew faint within
him, and the hands, which but a few

minutes before had longed to be steeped
in her blood, now trembled and shook with
nervous dread lest a finger of harm should
be laid upon her.

These and a hundred visions more or
less wild coursed through Adam's brain, as
his feet took their swift way towards Pol-pedro
— not keeping along the open road,
but taking a path which —-only known to
the inhabitants — would bring him down
almost in front of his own house.

The night was dark, the sky lowering
and cloudy. Not a sound was to be heard,
not a soul had he seen, and already Adam
was discussing with himself how best,
without making an alarm, he should awaken
Joan and obtain admittance. Usually bars
and bolts were unknown, doors were left
unfastened, windows often open ; but now
all would be securely shut, and he would
have to rely on the possibility of his signal

being heard by some one who might chance
to be on the watch.

Suddenly a noise fell upon his ear.
Surely he heard the sound of footsteps and
the hum of voices ! It could never be that
the surprise they deemed a possibility had
turned out a certainty ! Adam crouched
down, and under shadow of the wall glided
silently along until he came opposite the
corner where the house stood. It was ashe
feared. There was no further doubt.
The shutters were flung back, the door
was half open, and round it, easing their
tired limbs as best they might, stood
crowded together a dozen men, the portion
of a party who had evidently spread themselves
about the place.

Fortunately for Adam, the steps which
led up to the wooden oriel, or balcony — at
that time a common adornment to the Pol-pedro
houses — afforded him a tolerably safe

retreat ; and screened here, he remained, a
silent watcher, hearing only a confused
murmur and seeing nothing: save an occasional
movement, as one and the other
changed posts and passed in and out of the
opposite door. At length a general parley
seemed to take place, the men fell into rank,
and at a slow pace moved off down the
street in the direction of the quay. Adam
looked cautiously out. The door was now
closed. Dare he open it % Might he not
find that a sentinel had been left behind ?
Hovi^ about the other door % The chances
against it were as bad. The only possible
way of ingress was by a shutter in the
wall, which overlooked the brook and
communicated with the hiding-place in
which his father lay secreted. This shutter
had been little used since the days of press-gangs.
It was painted in so exact an
imitation of the slated house wall as to defy

detection, and to mark the spot to the
initiated eye, a root of house-leek projected
out below, and served to further screen the
opening from view. The contrivance of
this shutter-entrance was well known to
Adam, and the mode of reaching it familiar
to him ; therefore, if he could but elude
observation he was certain of success.

The plan once decided on, he began
putting it into execution ; and, although it
seemed half a lifetime to him, but very few
minutes had elapsed before he had crossed
the road, ran waist-high into the brook,
scaled the wall, and scrambled down almost
on top of old Zebedee, who, stupefied by
continual drink, sleep, and this constant
confinement, took the surprise in a wonderfully
calm manner.

Hist, father ! 'tis only me — Adam !'
A' right ! a' right !' stammered Zebedee,
too dazed to take in the whole matter at

once. ' What is it lad, eh ? They darned
gallows can't a-tracked 'ee, have 'em ? By
the hooky ! but they'd given' 't us hot and
strong this time, Adam ; they was tramping'
'bout inside here a mint agone, train' to
keep our spirits up by a-rattlin' the bilboes
in our ears. Why, however did 'ee dodge
'em— eh ? What's the main' o' it all V

^ I thought they was gone,' said Adam,
so I came down to see how you were all
getting on here.'

Miss, miss, sure ; wa-al, all right, I repose,
but I hasn't ain let outside much ; Joan
won't have it, ye know. Poor Joan !' he
sighed, ' hers terrible moody-hearted 'bout
't all — and so's Eve too. I never see'd
maids take on as they'd coin' ; but there,
I reckon 'twill soon be put a end to now.'

How so V said Adam.

Wa-al, you mustn't know, down below,
more than you'd tawld,' said the old man,

with a significant wink and a jerk of his
head, ' but Jerrem he let me into it this
benin' when he sinned up to see me for a
bit. Seems one o' they lodger chaps is
car 'in' on with Eve, and Jerrem's setting
her on to rig un up so that he'll get un
not to see what 'ain't maned for un to
look at.'

Well r said Adam.

Miss,' said Zebedee, ^ but will it be well ?

that's what I keeps ain' of un. He's cock

J.

sure, certain, that they can manage it all.
He's sick, he says, o' all this skulking', and
he's blamed if he'll go on standing' it,
neither.'

Oh !' hissed Adam, ' he's sick of it, is
he "?' and, in the effort he made to subdue
his voice, the veins in his face rose up to
be purple cords. ' He'd nothing to do
with bringing it on us all ? it's no fault of
his that the place is turned into a hell.

and Ave hunted down like a pack o'
dogs ?'

Awl, well, I daunt knaw^ muffin 'bout
that said old Zebedee, huffily ; ' how so
be if 'tis so, when he's got lane off 'twill
be all right amen.'

All right !' thundered Adam, ' how all
right ? "Right that he should get off, and
Ave be left here ; that he shouldn't swing,

but Ave must stay' to suffer '?'

«/

AAA^h, come, come, come !' said the old
man, AA'ith the testy impatience of one
ready to argue but incapable of reasoning,
'tain t no talk o' swinging', now; that was a
bit o' brag on the boy's part ; he's so eager
to same his neck as you or me either.
Awnly Jonathan s bin here and taAvld up
sommat that makes un Avant to be off to
Avance, for he says, AA'hat us all knows,
Without he's minded to it, you can't slip a
knot round Jonathan's clapper ; and 'ain't

VOL. III. 50

that Jerreni's afeared o' his tongue, awnly
for the keeping' up o' pace and quietness he
fancies 'twould be better for un to make
himself .scarce for a bit.'

Adam's whole body quivered as a spasm
of rage ran through him ; and Zebedee,
noting the trembling movement of his
hands, conveyed his impression of the
cause by bestowing a glance, accompanied
with a pantomimic bend of his elbow in
the direction of a certain stone bottle
which stood in the corner.

Did Jonathan tell you what word 'twas
he'd brought X Adam managed to say.

Noa. I never cast eyes on un. He
wasn't here 'bove a soo mints 'fore he
slipped away, none of 'em knows where or
how. He was warned not to go night
you,' he added after a moment's pause ; * so
I reckon you knows no more of un than us
does

And Eve and Joan — were they let into
the secret 1' asked Adam, and the sound of
his harsh voice grated even on Zebedee's
dulled ears.

Miss, I reckon,' he said, half turning ;
'cos Eve's got to do the trick — her's to
bamfoozle the lodger. Odds rot it, lad !^
he cried, startled at the expression which
leaped into Adam's haggard face, ' what's
-come to 'ee that you must turn round 'pon
us like that % Is it the maid you's got
a spite agen ? Lors ! but 'tis a poor
stomach you's got torts her, if you'd
angered by such a bit o' philander' as
I've told 'ee of What dree mane then 1'
he added, his temper rising at such unwarrantable
inconsistency. ^ I've gnawed as
honest women as ever her is that's a done
that, and more too, for to get their men
safe off and out o' way — miss, and wasn't
thought none the wus of, neither. You'd

50—2

growed mighty fanciful all to dance 'bout
what us is to do, and what us doesn't think
o'. I'm sick o' such talk. 'Taint nathan'
else fra' morning' to night, but Adam this
and Adam that. I'm darned if 'tis to be
wondered at if the maid plays ee false ; by
gosh ! I'd do the trick, if I was she, 'fore
I'd put up with such fantasy from you, or
either man like 'ee — so there !'

Roger did not answer, and old Zebedee,
interpreting the silence into an admission
of the force of his arguments, forbore to
press the advantage, and generously started
a fresh topic.

They's a told 'ee, I reckon, 'bout the
bill they's a posted up, right afore the
winder, by the Three Pilchards,' he said.
Miss,' he added, not waiting for an answer ;
^ the king's pardon, and wan hunted
pound, to he who'll discover to 'em the
man who 'twas fired the fatal shot. ' Wan

hunted pound !* he sneered. ' That's a fat
lot, surely, and as for t' king's pardon, why
'twudn't lave un britain' time to spend it
in, not if he war left here 'twudn't. No
fear ! us ain't so bad off yet that either
wan in Polperro 'ud stink their fingers wi'
blind money. Lord save un ! such a man
'ud fetch up the devil himself to see un
pitched head foremost down to bottom o'
say, which 'ud be the end I'd vote for un,
and see it was card out too — miss, tho' his
bones bore my own flesh and blind 'pon 'em,
I wud !' and in his answer the old man's
ruo'oed face o-rew distorted with emotion.

But Adam neither spoke nor made comment
on his words. His eyes were fixed
on mid-air, his nostrils worked, his mouth
quivered. Within him a legion of devils
seemed to have broken loose, and, sensible
of the mastery they were gaining over him,
he leaped up, and with the wild despair of

one who catches at a straw to save him
from destruction, it came upon him to rush
down and look once more into the face of
her who he had found so fair and proved
so false.

What is it you m going' to do then T
said Zebedee, seeing that Adam had
stooped down and was raising the panel,,
by which exit was effected.

^ Going' to see if the coast's clear said
Adam.

^ Better bide where you be urged
Zebedee. ' Joan or they's sure to rin up
so soon as 'tis all safe.'

But Adam paid no heed ; muttering
something about knowing what he was
about, he slipped up the partition and crept
under, cautiously ascertained that the outer
room was empty, and then, crossing the
passage, stole down the stairs.

The door which led into the room was.

shut ; but through a convenient chink
Adam could take a survey of those within.
Already his better self had begun to
struggle in his ear, already the whisper
which desire was prompting asked what if
Eve stood there — alone and — But no, his
glance had taken in the whole, quick as the
liorhtninof's flash the details of that scene
were given to Roger's gaze. Eve bent
forward, standing beside the door, over
whose hatch a stranger s face was thrust,
while Joan, close to the spot where Jerrem
still lay hid, clasped her two hands as if
to stay the breath which longed to cry,
He's free.' . . . The blow dealt, the firebrand
flung, each evil passion quickened
into life, filled with jealousy and mad revenge,
Adam turned swiftly round, and
backward sped his way.

They'd marched ofl*, ain't 'em V said
old Zebedee, as, Adam having given the

signal, he drew the panel of the door aside.
^ I've a bin listening' to their tramping' past
why what's the time, lad, eh ? — must be
close on break o' day, ain't it *?'

Just about,' said Adam, pushing back
the shutter so that he might look out and
see that no one stood near enough to overlook
his descent.

Why, you hasn't going agen, be 'ee ?'
said Zebedee, in amazement. * Why, what
for be 'ee hikin' off like this then — eh, lad ?
Lord save us, he's gone !' he exclaimed as
Adam, swinging himself by a dexterous
twist on to the first ledge, let the shutter
close behind him. ' Wa-al, I'm blamed if
this ain't a rum start ! Somnus gone
wrong: with un now. I'll wao-er he's a bin
ticked up in the bunt soraehows for a
guinea ; and if so be 'tis with wan o' they ;
they'd all sixes and sevens down below ;
so I'll lave 'em bide a bit, and hab a tot o'

liquor and lie down for a spell. Lord send
'em to know the valley o' pace and quietness
I But 'tis wan and all the same,

'' Friends and saws,

To battle they laws,
And what they all fights about,
Nobody knows. " '

It was broad daylight when Joan,
having once before failed to make her uncle
hear, gave such a vigorous rap that, starting
up, the old man cried, 'Ay, ay, mate,'
and with all speed unfastened the door.

Joan crept in, and some conversation
-ensued, in the midst of which, as the
recollection of the events just past recurred
to his mind, Zebedee asked :

^ What was up with Adam V

With Adam 1' echoed Joan.

Miss ; what made un start off like he
did ?'

Joan looked for a minute, then she lifted
the stone bottle and shook its contents.

Why, whatever be 'ee telhn' up ?' she
said.

^ Term up ! why, you seed un down
below, didn't 'ee ? — miss, you did, now.'

Completely puzzled what to think, Joan
shook her head.

Lor' ha' massy ! don't never tell me
he didn't shaw himself. Why, the lodgers
was barely out o' doors 'fore he comes
tumbling' in to shutter there, and after a bit
he says, '' I'll just step down below," he says,
and out he goes ; and in a quarter less no
time back he comes tapping' agen, and
when I drawer open for un by he pushes,
and 'fore I could say knife he was out and
lane off.'

You haven't a bin dreaming' of it, have
'ee V said Joan, her face growing pale with
apprehension.

Naw, 'tis Gospel truth, every ward.
I've a had a youthful of liquor since,

and a bit o' a caulk, but not a drap

more. '

'Jerrem's coming up into t'other room''

said Joan, not wishing to betray all the

alarm she felt ; ' will 'ee go into un there

the whiles I runs down and says a word to

Ever

Miss,' said the old man ; ' and I'll freshen

mysen up a bit with a dash o' cold water ;

happen I may bring some more o' it to my

mind then.'

But, his ablutions over and the whole

family assembled, Zebedee could throw no
more light on the subject, the recital of
which caused so much anxiety that Joan,
yielding to Eve's entreaties, decided to set
off with all speed for Crumplehorn.

Mother, Adam's all right— ain't he here
still, and safe ?' cried Joan, bursting into
the kitchen where Mrs. Tucker, only just
risen, was occupied with her house duties.

Miss, plaise the Lord, and so far as I
knows of, he is,' replied Mrs. Tucker,
greatly startled by Joan's unexpected appearance.
^ Why, what do 'ee mane,
child, eh ? But there,' she added, starting
up, ' us 'full make sure to dance and know
whether 'tis lies or truth we'd tellin'.
Here, Samm}^^, off over so quick as legs
can carry 'ee, and climber up and fetch
Adam back with 'ee.'

Sammy started off, and Joan proceeded
to communicate the cause of her uneasiness.


Awl, my dear I is that all V exclaimed
Mrs. Tucker, at once pronouncing sentence
on poor old Zebedee's known failing; 'then
my mind's made easy agen. There's too
much elbow crooked' 'bout that story forme
to set any hold by it.'

Do 'ee think so V said Joan, ready to
watch at any straw of hope.

*Why, miss ; and for this reason too,
I '

But at this moment Sammy appeared,
and, without waiting for him to speak, the
two women uttered a cry as they saw in
his face a confirmation of their fears.

Miss, 'tis every ward true ; he's a gone
sure 'nus !' exclaimed Sammy ; 'but by his
own accord, I reckon, 'cos there ain't no
signs o' nothing' been' open 'ceptin 'tis the
hatch over by trill-wheel.'

'Awl, mother!' cried Joan, * whatever's
the main' of it ? My poor heart's a
sinking' down lower than ever. O Lord \
if they should ha' catched un, anyways.'


Now, don't 'ee take on like that,
Joan,' said Mrs. Tucker. ' 'Tis like
tempting' o' Providence to do such like.
I'll be bound foret he's safe home amongst
afore now ; he ain't like wan to act wild,.

and go stepping' into danger wi' both his eyes
wide open

The possibility suggested, and Joan was
coif again, back on her way to Polperro, too
impatient to wait while her mother put on
her bonnet to accompany her.

At the door stood Eve, breathless expectation
betraying itself in her every look
and gesture. Joan shook her head, while
Eve's finger, quick laid upon her lip, warned
her to be cautious.

'They're back,' she muttered, as Joan
'Came up close ; ' they've just marched past,
and gone down to the quay.'
What for ?' cried Joan.
I don't know ; run and see, Joan ;
everybody's flocking that way.'

Joan ran down the street, and took her
place among a mob of people watching
with eager interest the movements of a
soldier who, with much unnecessary parade

and delay, was taking down the bill of
reward posted outside the Three Pilchards.
A visible anticipation of the effect about
to be produced stirred the small red-coated
company, and they wheeled round so as to
take note of any sudden emotion produced
by the surprise they felt sure awaited the
assembly.

Whatever is it, eh V asked Joan, trying
to catch a better siofht of what was sfoinof
on.

'They'd sticking' up a noo reward,
't seems,' said an old man, close by.
^ 'Taint no '

But the swaying back of the crowd
carried Joan with it. A surge forward,
and then on her ear fell a shrill cry, and
as the name of Jerrem Christmas started
from each mouth, a hundred eyes seemed
turned upon her. For a moment the girl
stood dazed staring around like some wild

animal at bay ; then, flinging out her arms,
she forced those near her aside, and rushing
forward to the front, made a desperate
clutch at the soldier.

Speak — tell me — what's writ there ?'
she cried.

Writ there X said the man, startled by
the scared face that was turned up to him.
Why, the warrant to seize for murder
Jerrem Christmas, living or dead, on the
king's evidence of Adam Pascal ! . . .'

And the air was rent by a cry of unutterable
woe, caught up by each voice
around, and coming back in echoes from
far and near long after Joan lay a senseless
heap on the stones upon Which she had
fallen.

HILE the small party of soldiers
were employed in attracting the
attention of the inhabitants to
the meaningless parade of taking down the
offer of reward, and replacing it by the
announcement of discovery, the larger
portion of their company had ahead
entered Uncle Zebedee's house and seized
upon Jerrem, their object being to avoid
any defence on the part of the neighbours,
which Adam, with a view of preventing

VOL. III. 51

further search being made in the house,
had assured them was certain to take place
unless they could find a means of very
speedily effecting their purpose. Although
little disposed to be influenced by any of
his suggestions, the force of this one
was greatly strengthened by the necessity
of dividing themselves into two parties, one
of which must take Adam on, while the
other returned to Polperro to seize the
prisoner. And this they managed with
such promptitude, that in less than ten
minutes they had entered the house,
and had dragged out Jerrem, who, half-stupefied,
Alas pinioned and marched off
before he was sufficiently aroused to
thoroughly comprehend or realise his situation.


The tattoo of the drums announced to
the men on the quay that the capture was
effected, and the party, hurrying off by the

Warren, had joined their comrades, already
half up Talland Lane, before those who had
been spectators of one calamity could exchange
their evil tidings with those who had
witnessed the other.

Yes, Jerrem was gone ! led off to disgrace,
maybe to death, through the
treachery of his shipmate, his comrade, his
all but in blood — brother. What would
come next ? Ghastly fears crowded in
upon all present. Vengeance grew rank,
hatred spread out on all sides ; the earth
thirsted for his blood, and the air was thick
with curses showered on his name. Even
Joan turned relentless, and flung pity
from her heart ; while old Zebedee, stung
to the quick by the odium brought upon
his name, disowned Adam for his son, and
took God to witness that so long as life
remained every farthing he possessed
should be spent in saving Jerrem.

51—2

At early dawn of the next day, Joan, at
the instance of her uncle and in company
with several trusty friends, set off first for
Liskeard, and then, if need be, to get onto
Plymouth or to Bodmin — at one of
which places Jerrem, they said, was certain
to be tried. Bodmin gaol and Plymouth
clink had both been familiar in days gone
by to many who still lived to tell their
tales and give their experience, and schemes
were already abroad to put the larger
boats on wheels, so that, if Bodmin were
selected, conveyances might be supplied by
which the mass of the people could be
transported there, and see fair play dealt
out to their comrade.

But days went by without Joan coming
back, and Eve, who was left behind to look
after Uncle Zebedee, had to sit and listen
to the terrible outpourings of wrath against
his son, to which the old man gave vent in

the presence of his neighbours, and the
more heartrending desolation of spirit
which bowed him to the around when no
strange eye was near to witness his weight
of woe.

So entirely had the chain of circumstances
overpowered Eve that this climax
of disaster seemed to have sealed up the
flow of her emotions, and listening to and
looking at the tears, exclamations, sighs,
and groans, with which the excitable,
sympathetic Cornish folk expressed their
anguish and their indignation, she asked
herself, ' Had all feeling left her ? Did she
no longer care what happened to herself or
anybody around her ? Was it nothing to
her that her life was, as it were, at an end ;
her future blighted ; her hopes dead ; her
love disgraced, reviled, disowned, and denounced
by his own father and his own
family V Anyway, she could find no tears

to bewail her sad fate in, no sighs to relieve
her burdened heart, no groans to ease
her desolate spirit : all was chaos, over
which two dark shadows moved — the
spectral forms of herself and Adam.

^ Uncle, what do you think's become of
him ? where can he have gone to 1' Eve
asked one night, as, no longer afraid of
his neighbours seeing him, the old man
tore off the armour under which in their
presence he concealed every softer feeling.

To bottom o' sae — lane gone out o*
the world, I hope, where I wishes I was
too !' groaned Zebedee. ' Awl I to think
e'er a boy o' mine should ha' served us so !
that he, us counted 'bove all other flesh and
blood, should ha' bin the whiles carrying'
'bout the heart of a fausse Judas in his
body !'

Perhaps he was mad,' said Eve, dropping
her voice in terror of the suggestion.

Lord send I could see un ravin' !' cried
Zebedee. 'Why he added, his voice
breaking under the pictured joy, ' I'd
thraw myself' 'pon un and hug un to me
close, though he tired out my heart 'pon
the spot foret % Naw, lass, naw he sighed,
he ain't mad : 'tis the devil has seated
hold on un somehow ! that's what's brought
un to this.'

Didn't he say nothing that seems now
as if he'd told you that night what he
meant to do ?' urged Eve.

Naw, nothing.'

And you didn't say anything to him,
did you ?*

Miss, there 'tis, that's what sticks by
me, and shows me plain the vengeance
that was in 'un, 'cos I tawld un that us
was train' to dale double, so as to manage
for Jerrem to stale away.'

You didn't tell him about the soldier ?'

faltered Eve. ' No, you couldn't, because
you didn't know anything about it yourself,
did you ?'

Miss, I did. Jerrem tawld — he allays
tawld me everything', Jerrem did — sand I
ups and tells Adam.' .

An icy grip seized Eve by the heart.

Oh, uncle I' she groaned, * could it be because
of that — that he thought — about me V

What damon's in the maid now '?' cried
the old man, starting to his feet, and standing
before her with clenched hands and
quivering limbs. ' Do 'ee give heed to
what 'tis you'd saying' of Down t 'ee know
that if I thought that 'twas you was the
cause of it, I'd scat out yer brains on the
planches where you'd standing to !'

Eve shrank back in terror, while Zebedee,
after a minute's pause, his outburst ended,
sank down into his former despondent
attitude, muttering :

There, there ! let be ! let be ! Awl, I
wander what 'tis a-keepin' o' Joan so ! — •
things is all bottom side upmost when hera
out o' hamlin' distance

But two days more passed before Joan
returned, bringing with her the startling
intelligence that, instead of Bodmin or
Plymouth, Jerrem was to be tried in London,
to which place report said Adam had
already been removed. But though everyone
thirsted for news, beyond the bare
facts, Joan had little with which to satisfy
them ; she had failed in her endeavour to
see Jerrem, of whose present whereabouts
even no one could speak with certainty ;
she could learn no positive tidings of Adam,
neither had she been able to ascertain any
trustworthy account of the betrayal, only
that it was in every one's mouth that Adam
had done it, and had meant to do it from

the first moment he found that the shot
fired against his will would bring them all
to trouble. Mr. Maceyy, the lawyer at
Fowey, who had always managed Uncle
Zebedee's money business, had said 'twas a
terrible job of it, and though he couldn't
take it himself, he'd see 'twas carried
through by somebody sharper at such work
than he was ; and he'd sent uncle Zebedee
word that not a stone should be left unturned,
nor a guinea unspent, while hope
was left that Jerrem's life might be saved ;
but he also sent a solemn warning to him,
and to all the Lottery s crew, to keep quiet
and out of sight, until 'twas seen whether
they meant to carry their vengeance further,
or whether Jerrem's life alone would serve
to content them.

'Wa-al,' sighed Zebedee, who had
listened eagerly to the whole of Joan's
details, and patiently to old Mr. Maceyy's

friendly warning, 'they'd fair words and
kindly spoken ; and so far as they goes I'll
bide by 'em. But hark 'ee here, Joan, if
the warsfc comes to worst, mind this,
though they strings me up with un and
we swings together, I'll stand yet dance
more face to face with Jerrem afore he
dies.'

^ And that you shall,' said Joan ; ' and
so will I, too, for while in life us cherished
cm, so while life lasts us '11 never desert
un.'

And as for t'other wan,' said the
stricken old man, his wrinkled face growing
pinched and sharp, ^ may the wound
that he's planted in my heart rankle and
fester in his own ! May he live to know
the want o' they he's cast himself off from,
and die a stranger in a furrin land, and be
buried where none who gnawed un here
jan point to the grave that holds un I'

Uncle !' cried Eve, thrusting her fingers-into
her ears to keep out these terrible
words from falling on them, ^ uncle !' but
Joan's upraised hand warned her to keep
silent, and turning she saw that a sudden
change had fallen upon Zebedee ; his
features had relaxed, his stretched eyelids
were half closed over his glazed eyes, his
head drooped low and was sunk down upon
his breast.

For some minutes the two wis stood
anxiously gazing at him, until Joan, terrified
by the ashen pallor which had blanched
his usually ruddy cheeks, ventured to speak,
and at length succeeded in so far rousing
him that he allowed himself to be persuaded
to go to bed, and the two girls
were left alone.

You're wanting to run up to your
mother's, Joan, ain't you?' said Eve. 'I'll sit
and watch Uncle Zebedee while you're gone.'

No, never mind for to-nights said
Joan, wearily.

^ Then let me go said Eve ; ' 'won't
take me any time, and I want a breath of
fresh air,' and she rose from her seat as
she spoke ; but Joan intercepted.

No ; now sit down,' she said hurriedly ;
there ain't no call for neither to go ; 'sides
which 'tis too late. I don't want 'ee to
go wandering' 'bout in the dark — you'd too
much given to going out by yourself — it
won't do now; 'ain't safe, you knaw/

Eve stared.

Not safe, Joan ! why not V

Well, now, I'd rather you didn't. Sit
down now, like a dear.'

Eve sat down, but her curiosity awakened
by Joan's agitated, nervous manner, she
said :

Joan, what is it ? I'm sure you've
heard something. Tell me, what makes

you say we oughtn't to go out by ourselves
ehr

Joan hesitated.

I wonder she said, ^ whether I'd best
tell 'ee or not ? It may be nothing' buta
passel o' mazed talk, only I wouldn't have
a finger o' harm laid 'pon 'ee for worlds.'

Why, what is it, Joan ?'

Well, my dear, you see, I've see'd
Jonathan. Through Again's tellin', he was
looked off too, and lodged in Plymouth
clink ; but finding' they couldn't make un
spake a word o' sense, when they carried
Adam away they left Jonathan bide, and
there he is, and there I hopes he'll stay.'

you do? What for?' asked Eve,
amazed.

Why, 'cos o' you, Eve. Miss,' she said,
answering her look of surprise, she's for all
the world like anybody ravin' mad agen
you.'

Against me ? But why against me ?'

He will have that you'd the cause of it
all,' said Joan ; ' and 't seems now he let
out to Adam 'bout the letter that Jerreni
writ and he broiled, and then he drove un
further mad by a passel o' lies he's somehow
got tagged on t' it, that you'd ha' told
the sergeant, and through that he dropped
a bit o' paper, telhn' of it all, into the
rendezvous winder — for seeming' that was
how they got scent o' the Lottery 8 landing.'

And Adam believed him ?' gasped Eve.

He must have,' sobbed Joan ; ' and then
I reckon something' he see'd or leered that
night finished un.'

Oh, Joan !' cried Eve, flinging herself
down and burying her head on Joan's lap.

Miss ; don't it seem as if us all must have
some hand in tightening' the rope that's
round that poor saw's neck ?'

And Adam could believe that I would

betray them — would betray him?' and clasping
her hands, Eve looked up as if making
an appeal to some unseen presence. ^ Him
she said, ' for whom I would have given my
life — for whom,' she cried, breaking down,
^ oh ! Joan, I would give my life now !'

^ Miss, I know you would,' said Joan,
hugging her close to her. ^ Why, haven't
I called un everything bad before ee, o'
purpose 'cos I should see 'ee flare up agen
me for coin' it, and haven't I blessed 'ee in
my heart for sticking' to un through thick
and thin ? Awl, Eve, my dear, don't 'ee
judge me hard for keeping all to Jerrem's
side. 'Taint only love for Jerrem makes
me do it, but that Adam shan't never befouled
by having' the stain o' blood resting' 'pon
un. If 'twas only for that, I'd spend my last
breath to save Jerrem from hanging.'

They think they'll try to hang him ?'
said Eve, in a faltering voice.

Miss, for certain they'll try, and though I
didn't say so to uncle, all Mr. Maceyy
fears is, that wan life won't content 'em
neither.'

Could Adam have known that 1' whispered
Eve.

^ He gnawed 'twas death to whoever
was took, and a free pardon to whoever
told on 'em, or else why didn't he take and
knock him on the head himself ? Jonathan
says,' she added, after a minute's pause, that
when he'd told un 'bout you, he sprung on
un like a tiger, and shook un like a rat ;
and after, when it comet to 'bout the
letter, he roared out like a bull melvin',
and then fell flat down 'pon his face like
one struck for death.'

Oh, why — why did Jerrem send that
letter !' moaned Eve, wringing-her hands in
desperation.

Miss, why indeed ? said Joan ; ' though
VOL. III. 52

that could have had no thin' to do with the
finding's out that I can see ; for if 'twas the
last word I spoked, I could take an oath to
never having' quitted a word 'bout it to a
single living' saw ; and as to you meeting'
the sergeant, why, you never stirred from
this, did 'ee ? Let's see, what did us do
that day V she added, trying to recall the
past events, while Eve, sensible of having
concealed her meeting with Reuben May,
averted her face, so that Joan might not
perceive its terrible pallor.

Over and over again had Eve endeavoured
to screw up her courage to tell
Joan of this meeting, since which one misfortune
after another had crowded so
thickly upon them, as to make each endeavour
seem inopportune. For days after
the interview, she had every now and again
been seized with terror lest Reuben should
make his appearance ; and great was her

relief when, as time went on, she began to
be released from this anxiety. But no
suspicion that he could in any way have
been connected with the betrayal had ever
entered her mind until now, when, as Joan
spoke of her being the supposed betrayer,
a sudden dart of terror seemed to strike her.
Was it possible ? Could she have said anything
that Reuben had laid hold of against
them ? For an instant Eve wrestled with
the doubt, and tried to crush it ; but so
vividly did it rise up before her, that at
any cost she felt it must be set at
rest, and seizing Joan's hand, she blurted
out :

Joan, there's one thing I've never told
you of — that the day we expected them all
back, after Jerrem's letter had come, T went
out for a bit by Talland way, and there,
just down before you come to the Warren

stile, I met '

52—2

Not he ! No, doan't'ee tell me you see'd
the sergeant,' cried Joan, forcing her
hands up to Eve's mouth, as if to keep back
the words.

The sergeant, no T said Eve indignantly,
but the young man I told you of from
London — Reuben May !'

Reuben May, Eve ! Why however did
he come down 'long this ways ? What
broiled un here, eh ?'

He was coming to see me,' said Eve.
He had come in Cape Triggs' vessel, because
of something he'd heard about us,
and the minute he saw me he began
about uncle and Adam, calling them
both thieves and robbers, and I can't tell
what.'

But that wouldn't make 'ee tell un
nothing' 'bout their landing' ?' said Joan.

No. I feel sure I never mentioned
that. I told him they were expected home.

because I feared he'd want to come that
night and see you all ; but then we fell to
quarrelling again, and parted in such anger
that I said I hoped never to see his face
again.'

But whatever made 'ee keep it to yourself,
and never spake of it 'til now V said
Joan, turning her eyes upon Eve with a
look of anxious scrutiny.

I never meant to keep it from you,
Joan,' said Eve earnestly,' and only that
your mother and Mrs. Clio and the rest
were here, I should have told you the
minute I got back ; then, when they were
gone, I said, I'll tell her as soon as we comedown
from the cliff: but what happened
there put everything else out of my head
for that night, and since then, though I've
had it on my lips to say twenty times,
something has always come up to hinder
me from speaking.'

I'd a made sure you'd never cast eyes
on any man outside the place said Joan,
perplexed by this new opening out of difficulties.


^ I wish now, more than ever, that it had
never happened,' sighed Eve. ' Still, Joan,
the more I think of it the more certain I
feel that Reuben May had no hand in it,
unless it could be that anybody might have
watched us together. That's not impossible,
although I never met a single soul, coming
or going.' ^

Joan made no comment ; for a minute
she seemed to struggle and debate with
her thoughts, then, suddenly looking up,^
she said :

Eve, you'll have to go back home to
dance ; it 'full never do to have 'ee stain'
here now.'

But why, Joan ? Has what I have
told you made you think ill of me ? Don't

you believe that I am speaking the truth
when I say that what kept me silent were
the bitter words that Reuben May spoke.
I meant to tell you of it because I had
spoken of him to you before, but I could
never have told Adam, that one I had
counted as my greatest friend had called
him a thief over whose head the gallows
was danoiinof :' and at the remembrance
of how near those words seemed now
to the truth, Eve burst into a passion of
tears.

Now don't 'ee go for to cry like that,'
exclaimed Joan, dashing away the drops
which were blinding her own eyes. 'Whatever
'tis, I loves 'ee too well to think harm
of 'ee for it ; and whether 'twas he or some
other man, t' mischief's done now and can't
be set straight agen. But, Eve, us mustn't
let more harm come to us if we can hinder
it, and I told 'ee that I didn't like the

angry words and the main' looks o' Jonathan,
and he give two or three twists o'
himself while he was spain' that made me
omni as cold as death, and 't seemed as if I
couldn't draw my eyes away from the
glaring' roll he was lookin' about un with.'

Oh, I'm not afraid of Jonathan,' said
Eve, trying to brave down the tremor of
nervous fear which was creeping through
her ; ^ a poor, half-witted creature who
says one thing this minute, and forgets all
about it the next.'

^ Awl, my dear, don't 'ee sneer at Jonathan,'
said Joan reprovingly ; ' he's a bitter
foe, I'll warn 'ee. And when,' she added,
dropping her voice to a whisper, ' he talks
of maidens who loves to stand gain' 'pon
the sea, grown' dizzy and fallen' in, and o'
folks been 'tired fro' their homes, and never
coming' back 'longs aspen, 'tis time to steer
clear of un, Eve, for there's devilry in

Ms words, and mischief brooding' in his
mind.'

Why, Joan !' gasped Eve ; * surely he
wouldn't % You don't think he'd — murder
me ?' and, as the words came trembling
out, her very lips turned white with
horror.

I wouldn't like to lave 'ee in his way,'
faltered Joan.

But he'd be afraid — wouldn't he X

Wa-al, if so be he could get free to tell
his story there's no knawin' what might
come of it. I had to dale double with un
as it was, and manage so that neither wan
but me got in to see un ; and 'fore he gets
set free altogether. Eve, you must put
miles atween you and they, who, when
they'd listened to his story, would awnly
be too quick to shut their eyes to what
they wasn't axed to take part in.'

^ Of course, in that case,' said Eve, ' 'tis

best I should go back by myself again to
London.'

And, as the words came slowly dragging
forth, the narrow street, the obscured sky,
the stifling air, weighed down upon her,
and crushed her with a sense of gloom
unknown before, when her thirst for freedom
was bat a want unsatisfied. Her whole
being revolted against the cruel exchange ;
her nature cried out in protest, but in vain.

The more they discussed the point, the
more convinced they both became that
there was no other possible alternative,
and, the money for her journey being
supplied by Uncle Zebedee, under pretence
of accompanying Jochabed Giles in one of
her stolen visits to Plymouth, Eve set off
late one afternoon, intending to rest by the
way, and get on the next day to Plymouth,
whence she would take coach to London.

There was to be no leave-taking, for

no one must know that she was going
away. So, with only a nod of good-bye
to Uncle Zebedee, and a moment's desperate
clinging to Joan, Eve left the house,
and, in silent sadness, followed Jochabed
down the street, past the Warren, and
away along by the cliff path until they
came to the jutting point which, once past,
shuts out all view of Polperro from beyond.


Here Eve paused, and, motioning Jocha-
bed to oro on, she turned and bade her
eyes gaze round upon the scene, and look
their last farewell.

The sun, which all day long had shone
hot and fierce, had run its course, and
sunk to rest, leaving its trail of glory to
tip the hills above, and be reflected down
in crimson glow upon the sea below. The
mist of heat, which all day long had hung
over the land, though rolled away from

there, still floated in filmy clouds before
the harbour's mouth, veiling the little
haven, and casting broad shadows on the
rugged cliffs, up whose steep sides the
white - faced houses clung, higher and
higher still, till they were lost amid the
tangle of the ridge which crowns the
valley's sides.

Like an echo awakened by some tuneful
strain which jars on the ear and smites
the heart, because the voice which gave it
melody is still and hushed for ever, so the
sunset calm of that peaceful scene jarred
on the misery of her who stood stricken
and desolate.

Involuntarily she shut her eyes that
through them at least her heart should be
no longer pierced ; and when she opened
them again, a mist of gathering tears
obscured her view and blotted out the
prospect from her sight.

Then, slowly turning. Eve went her way,
knowing that while this life should last, the
face of that fair earth would never meet
her eyes again.

Eben MAY had been but a
short time back in London,
when, one evening as he was
closing the shutters of his small shop,
a boy presented himself saying he was the
landlady's nephew at Knight's Passage,
and had been sent by her to ask Mr. May
for some of the things he was taking care
of for Eve Pascal.

Why, what does she want them for V
asked Reuben, curtly.

She wants them for Eve Pascal herself

said the boy. ' Eve Pascal has
come back again ; she came back this
morning, only she hadn't got any one to
send till now.'

^ All right said Reuben , returning to
his shutter-closing, and then proceeding to
fasten the door ; ' I'll go round and speak
to her myself.'

Then you won't want me V said the boy,
not sorry be to released by his stern-looking
companion.

Xo, you can go your own way replied
Reuben, already several paces in advance,
and walking with such rapid strides that a
few minutes brought him to the house,
which had been the scene of all the
romance his life had ever known.

Oh, Mr. May !' but, paying no heed to
the landlady's voice, and without a pause,
Reuben ran up the different flights of
stairs, knocked at the door, opened it, and

found himself at once in the presence of
Eve.

Eve !'

Eeuben !'

And then silence, each looking at the
other, wondering what could have wrought
such a change ; for the bodily fatigue and
mental anxiety undergone by Reuben had
told as heavily on his appearance as the
sorrow Eve had endured had told on hers,
although the absence of original comeliness
made the alteration in him less generally
noticeable.

Have you been ill, Eve '?' and as he put
the question a wild thought sprang up
that perhaps her suffering had been on his
account, and, stirred by this prompting,
Reuben took her hand in his and
looked with tender anxiety into her
face.

No,' she said, quietly withdrawing her

hand ; ' I have not been ill. Have you ?
You look very ill.'

Oh, that's on account of my having
walked most of the way back here from
Plymouth ; it's a stiffish tramp, you know,
and took the little flesh I had off my
bones.'

Eve paused for an instant, as if trying
to repress the over-haste of her question,
then she said, while her face was half
turned away :

Did you go straight on to Plymouth
after I saw you V

I got to Plymouth before daylight the
next morning. I was forced to rest a bit
here and there on the way, as I'd come the
same ground once before that day ; but the
night was fine, so, as I didn't care about
stopping anywheres, I stumped on without
waiting to see Triggs even — made a mes-vol.

III. 53

sage do for him — and started off on my
journey.'

Then you never went near Looe at all T
Eve exclaimed with eagerness.

Ah I' replied Reuben, evading a direct
reply by a little laugh, under which he
heralded his answer, ' you may be sure I
didn't stop to inquire the names of all the
places I passed through ; I was in too hot
haste to turn my back on them for anything
of that sort.'

^ Oh, thank God !' said Eve, and at the
words her whole mind and body seemed to
relax from the strain imposed en them
by the suspicion that, in some indistinct
way, on her had rested the blame of the
betrayal.

Thank God?' repeated Reuben, sharply.
Thank God for what ?'

For not making me the betrayer of
those who put their trust in me.'

Reuben's face turned crimson ; but so

engrossed was Eve b}^ her own satisfaction,
that his sadden confusion was lost upon
her, and she continued :

'■ I may as well tell you, Reuben, that a
terrible trouble has fallen upon me and
mine since I parted with you. That very
night some one played us false, and betrayed
the Lottery into the hands of the revenue.'

I can't see what else was to be expected,'
said Reuben, stolidly; * when men
run their necks into a noose, they may be
pretty sure of some day finding the knot
drawn tight.'

I was so afraid that you might have
laid hold on anything I said to you, and
had been led in any way to tell it against
them,' sighed Eve, paying no heed to the
taunt with which Reuben had hoped to
sting her.

And supposing I had he said,
oughtn't you to thank me for doing it ?

53—2

Don't tell me, Eve and he threw into his
tone a mixture of contempt and bitterness,
that you've come to take it as a trial, that
those you talk of belonging to are forced
into taking to honest ways.'

Those I belong to have been hunted
down like dogs,' she cried. * A price has
been set upon their lives, and one of them
has been dragged away up here that they
may try and hang him if they can.'

What r exclaimed Reuben, starting to
his feet, ^ hang him ! Who are they going
to hang ? What can they hang him for %
Is it your cousin Adam Pascal, you're talking
of V

No ; I wish it was,' said Eve, her face
quivering with the emotion the relation of
these details stirred within her ; 'but though
'twas in fair fight, 'twas Jerrem shot the
man.'

Shot what man ?' gasped Reuben.

*The revenue man. The Lottery was
lying still, waiting for the tide to come up,
when the boats crept up behind them in
the dark, and, if it hadn't been for Adam,
not one among their crew would have lived
to tell the tale ; but by his word he kept
his own men quiet, all but Jerrem, who
fired his gun, and down the revenue man
fell— dead.'

E-euben stifled the exclamation which
rose to his lips, and Eve, to whose days of
pent-up misery the repetition of these woes
seemed to bring relief, continued :

^ At first all blamed Adam and praised
Jerrem, but almost at once the soldiers
came, and they'd only barely time to hide
away from them. Adam went to the mill,
and was there a week and more ; and then
some one told him that 'twas I was the
cause of their being betrayed, and drove
him so mad with jealousy and rage that he

told of the place where Jerrem was hid ; and
the next day the soldiers came again,
dragged Jerrem out, and carried him away.
And now, though uncle spends every guinea
he has got, 'tis almost sure that through
Adam's word Jerrem will be hanged ; for
they say they've brought them both to
London, and that they're lodged in Newgate
gaol

Up to this time Reuben's eyes seemed
riveted upon Eve's face, but as she paused
he bent his head, and sunk it down upon
the table near — a movement that at any
former time would naturally have awakened
some surprise, but now so familiar had
Eve grown with the aspect of sorrow, that
she regarded all visible emotion as an outburst
of the certain sympathy to be expected
from her hearers.

Now you know why it is Reuben,' she
continued, ^ that I feel so glad that you had

no hand in anything of this — for you must
overlook the ano^er that I showed at that
time. I've been sorry for it often since,
and feared you'd count me overbold for
talking as I did. Not that I'm changed,
Reuben, nor think one bit the less of
Adam for what's happened. No ! and
though all the world should turn their
backs on him, I'd stand by his side ; and to
prove it I must find him out and tell him
that, in spite of all they've told him, in
heart and tongue I've never been untrue to
him.' And filled with the desire of seeing
the man she loved, Eve clasped her hands,
and sat trying to resolve her plans, while
Reuben commenced pacing the little room
with a troubled air. Suddenly bringing
himself to a stand before Eve, he said :

Eve, be sure your sin will find you
out.'

No, Reuben ; no,' and she put up her

hand as if to avert the continuance of any
homily, ' 'tis of no good talking like that.
Sorrow has sealed up my heart against
taking condemnation or comfort from anything
of that sort.'

^ It isn't of you I'm thinking !' he exclaimed.
' Oh !' he cried, giving vent to
his pent-up feelings, ' down into what a pitfall
a minute's evil passion may fling a man.
To think that I, while I was crying vengeance
against others, was drawing down
the wrath of God upon my own head,
stamping myself with the brand of Cain,
and doing the devil's work by sending men
to death with all their sins still heavy on
their souls.'

Reuben, what is it you mean ?' and
seizing hold of him with both her hands.
Eve gazed into his face.

That the thought you had was true,'
he said, * and that 'twas me who dropped

the paper in, that told them where the
Lottery would be found ;' and a tremor ran
through Reuben's frame, his pulses fora
moment quickened, and then grew faint
and seemed to die away; while Eve uttered
neither word nor sound, her eyes drooped
her hold relaxed, and tottering she sank
back into the seat behind her, and there
sat motionless and still as one carved out
of stone.

The abandonment of hope, the unutterable
despair of face and form, so unlike
anything which Reuben had ever seen in
Eve, touched him as no reproaches could
have done. That depth of misery which
words can neither describe nor express
pierced his inmost soul, and added to the
stings with which conscience was already
smiting him. Not for the act of betrayal,
for, had there been no Eve to prompt
him, Reuben would have looked upon it

as an act of justice that he should aid the
law against men, who set order and government
at defiance, and though each man onboard
had met his death, Reuben would
have held his conscience free of any tittle
of reproach ; but equitable and unyielding
to himself as well as to others, he full well
knew that when he wrote the words which
sealed the Lottery s fate, justice was clean
gone out of his mind. He neither knew nor
cared what might become of the men whose
safety he betrayed ; the whole rancour of
his hate was turned against his rival, and
the paper he flung into the Rendezvous
window was as much a blow aimed at
Adam as if he had dealt him a thrust, and
had stabbed him in the dark.

'Eve,' he said, 'words are but poor
things at a time like this ; and if I spoke
from now till ever, I couldn't make you
see by them the misery I feel, but if you'll

trust me this far, I ?wear by Hin ^vho sees
us both, and knows our hearts, that no stone
shall be unturned, no thing undone. I'll
walk London over, and neither rest day
nor niorht till I find out Adam Pascal and
his comrade, and tell them the whole truth.
And when I say this,' he added, his face
workings with emotion, ' don't fancy 'tis
because of love of you, Eve. I know that,
come what may, we never can be nothing
more than friends now; but oh,' and he held
out his hands towards her, ^ let's at least be
that, Eve — let me help you to set yourself
clear with the man, who, be he what he
may, it seems you've given all your heart
to, and you — you heljj me to rid myself
of the thought that I've led into sin,
and hurried on to death, fellow-creatures
whose godless lives I'd now give my own
to save. Together, if we set our minds to
work, there's no knowing what we ma^Ti't

do yet. Warrants have been squashed
and pardons given, when men have reached
the very gallows' foot; and as for getting in,
why Mr. Osborne knows Newgate Prison
every inch, from going there with old Silas
Told, when he was living, and he'll do anything
for me, so there'll be no fear about
that. And you knows me, Eve ; you know
how when I'm set upon a thing I strain my
utmost nerve to get it done ?' and pausing,
he stood watching with mingled hope and
fear the effect of his words ; first, the flush of
spreading colour, then the quivering mouth
and eyes, and finally the rush of tears
which lifted up and cleared away that
stone-like gloom. A ray of hope seemed
once more near, and catching at the feeblest
chance of being brought again face to face
with Adam, Eve, unable to speak, stretched
out her hand, which Reuben took, grasped
it almost to pain, then let it go, and with it

every hope of love that Angered still for
Eve.

The rest of the time was spent in explanations
of the various incidents relating
to the all engrossing event, the details
which bore upon it, the circumstances
which surrounded it, until, from following
out all these into their different channels,
Reuben began to have a clearer conception
of the men, their characters, their individual
virtues and collective failings, growing
interested in them almost against his
will. The hour was late before he recollected
that until he reached his home he
could hardly settle his plans, so as to secure
an entrance into the prison on the
following day.

Bidding Eve good-night, he left the
house, and walked away, only stopping at
the turn of the street to step into the road,
and cast his wistful gaze uj) to the window

of the room, which to him now was as
the tomb of his dead love.

An ordinary working-man standing
in an obscure street is not a figure
to arouse much interest, and Reuben's
stood face gave little index to the varied
emotions which surged within his troubled
heart. He was able to return the
gruff good - night the watchman gave,
and the old man, passing on, went
wondering as to the cause of such anxious
survey on Reuben's part. For as he stood
his thoughts ran here and there, and by the
magic of their power showed to his view
the long-gone joys of other days. He
watched the struggling birth of love,
scorched himself in its flame, and felt by
turns the tortures and delights its presence
gives to those who live on hope alone ;
then sadly saw it fade from out his sight,
sicken and faint almost to death, and yet

it did not die until by that one action he
had robbed it of life and killed it evermore.
Yes, love was dead, and love was Eve ;
and for Reuben May the Eve he had loved
so fondly lived no longer.

Bring the time which had
elapsed since the night on which
Eve Pascal and Reuben May
renewed their bond of friendship, many an
anxious incident had occurred to test its
value and cement its strength.

Jerrem and Adam were familiar names
to Reuben now, and the men who bore
them were often before his eyes and constantly
in his thoughts. Prepared as Reuben
had been for undergoing much awkwardness
in delivering himself of the tale

he had to tell, he found he had greatly
underrated the pain and humiliation he
actually felt when, through the interest of
his friend, he found himself within the walls
of Newgate and in the presence of Adam.
Reuben was no coward, yet it needed all
the strength of his strictly disciplined mind,
to open up and lay bare before a rival's eyes
those wounds which love had made, and
time had had no space to heal.

He shrunk from placing in front of Adam
the picture of himself and Eve, as they
had stood in the days when, Adam all unknown,
the balance of a happy future seemed
trembling still within the hand of Fate ;
and as he spoke, from time to time he paused,
hoping some word or sign would make
his task more easy : but Adam never spoke
nor turned aside his eyes, and under that
fixed orate Reuben was forced to tell his
tale out to the end, constraining his pride

VOL. III. 54

to give out word for word what Eve had
said in Adam's praise, and searing the
green memory of his love by making his
lips repeat those vows which she had told
him bound her to another.

At length the task was ended, the jealous
rage, the mad revenge, was all confessed,
and satisfied that, whatever guilt
it might please Adam to lay to his charge,
he had at least shown that Eve was
free from any shadow of stain, Reuben
paused, and the two so strangely linked
stood looking at each other with envy,
jealousy, distrust clouding their minds,
while a chord of sympathy drew them
together, as they recognised a similitude in
their actions which made each self-abasement
uttered find an echo in its listener's
breast. Proud, stern, unyielding to emotion
as both these men had lived, it was not
in them to take comfort in the shifts and

excuses weaker natures find; the heaths that
had refused Pity for their neighbours would
not entreat her because they now stood in
need. As they had judged their fellows, so
they arraigned themselves, and thus unwittingly
rendered the first atonement man is
called upon to make. The sight of Adam's
strong, powerful form shaken and bowed
down by the remorse he strove in vain to
control moved Reuben strangely. The haggard
pallor of his striking face, the sunken
eyes, the untasted food, the unslej)t-in bed,
each told its tale of misery and woe, and
opened out to Reuben a depth of despair
his own experience hitherto had furnished
him with no gauge to measure. What if
with no further warning he fetched up
Eve to Adam's aid — the thought would
bear no hesitation, a thousand jealous
Noes' battled with the suggestion; but
Reuben's better self resolved to have its

54—2

way, and seizing the opportunity of Adam's
head being bent down in his arms, Reuben
went swiftly out and along down to the
keeper's room, where Eve had been left impatiently
awaiting his return.

Although the grating of the hinge
roused Adam, he neither stirred nor
moved until, satisfied by the unbroken
silence that Reuben had left him to himself,
he ventured to raise his head.
Where could he go ? where hide himself
from human gaze ? And as the thought of
all his shame came crowding to his mind,
he started up and wildly stared around,
and then around again, seeing each time
the walls, which looked so near, draw
nearer still. No hope, no hope !
here he must live, until the hour when
those who brought him here would drag
him forth to swear away his comrade's
life. O God ! how helpless he felt ; and

as he let himself drop down each limb
gave way, and nerveless fell, as if dejection
claimed him for her own. The time had
been when Adam's mind was racked by
thoughts of what lay in the hearts of those
he had left behind; their pictured hatred
and contempt stung him to madness ; the
words they would say, the curses they were
uttering, seemed ever ringing in his ears.
But Reuben's tale had for the time swept
this away, and filled its place with dark
remorse of what he had done to Jerrem.
True, Reuben had shown that Jerrem's
hand had wrought his own and their destruction,
but what of that ? Adam through
him had wreaked his vengeance on them
all — had, Judas-like, delivered them to
death ; henceforth, branded and disgraced,
he must be an outcast or a wanderer. As
this fallen spectre of himself rose up and
flitted in his sight, a cr\^ of wild despair

burst forth, wrenched from the depths of
his proud heart — a cry which some one
near sent echoing back, and as it came
his hands where caught, and Pity seemed
to stretch her arms, and fold him to her
breast.

Was it a nightmare he was waking from ?
some hideous dream in which our bodies
slumber, while our fancies live a lifetime ?
Would this vision of Eve (for Eve it was
who knelt close by his side, her arms around
his neck) melt away and fade as many a
one of her had done before ? She calls
him love — her love, the husband of her
heart — what, he, this guilty outcast ! can
he be this to any one, and most of all to
Eve?

A finger's touch seemed laid upon the
veil which hitherto had shut out hope from.

Adam's view, and as it shrivelled up and
rolled away, the light revealed that Mercy
still sat throned on high ; and bowing down
his head on Eve's neck, he let his stricken
soul take comfort in the thought.

But while Adam vas thus cast down
under suffering, sorrow had taken but a
slight hold on Jerrem, who, after the first
shock produced by the horrors of a place
then branded as ' the darkest seat of woe
this side of hell,' gradually regained his old
elasticity, and was soon ready to treat,
laugh, and drink with all who came near
him.

His merry jokes, his quaint sea songs,
the free handling he gave to his plentiful
supply of money, all served to insure his
popularity ; so that instead of the man sunk
under misery and despair whom "Reuben,
after leaving Adam, had girded himself upto

encounter, he came upon Jerrem rollicking
and gay, a prime favourite with all the
authorities, and a choice spirit amid the
crew of tried and untried prisoners, who in
those days crowded together the foul wards
of Newgate.

Fresh from the sight of Adam's dark
remorse, filled with compunction at the
thought of all the ills their joint passions
had hurled on Jerrem's head, Reuben had
invested Jerrem with a sense of wrong,
to make reparation for which he had
come prepared to offer whatever sacrifice
he should demand. To find the
man for whom all this feeling had been
conjured up reckless and unconcerned,
casting oaths against his ill-luck one
moment, and cutting jokes at his possible
fate the next, jarred upon Reuben terribly,
and made him at once decide that it would
be worse than useless to urge upon him any

necessity for taking thought for his soul
when he was so utterly reckless as to what
would become of his body. The story
Reuben had to tell of himself and Eve, the
betrayal, and the suspicions it had aroused
against Eve in Adam, merely affected
Jerrem as a matter for surprise and
curiosity. He seemed pleased to hear that
Eve Alas close at hand, but still expressed
no wish to see her. He talked about Adam,
and, with a painful absence of all malice,
told Reuben to say to him that he'd best
lay it thick on his back, so that the judge
and jury would let the other chaps go free.
The circumstance of being brought to
London to be tried seemed to aftbrd him
immense satisfaction — a thing, he said, that
hadn't happened for sixty years and more,

when old swung for it ; and then he

fell to wondering how soon that might be
his fate, and if so, how many from Polperro

would make the stretch to come so far. He'd
promise them it shouldn't be for nothing :
he'd show the Cornish men that he could
cut his capers game. Only one subject
seemed able to sober or subdue his reckless
spirit, and this was any mention of Joan
or rjncle Zebedee : to them the poor soul
seemed to cling with all the love his nature
could command. And when Reuben, instructed
by Eve, told him how stricken
down the old man lay, and further on
promised to write for him all the messages
he wished to send to Joan, a heart of wax
seemed given to his keeping, in which it
now must be his care to mould the little
good there yet was time to teach. And soit
happened that in all his future visits —
and every hour that Reuben had to spare
was given up to Jerrem — Joan was the
theme that threaded all their discourse ;
and by her power Jerrem's soft heart and

softer nature became to Reuben as an
open page, wherein he read of actions in
which good and bad were so mixed up and
jumbled, that, in the very midst of his
reproof and condemnation, Reuben was
often forced to stand abashed before some
act of generous pity which found no echo
in his former life. And out of this humility,
which grew in strength, there sprang forth
greater merits than from all the wear'
efforts he made at working out his own
atonement ; for Reuben, like Adam, had
been over-satisfied about his own rectitude,
and took pride in the knowledge, that, if
ever he had committed a wrong, he had
acknowledged it freely and expiated it to
the uttermost farthing — while Jerrem, for
the first time in his life brought to see
guilt in what he had counted pleasure, scarce
dared to listen to a hope of mercy for himselfe
but rather craved Reuben to beg it

for the many who had been thoughtless
sharers in his folly. His ruling desire was
to see Joan once more, and no sooner was
he told that the Admiralty Session had
begun, and that his day of trial — although
not fixed — was near at hand, than he
begged Reuben to write and ask Joan to
delay her promised visit no longer ; and
this Reuben did, adding on his own account
that, from what the lawyer said, it
would be best she came at once, by the
coach which would reach London on the
following Thursday-week, on which day
Reuben would be waiting to receive
her.

Now, at the onset of this disaster, had
such a letter reached Polperro, not a man
in the place but, short of knowing it would
cost his life, would have risked all else to
go to London, and if Jerrem was to die,
give him courage by mustering round their

comrade at the last. But the downpour of
disaster had cowed these, daring spirits, and
the men ^Yho had not known what fear
meant so long as success was secure, now
trembled and gave way, under the superstitious
certainty that ill-luck was following
them and misfortune had marked them for
her owen. Their energies paralysed, they
succumbed to what they looked upon as
Fate, and in most cases were seized without
a struggle, and led off to the nearest
prisons without an effort on their own
part towards resistance.

The money over which — from the small
scope for spending it — they had seemed so
lavish and reckless, when needed for
lawyers and counsel and bribes, went buta
small way ; and though they made a
common purse of all their hoards, not a day
passed without some house being stripped
of the substance which adorned it, so that

money might be got for the husband, the
son, the brothers, who had brought these
treasures home.

The women, on then' knees, pressed on
the farmers' wives their chintz, their
lace, their gaudy stock of jewellery ; and
when this market failed, toiled along to
Liskeard, Plymouth and Launceston,
carrying their china, silver-plate, and bowls,
in the hope of finding somebody to buy
them.

With one, often two, revenue cutters
always in sight, landing parties of king's
men, who — recalling ugly thoughts of the
hated press-gang — roamed hither and
thither, ready to seize any one Who happened
to show his face ; with half the
husbands, sons and brothers in Bodmin
Gaol or Plymouth Clink, and the rest
skulking in farm-houses or lying hidden in
the secret places ; with plenty vanishing

and poverty drawing nigh ; the past circumstances
which had led to this desolation
were swallowed up in the present
misery it had entailed upon them ; and
though every one now knew the whole
story as it stood — how that through
Jerrem writing to Eve, she had had it in
her power to tell Reuben May, her former
lover, who, led on by jealousy, had betrayed
them to the revenue men, so
familiar had Reuben's good services to
Jerrem become known, that it was taken
as only one more of his many friendly
actions that he should write to Joan,
urci-ingf her to come to London without
delay, and promising to meet her and see
that she was taken care of If any among
them thought that Joan would go probably
to Eve's home, they made no mention of it ;
for Eve's name was by a tacit understanding
banished from their mouths, and the

memory of her lay as a seal to that dark
sepulchre wherein, with bitter scorn and
hate, Adam lay buried.

There was no question now of Uncle
^ebedee going, for the confinement, the
excitement, and the degradation had been
too much for the old man, whose free and
happy life had never known trouble or
restraint, and his mind had gradually
weakened under the burden imposed upon
it ; so that now, except when some unexpected
incident roused the flickering flame
of memory, the past few months were
blotted from his mind, and, in company
with Jonathan — who, broken down by ill-usage,
and turned out of prison to die, had
managed to crawl back to the friends he
knew he should find shelter with — he
roamed about harmless and contented,
always watching for the Lottery s return,
and promising, when she did come back,

that he would give them all a fling such as
Polperro had not seen for many a day.

It was an easy matter to cheat him now,
and when, Joan's journey all arranged,
she stepped into the boat which was to
take her round to Plymouth, and left old
Zebedee standing the shore, raisins his
thin cracked voice to fetch her ear with
cheery messages for Jerrem and for Adam,
whom she was going to meet, her cup of
bitterness seemed to overflow.

VOL. III. 55

prom the day on which Adam
knew that the date of J err em's
trial was fixed, all the hope
which the sight of Eve had rekindled was
again completely extinguished, and, refusing
every attempt at consolation, he threw
himself into an abyss of despair a hundredfold
more dark and bitter than before.

The thought that he — captain and leader
as he had been — should stand in court confronted
by his comrades and neighbours (for
Adam, ignorant of the disasters which had

overtaken them, believed half Polperro to
be on their way to London), and there
swear away Jerrem's life and turn informer,
was something' too terrible to be dwelt on
with even outward tranquillity, and, abandoning'
every thi no which had hitherto sustained
him, he gave himself up to all the
terrors of remorse and despair. It was
in vain for Reuben to reason, or for Eve to
plead ; so long as they could suggest no
means by which this dreaded ordeal could
be averted, Adam was deaf to all hope of
consolation. There was but one subject
which interested him, and only on one subject
could he be got to speak, and that was
the chances there still remained of Jerrem's
life being spared ; and to furnish him
with some food for this hope, Eve began
to loiter at the gates, talk to the
warders and the turnkeys, and mingle
with the many groups who on some busi-

55—2

ness or pretext were always assembled about
the yard, or stood idling in the various passages
with which the prison was intersected.
One morning it came to her mind, how
would it be for Adam to escape, and so not
be there to prove the accusation he had
made of Jerrem having shot the man? With
scarce more thought than she had bestowed
on many another passing suggestion which
seemed for the moment practical and solid,
but as she turned it round lost shape and
floated into air, Eve made the suggestion,
and to her surprise found it seized on by
Adam as an inspiration. Wl\y, he'd risk all,
so that he escaped being set face to f\ice
with Jerrem and his former mates. Adam
had but to be assured the strain would not
be more than Eve's strength could bear, before
he had adopted with joy her bare suggestion,
clothed it with possibility, and by it
seemed to regain all his past energy. Could

he but get away, and Jerrem's life be spared,
all hope of happiness would not be over.
In some of those distant lands to which
people were then beginning to go, life might
beo^in afresh. And as his thoughts found
utterance in speech, he held out his hand
to Eve, and in it she laid her own ; and
Adam needed nothing more to tell him that
whither he went, there Eve too would oho.
There was no need for vows and protestations
now between these two, for though to
each the other's heart lay bare, a word oi
love scarce ever crossed their lijos. Life
seemed too sad and time too precious to be
while away in pleasant speeches, and often
when together — burdened by the weight of
all they had to say, yet could not talk about
the two would sit for hours and neither
speak a word. But with this proposition of
escape a new channel was given to them,
and as they discussed their different plans,

the dreadful shadow which at times had
hung between them was rolled away and
lifted out of sight. Inspired by the prospect
of action, of doing something, Adam
roused himself to master all the difficulties;
his old foresight and caution began to
revive, and the project which had on one
day looked like a desperate extremity, grew
by the end of a week into a well-arranged
plan whose success seemed more than possible.
Filled with anxiety for Eve, Reuben
gave no hearty sanction to the experiment,
besides which he felt certain that now
neither Adam's absence nor presence would
in any way affect Jerrem's fate ; added to
which, if the matter was detected it might
go hard with Adam himself But his arguments
proved nothing to Eve, who, confident
of success, only demanded from him the
promise of secrecy; after which she thought,
as some questions might be put to him, the

less he knew the less he would have to
conceal.

Although a prisoner, inasmuch as Liberty
was denied to him, Adam was in no way
subjected to that strict surveillance to
which those who had broken the law were
supposed to be submitted. It was of his
own free will that he disregarded the various
privileges which lay open to him ;
others in his place would have frequented
the passages, hung about the yards, and
grown familiar with the tap, where spirits
were openly bought and sold. Money
could do much in those days of lax discipline,
and the man who could pay, and could
give, need have very few wants unsatisfied.
But Adam's only desire was to be left undisturbed
and alone, and as this entailed no
undue amount of trouble after their first
curiosity had been satisfied, it was not
thought necessary to deny him this privies

From constantly going in and outmost
of the officials inside the prison knew
Eve, while to but very few was Adam's
face familiar ; and it was on this fact, aided
by the knowledge that through favour of a
gratuity friends were frequently permitted
to outstay their usual hour, that most of
their hopes rested. Each day she came,
Eve brought some portion of the disguise
which was to be adopted ; and then
having learnt from Reuben that the Mary
Jane had arrived, and was lying at the wharf
unloading, not knowing what better to do,
they decided that she should go to Captain
Triggs and ask him, in case Adam could get
away, whether he would let him come onboard
his vessel and give him shelter there
below.

Waal no,' said Triggs, ' I won't do
that, 'cos they as I've got here might smell
un out ; but I'll tell 'ee what — I knows a

chap as has in many ways bin beholden tome
Tore now, and I reckon if I gives un
the cue he'll do the job for 'ee/

But do you think he's to be trusted V
Eve asked.

Waal, that rests on how small a part
you'd forced to tell un of,' said Triggs, 'and
how much you makes it earth his while.
I'm blamed if I'd go bail for un myself, but
that won't be no odds 'gen' Adam's going' ;
'tis just the place for he. 'Tut never do to
carey a pitch-pot down and set un in the
midst o' they who couldn't bide his stink.'

And the crew V said Eve, Evincing
under Captain Triggs' figurative language.

Awl, the crew's right enuf — a set o'
rashly smudge-faced rails that's near half
Maltese and t'other Lascar Injuns. Any gaolbird
that flies their way 'full find they's all
of a feather. But here,' he added, puzzled by
the event, ' how's this that you'd still mixed

up with Adam so ? I thought 'twas all
'long o' you and Reuben May that the
Lottery s landing' got blowed about ?'

Eve shook her head. * Be sure,' she said,
^ 'twas never in me to do Adam any
harm.'

And you'd going' to stick to un now
through thick and thin ? 'Twill never do
for un, ye know, to set his foot on Cornish
ground agen f

He knows that,' said Eve, ' and if he
gets away, we shall be married and go
across the seas to some new part, where no
sone can tell what brought us from our
home.'

Triggs gave a significant nod. 'Lord!'
he exclaimed, ' but that's a poor look-out for
such a bowery maid as you be. Wouldn't it
be better for 'ee to stick by yer friends
'bout here than '

I haven't got anv friends,' interrupted

Eve promptly, ' excepting it's Adam and
Joan and Uncle Zebedee.'

Ah, poor old Zebedee !' sighed Triggs ;
'tis all dickey with he. The day I started
I see Sammy Tucker to Fowey, and he was
tellin' that th' ole chap was gone reg lar
tattling' like, and can't tell thicker fra that ;
and as for Joan Hocken, he says you
wouldn't know her for the same. And they's
looked poor foolish Jonathan, as is more
mazed than ever, to live with 'em; and
Mrs. Tucker, as used to haggle with everybody
so, tends on 'em all hand and foot,
and her's given up praichin 'bout religion
and that, and 's turned quite neighbourly,
and, so long as her can save her daughter,
thinks nothing s too hot nor too heavy.'

Dear Joan 1' sighed Eve ; ' she's started
by the coach on her way up here now.'

Whether she hath or no 1' exclaimed
Triggs in surprise. ' Then take my word

they's heard that Jerrem's to be hanged,
and Joan's coming' up to be all ready to
hand for 't.'

^ No, not that,' groaned Eve, for at the
mere mention of the word the vascue dread
seemed to shape itself into a certainty.
soh, Captain Triggs, don't say that if Adam
gets off you don't think Jerrem's life will
be spared.'

Wa-al, my poor maid, us must hope so,'
said the compassionate captain ; * but 'tis
the worst o' they coin's that sooner or
later th' ending of 'em must come. 'T would
never do to let 'em prosper allays he
added with impressive certainty, * or where
'ud be the use o' parsons praichin' up 'bout
heaven and hell % Why now, us likes good
liquor cheap to Fowey, and dance 'pon a
time us had it too ; but that can't bin for
twenty year. Our day's gone by, and so
'full theirs be now ; and th' excise 'full come,.

and revenues 'nil settle down, and folks be
forced to take to holstein' for the bit o'
bread they ages, and live quiet and pace-able,
as good neighbours should. So try and
take heart, and if so be that Adam can
give they Bailey chaps the go by, tell unto
come longs here, and us 'uU be odds with
any o' they that happens to be follerin' to
his heels.'

Charmed with this friendly promise.
Eve said ^ Good-bye,' leaving the captain
puzzled with speculations on the female
sex, and the many curious contradictions
which seem to influence their actions ; while
the hour being now too late to return to
the prison, she took her way to her own
room, thinking it best to begin the preparations
which in case of Adam's escape, and
any sudden departure, it would be necessary
to have completed.

Perhaps it was her interview with Captain

Triggs, the sight of the wharf and
the ships, which took her thoughts back
and made them bridge the gulf which
divided her past life from her present
self. Could the girl she saw in that
shadowy past — headstrong, confident, impatient
of suffering, and unsympathetic
with sorrow — be this same Eve who walked
along with all hope and thought of self
merged in another's happiness and welfare %
Where was the vanity, where the tricks and
coquetries ? — passports to that ideal existence
after which in the old days she had
so thirsted. Trampled out of sight, and
choked beneath the fair blossoms of a
higher life, which, as in many a human
nature, had needed sorrow, humiliation,
and a great watering of tears, before there
could spring forth the flowers for a fruit
which should one day ripen into great perfection.


No wonder then that she should be
shaken by a doubt of her own identity, and
having reached her room, she paused upon
the threshold and looked around as if to
satisfy herself by all those silent witnesses
which made it truth.

There was the chair in which she had so
often sat, plying her needle with such tardy
grace, while her impatient thoughts did
battle with the humdrum narrow life she
led.

How she had beat against the fate which
seemed to promise naught but that dull
round of commonplace events in which
her early years had passed away ! How
as a gall and fret had come the thought of
Reuben's proffered love, because it shadowed
forth the level of respectable routine, the
life she then most dreaded !

To be courted and sought after : to call
forth love, jealousy, and despair ; to be

looked up to, thought well of, praised, admired
— these were the delights she had
craved, and these the longings she had had
granted. And a sigh from the depths of
that chastened heart rendered the bitter
tribute paid by all to satiated vanity and
out-lived desire.

The dingy walls, the ill-assorted furniture
(her mother's pride in which had
sometimes vexed her, sometimes made her
laugh), now looked like childhood's friends,
whose faces stamp themselves upon our
inmost hearts. The light no longer seemed
obscure, the room no longer gloomy ; for
each thing in it now was flooded by the
tender light of memory — that wondrous
gift to man, which those who only sail
along life's summer sea can never know in
all the heights and depths revealed to
storm-tossed hearts.

What, you've come back !' a voice said

in her ear, and looking round Eve saw it
was Reuben, who had entered unperceived.

There's nothing fresh gone wrong V he
asked.

'No, nothing ;' but the sad smile she tried
to give him welcome with was so akin to
tears that Reuben's face assumed a look
of doubt. ' 'Tis only that I'd thinking
how I'm changed from what I was,' said
Eve. 'Why, once I couldn't bear this
room and all the things about it ; but now,
O Reuben ! my heart seems like to break
because — perhaps 'twill soon now come to
saying good-bye to all of it for ever.'

Reuben winced. ' You're fixed to go
then r

Yes, where Adam goes I shall go too —
don't you think I should ? What else is
left for me to do V

You feel then you'd be happy — off with
him — away from all and — everybody else V

VOL. III. bQ

Happy! should I be happy to know
he'd gone alone ? happy to know I'd driven
him away to some place where I wouldn't
go myself f and Eve paused, shaking her
head before she added, * If he can make
another start in life — try and begin
again '

^ You ought to help him to it,' said
Reuben, promptly, ' that's very plain to see.
O Eve ! do you mind the times when
you and me have talked of what we'd like
to do — how, never satisfied with what
went on around, we wanted to be altogether
such as some of those we'd heard and read
about % The way seems almost opened upto
you ; but what shall I do when all this is
over, and you are gone away % I can't go
back and stick to trade again, working for
nothing more but putting victuals in myself


For a moment Eve did not speak ; then,

with a sudden movement, she turned, saying
to Reuben :

There's something that, before our lives
are at any moment parted, I've wanted to
say to you, Reuben. 'Tis that until now,
this time while we've been altogether here,
I've never known what your worth is —
what you would be to any one who'd got
the heart to value what you'd give. Of
late it has often seemed that I should think
but very small of one who'd had the chance
of your liking, and yet didn't know the
proper value of such goodness.'

Reuben gave a look of disavowal, and
Eve continued, adding with a little hesitation
:

You mustn't think it strange in me for
saying this. I couldn't tell you if you
didn't know how everything lies between
Adam and myself; but ever since this
trouble's come about, all my thoughts

56—2

seem changed, and people look quite different
now to what they did before ; and
most of all, I've learnt to know the friend
I've got, and always had, in you, Reuben.'

Reuben did not answer for a moment.
He seemed struggling to keep back something
he was prompted to speak of

Eve,' he said at length, ' don't think
that I've not made mistakes, and great
ones, too. When first I fought to battle
down my leaning towards you, why was
it ? Not because of doubting that 'twould
ever be returned, but 'cos I held myself too
good a chap in all my thoughts and ways
to be taken up with such a butterfly concern
as I took you to be. I'd never have
believed then that 3^ou'd have acted as I've
seen you act. I thought that love with
you meant who could give you the finest
clothes to wear, and let you rule the roast
the easiest ; but you have shown me that

you are made of better woman's stuff than
that. And, after all, a man thinks better
of himself for mounting high than stooping
to pick up what can be had for asking any
day.'

No, no, Reuben ; your good opinion is
more than I deserve,' said Eve, her memory
stinging her with past recollections. * If
you want to see a dear, kind-hearted, unselfish
girl, wait until Joan comes. I do so
hope that you will take to her. I think
you will, after what you've been to Jerrem
and to Adam. I want you and Joan to
like each other.'

I don't think there's much fear of that,'
said Reuben. * Jerrem's spoke so freely
about Joan, that I seem to know her before
ever having seen her. Let me see, her
mind was at one time set on Adam, wasn't

itr

I think that she was very fond of

Adam said Eve, colouring ; ^ and so far as
that goes, I don't know that there is any
difference now. I'm sure she'd lay her life
down if it would do him good.'

^ Poor soul !' sighed Reuben, drawn by a
friendly feeling to sympathise with Joan's
unlucky love. ' Her cup's been full, and no
mistake, of late.'

Did Jerrem seem to feel it much that
Uncle Zebedee 'd been took so strange V
asked Eve.

I didn't tell him more than I could
help,' said Reuben. ^ As much as possible,
I made it out to him that for the old man
to come to London wouldn't be safe, and
the fear of that seemed to pacify him at
once.'

^ I haven't spoken of it to Adam yet,'
said Eve. ' He hasn't asked about his
coming, so I thought I'd leave the telling
till another time. His mind seems set on

nothing but getting off, and by it setting
Jerrem free.'

But Reuben made no rejoinder to the
questioning tone of Eve's words, and after
a few minutes' pause he waived the subject
by reverting' to the description which Eve
had given of Joan, so that, in case he had
to meet her alone, he might recognise her
without difficulty. Eve repeated the description,
dwelling with loving preciseness
on the various features and points by
which Joan might be known ; and then
Reuben, having some work to do, got upto
say good-bye.

'Good-bye,' said Eve, holding out her
hand. ' Good-bye. Every time I say it
now I seem to wonder if 'tis to be goodbye
indeed.'

Why, no ; in any way you'd wait until
the trial was over ?

^ Yes, I forgot. Of course we should.'

Well, then, do you think I'd let you go
without a word ? Ah ! Eve, no. Whatever
others are, nobody's yet pushed you
from your place, nor never will so long as
my life lasts.'

T length the dreaded day was
over, the trial was at an end,
and, in spite of every effort made,
Jerrem condemned to die. The hopes
raised by the knowledge of Adam's escape
seemed crowned with success, when,
to the court's dismay, it was announced
that the prisoner's accuser could not be
produced ; he had mysteriously disappeared
the evening before, and in spite of a most
vigorous search was nowhere to be found.
But with minds already resolved to make
this hardened smuggler's fate a warning and

example to all such as should henceforth
dare the law, one of the cutter's crew,
wrought upon by the fear lest Jerrem
should escape and bafEe the vengeance they
had vowed to take, was got to swear that
Jerrem was the man who fired the fatal shot ;
and though it was shown that the night
was dark and recognition next to impossible,
this evidence was held conclusive to prove
the crime, and nothing now remained but
to condemn the culprit. The judge's words
came slowly forth, making the stoutest there
shrink back, and let that arrow from the
bow of death glance by and set its mark on
him upon whose face the crowd now turned
to gaze.

Can it be that he is stunned ? or is he
hardened ?'

For Jerrem stands all unmoved and calm;
while, dulled by the sound of rushing waters,
the words the judge has said come booming

back and back again ; a sickly tremor
creeps through, every Hmb, and makes it
nerveless; a sense of growing weight presses
the flesh down as a burden on the fainting
spirit ; one instant a thousand faces, crowding
close, keep out the air; the next, they
have all receded out of sight back into misty
space, and he is left alone, with all around
faded and grown confused, and all beneath
him slipping and giving way. Suddenly
a sound rouses him back to life — a voice has
smote his ear and cleaved his inmost soul ;
and lifting his head, his eyes are met by
sight of Joan, who with a piercing shriek has
fallen back death-like and pale in Reuben s
out-stretched arms.

Then Jerrem knows that hope is past,
and he must die, and in one flash his fate,
in all its misery and shame, stands out
before him, and reeling he totters, to sink
down senseless, and be carried off* to that
dismal cell allotted to those condemned

to death; while Reuben, as best he can,
manages to get Joan out of court and into
the open air, where she gradually conies
back to life again, and is able to listen to
such poor comfort as Reuben's sad heart
can find to give her. For by reason of those
eventful circumstances, which serve to cement
friendships by suddenly overthrowing
the barriers Time must otherwise gradually
wear away, Reuben May and Joan Hocken
have (in the week which has intervened
between her arrival and this day of trial)
become more intimate and thoroughly
acquainted than if in an ordinary way they
had known each other for years.

A stranger in a large city, with not one
familiar face to greet her, who does not
know the terrible feeling of desolation which
made poor Joan hurry through the crowded
streets, shrinking away from their bustle
and throng towards Reuben, the one person

she had to turn to for sympathy, advice,
assistance, and consolation ? With that
spirit of perfect trust which her own large
heart gave her the certain assurance of
receiving, Joan placed implicit reliance in
all Reuben said and did ; and seeing this,
and receiving an inward satisfaction from
the sight, Reuben involuntarily slipped into
a familiarity of speech and manner very
opposed to the stiff reserve he usually maintained
towards strangers.

Ten days were given before the day on
which Jerrem was to die, and during this
time, through the various interests raised
in his behalf, no restriction was put upon
the intercourse between him and his friends ;
so that, abandoning everything for the poor
soul's welfare, Reuben, Joan, and Jerrem
spent hour after hour in the closest intercourse.
Happily, in times of great extremity
the power of realising our exact

situation is mostly denied to us ; and in
the case of Joan and Jerrem, although surrounded
by the terrors and within the
outposts of that dreaded end, it was nothing
unfrequent to hear a sudden peal of laughter,
which often would have as sudden an
end in a great burst of tears.

To point to hopes and joys beyond the
grave when every thought is centred
and fixed on this life's interests and keen
anxieties, is but a fruitless vain endeavour ;
and Reuben had to try and rest contented
in the assurance of Jerrem's perfect forgiveness
and goodwill to all who had shown
him any malice or ill-feeling, to draw some
satisfaction from the unselfish love he
showed to Joan, and the deep gratitude he
now expressed to Uncle Zebedee.

What would become of them ? he often
asked, when some word of Joan's revealed
the altered aspect of their affairs ; and then,

overcome by the helplessness of their forlorn
condition, he would entreat Reuben to
stand by them, not to forget Joan, not to
forsake her. And Reuben, strangely moved
by sight of this poor giddy nature's overwrought
emotion, would try to calm him
with the ready assurance that while he
lived Joan should never want a friend ; and
touched by his words, the two would clasp
his hands together, telling each other of all
the kindness he had showed them, praying-god
would pay him back in blessings for
his goodness. Xor were theirs the only
lips which spoke of gratitude to Reuben
May ; his name had now become familiar to
many who through his means were kept
from being ignorant of the sad fate which
awaited their boon companion, their prime
favourite, the once madcap, rollicking Jerk
; the last one, as Joan often told
Reuben, whom any in Polperro would have

fixed on for evil to pursue, or misfortune
to overtake, and about whom all declared
there must have been ' a hitch in the block
somewheres, as Fate never intended that
ill-luck should pitch upon Jerrem.' The
repetition of their astonishment, their indignation,
and their sympathy, afforded the
poor fellow the most visible satisfaction,
harassed as he was becoming by one dread
which entirely swallowed up the thought
and fear of death. This ghastly terror was
the then usual consignment of a body
after death to the surgeons for dissection,
and the uncontrollable trepidation which
would take possession of him each time this
hideous recollection forced itself upon him,
although unaccountable to Reuben, was
most painful for him to witness. What
difference could it make what became of
one's body after death ? Reuben would ask
himself, puzzled to fathom that wonderful

tenderness which some natures feel for the
flesh which embodies their attractions. But
Jerrem had felt a passing love for his own
dear body — vanity of it had been his ruling
passion, its comeliness his great glory ; so
much so that even now a positive satisfaction
would have been his, could he have
pictured himself outstretched and lifeless,
with lookers-on moved to compassion by
the dead grace of his winsome face and
slender limbs. Joan, too, was caught by
the same infection. Not to lie whole and
decent in one's coffin — oh, it was an indignity
too terrible for contemplation ! and
every time they were away from Jerrem
she would beset E-euben with entreaties
and questions as to what could be done to
avoid the catastrophe.

The one plan he knew of had been tried,
and tried, too, with repeated success, and
this was the engaging of a superior force

VOL. III. 57

to wrest the body from the surgeon's crew
a set of sturdy miscreants, with whom todo
battle a considerable mob was needed ;
but with money grown very scarce and
time so short, the thing could not be
managed, and Reuben tried to tell Joan of
its impossibility while they two were walking
to a place in which it had been agreed they
should find some one with a message from
Eve, who, together with Adam, was in
hiding on board the vessel Captain Triggs
had spoken of But instead of the messenger.
Eve herself arrived, having ventured
this much with the hope of hearing something
that would lessen Adams despair
and grief at learning the fate of Jerrem.

Ah, poor saw !' sighed Joan, as Eve
ended her dismal account of Adam's sad
condition ; * 'tis only what I feared to hear
of But tell un. Eve, to lay it to his heart
that Jerrem's forgive un every bit, and

don't know what it is to hold a o^rudo^e to
Adam ; and if T speak of un, he says,
*' Why, don't I know it ain't through he,
but 'cos o' my own headstrong ways and
they sneaks o' revenge chaps," who falsely
sword away his blessed life.'

Does he seem to dread it much ?' asked
Eve ; the sickly fears which filled her
heart echoed in each whispered word.

Not iliad he don't,' said Joan, lifting her
hand significantly to her throat. ' 'Tis
after. Oh, Eve !' she gasped, ' ain't it too
awful to think of their cutting' up his poor
dead body into bits ! Call themselves
doctors !' she burst out ; ' the rashly
lot 1 I'll never let wan o' their name
come night to me agen.'

^ Oh, Reuben !' gasped Eve, * is it so ?
Can nothing be done f

Reuben shook his head.

Nothing now,' said Joan ; ' for want o'

57—2

money too, mostly, Eve — and the guineas
I've a-wasted ! Oh, how the sight o' everyone
rises and chinks in judgment 'gainst
my ears !'

If we'd got the money said Reuben,
soothingly, ' there isn't time. All should be
settled by tomorrow night, and if someone
this minute brought the wherewithal,
I haven't one 'pon whom I dare to lay my
hand to ask to undertake the job.'

^ Then 'tis no use harping' 'pon it anymore,'
said Joan, while Eve gave a sigh
concurring in what she said, both, of them
knowing well that if Reuben gave it up,
the thing must be hopeless indeed.

Here was another stab for Adam's
wounded senses, and with a heavy heart
and step Eve took her way back to him,
while Reuben and Joan continued to thread
the streets which took them by a circuitous
road home to Knight's Passage.

But no sooner had Eve told Adam of
this fresh burden laid on poor Jerrem, thana
new hope seemed to animate him. something'
was still to be done I There vet
remained an atonement which, though it
cost him his life, he could strive to make
to Jerrem. Throwing aside the fear of
detection which had hitherto kept him
skulking* within the little vessel, he set off
that night to find the Mary Jane, and,
regardless of the terrible shame which had
filled him at the bare thought of confronting
Triggs or any of his crew, he cast himself
upon their mercy, beseeching them as men,
and Cornish men, to do this much for their
brother-sailor in his sad need and last
extremity ; and his appeal and the nature
of it had so touched these quickly-stirred
hearts, that, forgetful of the contempt and
scorn with which, in the light of an informer,
they had hitherto viewed Adam,

they had one and all sworn to aid him to
their utmost strength, and to bring to the
rescue certain others of whom they knew,
by whose help and assistance success would
be more probable.

Therefore it was that, two days before
the morning of his sentenced death. Eve
was able to put into Reuben's hand a scrap
of paper, on which was written Adam's
vow to Jerrem, that though his own life
paid the forfeit for it, Jerrem's body should
be rescued and saved.

Present as Jerrem's fears had been to
Reuben's eyes and to his mind, until he
saw the transport of agitated joy which this
assurance gave to Jerrem, he had never
grasped a tithe of the terrible dread which
during the last few days had taken such
complete hold of the poor fellow's inmost
thoughts. Now, as he read again and again
the words which Adam had written, a

torrent of tears burst forth from his eyes
in an ecstasy of relief he caught Joan to his
heart, wrung Reuben's hand, and from that
moment began to gradually compose himself
into a state of greater ease and seeming
tranquillity. Confident, through the unbroken
trust of years, that Adam's promise,
once given, might be implicitly relied
on, Jerrem needed no further assurance
than these few written words to satisfy him
that every human effort would be made on
his behalf; and the knowledge of this, and
that old comrades would be near him, waiting
to unite their strength for his rescue,
was in itself a balm and consolation.

He grew quite loquacious about the
crestfallen authorities, the surprise of the
crowd, and the disappointment of the
ruffianly mob deprived of their certain
prey ; while the two who listened sat with
a tightening grip upon their hearts, for

when these things should come to be, the
Hfe of him who spoke them would have
passed away, and the immortal soul have
flown from out that perishable husk on
which his last vain thoughts were still
being centred.

Poor Joan ! The time had yet to come
Avhen she would spend herself with many a
sad regret and sharp upbraiding that this
and that had not been said and done ; but
now, her spirit swallowed up in desolation
and sunk beneath the burden of despair,
she sat all silent close by Jerrem's side,
covering his hands with many a mute caress,,
yet never daring to lift up her eyes to look
into his face without a burst of grief sweeping
across to shake her like a reed.

Jerrem could eat and drink, but Joan's
lips never tasted food. A fever seemed to
burn within, and fill her with its restless
torment ; the beatings of her throbbing

heart turned her first hot, then cold, as
each pulse said the time to part was hurrying
to its end.

By Jerrem's wish Joan was not told that,
on the morning of his death, to Reuben
alone admittance to him had been granted ;.
therefore when the eve of that morrow
came, and the time to say farewell actually
arrived, the girl was spared the knowledge
that this parting was more than the shadow
of that last good-bye which so soon
would have to be said for ever. Still the
sudden change in Jerrem's face pierced her
afresh, and broke down that last barrier of
control over a o-rief she could subdue no
longer. In vain the turnkeys warned them
that time was up, and Joan must go.
Reuben entreated too that they should say
good-bye ; the two but clung together in
more desperate necessity, until Reuben,
seeing that further force would be required,.

stepped forward, and stretching out his
hand found it caught at by Jerrem, and held
at once with Joan's, while in words, from
which all strength of tone seemed to die
away, Jerrem whispered, ' Reuben, if ever it
could come to pass that when I'm gone,
you and she might find it some day in your
minds to stand together — one — say 'twas the
thing he washed for most — before he went.'
Then with a feeble effort to push her into
Reuben's arms, he caught her back, and
straining her close to his heart again, cried
out, 'Oh Joan! but death comes bitter,
when it means good-bye to such as you.'
Another cry, a closer strain, then Jerrem's
arms relax — his hold gives way, and Joan
falls staggering back; the door is opened —
shut ; the struggle is past, and ere their sad
voices can come echoing back, Jerrem and
Joan have looked their last in life.

HEX Reuben found that to be a
witness of Jerrem's death Joan
must take her stand among the
lawless mob who made holiday of such
sad scenes as this, his decision was that
the idea was untenable. Jerrem too had a
strong desire that Joan should not see him
die, and although his avoidance of anything
that directly touched upon that dreaded
moment had kept him from openly naming
Diis wishes the hints dropped satisfied

Reuben that the knowledge of her absence
would be a matter of relief to him. But
how get Joan to listen to his scruples,
when her whole mind was set on keeping
by Jerrem's side until hope was past and
life was over %

Couldn't ee get her to take somnus that
her wouldn't sleep ois 'til 'twas late "?'
Jerrem had said, after Reuben had told
him that the next morning he must come
alone ; and the suggestion made was seized
on at once by Reuben, who, under pretence
of getting something to steady her shaken
nerves, procured from the apothecary near
a simple draught, which Joan in good faith
swallowed. And then, Reuben having
promised in case she fell asleep to awaken
her at the appointed hour, the poor soul,,
worn out by sorrow and fatigue, threw
herself down dressed as she was upon the
bed, and soon was in a heavy sleep, from

which she did not rouse until well into
the following day, when some one moving
in the room made her start up.

For a moment she seemed dazed, then
rubbing her eyes as if to clear away those
happy visions which had come to her in
sleep, she gazed about until Reuben, who
had at first drawn back, came forward to
speak to her.

Why, Reuben,' she cried, ' how's this ?
have I been dreaming' or what ? The daylight's
come, and see — the sun !'

And here she stopped, her parched
mouth half unclosed, as fears came crowding
thick upon her mind, choking her
further utterance. One look at Reuben's
face had told the tale, and though she did
not speak again, the ashen hue, that overspread
and drove all colour from her cheeks,
proclaimed to him that she had guessed the
truth.

'Twas best, my dear he said, ' that you
should sleep while he went to his rest.'

But the unlooked-for shock had been too
great a strain on body and mind, alike
overtaxed and weak ; and falling back, Joan
lay for hours as one unconscious and devoid
of life. And Reuben sat silent by her
side, paying no heed as hour by hour
went by, till ni^-ht had come, and all around
was dark ; then some one came softly up
the stairs and crept into the room, and
Eve's whispered * Reuben' broke the spell.

Yes, all had gone well. The body, rescued
and safe, was now placed within a house
near to the churchyard in which Eve's
mother lay; there it was to be buried. And
there, the next day, the commonplace event
of one among many funerals being over,
the four thus linked by fate were brought
together, and Adam and Joan again stood
face to face.

Heightened by the disguise, which in
order to avoid detection he was obliged to
adopt, the alteration in Adam was so complete
that Joan stood aghast before this
seeming stranger, while a fresh smart came
into Adam's open wounds as he gazed
upon the changed face of the once comely
Joan.

A terrible barrier such as, until felt, they
had never dreaded, seemed to have sprung
up to separate and divide these two. Involuntarily
they shrank at each other's
touch, and quailed beneath each other's
gaze, while each turned with a feeling of
relief to him and to her who now constituted
their individual refuge and support.

Yes, strange as it seemed to Adam, and
unaccountable to Joan, i^lie clung to Reuben,
lie to Eve, before whom each could be natural
and unrestrained, while between their present
selves a great gulf had opened out

which naught but time or distance could
bridge over.

So Adam went back to his hiding-place,
Reuben to his shop, and Joan and Eve to
the old home in Knight's Passage as much
lost amid the crowd of thronged London
as if they had already taken refuge in that
far-off land which had now become the goal
of Adam's thoughts and keen desires. Eve
too, fearing some fresh disaster, was equally
anxious for their departure, and most of
Reuben's spare time was swallowed up in
making the necessary arrangements. A
passage in his name for himself and. his wife
was secured in a ship about to start. At
the last moment this passage was to be
transferred to Adam and Eve, whose marriage
would take place a day or two before
the vessel sailed. The transactions on
which the successful fulfilment of these
various events depended were mostly

conducted by Reuben, aided by the counsels
of Mr. Osborne, and the assistance of
Captain Triggs, ^vhose good-fellowship,
no longer withheld, made him a valuable
coadjutor.

Fortunately Triggs' vessel, through some
detention of its cargo, had remained in London
for an unusually long time ; and now
when it did sail, Joan was to take passage
in her back to Polperro.

Awl, Reuben, my dear,' sighed Joan-one
evening, as. Eve having gone to see
Adam, the two walked out towards the
little spot where Jerrem lay, and as
they went discussed Joan's near departure,
I wish to goodness } you'd pack up yer
alls and come 'longs to Polperro home with
me; 'tut be ever so much better than stay into
this rashly London, where there ain't a
blow o' air that's fresh to draw your
breath in.'

VOL. III. 58

Why, nonsense !' said Reuben ; * you
wouldn't have me if I'd come

How not have 'ee V exclaimed Joan.
Why if so be, I thought you'd come, I'd
never stir from where I be until I got the
promise of it

'But there wouldn't be nothing' forme todo,'
said Reuben.

Why, miss, there would, oceans,' returned
Joan. 'Laws, I knows clocks by scores as
hasn't gone for twenty year and more. Us
has got two ourselves that wan won't strike,
and t'other you can't make tick.'

Reuben smiled, then growing more
serious he said, 'But do you know, Joan,
that yours isn't the first head it's entered
into about going down home with you ? I've
had a mind towards it myself many times
of late.'

Why, then, do come to dance,' said Joan
excitedly ; ' for so long as they leaves me

the house, there'll be a home with me and
Uncle Zebedee, and I'll go bail for the
welcome you'll get give 'ee there.'

Reuben was silent, and Joan, attributing
this to some hesitation over the plan, threw
further weight into her argument by saying,
There's the chapel too, Reuben ; only to
think o' the sight o' o^ood you could do
praichin' to 'em and that ! for though it
didn't seem to make no odds before, I
reckons there's not a few that wants, like me,
to be told o' some place where they treats
folks better than they does down here
below.'

Joan,' said Reuben after a pause,
speaking out of his own thoughts and
paying no heed to the words she had been
saying, 'you know all about Eve and me,
don't you ?'

Joan nodded her head.

How I've felt about her, so that I

58—2

believe the hold she's got on me no one on
earth will ever push her off from.'

^ Ah, poor saw !' sighed Joan compassionately
; ' IVe often had a feeling' for what
you'd to bear, and for this reason too, that
I knows myself what 'tis to be ousted
from the heart you'd craven' to call yer
own.'

why, yes, of course,' said Reuben
briskly ; * you were set down for Roger
once, weren't you ?'

*Ah, and there's they to Polperro,
mother amongst 'em too, who'll tell 'ee
now, that if Eve had never showed her face
inside the place, Adam 'ud ha' had me
after all. But there, all that's past and
gone long ago.'

There was another pause, which Eeuben
broke by saying suddenly, joan, should
sou take it very out of place if I was to
ask you whether after a bit you could

marry me ? I daresay now such a thought
never entered your head before

Well, miss it has,' said Joan ; 'and o' late,
ever since that blessed dear spoke they
words he did, I've often fell to wondering'
if so be 'tut ever come to pass. Not, mind,
that I should ha' bin put out if t' had so
happened that you'd never axed me like,
but still I thought sometimes as how you
might; and then agen I says, 'why
should he, though T '

There's many a reason why I should
ask ijoii. Joan,' said Reuben, smiling at
her unconscious frankness, * though very
few why you should consent to take a man
whose love another woman has flung away.'

Awl, so far as that goes, the both of us
is takin' what's another's orts, you know,'
smiled Joan.

Then is it agreed V asked Reuben,
stretching out his hand.

Miss, so far as I goes 'tis, with all my
heart.' Then, as she took his hand a
change came to her April face, and looking
at him through her swimming eyes she
said, ' And very grateful too, I'm to 'ee,
Reuben, for I don't know by neither
another wan who'd take up with a poor
heart-broke maid like me, and they she's
looked to all her life disgraced by others
and themselves.'

Reuben pressed the hand that Joan had
given to him, and drawing it through his
arm, the two walked on in silence, pondering
2: over the unlooked-for endings to the
strange events they both had lately passed
through. Joan's heart was full of a contentment
which made her think, ' How
pleased Adam will be, and won't mother
be glad ! and Uncle Zebedee 'full have
somebody to look to now, and keep poor
Jonathan straight, and put things a bit in

order.' While Eeuben, bewildered by the
thoughts which crowded to his mind,
seemed unable to disentangle them. Could
it be possible that be, Reuben May, was
going down to live at Polperro — a place
whose very name he had once taught himself
to abominate 1 That he could be
willingly casting his lot amid a people
whom he had but lately branded as thieves,
outcasts, reprobates \ Involuntarily his
eyes turned towards Joan, and a nimbus in
which perfect charity was intertwined with
great love and singleness of heart seemed
to-float about her head and shed its
radiance on her face, and its sight was to
Reuben as the first touch of love, for he
was smitten with a sense of his own
unworthiness, and though he did not
speak he asked that a like spirit to that
which filled Joan might rest upon himself.


That evening Eve was told the news
which Joan and Reuben had to tell ; and as
she listened, the mixed emotions which
swelled within her perplexed her not a
little, for even while feeling that the two
wishes she most desired — Joan cared for and
Reuben made happy — were thus fulfilled,
her heart seemed weighted with a fresh
disaster — another wrench had come to
part her from that life soon to be nothing
but a lesson and a memory. And Adam,
when he was told, although the words he
said were honest words and true, and truly
he did rejoice, there yet within him lay a
sadness born of regret at rendering up
that love so freely given to him, now to be
garnered for another's use ; and henceforth
every word that Reuben spoke, each
promise that he gave — though all drawn
forth by Adam's own requests — stuck
everyone a separate thorn within his heartsore

with the thought of being an outcast
from the birthplace that he loved, and cutoff
from those whose faces now he yearned
to look upon.

Xo vision opened up to Adam's view the
prosperous life the future held in store.
No still small voice then whispered in his
ear that out of this sorrow was to come the
grace which made success sit well on him,
and Eve ; and though as years went by, and
intercourse became more rare, their now
keen interest in Polperro and its people
was swallowed uj) amid the many claims a
busy life laid on them both, each noble
action done — each good deed wrought by
Adam, and by Eve too, bore on it the unseen
impress of that sore chastening through
which they now were passing.

Out of the savings which from time to
time Adam had placed with Mr. Maceyy
enough was found to pay the passage-money

out, and keep them from being
pushed by any pressing want on landing.


Already, at the nearest church, Adam
and Eve had been married, and nothing
now remained but to get on board the
vessel, which had already dropped down
the river, and was to sail the following
morning.

Triggs had volunteered to put them
and their possessions safely on board, and
Reuben and Joan, with Eve's small personal
belongings, were to meet them at the steps,
close by which the Maris Fanes boat
would be found waiting. The time had
come when Adam could lay aside his disguise,
and appear in much the same trim
he usually did when at Polperro.

Joan was the first to spy him drawing-near,
and holding out both her hands to
greet the welcome change, she cried

Thank the Lord for letting' me see im his
own self dance more. Awl, Adam ! awl,
my dear ! 't seems as if I could spake to
'ee now, and know 'ee for the same agen.
Look to un, Reuben : you don't wonder
now Avhat made us all so proud of un at
at home.'

Reuben smiled, but Adam shook his
head — the desolation of this sad farewell
robbed him of every other power but that
of draining' to the dress its bitterness.
During the oriole of that long day Eve
and he had hardly said one word, each
racked with thoughts to which no speech
gave utterance. Mechanically each asked
about the things the other one had brought,
and seemed to find relief in feigning much
anxiety about their safety, until Triggs,
fearing they might outstay their time, gave
them a hint it would not do to linger long ;
and, with a view to their leave-taking: being

unconstrained, he volunteered to take the
few remaining things down to the boat, and
stow them safely away, adding that when
they heard his whistle given it would bethe
signal that they must start without
delay.

The spot they had fixed on for the 
was one but little used, and well
removed from all the bustle of a more
frequented landing. A waterman lounged
here and there, but seeing the party was
another's fare, vouchsafed to them no
further interest. The ragged mud-imps
stayed their noisy pranks to scrutinise the
country build of Triggs' boat, leaving the
four, unnoticed, to stand apart and see each
in the other's face the reflection of that
misery which filled his own.

Parting for ever! no hopes, no expectations,
no looking forward, nothing to
whisper, ' We shall meet again.' ' Good-bye

for ever' was written on each face and
echoed in each heart. Words could not
soothe that sufferings which turned this
common sorrow into an individual torture,
which each must bear unaided and alone ;
and so they stood silent, and with outward
calm, knowing that on that brink of woe
the quiver of an eye might overthrow their
all but lost control.

The sun was sinking fast ; the gathering
mists of eventide were rising to shadow all
around ; the toil of day was drawing to its
close ; labour was past ; repose was near at
hand; its spirit seemed to hover around and
breathe its calm upon those worn, tried
souls. Suddenly a shrill v\'liistle sounds
upon their ears, and breaks the spell ; the
women start, and throw their arms around
each other's necks. Adam stretches his
hand out, and Reuben grasps it in his
own.

Reuben, good-bye. God deal with you
as you shall deal with those you're going
among.'

^ Adam, be true to her, and I'll be true
to those you leave behind.'

'Joan,' and Roger's voice sounds hard
and strained, and then a choking conies
into his throat, and though he wants to
tell her what he feels, to ask her to forgive
all he has made her suffer, he cannot speak
a word. Vainly he strives, but not a sound
will come ; and these two, whose lives, so
Frown together, are now to be rent
asunder, stand stricken and dumb, looking
from out their eyes that last farewell
which their poor quivering lips refuse
to utter.

God bless and keep you. Eve,' Reuben's
voice is saying:, as, taking her hands within
his own, he holds them to his heart, and
for a moment lets them rest there. ' Oh,

friends,' he says, ' there is a land where
partings never come ; upon that shore may
we four meet again !'

Then for a moment all their hands are
clasped and held as in a vice, and then they
turn, and two are gone and two are left
behind.

And now the two on land stand with
their eyes strained on the boat, which
slowly fades away into the vapoury mist
which lies beyond ; then Reuben turns
and takes Joan by the hand, and silently
the two go back together, while Adam and
Eve draw near the ship which is to take
them to that far-off shore to which Hope's
torch, rekindled, now is pointing.

Good-bye' is said to Triggs, the boat
pushes off, and the two, left standing side
by side watch it away until it seems a
speck which suddenly is swallowed up and
disappears from sight. Then Adam puts

his arm round Eve, and as they draw closer
together, from out their lips come sighing
forth the whispered words — ' Farewell,
Farewell.'

THE END.

Eir.LINa AND SONS, PRINTERS AND ELECTROTYPERS, Guildford.

S. & H.

^l

{ ^^ >rii

University

m .

onLLINOlS-URBANA

.-C-.-fte

5'oi12084216024 ^

^M

J,3^ ^

',^^jm:

*7 ■ /-^>

mi

^:^k€^^^m^^:*^:fmi
