OF THt

UN IVLRSltY

or ILL! Noise



P883n

vel

in 2009 with funding from

University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign

http://www.archive.org/details/nadinestudyofwom01prae

VOL. I.

%k <^tubg d a Scream

BY

MRS. CAMPBELL Prayed,

Author OF "policy AND Passion," " AN AUSTRALIAN HEROINE," ETC.

Who can say.' Thus far, no farther,' to the tide of his own nature ?

AVho can mould the spirit's fashion to the counsel of this will?
Square his being by enactment — shape his soul to legislature —

Be himself his law of living, his own art of good and ill ? "

J. BruHlon Stephens.

IN TWO VOLUMES.— VOL. L "

Chapman & HALL, Limited,
11, HENRIETTA. STREET, CO VENT GARDEN.

1882.

[All Rights reserved.]

CLAY And TAYLOR, PRINTERS

V. X

CONTENTS OF VOLUME I.

INTRODUCTORY.

PACE

EXTRACT FROM A LETTER TO THE AUTHOR . 1

BOOK I.

CHAPTER I.

PHYSICIAN, PRIEST, OR LOVER? . . 11

CHAPTER II.

ON THE BRINK OF THE PRECIPICE . . 29

/^ BOOK 11.

^ CHAPTER I.

THE FORESHADOWING OF DRAMA . . 48

^ CHAPTER II.

A LOVER A LA MODE . . . . G8

CHAPTER I J I.

Page

THE HISSING OF SERPENTS . . . 85

CHAPTER IV.

BEVIS WINS . . . . . Ill

BOOK III.

CHAPTER I.

THE BORDER-land OF THE INVISIBLE .;. 134

CHAPTER II.

THE Phantom IN THE Corridor . . 151

CHAPTER III.

THE LEGEND FULFILLED . . . 163

CHAPTER IV.

Cobham DESERTED . . . . 185

N AD I N E

INTRODUCTORY.

Extract FROM A LETTER TO THE AUTHOR.

A HARD frost — the most severe weather
which we have known for years — has set the
world sneezing, has broken up the hunting
coteries, has filled the clubs with aimless
loungers, has given an impetus to the sale of
stalls at the theatres, increased the circulation
of novels from Muche's, and — direst of results,
as regards the comfort and good-temper of
a quiet, studious recluse like myself — has
covered with solid ice the lake at the bottom

^

VOL. I.

of my lawn, and has turned loose upon my
borders a tribe of Goths and Vandals, whose
shrieks of merriment pierce my unhappy ears
even through stone walls and closed windows,
and cause me to anticipate mournfully the
approaching horrors of luncheon and five
o'clock tea.

"As I sit growling in my snuggery — the
only spot in* the house sacred from the inroads
of these barbarians — I 'find myself reflecting
with the poet that art is long and time is
fleeting, and am tempted to envy you the
limpid skies and heavenly seas of the sunny
south — the orange gardens and ilex groves
in which you are doubtless enjoying delicious
days of idleness at Pegli, and the near vicinity
of the picture-galleries, the monuments, and
glittering, if decayed, magnificence of Genoa.

I am tempted also, at the risk of provoking
your gentle raillery, to inflict upon you one
of my long letters, wtiicli you have been
pleased to compare variously with the ring
of cracked china, the quaint, precise harmonies
of the early Italian composers, and
the ponderous if polished productions of
the last century essayists. But pardon me
for remarking that I prefer incurring the
imputation of Johnsonian pomposity to that
of indulging in the slipshod English and
slangy phraseology which marks the epistolary
style of the ' young bloods ' of the
present age.

While on the subject of poets, I am led
to that particular one who has in reality
inspired this letter. You will recollect — But

no ; I had forgotten that I was addressing

2

you across a chasm of three decades. The
name of Harold Calderwood will, I fear, convey
to your mind no more distinct image than
that of several neat duodecimo volumes of
airy verse, which have probably since your
childhood reposed undisturbed in their
allotted places upon the shelves in your
father's library. They and their author were
the fashion of their day, but the writer has
lived longer than his works. With me the
poet, gallant, wit, raconteur, — a star which
had attained its meridian while I was still
a boy, and which has now sunk completely
below the literary and social horizon, — has
remained always a bright and invigorating
memory.

Last week, while lounging about London,
I found myself in the boudoir of our charming

friend the Transatlantic Hepatic, whose
kindness of heart, as you are aware, is only
equalled by her passion for the society of
septuagint octogenarian celebrities. Our
tUe-a-Ute was cut short by the announcement
of the carriage.

"'Now/ said she, 'I will reward you for
having made yourself so agreeable by taking
you with me to call upon the cleverest and
most fascinating man in the. world.'

In faint protest I represented the inexpediency
of placing my feeble flame in juxtaposition
with the rays of this luminary.

*' * There's something in that said Hepatic.
I like modesty. But I guess that Mr. Cal-underwood's
brilliancy is a reflection from the
past, and in a short time there'll be nothing
left of his light. If he could leap back forty

years and you twenty, you might have cause
for jealousy. As it is, he is like many of
your British institutions — a magnificent ruin ;
and I advise you strongly, if you are fortunate
enough to please him, to cultivate his acquaintance,
for he is fast crumbling to decay.
He has brought his chef with him from Rome,
and I can assure you, on the authority of
my male friends, that no one in Europe gives
more delicately composed dinners, or tells
a naughty story with greater piquancy. Ah !
he knows his world — as well he may do
with the experience of nearly eighty years to
teach him wisdom ! '

' Madam, ^ said I with a low bow, ' wisdom
of that kind is not confined to octogenarians.'


' But J am a philosopher,' murmured she.

'^I found my poet what she had described
him — a magnificent rain, crippled by slow
paralysis of the limbs, but not of the brain ;
attenuated, worn, yet with still inexhaustible
vitality beaming from his eyes and flowing
with his talk — a stream witty, aphoristic, epigrammatic,
in which there seemed scarcely any
perceptible break. He recognized me — greeted
me with warmth ; and I accepted an invitation
to dine with him upon the following evening.

'' The party was a small one — Herbert the
dramatist, Knowles the metaphysician. Dr.
Weldon, whom you know by renown, our
host, and myself.

We sat late. Calderwood's unflagging
vivacity seemed to inspire his guests. The
talk glided into literary and sociological
channels. Apropos of a remark made by

Herbert upon the difficulty of selecting from
the incidents and combinations in real life
which present themselves as material to the
observation of an author such as without
shock to conventional purism, may be exhibited
upon the stage,, individual reminiscences
and experiences of the tragic and
sensational kind gathered thickly. Almost
each one present had some harrowing tale
to relate which had come under his personal
knowledge, and the improbabilities of reality
as compared with those of imagination were
freely discussed.

Some melodramatic and morbidly exciting
situations were depicted by Dr. Weldon with
the graphic force of an eye-witness, and
their recital was followed by a remark of
Calderwood's.

'' ' I think that I can cap that narrative,
Doctor, interesting as it is. Herbert, I will
give you the materials for an emotional drama,
which at least possesses the merit of being
absolute fact. I can vouch for the truth of
what I am going to tell you ; but I must beg
that you will not exact chapter and verse of
my authority. The heroine of the romance
died several years ago. She was well known
in European courts, and though I fancy most
of you would be considerably astonished were
I to reveal her name, in relating some incidents
in her career, I am violating no confidence,
and running no risk of betrayals
injurious to any living persons

then proceeded with his
story. As I know that fact and fiction are
to you equally fascinating, and that no gift

could be more acceptable to you than the
skeleton of a plot, I send you this one. Erelong
I shall look for its appearance, clothed
in flesh, reanimated, and dressed after modern
taste ; but let me give you a word of advice.
Do not delay in the execution of your
projects. Herbert is deeply pondering the
solution of certain delicate and technical
difficulties, and is quoting the Greek
tragedy as a magnificent precedent for
realism upon the English stage. ■*'

5|C SjJ 5|C 5fC ?p 5JC

BOOK I.

CHAPTER I.

PHYSICIAN, PRIEST, OR LOVER?

And so you think that I have changed
of late — since nay visit to the Dormers in
London. How ? "

The question was asked in a tone half arch,
half melancholy, by a handsome girl seated
before the pianoforte in a dim, old-fashioned,
country drawing-room, and was addressed to
a gentleman who, bending forward with his
ej^es fixed attentively upon her face, had been
speaking in a low tone under cover of the
music.

Not that there was any need to drown their
voices. The only other occupant of the room
the girls father , leaned back in a deep armchair,
his fine profile outlined against the
sombre upholstery, his gouty hands folded
across each other, while he slept the sleep of
the aged.

It was nine in the evening. The curtains
were drawn, and a log blazed in the fire-place.
Wind howled without; the boughs of the
beech-trees creaked, and though it was late
in April, rainy sleet was driven against the
window-panes. Within, the harmoniously
tinted room adorned by vases of hot-house
flowers, the many traces of feminine taste,
the warm atmosphere scented with i^ot-pourrij
were grateful to the senses and suggestive of
all that is refined, tender, sympathetic.

Dr. Bramwell, so was named the gentleman
by the piano, fancied that he detected a ring
of emotion in Nadine Senguin^s voice. Her
tone seemed to challenge truth ; her whole
manner, he thought, was tinged by something
at once defiant and appealing, artificial and
yet deeply earnest. But he was in love , and
to him Miss Senguin was a mystery as subtle
as it was sweet.

Not the kind of man to grapple with
mystery in the form of a beautiful woman.
Dr. Julian Bramwell, aged twenty eight, in
appearance heavy - browed, contemplative-looking;
in face, square of conformation, and
rather plain than handsome; had dealt all
his life with the positive and knowable, and
though he possessed a fair share of idealism,
could not be said to have brought it under

cultivation. It was not his tendency to put
out feelers in emotional directions, or to glide
gracefully over surface interests. Life was to
him a serious business ; his moods inclined to
pessimism, while his soul burned to alleviate
distress. He was talented and ambitious, and
cherished visions of scientific discovery, of
fame and — a secondary consideration — fortune.
He had a clear logical mind, the capacity for
conceiving and carrying out a fixed purpose,
and a strong faith in himself. This was fairly
justified. He could walk between narrow
lines, and if impulse ever prompted him to overstep
them, he had the power of self-restraint.
He believed himself to be a keen student
of human nature. Success in diagnosis had
thrown him into the error of over self-confidence.
He was mistaken in imagining that

he understood Nadine Senguin. For that, he
felt too deeply. Her blushes, smiles transient
humours furnished him with food for deep
thought, and usually led him to conclusions
graver than they apparently warranted, and
most often erroneous. It is easier to read
character by physiognomy while counting the
beats of a patient's pulse, than to interpret
the manner of a woman who knows herself
beloved, while gazing into a pair of liquid
eyes, that melt imperceptibly from grey to
violet, and unconsciously magnetize the would-be
magnetizer. These self-same orbs were full
and soft, with deep lids, and strongly arched
brows which imparted to the countenance
an expression at once piquant and wistful.
The forehead was low and broad, the nose
straight and fine, the chin slightly pointed,

too short for oval English beauty; the lips
mobile — when smiling sweety but melancholy
in repose; the head sleek and small, with
dusky hair neither black nor brown, coiled on
the nape of a slender neck ; the complexion
was of a warm paleness, the whole colouring
nondescript, hues blending into each other
and producing an impression distinctly harmonious
; while the face was relieved from the
faintest suggestion of insipidity by an almost
startling variety of expression. Miss Senguin^s
figure was slight, but tall and singularly supple.
In her manner there was sufficient sadness
blended with vivacity to pique curiosity ;
her voice was low, and her speech, even when
she talked commonplace, had the peculiarity
of arousing interest and conjecture.

'* Well ! " she asked, ceasing in her playing

for a moinenfc and looking at him full. " In
what way have I changed ? "

He hesitated.

It is but natural that you should have
gained in grace, brilliancy, self-possession.
The consciousness of admiration must, I
should imagine, have this effect upon a woman
so young as you. But that is not what I
mean : the alteration is more subtle. It is
difficult to define what is indefinable. Your
manner was always variable ; now it is more
so than ever ; sometimes, indeed, I fancy that
you have a cause for trouble which is a secret
to the world. The thought grieves me deeply.
Yet underlying everything, there is a softness,
a tenderness which — " He paused for a
moment. " This makes me happy ; I hardly
know why. I think that I can express in one

VOL. I. c

word what I want to convey. You are more
Sj/mpafhujiie."

^^ You find me so ? "

*' Is it presumptuous to answer — j^es ? '*

"No. I am in a strange humour. Yau
are right in calling me variable. I give you
free permission to say to me this evening
what you choose."

"Do you know, Miss Senguin, what that
permission implies ? ",

He spoke meaningly, and bending forward
tried to meet her eyes, while he lightly
touched her right hand , which again drew
music from the keys of the piano.

She did not at once reply, then said slowly —

"Perhaps I can guess. But I warn you
that I am in a 'moods to-night, and not
responsible for my words or my manner. Do

not blame me, Dr. Bramwell, if you receive
false impressions. I don't wish to give them,
but — this is the truth — I do not understand
myself."

There cannot be any question of false
impressions," he said energetically. "If
you were less simple, less frank, you would
in all ways have more confidence in the
beauty of your own natures'

Then I may feel that everything we say
to each other is ' without prejudice ' ? Do you
know that you produce in me an impulsive
reliance upon you which makes me wish to
judge of myself by your opinion of me ? ^'

If that were the case'' he answered

with repressed passion, " you would see

nothing in your own character but what is

noble and lovable."

c 2

Ah me ! It would be well if you could
put your spectacles upon the eyes of others.
Not that one would care to be examined
critically or even approvingly by everybody
in the world, but it is elevating to the
character to be thought better of than it
deserves. For one thing, if all persons believed
one to be pure and good there would
be no possibility of being tempted. . . . You
doctors have a great many physical theories
about germs she added in a tone of forced
gaiety. " Do you believe, morally speaking,
that the seeds of evil can lie latent in a
person's nature for years, and then be suddenly
developed in a month — a days — by something,
some one, outside oneself, so that one's
very temperament is reversed, and one is borne
on a tide of longing towards what is evil ? . . .

And the strange thing is, that one is
almost persuaded it is not evil, but a
righteous murdering of instincts, which
seem to be the fruit of perhaps a false
idea of morality'

She had begun lightly, but as she concluded,
her lips trembled, her voice grew
deeply earnest.

^^ I wish that you would speak plainly,"
exclaimed Dr. Bramwell, anxiously. '' What
do you mean ? ■'"'

Only this. Do you think it possible that
a woman, say a girl like me, could become
suddenly depraved in mind ? '^

'depraved! Nadine ! how can you use
such a word in connection with yourself — you
who are the embodiment of truth and purity ?
It is wrong of you to say such things ; I

cannot bear to hear them, I will not discuss
such a possibility

Miss Senguin's head drooped. She stopped
playing again , and timidly touched his arm.

^^ You see it is impossible foi us in a mental
sense, to face each other fairly. We are too
different. I know that you haven't any faith
in angels or devils or anything else supernatural.
I have a strong one. I am morbidly
superstitious and I have a fancy that at
times one's good and evil genii have the power
of personifying themselves in particular individuals.
Well, Dr. Bramwell, 1 am inclined to
think that you are my good genius at present.
When I am with you, morbid impulses and
wicked thoughts become unreal or grimly
laughable. My nature seems to find something
which it needs , in yours. There's not

the least element of personal attraction in
this feeling: : I almost wish there were. I am
very honest with you even at the risk of
your thinking me unwomanly. What does it
matter ? What does anything matter ? But
one goes through phases of experience in
which one feels the most intense need of help.
It is so with me now. Do not however, misunderstand
me. There is nothing definite that
I can confide to you. You can best help me
by taking no notice of my mood, by letting
me say what is passing through my mind,
without attaching too great importance to my
words. You say that I am variable. Think
that I am this evening what I shall not be tomorrow,
what I shall perhaps never be again.
I want a figurative hand clasp. Sympathy —
the knowledge that some one whose judgment

we respect cares for us, and expects good
from us, is, when we are tossed about and
troubled and uncertain of ourselves, the
greatest help . . . But — why should I speak ?
Dr. Bramwell, do you thirst, that I aro
looking well ? "

^' Oh ! say what is in your mind ! No, you
do not look well now. When I came this
evening you seemed to me full '"f brightness,
but at this moment jour eyes are heavy
and your face is almost haggard.''^

** That is not surprising. All last night I
lay awake. I do so during many nights. It
is wretched work : every sound jars my
nerves ; my head throbs, and the same weary
thoughts fly round and round in my brain.
I am afraid of opium : it makes me dream,
and dreams are the mockery of reality. I am

afraid of a great many things but I am most
of all afraid of myself."

'' Nadine' cried Dr. Bramwell^ " you
bid me take no notice of your words; but
how is that possible ? All this is new to me.
You do not know low you distress me. You
are unhappy and I yearn to comfort you, if
I might — if I dared. I beseech you to place
confidence in me. You have said already that
instinctively your nature turns for support to
mine. . Ah, you cannot realize how happy
those words have made me. But what I feel
is nothing. . I only wish you to know
that all I ask is to serve you. I am convinced
that your mind is preyed upon by
some inward morbid exaggeration of outward
circumstance, which will cease to affect you
painfully when you can disburse yourself

of it to another. Tell me — Is your trouble
in any way connected with your visit to the
Dormers ? ''

Nadine bent involuntarily as it were ,
towards him, began to speak, then hesitated.
Anxiety showed itself in her eyes as their
searching, melancholy gaze met that of his;
doubt and irresolution were upon her parted
lips. A struggle was waging within her. . . .
Suddenly, the flicker of impulse died out of
her face and left it cold and still. He felt
intuitively that a look, a gesture, — on his part
unconscious, — had arrested speech on hers.

Nadine ! " he exclaimed imploringly.

His voice seemed to recall her to herself.
She shook her head mournfully.

'' No,^' she murmured, not in answer to his
question but as if replying to one which had

presented itself to her own mind; then added
with what appeared to be an affectation of
indifference , " I am going next week to stay
with the Dormers for the Chollerton races. I
hear that you also are to be there""

Nadine/^ cried Bramwell impetuously,
'you are not true to yourself — or to me. How
can I convince you of my entire longing to
help you — how convey to you the devotion,
the worship that is within my heart ? My
deepest sympathy is yours — and more, far
more, if you will have it so. Speak to me.
Let me know what is grieving you. Something
tells me that when we meet at Cobham
it will be too late, and the impulse to confide
in me will have passed away."

Nadine smiled with sad bitterness.

"You are rig-ht. When we meet at Cobham

it mais he too late. . . . No. Do not urge
me farther. You cannot help me ; I will not
ask you to try. I need a priest more than a
doctor — if I could believe in the priest ! My
trouble lies in myself and is caused by my
own nature. Why should I struggle against
irresistible bent ? . . . . What you say is
true. My feelings are morbid. They are
unreal and must be dealt with as one deals
with phantoms. Let us talk no more of my
imaginary griefs : you would be the first to
attribute them to an over-excited condition
of the nervous system. Tell me something
of yourself'

^^ To speak of myself is to talk of yoii. My
life is bound up in yours. I have no hope
for the future apart from you. You know
this. . . . Nadine, you know that I love you."

CHAPTER II.

ON THE BRINK OF THE PRECIPICE.

Rapine raised her hands with a shrinking
gesture.

"Do not tell me of this — not now."

Yes, now' cried Bramwell vehemently.
'^ I came this evening for no other purpose
and it is impossible, Nadine, that this can bea
surprise to you."

Ah ! Have I the power of reading
thoughts ? . . . No. You deserve frankness.
I did suspect it. But I knew that it is
your metier to study character; and I might

have supposed your interest in me to be
partly scientific. You are rather cold-blooded,
Dr. Bramwell.'*

Am I cold-blooded ? How little you know
me''

He bent suddenly close to her, and his eyes
glowed upon hers.

^'Do not awaken papa. He is sleeping
so quietly, dreaming his happy dreams of
old-world fables, inspired perhaps by a
new religion or a new mystical philosophy.
Who would not cast off all ties with the
present if they could — and live in the
past ? ''

"Nadine," said Dr. Bramwell, more gently,
*^ if you had reason for thinking me cold and
self-contained, it is that my position with
regard to your father, and the almost daily

contact with you, into which it brought me,
obliged me to place a strong guard upon my
feelings. A doctor is not on the same footing
as an ordinary acquaintance'

^^No; and it is partly upon that account
that I have talked to you so frankly, and
have come to lean upon jou.'^

It was a false position," replied Bramwell,
*haud every time your clear eyes met mine I
felt it more keenly. Now I have put an end
to it, and I can speak. My dearest hope is
to win you for my wife. I know that I could
make you happy. I love you passionately.
In time my love would compel yours. I am
certain of this. You have admitted that there
is sympathy between our natures. In your
case, it would become something stronger; nay,
but for your maidenly reserve it might now

be love. I speak in all reverence : you are
sacred to me ; but we are face to face now as
man and woman. I meant to speak to-night.
I meant that we should stand fairly to each
other. I do not wish for any definite promise
from you. Of course there is disparity. I
would not ask you to share my lot unless I
bad something better to offer you than that
of a country doctor's wife. I bave given up
my practice bere and am going to London.
Through my writings I bave already gained
some sort of repute. I am ambitious and I
feel in me the elements of success. I will
succeed for the sake of winning you. In a
short time I shall not be ashamed to come to
you boldly. Now, I ask nothing, unless it bea
word, bidding me either hope or despair
utterly''

Miss Regain's only answer was a plaintive
chord that preluded a wistful melody.

Do you know this ? '^ she asked.

"It is something of Schumann's, is it
not ? " he answered impatiently.

"Traumerei. Dreams she said in a melancholy
tone, " idle fancy ! But dreaming is
pleasant, even though we know that there
must be sorrowful awakening.^^

A sense of blankness and desolation fell
with her words upon Dr. Bramwell.

Are my hopes then only dreams ? ^' he
asked bitterly. "Must I go away despairing?"

"Do not either despair or hope," she
replied. " Wait. Leave me in peace for a
little while, till I see where fate means to
strand me.'^

Tell me'' he said. " Is there any other

VOL. I. D

man whom you love, and who wishes to
marry you?^^

She did not answer immediately, then said
with a forced laugh —

'' There is not any one in the world whom
I love — and who wishes to marry me'

^^ Then I am content'' said Dr. Bramwell.
*' I see light in the future''

Don't deceive yourself. Don't build plans
upon me. You know that I am a person of
moods. I am not to be depended upon.
There are two creatures within me fighting
against each other, and no one can say which
will conquer. It would be better if jo\i
believed me vain and heartless; better that
you should wean yourself from loving me. If
you will not, or cannot, you must accept the
consequences. If it is my fate to make, you

unhappy I too shall suffer; but at least I
shall have warned you*

^' You • talk as though it were possible to
choose whom one would or would not love.
It is happiness to me to think of you, even
though it be sadly ; and to try and wean
myself from you would be to tear away a
part of my being''

"Would you still find happiness in loving
me, though you knew that I could never be
yours ? "

Do not bid me believe that. I cannot —
I will not. But even if it were so — yes.^'

Then be happy' said Nadine with a

bewitching smile. " But' she added, " I

have a bargain to make with you — a selfish,

one-sided bargain. I will accept your love

and be grateful, and — yes, I will try to return

o 2

it ; but it must be on condition that you do
not tell me of it, at least till — '^

'still I am in a position to claim you for
my own' interrupted Bramwell triumphantly.

''No^ that is taking things far too much
for granted. Say till — if such a day ever
comes — I confide in you freely. Dr. Cromwell,
I bid you think the worst of me that
you can. If I obeyed my better self I
would send you away and tell you to forget
me. Think of me as heartless and selfish,
as unwilling to lose your admiration, — if
you prefer the word, — your sympathy, or
what is more true, loth to deprive myself
of the good which I gain from your belief
in me. . . . Oh, I am sacrificing you to
my wandering impulses ! What shall I do ?
Tell me what to do''

To serve you at any cost would be no
sacrifices

He bent till his lips touched her hand.
She shivered slightly and drew it gently
away. Then compunction seized her, and
she allowed her fingers to rest for an instant
upon his, in a caress that she might have
bestowed upon a faithful dog.

''^I think that you would be very loyal'
she murmured — ^' more loyal than I deserve.
But at Croxham next month you will not let
any one suspect an understanding of this sort.
You must not single me out, or be aggrieved
if you see me monopolized by other men''

I shall only be at Croxham for a few days.
I should not have accepted Mrs. Dormer's
invitation had it not been for the temptation
of meeting you there. Miss Senguin, your

wishes shall be respected, and after to-night
my love shall be silent'

'' You are very good to me' said Nadine
earnestly. ^^You have always been good tome
since that day when I thought papa was
dying, and you comforted me. . . . Life is
very difficult' she went on in a dreamy tone.
"It seems a perpetual struggle of what ^is^
against what * might have been.' Circumstance
shapes not only our fate, but ourselves.
If some one or something were different then
we might be either better or worse. That is
what is so hard. A little earlier — a little
later — never at all. It is all a throw of the
die. . . . You look very mournful. Does
what I say distress you ? "

*^ It would give me the deepest pain'
answered Dr. Bramwell gravely, '* were it not

that, in spite of your half-repulse, I still hope
one day to possess the key to your thoughts.
You are very complex. A few months ago I
thought that I understood you ; to-night, I
am further from doing so than if I had met
you for the first time yesterday."

"And does not that thought depress and
deter you ? "

'^ No ; for to me you are the noblest, truest
woman living, and I lull win your heart''

'^My heart! Oh, I am cruel, false — all
that is most base. I must say this ; it relieves
me. I have no healthy, emotional impulses.
I should make a bad wife, an indifferent
mother. And even in fighting against the
evil within me I am calculating, I am capable
of anything — capable even of marrying you
as a refuge from myself. . . . Don't look so

horrified and bewildered' she added in a
different tone. " You mustn't think that I
really mean all the wild things I say. It
amuses me; it is a safety-valve. I am very
wayward. I dare say that you find me perplexing
but you must consider how lonely I
am ; there's no one to whom I can open my
mind. I have only papa in the worlds and,
poor dear ! I would suffer anything rather
than that he should be worried by my whims
and vagaries. I always had a feeling, Dr.
Bramwell , that you would in some way be
mixed up with my Hfe. Perhaps for that
reason I have talked to you so oddly and
impulsively. It would be foolish to take my
confessions too seriously. I had theories
about you. I felt a strong desire to verify
them ; but the worst of being interested in

people is that one is always wanting to make
experiments and to do or say something
utterly untrue, but wliicli, by means of their
interpretation of it, would throw a new light
upon their character. , . ,''

At this moment a gentle movement in the
arm-chair announced that the sleeper had
returned to consciousness. Miss Senguin
plunged abruptly into a rather difficult concerto,
by Handel, which lay open on the
music desk. It was the signal for Dr. Cromwell
to rise, while Mr. Senguin straightened
himself and stirred his cold coffee, trying to
make believe that he had not been asleep.

'^ Your music is very pretty, Nadine. I
missed it in the evenings when you were
away, and should have felt lonely indeed if
this good doctor had not sometimes taken

compassion on me. Not that I would for the
world keep you buried here. Young people
must have their chances of making the best
they can out of life. Go on playing, my love ;
and, Bramwell, what do you say if we have
our game of carl? '*

Dr. Bramwell acquiesced. The card-table
was set out, and presently both gentlemen
were seated at it, while Nadine continued
at the piano. As he shuffled the cards Mr.
Senguin^s eyes wandered towards his daughter
with a glance of admiration, and his head
nodded in time to the crisp, stately measure.

How do you think she is looking ? "
he asked, but fortunately did not wait fora
reply. " Improved in appearance, eh ?
but her spirits seem to me a little variable.
Naturally so. London even in winter is a

more exciting place than Aston. I have been
reproaching myself, Doctor, for not sending
Nadine to town in the season. You should
have heard Mrs. Dorraer^s views upon the
subject ; she has offered to chaperon e her this
year. Hitherto I have selfishly thought only
of my own present comfort, and have not
considered her future ; but that must not goon.
I should like to see her well married
before I die. There ! I had almost forgotten
to mark the king. . . . Mrs. Dormer, oh yes,
she was over here yesterday with a sort of
distant connection, Colonel Halkett. He is
staying at Croxham. . . . Dear me ! how
many years that name carries me back. I
was his father's fag at Eton, and we were
in the embassy together at St. Petersburg.
Regie Halkett was my best man. Of course

you are aware that my wife was a Russian.
It sometimes strikes me that a certain
peculiarity of temperament which you may
have observed in Nadine is inherited from
her mother. Time passes. Halkett married
some years afterwards, and this is his eldest
son — a handsome fellow in the Blues ; but
there is a queer story about his wife. She
went mad after the birth of their first child
and is in confinement, I' am told. A melancholy
way of being handicapped; but it is
said that he has his consolations. . I win
the trick. You never proposed, so I mark
two. The Dormers have a large party on
the sixth for the Chollerton races. I hear
that you are to be there : your farewell, I
suppose, to your old friends. Nadine goes
next week, and I am left to the fate of the

old and infirm — solitude. However I don't
grumble. And so your successor has arrived.
Bring him over soon and introduce him ;
and, for Heaven's sake, Bramwell, go
thoroughly into my case with him. How
I shall exist when you leave us, I really
cannot imagine. The position is too terrible
to be contemplated."

Nadine abruptly ceased playing and advanced
to the fireplace. Here she stood
without speaking, one arm resting upon the
oak mantle shelf, her forehead shaded by her
hand.

Shifting his position a few moments later,
Bramwell had an opportunity of observing
her face as it was reflected in the mirror
opposite him. She was apparently gazing at
her own image, but in her eyes there was

a look of melancholy, almost of despair, so
intense that it startled him. He involuntarily
uttered her name and recalled her to herself.

^^Your expression alarmed me/^ he said
apologetically. "The lamp threw a ghastly
shade upon your face. I fancied that you
might be ill."

Miss Senguin met his glance of troubled
inquiry with one of her doubtful smiles.

No ; I was only thinking. . . . Dreaming'
she added mournfully, "dreams of the
future, in which one sometimes sees warning
ghosts. . . . Ah, papa' she continued, with
a sudden animation, " you don't know how
superstitious the Dormers have made me !
Henceforth your spiritualistic seances, your
mediums, and your astrological studies shall
be sacred from my ridicule. I intend to

bring you back a perfect repertoire of ghost
stones from Croxham. There is a mysterious
white lady who walks the central corridor,
and there are unearthly sounds and unaccountable
lights, all of which I mean
seriously to investigate. Dr. Bramwell, you
are an inveterate sceptic, but in the interests
of science I shall call upon you for your
co-operation."

BOOK 11.

CHAPTER I.

THE FORESHADOWING OP DRAMA.

Dr. Bramwell did not see Miss Penguin
again before lier departure for Croxliam, to
which hospitable abode felix had been bidden
a week earlier than the less intimate friends
who were invited for the Chollerton Races.

The Dormers were seldom at any time
alone; and besides her hosts family, Nadine
found at Croxham, Colonel Halkett, the
gentleman spoken of by Mr. Senguin to Dr.
Bramwell ; Miss Curtis, a handsome, indolent
heiress, the niece of Mrs. Dormer, whom the

latter — plain, clever, charming, and slightly
satirical — catalogued to Nadine as follows : —
'' My dear, she is a small soul oppressed
by a large body. One feels quite a sympathy
for the over-weight of fine flesh. She won't
bore us. She may stay five days and she
may stay five weeks. It depends upon how
the supply of French novels holds out. I have
taken care to lay in a stock from Rolandi^s
and have directed her attention to the most
springy arm-chair in the house. She is a
beautiful piece of furniture which eats, and
has a weakness for truffles ; " Mrs. Bartlett,
commonly called Clem Bartelotte, a pretty,
vivacious American, with her husband, a
travelled gentleman of varied accomplishment,
which ranged between a facility for deciphering
Egyptian hieroglyphics and for taking

VOL. I, E

successfully the stiffest Leicestershire bullfinches
j a young diplomatist who knew everybody
and everything, and who was suspected
of admiration for Nadine, and serious designs
upon Miss Curtis; and finally, Mr. Jem
Ormthwaite, a north-country squire, who had
been discovered a short time before by Harry
Dormer in the act of gazing disconsolately
into the Serpentine, and upon being asked
what he was doing, replied grimly, " Waiting
for November,^^ whereupon Mr. Dormer represented
that Chollerton Races might be a poor
but temporary substitute for fox-hunting, and
carried him off in triumph to Croxham.

The party was small enough for sociability,
and sufficiently large to subdivide conveniently
into twos upon occasions. Croxham
was a charming country house full of

resources so close to London that it was well
in the world, and offered workers or pleasure-seekers
agreeable opportunities for running
down to dinner and returning by a well-timed
midnight train. Mrs. Dormer was Catholic
in her tastes and Bohemian in her proclivities ;
and she was one of the few hostesses who
contrive to amalgamate successfully the
country element with that of London life.

There was a sense of freedom in the atmosphere
; cigarettes were tolerated in most
places, and conversation always flowed freely,
even verging sometimes on innocent laxity.
A good deal of money was lost and won in
the evenings at loo and poker. Flirtation,
which might have been considered compromising,
was accepted in good faith. '^ Hon
suit qui mal y pense" represented Mrs.

E 2

<5 Gr

Dormer's social creed, and frisky matrons,
well known on the Promenade des Anglais,
and familiar with Monte Carlo, found ample
opportunities for diversion during the spring
and autumn gaieties at CroxLam.

At the present crisis, this freedom from
restraint and absence of ill-natured comment
or disagreeable suspicion was particularly
grateful to Imagine Senguin. Her temperament
possessed all' the Slavonic pliability.
She seemed to have cast aside those tragic
forebodings at which she had hinted in her
conversation with Dr. Bramwell, and had
assumed, with her pretty London gowns, a
reckless vivacity of manner which rendered
her the very life of the party. A demon
of restlessness appeared to have entered into
her; it was as though she found silence and

solitude insupportable even for an hour. She
rode and walked a good deal with her host
and with Colonel Halkett. She entered with
eagerness into Mrs. Dormer^s^s plans for entertaining
her guests — romped with the children,
played lively rausic , and sang gay French
songs with the entrain of a vivandidre, chattered
to Mrs. Bartelotte, and except at the
rare moments when her body was still and
her face in repose, looked as though she had
not a care to cloud her girlish levity.

The Chollerton Races were to take place
on the seventh and eighth of May and on
the afternoon of the sixth all the party, with
the exception of Dr. Bramwell, who was
momentarily expected, were assembled in the
hall at Croxham, where Mrs. Dormer, looking
particularly quaint and original in her trim

serge costume was pouring out tea , and with
the tact wliicli made her so popular, was
dolno^ her best to remove the slight stiffness
that so often follows the arrival of a bevy
of strangers.

The hall at Croxham was an attractive
lounging-place, and was more frequently
occupied than any other room in the house.
Now, though it was broad daylight without,
and the scent of lilac and narcissus floated
in through one open window, a blazing log
surmounted the great heap of white ashes
upon the hearth, and the bright reflections
from the antique silver tea-service, the steaming
muffins upon their brass tripod before
the fire, and the presence of two lazy-looking
dackshunds curled up upon the hearthrug,
seemed more in harmony with a touch of

rawness in the air than with any preconceived
notions of our merry month of May.

The dark panelled walls, hung with family
portraits and ornamented with china plaques
and old willow-patterned dishes ; the 
screens and tapestry tortures ;
the oak bookcases and dusky recesses lighted
with vivid spots of colour, in the shape of
some gorgeous, quaintly-fashioned vase from
the East, some antique brazen shield, rich
piece of bric-a-brac or stand of azaleas or
cancellaria, formed an harmonious background
to the scattered groups. It was a
charming scene, rendered doubly so by the
living element of attractive women and men,
possessing more or less the air of distinction
which good breeding imparts. All were
talking — the elder gentlemen somewhat apart.

their deep tones , as they discussed sport or
politics, contrasting with the ladies' milder
voices, and with the not unmelodious twang
of Mrs, Bartelotte, who, attired in the most
^ fetching ' of tea gowns, leaned back in a
basket-chair, with her pretty, pert face turned
towards Mr. Ormthwaite, while she stroked
the golden hair of Mrs. Dormer's little girl
of three. Mrs. Bartelotte had a way of
rippling on about nothing in particular, which
filled up pauses; and as her discourse was
accompanied by much graceful gesticulation,
it was agreeable to eye and ear.

"Well, I must say I do admire children,
they're so round and soft, and their dimples
are so 'cute. You should see my baby, Mrs.
Dormer; she's real lovely. I intend to have
her portrait painted. I wish you'd tell me

of a young artist that's going to be a celebrity;
it's always best to catch them young.
I thought I bad discovered a treasure the
other day. He was an Italian. His name
was Count Dam'mi. It sounds like an objurgation,
don't it , Mr. Ormthwaite ? He
had a title as long as my arm, and I assure
you that was the shortest part of it. I
wasn't going to lose sight of him, so I took
him all the way from Some to Twickenham.
Gerald said that if I chose to buy him a
new suit of clothes, and half-a-dozen shirts,
and pay his washing-bills, I might keep him.
I guess he was dear at the price, that Count.
I must say he wasn't a success. Gerald
thought he'd show him something of English
country life, and took him out shooting. He
had a passion for improving his mind ; I will

say that for Count Dam'mi. You should have
seen his get-up : he turned out armed like
a desperado. Pm sure I don't know what he
expected ; but I must say he wasn't altogether
pleased. This is what he remarked
when he came back. You must just imagine
a creature like a shrimp , with beady black
eyes and an imperial." Mrs. Bartelotte executed
a little pantomimic description. " ' I
do not understand ze way english gentlemen
make sport. Sey shoot ze little birds;
I shoot ze brigands.' I calculate' added
Mrs. Bartelotte reflectively, ^^ there was nothing
paltry about his ideas. . . . Now, Colonel
Halkett, there isn't the least use in your
eyeing a certain young lady in that savage
fashion, for she is appropriated already, so
come and give me the straight tip for the

Chollerton Cup, for I've got to replenish my
purse after all my losses at poker.'^

Nadine Penguins the object of Mrs. Barter
observation, was seated in a window
recess at the further end of the room. Her
gaze was fixed upon the carriage-drive, which
from her position she commanded. She
looked feverish and excited. Upon each
cheek glowed a spot of carmine. Her lips
were parted in an artificial smile, but her
eyes wore a melancholy expression, and she
turned an abstracted ear to the conversation
of her companion, a small, sandy-whiskered
man, one of Mrs. Dormer^s^s gifted proteges
whose claims to social consideration rested
upon the practice of palmistry and a general
proficiency in such-like recondite arts ; and
who had now launched himself upon a stream

of discourse tending towards his favourite
topics.

'^ You don't remember me, Miss Senguin ;
that was not to be expected; but I have
seen you. Do you recollect a conversazione
at the South Kensington, and a lecture upon
Physiognomical Diversities in European
Races ' given by Deodatus Lumley ? Imagine
an existence weighted by the name of Donatus
! Don't you pity me ? You were
there with Mrs. Dormer and Colonel Halkett.
I have a keen eye for faces that are out
of the common. Yours puzzled me, for I
could not at first determine your nationality.
Oh, I know all about it now. You are half
Russian. Mrs. Dormer enlightened me ; but
not before my inner consciousness had evolved
the fact from your voice and appearances

Miss Senguin turned lier face towards Mr.
Lumley, lier eyebrows delicately elevated, a
faint gleam of interest in lier eyes.

*' The feminine Russian types continued
he, didactically ^^is at once languorous and
spirituelle, passionate and cold , impulsive
and subtle. All these characteristics foretoken
drama in life.^^

Ah J drama is pleasant ! '' murmured
Nadine.

*' You will make it. I see tragedy shadowed
forth in your nostrils. Do not dilate them so
scornfully, Miss Senguin. Let me refer you
to Latter for information on that point;
and to go further, I have not the least doubt
that the testimony of your nose will be confirmed
by the lines of your palm."

Nadine, with a gesture of curiosity.

tendered her slim and exquisitely-shaped
hand, upon which glittered several valuable
rings. Mr. Lumley took it within his own,
turned it over, and, while examining it with
apparent minuteness, continued talking in his
serio-comic manner.

To a student of pathology. Miss Senguin,
the hand is a book which contains the
secrets of human nature; no line or curve,
no mound or indenture is without significance.
The shape of a finger-nail may determine
belief. Success or failure, the struggles of
ambition, the pangs of defeat may be read
on this little elevations and he lightly
touched the edge of Nadine's palm. ^' Destiny
speaks in the line descending from the
second finger, and the workings of the
heart are revealed in this chain-like tracing,

which, alas ! tells of emotional ebbing and
Sowing, of instability of attachment, pain
inflicted, loyalty ill-requited. Ah me ! a
melancholy record. Do you shrink ? Shall
I continue ? ^'

Pray go on," said Nadine, her egotism
piqued ; " but you generalize too much. Tell
me something more definite."

You have a clear intellect, too much in
subjection to your impulses for your safety
or peace of mind. You are now, or shortly
will be, dominated by a passion that will
materially affect the course of your life."

Nadine started, and looked keenly at the
fortune-teller, but his eyes were fixed intently
upon her palm. She answered in a tone of
raillery —

"" And yet you say that T am inconstant."

True j but in this case — Do you really
wish to know what I see ? ^'

Nadine nodded.

Passion is arrested almost in the hour
of consummation by sudden deaths

The gravity of Mr. Lumley^s manner produced
a strong effect upon Miss Senguin.
She turned very pale and half withdrew her
hand.

'*■ Not your own death' lie added, reassuringly.
^' A prosperous marriage, health, and
long life are promised you. Was I not
right ? Your nature does present the elements
of drama. But you need not fear
personal disaster; you will be in peril, but
you will escape from it. I am not altogether
a prophet of evil. Your line of Saturn points
to a brilliant career; here is denoted the

favour of princes. Wealth, and social distinction
will be yours."

^' And happiness ? ^^ asked Nadine, " for it
seems to me that your bag of blessings is
weighted by curses.'^

Ah happiness ! That is indeed hard to
define. Who is happy ? Shall you be happy
on the box seat of Dormer's drag to-morrow
even though, you know yourself to be the
envy of professional beauties, and are certain
of an invitation to the Blues' ball ? There
will be an east wind, or you will have the
wrong person beside you'* added Mr Lumley,
plaintively. "There always is an east wind
in life, except when one wants it to keep
bores away.-"

Nadine laughed nervously. The sound of
carriage-wheels without attracted her eyes

VOL. I. F

to the window; but again her gaze drooped
towards her lap, and she appeared lost in
contemplation of the hand which no longer
rested in that of Mr. Lumley. It was only
a fly laden with luggage that had driven
round to the side entrance. She did not
speak for a few moments; her attention had
wandered.

Mr. Lumley observed her abstraction, and
rattled on with commenda,ble'tact.

"What a delightful old hall this is,
especially at this hour ! It is the fashion
with our neighbours across the Channel to
ridicule the Anglo tea mania, but it has certainly
an element of the picturesque. Five
o'clock tea, charming faces, old oak, faded
tapestry, and blue China, — all the accessories
complete for a genre picture, — and a faint

suggestion of ghostly presence in the background.
The soul of an gesthete could not
more desire. Heres Halkett , Miss Senguin,
making for you with a tea-cup in one hand
and a cream-jug in the other. His mission
in life is to amuse, and as 1 am not even
interesting you, — your eyes are more truthful
than your lips, — 1^11 give him my chair ,
and go and make myself useful in carrying
about the muffins.'^

F 2

CHAPTER II.

A LOVER A LA MODE.

Colonel Halkett might have posed as a
nineteenth century hero of that now familiar
type which combines the muscular with the
sentimental. Capacity for all the finer emotions
did not in his case appear incompatible
with proficiency in every manly pursuit. One
could have foretold that women would find
him an irresistible suitor, and men an excellent
boon companion. He was tall and spare,
with straight features, a blonde moustache,
and fierce, melancholy eyes, which seemed

now to seek a return glance from those of
Miss Senguin; but, strange to say, she hardly-looked
up as he approached nor did she
address him any word of thanks when she
accepted the cap of tea which he had brought
her.

He seated himself in the chair which Mr.
Lumley had vacated.

<^ Why do you watch the carriage drive ? '*
he asked. ^' Are you expecting any one ? "

"Yes. There is another guest still to
arrive."

Some one in whom you are interested ?
Happy person ! '^

It would be more true to say that he
is interested in me' replied Nadine, smiling
artificially.

"Ah! "said Colonel Halkett; "a gentleman

! That makes all the difference. I
retract my exclamation. He has my pity."

Their glances met : hers full, troubled
vaguely fearful ; his deep-set, fiery, with the
faintest element of mastery.

"I give you false impressions," said Nadine,
bending forward and speaking impulsively.
^'^ My regard for Dr. Bramwell — you know, I
have spoken to you of him — is really strong,
only it is abstract, not personal. His feelings,
his hopes, his future are no great concern of
mine. If he were unhappy I should be sorry,
but it would not touch me deeply. Oh ! I am
ashamed of being so cold-blooded. . . . But
it is true that he influences me powerfully;
and his influence has usually the disagreeable
effect of making me miserable. Do you know
why ? His greatest weakness is in believing

me good. . . . Ah ! '^ she added and her
eyes seemed to shine through tears, " what a
mockery it is to talk of free will when one
considers how entirely we are at the mercy of
circumstances which we do not make, and of
people who master us whether we will have it
so or notes

said Colonel Halkett, '' we are
mastered by our own emotions, passions — all
within ourselves that makes life positive and
worth the living. This is not a bondage to
be mourned, but the happy servitude of higher
natures which frees them from the galling
chain of circumstance ; if with it there is
sometimes pain and rebellion, does it not
bring also the most exquisite bliss ? "

You call it so ? It seems to me that joy
is born in the death-throes of all that is best

in our nature. And what is left ? What
follows ? This is the thing I want to know.
This is the thought which haunts me."

At that moment Dr. Bramwell was announced.
His grave presence the square,
heavy brow, dark, thoughtful eyes, and air of
reserve and preoccupation, seemed in a vague
but apparent manner to affect the whole party.
Those with whom he was acquainted smiled
upon his entrance, after a fashion less conventional
than their wont ; and the strangers
watched with an expression of awakened
interest the approach of a man whose lately
published investigations in certain imperfectly
explored fields of mental physiology,
had attracted the attention of the College of
Physicians, and had caused his name to be
quoted in such popular and scientific journals

as might be found upon the drawing-room
tables of the fashionable world. As he
advanced, Mrs. Dormer rose, greeting him
warmly. The eyes of both Miss Senguin and
Colonel Halkett followed his movements, and
the latter remarked, —

So that is the man who you say exercises
a queer sort of moral influence over you. He
prescribes for your mental as well as your
physical ailments — a convenient combination
of the functions of priest and doctor. It is a
curious fancy of yours. . I wishes' he
exclaimed in low, earnest tones, *' that I could
draw you out of this current of morbid,
exciting thought, which is poisoning for you
all the sweetness of life''

"Do you think that it becomes you to
reproach me because — ? '^

She hesitated ; her eyes drooped and a
faint colour rose to her cheeks.

Because you have come to me , like an
angel to one in despair, and have taught me
the meaning of happiness ? '^

"No, no , no. Because I can never be again
the girl Dr. Bramwell now imagines me to be."

"Why will you not believe that you are
one of those women by whom men are
redeemed ? " whispered Colonel Halkett, passionately
— " the women who win honour and
devotion by noble self-surrender."

Honeyed words ! Sweet, but false, false !
They are like lulling narcotics. But after
dreamy delight comes the reaction of misery.
That is the way with me. I feel happy
sometimes — yes, very happy, and then
There are two creatures within me, which

are always torturing each, other : the one
cold self-analyzing, calculating; the other
impulsive, variable daring. You know both.
I read in some book the other day that this
dual temperament is characteristic of the
Russian type. There again, you see, is an
instance of our subjection to forces beyond
the control of our will. But this is not the
place, and we are not the kind of people to
discuss metaphysics. For us life is too real.'^
saline rose and advanced a few steps. 'mrs.
Dormer' she said, ^' do you think that I may
venture to ask for some roses to wear this
evening, or is your gardener a tyrant ? "

'^ I have no doubt, my dear, that he will bea
slave to you. But as Dr. Bramwell is the
old man's especial favourite, I advise you to
take him with your's

Nadine turned to her lover and gave him
her hand, smiling bewitchingly.

'^ Yon have come from Aston to-day ? And
have you seen papa ? " she asked. " Now
you must tell me all about the dear old man, ,
and whether he is a cripple still, and how
Dr. Hervey consoles him for my absence.
And have you brought the book of glees I
told them to send by you ? Mrs. Dormer, I
have made a discovery. Colonel Halkett has
really a charming voice ; but Mrs. Bartelotte's
passion for poker has demoralized him to
such an extent that anything so innocent as
music has no attraction for him''

*swells' said Mrs. Bartelotte with a
grimace, " T call that rough upon my morals,
considering that it was Colonel Halkett who
first persuaded me into gambling at Monte

Carlo. I have been a hardened woman ever
since'

Dr. BramwelPs heart bounded as he followed
Miss Senguin to the greenhouse but their
Ute-a-Ute hardly answered to his expectations.
She chattered incessantly the whole time
they were together, but upon indifferent subjects
interlarding her inquiries about Aston
matters with amusing anecdotes of Mrs.
Bartelotte, Deodatus Lumley, and others of
the Croxham visitors. He marvelled within
himself at the transformation her spirits had
undergone ; but, true to his compact, refrained
from any allusions which might render their
talk dangerously personal. He was vaguely
disquieted by the air of coquetry that he
now perceived in her. To his mind she was
more lovable in her impulsive, self-upbraiding

moods. But never had she appeared more
beautiful; every motion was instinct with
grace ; her dress even to the most minute
detail, was studied; her lips parted almost
dangerously ; her eyes by turns melted,
with tenderness and sparkled with vivacity ;
her expression was never for two minutes
alike, yet all the while she presented the
same vivid and harmonious identity. She
bewitched him to a greater degree, yet not
quite in her former fashion. The fascination
was more unwholesome; it excited him and
yet deepened his melancholy.

When they returned to the house it was
found that most of the party had adjourned
to the billiard-room. Dr. Bramwell felt
himself out of place in the atmosphere of
gaiety and badinage. Native threw herself

with animation into some bantering talk, to
which he did not possess the key, and he
betook himself to Mrs. Dormer, who did not
add to his happiness by her free and unsus- '
vicious relation of Miss Senguin^s triumphs.
Mrs. Dormer was a woman of fashion, far
removed from prudishness, who took life as
she found it, and was too cynical, possibly too
deep of nature, to be vain. It amused her
to chaperone a new beauty, and she had a
curiosity to observe how Nadine would deal
with the ball that lay at her feet.

Dr. BramwelFs vague feeling of dissatisfaction
did not decrease during the evening,
and he had still the sensation of being out of
the swing of proceedings. Nadine descended,
lovely in black velvet, with tea roses at her
breast, and was soon the object of universal

attention. Dr. BramwelPs consolation that
lie lead given him the bud which he wore in
his button-hole, was counteracted when he
perceived that Colonel Halkett was similarly-decorated
; but he again derived comfort from
the recollection of Mr. Senguin's story. The
man whose mad wife was still living could not
be Nadine's suitor.

He had hoped that it might fall to his lotto
take Miss Senguin in to dinner, but fate, or
Mrs. Dormer, had ordained otherwise. She
was given to a stripling lord, one of the
country neighbours; and to Dr. Bramwell
was awarded Miss Curtis, who, handsome and
stolid, principally confined herself to the
discussion o£ an elaborate repast.

Upon his other side was a travelled, rather
blue, old-young lady, whose proclivities were

literary and artistic, and who dabbled in
shallow science but who fearful of committing
herself, did not venture beyond safe
generalities. She had read an article in one
of the magazines upon Dr. BramwelPs theories
concerning nerve function and nerve organization
; and though retaining but a misty
notion of his special claim to honour, was
alive to the advantages of acquaintanceship
with a man likely to become famous. Miss
Beauchamp had a great deal to say upon
most subjects, and attacked Dr. Bramwell
from various points, but without striking
success. Sara Bernhardt and the French
plays ; the private view at Burlington House ;
modern literature ; M. Pastures discoveries ;
and finally, apropos of Caro and Le monte
ou Von s^ennidey prettily dressed latter-day

VOL. I. G

philosophy, — all fell flat. Dr. Bramwell,
catching sight of Nadine some little way
down the table, her fine face shadowed by
a drooping frond of fern, her eyes fixed
intently upon him in a gaze half-melancholy,
half-beseeching, listened inattentively to the
remarks of his erudite neighbour.

*^ People talk of Germany as the home of
scepticism, but we English outrun the Germans
in our materialism. Germans cannot be
rationalists ; they are essentially theists ; none
have ever denied the existence of the soul.
Have you studied Descartes, Dr. Bramwell ? "
Dr. Bramwell answered at random, hitting
the mark.

Are you alluding to French or German
philosophy ? "

Gracious ! '^ exclaimed Mrs. Bartelotte

across the table. '^I shall never ask you to
come and see me in London, Dr. Bramwell, if
that is the kind of light conversation you
indulge in. Pm as ignorant as a typical
country woman whom I met at Nice; she
thought Tauchnitz a very good author, but
was surprised that the foreign libraries had so
many of his works."

*^*'Ah! " sighed Miss Curtis, who had caught
only the word Nice, '^ we used to breakfast
sometimes at the Reserve. The bouillabaisse
is so excellent'

Miss Senguin smiled from the distance in a

manner that implied intimate understanding.

A warm glow suffused Dr. Bran well's soul,

which had been cold and hungry for some

definite sign of her regard. He plunged into

a wild dissertation upon the Cartesian system.

G 2

This had at least the happy effect of alarming
his philosophical interlocutor, and she was
glad to withdraw from these deep waters to
the comparative shallows of Wagnerian music.
Dr. Bramwell determined to seek Nadine
later, and at all hazards to try and draw her
into confidential talk. But alas for his chances
of private conference with this enigmatic
lady whom he loved ! After dinner his host,
full of kindly but misplaced interest, led him
aside to ask innumerable questions about the
London life which he intended to embrace.
Did not Croxham feel justifiable .pride in its
doctor who had already achieved celebrity ?
And when Dr. Bramwell was able to escape
from Mr. Dormer he found that Miss Sensruin
had seated herself at the card-table, and was
banking with Colonel Halkett.

CHAPTER III.

THE HISSING OF SERPENTS.

It is a pleasant sensation to be seated on
a well-appointed drag, beside one of the best
whips in England, and behind a team of
spanking horses which you are certain will
not be eclipsed by any in the coaching enclosure.
Nadine Senguin, abstract and emotional
as she sometimes appeared, was by no
means insusceptible to these material considerations.
Contrary to Mr. Deodatus Lum-ley's
vaticinations, there was no east wind,
she was not beside the wrong person, and

in all the consciousness of beauty enhanced
by a becoming toilette she felt herself in
excellent spirits. Apart too from any peculiarly
private feelings there was a scarcely-defined
sense of gratification in the reflection
that her charioteer, Colonel Halkett, to whom
Mr. Dormer had yielded the reins, was a man
of fashion, whose attentions might almost be
considered the hall-mark of social success.

The seat of honour had by common consent
been allotted to Miss Senguin. She was to
be the new ' beauty and had already begun
to taste some of the sweets which that distinction
confers. The elder married ladies,
with their appointed squires, had preferred
going comfortably by train to the long drive
and chance of taking cold ; and Mrs. Bartlett,
determined on no account to desert Mr

Ormthwaite, whose education she had taken
in hand, and whom she had resolved to inspire
with a taste for dissipation more piquant than
fox-hunting, sat with that gentleman behind ;
the other seats were filled by the younger
and more spirited of the guests at Croxham,
including, though he could hardly be classed
with them, Dr. Bramwell.

He, placed-to the left of Mrs. Bartelotte,
had ample opportunity for observing the
demeanour of Miss Senguin, and could not
avoid hearing scraps of the conversation
which she carried on with Colonel Halkett.

It was frivolous enough, certainly not of
a kind to arouse jealousy; but it seemed
to Bramwell that the voices of both rang
artificially, and their talk was emphasized
by gestures implying a certain nameless

familiarity, and by quickly averted glances
charged with some subtle current of thought
which he could not divine, but which set
his brain working in conjecture, hateful to
himself, and degrading to the goddess who
still sat enthroned in his imagination.

Yet in spite of the smiling radiance of
Nadine's face, it wore an expression more in
harmony with this vein of thought than with
the mental vision of her which Bramwell
cherished. Can change of feature be wrought
in a week ? Could it be possible that the
lips had shaped themselves into fuller curves,
and that the eyelids had acquired a trick of
voluptuous drooping and of sudden, coquettish
uplifting of fringed lashes ? Surely this was
not the girl who had played Schumann to
him in the Aston drawing-room so short a

time ago ! Dreams ! Were all his hopes
baseless ? and did Nadine's purity of mind
and grace of character exist only in his
fancy ?

'No, a thousand times ! Not for an instant
would he admit the bare suggestion.

Chollerton, though comparatively a small
race meeting, is one of the most popular in
England. Upon this occasion, royalty was
represented; the great houses in the neighbourhood
had sent forth large parties, and
many well-known London faces smiled from
the grand stand and from the tops of the
drags in the four-in-hand enclosure. Hundreds
of opera glasses were levelled at the
dark green coach, with its well-dressed freight
and team of handsome bays, and whispers of
admiration ran down the row as Colonel

Halkett swept smoothly in at the opening and
took up his position in line with the rest.

To court the gaze of a thousand eyes is
part of the programme of a race day. To
simulate enjoyment, if not to experience it, a
social necessity. Kill-joy faces are an insult
to the pleasure seekers, who, not having yet
lost their money, ready to skim the cream
of sport and pleasure, and anticipating a
profitable if brief future of agreeable possibilities,
are as fresh as the ladies toilettes
and the jockeys' colours.

But Bramwell in nowise fulfilled these
conditions. It is one of the misfortunes of
a doctors profession that in it he is trained
to peer below the surface of life, and that
in whatever situation he finds himself, the
earnest student must be oppressed by a sense

of incongruity and of want of harmony
the frothy exterior and the human
interests and passions that surge below. This
feeling was intensified tenfold in Dr. Cromwell
to-day. The garish display, the forced
laughter the artificial excitement, the element
of coarseness and sensuality, which if not
disagreeably obtruded in the fashionable
crowd, was painfully manifest in the mob
pressing against 'the enclosure, awakened in
him a keen sensation of disgust. Were those
painted gaudy creatures, whose trade was
written upon their faces, of the same mould
as Nadine ? It seemed to him desecration
of his ideal that she should, as was apparent,
lend herself heart and soul to the spirit of
such a scene as this.

The party divided. Some joined Mrs.

Dormer in the grand stand ; others remained
on the drag to watch the horses being led
out for the first race. Nadine, her face
flushed and eager, surveyed the course from
her position of vantage in front, while Colonel
Halkett held her parasol and adjusted the
focus of her field-glass.

In her excitement she placed her hand
upon his arm ; their faces were close together.

Bramwell could not then-account for the
repulsion which their attitude aroused in his
mind. He leaned forward and asked if she
would accompany him to the saddling
paddock.

Colonel Halkett shot at him a brief, bright
glance, and bit the end of his tawny moustache.
For a second Nadine appeared to
hesitate, then said with a light laugh —

Not now. At this moment my thoughts
are concentrated on cold chicken and champagne.
Later on Dr. Bramwell, yon may
take me to the paddock; and in the meantime,
if you want to earn my eternal gratitude,
go across to the Stand and remind
Mrs. Dormer, when the race is over, that
there are hungry souls here dying for
luncheon. Colonel Halkett, the race after
this one is for the Cup, isn't it ? I am glad
that we shall be well-fortified before it comes
off. I stand to win or lose six dozen pairs
of Swedish kid gloves on Miss Mary; and
you ? '^

Colonel Halkett laughed a little unsteadily.
"More than I like to think of before
luncheon. Miss Senguin ; " and then, bending
towards her, he whispered something in a

low tone at wliicli her face became set and
white, and she glanced round uneasily.

But Dr. Bramwell had left the drag and
was on his way to the Stand. There Mrs.
Dormer, smiling but inaccessible, was exchanging
greetings with London friends.
The place seemed all a flutter of feminine
drapery and a buzz of chatter. Pretty women
fingered dainty lorgnettes and toyed with lace
parasols; goddesses in nineteenth-century
attire displayed a mundane eagerness over
their betting-books; frisky matrons despatched
their admirers upon excursions to
the ring; and portly dames interchanged
county civilities with bored-looking squires ;
while men of all types passed to and fro,
blocking up the narrow gangway. One of
these — muscular, fresh - complexioned, with

something of the sporting cut in his attire —
accosted Bramwell as the latter was steering
circumspectly towards his destination.

Why Julian old fellow ! Is it you ?
What ages since we met ! This puts me in
mind of the old days at Cambridge, when
you were a front rank man with the Fits
, and a successful performer at Cottons
I fancied that you had eschewed
athletics, sport, fashion, and all the rest of
it, to become a medical great gun. I read
a paragraph about you in one of the papers
the other day — madness, hydrophobia, or
something equally horrible and incurable,
traced to insects Everything is traced
to insects now-a-days. Mortality in grouse,
agricultural depression, consumption, and
Egyptian difficulties. Where are you staying'

*^' With the Dormers at Croxham/^
"In the same house with that pretty
Miss Senguin, of the queer Russian names
about whom every one is talking, and who
is flirting so outrageously with Halkett !
I envy you your opportunities of studying
the colour of her eyes. I have a bet with
Yorke on the subject. He says they're
grey ; I back them for green. You can't
help me, I suppose ? I shall put the case
to Harry Dormer , and get him to introduce
me."

Disgusted and sore, Dr. Bramwell pressed
on ; but the crowd thickened, and presently
he came to a standstill beside the first row
of chairs. A striking-looking lady, one of
the freest and fastest of the fashionable set
'of married women, stood with her profile

towards him, talking in perfectly audible
tones to a gentleman upon lier left.

^' You know the ins and outs of Colonel
Jack's little affairs' she was saying. ^^ I
have been hearing all kinds of naughty things
about him lately. They say that he made
desperate love in the winter to that pretty
Miss Senguin, who is beside him on Harry
Dormer's drag opposite. Clem Bartelotte,
who went about with them a good deal, was
the first to tell her that horrid story of Mrs.
Jack and the madhouse. Really, there should
be a law allowing men to divorce insane
wives. Clem said — you know her quaint way
^ Well, I should say it was just a crusher ;
but that was not my business. My dear
woman ! romance and high saluting' ain't in
my line ; they take a deal too much out of the

VOL. I. H

nervous system; but I guess there was a
pretty powerful eruption in that quarter. She
kept her room for a week, and Jw went off
all of a sudden to Paris That's the way of
the world' added the lady. " Women when
they are hard hit send for their doctor, and
men — go to Paris. But this is a lame conclusion
to the tragedy. There they are,
apparently excellent friends, with what seems
to be a remarkably tasty luncheon spread out
behind them ; and I'm bound to say that
neither hero or heroine give one the idea
of being victims to hopeless passion. How
has Colonel Jack settled matters?"

*' Oh, Halkett has a genius for Platonism."

The lady laughed.

'platonism answers admirably with married
women, but it don't do in the case of pretty

young ladies. Colonel Halkett is wise in his
generation. He will teach Miss Senguin
nineteenth century morality ; and seeing that
he cannot keep her for himself, will magnanimously
hand her over to an unexceptionable
partis''

With all rights reserved ! Look, here
come the horses; and Potboy is nowhere.
You are in for a pony, Lady Alsager.'^

Dr. Bramwell moved away, borne on by
the crush downwards to the course. The
shouting of the crowd, the yells of the
bookmakers, the buzz of exclamation, the
frou-frou of silk in the Stand, all mingled
confusedly in his ears like the roar of distant
thunder. His brain whirled. Escaping from
the throng of well-dressed people, he wandered
aimlessly among the motley mob

H 2

outside the ropes, past spangled dancing girls,
clowns, tumblers, sword-swallowers, booths
placarded with announcements of ^Bodiless
ladies,' ' Mammoth children,' ^ Wonders of
the World besieged every now and then by
hoarse entreaties that he would buy, a donkey
that swallowed pence, a rosebud for his
sweetheart, a pure-bred Skye terrier, a box
of lucifers, " for the love of God, and to save
a penniless widow and children frt»m starvation
" — sickening sights and sounds that
chimed in a horrible incongruous fashion with
the ghastly misgivings that rose in his mind.
His former vague doubts assumed shape now,
and appeared to mock at him like gibbering
fiends. A lurid light seemed thrown upon
his mental image of Nadine. Her wild words,
conflicting impulses, wayward moods, and

occasional fixed look of misery, might be
interpreted by the key of passionate, unavailing
desire. . . . Yet, was it conceivable that
tragic yearning could mask itself beneath a
demeanour at times so frivolous ? If Lady
Alsager^s story were true, — Bramwell shuddered
at the thought of his darling's name
the subject of shameful innuendo and vulgar
gossip, — he marvelled at the self-command
which enabled Nadine to support such
agony as, under the circumstances, this false-seeming
intercourse at Croxham must imply;
or had she fallen so thoroughly into the
spirit of the age, that to enact the part
of heroine in a nineteenth-century drama,
involving the sacrifice of maidenly instinct,
and the torture of her most sacred emotions,
against such a background as now presented

itself, cost lier no more than a passing
pang ?

When Dr. Bramwell returned to the enclosure
the ostentatious business of luncheon
was in progress. Every drag had mounted
its white table-cloth, upon which glass and
silver glittered, aspic jelly quivered, and
lobsters and forced strawberries made brilliant
spots of colour. Each repast seemed to vie
with the other in a display of seasonable and
unseasonable dainties. Champagne corks
were flying, and there was a rattle of laughter
and light talk. The Dormers' party had
been reinforced from the Stand. Mrs. Bartlett
had discovered an old admirer, and was
not sorry to have an opportunity of piquing
Mr. Ormthwaite, who, she declared, was neglecting
her shamefully, and whom she rallied

unmercifully upon his preference for the
saddling-paddock and the ring. Miss Curtis,
her glass frequently replenished by the attentive
diplomatist was serenely enjoying her
luncheon and contributing but little to the
general hilarity. Deodatus Lumley^ Mr. Bar-melmotte,
and Miss Beauchamp, the travelled
young lady who owned a weakness for improving
society, had secured a pigeon pie,
a dish of cold cutlets, and a bottle of champagne
between them, and were enlivening
the more serious business of the collation
by a discussion upon Eastern mysticism.
Colonel Halkett had withdrawn from Nadine's
side, and was ministering to the wants of a
London beauty, whom Harry Dormer had borne
triumphantly across from the Stand, and two
young guardsmen leaned over Miss Senguin,

who consumed lobster salad with a satisfaction
as placid as that evinced by the heiress.

Luncheon was barely over when the horses
came out for the Cup race. As it was for
two miles , Colonel Halkett suggested a walk
to the starting-point. The party divided
again. Nadine, piloted by Colonel Halkett,
moved on ahead , and Mrs. Bartelotte fell , for
the time being, to Dr. Bramwell. She called
him to task for his moody manner, and
requested that if he had any more new
theories about diseases and such-like horrid
matters, he would ponder them in his
consulting-room, and not on a racecourse.

I detest doctors she remarked, with her
usual frankness. " If you weren't so charming,
upon occasions, and if every one didn't
say you were going to be another Harvey or

Jenner, I should have nothing to say to yon.
But come now, I don't believe it's science
that is absorbing you. You seem dreadfully
out of sorts. If my husband looked as glum
as you do I should just suspect that he
had backed Potboy to a pretty considerable
amount; and my deduction from that would
be domestic squalls, and a row over my
milliner's bill. But betting isn't your weakness.
Hem, I know what is. Don't you
think that I've lived all these years in the
world for nothing ! You should not let a
married man run off with your young lady.
There is a wife in the background, though,
perhaps, you aren't aware of the fact. Few
people are. Confess. Aren't you dying to
be in Colonel Halkett's shoes at this present
moment ? "

*^No/^ answered Bramwell. mastering himself
with a great effort, '^ for if the state of his
heart is what you suppose it to be , neither
his position or his feelings can be at all
enviable'

Mrs. Bartelotte shrugged her shoulders
with pretty affectation"'

You look down from a pedestal upon
the world in general. I thought that the
impossibility of marriage was the crowning
attraction of being in love. Anyhow, that's
what erotic philosophers tell us. We treat
our passions kindly in real life. Dr. Bramwell;
it's only in novels that they are torn to
tatters. But unless I'm greatly mistaken,
Colonel Jack has other fish to fry to-day
besides sentimental ones; and if Miss Mary
does not run up to her form for the Cup he

will go back to Croxliam a sadder and a
poorer man. I'm immensely curious about
the result of this race from a psychological
as well as a pecuniary point of view , tbougli I
know that you won't sympathize with me for
you have a sovereign contempt for everything
that is interesting and uncanny."

^^ By no manner of means, Mrs. Bartelotte,
for you are interesting, though I hope you are
not uncanny.''^

Bramwell could have jeered at himself ashe
uttered the bald compliment.

'^ Well, I guess you are getting on' said
Mrs. Bartelotte approvingly. ''^At this rate,
and by dint of practising on me, you^U be a
match for Colonel Halkett himself Now let
me tell you, though I must say it sounds very
silly, Mr. Ormthwaite has had a dream about

the winner of the Cup, which he confided tome
on the drag coming here. You wouldn't
take him for a Joseph, would you ? but it
doesn't do to judge by appearances. ?He
dreamed last night that the race was won by
an outsider — out of the betting altogether —
called Abates."

They had reached the starting place, and
Colonel Halkett, who had caught Mrs. Bartlett's
last words, turned' laughingly round.

^'^I wouldn't advise you to lay long odds
against Miss Mary, Mrs. Bartelotte, on the
strength of Jem Ormthwaite's prophetic
vision. He was heard to declare last night
that curried prawns invariably gave him the
nightmare; and I can vouch for three brandies
and sodas in the smoking-room. Allah is
great, but Jem Ormthwaite is not his prophet.

Besides, there isn't a horse of that outlandish
name on the card'

Ah ! that is just where the dream begins
to fulfil itself' cried Mrs. Bartelotte excitedly.
"Lord Alsager has found out on excellent
authority — don't smile in that jeering way,
it's one of the trainers — that Bevis, the last
one down on the list, was so christened, and
his name had to be changed because one of
the grooms being called Abbott, the horse was
always known as ^ Abbott's 'loss.' There !
what do you say to that ? I've given all my
friends the straight tip, and you might have
profited by my warning. Colonel Halkett, and
hedged an hour ago."

Colonel Halkett laughed again.

You and I, Mrs. Bartelotte," he said,
'' have the true gambler's instinct. Don't be

surprised to hear that I have staked my all on
Abates ; '^ and Mrs. Bartelotte had presently
to bear a considerable amount of cliff upon
ber development of Jem Ormtbwaite^s latent
mystical capabilities.

The horses gathered in line ; and after one
or two false starts were fairly off, Miss Mary
leading. Now, set in the rush back to the
Stand. Colonel Halkett's excitement was
evident , in spite of bis-efforts to 'conceal it;
and Mrs. Bartelotte bad ber private reasons
for anxiety. In the mere they found themselves
in advance together. Nadine Senguin,
wbo bad lingered, cast a glance, half-inviting,
half appealing, towards Dr. Bramwell. He
pressed through the thin stream till be
reached ber side. Tbe wave rolled on. They
two were left, practically alone.

CHAPTER IV.

BEVIS WINS.

"I Don't want to see this races exclaimed
Nadine. " I hate racing. I hate crowds and
excitement. The whole thing is sickening : it
is a raree-show, where we are like puppets
dressed up, each with a part to act; and we
must smile and pretend to be happy when our
hearts are aching with pain. . . . Did you
listen to Mrs. Bartelotte's story about Mr.
Ormthwaite^s dream ? I'm beginning to
believe that Croxham is an uncanny place.
Last night I had a horrible dream. I dreamed

that I was the White Lady who haunts the
long corridor, and that like her, I was
doomed to perpetual unrest in expiation of
some terrible crime that I had committed in
the far past. On, on, up and down, pacing
for ever — always weighed down by this ghastly
burden of secret sin ! Ah me ! Do you
know what it is to wake at night and to feel
ghostly hands clutching you, and to strive
with soul and might to escape, and then to
realize that you are alone — alone — and that the
spectres are your own hideous fancies and evil
desires? Dr. Bramwell," she added in a quieter
tone, " I suppose that there is a place near
where you can buy drugs. I want you to get
me something which will send me into a
sound dreamless sleep — if only for one night''
Her haggard looks^for her face seemed to

have grown in a moment old and withered
and her excited words confirmed all Cromwell's
torturing suspicions. His eyes fixed
themselves upon her in deep despairing
solicitude. He uttered a heavy groan.

*' What is it ? '^ she asked with sudden
sweetness, bending towards him, and gently
touching his arm. '^ I make you unhappy,
and I do not want to do that. I am not
worth troubling about. Don't mind me; my
nerves are overstrained''

'^ You do care whether I am unhappy ? '' he
asked brusquely.

Yes, indeed I do ; it distresses me. Your
face is my conscience. It has made me
hate myself —hate everything around me. At
luncheon you seemed to me like the skeleton
at the Egyptian feast''

VOL. I. I

^' Oh, Nadine ! '■' exclaimed Dr. Bramwell
impulsively; "it would be kinder far if you
told me that my feelings were nothing to
you'

I know that it would' she answered
sadly, " but it would not be true. Have you
not often told me that truth is the one good
thing ? I wish to be honest — sometimes, I
am not indifferent to you ; you affect me
strongly.'^

They stood silent for several moments.
Though her voice had been knell-like, and
though his better judgment assured him that
his anguish and love were poured forth to no
purpose, a ray of hope entered his heart.

I am glad' he said, " that you have
given me this opportunity of speaking to sou,
for I have something serious to say."

I hope that this does not imply an infringement
of our compacts she replied, with grave
coldness.

No ; it concerns you — " He paused.

Well ! what is it ? '' she asked defiantly.
'' I am listening. But I warn you that I am
not in the same mood to-day as when we
talked last — a fortnight ago."

Do I not know it ? Since then you have
come under another influence, and as it gains
strength mine wanes. Oh, Nadine ! " he cried
passionately, " at this moment, I would sacrifice
all my hopes for the future to possess the
power of reading your thoughts. But I think
that I have found a clue to them ^'

Remember," she interrupted haughtily,

I have not given you permission to say

anything to me.'^

I 2

"Miss Senguin, the only right of speech
that I claim, is that of one to whom your
good name is sacred'

My good name ! '^ she repeated in a low
voice, and coloured all over.

He had never before seen so deep a blush ;
throat and ears were crimson.

'' Surely' he continued, ^* that is imperilled
by the marked attentions of a man who
cannot marry you ! '^ -

Nadine grew pale, slowly, as the grey tinge
creeps over snow after sunset.

*what? How'' she faltered. '^ You
have not seen or heard anything since you
came to Croxham to — to give rise to such
thoughts ? ''

Not an hour and a half ago, I heard your
relations with Colonel Halkett, possible and

impossible discussed in the Grand Stand by
Lady Alsager and one of Halkett^s brother
officers. It was said that you loved him,
that he had won your hearty — villain that he
is ! — while you were unaware of the fact of
his marriage, that — but I cannot repeat the
slanderous insinuations'

Nadine did not immediately reply, but
stood, with face downcast, meditatively raking
the ground with her parasol. Presently she
said, quite coldly —

^' If you listen seriously to the gossip of
Lady Alsager and her set you will believe
a great deal that is totally untrue."

"Nevertheless'* rejoined Bramwell hotly,
"it is cruelly compromising to a beautiful
and comparatively unprotected girl''

"I fancied," she said, with a swift glaiico

at this face, " that you were one of the few
righteous men who don't measure by the
.standard of conventionality, and who have
the courage to affirm that white-washed vice
is not morality."

There are some things' said Bramwell,
hesitatingly, "in which private and conventional
judgment must be identical."

She coloured again. At this moment the
horses, veins quivering, flanks streaming, flew
past the second time. Four were almost ina
cluster, two neck and neck. It was a fine
race ; riders bent almost double, every nerve
on the stretch, hands tense, faces grim with
anxiety. The roar of voices round the Stand
became hoarser and more deafening ; when
above the confused tumult rose the shout,
Bevis wins ; " *' The outsider has it." Butin

spite of Nadine's assertion that she did
not wish to see the race, Bramwell perceived
that her frame was trembling with suppressed
excitement. She moved eagerly forward
and leaned over the ropes ; her face changed,
her colour came and went, and her eyes followed
the horses with an intensity of gaze
that surprised and almost shocked him.
When the race was over she heaved a deep
sigh, as though some inward strain had
been removed. A smothered ejaculation fell
from her lips. To Bramwell it seemed like
an exclamation of despair. But she recovered
herself in a moment, and cried gaily, —

^' Jem Ormthwaite is a true prophet. The
race has been run ; Miss Mary has come in
second. There's a triumph for the superstitious.
Dr. Bramwell, does not this convert

even a hardened sceptic like you to a belief in
occult forces ? Happy are they who backed
Abates. Come, let us go back and congratulate
the winners*

But Dr. Bramwell detained her by an
appealing gesture.

"Nadine' he cried "have you no word
of comfort for me ? I do not mean as regards
my own hopes. Let them remain blighted
and dead as though they had never blossomed.
But you ! Oh, it is your pain that makes my
heart bleed. . To know that you are suffering,
is anguish greater than I can bear. You
are on dangerous ground ; will you not fly from
it ? If Colonel Halkett has not the manliness
to leave you, will you not release yourself? '^

Nadine seemed deeply moved by his appeal;
her eyes melted with tears, her lips trembled.

^^Oh!" she began, and a sob choked her
voice. . . . But a new mood seized her, and
she shook herself free from emotion. "Release
myself! From what ? The chain of this
degrading attachment ? " she cried and her
tone was metallic in its hardness. " What
right have you to suppose that I have any
such unworthy feeling, if indeed it be unworthy
to love a man whom Fate has placed beyond
the pale of happy marriage. Dr. Brawl), I
could not have believed that you would take
this melodramatic view of a situation, commonplace
enough. Must every girl whoui Colonel
Halkett honours or degrades by his attentions,
bear the stigma of having yielded to unlawful
passion ? One half of society speaks evil of the
other half, and one does not hear of tragic
consequences. Girls of the period are taught

early to bridle their affections. As Mrs. Bartlett
remarked the other day, ^ Love resolves
itself into a question of keeping a carriage
And if Jack Halkett were free tomorrow,
he is too poor and too extravagant to think
of marrying — me. I have a strong vein of
worldliness in my composition, and am inclined
to philosophize on life ; the first axioms
of my creed are — nothing matters, nobody
cares. Ah, I am ungrateful to say that ; no
one cares — except you, and you only make
yourself unhappy by doing so. Try to dismiss
all these fancies from your mind. I wish it
to be at ease. . Is it so — now ? "

Bramwell shook his head.

She looked ^t him, melancholy, anxiety,
and a certain repressed impatience blending
in her expression.

"■ You know that I have a strong regard for
you. It pains me deeply to think that you
are troubled by false impressions about me.^'

Oh, that I could believe them false ! But
your alternate fits of feverish gaiety and of
strange depression, your vague admissions,
the traces of mental tumult which I see so
plainly on your face, all confirm themes

'^ And you call yourself a clever physician,
and yet do not consider how easily a sensitive
nervous system may be disordered by several
wakeful nights, and the excitement of poker,"
rejoined Miss Senguin with a forced laugh.
I will not gamble this evening. Dr. Cromwell,
but will play all your favourite music
instead; it will, I hope, have a tranquillizing
effect upon us both. Then you shall give
me my dose of 'bottled happiness,' and

to - morrow you will find me a different
persons

'' You are right' said Dr. Bramwell mournfully.
'^ Where you are concerned I have no
insight, no knowledge. For you I am buta
poor physician. You bewilder me. In
your many moods the real you escapes from
me. You are a mystery which my skill
cannot enable me to unravel. Latterly I
have become painfully conscious of this. You
have made me distrust my own powers. And
it is because I love you."

She stopped him with an imperative
gesture.

'^ No , no more. Remember our compact.
I do not think that you will ever know the
real uie ; but the time may come, perhaps
will come shortly, when you will regard me

with horror. If so, reflect that the woman
you love now is in every respect the same asher
whom you will hate then — in no way better
or worse. Possibly virtue and vice may then
seem to you mere things of comparison.-'^

She walked on abruptly and hindered any
comment on his part upon her ambiguous
words by resolutely changing the subject to
inquiries concerning his Lomond practice and
plans for the future.

The occupants of the drag were all in a
state of excitement and self-gratulation. As
Nadine and Dr. Bramwell approached , they
were greeted by a volley of reproaches for
having missed the race of the day. Miss
Senguin received cheerful condolences for her
heavy losses in gloves, and was advised to
seek consolation in the good fortune of her

friends. Mrs. Bartelotte appeared radiant lily
triumphant. Jem Ormtliwaite and Colonel
Halkett were the heroes of the hour : the
former looking somewhat sheepish, was chaffed
without mercy, and implored to prophesy the
winner of the coming Derby; while Colonel
Halkett laughingly responded to the congratulations
showered upon him when it was
discovered that he had actually taken Mrs.
Bartelotte's advice and had backed Sir Bevis,
otherwise Abates, to such an extent that his
winnings effectually placed him beyond the
reproach of poverty. Though half ashamed of
his recklessness, he had exhibited an interest
in Miss Mary, and had thus misled the clever
little American lady.

Bramwell, standing aloof and taking no
part in the general felicitations upon this

extraordinary CO itp, observed a long land-clasp
and a lingering look exchanged between Colonel
Halkett and Miss Senguin; but presently the
former disappeared from the roof of the drag,
and was no more seen till the horses were
put to and the coarse was beginning to clear.

During the rest of the afternoon Nadine
was subdued, almost melancholy, and when
rallied upon her silence, could only bid her
persecutors remember that she had not backed
Sir Bevis. She seemed to show a wish to
avoid Halkett, insisted upon Mrs. Bartelotte
taking her seat in front, and placed herself
beside Dr. Bramwell. Her manner to him
during the drive home lost its tinge of defiance,
and was gentle even to tenderness : her
accents, as she conversed in the tentative
abstract manner which was one of her charms,

low and suggestive ; lier eyes full of soft
gravity. This sweetness all m harmony with
the lengthening shadows the balmy air and
fragrance of the May-day, intoxicated Cromwell,
reason notwithstanding and thrilled hirfi
with dreamy happiness, which in turn changed
to hungry longing and passionate pain.

For minutes after her hand had been
released from his, when he helped her to
descend from the drag the impression of her
touch lingered, and his blood tingled at the
sense of imaginary contact. And her eyes
when they parted seeming to beseech his pity
and forbearance, stirred all his yearning, and
renewed belief in her truth and the nobility
of her nature.

She came down to dinner clothed in creamy
white, which seemed typical of her purity, a

bunch of narcissus blown as it were upon her
bosom, her face pale, with wistful eyes and
gracious lips, and her dusky hair making a
shadowy background to the clear brow and
delicately cut features. She was allotted to
Bramwell, and her appealing look and whispered
entreaty, " Don't expect me to be gay
and amusing this evening' seemed to establish
a new claim upon his tenderness. The
spell was intensified when, later on, she seated
herself at the piano and played several of
Heller's dreamless nights blanches, then wandered
through one of Raff's symphonies, and
finally, after two or three preluding chords of
grand dissonance, broke into Chopin's Marche
Funera.

The stately measure filled the room and
stilled the murmur of conversation. Nadine's

VOL. I. K

eyes dilated her small head was bent slightly
backwards her lips were parted all her face
seemed instinct with the harmony she was
creating ; Mrs. Bartelotte's nasal laugh sounding
from the hall, where she sat commenting '
upon the events of the day, was the only
jarring sound in the room. Colonel Halkett,
to whom she had been talking, abruptly
quitted her, and stood, a handsome figure,
against the slightly drawn torture, his eyes

intently fixed upon Miss Senguin. She

•

glanced towards him ; then her head drooped ;
she finished the march, hesitated a moment,
and when all expected her to rise, struck the
notes of a rippling accompaniment, lilting in
measure, but pitched in a minor key, so that
all through it ran a strain of sadness, and
sang in a manner plaintive yet arch, this little

ballad of Edgar Allan Poe's, which she had
once set to music.

Gaily bedight,

A gallant knight,
In sunshine and in shadow,

Had journeyed long,

Singing a song,
In search of El Dorado.

But he grew old.

This knight so bold.
And o'er his heart a shadow

Fell, as he found

No spot of ground
That looked like El Dorado.

And as his strength

Failed him, at length
He met a pilgrim shadow.

Shadow,' said he,

Where can it be.
This land of El Dorado ? '

' Over the mountains

Of the moon,
Down the Valley of the Shadow,

Ride, boldly ride,'

The Shade replied,
If you seek for El Dorado.' "

K 2

The last verse was given forti in a manner
at once playful, defiant, and despairing. A
moment's silence greeted its conclusion; then
followed a low murmur of applause. Nadine
left the piano, and presently the party began'
to disperse. It was getting late ; no one had
shown any inclination for the usual after-dinner
diversions; the card-tables were
deserted. The gentlemen had mostly broken
up into knots ; a cheerful clicking of balls
sounded from the billiard-room. The elder
ladies had retired, pleading fatigue; only a
small party of congenial spirits remained,
gathered now round the dying embers in the
hall, and moved partly by Nadine's fanciful
music, partly by some subtle sympathy —
some indefinable current of thought which
at times connects minds the most dissimilar —

fell into fugitive, informal talk, touching subjects
often shrunk from in mere commonplace
discussion.

Nadine, followed by Bramwell, joined trio
group, wliicli already included Colonel Halkett,
and seated herself in a large, carved arm-clair
a little apart from the rest.

A rose-shaded crystal globe shed a subdued
light upon the scene, and, after the manner
of half-illumination, brought into relief upon
the oak carving above the fireplace, grotesque
heads and curious tracery, and showed upon
the tapestry quaint mediaeval figures — warriors
in ill-jointed armour, mounted upon lean
steeds of sickly colours, and ladies in ruffs
and farthingales, contrasting strangely with
the bright faces and modern toilettes to which
they formed the background.

BOOK III.

CHAPTER I.

THE BORDER-LAND OF THE INVISIBLE.

Mrs. BartelottEj who had been admiringly
contemplating the tips of her daintily shod
feet and the bugles which ornamented her
dress, looked up suddenly, and gave a little
shiver.

'^ Did you ever read a story of Hans Under.
son^s/^ she remarked, 'ein which the dream-shadows
chase each other on the wall, and
invite the thoughts of the lords and ladies ?
I always considered that a real practical idea.
Why shouldn't dreaming be cultivated as a

science ? Dr. Bramwell, there's something
for a clever man like you to think about.
Well, I must say that I hope somebody will
be prophetically inspired to-nights for at th's
rate I shall soon pay off all my dressmaker's
bills. Mr. Dormer, I must really beg you
to take care that our Joseph is not exposed
this evening to coarse and antagonistic influences.
Pv€ always understood that there
was a great deal in influence. Fm sure that
JVe been doing my best to elevate his soul ;
and I must say that I don't consider billiards
and brandies and sodas, and the sort of conversation
that goes on in the smoking-room
after we are in bed, at all stimulating to the
spiritual faculties. Oh, we are all becoming
quite mystical. Here's Colonel Halkett, who
has been holding forth about elective affinities.

moral magnetism, mysterious sympathies,
clairvoyance, and all the rest of it, till I have
begun to feel quite squire. I guess it's
something in the air of the house, Mr. Dormer 5
and if Mr. Ormthwaite, or any one else, names
the winner of the Stakes tomorrow morning,
I think that the least we can do is to tender
a vote of thanks to the Croxham ghosts.
Now, would it be putting an insult upon
your great great grandmother, if we were to
call her up from the vasty deep — or rather,
down from the corridor, and ask her help
in regulating our betting-books ? "

I shouldn't advise you to trifle with the
White Lady, Mrs. Bartelotte,'' replied the
host, with an air of gravity. " Do you know
the legend ? It is said that the lover of a
certain Lady of Croxham was once foully

murdered in her presence, in one of the
chambers of the west wing. Since then the
story goes , whenever a guest dies at Croxham
an events as you may imagine, of rare
occurrence — footsteps and strange muffled
sounds are heard in the corridor, and the
phantom figure of a woman in white is seen to
move slowly, and as if with difficulty dragging
behind her a shadowy, vaguely defined form,
supposed to be the body of a man. She
pauses for an instant at the door of the
doomed person, knocks, and disappears. ^^

^'Oh my'' cried Mrs. Bartelotte. '' 1
reckon we'll let that ghost of your great
great grandmother alone, Mr. Dormer. And,
by the way, I hope none of us are going to
leave our bones at Croxham. I woke up last
night, or rather this morning, between three

and four o'clock, and I am certain that I
heard stealthy footsteps in the corridor. I
should have got up to look if I hadn't been
so sleepy. See how you have frightened Miss
Senguin ; she is as white as though she were
going to faint."

Every glance turned towards Nadine. She
was leaning forward, her eyes dilated, her
lips parted in an unconscious expression of
fear, her face ghastly pale. Regaining composure
with an evident effort, she said —

^^ It is nothing. I have got into the habit
of sleeping badly, and such stories take hold
of my nerves'

"Talking of haunted houses said Colonel
Halkett, breaking abruptly into the circle
round the fire. "Have you heard the latest
solution of the Carnwarth Castle mystery ?

It is ingenious, if nothing else. They say
that several hundreds of years ago the wife
of an Earl of Carnwarth, a lady of evil repute
popularly described as the Witch of Fife,, gave
birth to a monstrosity — half-toads half-man.
Ths longevity of the toad species is a matter
of natural history. This creature,, protected
by the spells of his mother the most malevolent
spirit in the Castle is the occupant of the
mysterious chamber and the rightful Earl of
Carmarthen

the buzz of comment with which Colonel
Halkett^s story was received, the impression
made upon Nadine by the Legend of the
White Lady of Croxham was forgotten, and
conversation drifted towards the subjects of
apparitions, of dual existence, hallucinations,
and kindred topics.

The late Lord Lytton was quoted as an
exponent of the theory of AWE, and almost
each member of the party had some history
to relate of individual excursion into the fields
of mysticism. Dr. Bramwell was assailed asa
sceptic in all that appertains to the occult
and transcendental. Nadine Senguin's eyes
seemed to implore him to divert the current
of talk from the personal channel in which
it now flowed.

'surely' said Mrs. Dormer, "you must
admit the reality of certain psychological
experiences common to many of us, which
cannot be explained by natural law."

"Ah!^^ said Dr. Bramwell, smiling, "the
materialist is popularly accused of arrogance
and narrow-mindedness, but, in fact, quite the
contrary is the case. It is the supernaturally

who limits his belief in the operations of
nature by the evidence of his own senses,
and compelled to supply deficiencies, presupposes
the existence of arbitrary spiritual
agencies, with which reason must be more
or less at variance. To the scientist who
regards natural law as a continuous and
ever more complex chain of cause and effect,
of condition and result, the explanation of
psychological phenomena by the working of
physical forces, appears no more impossible
and no less wonderful than the promulgation
of disease by the action of germs, or the
confinement of mind in grey matter.

What is matter ? Never mind. What is
mind? No matter," parenthetically observed
Mr. Deodatus Lumley.

'' Oh dear ! " sighed Mrs. Bartelotte. '' Since

we are all agreed that everything is a mystery,
whereas the use of arguing about it ? But
I must tell you that I have a very poor opinion
of your philosophy, Dr. Bramwell, and I think
you deserve to encounter a specially malevolent'
ghost as a punishment for your unbelief'

At any rate," added Mr. Dormer, " we
will not be so cruel as to hope that the White
Lady may pay him a visit to-night in order
that he may have proof positive of* the spirit
world'

**I think' said Mrs. Dormer, thoughtfully,
that many curious things might be accounted
for on the supposition that there is a kind of
moral electricity which pervades nature and
life, and under certain conditions brings
people into unconscious rapport with each
other. We know how the nerves may vibrate

like the strings of a sensitive instrument, and
the mind be filled with strange fugitive
fancies, unreal, yet vivid impressions, by
some indefinable outward agency ; the sighing
of a south wind, the scent of a flower
the refrain of a song. We know the subtle
sympathy which before receiving a letter from
one with whom our soul has been in communion,
causes us to be haunted, waking
and dreaming by thoughts and images of
that person. . . . This was at one time a
common experience with me. . . ."

Mrs. Dormer sighed involuntarily, and a
vaguely embarrassing consciousness fell upon
the group. It was known to one or two intimate
friends, and suspected by others, that
the force of her nature had expended itself
in a strong intellectual attachment to a

gentleman of rare attainments, who lead died
some few years before.

^^ I will tell you something which partly
illustrates what I mean' Mrs. Dormer added,
hurriedly. ^^As this experience is my own
you may take it honestly for what it is worth.
The oddest point in it, is its total absence of
point. ^^ She laughed and continued —

^'^You know how fond my husband is of
running up to London, for the day, leaving
his dog-cart at Brayshill, and driving himself
home, so that he is not tied by any particular
arrangement. Upon the occasion to which
I am referring, he went up on a day when we
were expecting friends to dine and sleep,
and without having inquired his plans, I had
taken it for granted that he would return by
the train which brought them. An hour or so

before the time at which I supposed he would
arrive I was sitting at my boudoir window, — ■
you will remember that it overlooks the back
entrance, — when, glancing suddenly down, I
saw Harry in the dog-cart drive round by
the sweep which leads into the stable-yard
and disappear within the gates. As he
turned, he looked up, and laughingly shook
his whip at me, while I nodded and waved
my hand in return, then went on with my
work; concluding, as he did not come upstairs,
that he had been detained in conversation
with the coachman, or had gone straight
to his own study.

But when on the arrival of our guests he
did not appear, and when on inquiring I
found that he had not been seen, and that
there was neither horse nor dog cart in the

VOL. I. L

stable I began to feel alarmed, though I
tried to hide my anxiety, and after waiting
dinner for half an hour, ordered it to be
served without my husband. Just as we
had finished the dog-cart did drive up, and "
Harry rushed in, full of apologies, and rather
hesitatingly explained the cause of his late
arrival.

^^'1 fully intended to come down by the
train before yours,' he, said to one of our
guests, ^ and am ashamed to confess that,
having a few minutes to spare at Clapham,
I went into the waiting-room and fell fast
asleep on one of the settees. The extraordinary
thing is, that when I awoke I could
not at first divest myself of the notion that
I was lying on my own sofa in the smoking-room,
for I had the most singularly vivid

impression of having accomplished the journey,
remembering the minutest detail, even to the
fact of driving in at my back gate and of
seeing my wife at her boudoir window, shaking
my whip at hers and receiving a nod
and a wave of the hand in return

Now," concluded Mrs. Dormer '^ if anything
had happened to Harry that evening
the occurrence would have been considered
a supernatural warning. As it is, the whole
thing is motiveless, inexplicable — the fact
of an apparition without its raison d'etre.'^

Just then several of the billiard-players
entered, and the conversation was momentarily
diverted. Miss Senguin rose abruptly
and addressed her hostess.

'' Our talk has been extremely eerie, and I
am afraid that 1 shall not sleep if I listen

L 2

to any more like it. Good night, dear," ina
half whisper; ''1 don't think that I am
up to 'curling paper' confidences. Mrs.
Bartelotte, I hope the ghosts won't revenge
themselves upon us for discussing them so
lightly by whispering the name of the wrong
horse in Mr. Ormthwaite^s ear. ' Colonel
Halkett, I wish you happy dreams of your
good fortune. You at least have found El
Dorado to-day."

As she spoke, pausing opposite him,
whether by accident or design, the bunch
of narcissus that she wore fell at Colonel
Halkett' s feet. A look was interchanged
between them. Bramwell, as he held back
the heavy curtain which partly veiled the
staircase, observed the glance, and his heart
contracted with a spasm of pain. He gave

Nadine her caudle and let the curtain fall
behind them.

^' Have you got me my flacon of bliss ? ''
she asked offering him her hand.

'' I have given it to your maids he replied
gravely ; and added, not without a tinge of
bitterness in his tone, " I hope that you will
sleep well, and awaken in a more happy moods'

She gave him a look in which anger and
defiance seemed to mingle.

'' Oh, Nadine ! ^' murmured Bramwell ; but
she shook her head with a peremptory
gesture, and without another word .ascended
the staircase, and passed into the long corridor
upon which most of the bed-rooms opened.
Racked by pain and perplexity, he watched
the last flutter of her white dress, then
turned to encounter the rest of the

party filing out from the inner hall Mrs.
Bartelotte in advance discoursing volubly,
and Colonel Halkett lingering to give some
directions to the butler about being called
a little earlier than usual, as he had some
important letters to write before breakfast.

CHAPTER II.

THE PHANTOM IN THE Corridor.

It was one o'clock when the men began to
leave the smoking-room, half-past one before
all sounds were hushed in the house, and
Bramwell, released by his host, found himself
alone in his chamber.

The potion which he had been at some
pains to procure for Miss Senguin, he might
with advantage have administered to himself,
for never had he felt more restless or disinclined
for repose. He threw himself in a
large arm-chair, and remained for some time

lost in bitter and fruitless reverie, his mind
working in vivid images of !N^adine , which
presented her by turns alluring and repellent,
candid and inscrutable, and that tortured
while they excited him to keener longing.

Hours passed. The stillness of the chamber
was palpable, oppressive; yet there was
tumult in BramwelFs soul. Hungry passion
stirred in him ; it was like a life within his
own ; it beset him ; he could not be tranquil.
Now he opened the window and gazed outward.
A bank of ebon clouds lay heavy
in the west. The wind had risen, and moaned
sullenly, seeming to herald a gale. Masses
of murky vapour veiled the heavens ; every
now and then, the moon severed them, and
broke forth, a clear, full orb, gleaming pale,
and imparting an unearthly radiance to the

swaying beeches and stretch of lawn and to
the grey stone walls of the wings that rose
on either side of the central building where
Bramwell stood. Momentarily, almost, the
pallid light illuminated the scene, then all
was blackness, sable folds closed ; balustrade,
parterre, and silvery streak of ornamental
water vanished in the night.

The clock in the turret struck half-past
three.

Whence came this troubled sense of
presentiment and of strange, anxious expectancy,
this vividness of impression and
quickening of ideational and emotional
activity ?

Bramwell felt himself to be in an abnormal
condition of brain and perception, resembling
almost the recurrent fantasia and depression

produced by nervine stimulant — recognized
the fact , yet was unable to assign it to any
given cause save the tension of anxiety and
love for Nadine, and yielded himself with
hardly a struggle to the sensation of unreality,
and of ripeness for any curious or psychological
experience, which was stealing over him
and subduing his materialism.

Minutes went on. The clock struck again
four distinct strokes, each dropping slowly
like a knell. The wind had grown fiercer,
and rising in mournful swell and gusty
cadence, seemed the wail of approaching
disaster. A deadly chilliness was borne upon
the blast. Bramwell shivered and closed the
window. As he did so a sudden gust extinguished
the candles which had been placed
lighted upon his dressing-table. Save for a

feeble glow seed by the dying fire, the room
was in darkness.

He groped for matches, but uncertainly.
The room appeared full of shadows. A fitful
flame leaped up, and died, and leaped again.
He paused. . . . Hark ! Was that a sound
in the corridor, or was it the wind, or was
it his own fancy ? . . .

The impression of unreality deepened. He
might have been thinking, feeling, listening ina
dream. Was he in a dream ? Suddenly his
being became merged in one of those transitory
phases of consciousness to which many
persons are liable, but which he had never
known. Scene and condition of existence were
recognized — instantaneously, evanescent — as
an experience of the past. The dim room, the
dusky drapery, the moan of the blast, almost

drowning that other protracted roll which had
caught his ear the flickering flame, a streak
of moonlight that fell through the aperture
of an imperfectly closed shutter and defined
in its milky track the pattern of carpet and
shape of chair, the fantastic tumult within
his brain — all seemed to have sunk at some
former time into memory, and to have revived
now with the swiftness of lightning, bearing
for the second during which the intention
lasted, a wondrous prevision and mysterious
expectancy.

And still, as in a dream, he knew that the
sound — heavy, halting, muffled, as of a massive
substance dragged with difficulty along
some dull and resonant surface — advanced,
proceeding down the corridor, and drawing
nearer to the door of his room.

Tiens not iu the nature of inspiration , but
as if the idea had been long familiar, and were
incorporate with that weird state of consciousness,
the legend of the Lady of Croxham
took possession of his mind; and while
underlying the illusive reality, there was an
incongruous sense of possible deception or
hallucination, and of the necessity for maintaining
composure, Bramwell, his nerves
quivering, waited and listened.

The noise deepened, becoming every instant
more distinct — a painful trailing, with at
intervals, a pause or suggestion of spasmodic
motion, as though progress were laborious;
now silence; now the sound of accelerated
speed, as hurried in a more intense access of
energy, IT passed his room.

There was no ghostly signal.

At the moment, Brarawell knew nob
whether lie himself opened the door of his
chamber, or whether what he saw were a
vision, created by his quickened imagination,
or the phantom of a dream in which he acted,
unconscious that he slept.

Before him, at the distance of a few paces,
there moved in the dimness, what appeared
to be the slender, white-clad form of a
woman. Her shoulders . were shrouded in
falling hair; her face was turned sideways,
her figure bent in a semi-crouching posture ;
while her two white hands grasped a recumbent
mass, the apparently lifeless body of a
man, which she half dragged, half supported,
in her struggling movement towards a dim
barrier that rose before her in the shape
of a green baize partition dividing the long

corridor and cutting off the rooms at the
further end.

Here, the shape, corporeal or incorporeal,
paused. It turned, straining wildly at its
burden with a gesture of seeming despair,
and Bramwell discerned a white featureless
mask, and the contour of neck and uplifted
chin.

The corridor was almost in darkness, every
lamp extinguished, the shutters barred. One
window only, had by freak or inadvertence
been left unclosed, and was shrouded by a
swaying curtain, through which the moon, in
her fitful flashes, shed a pale glimmer. Suddenly,
either the draught from ths opened
baize door or a sharper gust of wind blew
aside the heavy drapery.

A silvery ray streamed full across the

apparition , and bathed in pale phosphorescence
a woraan^s face — bloodless the
features transfixed by terror indescribable the
eyes wild and glassy, the lips parted, — and
shone upon tense white arms and rigid fingers,
upon which was the glitter of diamonds —
fingers that were contracted in an agony of
effort, as by a strength almost superhuman the
body was hurled through the opening.

There was a swift flash, and the clan of
a fallen trinket rebounding from the wall ;
the door closed behind the figure ; the curtain
swung back ; the corridor was again wrapped
in gloom.

A nameless horror gripped Bramwell. . . .
Those lips ! those eyes ! Was he mad ? was
he dreaming ? or had he gazed upon the
face of Nadine Senguin ?

With a smothered ejaculation he darted
forward; but in his bewilderment and in
the darkness he struck his forehead sharply
against the lintel of the doorway and staggered
back, for the moment almost stunned
by the blow. When he had reached the
baize portal, and had flung it open, nothing
but blank darkness was before him.

Had the shape, woman, or phantom, disappeared
into one of the rooms beyond ? He
tried each door in succession : all were closely
fastened; no ray of light or sound of voice
or movement betrayed human occupancy.

Dazed, shaken, distrustful of his very
senses, Bramwell groped his way back towards
his own room. As he passed the baize
barrier, again the curtain was stirred, and fora
second the moon shone through the opening

VOL. I. M

and caught the gleam of a quaint, heart-shaped
diamond ring that lay upon the carpet.
Involuntarily Bramwell stooped and picked
up the ornament. Without pausing to examine
it, and in the confusion of his brain
hardly connecting it with the vision he had
witnessed, he thrust it into his breast, gained
his chamber, and there, overcome by horrible
and undefinable dread, he, the man of iron
nerve, the materialist, the philosopher, .sank
back in a stupor of semi-unconsciousness.

CHAPTER III.

THE LEGEND FULFILLED.

About half-past eight the following morning
Bramwell was awakened from the troubled
sleep into which lie had fallen by a hurried
knocking at the door of his room , and started
from his chair to confront Harry Dormer, who,
with his usually cheerful countenance pale
and ominously grave, rushed in, exclaiming
in agitated tones, —

*' Bramwell, get up ! You are wanted

immediately. Get up, man! What! you are

dressed ! You have not been in bed."

Dormer scanned the haggard face, looking

M 2

even more perturbed than his own, and the
disordered figure, still apparelled in evening
costume.

Good God ! ^^ he cried, *^ do you know
anything of this terrible business ? '^

The room seemed to swim before Cromwell's
eyes ; he staggered, and his hand
grasped nervously at the chair by his side.
Simultaneously with Dormer's ejaculation,
there rushed into his mind a clear recollection
of the events of the preceding night, but
whether as the remembrance of dream or of
actual fact he could not tell. A hideous
dread seized him icily; cold perspiration
stood upon his brow. ^^ What ? . . . Who ? "
he stammered. But in a moment he had regained
his habitual self-control, and answered
composedly, —

I know nothing. Last night I was restless
and did not go to bed, but fell asleep
while I sat thinking over the fire. Tell me at
once what I can do. What has happened ? "

"A death, the most sudden — shocking; it
has utterly unnerved me. I don't know how
I am to break the news to my wife. Not
many minutes ago Halkett's servant came
in to tell me that he had found his master
lying stone dead in his bed. You can imagine
the shock. I went into the room ; it was all
too true. You are the nearest doctor at hand.
I don't suppose there is the least hope; but
come quickly and examine the — See if anything
can be done''

Wasting no further time in explanation, and
signing to Bramwell to follow him, Dormer
passed into the corridor and turned to the

left towards the baize doors which now stood
open, displaying a passage equal in length
to that through which they were hurrying,
and with rooms opening on to it on one side.
Housemaids had already been at their morning's
work. The curtains were discreetly
folded back ; a flood of light poured through
the open windows, and sunbeams danced upon
the carpet. Bramwell gave an involuntary
shudder as, walking now-in the daylight to
face a known horror, the vivid, fantastic
impressions which had made the night
terrible returned to him with the force of
reality. He felt again that mysterious sense
of prescience, heard the moaning of the wind,
the muffled sound of dragging; beheld the
eerie flash of moonlight, the white clad shape
and Medusa stricken face, so like and yet so

unlike that of Nadine; saw the struggling
hands and strained arms as, with a strength
surely transcending that of any frail girl, the
ghastly burden had been drawn into the darkness
beyond. Was this nightmare , or had
the Lady of Croxham walked, in obedience
to her doom, and delivered her supernatural
warning ?

Mr. Dormer turned the handle of a door
not many paces beyond the baize barrier, and
they entered the chamber — the only one
occupied in that end of the corridor — which
had been assigned to Colonel Halkett. There
was in the room no appearance of disorder
suggestive of violence or tragedy. The deadman's
watch ticked upon the table beside a
heap of notes, loose gold, and silver. A
library novel lay half open, with a paper-cutter

between its leaves. The curtains of
the bed were drawn the clothes folded
smoothly ; while the body lay in a natural
position, with its head turned sideways upon
the pillows and except for a certain rigidity
of feature and tenseness of nostril and eyelid,
the face might have been that of one in
peaceful sleep.

Dr. Bramwell felt the still pulse, and laid
his hand upon the beating heart, then
stepped back, saying gravely —

'' There is nothing to be done ; he is quite
dead.^^

Dormer turned away, struggling with an
emotion of which the other showed no trace.
Neither spoke for a minute or two. Strange
thoughts stirred Bramwell as he stood in the
dead presence of the man whom he had

believed to be his rival. Afc last Dormer
said, —

'^ I must break this to my wife and to — to
Nadine Senguin.-'^

^' It would be best/^ said Dr. Bramwell,
speaking in a voice which even to himself
sounded hard and unnatural " that Mrs.
Dormer should send a note to Miss Senguin^s
room conveying to her gently the tidings of
what has happened. The shock of public
announcement would — might unnerve and
distress one so sensitive and easily wrought
upon.'^

You are thoughtful — and right' answered
Mr. Dormer. " She and the poor fellow were
a great deal together. I sometimes fancied —
but every one knows what Jack Blackett was ;
and the story of his wretched marriage was

common property. Mrs. Dormer is fond of
saying that of all women in the world Nadine
Senguin is the one most capable of amusing
without compromising herself. Ah ! that
marriage was Halkett's undoing — the ruin
of his life ; never was there a more tenderhearted
creature or better fitted for domestic
happiness'

Dormer turned away and began pacing
the room while Braw-ell bent in silent
examination of the dead body.

'^ What a man to be taken ofi* so suddenly'
continued Dormer his habitual flippant loquacity
which had been checked by the shock,
again awakened, and taking the form of
retrospect. *^ Good all round : a crack shot,
the best whip in England bar one, and as
straight a rider across country as ever

followed hounds. I shall never forget him,
on that raking bay of his, clearing the brook
at Boswell's Bottom. We shall miss him in
the field this season. And what a good
fellow ! Men, women, and children all adored
him. Heart disease, I conclude. Nobody
suspected it ; he, I am certain, least of all.
Shall I leave you, Bramwell, or do you need
any assistance ? ^'

"'No/' answered Bramwell, ^^I would rather
be alone."

^^You will find me in my dressing-room.
I suppose Jacks brother ought to be telegraphed
for at once ; and these people, or at
any rate the strangers, must be got away.
Good Lord ! have you ever heard of such a
melancholy conclusion to a racing party ? and
so jolly as we all were too ! IVe stopped the

confounded servant's chatter. You remember
our chaff last night about the White Lady ?
Curious coincidence, wasn't it ? They've got
a story afloat already that a woman's figure
has been seen of late gliding along the corridor
about daylight in the morning. It is a
case of the carcase and the eagles. Where
sudden death is, there the gossips gather
together. I have a sad business before me.
I must go to my wife ;. and then there's
the clearing of the house. You'll stick to us,
Bramwell ; I couldn't stand a night here by
myself. 1 suppose that tomorrow there'll
be the inquest. Doctor, you may think me
shallow-hearted, but I declare that I'd give
my right hand to have Jack Halkett alive
among us again."

Dormer went away, and Bramwell was left

alone. When his examination was over he
proceeded to the dressing-room of his host to
deliver his report. There was no doubt as to
the manner of death. Colonel Halkett had
been suffering from disease of the heart of
long standing, which at any moment of undue
excitement or exertion might have suddenly
terminated life. The only ground for surprise
lay in the fact that death had taken place
during sleep, and not, as might have been
anticipated, in immediate consequence of
mental agitation or physical effort.

There was that morning something hushed
and ominous in the atmosphere at Croxham.
Blinds were drawn up-stairs. Servants talked
low together, and scared faces haunted the
corridor. By ten o'clock most of the guests
were aware that the most reckless spirit

among them upon the previous day had buta
few hours since passed into the eternal
silence. Conjecture was rife; vague whispers
of suicide prevailed; mysterious rumours ran
through the house. Maids had each a
different tale to confide to their respective
mistresses. Alarm and confusion reigned;
and only Mrs. Dormer s pencilled request that
all would assemble as usual in the breakfast
room, prevented hurried departures, and a
general uncertainty in the minds of everyone
as to whether presence or absence were
most desirable.

Great as was the shock to Mrs. Dormer,
for she had been fondly attached to Jack
Halkett, she bore herself bravely; stifled
her grief, and resolved that the exodus of
her guests should be rendered as little trying

as the unhappy circumstances would permit.
Trouble on another score also assailed her
mind. Her conscience, roused to activity
by Harry Dormer's suggestive lamentations
over the fate of his friend, accused her of
having indulged a selfish, cynical curiosity
and thoughtless disregard of calamitous
consequences, in her encouragement of the
intimacy between Halkett and Nadine. She
had credited the latter with considerable
callousness and worldly wisdom, her easy
belief being hardly warranted by her knowledge
of the girls character; and she now
felt qualms of terror as to the effect which
a sudden announcement of the late tragic
occurrence might possibly produce upon
Nadine. In an access of womanly tenderness,
weeping, her heart soft with sympathy.

Mrs. Dormer went herself to Nadine^s room,
nerved to meet reproaches and a display of
the most heart-rending emotion. But the
young girl greeted her friend calmly, and
received her statement with an apparent
frigidity which startled, but instead of
deceiving, was a revelation to Mrs. Dormer.
Nadine had by a supreme effort braced
herself to the part ; but she acted it too well.
Her composure was unnatural. The marble
quietude of her face, her dry, tearless eyes,
the fixity of her look, her forced voice and
measured comments, betrayed too surely the
pent-up anguish which her will held in such
merciless restraint. Mrs. Dormer admired
and wondered at her courage, pitying her
from the depths of her heart; and yet she
dared not show by word or sign that her

woman's instinct lead divined Nadine's secret.
The girls stoicism was a mask which might
not be torn down, and at least it gave no
justification for Mrs. Dormer's self upbraiding.

That lady's tears fell freely. Nadine
watched her, listening to the hysterical sobs,
her own lips firmly set , the nails of her
tightly clutched fingers tearing her pretty
palm, her eyes grim . and defiant. But if
they were dry, her heart was weeping blood.
At last Mrs. Dormer roused herself and said
falteringly, —

"Harry has telegraphed for Rupert Halkett.
Most of these people will go away, but you,
my dear, must remain of course, as we had
arranged, till it is time to leave for London.
Oh, I cannot bear to think of that now."

No," answered Nadine, and her voice

VOL. 1. N

sounded to herself strangely far away ; ^' I
shall return to Aston by the mid-day train.
I have told my maid to make all necessary
arrangements. She — T heard this first from
her. I must go home ; and you will be better
without me here."

It is not a question of that, dearest, but
of what you prefer."

'^I want to go home," repeated Nadine,
and looked straight at Mrs. Dormer, ^witli
wild eyes like those of a stricken animal
seeming to urge dumbly — " Have pity. Do
not you know the strain of silent endurance ?
Let me go away and be alone with my pains'

Mrs. Dormer left the room, not imagining
that Nadine would descend till she was
equipped for departure ; but to her surprise,
when, pale and red-eyed, she took her own

place behind the urn Miss Senguin was
already seated.

Dr. Bramwell, who had come down before
the rest, watched Nadine^s entrance,, his eyes
fixed upon her with an intensity of which he
was unconscious, but which was akin to the
burning anxiety in his soul. She met his
look, but it brought no flush to her cheek, no
answering consciousness to her eyes : they
seemed to gaze through and beyond him. In
truth, she had reached that pitch of effort at
which the mind is abstracted from all outward
things, and even sensation is almost null.
Nadine heard confusedly the lachrymose murmur
of conversation, but her own being was
removed far above the flow of that babbling-current.
Automatically she moved to her

chair, and sat like a statue, with head erectly

N 2

poised and lips set tightly, while she toyed
with her food and apparently lent her ear to
Harry Dormer's disjointed and ungrammatical
jeremiad upon the desolation which had come
upon the house ; to Mrs. Bartelotte^s threnody,
in which eulogium of the dead man's charms,
foibles, and virtues mingled with naive regrets
that only his creditors and heirs would reap
the benefit of his grand coup of yesterday ;
and to the platitudes and condolences which
were being poured forth upon their hostess
by the elder ladies of the party.

It seemed to Nadine that the greater
number avoided speaking to her, and that
with regard to her presence, their manner
exhibited an elaborate and scarcely disguised
affectation of unconsciousness, while all, in
reality, examined her critically. There was

something grimly ludicrous in the situation
that sustained her through an ordeal which
not another woman present could have
supported. Lax as were the morals of
Croxham^ — ^ Flirt and let flirt ^ being the
motto of its habitues, — tongues had already-begun
to wag upon the subject of Colonel
Halkett's obvious devotion to Miss Senguin.
More than one speculatively-inclined person
had wondered whether she would ' show up ^
that morning, and if so how far her demeanour
would furnish a clue to her feelings ; while
the sentimental ones had derived consolation
for the unhappy state of affairs by the
expectation of an interesting drawing-room
drama.

Mrs. Bartelotte^ her radiance hardly dimmed
by the black gown which she had donned and

the lugubrious drawing down of her rosy Upshot
one glance across the table at ^N^adine^,
and then began to chatter perhaps for the
first time with a serious motive for her
volubility.

"I reckon that Lacedaemonian boy is beaten
any way' whispered the little American to
her neighbour Mr. Deodatus Lumley. " I
will say for you Britishers, that you do carry
off things on this side of. the water in a way
that's quite astonishing."

Mr. Lumley blinked his blue eyes and bent
his sandy brows in abstracted contemplation
of the beauty of stoicism. He too had his
theories founded upon social observations
and the study of chiromancy ; but he was
sympathetic,, and pretended not to understand
Mrs. Bartelotte^s remark.

The meal was short and constrained, a mere
sacrifice to conventional obligations, and an
exemplification of the insular maxim — " Let
everything be done decently and in orders
The black shadow up-stairs seemed to have
descended and to hover over the assembly.
All were painfully conscious of the presence
of death ; all wished to escape as speedily
as possible from the vicinity of that dread
spectre which stalks even amid scenes of
gaiety. Some few were faintly aggrieved at
having been cheated by untoward fate out
of a day's sport or pleasure, but for the most
part the guests at Croxham were too deeply
awed to bestow any thoughts upon the
Chollerton Races.

For Nadine each minute was a martyrdom.
She made no sign ; though a woman's heart

be rent in twain, to utter a cry in public is to
commit treason against her womanhood ; but
Bramwell, who still watched her, regardless
of what might be said or thought of their
relations, — full of deep, anxious solicitude for
her in her pain, solicitude purely unselfish,
and resembling rather that of a brother thana
lover, too bewildered to be conscious of
aught save of her and of that hideous,
undefined suspicion which poisoned present
and future, — saw that her coffee choked her,
saw that her face was growing every instant
more death-like, and knew that unless the
strain were removed for a minute she must
faint or shriek.

CHAPTER IV.

Cobham Deserted.

At that moment, the arrival of the post-bag
created a diversion, though Mrs. Dormer, in
spite of her self-command, almost broke down
at the sight of a packet of letters directed to
Colonel Halkett — letters, the writers of which
had little imagined would never meet the eyes
of him to whom they were addressed. A
move was made, and Nadine escaped up-stairs.
Her fly had arrived and was waiting, piled
with luggage. For her too, death seemed a
pestilence to be shunned ; or did she, like a

wounded doe yearn for solitude ? Bramwell,
longing passionately for one word, one look
which might relieve the torturing anxiety by
which he was racked, followed her unobserved,
and saw her pass towards the west wing. Ina
few moments she reappeared, clad in her
travelling cloak, with her hast on aud her veil
down. She stopped for an instant in the
corridor and cast one fearful look around,
not seeing Bramwell, who stood against an
abutting pillar at the head of the stairs. But
for his presence the long passage was empty.

Nadine threw up her veil, and Bramwell
saw her face unshadowed. Never had he
beheld mental agony imprinted with such
distinctness upon human countenance ; but
only for a moment : presently it had assumed
again its grey, petrified look, and he could

almost have doubted his own eyesight. She
hurried towards the baize door, her head
bent, her steps unfaltering, as though she
were impelled onwards by a force outside
herself. Having gained the partition, she
hesitated. Her hand was outstretched, then
withdrawn. Despairing resolve seemed to
enter into her, and she turned deliberately
back. It was the crowning act of her
crucifixion of passion.

Bramwell advanced to meet her, in his
eagerness stretching forth his arms ; but
she swept swiftly past him, vouchsafing him
not a look. Her veil was again lowered,
but he could see that her white teeth pressed
into her lips with a force sufficient to draw
blood.

Miss Senguin," he said, '' may I speak

to you a moment ? " then added in a tone
of sharp entreaty, " Nadine, I must speak
to you."

She paused on the stairs till he had reached
her side, then moved a step or two till they
stood upon the half-way landing. Some one
was ascending, and below in the hall was
a knot of ladies conversing in whispers, their
eyes directed upwards. Bramwell divined
the instinct which had prompted her to evade
him in the corridor. She feared self-betrayal.
The dual nature was warring within her.
She had called him her conscience. He felt
with something like triumph, that to him,
in wavering, inconsistency, or defiance, she
onus be true. There was comfort in the
reflection. But the same subtle intention
bore conviction of her passionate attachment

to Halkett and of the hopelessness
of his own love. His thoughts and emotions
rose and fell like the waves of a troubled
sea, agonized certainty succeeded by reactionary
doubt. Yet it seemed to him
that in this moment of mental renunciation
he read her complex character more clearly
than ever before. After the flash of comprehension
came darkness ; but it left irritated
resolve. She might never be his; but suspicion,
which perhaps wronged her, must
either be confirmed or rooted from his mind.

I have something that I must say to
you' he said, his voice trembling with
earnestness.

'^ This is not the time. I am on the
point of going away. Do not delay me*'

Nadine," exclaimed Bramwell passionately

^' you wish, to evade me; but I will
force you to listen to me. You have minutes
to spare. And in the face of such a tragedy
as this, of what consequence is it to you
where you are or what you do, unless
indeed you could be alone ? You know that
if, instead of being taken to Aston, you were
to-day conveyed to the Land's End, the
relief to you would be intense. There you
would be free from the observation of familiar
eyes, and might relax the strain under
which you have placed yourself. At home
there will still be the necessity for sustaining
your part. Have you considered that this
cannot last ? Sooner or later you must
break downs'

'' What can I do ? Ah me ! " Her hands
dropped helplessly. She was momentarily

subdued by his firm tone of mastery. '^I'ra
a brave woman. I can bear a sword-thrust
without wincing; but — it's pulling out the
weapon that's worst."

Let me take you back to Aston' he
pleaded. '^ At least I can watch over you,
divert your father's attention from you —
make your trial easier. You once vaguely
promised me your confidence ; give it tome
now. You owe it me. I am tortured
by the most hideous uncertainty. There is
a mystery which must be cleared up. For
your own sake, even more than for mine
I implore you to be open with me."

Nadine drew herself up, her momentary
weakness conquered. She answered unfalteringly,
though she held her eyes averted —

I forbid you to come to Aston, or to

question me any further. Whatever your
perplexities may be , you must solve them,
or submit to them without appeal to me.
There is no mystery, except in your imagination.
I admit nothing except indeed that
I am unhappy. You are too able a physician
nut to interpret the signs of pain. I can
deceive others, I cannot deceive you. But
my sorrow is not deeply rooted. I know
myself far better than you know me. In a
month it will have passed away. That I
should suffer from this shock is natural, is
it not ? Does not Mrs. Dormer mourn ?
But she has the privilege of grieving openly' ;
I must stifle my emotions because I am a
girl, and defenceless — and already my feelings
have been made the subject of common talk.
Have you forgotten what you told me on the

race-course yesterday ? Oh, yes, I do well
to wear a mask ; but it will not be necessary
for long. I shall soon show an indifferent
face like the rest — soon be able to boast
an indifferent heart."

All this had been uttered in low, rapid
tones, with no sign of feeling. She would
have passed on, but Bramwell detained her.

'' When may I see you ? ''

When ? How can I tell ? Remember
that I have forbidden you to come to Aston.
Wait till I am with the Dormers in London."

They will go to London ! And you . . .
you will laugh, dance, jest-.'^

Yes, laugh, dance, jest," she interrupted,
a smile playing about her lips after
the manner in which phosphorescent light

might illuminate the face of a corpse; go
VOL. I. o

to Buckingham and Ascot, and dine at
the Orleans, and spend idyllic Sundays, on
the river, parade the Park, struggle for
invitations to smart houses, and count myself
blest if an Exalted Being retreats me approvingly,
or if my looks are commented upon
in a society paper ; be Lady Beauty here
and Lady Gaiety there, and never, never
Miss Melancholy. Amusement by day,
chloral by night. You don't know your
world. Dr. Bramwell. Do fashionable vromen
stay at home and put on sackcloth because
a friend has died suddenly ? '^

Her artificial manner, the little laugh
which closed her speech, acted upon
Bramwell like an electric shock. He
started back with a gesture of shrinking,
almost of aversion. Her defiant insensibility

maddened him. Was she, after allas
cold-blooded as she wished him to
assume ? He had faced his own disappointments
and could endure the sickening pangs
it inflicted ; but with keener suffering rose
all the more strongly passionate need for
belief in her. That he should have misunderstood
her might be pain ; that she
should show herself unwomanly was despair.
He resented the hardness that belied his
conception of her nature, even though it
might perhaps be interpreted on his own
part as ground for renewed hope. Her next
words deepened the sense of repulsion. She
was looking away from him. In this obstinate
avoidance of his eyes — he knew that they were
charged with such solemn entreaty as must
compel sincerity — lay his justification for faith.

O 2

You begin to read my nature rightly
at last. You see that I am thoroughly
heartless — completely unworthy of your
regard. Be it so, I have wished all along
that you should understand me. I will not
accept esteem that is based upon a false
estimate of my character. Think of me as
far more despicable than you even now
imagine ; and leave me — to fight my own
battle with the world and-with myself."

She quitted him without glance or hand
touch. A moment later she was in the hall
kissing Mrs. Dormer, and with the same
impassive face bidding farewell to her host,
while she uttered some commonplace phrases
of thanks and regret. Bramwell held aloof,
and made no further attempt to obtain from
her any elucidation of the mystery which

tormented him. Heart-sick and weary he
turned away. . . The fly drove off. . . She
was gone.

By noon all the guests had departed
from Croxham with the exception of Dr.
Bramwell, whose presence at the Coroner s
Inquest was rendered necessary by his
examination of the body after death.

Life seemed to him that day a dream
within a dream. In movement or rest, in
silence or speech, he was haunted by the
image of Nadine, not as he had seen her
face last on the staircase, pale and coldly
defiant, but as it had appeared to him in
the corridor during that weird flash of moonlight
— spectral, ghastly as the face of one
struck by a horror worse than death — murder,
or shame ! Yet how reconcile the one with

his medical knowledge, the other with his
unalterable conviction of Nadine's purity ?

Had he then been the sport of an overwrought
imagination ?

Crashed down by the burden of these
thoughts, he was that evening languidly
dressing for the melancholy meal which
awaited him down-stairs, in grim contrast
with the noisy repasts of the previous nights,
when his attention was attracted by something
glittering upon his dressing-table,
and upon examination found that the gleam
proceeded from a heart-shaped cluster of
brilliant.

It was the ring which he had picked up
in the corridor, and which, in his bewilderment
and agitation, he had thrust into his
breast and had forgotten.

Here was confirmation of his most torturing
suspicions.

Many times, while bending over Nadine
Senguin as she played to him in the
drawing-room at Aston, BramwelFs eyes
had lingered upon the cluster of diamonds
that had been wont to adorn the little
finger of her left hand.

END OF VOL. I.

WPW^

'^&S

OF Thou
N I Verity
Of ILLINOIS



P883n

Y.2

in 2009 with funding from

University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign

http://www.archive.org/details/nadinestudyofwom02prae

VOL. II.

^tuiii d K Momii

BY

MRS. CAMPBELL Prayed,

AUTHOR OF "policy And PASSION," "AN Australian HEROINE, ETC,

Who can say ' Thus far, io farther,' to the tide of his own nature ?

Who can mould the spirit's fashion to the counsel of his will ?
Square his being by enactment — shape his soul to legislature —
Be himself his law of living, his own art of good and ill? "

J. Brandon Stephens.

IN TWO VOLUMES.— VOL. IL

CHAPMAN & HALL, Limited,
11, HENRIETTA. STREET, COVENT GARDEN.

1882.

[All Flights reserved.]

CLAY AND TAYLOR, Printers.

CONTENTS OF VOLUME II,

BOOK lY.

CHAPTER I.

PAGE

AN ACTRESS BEHIND THE FOOTLIGHTS . 1

CHAPTER II.

IN THE PAVILION . . . . 18

CHAPTER III.
nadine's confession . . . 41

BOOK V.

CHAPTER I.
IN THE VALLEY OF DESPAIR . . 68

CHAPTER II.

DECEPTION . . . . . 90

CHAPTER III.

PAGE

FAREWELL . . . . . 98

BOOK VI.

LETTER I.

FROM NADINE Penguin TO DR. Cromwell . 123

LETTER IL
FROM" DR. Cromwell TO MRS. BLUNDELL . 135

Book VII.

CHAPTER 1.
A DAUGHTER OF MAMMON . . . 139

CHAPTER II.

THE WEAPON TURNED . . . 164

CHAPTER III.
CONQUERED . . . . . 189

EXTRACT FROM A LETTER TO THE AUTHOR . 205

BOOK IV.
CHAPTER I.

AN ACTRESS BEHIND THE FOOTLIGHTS.

For weeks Dr. Bramwell was preyed upon
by gnawing care, to which the constant occupation
that lie was now forced into — for lie
had established himself in London — afforded
almost the only anodyne.

Many times he was impelled to seek Nadine,
to recount to her his tale, and to exact from
her, denial or corroboration of his haunting
fear. But the necessity for his constant presence
in London, her stern prohibition upon

VOL. II. B

his visiting her at Aston and above all,
dread of certainty, held him still in a state
of tension and anxiety.

He dared not risk the extinction of his
faith which, notwithstanding all that he had
seen and heard during his stay at Croxham,
burned, if flickering, at times brightly as
'ever, when he recalled words and looks of
Nadine^s that told of reliance upon, and
almost of affection for, himself. These were
his consolation. He shrank from the possibility
of losing those waking dreams and
visions, which at moments, when his doubts
were lulled and his judgment sleeping,
created for him an illusory but intoxicating

joyce

heard later that she was in town with
the Dormers; but their paths seemed to lie

in separate directions for this avocations did
not naturally lead him into the circles which
she frequented.

The Derby was run. Jack Halkett^s tragically
sudden death had become a story of
the past. Garlands adorned the balconies of
Belgravia and Mayfair and London, grave
and fashionable frivolous and laborious, was
in the full swing of summer life.

Occasionally Bramwell saw Nadine driving
down the Ladies' Mile, or riding in the Row,
more lovely than ever, but with an expression
of languor, almost, he fancied, of spirituality
upon her face, that seemed to tell of some
inward trouble or refining influence placing
her apart from the gay herd, for whom life
had so little meaning beyond the pleasure
of to-day.

B 2

At the sight of her, his yearning to touch
her hand to hear her voice, intensified to
craving. He wrote,, begging that she would
grant him an interview, if possible, alone.
Isis subject could have sued more humbly for
an audience from his queen. On her reply, he
called at Mrs. Dormer^s^s house at the hour,
late in the afternoon, which she had named.
The drawing-room was thronged, and JN^adine,
in her most artificial and least lovable mood,
resisted all his mute pleadings for a word
apart. He was angry and sore. But one
look from her eyes, melting, beseeching,
tender, directed towards him as they parted
made him her slave once more. He saw that
her lips were quivering, and felt that her
fingers pressed his ever so slightly when she
bade him good-b3^e. Who does not know the

magnetic, thrill, the strange, subduing sense
of soul-communion which sometimes lingers
after a hand-clasp ? Bitterness, wrath, and
distrust vanished from BramwelFs heart, and
love and hope reigned there instead.

Not for long. The next morning a paragraph
in one of the Society journals, at which
he happened to glance, thrust him again into
the depths of despair.

0)1 Friday evening Mrs. Granny Wilton
opened her healthful new house in Grosvenor
Gardens. Royalty tuas present, and Royalty
seemed to he especially happy ; hut the feature
of the evening was the sensation caused by
'yet another' fair one, ivho, under the auspices
of Mrs. Dormer, goes into the world for the
first time tJtis season. Young, beautiful, and
graceful as an hoar, Miss Senguin scored a

decided success, and was honoured hy marked
attentions from the great ones of the earth''

Dr. Bramwell threw the paper from him
in disgust and went forth on his round. '
What had he to do with this Nadine of the
great world ' ?

Thus in alternations of excitement and
wretchedness, the days wore on. He made
several more attempts to see Nadine alone,
but to no purpose. It was evidently her wish
to avoid him; and Mrs. Dormer, whose suspicions
had been faintly aroused, and who,
in atonement for her imprudence with regard
to Colonel Halkett, was doing her best to
achieve a brilliant marriage for her protege,
in spite of her sincere regard for Dr. Cromwell,
looked upon hint now with disfavour,
and appeared an enemy rather than an ally.

One chance was left him. A ball in aid
of some fashionable charity was shortly to
be given in a great empty palace in Kensington.
He knew that Nadine would be among
those present. She could not refuse to dance
with him. Here offered the opportunity for
saying those words which he burned yet
dreaded to utter. And apart from this motive
for going, there] was another still stronger.
The longing to hold Nadine in his arms to
feast his eyes upon her beauty enhanced as
it would be by all the cunningness of attire,
even though he should realize that she must
be renounced for ever, possessed him like
thirst. Then shame smote him, and he recoiled
before the might of his passion. A
leprosy seemed to have blighted his love ; it
was no longer the pure devotion which had

thrown a halo over all that was sordid in
his life and had sanctified womanhood in
his eyes for the sake of her whom he hoped
to win for his own.

His existence seemed to flow in two
currents. Side by side with the daily routine
of duty, the commonplace people whom he
met and tended, was this keen vibrating
consciousness, in which all his senses quivered,
he scarce knew if with joy or pain. And if
chill, gnawing thoughts sometimes came as
unwelcome visitants,, what matter ? The
present bounded the future.

Though it was comparatively early when
Dr. Bramwell arrived at Kensington House,
the rooms were filling rapidly. He passed
through the bower-like vestibule, lingering

in the suite of ante-chambers, where banks
of roses and hot-house flowers bloomed beneath
drooping ferns and tropical palms , and where
the mellow light of shaded tapers shone upon
rax'e tapestry and antique cabinets, and mirrors
reflected back the lustre of diamonds
and the sheen of rich apparel ; but he sought
in vain for Mrs. Dormer's quaint, expressive
face and the lily-like head rising behind it.
Among the many beauties present Nadine had
apparently not yet taken her place.

Later on he caught sight of the sweeping
shoulders and perfect profile, as, smiling and
curtseying, the brilliant throng drew back
in lines, leaving a clear avenue for the passage
of Royalty. Again, when the Hungarian
Band broke into a strain of plaintive wildness,
he lost her in the dance, and at last wandered

forti to the long terrace, where a blaze of
limelight, slowly deepening to rose, shed an
ethereal radiance round the dark and light
figures which passed to and fro, or descending
the great flight of steps, mingled with the
loiterers in the garden. Bramwell leaned
against the balustrade, his eyes fixed idly
upon the moving kaleidoscope : nymph-like
beings in aerial tulle and shimmering satin ;
virginal creatures of doves plumage ; maturer
angels, not weaned from the frailties of humanity,
whose rose-bloom might have been purchased
at Rimmel^s, with fairness enhanced
by 'poudre de Ninon, and eyes brightened by
antimony ; matrons in sweeping robes and
glittering i')arures ; politicians, dignitaries,
wits, guardsmen, fashionable butterflies, all
jostled each other in the promenade. Now

there was a scarcely perceptible flutter and
rapid curtsey, as an exalted personage stopped
to address a remark to some favoured acquaintance
; or again, a momentary pause in the
gurgle of conversation and laughter, as a
great lady moved by the smiling groups on
her way to the dancing-room.

The bloom of ripeness without ; within, the
rottenness of vanity, intrigue, and lust, which
festers at the core of London Society,

Above the great stone house, all outlined
in jets of coloured flame, two electric moons
vied with the pale orb which sailed serenely
in the blue heavens. They shed a spectral
glow upon the winding walks and shrubberies
enamelled with variegated lamps, and streamed
across a sheet of ornamental water bright
with the reflection of illuminated arches.

Here Venetian gondolas, in which sat ghostly-looking
figures, were noiselessly pl^nng.
Showers of fireworks rose and fell in luminous
streaks and star-like clusters. The
beech-trees, which at one point closed in the
garden, were tipped with silvery light, and
above them the spire of a neighbouring
church stood out grey and solemn against
the sky.

BramwelPs gaze was arrested by the object
which it sought.

Nadine stood a few paces from him. She
was bending forward, her statuesque arras
resting upon the parapet, her eyes looking
abstractedly towards the lake.

She was all in white; her dress floated
round "her, a cloud of tulle; her bodice of
satin defined the curves of her exquisite bust.

and her neck and throat, with their enchanting
dimples and indentations, rose fairer than the
lace by which her bosom was veiled ; a
diamond star gleamed in her dusky hair
Between her clasped hands she held a large
bouquet of white flowers, and her clear-cut
face seemed to resemble the blossoms in its
purity of outline and colouring.

For the moment she was alone. It was
Bramwell's opportunity ; he advanced. Nadine
started as he addressed her, and turned with
a half-frightened smile.

Dr. Bramwell ! I did not expect that ijoio
would be here to-nights''

"I came to meet you," he answered
impulsively.

"You are very welcome. Since you have
become busy and famous we have seen nothing

of you. Is that your fault, or ours ? Oil, I
know what you would say. In this garish
London life there is no time for friendship.
I hear that golden honours are already falling
thickly upon you, and that through your
instrumentality the Race may be in a fairway
to become immortal. Why do you not
go out more ? You might be a lion if you
chose. Science is the foible of fashion just
now.^^

Her tone jarred upon his nerves. He was
silent, while she continued in her conventional
manner , —

"■ How strange and unreal the garden
looks. There's something ghastly in the
mixture of moonlight and those coloured
lamps. Did you ever off the stage see anything
so like a transformation scene ? A few

grotesque masks, and one might be at Covent
Garden Theatre."

'' All life seems unreal sometimes' answered
Bramwell, dreamily ; then added, " Will you
dance this with me — or rather, will you not
dance it ? I want to talk to you. Let us
walk down towards the lake instead''

She seemed to hesitate for a moment, looking
at him with mournful questioning, then
assented, and placed her hand within his arm.
But as he felt her touch, and was moved
by something in that timid gaze, the temptation
of encircling her with his arm in the
waltz was too potent to be resisted, and
instead of leading her into the garden, he
turned towards the ball-room.

A murmur of admiration followed her as
she entered, and Bramwell's ears tingled as he

overheard a dark-eyed lady with marigolds
in her hair who was the author of several
volumes of erotic verse, say to a gentleman
beside her, —

That girl is just the combination to suit
this naughty, white-washed age. She has
the face of an angel, the grace and subtlety
of a serpent, and the worldliness of a
cocotte."

Bramwell shuddered.

What is the matter ? " whispered Nadine,
in those wooing tones which seemed to breathe
poetry.

He placed his arm round her waist and
piloted her across the floor. Her slight frame
swayed reed-like in his arms as they glided
round to the strains of a dreamy waltz. To
BramwelFs excited fancy lights, flowers, and

glittering throng mingled in a confused billowy
mass. The perfume which exhaled from
Nadine^s presence intoxicated his senses. To
hold her thus was Paradise.

'^ Nadine \'* he whispered passionately,
almost below his breathy then paused abruptly
and released her.

He saw that she was trembling and very
pale, and her look was sweet and clinging.

*■' Take me outs' she said brokenly ; " I
am so tired. This has been going on for
so long, and I am weary, weary; and there
has been no one to feel for me, or to say a
word of sympathy. Don't ask me any questions
, but be kind to me as you used to be.
Let us go into the garden."

VOL. II.

CHAPTER II.

IN THE PAVILION.

So bewildered was Bramwell by Nadine's
rapid change of mood that he could only
silently obey her entreaty. They went forth
on to the terrace then down the broad flight
of steps into the garden. For a few moments
they stood by the lake watching the gondolas
gliding swan-like from bank to bank, and the
fireworks shooting up into the sky, and descending
in showers of stars and fiery streaks.
Presently Bramwell led his companion into a
sequestered walk which brought them to a

pavilion almost concealed by the thick foliage
of the shrubbery. This, like many other tents
scattered about the grounds, was decorated
with ferns and flowers, dimly lighted, and
furnished with luxurious settees. He placed
Nadine on a couch, saying in that passionate
tone which always seemed to affect her
powerfully, —

"We will stay here."

The curtains had fallen when they entered,
over the entrance to the tent. They were
completely alone. The murmur of music
and of voices floated faintly across the lake,
otherwise they might have been in the solitude
of an enchanted forest.

Nadine leaned back on the couch, her white
neck and the slender column of her throat
defined against the cushions of Eastern static

2

with which it was lined ; her chin uplifted,
her hands idly clasping her bouquet, her eyes
fixed and melancholy, gazing abstractedly into
space.

Dr. Bramwell stood looking down upon her.
He saw then what he had hardly noticed
before, that her face was worn, her eyes
hollow, and that she looked very ill.

His heart was beating tumultuously. The
almost voluptuous excitement which during
the waltz had thrilled him had not yet subsided
; but mingling with it was a feeling of
stern revulsion and loathing of the leaven
of passion that seemed now to blend mysteriously
with his love. His spiritual attitude
was one of conflict with his human impulses
of late so strangely stimulated. Was it, that
the indefinable change in Native had worked

a corresponding alteration in himself, so that
in his mind she was transformed from an
angel who had been worshipped, to a syren
whom it was his duty to shun ?

He felt the barrier which circumstance, his
own shrinking from the pain of conviction,
and her constrained, artificial manner had
raised between them must, at all cost of
suffering, be broken down to-night. His
whole being was charged with the consciousness
of impending crisis. He knew intuitively
that Nadine's mood swayed towards his own,
and that she too was passing through a phase of
emotion in which reserve could not for long
be maintained. It was as though winged
words hovered in space around them, and
BramwelFs abrupt utterance which broke the
silence seemed but the echo of previous speech.

'^ Nadine this mockery of fair appearance
between us cannot be kept up any longer.
It is six weeks since I besought your confidence
before we parted at Croxham. Your
boast then was an empty one. You cannot
show an impassible face to the world, or
delude yourself or others into the belief that
you have an insensible heart. You act very
well, but there is a strain which nature will
not bear. I should be blind indeed if I could
not see in you the signs of ever present pain.
This gaiety, display, adulation can be no
antidote to the misery that is poisoning your
life. It brings you only weariness and sickening
disgusts'

'you are right," she answered listlessly.
'dead sea fruit. The taste of ashes is between
my teeth''

'' Why keep up the hollow farce ? '' cried
Bramwell with indignant passion. " You do
not deceive me. I — who of all men have the
strongest claim upon you — I who love you
more madly than any other — read your suffering
too plainly. Why try to deceive an idle
crowd for which you care nothing ? Go
home. Make your moan if needs must, and
overcome your trouble. Time blunts all
emotions, softens the worst grief. But be
true; be true to your womanhood. This
seeming falsity in you, whom I have trusted
and worshipped, is more bitter to me far than
my own despair. Listen, Nadine." He
seated himself in a chair beside her; and
resting his arms upon the head of her couch,
while he gazed with solemn eyes at her
averted face, continued, hurried out of himself,

as it were, by the rush of agitated remonstrance,
so that it seemed no longer Bramwell
who was speaking. ^' This uncertainty is
torture ; I can bear no more. I have been
a coward, dreading a sword-thrust that might
kill my faith for ever. Better to brace myself
and know the truth. I have a thin of to
tell you of that night at Croxham. No need
for you to go back on memory; that page
must be written in letters of fire — our fanciful
conversation in the hall, the legend of the
White Lady, — you recollect ? Your sudden
paleness, the strangeness of your manner,
the glance you interchanged with Halkett,
your evasion of my appeal, all maddened me.
I was torn by jealousy; horrible suspicions
had entered my mind. I remembered Lady
Alsager's words on the race-course — my brain

was burning. When I had gone to my room
to sleep was impossible. I could think only
of you and of Jim. . . . You will recall the
night it was — the sky overcast , the moon
shining in fitful gleams the wind risen and
moaning sullenly, sweeping the turrets. Three
o^ clock had struck ; everything was still except
the wind. I had opened my window, and the
lights upon my dressing-table were extinguished
by a sudden gust. . It was then
that I heard another sound — deeper — nearer
than the blast — a sound of muffled, toilsome
dragging, all down the corridor from the west
wing, halting, now slow, then quicker. It
approached my door, passed ; and then there
flashed through my mind the legend which had
been told us that evening. My brain was full
of strange bewilderment; underlying all was

the thought of you. It did not seem to be I
myself who was waiting, listening. I scarcely
knew whether I were awake, or. in a dream,
or in my right mind. . I looked forth
into the corridor. You, maybe, know what
shadowy woman's shape I saw in the dimness.
Suddenly the wind stirred the curtain of an
unclosed window. Moonlight streamed in —
for a second the darkness was light, and I
beheld the phantom figure and its burden.
A broad ray flashed upon both. I saw the
white face; I saw the glitter of diamonds upon
the frenzied fingers; I saw the agonized
hands clutch the dead body, and hurl it
beyond the baize partition. Then all was
blackness ; the vision was no more. . A
horror came over me. . . . When I rushed
forward the corridor was empty'*

Nadine's bouquet fell with a heavy thud,
and lay bruised upon the floor. She half-rose,
her lips parted, trembling in every limb,
perspiration upon her brow.

"You — you saw this ? '^ she gasped. ^^Oh
no, no ! It was fancy. Your brain had been
excited. You slept, and dreamed that you
were awake. This was so. No ! " and she
laughed wildly. " The ghosts at Croxham
were walking, and it was the White Lady
who passed through the corridor that night."

'^ I would sacrifice all my faith in science for
such a belief, were it possible' said Dr. Cromwell
sadly. " Yet so great was the shock, so
horrible the fear, that then, even later, I might
have persuaded myself that the vision had no
existence except in my imagination had I not
possessed proof positive of its reality."

'' Proof ! How ? What proof ? ''
Nadine bent forward, an image of agonized
alarm and entreaty.

'^ This:'

Dr. Bramwell held before Nadine a heart-shaped
cluster of diamonds, which glittered
now in the light of a coloured lantern pendent
from the roof of the tent.

She clutched the ring; her eyes, like those
of a wounded doe at bay, met his for an
instant. She uttered a low cry. Then a
change came over her face helplessness and
marble stillness, and she sank back fainting
against the cushions.

Reaction seized Bramwell. He bent over
her, his whole being stirred to its depths
by compassion, tenderness, and unreasoning
wrath against himself. He reproached himself

with inward bitterness for the abrupt manner
in which he had broken to her his knowledge
of the events of that tragic night. *^ Fool —
brute that I am ! '^ he muttered. He tore
off her gloves, kissed her cold fingers and
chafed them between his own whispering
words of endearment , while by every means
in his power he tried to reanimate the motionless
form.

^^ Oh , Nadine ! ^^ he murmured,, " my love,
my darling ! You bade me be kind, and,
idiot-like, I have smitten you as though you
were my enemy."

He pressed his lips to hers in a transport
of passion. Never before had he so forgotten
himself. She opened her eyes, and he saw
in them something of the same blank horror
as had transfixed her features during that

momentary flash of moonlight in the corridor
at Croxham.

At this moment Bramwell was not master
of himself. He experienced that feeling
when the world and duty seem slipping away,
and overmastering emotion is all that makes
life real. Glamour, mystery, peril seemed
to have transformed existence. Formerly, lie
had viewed it, as it were, from an altitude;
now, it was as though he had descended, and
urged by human passion, was struggling hotly
with the baser crowd.

Nadine too appeared deeply moved, though
after another fashion. The wild despair in
BramwelPs eyes, the casting away of all his
habitual self-control, had set her heart vibrating
in new chords. Hitherto in their relations
she had, while succumbing to a certain

vague impracticability which it had been
partly her pleasure to intensify, held herself
mistress of her feelings and of the situation.
But the change in B ram well had wrought
one in her mental attitude towards him, and
it seemed as though all instincts of domination,
all surface emotions, had been swept
away, and that they two stood alone in the
universe, no longer as man to woman, but
as soul to soul.

Impelled by this consciousness, and with the
sense of a motive power at work within him,
not his own will, but something spiritual,
which yearned in fierce pity towards her and
towards himself, — Bramwell went on in low-toned
eagerness, —

It is not now between us a question
of love given and sought; it is something

deeper touching our souls more closely.
The remembrance of that night at Croxham
is a chasm into which your fear-less girlhood
and my tender hopes have sunk. But ijcut
remain ; you, the ideal or the woman, and
my love, gold or dross. . . We can never
be again as we were. We have probed dark
realities that must make all commonplace
intercourse, all conventional wooing, seem
a mockery and a sham. . . . This life is
maddening; it is weaving garlands round
the head of a corpse, disguised by the grinning
mask of comedy. You cheat your world,
Nadine ; but I am not of your world. If
I could convey to you what I have endured
of late, even you would pity me. For the
last six weeks I have been living through
a horrible nightmare. It is true that but

for the evidence of this ring, which I saw
flash on the hand of the phantom woman,
as she passed into the darkness, I might
have believed the scene a creation of my
disordered brain, and might have convinced
myself that you, lulled by my composing
draught, were at that time sleeping peacefully,
innocent of all part in Colonel Halkett's
death'

'' What ! '^ cried Nadine, starting to her
feet, and wrenching her hand from Bramwell's
grasp. " It had entered your mind that
I — that / murdered him ? ''

Bramwell was silent for a moment, then
said in shaken tones, —

"You will understand that the morning-after
that awful night, when I was taken
straight into the presence of death, my mind

VOL. II. D

was a maze of bewilderment and horror, and
the most frightful suspicions were not unnatural.
But examination dispelled them
quickly. Colonel Halkett died suddenly of
heart disease — so much is clear to me. The
rest is a mystery, which has haunted me

like a shadowy fiend. It has made the

*■
darkness fearful, and has turned my days

into a waking nightmare. The misery was
greater than could be borne. I determined
that to-night I must know the worst. . . .
Nadine! — oh do not cry; this unmans me. . .
Nadine, hear me."

She had sunk down again, and with her
hands covering her face, was sobbing uncontrollably.
Whatever might be the contradictions
of her nature, the strange blending
in it of impulsiveness and self-command, all

were merged now in an outburst telling only
of helplessness and despair. Could this bethe
pale, defiant woman who had borne herself
so bravely in the supreme crisis of her fate ?
She wept on her frame shook with deep-drawn
sobs. At intervals there fell from her
lips low heart-rending whispers, broken by
pitiful gasps.

'' Oh, what shall I do ? What shall I do ?
Oh, my God, what can I do ? ^^

Riven with the anguish of watching and
hearing, B ram well waited till the paroxysm
had almost passed, and quivering sighs only
came like those uttered by a child weary of
crying. His worst dread seemed to have
received confirmation, and to overwhelm him
with deeply gathering horror. He sought
refuge from it in hurried speech.

D 2

There is one solution' he said hoarsely.
^^ I have repeated it to myself so often that it
has become borne in upon me as truth, and has
comforted me in my despair. Trading, let me
speak as though I were jour brother. Trust in
my loyalty , my reverence. That night — listen
is not this how it was ? He forced his way
into your room. You repulsed him. In the
excitement and agitation death struck him ? "

Bramwell paused and waited breathlessly for
her reply. None came. She sat motionless,
her eyes bent downwards. In his agony
he quitted her side and walked towards the
door of the tent. Here he stood for several
moments looking earnestly upon her, while
there was still silence. At length the strain
became unbearable, and he turned his face
resolutely away from her.

Aware of the movement, lie seemed to
interpret it as a sign of desertion. For a
second the old defiance revived. She uplifted
her head J her lips framed the words, —

'^ Go ; think the worst of me that you
choose. I can live without you.^'

Though she had spoken so low as to be
inaudible, his mind grasped at her meaning.
He turned once more, uttering an ejaculation
of reproach. As she met his gaze the
momentary expression of defiance vanished ;
once more her features and attitude conveyed
only imploring dependence.

Where can I look for help if not from
you ? ^' she murmured, slightly extending her
arms.

Obeying the gesture of appeal, he moved
impulsively to her and clasped her hand,

his touch seeming to convey the solemnity
of a pledge.

^' I will help you ," he said, " through anything,
everything, if there be need of my
help ; only trust me. Remember that I am
ignorant, and that I have been racked by
doubts that may have wronged you. Remember
that I love you. . But all personal
feeling is merged in the longing to
answer to your need, whatever it may be.
I was wrong to speak so insistently; it was
cruel. Tell me only what you feel it a relief
to says

motioned him from the chair on which
he knelt to a place on the couch near her.

^^ Sit there — so. , . . And don't look at
me. I will try to tell you. . I don't
know if I can — all ; but I will try. . . . And

you will be patient ; you will try to understand
? ''

His only answer was to tighten his clasp
of her hand. Nadine went on in broken
language, her thoughts following a mental
sequence independent of the order of events,
pausing frequently, and speaking in beseeching
accents as a child might who was confessing
a fault of which it dreaded to reveal
the worst consequences.

It is not as you think — not quite. Think
worse than that — if it be worse. . . . You
remember what I said long ago at Aston —
how long ago it is ! — about evil lying latent
in our natures and springing up at an outward
touch ? Vanity, love of power, all sorts
of desires and impulses, which seem to tell of
something in us that we had never dreamed of

till we grow frightened at ourselves, and our
brain becomes confused between true right
and what the world calls right. . . . Ah !
there is the contradiction ! Within and without
the law, human instincts are the same,
love is the same ; and yet it is only a shadow,
a form of words that makes the distinction
between virtue and vices'

CHAPTER III.

NADINE^S CONFESSION.

Nadine paused; Bramwell could not speak.
The silence seemed lieazy with coming revelation.
The very drawing of his breath was
pain. After a minute Nadine went on,
gathering up the scattered threads, —

"It began to come upon me that time in
London that I wash like others — that there
were in me capacities for strong feelings, and
all sorts of mixed impulses making me restless,
and drawing me against myself. I
wanted to understand life ; I wanted to love.

I did let myself love, when something told me
it was wrong. I knew that I wasn't like a girl
that I did not shrink from things which . . .
and that made me afraid. I had no otfe
to whom I could speak. Women are hedged
in and tied round. To be true to themselves
is to be false to their sex. . I felt myself
to be half-hard, half-impetuous, cynical, calculating,
and daring at the same time, so that
I could rush to a pj-edifice and yet pause on
the brink and count the cost of falling. . . .
And it seemed a noble thing to fling oneself
down in the hope of saving another
whom one loved from a base, unhappy life.
But there was not only that feeling. I
don't want you to think better of me than
I deserve : there were other feelings more
unworthy — I was afraid of being forsaken.

I had set a fire burnings and I could not
quench it — and I could not fly. . . . Ah,
do you not understand ? You said that
you would help me. You might have helped
me then ; you can't lift me up now. . . .
You said that my good name was sacred
to you. It is at your mercy. " The tears
rolled down her cheeks. Suddenly she
looked at him and said swayed by a less
selfish emotion, " I give you great pain ? '^

^* The worst pain," said Bramwell very low,
is in knowing that I can do nothing for you."

'^ This is weakness," said Nadine. " I
should have defied you — braved everything.
I thought that I could do so ; but it was
impossible. Whenever I met your eyes they
seemed to say, ' I know your secret,' and
they made me loathe everything. And I am

lonely, I am very wretched ; this struggle
is wearing me out. •'^

For the first time since she had bidden
him avert his eyes Bramwell looked at her.
She withdrew her hand from his and hid
her face, while sobs again rent her frame.
The anguish of hearing her confession had
become so great that personal feeling held
at this moment no place in Bramwell's consciousness.
The blow had fallen, and still,
it seemed now that for a long time certainty
had been in his mind. A great wave had
rolled over him, and he was left mentally
stunned. Yet from the trough of despair
he clutched at a straw, the last shred of his
faith. He said huskily,

^'' But you were deceived — you believed him
frees

There was silence. Again Bramwell turned
away this eyes. To watch her struggling
sobs was too painful. She continued, in
an undertone utterance, still in the same
fragmentary manner, —

I did not know, — not at first, — only I
seemed to understand always that there
was a bar. They did not tell me that he
was married — till afterwards. . . . But it
was not as people thought. That knowledge
made very little difference. The
feeling was too strong : it was like thirst.
I used once to laugh to myself over poetry
and romances ; and I thought that to love in
that way was unnatural — just as I always
fancied that temptation of such a kind could
never come near me. It was a mystery.
I was a mystery to myself. . I could

not bear the dread lest lie might ever
forsake me. 1 knew dimly that lie did
not care for me in the way that — as yrm
cared for me. But it made no difference —
nothing made any difference. . It was
fascination something which compelled me
from the first. I was always thinking of
him, when I was alone or with others —
always wanting to tell him of thoughts which
came into my min(J — longing for the touch of
his hand or a look from his eyes — longing to
hear him say that I made his life better, that I
was his good angel. Oh me ! it seems now such
mockery, such mockery ! . . . And then, when
he talked of our going away to another land,
of our being husband and wife in Gods sight
I wondered often if there were any God,
and if there were, how it could give Him

pleasure to torture a weak girl like me, when
it would have been so easy for Him to order
everything differently. I thought of you,
and of how you did not believe in the after-world.
And then it seemed to me that if
there were no immortal future, all the creeds
and codes of this world went for nothing ;
and that it was only just that we should
take the joys offered us, when the doing so
would wrong no one. I felt that you must
have a law of morality more righteous than
that of churches, and that if I could tell
you everything you might perhaps help
me. . . . That was what was in my mind
when I came back from London. And I
tried to tell you — that night at Aston. "

A pang of exceeding bitterness pierced
BramvvelFs heart when, even at that moment.

it struck him as characteristic of Nadine's
egoistic temperament that she should have
considered only her own need and should
have felt no compunction for the pain that
she inflicted upon him. He started back as
though the thought had been treason and
involuntarily shuddered, for it revealed to
him too surely that his goddess had fallen.

By some subtle current of sympathy the
same idea darted through Nadine^s mind.

You think that I was heartless, that I
had no remorse for the suffering I must
cause you. . . Dr. Bramwell, if I were to try
till Doomsday to analyze my feelings towards
you then, and now, they would still remain
a mystery. I did not wish you to think
well of me, and yet I shrank from appearing
despicable to you. You had a strange

influence over me — always. It began partly
in myself. I yielded to the impression, I
wished to deepen it, and yet to keep the
reins; I wished to experimentalize on you
and on myself. Now you see that I am calculating.
But it was more — more than mere
coquetry and love of power. . . . The knowledge
that you believed me innocent seemed
a safeguard against evil desires. It would
have been better for us both if you had
doubted me. I had a notion that because
of your character, your profession, you must
have a keener insight than most men into
human nature. And yet, when I saw daily
how little you understood me — ! But I
wished to tell you everything. Does not
that show you how I trusted you ? . . I don't

know why I had this impulse, except that I
Vol. II. E

wanted you to understand me. I was afraid
of myself ; I was afraid of committing suicide,
as it were ; and I knew that if I were on
the point of destroying myself morally, and
it was right that I should be saved, you
would save me, even against myself. . . .
That night while I played — it was on my
lips ; but the very sense that I had power
over ycu, that I could stir your feelings by
a word, a look, held the confession back. I
could not endure to lose the power. . . .
And then you said that you loved me. . . .
And all that was worst in me came uppermost
; it was like the taste of blood to
a wild creature which had been brought up
tame — wicked thoughts, cold, cruel plans of
deceiving and — Then afterwards, loathing
of myself. . . . Do'j^ou hate me now ? ''

"It could never be my impulse to hate
you," said Bramwell in deep-shaken tones.
01i , that you had confided in me ! ^' he
exclaimed in passionate sorrow. " I would
have saved you, — at the cost of tearing the
heart from your bosom , at the cost,'^ and
his voice sank to a fierce whisper, " of taking
the tempters life. Nadine/^ he went on
more gently, "I don't want you to be
oppressed by a sense of guilt towards me.
You were under no obligation to love me,
and now you have enough to bear without
the added pain of thinking that you have
wronged me. Why did you not trust me ?
Could you not have believed that my devotion
was not wholly selfish, that I could
have found consolation for my own sorrow
in comforting you — in instilling into your

E 2

0H^^^«^''.'?

>«-<

mind the truth that no love can be perfect
unless it be pure ? ^^

^'' No' said Nadine; and in the movement
of her uplifted chin there was some faint,
pitiful trace of her former self "You do
not yet understand me. I have not sunk
so low as to humble myself in penitence
before you. I am not repentant. My nature
has made my fate, and I have obeyed it.
All that I have bad in me now was in me
before, and more — for now I am cutting
myself off from a temptation which you do
not know of. . . . This is not the true
Nadine. The real woman is she whom you
see in crowds — too proud to court pity,
masking misery under smiles. But tonight
the stress is harder than human
nature can support; the springs are broken.

I mist speak — I 7n'ust have a word of sympathy
— or die'

Her voice gathering intensity with compressed
passion broke suddenly. She turned
towards Bramwell^ and her eyes, wild and
dilated, met his full. The anguish of pity
in his face, which no words could represent,
seemed to throw her back into the attitude
of helpless appeal that ail through the interview
had impressed him so strangely. She
leaned a little towards him, and began again
in a frightened whisper.

I must speak — I 7nust tell you, or I shall
go mad. Sometimes I think that I am mad.
Oh, the darkness ! the horrible darkness !
Even though there is light in the room it
seems always dark ; and I see it. . I
see it always — everywhere — most distinctly

at night. It is outside myself, and yet it is

nne That white woman with her long

hair — and her staring eyes. . .\ . And her
arms strained — clutching — dragging — and oh !

so heavy so heavy And the horror

the dread lest strength should fail, and I
should sink before the door is reached ! I seethe

dead face Oh, my God, what shall

I do ? How shall I escape from it ? "

she crouched down shuddering convulsively
; her lips remained parted, and her eyes
were fixed blankly in space upon the vision
which her imagination had conjured. Cromwell
had no words in which to soothe her. He
could only look dumbly and fold her hands
more tightly between both of his. Deepening
the sense of unreality, and, as it were, in grim
mockery of his own wretchedness and of the

unhappy woman's despair, a weird melody,
one of the Hungarian national airs transposed
as a waltz, floated down from the ball-room,
and with, it mingled the sound of voices and
laughter as every now and then the porridge
of the pavilion was brushed aside by some
passing promenade; while through the aperture
were revealed fitful rays of the electric
light, which coldly illuminated the glade.
But from all sense of outward incongruity
Nadine seemed far removed. Under the stress
of that strange impulse which prompted her
to self-revelation, she proceeded, still in the
same unnatural whisper, —

"I will tell you the truth — of that night.
I want you to understand, so that everything
may be bare between us ; and then I want
you to leave me, and never by word or look

remind me in future of what I have told you.
I wish your knowledge to be my safeguard.
It was as you thought — partly That day
when you spoke to me on the racecourse,
and I said that perhaps shortly you would
look upon me with horror, — you remember ?
my mind was made up. I had determined
to forsake my home and my father, and
to go and live with Aim in another land,
far away — where there could be no deceiving.
And yet I felt a wicked joy in deceiving.
. . . But it was the being with you that
turned my thoughts backward — to papa, and
the old life ; and I repented. He was with
me. He was full of excitement and joy. You
know he had won largely that day, so that
everything was easy. It was as though Fate
were throwing riches, opportunity, all into our

bands. But I said that we would wait a little
longer. I said that we were acting a lie and
that a scene in the drama more or less did
not matter. And he replied in a way that
maddened me — and I reproached him. And
then — then it was all over in a minute — and
I sat holding his dead hand and knowing
that the curse had fallen on me. . . . This is
why 1 have told you. If I know that I have
told you, it may seem to me perhaps more
like a dreadful dream, and I may be saved
from doing in madness something which could
never be altered — which would haunt me in
life and when I was dead. . . . Fors and her
voice grew terrible in its low distinctness, " all
sorts of things are in my mind. I am afraid
of what I may do in the future — I am afraid —
The thought has come to me sometimes that

if I were to marry — and some day I shall
forget and be tempted and I shall marry —
that I should kill the impulse would
come to me to act it all through again. 'It
would be like fulfilling a doom. . . . That is
the feeling which was in me before — before
you came to Croxham — that there was a curse

upon me I had struggled — and after I

had — Then wicked spirits possessed me. . . .
I did not know before what it would be. And
then — when I knew, and it was done,, and
could never be undone all my life through, I
wished to give myself up utterly, so that
there could be no turning back. It seemed
to me that it did not matter any more what
happened to me. I wanted to defy people.
But still I used to pray that his wife might
die. If by willing I could have killed her.

God's lightning would have struck her dead.
That was what made me feel most that I
had become wicked. Often at night when
there were strange sounds in my room I
would fancy that the evil ghosts of Croxham
were gathered round my bed, saying to each
other, ^ She is lost — she is one of us. She
must obey her doom.' And that night —
the dead face was turned up to mine — and
the dear eyes. . . . My life seemed outside
me — my life, my love, my honour, all. . I
tried to shriek, but no voice came and
the spirits pressed round me the room
was full of voices crying, *" Shame — despair ! '
An icy coldness crept over me; I was like
stone. And I said, ' I will defy the world ;
I will save myself.' And I lifted it
up — and the eyes seemed to say, ' Save

yourself ! ' and I dragged, and dragged, and
dragged — oli, the terrible way ! — all down the
silent corridor — past door after door, with my
body bending under the weight of the dead
limbs, and my heart turned to stone. The
strength that was in me seemed not mine.
It was not / . . . . it was the spirit of the
wicked lady of Croxham. . . . And I knew it,
and she laughed in my-ear — as at nights she
laughs still aid I was afraid lest she
should desert me, and I should have no
more power, and the door would be closed. ^^

Again a fit of shuddering seized her ;
again the strength which his touch brought
her carried her on.

"You see, it is like a crime — burned into
me. . But I did not do anything really
wicked. I had not stolen or committed

murder, or injured another person. It was I
only who was injured. Surely we have a right
to shape our own lives as we choose. Why
should I be haunted as the vilest murderer
might be haunted ? The misery of having
lost my happiness is light pain compared to
the torture of inward conflict — the terror of
things unseen — the terror of myself. This is
what I cannot bear'*

There was a note of pathetic, forlorn protest
in her voice. It was pitiful to witness the
warring of her members, the effort at self-comprehension,
the groping after self-justification.

'^^You will not believes' said Cromwell
with sorrowful sternness, ^^ that your higher
nature is avenging itself."

Nadine did not answer. Bramwell, stooping,
raised her fallen bouquet, and mechanically

began to remove the bruised blossoms. There
seemed something suggestive in the action.
She held out her hand and took the bouquet
from him, saying in a tone half-mournful ,
half bitter,

You can never make it fresh again."
At that moment the curtain of the pavilion
was drawn aside, and a great personage with
a beautiful woman upon his arm entered,
not observing at' the first glance that the
place was tenanted. Nadine rose hurriedly ;
then, self-possession regained, curtsied as she
replied to the gracious remark addressed
to her, and, followed by Bramwell, passed
out into the garden.

The scene fitfully illuminated, the festoons
of jewel-like lights, the strains of music
and array of moving figures, acted more

quickly upon her mobile temperament than
upon that of Bramwell. To him the contrast
between mood and surroundings seemed
sacrilegious, and he longed wildly to bear
her away into darkness and solitude. She
paused as they passed a fountain, and stooping,
dipped her fingers into the basin and
lightly bathed her eyes.

Back to the >-aree-show/^ she said
bitterly. ^' There must be no tears under
the mask. Enough has been said to make
you despise and forsake me. That is what
I wish. Let the past be buried. The book
is sealed for ever between you and me;
never try to open it.^^

Nadine ! " cried Bramwell, swept along by
a passion from which in any saner moment
he might have shrunk appalled, '* I can never

forsake you ; the past cannot be buried in
this way. As well bid me forget that I am
myself. My life is yours ; and how can I
serve you better than by standing between
you and the world — between you and your
worst self? Let me restore to you the purity
which is a part of your real nature. Have
faith in yourself. Take comfort from my faith
in you ''

She interrupted him, shaking her head and
looking at him almost pityingly.

"Nos no; all this capacity for high feeling
exists only in your conception of me. That
is how you fail to obtain any real mastery
over me : you will not see me as I am —
the slave of a temperament, which I accept
as a fate, and would not escape from if I
could, because I can realize no other. "

'you shall not take this view of yourself
exclaimed Bramwell fervently. " You shall,
you must see your true self in the image
of you that is mirrored in my mind. Be
my wife. Let our marriage be a new 
for the future. I do not ask your
love; I can be content with your confidence.
I ask nothing but the right to protect and
comfort you.-"

Nadine turned away and for a moment
seemed to be battling with fresh emotion.
At last she said, in a voice very tender, and
at the same time unutterably sad, —

You offer to marry me, notwithstanding

the thing you know of me — you of all

men ? . . . . And I thought you cold !

Ah me ! But I said — I said always that

you would be very loyal. Do you not know
Vol. II. F

that I have told you every thing in great
part because I wished to cut you off for ever
from any thought of that kind ? I think that
you are capable at this moment of the most
complete self-sacrifice ; but I am not base
enough to accept it from you. That would
be murder indeed — murder of my own better
instincts — murder of your peace, of everything.
Think what it would be to live with
a woman whom you despised and who hated
you — for I should hate you. No ; tomorrow,
when you are calm, you will be deeply thankful
that I have refused to accept your
devotion. It will be the only cause for
gratitude that I shall ever have given you.
The kindest wish I can frame for you is that
you may learn to love another woman. As
for me, it is better that I should sink to

my level, and marry — if I ever do marry — a
man who will require from me no more
than I can give. You and I must remain
apart. I beseech you for the present at
least to avoid me. To-morrow I may repent
the impulse wliicli to-night lias prompted my
confession to you and the very sight of you
may goad me to something worse. Henceforth
on this subject your lips are sealed
even to me. Remember this, and for the
rest, we are as completely divided, in all
sense of marriage, as priest and nun. "

He began to speak , but she stopped him
with an imperious gesture.

^' No — no more. For your own sake be
silent, and from this time shun me as you
would shun your worst enemy. Now, take
me back to the ball-room. '^

F 2

BOOK V.
CHAPTER I.

IN THE VALLEY OE DESPAIR.

For nearly six months Dr. Brarnwell saw
nothing of Nadine Senguin. She left London
soon after the ball at Kensington House,
and he heard of her vaguely as having
refused to join the Dormers in a yachting
expedition,, and as being occupied at Aston
in attendance upon her invalid father.

This news Bramwell hailed as the harbinger
of awakening good.

He had obeyed her command, and had

sedulously avoided all possibility of the
renewal of their intercourse. In this he
had acted partly from deliberation. He
was afraid for himself. Though his love
had gained, if possible, in intensity, he
was able to recognize in it an element, as
it were, of witch - craft, which might ina
moment of passion overcome his better
judgment. Absent from Nadine, the feeling
of revulsion deepened, though blending
with it was a pity almost divine. He
loathed the sin, yet after a manner reverenced
the sinner; and at this time the
consecration of himself to her need seemed
the mournful yet sweet necessity imposed
upon him by his love and by her fall.
The future held hope ; but in the present
he acknowledged it best for her sake

and for his own that they should remain
apart.

His work was the safety-valve for all
pent-np emotion. He threw himself with
ardour into the practice of his profession
and the prosecution of scientific discovery.
Several slight circumstances,, apart from
the attention which his medical work had
excited among savants, combined to bring
him into notoriety. In a shorter space
than he could have imagined possible,
the prosperous career, of which in the old
days at Aston he had lovingly dreamed,
seemed opening before him. Yet with
opportunity there appeared to have vanished
the zest for fame, the incentive towards
worldly endeavour.

One evening when he had come home

late from his rounds he found awaiting him
the following letter from Mrs. Dormer : —

Croxham, November 2nd.

"Dear Dr. Bramwell,

Have you become too busy to remember
old friends, or are you not yet famous
enough to allow yourself a Sunday's holiday,
and run down to Croxham for dinner on
Saturday evening, returning, after the custom
of London men, by our early Monday train ?

I wish that you could come to us on the
10th. We shall have comparatively an empty
house — only two or three country neighbours
collected for the first meet near here of the
Chauceley hounds — and Mrs. Bartelotte and
her husband. You will remember her as connected
with poor Jack Halkett's melancholy
death in the spring. None of the same party
have been here since ; and I, who am, as you
know, impressionable to such influences, dread

a reunion shadowed by the memory of a lost
friend. But my husband, who laughs at any
sentimentality on my part, insists that Mrs.
Bartelotte, who is a particular favourite of hi^^
should be asked, and it was with difficulty
that I persuaded him to arrange Nadine
Senguin's long-promised visit for a week
later, when we have some balls in prospect.
I mention this that you may choose
your own time if the 10th does not seem
to you to promise, sufficient attraction. In
any case you need only telegraph an hour
beforehand. Apart from the pleasure of seeing
you, I am anxious to consult you about
my own health, which has not been of late
as satisfactory as I could wish. With my
husbands kindest remembrances,

I am very sincerely yours,

Nellie Dormer

bitter was the remembrance of his

last visit to Croxham, that BrauivveH's first
impulse was to refuse the invitation. Had
he not been assured of not meeting Nadine
Senguin, he must at once have declined it.
To be thrown into her society in that house
would be too painful. As it was, his conscience
smote him with regard to the Dormers,
to whom he felt himself to be under obligations.
With Mrs. Dormer he had always been
particularly intimate; and he knew that in
the treatment of her malady, one of the
nerves complicated by troubles that she had
confided to him, connected with her domestic
life, no one could be so successful as himself;
while her reliance upon his help and
sympathy established a claim upon him which
he would not willingly evade.

He wrote vaguely that he would try to

make arrangements for the 10th, and added
that, owing to his press of engagements,
he would avail himself of Mrs. Dormer^s^s
permission to telegraph a few hours only
before his departure from London.

It was late upon a raw November day
when he arrived at Croxham. The dressing
bell had rung, and he was at once taken to
his room, the same which he had occupied
upon his former visit; and only made his appearance
in the drawing-room simultaneously
with the butler who announced dinner.

Harry Dormer, brilliant in pink, his good-humoured
face almost as bright as his coat,
glowing after a hard day across country,
paused in the act of offering his arm to
old Lady Critchell and shook hands with
Bramwell.

Well Doctor I'm glad to see you. Wish
you could have managed to get down earlier.
It was a stunning run. I wouldn't mind
laying long odds the best we shall see
this season. Dear ! dear ! Do you recollect
the last time you were at Croxham ? I
thought of poor Jack Halkett this afternoon
riding home from Boswell. You were very
near having a case waiting for you — an accident
to the phaeton; Lumley's charioteers.
Pve got a bone to pick with you , Deodatus,
about my chestnut mare's broken knees.
Happily beyond that, no harm was done
except a shaking, and the young lady whom
he was driving so recklessly is keeping her
room this evening. Allow me, Lady Critchell.
Bramwell, you will take in Mrs. Bartelotte."

Presently Bramwell found himself seated

beside that vivacious lady, whose spirits
seemed in no way to have suffered from
certain reverses at Newmarket which she
shortly confided to her companion.

"You see that I am as inveterate a
gambler as of old, Dr. Bramwell. Ever since
that extraordinary dream of Jem Ormthwaite^s
about the winner of the Chollerton Cup, Overtaken
to racing instead of trente et quarante
as an outlet for my wickedness. Anyhow,
Epsom and Newmarket are handier than
Monte Carlo, and I guess they are more
respectable. Well, and what have you been
doing since I saw you last ? I hear you are
fixed up convenient in London. Have you
found out yet why poor Jack Halkett did
not die a little sooner or a little later ? That's
the worst of you doctors — you are always

too late to do any good except find a reason
for things. I must say I don't care about
reasons. Do you remember bow we all
bundled off that morning as grim as mutes
at a funeral ? Poor Jack ! I dare say you
wouldn't believe that I bad a good cry
when I got borne that evening. You were
very nearly coming in for another tragedy
to-day. Mr. Lumley and Miss Senguin were
in such state of excitement or mental
aberration that they forgot they were bunting
on wheels, and tried to jump a stonewall.
Ob , you need not look so frightened
no bones were broken, and the worst
result of the catastrophe is, that the beautiful
Nadine is baying tea and toast in ber
bed-room instead of gladdening our eyes
down-stairs."

"Is Miss Senguin here ? '^ asked Dr. Cromwell
abruptly, turning to Mrs. Dormer, who
was on his other hand.

She came yesterday' was the reply. " I
dare say that you are surprised. So was I
when I got a letter from her a few days ago,
saying that she hated balls and large country-house
parties, and wished to come to us
now for a little milder' dissipation. But you
will have discovered, Dr. Bramwell, that
Nadine's moods are somewhat incalculable.
This accident is unfortunate, though she is
not the least hurt, and would not let me
send for Dr. Hervey. However, I insisted
upon her keeping quiet this evening."

Deeply disturbed, Bramwell turned with
little appetite to the business of dinner.
He had been at pains to avoid Nadine; he

dreaded meeting her, and yet now that lie
learned suddenly the fact of her presence
under that roof with him, his heart throbbed
with wild pleasure, his pulses tingled at the
anticipation of again touching her hand, and
it seemed impossible that he could for so
long have voluntarily denied himself the
joy of beholding her. But he asked no
further questions, and took his part as best
he could in the conversation that flowed
around him. Fortunately Mrs. Bartelotte
required little entertainment, but rippled on
in her low-toned monologue, which, if it
produced upon the senses an impression as
vague as the sound of running water, had
at least the merit of effectually filling up
blanks. The party was comparatively a
small one, consisting, besides the guests in

the house, of a neighbouring squire and his
wife, the parson and his wife, and Sir Peter
and Lady Critchell. Sir Peter was a bluff,
ruddy-faced old gentleman, who reverenced
no personages upon earth except his sovereign
and a genuinely successful M. F. H.,
and who was now with sepulchral distinctness
epitomizing the claims to social consideration,
from a fox-hunting point of view,
of a gentleman 'who had lately established
himself in the neighbourhood, and who had
been so unfortunate that day as to provoke
Sir Peter's ire by an ill-timed jest at a blank
covert.

^^H^m!" grunted Sir Peter. "He don't
like foxes. I don't call that foolish ; I call
it wicked. I don't mean to say'' after a
pause devoted to an attack upon the wing

of a pheasant, "that he's a 6 a -i man. Don't
hunt, but lets other people hunt; don't
shoot, but lets other people shoot; don't
drink but keeps good wine. But he jokes
about foxes ; and I tell you what it is " —
glaring fiercely round — '^ foxes are too
serious a subject to be joked about in this
country's

I will say," said Mrs. Bartelotte
with her air of candour, " that you make as
much fuss over foxes in your country as
we do over Congress men in ours. I'm doing
my best to respect British institutions. Sir
Peter, but I reckon the world wouldn't
stop still, after all, if a fox were killed at
Dudley Beeches instead of Gravely Wood."

You think so, madam, do you ? '^ growled
Sir Peter, and betook himself again to the

VOL. II. G

discussion of his pheasant ; whereupon Harry
Dormer, who liked nothing better than to
chaff Mrs. Bartelotte, tried to draw her out
upon the subject of British institutions in
general, but she refused to answer to the
bait, and with a pretty grimace turned to
Dr. Bramwell and caused him to become
first red, then white, by inquiring whether
he had yet made acquaintance with any of
the Croxham ghosts. Mrs. Dormer was not
in her usual spirits. She looked pale, and
it was evident that she was suffering. Conversation
flagged in the drawing-room, and
there was no music to enliven the evening.
Lady Critchell set example to the other
guests by an early departure, and before
half-past ten all the ladies had retired. Dr.
Bramwell, after a short conference with Mrs.

Dormer, when, concerned at the state of
her health, he urged her to remain in
her room during the following day, joined
the gentlemen in the smoking-room fora
little while ; then, on the plea of having
some important writing to finish, excused
himself to his host and went to his own old
room.

The associations connected with the chamber
were as fresh in his mind as though
Colonel Halkett's death had taken place but
yesterday. Every trifling detail of surrounding,
— the arrangement of the furniture, the
folding of the drapery, the blazing logs
upon the hearth, — all recalled to him the
strange phase of consciousness through which
upon that terrible night he had passed,
and seemed to arouse the same mysterious

Q 2

expectancy and sense of coming evil which
he had experienced then.

He tried to turn his thoughts from this
painful retrospect, and spreading on the
table before him the work which he had
brought set himself resolutely to his task.
Eut unintelligible sentences flowed from his
pen, and the image of Nadine persistently
obtruded itself between his eyes and the
page upon which they were bent ; so that
perforce he yielded to the mood of melancholy
reverie which was creeping over him,
and leaning back in his chair, lost himself ina
train of reflection in which bitter regret
over the past mingled with dread of the
future, wonder how Nadine would greet him
upon the morrow, and excited longing for
the hour of meeting.

Midnight pealed forth from the turret clock.
Roused by the chime, Bramwell started,
heaved a regretful sigh, and again braced
himself to his writing. The room felt chilly,
for the fire had burned low. He rose to
replenish it, and as he did so a timid knock
sounded at his door. He waited for a
second, doubtful. It was repeated, and the
door pushed slightly ajar, while a voice
which thrilled through his frame said very
low, —

'' It is I— Nadine."

Sick with the anticipation of some new
evil, and yet hardly astonished, — for Nadine's
actions could be predicted by no known rules
governing human impulse, — Bramwell gave
her admission ; and she stood in his presence
white and almost as terror-stricken as upon

the night to which his thoughts now involuntarily
reverted.

She was dressed in a loose cashmere robe
that, clinging to her form, displayed its outlines
clearly. In an instant his practised
intelligence had grasped her imminent need.
His worst horror confronted him. She had
come to him for aid in the direst extremity
which can befall woman.

He stood, almost as pale as she was,
waiting for her to speak. Suddenly she
divined that he knew her secret. A wave
of crimson swept over her face. She advanced
with drooped eyes, and said in an
imperative whisper, —

*' I want you to come at once to my rooms'

He bowed his head, and still without
speaking followed her down the long dim

corridor till they turned into the west wing.
Here she paused, and motioned him to enter
a room the door of which stood partially
open ; then closed it behind them both and
turned the key.

The chamber was in order ; the fire burned
brightly, the candles were lighted upon the
dressing-table ; a white camellia in a vase
upon the mantel-piece appeared to have been
placed there in readiness for her wearing.
All kinds of daintinesses and expensive trifles
were scattered about. He noticed these
details even at this moment, for the stamp
of Nadine's individuality seemed imprinted
upon all. He shuddered as his eye caught
the reflection of her haggard features in a
pier glass opposite him. All the grace and
sweetness of girlhood had fled from them.

She stood before him a desperate woman,
threatened swiftly and suddenly, by the most
terrible danger.

You see' she began in a hard, concentrated
tone, ^^ my doom has come upon
me. You — you only can save me from a
fate worse than death. If you will not save
me I must kill myself. I cannot . I
cannot ''' Her voice broke ; she sank
upon the ground at his feet and seized his
hands. " What shall I do ? Oh, what shall
I do ? " she moaned. " On all sides nothing
but despair. I had come here with the
thought that I would confess all to Mrs.
Dormer ; . . . but now — it is impossible. . . .
And when I heard that you were near me, —
in the house, — it was like a ray of light in
blackness — like the clutch of a hand when

I was sinking. . I said to myself that
you would not forsake me And you
will not — you cannot ? ''

Her face was upturned to Ms in an agony
of beseeching ; tears rolled down her cheeks.
He raised her gently, but with reproving
firmness. There was in him no impulse to
tenderness. Instead , a steel-like insensibility
seemed to have crept over him, numbing all
his capacity for emotion.

** I will not forsake you," he answered,
very low. "Nadine, I will save you — if it
be possible."

CHAPTER II.

DECEPTION.

About nine o'clock the following morning
Harry Dormer, turning sleepily upon his
pillow, received a message to the effect
that Dr. Bramwell wished to speak to him
immediately.

"Well, Doctor," was the greeting which
Bramwell received as he entered his hosts
dressing-room, " what is up now ? Your
presence at Croxham seems invariably the
harbinger of ill-luck. Have you come to
break the news of some new tragedy ? Out

with it. Let me hear the worst at once. Is
any one dead, or dangerously ill ? '^

*' You jump quickly at conclusions' answered
Bramwell gravely. *sit is true that
I have some unpleasant news for you. No
one is dead; but Miss Senguin is seriously
ill''

Nadine Senguin ! " Harry Dormer started
up in consternation. '' All I suppose, owing
to the confounded carelessness of Deodatus
Lumley. I wish I had seen him hanged
before I let him drive my chestnut mare.
Well, what has happened ? My wife saw
Miss Senguin last evening, and there did
not appear to be anything greatly amiss.
Has there been any alarming change ? Were
you called to her during the night ? "

"Yes' answered Bramwell mechanically.

Harry Dormer^s^s habit of rapid conjecture
rendered his task comparatively, easy. " The
case was imperative. You will forgive rpe
for assuming the responsibility of stringent
measures. Miss Senguin has sustained a
severe shock to the nervous system ; and
in the event of cerebral inflammation setting
in , the worst results are to be feared. Absolute
quiet is essential to her safety. I will
not answer for the consequences if any one
but the nurse or myself is allowed to enter her
room. I have already secured from the village
the services of Mrs. Gaythorne, in whom,
as you know, I can place entire confidences'

But — Dr. Hervey,^^ said Mr. Dormer in a
bewildered manner, " you will send for him
and consult with him about the case, for I
presume that you will not be able to remain in

attendance upon Miss Senguin. Is this out
of the question ? Pray consider, Bramwell,
whether it is impossible for you to combine
this with your London engagements ; you
would, by doing so, confer an inestimable boon
upon us, and, I need not add, upon Nadine^s
father'

I have already considered the matter,"
replied Bramwell with grave decision ; '' and
if you will allow me, have determined to
remain here. Both on account of my presence
in the house, and of my friendship with
the family, I think it well that I alone should
have the care of Miss Senguin in this illness ;
I have been fortunate enough to win Mr.
Senguin's good opinion, and he will more
willingly confide his daughter's treatment to
my discretion than to that of a comparatively

new acquaintance. I must insist upon his
making no attempt to see her, and must beg
you to help me in enforcing my prohibition."

"Willingly, Doctors said Mr. Dormer,
grasping BramwelFs hand. " Consider everyone
in the house at your orders. You have
taken a weight off my mind by deciding to
remain. I have the most complete confidence
in your skill and judgment, and in this
can speak for Mrs. Dormer even more strongly
than for myself, who fortunately have never
had occasion to test your powers of healing.
She has greater faith in you than in anyone
else in the world, morally and medicall}^,
I think I may say," added he with a smile.
BramwelPs eyes drooped ; his face flushed,
then grew pale, and he turned away without
uttering any acknowledgment of Mr. Dormer's

flattering speech. He stood for a few moments
as if in inward debate, then said harshly and
abruptly, —

'' Though I cannot deny that imminent
danger might be anticipated if my directions
were not strictly carried out, I see at present
no reason for consulting with Hervey. Should
there arise any later, I will send for him.
Pray do not alarm Mrs. Dormer. Assure her
that I have every hope of Miss Senguin's
speedy restoration. In the mean time, I will
telegraph to London and make all necessary
arrangements for my absence. I have already
written to Mr. Senguin, and will send the
letter by the early post. If you are writing,
pray add force to my injunctions that he
will refrain from exciting my patient by any
attempt to see her."

Mr. Dormer readily promised, and Bramwell
withdrew to his own room, where upon the
table lay open the letter which, under the stress
of Nadine's entreaties and the urgency of the
situation, he had forced himself to write.

It ran thus : —

CroxJiam. November 10th, 18 — .

My Dear Mr. Senguin,

I grieve to tell you that a
shock to the nervous system, dae, it may be
supposed, to an accident which took place
in the hunting-field before my arrival here
yesterday, has produced in Miss Senguin
symptoms of cerebral inflammation which gives
ground for grave anxiety, and demand the
utmost care in her treatment, and in preserving
the state of absolute quiet, upon which
her safety mainly depends. Believe me that
I sympathize deeply with the trouble of mind
which this news will cause you; but must
earnestly entreat that you will on no account

allow it to hurry you into a journey here,
which far from being of satisfaction to yourself
or service to your daughter, could only
increase your unhappiness, and would probably
have the most injurious effect upon her state.
My duty would compel me to forbid you access
to her room, and any rumour of your presence
in the house reaching her ears would probably
rouse the excitement and . agitation
from which I am most anxious to guard her.

Pray rely upon my unremitting care, and be
assured that you will be kept well informed as to
Miss Senguin's condition. I anticipate that if
my directions are complied with, she will in a
few days be out of danger, and I feel sure that I
am only carrying out your wishes in taking upon
myself the charge of her case, and have made
such arrangements as will enable me to remain
here as long as she requires constant attention.

I am, sincerely yours,

'*^ Julian Bkamwell.'^

VOL. n. H

CHAPTER III.

Farewell.

Some two months later, Dr. Bramwell stood
alone in the corridor of Mrs. Dormer's London
house, listening with beating heart and
mingled dread and anxiety for the sound of
a footfall on the landing or the rustle of a
dress upon the stair. The night before, he
had received the following pencilled note from
Nadine, —

*^ We are in London for a day or two on
our way to Italy. I lush 'much to see you.
Come tomorrow between three and four''

Against kis better judgment Bratnwell was
here in obedience to the summons. The
dainty room, notwithstanding its velvet hangings,
luxurious furniture, and the fire burning
in the grate, struck him with a feeling of
chill and desolation. Without, a thick fog
clung to the bare trees in the square ; the
pavement was wet ; the houses opposite
loomed dimly through mist ; the street lamps
burned dull ; the cold was penetrating, and
the gloom, seemed palpable. A fit day upon
which to bid Nadine farewell.

She was long in coming. Perhaps she
too found the meeting difficult. Bramwell
shivered, and, tired of waiting in suspense,
began to pace nervously to and fro between
the fire-place and the window. He regretted
now that he had come. The horrible feeling

H 2

of mockery which had of late so often
occurred to him in connection with Nadine
oppressed him heavily at this moment. It
was, to use his own simile like the contrast
between a dead, distorted face and a wreath of
summer flowers crowning its brow. Nadine,
his ideal woman, had ceased to exist. In her
stead, memory presented an image inspiring
a joyless, hybrid feeling, in which blended
compassion, yearning, and vague loathing.
He rebuked himself sternly for having
yielded to her wish. Alas he then but a
weak coward — the slave of a woman's capricious
impulses, without resolution to cut
himself wholly adrift from her fate; incapable
of facing a dreary future, without pausing
to cast a regretful look backward at the
past, and chafing under the burden of a

sacrifice which he had made fully counting
the cost ?

He was thus taking himself to task when
the door was softly opened , and Nadine
entered.

Something in her appearance — he could
scarcely tell whether it were due to the black
dress she wore, to her chastened mien, or
to the extreme fragility of her face and figure
quelled the tumult within his breast and
deepened the sensation of pity, while for the
moment it banished completely that of repulsion.
He advanced and took her passive
hand in his ; and as he did so, he marvelled
at his own calmness. This very absence of
compelling emotion made him realize the
change in his mental attitude towards her.
The sadness of the inevitable weighed hin

down. Life seemed a gulf of horrible possibilities,
in which, through the instrumentality
of some malignant destiny against whose
edicts it was vain to strive, the innocent were
made guilty, the pure defiled.

Nadine met his pleading, sorrowful gaze
for an instant, and a deep blush overspread
her face ; but it faded quickly, leaving her
pale as snow. She motioned him to a seat,
moving herself away to the window, and
remaining there for a moment as though she
were struggling to subdue her agitation.
Presently she returned, aud standing with her
arras resting upon the back of a chair, said
in pathetic tones that pierced his heart anew,
while still they seemed to widen the spiritual
distance between them, —

'^I have grieved you very much. . . And

now, I don't want to make you more unhappy
than I must do — I can see how you have
suffered. And I too have suffered in a way
that you could hardly understand. I do not
expect that you will understand me. How
should you, when I am a mystery to myself?
After I had sent for you I was sorry, for
I thought that to see you would be too
painful. . . But you will let it be as little
painful as is possible. I could not go away
for a long while without telling you — without
saying — "

A sob rose ; she paused.

Bramwell had been sitting in an attitude
of dejection, with head drooped and hands
clasped between his knees. He spoke without
lifting his eyes and in a constrained manner,
which concealed how deeply he was moved.

"Do not tell me anything which it hurts
you to say. There is no need. All my wish
is that you should be spared in every way
possible. There is so much suffering which
is inevitable — which comes into our loi in
spite of ourselves. The world is so full of
it. . . . And you have had a long trial. It
distresses me to see you looking still so pale
and weak; you are not fit to bear agitation.
If, without entering into matters, you would
rely upon me — would trust me to make what
arrangements I think best for your safety,
your honour — much that troubles you at this
moment would, I feel sure, be lifted from
your mind. The future must appear to you
a web of difficulties, immediate and distant.
I cannot bear to think of you in your present
state trying to cope with them. It would be

wisest not to look forward. After a few years
your position may be more independent. Let
me provide for the present'

Nadine fixed her eyes upon his face in
mournful questioning, as though she longed
with all her soul to follow his thoughts, yet
could not by any possible effort discover their
actual bent. The intensity of her gaze compelled
his upward glance. She sav that the
muscles of his face were quivering. Something
in his eyes made the colour rise again
to her cheek and brow. He seemed to
divine and to answer her mute inquiry. •

'' Nadine' he said, " this is our farewell.
After to-day we shall meet no more — in the
way that we have met hitherto. To touch
hands in conventional intercourse with the
consciousness in our hearts of all that has

passed would be too terrible; and any closer
friendship between us is impossible."

Nadine bent her head downwards till it
touched her clasped hands. Suddenly she
lifted her face, and looking away from him,
said in a tone of passionate defiance, —

Why impossible ? You judge by the
worlds standard, after all. Am I so lost,
so degraded, that I am unworthy to be called
your friend ? Am I any worse now than
when — when I confessed everything to you
at Kensington House, and you said — you
offered to make me your wife ? "

He did not answer. There was a painful
pause. She continued, her voice changed by
tears, and gradually sinking to a whisper, —

*^ Will you desert me now, when my great
need is over, and I ask only your pity and

forbearance ? I thought — I had been thinking
— that by and by — after I have come
back to England — though now I can hardly
bear to meet your eyes — then we might befriends,
and I might look to you for help
as to a brother ; and your knowledge would
be my safeguard — my preservation from the
bad that is in me. . . . This is what I most
dread — the evil which is growing in my
nature, corrupting it, poisoning all good impulses.
There are horrible thoughts in my
mind, sometimes they are more than I can
endure, and I feel as though I must shriek
or laugh, or prick myself with pins, anything
to escape from them — the old thoughts — the
old terror of myself. You see I must tell
you everything, even though it should make
you turn from me. . At first, when all was

over, there was an intense relief as of awakening
from a dreadful nightmare; and T could
only say to myself ^ I am saved and - 1
could have gone on my knees and kissed
your feet in my gratitude and thankfulness.
But now that is past and I cannot rest; I
cannot breathe. There is a fire within mea
craving for excitement, a longing to act
some new part, aid always beside me . an
invisible demon whispering loathsome suggestions,
crimes, horrors. . I have impulses
to tell lies — cold, snake-like impulses —
and the wish to destroy. There's no soft
feeling in me, nothing womanly ; no natural
affection — only cruel hatred, and longing to
get my own will, and to gain power, and
to make others suffer''

He checked her by a sudden exclamation.

I beseech joxx," he said in a shaken
voice,, " do not dwell upon these fancies.
The very speaking of them strengthens their
hold upon you. How can I convince you
that they are utterly morbid and due entirely
to your physical state ? '^

She shook her head.

'^ No, you must hear me out. There's
something else I must say to you. I sent
for you to-day to tell your's She leaned over
to him and went on in a whisper. " The
little child you know I hated it from
the first. I could not bear to see it. And
now, though it is away from me, the hatred
is stronger than ever. . I have a fancy
sometimes that I hear it crying — and then
it is as though a wild wicked spirit came
into me and prompted me to take it away

and drown it in some deep pool, where its
crying could never more be heard."

She shivered. He touched her hand;, it
was very cold. Mechanically he chafed it
between his own ; the action seemed to
comfort her.

This is not delirium ? '* she said, questioningly
; " all that is past. I am quite well
now''

He released her hand with a gesture of
denial.

^' You are far from well. I am deeply
thankful that your father has decided upon
leaving England. Your nerves are utterly
unhinged, and if you remained here I should
fear that you might have a serious illness."

She went on, following the former thread
of thought, —

*' I am afraid of what I iniglit do. Sometimes
the horror comes over me that if —
Everything would be so easy if I knew where
it was. I don't want to know. I want to
be kept from it''

'you shall not know' said Bramwell
earnestly. "You shall know nothing. And
now you have told me what was in your mind,
try to feel as though you had confessed to a
priest and had received absolution. Try to
think, now at least, that you have no burden
that I have taken it from you."

It is for this that I have decided upon
spending the next few years abroad," said
Nadine, speaking with agitated hurry. " I
wish to leave the past behind me. I wish
to begin life anew — unshackled. And how
could I do so with this hateful consciousness.

this miserable weight always dragging me
down. You must help me to escape from it.
Where else would be the use of all you have
done for me ? . . . And when I come home
again everything may be different. / may be
different. But if you forsake me — you do
not know how in my thoughts I have clung
to you — I shall grow wicked — mad. I shall
become callous — and then there will be no
hope for me. . . . '^

As she ceased speaking she lifted her arms
and let them fall despairingly remaining a
motionless figure, with parted lips and dilated
eyes.

Bramwell rose and walked away a few
paces. His former mood had been shaken.
There was now no repulsion in his mind. In
her power of swaying the emotions of those

with whom she was brought into relation lay

the secret of Nadine's witchery. It seemed

to Bramwell that she was less the victim of

temptation, to which her own propensities

placed her in subjection than of a cruel fate,

which had compelled circumstance. He stood

battling with the storm of passion that swept

him, as his thoughts turned to the dead man

who had wrought this evil ; and he clenched

his hands in impotent rage and despair when

he compared the miserable woman before

him with the bright creature of a year back,

who had travelled so swiftly from fearless

girlhood to this region of tragic horror

When he returned he saw that she had

changed her position; and, with her hands

clasped before her face, was crouching against

the arm of a sofa.

VOL. n. I

You must not give way to these feelings,"
he said in deep passionate tones. ^' You
must not ! you must not ! Try to look upon
them as a form of disease, no" as the outcome
of your real nature. Your existence has been
shaken, as it were, to its core. Your whole
being has been paralyzed by the most terrible
of experiences, and you have passed a crisis
which might well have unhinged the strongest
brain. I have great hope in the effect upon
you ot new scenes and fresh occupations.
Soon there will be nothing in your surroundings
to recall the past; gradually these
miserable fancies which torture you now will
leave you; and as you grow stronger your
mind will regain its original balance. Your
trouble has come to you in youth ; and
though its effect must always remain, its

worst bitterness will pass away. But this
constant self analysis and morbid introspection
can only do you harm. Put forth
all your strength and courage to face the
demons you dread, and to keep them at arm's
length. Encourage all occupation which
tends to moral health. Live, but do not
think. Interest yourself in abstract things,
in books, music, art. Try to cultivate some
pursuit which will enlarge your sympathies
and lift you above melancholy brooding.
Above all, cultivate human affection, not in
the sense of love, but the affection of
ordinary daily life. This will be your truest
safeguard — ^' He paused, and added with a
bitter, impatient gesture — "I am talking to
you like a priest. My words seem to myself
now utter mockery, unmeaning platitudes.

I dare say they seem so to you. But perhaps
you will tliiok of them by and by, and they
may do you good'

^' You do not understands answered Nadine
wearily, letting her hands fall upon her lap.
^^ None of these things would ever take any
hold upon me. I cannot be fond of people;
it is not my nature. The feeling of pleasure
in being admired is all that' I have ever known
of affection — except in two instances — "

She was silent ; her face softened ; her eyes
seemed to lose themselves in backward visions,

'^ I have loved one person only in th
world. Ah me ! That fire is burned out forever.
. . . And I have cared — I do care —
for yo2i. You are all that is left me now —
yet you will forsake me''

"^ Nadine' cried Bramwell, urged beyond

all power of self-restraint, " you ask too much,
of rue. You ask more than human nature is
capable of. To act a lie for your sake ; to save
you at the peril of my professional reputation ;
to guard you from disgrace; to take upon
my shoulders the burden you fling aside —
this I have done and will do faithfully. But
to be your friend and companion; to listen
to your confidences and self-upbraidings • to
watch you play your part in society, as you
can so well play it; to prescribe for your
mental health , knowing your secret; to feel
my love for you intensifying daily to madness,
realizing even more strongly that there lies
between us a gulf that cannot be passed —
this is more than I could bears

Nadine bent towards him, smiling with
ineffable sweetness.

Then you love me/^ she whispered softly —
'still''

Why will you torture me ? '' cried Bram- ^
well passionately. " No ; I do not love you —
not as I once did. I don't know what I feel.
I cannot understand myself. A blight has
fallen upon me ; life is sickening. I am more
wretched than words can express. To me
this condition is moral death, and my only
hope lies in shunning you/^

Do not reproach me' said Nadine.
Remember that from the first I bade you
leave me. Remember that when you offered
to make me your wife, knowing all, I refused
to accept the sacrifice. . . . You do not love
me — is this so ? ''

She placed her hand upon his arm
and forced his miserable eyes to meet

hers, which were melting with womanly
softness.

Nadine/^ he cried, and held out his arms.

But she repulsed him gently and drew
back.

No," she said sadly ; '' there shall at
least be one crime with which you will have
no cause to reproach me. Think, if it will
lighten your pain, that at the last I was
touched by your goodness, your nobility, and
that I regretted — that if I could, I would have
made you happy. Think of me as the old
impulsive Nadine, who knew herself, but who
for once did not yield to an impulse which
would bring you sorrow ; for we should only
bring each other sorrow, of that I am sure
in my heart. Though I cling to you, for I
cannot bear to let you go, I know that weare

best apart. I must go my way; I must
fulfil my bent. You remember what I said
always — ^ My nature is my destiny You
in time might become a shackle that I should
hate''

'' Nadine' said Bramwell hoarsely ^^ let
this be a new birth, as it were, a baptism in
which you will be cleansed from all former
associations. If you would accept and believe
in your capacity for 'goodness — if you would
make that belief a starting point — Nadine, I
havf^ faith in your youth — I have faith in the
power of time. It is best that we should be
apart. But our hearts and minds may grow
more purely towards each other. . If it
is ever any comfort to you to write to me
you will do so ? ''

Yes' said Nadine, in a mechanical manner,

'^ I will write sometimes. But it will
not comfort me for long. We shall drift
further and further away from each other. . . .
I shall grow hard, as I said and then writing
to you will be of no use — nothing will be of
any use'

She had risen; and he too stood up
clasping both her hands. At the sight of
his sorrowful eyes, big with tears, a pang
of sorrow and remorse pierced her, and she
added tremulously —

I grieve you, and I am not worth
grieving for. I have done you nothing but
harm. I have spoiled your life. . I have
caused you the worst pain. . . . And now,
what can I do to atone ? — nothing, nothing.
I will try, indeed I will try, to be better
for your sake''

Bramwell could nob speak. The anguish
of the moment was intolerable. He lifted
Nadine's hands and held them against his
breast ; then stooped forward and kissed her
cheek.

Tears fell from Nadine's eyes and repressed
sobs shook her frame. He loosed her hands,
and she sank back upon the couch burying
her face in the cushions. ,

'^ I can't — say — any more' she murmured
brokenly. " I said — that I would try. I will
be better. You have been very good to me.
I do not see now how you can ever feel anything
but regret for having known me — but
perhaps some day you may be less sorry''

He left her without another word.

BOOK VI.
LETTER I.

From Nadine Senguin to De. Beam well.

Villa Alexia, Nice,

January 18th, 18 —

*' It is two years since I have written to
you. I could not answer your last letter.
There was in its tone an indefinable something
which told me that it had cost you an
effort to write. Is not this true ? — and the
solicitude which you expressed for me was so
out of harmony with my mood and my
manner of life, that it irritated instead of
softening me, and goaded me to excitement
as a stronghold from thought.

'^ Did I uot say that this would be the case ;
and that as time went on , and I grew harder
and colder, we should, in a spiritual sense,
drift further and further apart? You will
gradually get to think my reliance upon you
a distasteful burden, and I shall feel less and
less the need of you.

^' But to-night I have a powerful impulse
towards you. The sense of your presence is
so strong within me, that once or twice I had
almost turned in the expectation of meeting
your sad eyes. Strange, if after all I should
be more faithful to my sentiment for you
than you to yours for me ! Is not there some
spiritual sort of electricity which upon
occasions forces souls to speak to each other
through darkness and space ?

^' Not that for me there is at this moment
any tragic necessity for such communion.
I hardly know what has turned my thoughts
towards you so vividly, unless it be that you

formed the subject of conversation with some
people in whose company I dined this evening.
Their name is Blundell. They are
mother and daughter, and appear to know
you intimately. I wonder if you are deeply
interested in them. I wonder if the mother
deceives you into believing her true ; we
false women have intuitions concerning each
other, and they are generally correct. I
wonder — Something that was said this evening
set my mind working. Mrs. Blundell is
a woman of the world — the world of Monte
Carlo. This means that she is an inveterate
gambler, of straitened means, who, with an
affected devotion to her daughter, would sell
her to the highest bidder. The girl is lovely,
sweet, and gentle. Her face brightened
strangely as we walked in the garden after
dinner and talked — of you. It pleased me to
lead her on. I wanted to hear of your success,
of your mode of life. I wanted to try and

glean whether you had changed. Perhaps there
was a little womanly pique, a taint of jealousy
at the bottom of m}^ interest. Do you recognize
Nadine ? Have you changed ? Do you
ever think of marrying, or are you still
wedded to science — or to memory ?

'^ Men have less t;) repine at in their lot
than we women in ours. To you love and
marriage are mere episodes; to us they are
the supreme crisis, the refuge from dissatisfaction
and despair,' the passport to
independence, the-means to some definite
aim in life. Ah me ! do you recollect the
advice you urged upon me when we said
farewell to each other three years ago? You
bade me cultivate a healthy interest in
abstract things — in books, music, art, above
all, to cultivate affection. You said that I
might think of your words some day. I have
often thought of thun, and of many others
that you have spoke n. But I have profited

nothing by your counsel. Books have meant
for me only self-loathing the hateful presentment
of my own mood and passions ;
music, indefinable sadness, from which I
would fain escape ; art, the conventional
jargon of a certain school — false, narrow rules
applied to drapery and colouring, afternoon
teas in aesthetic studios at Rome and Florence ;
and affection ! vanity, display, greed for
power, and sordid effort to outvie other
women in the number of my admirers, or by
the achievement of a brilliant marriage.

It is a relief to me to open my heart
in this vague way; and you will understand
my impulsive candour, and will take it for
what it is — the fancy of the hour. You perhaps
alone can realize the moral nausea which
at times even still overpowers me. It comes
over me at moments when I appear in the
gayest spirits; when I am dancing, dressing,
driving, when men are paying court to me;

and for the moment I feel miserable enough
to go forti and drown myself, like the lost
wretch that I am. But this sickening feeling
does not last long; and for the keen
pain which I once endured excitement has'
proved an effectual anodyne. I have no
capacity for pain now save of the egoistic
kind, nor am I tortured any longer by a
sense of inward conflict. The seven devils
have entered victoriously in and hold the
sanctuary. Who shall cast them forth ?
Even you, in your deepest and most earnest
mood, would have no power to awaken
in me emotion of any nobler kind than
that artificial sentimentality which fashion
prescribes as becoming to a pair of intense
eyes and a Burne Jones type of
countenance.

Do you know that restless stirring of
the soul, that craving for sympathy which
constrains us imperiously, even when we are

most self-contained, and believe ourselves
most entirely self-sufficing ?

"I paused here. It is a wild night.
The mistral is blowing, and the surf is
beating on the shore. To me it feels
oppressively sultry. I have been wandering
in the garden among the eucalyptus trees
and the fragrant yellow laden mimosa shrubs.
Are you fond of this place ? Can you conceive
the infinite beauty of this landscape,
and the sweetness and loneliness of such a
southern night — the open stretch of sea
gleaming pale beneath a watery moon ; the
dim background of hills ; and the distant,
steadfast light of the beacon at Antibes,
which in some strange way brings to the
heart a sense of rest and anchorage ; the
murmuring of insects and whispering of the
eucalyptus leaves; the perfume of flowers
and indescribable freshness of the atmosphere
? We are fools to seek sympathy

VOL. II. K

from urbanity when nature has such wealth
to offer ; but in the case of temperaments like
mine — restless, capricious, tumultuous to-day,
composed tomorrow, at peace never — nature
has less power to soothe than the garish scenes
in which I have of late taken part.

'^I am quieter. The air has done me
good; my head aches less wearily. And
now, my friend, — may I not call you so upon
this page ? — I have news for you. To-night
I have decided my destiny.

*' Congratulate rne. It promises at least
to be brilliant — one upon which Mammon
must smile ; and though angels may weep,
the hosts of earth and hell will applaud.

What are the good things which mothers
of the world covet most earnestly for their
daughters, and that women such as I
yearn after ? A title, a vast rent-roll, a
lineage almost royal, palaces, equipages,
diamonds that a queen might envy, a life

of luxury and constant excitement — and all
burdened with but the honourable condition
marriage.

Well, this evening I consented to become
the wife of Prince Nicolaivitch TitchakoS*.

'you may have heard his name. Do
you know that it ranks but little lower than
that of the Imperial House ? Do you know
that his wealth is almost fabulous; that he
has territories in Russia, a palace in Rome,
a villa in Cannes, an hotel in Paris, an estate
in Warwickshire inherited from his mother,
who was an English heiress, a Scotch forest,
and a mansion in Park Lane ; that his jewels
are world-renowned; that his taste is considered
the most fastidious in Europe ; that
his manners are exquisite ; that for years
he has been the despair of chaperones, and
that court beauties have sighed at his feet
in vain ? Could the soul of woman desire

more ? What matter that he has been twice

K 2

married; that he is of middle age; that
he has the reputation of a Bluebeard and a
voluptuary ; that mystery surrounds him ; that
he is called cruel and cold-blooded, and is
said to have a passion for dangerous excitement
and political intrigue; that there are
in his castle locked chambers to which the
outside world may not penetrate ?

Oh, for any source of excitement which
should make life seem momentous ! Are
there not in my castle locked chambers
also ?

^^ Ah ! in these day of cheap cynicism and
difficult morality, when life is like a solemn
farce enacted behind the footlights to an
appropriate orchestral accompaniment, it is
so easy to talk and write flippantly ; but the
drop scene must fall sometimes ; and there
are interludes in the drama when memory
awakes with tears, and the heart communes
silently with its own bitterness.

In obedience to the higher law which
imposes an especial creed upon the Princesses
TitchakofF, I enter upon my marriage, into
the Greek Church. It is expedient that one
should bow in the house of Himmon ; and of
what importance can a slight change of ritual
be to me, for whom the name of God bears
little or no meaning ?

"If it were otherwise — if I could feel any
confident anticipation of a future in which the
errors of this world might be repaired and
its sins atoned for — I might perhaps struggle
towards a different future. But my religionis
dead, and it is you, strangely enough, who
have killed it — you who at one time stirred
all the impulses towards higher living which
lay in my nature.

This being so, why should I strive after a
vain ideal, an impossible duty ? Life being
all that I have, why should I not clutch at
the best which it can give ? why not halt at

every green place that presents itself in this
dreary desert ?

'^ Farewell, my friend. This is indeed farewell.
Henceforth you and I can have no
interest in common.

Nadine."

The letter enclosed a cheque for a large
sum drawn in favour of Dr. Bramwell for the
benefit of his ward Evelyn Gage.

LETTER 11.

Written some three years after the marriage
of Nadine Senguin to Prince Titchakoff.
From De. Bramwell to Mrs. Blundell.

Great Cumberland Place,

Julie 12th, 18—

'' My dear Mrs. Blundell,

I am deeply sorry that you renew
in your letter, which I have just received,
your refusal to let me see your daughter,
and in person press my suit.

"I was under the impression, after our
interview yesterday, that your confidence in
me had been restored, and that I had sufficiently
relieved your mind capon the subject

of certain circumstances in my life which
appear to have awakened your distrust. I can
only again solemnly assure you that, unworthy
as I in many ways feel myself .of the love
of a girl sweet and innocent as your Margaret
there is no reason such as you hint at to
debar me from asking her to be my wife, or
from honourably introducing her under the
same roof with my ward, Evelyn Gage.

"I gather from your letter, that remarks
incautiously dropped by Mrs. Gaythorne have
re-aroused your suspicions ' as to my relationship
to Evelyn. I do' not deny that the child's
parentage is a secret which I am pledged not
to divulge ; but I do distinctly deny that I am
her father, or that I have been actuated by
any but the purest motives in becoming her
guardian.

^^You state positively that this denial does
not remove your scruples or induce you to
consent that I should pay my addresses to

your daughter. Forgive me for venturing to
express a doubt whether , in the case of a
suitor more highly placed in the scale of
society than I^ these delicate scruples would
be so firmly put forward. I can well understand
sour wish that Margaret should marry
a man younger richer, less absorbed in grave
pursuits, and of higher rank than myself — all
these disadvantages I feel strongly ; but, and
I write in all humility, I question greatly
whether any other marriage would equally
promote her happiness.

You know that I should never have been
emboldened to speak but for the revelation
of feeling which in her delirium Margaret so
innocently made. Even then I hesitated, and
the time when I avoided going to your house
was passed in convincing myself that I should
be doing her no wrong in making her my
wife. I do not wish to conceal from you
that my earlier life was sacrificed to a hopeless

infatuation, and that the love which I have
now to offer is not the passion of youth, but
the earnest affection of a prematurely aged
and somewhat disappointed man, who feels
that the tenderest care and devotion is inadequate
for the priceless treasure of such a heart
as Margaret's.

But these I offer in the deepest reverence
and sincerity, and with no shadow of shame.
Since you demand the full disclosure of
Evelyn's parentage, I will if possible satisfy
you, and will try to obtain a release from my
vow of silence. But if this is denied me,
though I have little hope that Margaret will
ever act in defiance of your influence, I claim
it as my right that she shall be permitted to
hear my pleading and herself decide my fate,
^aam,

*^ Sincerely yours,

'julian Beamwell."

BOOK VII.
CHAPTER I.

A DAUGHTER OF MAMMON.

In the boudoir of one of the larger houses
in Park Lane the Princess Titchakoff and
her friend Margaret Blundell were seated,
engaged in intimate conversation.

If misery still dogged Nadine, and life
yet appeared to her no more than a hollow-farce,
her beauty showed no sign of deterioration;
and only her eyes spoke of weariness
and dissatisfaction with her lot. Her
complexion exhibited a more delicate bloom

than even of old; in her gestures there was
the same languid vivacity ; her lips seemed
to have been trained to smiles ; and though
in her features and mien the expression of
forced sweetness and of conscious power
had perhaps deepened to artificiality it did
not detract from the fascination which must
always be her ruling characteristic.

A more decided contrast to the Princesses
beauty than that of her companion could
hardly be imagined. ' 'The madonna-like loveliness
of Margaret Blunders face though
it would have shown to greater advantage
upon a form less slight and more perfectly
moulded, might have gained for her a perhaps
purer admiration and more lasting influence
than that which Nadine inspired. Her
large grey eyes shone with a light that

seemed more of heaven than of earth; her
lips and brow bore the stamp of tender sincerity
and confiding innocence ; her whole
presence breathed womanliness; and if the
curves of her mouth and chin faintly suggested
irresolution and undue susceptibility to
the influence of afFection , the fault was amply
redeemed by the angelic sweetness of her
glance and the noble pose of her head.

She was seated now in a low chair by
the Princess's side, and in a caressing manner
was stroking the hand of her friend. There
was something childlike and singularly engaging
in all her actions.

'dear Princess she said affectionately,
'you are certainly thinner than you used to
be in Rome, and there are darker shadows
under your eyes. Are you quite well ? '^

Quite well little ones answered Nadine
listlessly ; " but we stayed in Paris on our
way here, and late hours tell upon me a
little. Perfect health is the curse of narrow
lives like mine. Think what a fund of excitement
I might find in studying my various
symptoms and experimentalizing with quack
medicines upon my nervous system. I was
reading in some book the other day that, apart
from dress, society, and lovers, the only things
which vitally affect fashionable women are
spiritualism and the confessional. A chronic
malady is worth all these distractions of the
flesh and the devil. •'^

'^ You call your life narrow," said Margaret.
"I should have imagined it a ceaseless
round of amusement and occupation ;
and yet — " she hesitated slightly — ^M have

noticed that, in spite of your gaiety, you
always seem sad. Is it that vague melancholy,
I wonder, which makes you so attractive
? Why are we always most charmed
by that which is saddest ? Does nothing
interest you, Princess ? ''

eyes, a thousand things — as much as
blowing bubbles in the air and watching
them burst."

Nadine paused and leaned forward, resting
her chin upon her hand; then lifting her
head impatiently, she continued, with that
curious impulsiveness which often showed
itself in strong contrast with the usual indifferent
reserve of her manner —

Frankly, I need a big excitement to stir
my blood. Gambling would perhaps drag
me out of myself if it were not a matter

of supreme unimportance whether I should
win or lose. One must have staked ones
all before passion can be roused or an issue
seem momentous, and then— then. . In
order that one's faculties should be completely
absorbed, desperation must be the goad to
interest; honour, position, life must rest upon
the fall of the card. . . Oh, that I had lived
in the old days when the world was not too
enlightened for enthusiasm : I could have
led a forlorn hope, or struck a fell blow for
my country's freedom. I could have been
a Judith, a Catherine of Russia, a Charlotte
Corday. But in these days, when ambition
means for women degrading intrigue, treachery,
conspiracy, dynamite, we had better all
be patient Grizzle or frivolous puppets."
Margaret looked bewildered.

I am surprised Princess' lie said, " to
hear you speak so scornfully of political
movements. At Rome I have seen you
kindle with excitement when you discussed
these matters with the statesmen and authors
and leaders of great causes who assembled
in your salon. It fascinated me to watch
your face when you mourned the oppressions
of Italy and of Russia. And it is said that
Prince Titchakoff is so keenly interested in
the troubles of his country."

Nadine started , and eyed the young girl
keenly.

Well, perhaps some day you may hear that

I have plunged into — what shall I say ? — the

whirlpool of Nihilism as a refuge from ennui.

But tell me of yourself, Margaret. What

have you been doing during the last two
VOL. 11. L

years ? It is strange that we did not meet
abroad during the winter. Does your mother
still take annual flight with the swallows ? and
do you submit as patiently as ever to being
dragged the weary round which fashion
ordains for a young lady who wishes to
achieve a decent settlement in life ? "

<i Princess, you make me unhappy when
you speak so cynically. It is a weary round.
I detest it. But though you say that the
world has grown supine and that there is
no nobility in men , surely we know some
lives which are devoted to ennobling pursuits
to science, the benefit of humanity. How
blessed a woman might feel herself if it
were her privilege to merge her existence
in one of these."

Margaret's voice trembled, and a vivid

blush overspread lier cheeks. The Princess
raised the girls face, and forced the grey eyes
to meet her own.

Science ! ^^ she repeated in a tone of
mournful raillery. "In that word lies the
key to your discontent with woman's ordinary
lot. Margaret, do you remember ivho we
talked of most the evening that I first met
you at Nice ? "

You bewitched me then, Princess," murmured
Margaret. " And at Rome I felt all
the time that, half against my will, you were
worming my secrets out of me. But I had
no secrets that I was ashamed of. I have
none now."

"Women are only ashamed to own that
they love when they love unworthily," said
Nadine.

L 2

Ali Princess 1 " exclaimed Margaret,
*Here spoke the nobility of your nature.
But you have not quite understood me. It
was not ?ove' she added hesitatingly. '' It
was pity, admiration, reverence — the feeling
which an ignorant child may have for one
older, sadder, wiser, and infinitely better than
herself''

"And since that time the child's feeling
has ripened into the woman's affection ? . . .
And it is returned ? ''

Do not ask me. Indeed I cannot tell you."
"I must know," said Nadine imperiously.
'^ Confide in me freely. I — I am interested
in you and in him. Speak, Margaret. Has
he asked you to be his wife ? "
"No— that is— he— "
But you are certain that he loves you ? "

^^ No — yes' faltered Margaret; '''^not in
that way. Princess , you do not understand.
Marriage was not in my thoughts. How
should it have been ? He always seemed tome
a man set apart — by his love for his profession
— by some sorrow which I felt must
have overshadowed his early life. His friendship
— to be allowed to sympathize with his
aims — to have the joy of knowing that there
lives in the world at least one man absolutely
truthful, unselfish and loyal— seems to me
sufficient to make life happy. Were it not
for that complete faith in him and in the
purity of my feeling, I could blush when I
think of — I was very ill, Princess, in the
winter. I had a fever; and I fear — I have
never dared to ask my mother whether in my
delirium I betrayed how deep is my feeling

for him. But lie would not misconstrue
words spoken so innocently. That is my

comfort He was very - good to me

while I was weak and suffering, more tender
to me than even my mother, if that could be
possible. And when I began to get better,
and was feverish and restless, he was so
patient — so pitiful. He would sit looking at
me with sad, earnest eyes; his face so grave,
but oh ! so kind ; and once — he bent over me
and kissed my forehead, and bade me grow
strong for his sake. I was very happy. It
was like the revelation of something I had
dreamed, but had never dared picture to
myself. Then for a long time he did not
come to see me, and I was afraid lest perhaps
I had grieved him. . . . But last week we
met again ; and though he said little, I felt in

some strange way that I was dear to him, and
that he understood. But I have seen him no
more since; and when I asked my mother if
he had been to her, she reproached me for
want of faith in her, and said that I must
wait patiently till she had satisfied herself
that he was worthy of me. Worthy of me !
I am not afraid, Princess. I can trust my
mother, but I can trust him implicitly also.
You, who knew him long ago, tell me, am
I not justified in my confidence ? "

For a moment the Princess did not answer.
She had turned away while Margaret spoke,
and was gazing vacantly at a stand of flowers
which stood in the window. A curious smile,
half-mocking, half-melancholy, played about
her lips.

I am the last person to whom you should

appeals lie answered, in a tone of repressed
energy which invested her words with deeper
meaning than they would naturally have conveyed.
"It is impossible she continued
excitedly, "for a woman to judge accurately
of any man's nature. Perhaps once in a
lifetime we may imagine, as you now do,
Margaret, that we have realized a 
ideal, and have discovered in the
flesh perfect truth, perfect loyalty, perfect
constancy — " The emphasis upon the last
word was intensely bitter. " This belief may
have been our anchor in stormy seas, where
otherwise we might have perished. You
little know what safeguard there lies to a
desperate woman in the conviction that she is
loved purely, unchangeably by a man whom
she feels is capable of the highest devotion,

the sternest renunciation. She would die
rather than sacrifice him to herself.
His love is her religion; it is to her the
symbol of all good. It represents faith and
virtue in a world that seems to her a sink of
vice. But when that love fails her, when she
finds that it was worth no more than the base,
ephemeral passions which are sighed daily at
her feet — where then would be the motive for
striving to rise above the level of her nature ?
Cynicism would be her justification. There
might be excitement in giving play to despicable
passions, even if she were actuated alone
by selfish greed of power. That sort of
distraction would be her moral opium."

Nadine rose hurriedly and walked towards
a pier-glass, where she stood apparently
lost in contemplation of her own beauty.

Margaret could not see her face but silently
watched her attitude with eyes in which
bewilderment mingled with fascination.

Suddenly Nadine turned and exclaimed
impulsively —

^' There are people who rouse in me all
that is at once best and worst''

As she spoke the door opened, and a
servant came in bearing a card upon a
salver.

The Princess glanced at it, and ordered
that the visitor should be admitted.

'^ Margaret's she said calmly, ^' an old
friend has come to call upon me. You
will be surprised to hear that it is Dr.
Bramwell.'^

Margaret started to her feet in a state of
painful confusion.

Princess I cannot see him now. Let
me leave you before lie enters

"Too latest said Nadine imperiously; ^^but
you may go presently if you will. Better
do so' she added with a forced laugh ; 'your
presence might be a check upon confidences.
It is a drawing-room drama, full of curious
situations. This is a scene for which we
ought to pose theatrically.^^

She approached Margaret, but the latter
drew back.

'' Princess, your manner is so strange.
You almost make me fancy that '^

She paused abruptly. Dr. Bramwell was
announced.

A swift, indefinable change swept over
Nadine's features. It might have been likened
to that sudden subsidence of irritation which

takes place in a certain species of serpent
the moment before it makes the fatal spring.
Her lips parted in a winning smile, lier
eyes beamed alluringly, the muscles about
her mouth relaxed, and dimples came into
play. She extended her hand in a gesture
of the most perfect grace and courtesy, with
which there yet blended the faint reflection
of her old thirst for admiration.

For a second Bramwell stood, his gaze
rivetted upon her face. A little extra paleness,
and the tension of his brow and nostrils
were the only signs which betrayed inward
agitation. But these were clearly perceived
by Nadine. Triumphant resolve took possession
of her; it was like the whetting
of a keen and dangerous weapon. As he
took her hand their eyes met, and mutual

consciousness seemed to establish a magnetic
current between them. The old dynamic
force of her look asserted itself irresistibly.
Why should he struggle against a fascination
stronger than his will ? All thoughts of his
later love were for the moment swept away.
His pulses throbbed wildly. . . . Was not
this Nadine — the dream of his youth, the
only woman whose glance had ever stirred
his blood to madness ; about whose very
name there yet clung a subtle magic; whose
smile and touch had still the power to intoxicate
; whose tones thrilled his being as
the echo of a war-song, which had once
moved a nation to revolt, might set the
nerves of a patriot quivering long after the
passionate struggle was ended ?

Dr. Bramwell," said the Princess, " this

is indeed a pleasure. In the years that have
passed, since we were friends — at Aston —
I have thought of you many times, and have
rejoiced to hear of the fame that: you have
won. My father remembered, you till the
last, and spoke often gratefully of your care
and kindness in the old days. But — it is
so long since I have heard from you — I feared,
that you had forgotten me, and that we were
never to meet again."

"With what platitude can I answer you,
Princess ? " said Bramwell, recovering himself.
" Shall I say that to forget you would
be an impossibility ? Our lives have lain
apart''

True. I have been so little in England
of late years. And our paths are likely to
be still more widely separated if my husband

carries out his threatened intention of taking
me to Russia. But there has been a link
between us, Dr. Bramwell. In Rome two
winters ago, Miss Blundell and I often talked
of you. Indeed, the mention of your name
first created a bond of sympathy between us.
Was it not so, Margaret ? "

Bramwell started as his eyes followed those
of the Princess and rested upon Margaret
Blundell, who, her head bent in ostensible
examination of a water-colour sketch, was
standing at a table some little distance apart.
Her presence intensified the conflict of
emotions which his meeting with Nadine had
aroused, and plunged him into a state of
consciousness at once keen and unreal — so
often the accompaniment of a vivid dream that
all the time we are aware is only a dream.

Had he not often in the night watches
pictured himself face to face with these two
women — Nadine the enchantress, Margaret
the pure, the dove-eyed, who, could he shake
himself free from the old witchery, might bethe
lamp of his home, the sustaining joy of
his life.

Though he felt in a vague manner that the
crisis was momentous, he was yet wholly
incapable of realizing the full tragic import of
the situation. The ' drama was inward ; its
issue depended upon himself; his own nature
was the arbiter of his fate. Swift images in
connection with Nadine, of rapture, doubt,
despair, repulsion, succeeded each other in his
mind, and with them in some dim way
blended an intuition of need on her part.

If she required him, could he desert her ?

The dream-like sense deepened. He had a
feelings bewildering yet not painful of being
borne on without any consciousness of volition,
and of watching his life outside him, having
no power to regulate it. And with the
wonderful contradictoriness of human nature
he experienced for the moment a distinct
satisfaction in this inability to sway his mood.
It lulled the pangs of compunction and
relieved the pressure of responsibility.

But Margaret's pure eyes as they met his
infused new strength into his soul. The
fresh emotions which her influence sent
streaming through his being were like the
beginning of another existence — an existence
in which Nadine must always stand apart,
solitary — invested with a glamour that could
never in his eyes enshrine another woman;

VOL. II. M

but, most of all, apart from that one with whom
his own lot would be blended in a blessedness
that yet must ever be half mournful.

Margaret's touch when she mechanically
returned his greeting seemed to him that of a
miraculous hand. He felt that the crisis had
passed, and saw his fate decided — but saw it
through a vista of present pain.

Margaret advanced in an agitated manner
towards Nadine.

Princess she said tremulously, '^ it is
time that I went away. I will bid you
good-bye."

Nadine drew the young girl to her side and
kissed her lips. At the contact Margaret
recoiled ever so slightly, and Nadine s eyes
met those of Bramwell for an instant, flashing
at him a glance of passionate inquiry.

"Good-bye/^ said the Princess; *^ but not
for long. In a few days we shall meet
again."

Bramwell belt open the door as Margaret
passed through. Their hands and eyes met
again. In her look there was holy trust ; in
his mournful entreaty.

I shall see you very soon,'^ he whispered.

His gaze followed her till she had disappeared
from the outer room.

M 2

CHAPTER 11.

THE WEAPON TURNED.

When Bramwell turned lie saw that Nadine
was still standing. Lie took Ms hand, and
with a gesture inexpressibly winning motioned
him to a chair. Then sinking upon a
low settee by his "side she leaned forward,
and resting her chin upon her hand, gazed
at him earnestly.

'" And now, old friend' she said — and who
but Nadine had at command tones so thrilling
? — " tell me — have I changed ? "

■ '' Changed ! You ! How, Princess ? '^ he
stammered.

Do not call me ' Princess' '' she exclaimed
with mournful imperiousness scornfully accentuating
the word. '' Can I not forget what
I am, if only for an hour ? Let me be
Nadine — the Nadine of Aston, the Nadine
whom you once loved''

Their eyes met. Hers had grown larger
in their intensity, and were melting with
tenderness. She had suffered her voice to
drop almost to a whisper. Her accent conveyed
maddening possibilities, the thought of
which, against will and judgment, fired his
blood. He could have flung himself at her
feet, clasping her hands. . . . But Margaret's
presence still haunted the room; the remembrance
of Margaret's touch, like that of a
guardian spirit, restrained him from impetuous
avowal, which a second later must have

turned to bitter self upbraiding. Nadine
watched the struggle. . . . At last lie saw
his face set into sorrowful sternness almost
despairing resolution. With consummate
tact, allowing him no time to reply, she
continued, —

I dream impossibilities. Nadine is no
more. The Princess Titchakoff reigns in her
stead — reigns, suffers, weeps. . . . Ah, me !
But dreaming is pleasant ; and I have a
means which is very simple, very painless,
for escaping to another world when I am
weary of this. Sometimes in my fancy I
paint my lot as it might have been— a lot
wedded to high purposes, warmed by unselfish
devotion, in which the faint germ of
nobility that lay in me might have been
converted by the faith and encouragement

of another into a sustaining principle. . . .
Traumerei ! Ah, do you remember ? Do you
remember the drawing-room at Aston, the
dim light, the scent of the potpourri, the
quaint, carved chairs, and the old man leaning
back, with the firelight upon his face,
making it glorious ? Even he has gone from
me. In all these years I have had but one
friend, which has been a refuge from self,
which has comforted me in hours of misery,
which has made memory reality."

Who ? What ? " asked Bramwell eagerly,
a chill fear striking him.

You are so wise in your craft, and yet you
cannot read my face ? But you used to say
that when / was in question you were but a
poor physician. . . . Nay, ask me no more.
Let us imagine that we are in the drawing-room

at Aston. Shall I play to you
again ? '*

She rose abruptly and moved to the open
piano opposite. For .some minutes her fingers
wandered among the keys breathing the old
plaintive harmonies that had echoed so many
times in his dreams. Present thoughts and
past moods seemed to take form and troop
in poetic images, phantasmagoria-fashion, before
him, saddening, yet. at the same time
thrilling him with suggestions of what might
have been. Suddenly Nadine struck a minor
accompaniment and sang with indescribable
pathos the following sonnet , —

- " What's the best thing in the world ?
June rose by May dew impearled ;
Sweet south wind that means no rain ;
Truth not cruel to a friend :
Pleasure not in haste to end :
Beauty not self-decked and curled

Till its pride is over plain ;

Light that never makes you wink ;

Memory that gives no pain ;

Love — when so you've loved again.

What's the best thing in the world V

Something out of it, I think."

Her voice trembled ; her bands fell upon
ber lap, and sbe sat for a moment quite still.
Then returning to ber seat , sbe cast herself
back against the cushions in an attitude of
weariness and ahandoyi. Her bosom behaved
gently. Tears beaded ber drooping lashes.
He saw that sbe was hardly mistress of

herself.

Tbe spell of the music still belt Bramwell
in thrall. He stooped over ber.

Nadine/^ be said in a voice of anguish.
"It breaks my heart to see you so unhappy'


Nadine did not answer at once. Their

looks dun": to each other, and the sadness of
her face was intensified in his. She smiled
strangely and shook her head.

I am not often like this — only sometimes,
when I am alone and unnerved. , . . Still
impulsive, you see, still emotional, still
double in nature, still compelled to sincerity
by you. . I am not so greatly changed.
Unhappy ! '' she exclaimed impetuously.
Ah ! if you could but know the wretchedness,
the sickening "disgust that lies beneath
this mask of prosperity. There are things in
my life which I would tell you if I could.
But I cannot — I dare not. . . . Picture me —
Nadine, who was once so proud, so self-confident
— a victim, a tool, a slave to jealousy,
tyranny that I loathe, smiled upon in society,
gibed ate threatened, insulted at home, treading

always upon a mine wliicli at any moment
may explode and destroy me/^

^''Nadine/^ cried Bramwell, startled, 'rit is
difficult to understand what you mean. It
is more than hard to know that I cannot help
you. I can only imagine vaguely what your
life is. . . . I have heard rumours. Your
husband is perhaps involved in the great
political movements abroad. You shrink
from possible consequences — '^

"No, not alone that," answered Nadine
recklessly. "There would be excitement in
danger if only I could feel that for me there
were any vital interest at stake. But all is
empty and barren. What is it to me if an
emperor lives or dies, if a few human lives
more or less are sacrificed ? I have no large
abstract sympathies, no deep passions. I

thought once that I could find satisfaction in
the gratification of vanity and ambition. I
was mistaken. I have tried — yes, let me
confess it — to lower myself to coarse pleasures.
I cannot; and sometimes she added with
a bitter laugh, "I am tempted, like Madame
de Seine, to regret that I am so cold.
There are no sources of distraction for me.
But it is like the old days to see your
face sadden while I talk ' of what is in my
mind. And I was selfish always in grieving
you. I have not yet lost the power of causing
you pain."

Nadine' said Bramwell impulsively,
^' you are the abiding wretchedness of my
life.^^

She raised herself and leaned towards him,
her face upturned to his.

Must I be so — always i* I want to tell
you something. You remember when we
parted. You might have made me what you
pleased if you had not chosen to forsake
me. If I had thought less of you and more
of myself — '^

He interrupted her by a passionate gesture.
She drew back and watched him anxiously,
waiting for him to speak. His attitude — that
habitual to him when deeply moved or in
inward debate, of head bent forward, face
lowered, and hands tightly clasped together —
told her that he was struggling with either
impulse or agitation. She saw that the
muscles of his forehead were contracted, and
that his lips were sternly locked. . . . How
long he remained silent ! . . . Would he
never look at her ?

The silence continued, to Bramwell made
momentous by the pressure of mysterious
necessity, growing every instant more imperative.
The feeling of unreality and of
being hurried onward by forces beyond hie
control had left him. His mind was vividly
alert, capable even of self-analysis ; and though
the rapid probing of his inmost feelings inflicted
the keenest suffering, he was in that
state of mixed, remorseful consciousness when
pain as the consequence — nay, even the justification
of definite resolve — seemed welcome.
He had at this moment none of the passionate
impulse of a lover towards Nadine, but only
aching anxiety and pitiful yearning — something
also of the despairing self-reproach
which a rescued man might feel who, faint
and helpless, is compelled to watch from the

shore the drowning agonies of a late companion
for whom there is no possibility of aid.

But predominant in the rush of emotions
that swept his being was the sense of yearning
and devotion towards Margaret — an aim
glowing starlike in the future, a salvation that
reconciled him to the present inevitable
anguish.

For, complete separation of his lot from
that of Nadine, complete bursting of the old
bonds, which would admit of no such half
measure as friendship was urged upon him
now, even more peremptorily than when he
had bidden her farewell before her departure
for Italy.

At length, without looking up, he said in
shaken but insistent tones, —

You have made your lot. I must always

grieve deeply that it is a wretched one. As
long as I live you will be to me a bitter
memory. Bat I see no way in which I can
help or comfort you. To alter the past is
impossible ; and harking back upon it can
only give useless pain to us both. Nadine,
there is nothing I can say now which I have
not urged in the old days and speech seems

a mockery. What right have I ? I used

to tell you that in self-hatred lay the germ of
effort. Try to think so. You can — you must
make your life blessed."

Tears gathered in Nadine's eyes and fell
slowly. Her lips quivered.

^^ It is only you who could ever have done
anything for me,'^ she whispered.

Bramwell could not bear to look at her.
He rose and walked to the piano against

which, lie leaned, covering his face with his
hand. She stretched out her arms to him
imploringly, and said in a passionate manner,

Are we not both wretched ? We were
mistaken. It would have been better if I
had put forth my strength and held you tome.
I can still grieve you. Have I lost the
power of making you happy ? '^

Again there was silence. Nadine had
risen too, and stood, with head bent, facing
Bramwell. Her breath came hard and thick,
and a blush suffused her face.

Bramwell straightened himself and advanced
a step towards her.

<( Princess ! " he said deliberately, " everything
is changed between us now. You are
right : Nadine is no more ; and the old
feelings are dead too, and can never return.

VOL. II. N

We may still be conscious of pain in a wounded
limb even when the limb has been taken
away. So it is with my feeling towards you —
it is only now the echo of a passionate love
and a bitter pain. . . . But life cannot end
when that mad love, which is known but once,
dies and is buried. New affections, new duties
spring up for us over its grave. And — I
quote your own words — why should we not
halt at the green places , in the desert ? why
not gather the flowers which are so rare ?
I wished to avoid you. I would not have
come to-day but that I had a definite object
in view, which obliged me to seek you. After
to-day, I would if I could, draw a veil between
the past and the future. Perhaps I fear you
still. Perhaps — I scarcely know what I feel.
But I see a new existence opening before

me , which has claims incompatible with the
old. There is one way in which you
can make me happier — this is the purpose
which has brought me here. You can help
me to win for my wife the woman whom
I love'

While he had been speaking Nadine's face
had grown slowly paler and more rigid.
With a slow stately movement she turned
from him and stood silent, with head bent
and fingers lightly interlaced. B**amwell
could only guess dimly at what was passing
through her mind. In one of those swift
and inexplicable flashes of memory, which
under dissimilar circumstances connect phases
of thought, certain words which Nadine had
spoken years before recurred to him, seeming
to stand forth in letters of fire.

X 2

The very sense that I had ijower over you
held the concession bach. I could not endure
to lose the power. And all that was worst in
me came uppermost — it was like the taste of
blood to a wild creature that has been brought
up tame''

At length lie turned again.

With all her marvellous self-command she
could hardly have been conscious of the
change which had taken place in her face.
It was hard and gj:*ey as that of a corpse.
All sweetness and womanliness had vanished
from it. Her eyes gleamed with a pale fire,
and her head was upraised, showing the
spasmodic working of her throat.

Bramwell felt that the spiritual distance
between them had suddenly become immeasurable.
A sensation of repulsion came

over him, wliicli deepened as lie answered
in even, metallic tones —

*^ The lady whom you love is my friend,
Margaret Blundell."

He bowed affirmatively.

Yon ask my help in inducing her to
become your wife ? I should not have supposed.
Dr. Bramwell, that any inducement
could be necessary ; nor do I see now what
assistance I can render you'*

Bramwell directed a searching glance
towards her face ; but her eyes were lowered
as she played with an ornament that hung
from her chatelaine. He answered with a
composure which emulated her own, —

"You are aware that in my house there
resides now a child named Evelyn Grace,
whom I call my ward. I charged myself

with the care of this little girl under
peculiar circumstances which honour forbids
me to reveal without the consent of her
mother. Of late, remarks of the child's
nurse, Mrs. Gaythorne, who , though pledged
to secresy, has grown garrulous with age,
and has always entertained her own convictions
upon the subject, which I have never
attempted to uproot, have aroused injurious
suspicions concerning my relationship to
the child. Mrs. Blundell has made these
suspicions a pretext for forbidding me to
become her daughter's suitor. She absolutely
refuses her consent to ray marriage
with Margaret unless I can offer her a full
explanation of Evelyn's parentage, and my
reasons for assuming her guardianship, exonerating
myself from odium."

The Princess smiled icily and seated herself
again while she remarked with perfect and
marvellous coolness, —

Mrs. Blundell is a woman of the world ;
I know her well. It is surprising that she
should be troubled by such refined scruples.
But she is anxious that her daughter should
marry Lord Engrave. That was evident
two years ago — at Rome. I wonder that she
has not succeeded in carrying out her wishes
she usually does so. It is a pity that Margaret
is so yielding in disposition. Entirely
devoted as she is to her mother, she would
sacrifice her own happiness rather than overleap
any real or fancied obstacle which Mrs.
Blundell might put forward. I am sorry for
you in your difficulty, Dr. Bramwell, but I
still fail to see how I can help you.^^

Nadine ! ^' exclaimed Bramwell excitedly,
'you have a strong influence over Mrs.
Blundell : this I know positively, though I
am ignorant of the manner in which you have
gained it. Perhaps your rank impresses
her; perhaps you have lent her moneys''

'' You are right' replied the Princess
composedly. " I have lent her money — to
pay her gambling debts at Nice''

^' Exercise this influence upon my behalf.
By means of your hold upon her, force her
to consent to my marriage with Margaret.
Is this a great thing for me to beg of you ?
I do not demand of you the sacrifice which
I might claim, but which a man of honour
has no right to exact from a woman. I do
not bid you reveal your shame, or tell the
tale of that miserable night at Croxham."

^' Tf^hat night ? — you forget we decided
that Nadine had ceased to exist. It is the
Princess Titchakoff to whom you are appealing.
And what has she to do with you, or
with the child, your ward ? — nothing. I refuse
to exercise any influence which I may possess
over Mrs. Blundell for the furtherance of
your marriage with Margaret."

Bramwell started back like one stunned
by an unexpected blow, and stood gazing at
Nadine in surprise and incredulous horror.

Are you the woman I once loved — whom
I believed to be the embodiment of all that
is noble and true ? " he cried in passionate
upbraiding — " the woman who came to mein
her despair, and whom I saved at the
peril of my professional honour, at the
sacrifice of all I held dearest ? Is there

no spark of gratitude or womanly feeling
in your heart, no germ of motherhood in
your bosom ? Will you deny your own
child ? "

'^ I deny that I have ever borne a child's'
said the Princess unflinchingly. " If you can
prove it, do so."

You must he mad ! " Goaded to fury,
Bramwell darted forward and seized her wrist.
Are you not wearing on your finger the
very ring which wars the proof of your shame ?
Do you not know that I can denounce you
to the world, to your husband ? "

The Princess started to her feet, shaking
herself free from his grasp. She retreated
a few steps, and faced him like a hunted
animal at bay. She was trembling visibly,
but her eyes shot fire.

"^ Yow. threaten me ! ^^ she said in a tone
of concentrated passion. "I defy you. Do
your worst. Blare out to the world what
you are pleased to call my slime. Go and
proclaim that at Croxham, on such a night,
I became the mother of a child whom you
adopted as your ward. Who will believe your
word , supported by that of an old woman in
her dotage, against the evidence of your own
actions — of your own handwriting ? ^'

As Nadine spoke she touched the secret
spring of an escritoire which stood near her,
and drew a folded yellow sheet of paper from
the receptacle which suddenly revealed itself.
This she shook open and held out before him.

In an instant he had recognized it — the
heading, Croxham; the date; the superscription.
It was the letter which he had

written to Mr. Senguin , describing the alleged
nature of Nadine^s illness.

The Princess replaced the document. The
sliding panel closed. She stood — her lips
curling in a triumphant smile — mistress of
the situation.

'^ Madam' said Bramwell with ironical
emphasis, bowing low before he withdrew,
"you have mistaken your vocation. You
would have made a great actress. I can
say no more. You have turned against
me the weapon with which I saved your life.
Farewell."

CHAPTER III.

Conquered

When Bramwell quitted the presence of
Princess Titcliakoff lie suffered himself to
be driven away, neither knowing nor caring
whither. His whole being was in a tumult
of disgust, passion, despair. Life seemed
to hold no further good. Even the image
of Margaret was blurred by the tears which
he could not refrain from shedding over his
broken bubble, his vanished ideal.

The day passed like a feverish dream. On
his way home from one of his visits Bramwell

drove through the Park, which at this hour
was thronged; and at the distance of a few
feet passed Nadine in the Ladies' Mile. She
was sitting in her carriage, beautifully dressed,
faintly flushed, and smiling with apparent
animation upon a young attache who faced
her. By her side was the wife of one of the
foreign ambassadors. Suddenly she turned
her head and met Bramwell's gaze levelled
full at her. There was in her eyes and upon
her tremulous lips, an indefinable expression,
which, with her vague allusions still fresh in
his mind, revealed to him too surely the secret
of her artificial vivacity. Hapless Nadine !
slave to the worst tyranny which can hold a
woman in thrall ! " Again there came over
him the terrible feeling* of watchings her drown
and of being unable to stretch forth a hand

to save her. For the second during which
they were face to face she looked at lira
unflinchingly, making not the slightest sign
of recognition. Her carriage proceeded, but
BramwelPs was detained for a minute or more
by the pressure of the throng. As he waited,
his ear caught the note of a falsetto voice
which he knew, and he overheard the following
brief dialogue interchanged between two
people among the row of bystanders, whom
he recognized respectively as Mrs. Bartelotte
and Mr. Deodatus Lumley.

So there's the Princess Tifcchakoff. Well,
I guess she does not require much instruction
in social philosophy. The world has gone
better with her than it would have done if
she had eloped with poor Jack Halkett. They
are trying to do away with Providence nowadays;

but it is a convenient method of
accounting for things not that I am very
partial to reasons. They are like the heavy
bills that come in at Christmas after one has
worn out ones gowns ; but Jack Halkett's
sudden death at that particular juncture — for
nothing will ever persuade me there was not
something behind the scenes — was one of
those curious coincidences which require a
special dispensation."

^'^ Ah ! '' observed Mr. Lumley thoughtfully.
'''How well I remember reading the lines of
Nadine Senguin^s hand. I foretold drama in
her life."

^' You did not read her marriage lines'
retorted Mrs. Bartelotte^ ^' or you might have
made your fortune on Ascot Heath long ago.
As for drama I should not wonder if our

pretty Princess lead a precious deal of that before
lier. It is rumoured that Siberia is likely
to be Titchakoff^s last resting-place. I hear
that the Emperor has discovered his Nihilist
proclivities, and has recalled him to Russia."

If I were not aware that no foreigner
can understand Russian politics, I should be
surprised that a man of Titchakoff^s wealth
and influence should compromise himself in
revolutionary politics said Mr. Lumley.

You-wouldn't say so if you had seen him
tackle a mad dog as I once did/^ replied
Mrs. Bartelotte. "Russians like to alio-lit
their pipes beside a barrel of gunpowder.
Titchakoff would compromise himself in anyway
provided there were a petticoat involved
in the matter, and Vera Vassals is at the
bottom of his politics

II. o

Late that evening Bramwell sat alone in
Ms study. Eleven o'clock had long since
struck. The house was still; and the fire
which he had caused to be lighted — for the
night was cold and chilly — burned low' in
the grate. Suddenly he was startled by the
sound of a peal from without. He rose
nervously, and waited, listening to the footsteps
of the servant who answered the summons.
Then he heard a rapid parley in
the hall, and a woman's voice, the tones of
which thrilled him still, raised in imperious
expostulation. Presently the door of his
own room opened, and a lady was ushered in.

She was covered almost to her feet by
a long mantle of some sombre rich stuff:
and a black lace scarf was twisted round her
throat and head, concealing the lower part

of her face. But her pencilled brows and

dark eyes shining with a lustre almost

unnatural, were visible ; and it needed no

second glance to convince Bramwell of the

identity of his visitor. He saw before him

the Princess Titchakoff.

She waited till the door had been closed

again and they were alone ; then loosening

her cloak, let it fall behind her, and threw

aside her disguising head-dress. She was in

full evening costume of gleaming white satin

and filmy lace; diamonds shone upon her

neck and arms, at her bosom, and in her

hair ; in her hands she carried a large bouquet

of stephanotis and snowy carnations. She

was evidently on her way to, or had just

quitted some splendid entertainment.

He could not speak — surprise numbed his

o 2

faculties ; and yet, had he been capable of
reflection, he might have considered that
inconsistency was the only certain thing
which could be predicted of Nadine.

She advanced — her shoulders bare and
gleaming with her jewels — as a tragedy
queen might have walked the stage, and
stood facing him, her arm resting upon the
mantelpiece, dazzling him by her magnificence
and her beauty.

"I am the last person, after our interview
to-day, whom you could have expected to
see. Nevertheless, I have come. . . And not
in my mood of this morning — that has passed.
I am Nadine — variable as of old, impetuous,
cruel, but not wholly heartless, not wholly
ungrateful. I am here — " her voice faltered,
and she stretched out her arms entreatingly

^' I have come to humble myself before
you — to beseech you to forgive me."

She sank upon the ground at his feet and
uplifted her face, transformed again — now-all
womanliness, full of tender pleading,
childlike in its submission.

You have borne so much, you have forgiven
so much. And after to-night we may
never meet again. Let us be at peace with
each other. I do not wish to live in your
heart a cruel memory. I do not wish you to
hate me — you are too dear to me Think
of me kindly sometimes, if always sorrowfully.
I have done everything that you desired. If it
lies in my power to make you happy you shall
be so. To-morrow go to Mrs. Blundell — you
will find that all opposition on her part is
withdrawn. Margaret shall be yours. Nay,

more — I have written my confession to hers
wliicli I give to you. Maybe that you will
wish to justify yourself to your wife. That
confession is my expiation of the wrong I
have done you'

He tried to raise her.

Nadine ! Nadine ! " he cried in a choked
voice. " It is I who am cruelty'

She shook her head, smiling mournfully.
^' No. Sit here, and let me remain so. I
have something to give you."

She. drew from her bosom two documents :
one was creased and yellow — this she cast
into the bed of coals and watched burning till
it was consumed to blackness ; the other a
sealed envelope directed to Margaret Blunders
she placed in his hand.

*^I have destroyed your letter to my father.

In this I have told Margaret everything. You
will forgive me now ? . . . I said —-that it was
only you who could ever make me do any
good thing. Oh, I wish you well — I hope you
may be happy.'^

Sobs checked her utterance. He raised her
two hands to his lips ; she felt tears fall hot
upon them.

'' I have only one thing, to beg of you. I
place no restrictions upon your use of this
letter. It may be shown to Margaret before
or after your marriage, as you will. But do
not give it to her till a fortnight has passed.
By that time I shall have left England. I am
going with my husband to Russia."

Bramwell uttered an exclamation of
horror.

"There is no cause for alarms answered

Nadiiie composedly. " And if there were, what
matter ?— women such as I am bear charmed
lives. If misery could kill I should have died
long ago. And of what consequence whether
I die in a Russian palace or a Siberian hovel ?
life has no more sweetness for me."

She raised herself, and stood leaning
against the mantel-shelf. Her eyes wandered
round the room, noting everything; it was
as though she were trying to imprint upon
her memory all the-details and surroundings of
his life. At last her gaze rested upon him in
sadness indescribable. Her lips quivered, and
a deep-drawn sob shook her frame.

Intense yearning filled BramwelPs heart,
and swept from it every other feeling. He
saw in her only Nadine, forsaken, wretched
a lost soul going into darkness. Again

he clasped her hands, kissing them wildly ;
a torrent of passionate entreaty burst from
his lips. He might have been praying for
his own happiness so urgent were his words.
He implored her, for his sake, for the sake
of her youth, to take pity upon herself. He
besought her to try and build up the ruins of
her life, to be true to her real nature, to make
of her sorrow a baptism into a worthier future.

Nadine tried to speak, but voice failed
her. When he had ceased she remained
motionless, her hands still clasped in his,
her face wearing almost the expression of
one who has lost consciousness. At last
there seemed to come a revival of feeling;
tears began to fall anew, and she said, with
an effort at calmness, —

It is of no use ; I can never be different.

It will be best for me if I can grow completely
Lard, and not care — after to-night. . . . But
to-nio-lit I should like — it is a strange wish
for me. . I want to see my child, if it
be possible."

"You shall see her. I will bring her to
you/^ answered Bramwell.

He left the room. After a few minutes
he returned, bearing the little girl in his
arms. She was fast asleep. Her rounded
limbs drooped helplessly ; the tiny head, with
face upturned, rested upon his shoulder, over
which fell the tangled masses of her fair hair.

Nadine bent forward with a strange,
pathetic movement. Upon her face was a
struggling expression of wonder, awe, tenderness
; but she made no effort to kiss the
child or to take it in her arms.

She is very pretty said JSfadine in a
choked whisper, lifting the little hand, and
stroking it softly and timidly — " not like me.
She is like — her father."

Then suddenly the unhappy woman uttered
a smothered cry and flung herself upon the
sofa. Burying her face in her hands, she
wept convulsively.

But the paroxysm did not last long. When
it had passed she rose, tearless and white,
and automatically fastened her mantle and
adjusted her scarf.

'' Farewell' she said.

Again she paused before Bramwell, and
the mother's instinct awoke and cried. She
held out her arms, and clasped the child to
her bosom. Evelyn's eyes opened, large,
dark, wistful, but showing no terror of the

agonized face but over hers. With a sleepy
gesture lie lifted her hands caressingly to
her mother's cheek.

Nadine murmured some faint, inarticulate
words of endearment. She strained the child
closer to her heart, and kissed passionately
the unconscious lips, then thrust her again
into Bramwell's arms, and went forth silently
to play in the world that part which she had
chosen.

EXTRACT FROM A LETTER TO
THE AUTHOR.

^'I HAVE tried, as you requested, to
glean from Calderwood some further particulars
of the career of Nadine, Princess
Titchakoff, but with no success. He hints
darkly at a certain diplomatic mission to St.

Petersburg in which he was at one period of
his life engaged, and during which presumably
he became acquainted with the Princess's
secret. In what manner I know not but
there is room for conjecture that for the
second time in her life her strange complex,
emotional nature required the safety-valve of
confession ; and Calderwood may have enacted
the part of another Bramwell. He has intimated
to me that to reveal more would be a
violation of honour, and possibly involve him
in the betrayal of State secrets ; and I am
bound to respect his reticence. The close of
your narrative strikes me as being somewhat
abrupt, and as hardly fulfilling the dramatic
essentials which the opening would appear to
indicate. But it must be remembered that
these events really occurred some twenty-five
or thirty years ago ; and that for purposes of
fiction you have transposed their key, in order
to meet the actualities of modern fashion,

society, language, and Americanisms. That, to
strike fresh chords, or to pursue further the
struggles and failures of Nadine, would involve
you in anachronisms and inconsistencies, which
you now happily avoid.

But Calderwood's vague hints set the mind
working ; and the respective mental and moral
attitudes of our dramatis personae offer an
interesting field for speculation to the social
philosopher and dabbler in the mysteries of
human relationships.

I am assured that Bramwell and his wife
are, in spite of the anxious and pessimist temperament
of the former, supremely happy. An
opportune attack of rheumatic fever carried off
Mrs. Blundell shortly after her daughter's
marriage to our excellent, if slightly priggish,
physician ; otherwise I should be disposed to
cherish a doubt of the felicity which my friend
describes in enthusiastic terms.

"Mrs. Bramwell has never had children, but

has always exhibited a marked attachment to
her husband's ward. The beauty of this lady,

now the wife of Lord , ambassador at the

Court of , has for some time been the

theme of society journals ; and mysterious
rumours concerning her parentage are still
in circulation, vaguely inferring that blood
no less azure than that of foreign royalty
flows in her veins.

Have she and the Princess Titchakoff ever
held hands or brushed garments in fashionable
Roman salons or on crowded Parisian staircases
? Upon this point Calderwood is silent.

'^Bramwell is I am told, one of the most
celebrated physicians in Europe, famous for
psychological discovery, and for the successful
treatment of maladies connected with the
nerves and brain. What a sign of the times
and of the deterioration of the human species,
that this branch of physiology is becoming
the speciality of the age ! I have always

proclaimed the fallacy of the positivist theory
of eternity. Before the race can be enabled
to attain an earthly immortality, it must first
be endowed by science with a sound digestion
and an improved nervous system warranted to
withstand the ravages of civilization''

THE END.

BUNGAY : CLAY AND TAYLOR, PRINTERS.

3 0112 084218129
