VOL. I.

BY

MRS. Randolph

AUTHOR OF

"GENTIANELLA," "WILD HYACINTH,"
"WOOD ANEMONE," "GENISTA,"

&c., &c.

The garden's gem,
Heart'sease.

Leigh Hu>-t.

IN Three Policies.
VOL. L

LONDON:
HURST AND BLACKETT, PUBLISHERS,

13, GREAT MARLBOROUGH STREET.
1881.

AU rights reserved.

PRINTED BY DUNCAN MACDONALD, BLENHEIM HOUSE.

BLENHEIM STREET, OXFORD STREET.



,i^



r5 3
y. 1

TO

MRS. BOUGHTON KNIGHT

THESE PAGES

r

>5^ ARE AFFECTIONATELY INSCRIBED.

CHAPTER I.

Every man is a debtor to his profession, from the
which, as men do of course seek to receive countenance
and profit, so ought they of duty to endeavour
themselves by way of amends to be a help and ornament
thereunto.

Bacon.

If you wish success in life, make perseverance your
bosom-friend, experience your wise counsellor, caution
your elder brother, and hope your guardian genius.

Addison.

A Ancestor, the capital of 
shire, was a pretty old-fashioned
town, with an old grey ruined castle standing
on steep red sandstone cliffs overhanging
the river; and a fine old church, the

VOL. I. IJ

tower of which formed a landmark for
miles round.

The greater part of Meadowshire was
rather flat, consisting chiefly of rich meadows,
wherein the sleek red and white
cattle stood knee-deep in luxuriant grass,
shaded from summer heats by fine old oaks
and limes ; but about Arncester the country
was more picturesque and hilly, the cliff
on which the castle stood being the end of
a spur descending from the hills in Rockshire,
where the river Arne took its rise.
It was a deep and rapid stream, and just
below the castle it widened out into a
small quasi-like, which much improved
the beauty of the landscape.

The town stood on a considerably lower
level than the castle, but yet a good way
above the river. The streets were very
steep in some places, and there was but
little uniformity among the buildings,
though the majority of them were old, and
many were of the white plaster with black

beams well known to those acquainted with
some parts of Cheshire and Shropshire ;
while others were of rich red sandstone,
carved, over doors and windows, with the
arms of the old county familles, whose
town-houses they had been in the long-past
days when a season in London was
unattainable to, and never thought of by,
the country gentry; and when the two or
three months spent in Arncester were considered
as great dissipation as are tho
superior attractions of the Metropolis at
the present day.

Side by side with these venerable mansions,
which gave a somewhat aristocratic
air to the town, despite the heterogenous
lower uses to which they had now fallen,
were of course many newer erections, some
of grey stone like the castle, but the majority
of red brick, which looked very
coarse and mean when contrasted with the
old weather-stained sandstone.

From the castle a fine view was obtained

rover

Meadowshire and the sinuous course
of the Arne ; in one direction the windings
of the river could be followed for many
miles, as it twisted and curved through
woods and meadows ; in the other it could
be seen emerging from a wooded valley
about two miles off, and eddying among
rocks and tiny green islets before it reached
the lakelet under the castle hill. On
the other side of the river stretched the
fine oak and beech woods of Kelmorton
Hall, the grey Elizabethan gables of which
were visible on a slight eminence in the
distance. No smoke was to be seen rising
from its twisted chimneys, for its owner,
Lord Kelmore, preferred another residence
in the north, and had not visited Meadow-shire
for more than ten years.

Among the principal buildings of Arn-chester
the inhabitants counted the church,
a beautiful structure of red sandstone,
standing on the top of a hill but little inferior
in height to that on which stood the

castle, in the centre of a churchyard, the
beautification of which was very dear to
the rector s, Mr. Mordan's, heart ; and certainly
there were few in the county that
could vie with it either in neatness or in
profusion of flowering plants and shrubs :
the Town Hall, one of the finest specimens
of the old black and white edifices,
which had recently been most carefully and
judiciously restored ; and last, though by
no means least, the Bank, which many of
the worthy but anaesthetic townsfolk considered
in their secret hearts to be by far
the handsomest building in the town, and
which was of bright red brick with white
stone dressings, a profusion of plate-glass,
and a general air, in the quiet High Street,
oF painful newness and incongruity. It
stood at one corner of the market-place,
almost opposite the Town Hall, and more
than one member of the Corporation had
been heard to say that the money spent in
restoration of that " tumbledown old barn "

would have been better expended in assimilating
its appearance as nearly as possible
to that of the Bank.

The market-place had once been the
fashionable quarter of Arncester, and most
of the old houses that had belonged to the
county families were situated there, and had
spacious gardens at the back, with here
and there a fine old cedar and tulip-tree ;
but the modern aristocracy of the town,
the lawyers, the families who lived in the
town for the sake of the Grammar School
education, the wives of the officers of the
small detachment quartered there, the retired
tradesmen and others, affected to
find the annoyance of the bi-weekly* market
too great, and had decreed that the fashionable
quarter should be Arne Street, which
was quite on the other side of the town ;
where the situation was much lower, where
there was no view, and where the houses
had no gardens. The fine old houses, with
their broad, shallow oak staircases and

panelled rooms, were converted into offices,
some one or two even into shops : the
gardens were either allowed to run wild or
leased to a market-gardener, and the members
of Arncester society, when they left
their offices, returned home to the superior
delights of Arne Street ; where each house
was as like its fellow as if run out of a
mould, where the walls were sufficiently
thin to allow the enjoyment of the sound
of a neighbour's piano, and where the
front view was of the opposite side of the
street, and the back one of a small flagged
yard leading to the stables. That those
interested in either the barracks or the
Grammar School should select it as a
residence was comprehensible enough, for
it was within a few minutes' walk of both ;
but that those to whom such vicinity was
no object should willingly locate themselves
in one of the least agreeable quarters
of the town, could only be accounted
for by the mysterious fact that "it was

the fashion," a reason that had fully as
much force in Arncester as in Belgravia.

Only two members of " Society " in
Arncester continued to live in the marketplace.
Those were the rector, the Reverend
Alfred Mordan, and the banker,
George Deveron. The former had hardly
a choice, for the rectory had from time
immemorial been one of the old red houses
so despised by the modern residents, and,
beinor a man of much culture and excellent
taste, he fully appreciated the advantages
of the position. His wife quite agreed
with him, and was very thankful for the
arose garden, where the children could
play in safety during the day, and wherein
the summer evenings she and her husband
could sit in quiet and enjoy the lovely
view, as free from sight or sound of the
town as if they were in the remotest
country parsonage, and yet with the knowledge
that he was in the heart of the work
in which the whole energy of his nature

was engaged. Arncester was a large
parish, and Mr. Mordan kept three
curates, but he did not consider that any
reason why he should not be personally
acquainted with every one of his parishioners,
and supervise the proceedings of
his subordinates. He was much "thought
of," as the phrase was in Arncester : partly,
let us hope, for his high views, his charitable
and earnest disposition, and his pure
and self-denying life ; but also, and probably
by the majority, because he was a
member of one of the oldest county families,
and had married the daughter of
another.

'' The county " was an object of almost
servile worship in Arncester : Meadow-shire
was a very exclusive county, and
there were very few of the town aristocracy
who were on visiting terms with the
county people, though it certainly was not
from any want of endeavour on their part.
The advent of Mr. and Mrs. Mordan, some

three years before the commencement of
this narrative, had been hailed with much
enthusiasm as a probable means of coming
in contact with the longed-for magnates.
The Mordant must entertain ; they would
of course have their relations staying with
them ; they must ask some of the townspeople
to meet them," — in short, it would
be the thin end of the wedge, and Arn-chester
was excited and jubilant.

But it was doomed to disappointment :
Mr. and Mrs. Mordan entertained very
little indeed, and when they did invite
those who had shown them civility, their
guests were inexpressibly mortified to find
that, with the occasional exception of one
of Mr. Mordan's sisters, or of an old
maiden aunt of his wife's, they never met
any of " the county," though they frequently
encountered couples living in the
town, whom they did not consider worthy
of the honour of admittance into the Arne
Street '^ set." They did not comprehend

that Mr. Mordan preferred to spend the
modest sum which the education of his
children and the duties of his position
allowed him to devote to entertainment,
rather on those who lead few pleasures,
and to whom an evening spent at the rectory
and a meeting with Arncester society
were a great event, than on the great
land-owners, who could have what amusements
they pleased, and to whom a dinner-party
more or less was naturally a matter
of the most perfect indifference.

Perhaps no one was more indignant at
the failure of the hopes which Arncester
had considered itself justified in forming
on the new rector s advent than the wife
of the other dweller in the market-place,
the banker, George Deveron. It was an
extremely sore grievance to Mrs. Deveron
that her husband insisted on continuing
to live in the old house in the marketplace,
on the plea of its convenient contiguity
to his business, while her heart

yearned for the greater gentility of a residence
in the fashionable quarter of the
town. But above all things she longed to
be distinguished beyond other Arncester
folk by acceptance by the county, and resented
bitterly the failure of the hopes
which she had founded on the Mordant.

Mr. Deveron's position in Arncester was
a high one. His great-grandfather had
been one of the traditional boys who, beginning
with half a crown and the office
of sweeping out the Arncester Bank, had
successively progressed to a clerkship,
marriage with his master's daughter, reception
into partnership, and finally the
sole proprietorship of the business. His
grandfather and his father had improved
and consolidated the connection ; had married,
the former the daughter of a banker
at Shrewsbury, the latter the daughter of
a small farmer, and had never aspired to
society other than that of the townsfolk.

George Deveron himself had no social

ambition ; he had been educated at the
Grammar School, had learnt his business
under his father's eye, and was well contented
to remain in the groove that had
suited that father before him. The Bank
was a sound and most lucrative concern,
as it behoved a business to be that never
lacked the supervision of the watchful
master's eye, and Mr. Deveron's name and
character were known and respected far
and wide in Meadowshire and the adjoining
counties. He was, of course, known
to all the gentlemen in the county, and
his wife often told him, not without bitterness,
that any other man in his position
would have long ago contrived that his
family should share the advantages which
he enjoyed. It was a downright insult to
her, she averred, that he should be asked
to shoot, and afterwards to dine and sleep,
at Daleford, when Mrs. Delmar had never
condescended to call upon her ; yet she
would not hear of his refusing the invitation,

as he at once offered to do. It was
the last things she wished that he should
sever his connection with the county ; it
would annihilate her own chance of ever
setting foot within the charmed circle.

Mrs. Deveron had been Miss Matilda
Morris, the daughter of an attorney at
Birmingham, whom Mr. Deveron had encountered
when sent to that town by his
father on business. She was by nature a
somewhat vulgar minded woman, and her
defects had been heightened at the 
where she had been sent to acquire
accomplishments, and to learn to be
'' genteel."

At the time that George Deveron first
saw her, she was very handsome, in a
somewhat common and vulgar style, intensely
bright colouring, with very black
hair and eyes, but her chief beauty lay ina
really magnificent figure. As she grew
older, her charms ripened too much ; she
grew very large, and the complexion which

had once been likened to lilies and roses
more nearly resembled a full-blown peony.
Nor did her mind grow more refined. She
would have liked to take advantage of her
husband's wealth, and make a display that
he would by no means sanction ; she
fretted under his quiet decree that nothing*
was to be done to make it seem that they
wished to ascend from the respectable
middle class to which they of right belonged,
and remarked peevishly that he
could very well afford to buy an estate,
and to take his place among the landed
gentry.

To all such suggestions George Deveron
turned a deaf ear, going on in the even
tenor of his way, attending diligently to
his business, and taking an occasional
day's holiday in the hunting-field, or when
asked to shoot with some neighbour. He
was a man much liked by all who knew
him for his unobtrusive manners and
shrewd good sense, and it was quite true.

as his wife often said, that, if he had
chosen to make a point of it, she would
have been received in many houses where
he visited alone. But he was a proud
man in his own way, and disdained to be
beholden to a hint of his own for an invitation
for his wife : everyone knew of her
existence, and was at liberty to call on her
if it was wished ; it was certainly not for
him to make the first move. And so ladies
who saw Mrs. Deveron's coarse beauty
occasionally at meets of the Hounds, or
on other public occasions, and heard the
harsh tones of her somewhat loud voice,
agreed that, as Mr. Deveron never said
anything on the subject, it was clear she
did not wish to visit, and absolved themselves
from what they considered would bethe
unwelcome duty of calling on her.

Four children were the issue of this
union : two sons and two daughters.
With much reluctance, Mr. Deveron had
deferred to his wife's wishes in respect to

Lis sons' education. His wish was that
they should have been educated, as he
himself had been, at the Grammar School,
and should, as soon as possible, have taken
their places in the Bank; hers that they
should be sent to Eton " to make friends,"
and then both enter the Army. To Eton
Mr. Deveron would not consent, but he
finally agreed to Rugby, which, though far
from satisfying his wife, was yet in her
eyes infinitely preferable to the alternative
of the Arncester Grammar School.

The idea of sending both sons into the
Army was most repugnant to Mr. Severn
; but at length, exhausted by his wife's
importunities, he promised her that the
lads should be left perfectly free to choose
their own career in life, and that he would
neither do nor say anything to influence
them, if she on her part would also abstain
from doing so. Mrs. Deveron promised
readily, and had every intention of keeping
her word, but it was impossible for her

VOL. I. C

not, almost unconsciously, to show the
children in what different estimation she
held any of the townsfolk, and such officers
as were attached to the small cavalry detachment.
It was clear that she considered
them as of a different race, and, as she
always remarked, they were invited to
country houses, while Arncester people
were not.

Her observations had no effect on her
eldest boy, Arthur, who was very like his
father both in looks and in disposition.
Prom a little boy he always announced that
he meant to stick to the Bank ;" and, at
eighteen, he told his father that he had
never changed his mind, and should like
to learn his work thoroughly, and as soon
as possible. His decision was a real joy
to Mr. Deveron, who was both fond and
proud of the old established business that
had been so long in his family, and which
it would have been a sore grief to him to
know must pass into other hands ; but it

was a great disappointment to his mother,
who had fondly hoped that her boys would
disdain any connection with business. She
expressed something of her feeling to
Arthur when he announced his decision,
but it was plain that his mind was quite
made up, and he told her at once that ife
was the only life he had a fancy for, and
that he thought his father seemed pleased.

Hubert, the second son, who was a year
younger than his brother, was equally clear
in his wishes, and announced them quite
as early. Almost before he could speak
plainly he had determined to be a cavalry
officer, and his fancy never wavered. Of
all her children he was his mother's favourite,
and was the most like her both in
appearance and character.

Different as they were in appearance,
both boys were very good-looking ; Arthur
was tall and broad-shouldered, with a frank,
open face, curling fair hair, and laughing
blue eyes. He was quiet, steadfast,

c'2

and particularly sweet-tempered, perfectly
straightforward, and inclined to be intolerant
of any humbug or affectation.
Hubert had his mother's clear bright
colouring, and dark eyes and hair, and inherited
also her longing for a higher social
position than that assigned her by Providence.
He longed to be one of the gay
officers of a cavalry regiment, and to receive
the admiration he saw lavished on
those quartered in Arncester. Vanity and
love of praise were the chief motive powers
in his character ; his temper, though generous,
was passionate, and he was quite incapable
of ever seeing more than one side
of a question, and that the one most satisfactory
to himself.

The two girls, who were both younger
than their brothers, were as different from
each other as were the boys. With them,
too, their mother's wishes as to education
had. been allowed to prevail, and when
Sophronia was twelve and Julia nearly

eleven, they bad been sent to a highly
fashionable school at Brighton, having
been previously instructed by a governess
at home.

Sophronia, the eldest, was the only plain
member of the family, and her want of
good looks was a great sorrow and grievance
to Mrs. Deveron. She was neither
tall nor short, neither dark nor fair, her
complexion was muddy, and her eyes of a
pale watery blue. As Mrs. Deveron said
disparagingly,

She really had not a good point either
in face or figure."

Sophronia was quit aware of her own
defects, which had been freely pointed out
to her both at home and at school, and she
had decided on the role which it would be
desirable for her to adopt. She would
be quoted as clever, would be decidedly
"blue," and affect to despise those frivolities
which to her would never bring
triumphs. But this decision by no means

moved her to hard study ; nothing was
further from her thoughts than University
examinations, or a sojourn at Girton College.
She did not in the least wish , to
know things, only to seem to do so, and to
be quoted as clever ; and she well knew that
in these days of royal roads to learning
there were plenty of books from which she
could acquire a smattering of scientific or
literary subjects that would quite fulfil her
requirements.

Where was the use of reading tiresome
old books, when a good dictionary of literature
would in a few lines give a resume of
their contents, quite sufficient to enable
her to shine in the eyes of the illiterate ?
Why should she take trouble to study any
of the sciences or ologies, when short handbooks
and glossaries of terms would make
her quite capable of dazzling ordinary
mortals ? Only one thing she did really
study, and that was music, giving her attention
almost exclusively to that styled

of the future," and shunning religiously
anything with the remotest approach to an
air. In this she exercised very considerable
self-denial, for valses and popular airs
were far more pleasing to her than the
grandest creations of Herr "Wagner and
his imitators, but she resisted them steadfastly
as being unsuitable to her self-elected
position as the intellectual member of the
family.

Julia was a complete contrast — a bright,
fresh, pretty girl, with a beautiful complexion
and a lovely figure, frivolous to
the last degree, and contemptuous of any
learning excepting the accomplishments of
singing and dancing, which she regarded
as important weapons for future conquests.
Her mother had spoilt her terribly during
the holidays, impressing upon her how
pretty she was, and what success she ought
some day to have, hints that bore abundant
fruit in the fertile soil of Julia's vain and
selfish nature. And the mistress of the

school where she was placed exercised no
influence which at all counteracted this
injurious home-training; she cared for
nothing but to make her pupils shine as
brilliant members of society, and bestowed
little or no attention on their moral train-ins.


At the time at which this story commences,
the two girls had been about six
months at home, after having finally left
school : Sophronia was nineteen and a
half, Julia a little past eighteen. Mrs.
Deveron, ambitious for her pretty youngest
daughter, was more than ever inclined to
murmur at the hard fate that kept them
estranged from the county set. In any
other county such would hardly have been
the case, but Meadowshire, as we have
before said, was extremely exclusive, and
her predecessors, her husband's mother
and grandmother, had been so utterly devoid
of social aspirations, so contented to
stay at home, and see only such friends as

came to them, that the county had grown
quite accustomed to see and invite the
Deveron of the day, without considering
whether or not he possessed any feminine
belonging. If only, his wife sighed, Mr.
Deveron would have '' plucked up a spirit !''
However, now that Julia's interests were
involved, she was determined that he
should no longer shirk his duty for lack
of having it put plainly and frequently
before him.

The two sons were aged respectively
four and three and twenty. Arthur was
already his father's right hand in the Bank.
Hubert was in the Twenty-third Lancers,
and wrote enthusiastically of the delights
of Hounslow, and of having been on the
detachment at Kensington Gate. The
regiment was to move to Stockton in the
ensuing year, and Mrs. Deveron built
much on the assistance which her son's
London acquaintance with various 
people would be to her in her

schemes of social aggrandisement, more
especially if he happened to be one of the
detachment sent to Arncester.

CHAPTER 11.

'Tis the most tender part of love
Each other to forgive.
The Reconcilement — Duke of Buckinghamshire

This is the place. Stand still, my steed.

Let me review the scene,
And summon from the shadowy Past

The forms that once have been.

A Gleam of Sunshine — Longfellow.

T T was a beautiful morning lace in 
temper, and breakfast was laid in the
oak-panelled dining-room of Mr. Deveron's
residence in the market-place. It was a
long and somewhat low room, with a bay-window
at the end looking into the garden,
where the flower-beds were still in
their full beauty. To the left a view of

the castle could be obtained, while beyond
the rose hesse that bounded the garden
the ground sloped abruptly to the river,
on the other side of which could be seen,
beneath the spreading boughs of the cedar
on the lawn, the woods of Kelmorton in
the first flush and beauty of their autumnal
tints, and the grey gables of the Hall
peeping from among the trees. Roses
clustered round the open window, and
mingled their fragrance with that of the
jasmine, and with the perfume of the
heliotrope, as yet untouched by frost.

The family correspondence was duly
arranged on the sideboard, for Mr, Severn
would never sanction his wife or
daughters having their letters upstairs,
declaring that it would infallibly make
them late for prayers. Punctuality was a
sacred virtue in his eyes, and the very
slightest lapse from it on the part of .any
member of his family or household was
never suffered to pass unnoticed. Precisely

at a quarter before nine the bell rang
for prayers, and within two minutes the
family and servants were assembled ; Mr.
Deveron read a very short form of prayer,
and the urn made sits appearance as the
clock struck nine.

On the morning in question the number
of letters seemed unusually large, and in
the short interval between prayers and
breakfast. Mrs. Deveron and her daughters
were exchanging scraps of intelligence.

"A letter from Hubert. He is going
to stay for a couple of days with Lord
and Lady Snowdon. She is his Colonel's
sister."

Oh, Mamma ! Betty Farmer, who was
at school with us, is. going to be married
to a Mr. Weston, a lawyer. She wants
me to be bridesmaid ! We always settled
whichever married first should have the
other."

Only think, Julia, Sophia Northern is
coming to Rockton for the Mythological

Congress next month ! We must try to
get her here."

The Yernons want us to dine there on
Thursday," said Mrs. Deveron, addressing
her husband.

Before he could reply, Julia exclaimed,

Have they asked us, Mamma? I hope
so!"

Yes, one of you ; but I think it is
Sophronia's turn, is it not ? We may as
well go, I suppose, George."

*'I am afraid I cannot. Indeed, I must
leave home to-day. My sister is very ill,
and has written an earnest request that I
will go to her at once ; I shall go by the
11.30, and of course it is quite uncertain
when I shall be able to return. Not by
Thursday, certainly."

But, George, it is absolutely impossible
you can go to-day ! You forget we have
a dinner-party. You have neither seen
nor heard from your sister for two-and-twenty

years, so surely there can't be this
great hurry all at once."

There is the reason for hurry, Matilda,
that, if I delay, it may be too late; she
writes that she is dying, and earnestly
wishes to see me ; she says she has put it
off till the last. It is a request I cannot
refuse, and I must go at once. As to the
dinner, you can do very well without me —
there is Arthur to take my place ; at any
rate, it cannot be helped. Now give me
some tea. I have two or three letters to
write before I start."

It will make us an uneven number,"
said Mrs. Deveron.

'' We only want a gentleman. Mamma.
Couldn't you ask Mr. Musgrave ?" said
Sophronia, mentioning one of the curates
who was supposed to be rather impressed
by her display of learning, and who had
been heard to remark that it was a treat
to find a young lady not entirely devoted
to frivolous pursuits.

^' Or Harry YernoD, Mamma ; he sings
so awfully well !" exclaimed Julia.

"Julia," said her father, "1 wish you
would try to remember what I tell you so
often — that the misuse of words is both
silly and vulgar. If you look in any
dictionary, you will find the meaning of
awful to be 'solemn, dreadful, fearful,
terrible.' Pray, which of these epithets
do you consider applicable to Mr. Vernon's
— I object to your calling him
Harry ; it is fast, and bad style — singing ?"

''Oh! none, of course, you dear old
particular Dad," said Julia, perching herself
on the arm of his chair and kissing' his
bald head ; " I daresay it's aw — very silly,
but everyone does it."

Even if they did, which I quite deny,
it is no reason why you should make yourself
ridiculous. There, get up, child, I
must be off to the Bank for half an hour.
Come, Arthur, there are one or two things
I want to call your attention to. See my

tidings are ready bj eleven, will you, Matilda
? I shall be back here before then.
Oh ! by-the-by, here is Clare's letter — you
would like to read it."

Mr. Deveron had an only sister, who,
in her youth, had always complained bitterly''
of the dulness of Arncester, though she
had never known any other place. She
was exceedingly pretty — in a very delicate
fragile style, and had no lack of opportunities
of marrying very well indeed, in the
town ; but she always declared her only
object in marrying would be to obtain a
complete change of life and scene, and
that, if Fate decided that she was to spend
all her life in the dismal dulness of Ancestor,
she would do so as Clare Deveron.
Her mother had died when she was about
fifteen, and on her father's decease, which
occurred when she was three and twenty,
she continued to live in the old house in
the market-place with her brother and his
wife. This plan suited neither her nor Mrs.

VOL. I. D

Deveron. To the natural antagonism of
sisters-in-law were added the facts, that
Mrs. Deveron regarded Clare as an incumbrance,
and that Clare considered her
excessively underbred. The best that
could be hoped for was a species of armed
neutrality, even this was often endangered
by Clare's great turn for sarcasm, which
occasionally roused Mrs. Deveron to retorts
very far from courteous. It was an unacknowledged
relief to all parties when
Clare went away to pay visits, and her
absences gradually grew both longer and
more frequent. A cousin residing in
Brighton was the friend whom she visited
oftener, and one day she wrote in the
highest glee to say that this cousin, Mrs.
Norton, had been invited to spend a fortnight
with friends in Paris, and that the
invitation had been extended to herself.
The fortnight extended to a month, and at
the end of it Clare wrote to announce her
engagement to the Count de St. Sigol^ne,

the eldest son of the Marquis de la Eoche-
caille.

Mrs. Deveron was enchanted : first at
the thought of being rid of Clare's company
for good, and next at the idea of such
aristocratic connections. The titles of
Count and Marquis were to her as the
music of the spheres, and within five minutes
of having finished her perusal of
Clare's letter, she had arranged a series of
glorious tableaux of visits to be paid at
the Chateau de la Rochecaillou, and of dinners
in Arncester at which the Count and
Countess, and later the Marquis and Marchioness
were to be present.

But to her amazement and dismay Mr.
Deveron saw the matter in a very different
light. He had the inborn British distrust
and dislike of all foreigners, the very
name of Count suggested to him nothing
but an adventurer and probable cardsharp-
er, and, though it was soon clearly proved
to him that Monsieur de St. Sigolene's social

d2

position was indisputable, he absolutely declined
in any way whatsoever to countenance
the marriage. Even, he said, if the
young man were not a foreigner, and therefore
according to his views necessarily
objectionable, the difference of religion
was in his eyes so insuperable an obstacle
that nothing would ever induce him to
give his consent. Had Clare, he asked,
ever given a thought to the certain misery
that must ensue from want of unity of
faith with her husband ? Could she bear
to think that, if he believed at all in the
religion he professed, the secret thoughts
of his heart must be revealed to his confessor,
who would always prove a barrier
between them ? Above all, she must
remember that she would not be allowed
the privilege of bringing up her children in
her own faith, and would in all probability
be incessantly importuned herself to
abandon her Church.

Mr. Deveron spoke strongly, and Clare,

always accustomed to defer to his judgment,
cried and hesitated, and declared
that Leon was so good, so perfect, that
with him it was quite impossible that the
dreadful thugs which George predicted
could possibly happen. Her brother replied
that the better man Monsieur de St.
Sigol^ne was, the more certain was it that
the difference in faith must be a constant
source of sorrow and heart-burning. At
length Clare consented to write a letter,
telling her lover that her brother would
not hear of the marriage, and that they
must part. But the young Count was
really very thoroughly in love, and by no
means inclined to allow himself to be refused
at a brother's dictation. He wrote
Clare letter after letter, filled with vehement
reproaches and declarations of the
most passionate adoration. He also enlisted
Mrs. Norton on his side, and when,
about six months after her return from
Paris, Clare went to stay at Brighton once

more with her cousin, the judg people
were married there, and she never returned
to Arrester.

Mr. Deveron was extremely angry.
Though of course he had no real authority
over his sister, she had always hitherto
been so submissive to what was required
of her that the thought of her taking the
law into her own hands in so important a
matter had never once occurred to him ;
and he was doubly annoyed, first by being
set at defiance, and next by having been
taken by surprise, for he rather prided
himself on his penetration. He wrote very
coldly in answer to the announcement of
her marriage made by Clare in a somewhat
gushing manner, assuming that now that
the deed was done he would see there was
no use in continuing to show his disapproval,
and would receive her and her husband.


He said that he disliked the idea of
the marriage fully as much as he had ever

done, and that this opinion of Monsieur de
St. Sigol^ne was not raised by his having
induced his wife to wed him clandestinely.
He could not wish her joy, for he did not
believe that happiness could exist where
there was diversity of faith, and he could
only hope that she might not have the
truth of his opinion bitterly proved to her.
He regretted that as she was of age, and
had married without settlement, her fortune
of £] 0,000 passed absolutely into her
husband's possession, and reminded her
that if he died without a will, or during
his father's lifetime, she would feel the
want of a settlement from having neither
jointure nor provision for her children,
while her own fortune would have been
swallowed up.

Finally he said that there was no use in
her endeavouring; to make him see things
in a different light — that if ever she was
in need of anything that he could do for
her he should be happy to do whatever lay

in his power, but that, excepting in such
an event, he would rather that they did
not correspond. He could not forget that
not only had his wishes been set at naught,
but that he had been deliberately deceived,
and, for the sake of his children, he did not
wish to hold communication with a Roman
Catholic house.

From that date Clare had never written
all that her brother knew of her, or her
husband's family, was gleaned from occasional
paragraphs copied from French
papers. From them he learned, about
three years after his sister s marriage, that
her father-in-law had died rather suddenly
of a chill caught on his way back from
Frohsdorf, he being a devoted follower of
Henri Cinq. Apparently his son did not
share his views, for the next thing that
caught Mr. Deveron's eye was the announcement
that the Marquis de la
Rochecaillou had been slightly wounded,
while acting as aide-de-camp to the Emperor

at the Battle of Magenta. From that
time occasional notices ol the Marquis and
Marquise de la Rochecaillou as among the
guests at Compiegne were all that reached
Arncester, and after the fall of the Empire
these of course ceased. It must be something
very wonderful, Mrs. Deveron
thought, that had at length induced Chare
to write, and, as soon as her husband left
the room, she sat down to peruse the
letter.

"My dear brother George,

It is many years since you
have heard of me, or I of you ; indeed, I
hardly know whether this letter will find
you still alive, and at Arncester. Often I
have been about to write, but have always
remembered that you said I had better
not, unless I needed you. You promised
not to fail me then, and I am sure you will
not, though what I ask of you is to come
to me here at La Eochecaillou as soon as

ever you get my letter. If you do not
come at once, it will be too late : I am
dying. I have known it for some months,
but not that it must be so soon. The
doctors said it might last another six
months — now it seems I may hardly have
so many days. I am sure you will come,
George, and let me see you once more, and
tell you what it is I would ask of you ; it
is long to write, and I am very weak. I
know not if you will have seen in your
papers of the death of my poor, brave
Leon, killed at the head of his regiment at
Gravelotte. Ah, me ! the years seem very
long and sad since then ! Ah, George ! in
spite of all your warnings, we were happy
as I never believed in happiness. It was
too perfect, it could not last. I should
rejoice to follow him if it were not for my
children. I have two ; Leon, the very
image of his father, and so good, so dear !
just twenty-one, and my little Penseee, who
is seventeen. I could write of them forever,

but my strength fails rae. Telegraph
to say when you will reach St. Sigolene,
and the carriage shall meet you. You will
come, George, I know, to
Your dying sister,

Claire de la Rochecaillou."

*why have we never heard anything of
Aunt Clare, Mamma?" asked Julia. "I
suppose I knew she existed, but you have
never talked about her, and she has never
been here."

No, your Papa was very much annoyed
at the marriage ; he objected, and so they
were married quietly whet she was staying
at Brighton. He wouldn't hear of her
marrying a Roman Catholic. I always
said, when the thing was done, it would
have been wiser to make the best of it ;
they were great people in France, especially
while the Empire lasted, going to the
Tuileries and Compiegne, and all the rest
of it. It would have been very pleasant

to go over and stay with them — quite a
change. Clare was made to be a good
hostess, too — but there ! Papa had made
up his mind, and you know what that
means."

Mrs. Deveron had quite forgotten that,
in the old days when they were together,
there had been little love lost between the
sisters-in-law. Between Clare Deveron,
de trap in her brother's house, and the Marquise
de la Rochecaillou with a fine chateau
in the country and an hotel in Paris, there
was a gulf wide and deep enough to drown
all recollections of bickering or enmity.

"I wonder what she wants with Papa
so particularly."

'' Oh ! I daresay only to wish him goodbye
; Clare always was sentimental. I
shouldn't wonder, after all, il it were a
false alarm, and that she is not so ill as
she fancies. It is a pity Papa must go today;
Arthur will hardly know how to
manage. Now, if it were Hubert, who is

SO much more accustomed to the world — "
Shall I write to Mr. Musgrave,
Mamma ?" said Sophronia.

'eyes, dear, do. Don't frown so, Julia;
remember it creases your forehead if you
get a trick of it — and really we've had
Harry Vernon very often. People will
begin to talk."

1 don't care if they do," said Julia,
with a toss of her head and a ohio-orle ;
*' besides, why shouldn't they talk about
Soph and Mr. Musgrave?"

I had meant to have another dinner
the week after next," said Mrs. Deveron ;
'* but, of course, now we must wait. It is
lucky, if we do have to go into mourning,
we haven't got our winter things."

Shall I write and tell Mrs. Vernon
you can't dine there?" asked Sophronia,
who had just completed Mr. Musgrave's
note in her best and clearest hand.

Yes — no, stay, I had better write it
myself," and Mrs. Deveron proceeded to

make a very strong point of the shock
they had received at the intelligence of
^' Mr. Deveron's only sister, the Marquise
de Eochecaillou's," serious illness.

So many years had elapsed since Clare
had faded from the life of the house in the
market-place that most of those even who
had known her had almost forgotten her,
and many who had since settled in the
town, the Yernons among them, had never
even heard of her existence. The separation
had been so complete that even Mrs.
Deveron had quite forgotten to glorify
herself by allusions to the titled relatives
of whom they never heard. She congratulated
herself now on the consequence which
would accrue to her from talking of, perhaps
mourning for, the Marquise.

And so the Marquis had been shot at
Gravelotte — she must ask Sophronia about
that before dinner, so as to be quite sure
to make no blunder. It was provoking

they had not known at the time. People
were sure to remember they had not gone
into mourning. Mrs. Vernon had such a
painfully accurate memory, she was sure
to ask some question about it in her quiet
drawling voice, and it would be so awkward
to answer. How very inconsiderate
it was of Clare to have left them in ignorance
! She really might have remembered
what country towns were. But there, it
was just like Clare ! She never had thought
ot anyone but herself.

The dinner passed off very well, and
j\Iadame de la Rochecaillou's illness formed
a totally novel topic of conversation, which
was much appreciated by most of the
guests, who were not sorry for some variation
in the ordinary subjects discussed at
an Arncester dinner-party. Sophronia
monopolised Mr. Musgrave, and flirted to
her heart's content, under colour of discussing
the coming Mythological Congress

at Stockton, and the different authorities
that would be present. The secret of her
sudden ardour was that Mr. Musgrave had
a short time before confided to her his
discovery of a remarkable fungus in the
Kelmorton woods, and his intention of
writing a paper for the Congress at Rockton,
proving it to be edible. Since that
time Sophronia's talk had been of fungi ;
she had brought in toadstools of every
shape and colour, and had endeavoured to
persuade her family that they were infinitely
superior to mushrooms. But here Mr.
Deveron interfered ; he had no wish, he
said, to furnish a paragraph of warning in
the local papers, and, being old-fashioned,
he totally disbelieved in the wholesomeness
of any fungus whatsoever. The cook,
therefore, had stringent orders never to
accept any toadstools from Miss Deveron,
but to confine herself strictly to the old-established
mushroom. Sophronia lamented
their want of scientific enterprise, and

was fain to content herself with painting-portraits
of her treasures, which formed a
never-ceasing bond of union between her
and the curate.

VOL. I.

CHAPTER III.

The passionate summer's dead ! The sky's aglow
With roseate flushes of matured desire ;
The winds at eve are musical and low
As sweeping chords of a lamenting lyre,

Far up among the pillared clouds of fire

Whose pomp of strange procession upwards rolls
With gorgeous blazonry of pictured scrolls,
To celebrate the summer's past renown.

Ah me ! how regally the heavens look down,
Overshadowing beautiful autumnal woods.
And harvest-fields with hoarded increase brown,

And deep-toned majesty of golden floods

That lift their solemn dirges to the sky.
To swell the purple pomp that floated by !

October — Paul H. Hayne.

T T was so very seldom that Mr. Deveron
-^ left home for more than a couple of
days that it seemed to him really quite an

event to take so long a journey at such
short notice. Though to all outward
seeming a cold man, his affections were
really very deep and warm, and his only
sister Clare had been very dear to him in
the days when she had been submissive to
his superior wisdom. He had not a high
opinion of women, and considered that
they had no right whatsoever to views
that in any way ran counter to those of
their legitimate guardians and protectors.
He had so fully believed that, when he
had once said that he could never sanction
his sister's marriage, the affair was at an
end, that he had never quite recovered
from the blow dealt him by her taking the
matter into her own hands.

But as he travelled rapidly through the
rich autumnal landscape to what he concluded
must be his sister s death-bed, the
old affection came back to him, and,
though he did not go so far as to acknowledge
to himself that he had been harsh in

E 2

H^'5.tV 0^ ^VUNO^S

SO persistently refusing to hold any communication,
he yet found himself wishing-that
Clare had not so loyally obeyed his
desire of silence. It shocked him that he
should have remained in ignorance of his
brother-in-law's death, and, though less
swayed by the consideration of " what
people would say" than was his wife, he
felt that there was a certain awkwardness
in having only now learnt the fall of the
Marquis at Gravelotte. What was it that
his sister so earnestly desired to ask him ?
Not, he devoutly hoped, that he should be
guardian of her son ! He knew nothing
whatsoever of French laws or customs, and
should be most inefficient. Stay, though ;
she had said that Leon was twenty-one ; it
could not be that. Of the daughter he
did not think. He had a vague notion
that all French girls of good family were
kept in a convent, and married at seventeen
to some one they had never seen, or
else forced to take the veil. The more he

thought of it, the less he could imagine
what was the service that Clare was about
to demand of him, though he mused on the
matter all through the journey to Southampton,
the crossing to Havre in the still,
moonlit night, and the next day's travel
through sunny France. He had had but
little experience of foreign travel. Twice
Mrs. Deveron had persuaded him with infinite
difficulty to take her to Paris, and
once the doctor, inspired by her wishes,
had ordered him to Homburg, where he
had prone without faith, and whence he had
returned without benefit, having, in truth,
had nothing whatsoever the matter with
him.

He looked with considerable curiosity
at the strange country through which he
passed. The husbandry seemed to him
wretched, as, of course, he compared
everything with the Meadowshire standard,
where he was accustomed to see the
results of very high farming. The Chateau

de la Rochecaillou was situated in the
fertile region of the Loire, about half-way
between Tours and Angers, and at the
latter town he found himself compelled to
remain for the night.

Mr. Deveron was absolutely unacquainted
with any language but his own, and
had all the average Englishman's secret
contempt for those who had the gift of
foreign tongues ; but that evening he was
forced privately to confess that, when a
man was compelled by adverse fate to sojourn
in an inn where no one could understand
a syllable of English, there were
certain advantages to be obtained by familiarity
with French. He was not quite
reduced to the state of the gentleman in
Hood's amusing ballad, but it was chiefly
because he meekly accepted what was given
him without any attempt at explanation ;
certainly he would heartily have endorsed
that worthy's advice — '* Never go to France,
unless you know the lingo."

As the train for St. Sigolene did not
start till mid-day, lie had time in the
morning, after telegraphing to announce
his advent, to see the sights of the town,
which, without caring much for them
he did with a truly British sense o?
duty.

The cathedral of St. Mari certainly
impressed him, as it well might, being,
though he was unaware of the fact, one of
the finest in France ; but he did not care
much for the Hotel Dieu, though he respected
it as having been built by our
English Henry the Second, nor yet for the
picture gallery. Perhaps the Boulevards,
formed on the walls of the old town, were
what pleased him best, but he was really
anxious to reach his destination, and was
heartily glad when he found himself once
more en route for St. Sigolene. A small
waggonette met him at the station, and, in
answer to his anxious inquiry for his sister,
the servant replied that 'madame la Marquise

was neither better nor worse, but
very seriously ill."

The drive of six miles to La Rochecail-

lou was through a district of vineyards,

now just relieved of their purple load. It

had been a very fine vintage, and in a

village on the road they fell in with the

triumphant procession which answers to

our harvest home, but which, owing to the

natural taste and eye for colour possessed

by more southern races, is so infinitely

more picturesque than our prosaic northern

festivities. The procession might well have

been copied from some old picture of a

Triumph of Bacchus : the girls, wreathed

with vine-leaves and roses, dancing round

the car on which one of their number,

similarly crowned and embowered in vines

with rich purple bunches, sat enthroned,

was very different from any sight to be seen

in Meadowshire, and gave Mr. Deveron a

feeling that he was looking at peasants in

an opera rather than in real life. The rich

colouring of everything around him surprised
him; the country appeared so wonderfully
fertile, with its swelling hills covered
with chestnut and beech-trees, affording
frequent glimpses of the windings of the
silvery Loire, its calm waters studded here
and there by a hay-barge with its heavy
brown sail, or by some pleasure-boat with
a tiny white one. The peculiar green of
the olive groves, too, was new to him,
and, indeed, all was so unlike Meadow-shire
that he felt half surprised to see the
squirrels f risking from tree to tree as
merrily as if in the Kelmorton woods,
especially as they did not seem in the least
disturbed by the company of the golden-winged
orioles that darted in and out
among the vines. The blue blouses of
the peasants and the high white caps of
the women were also novelties to him, as
were the huge yellow gourds in every
cottage garden, and the great red earthen
bowls and pitchers ranged side by side

with bright brass pans that he caught
glimpses of through the cottage doors.

The old Castle of La E-ochecaillou was of
the style of architecture we are accustomed
to connect with French chateaux, with
high • hansard roof and numerous small
nouvelles. It stood on a richly-wooded
eminence just above the Loire, which,
winding considerably at this point, bathed
two sides of the hill on which it stood, the
little village clinging to the base along the
shore. It was a somewhat steep ascent to
the house, the road winding considerably
through woods of chestnut and beech, with
occasional clear spaces, where generally
stood a fine cork-tree.

At length they drove through great gates,
with the family arms on a large gilt medallion
in the centre of each, into a somewhat
sombre courtyard, and drew up before
the great door. Before the bell could
be rung the door was flung open by a very
tall, handsome young man, who flew down

the steps to the carriage door, and seized
his uncle by both hands.

"At last!" he exclaimed. ''Oh! dear
uncle, my mother has wished for you so 1
She was not sure — it was so long, so long
since she had heard of you, she feared so
many things ! That you might not get
her letter, or might not come, or — Enfin
que sais-je ? She will be transported, but
you cannot see her yet. She sleeps, and
she has so little rest."

•' And you are Leon ?" said his uncle,
much relieved to find himself addressed in
English.

Yes. Ah ! you know my name !"

Your mother mentioned it in her letter,.
and your sister Penseee."

Ah ! yes, she is with my mother, she
never leaves her but to sleep ; you will see
her presently. Now you must come into
the drawing-room to see Bonne Maman."

While the young man spoke he had
drawn his uncle through the hall, which

was the whole height of the house, and
panelled with oak carved with beautiful
garlands of fruit and flowers. In every
direction were brackets and shelves, on
which were displayed dishes and bowls
of Monsters faience, interspersed with
some fine specimens of old brass work,
which sparkled in the red rays of the declining
sun. From the hall they went along
a passage, the boards polished to a degree
of slipperiness very perilous to unaccustomed
feet, and then Leon opened a white
and gold door, and introduced his uncle
into the large saloon.

The floor was as slippery as that of the
corridor, with a few very handsome Aubusson
rugs at wide intervals ; the walls
were painted with wreaths of flowers upheld
by Cupids, the ceiling with clouds,
among which more Cupids disported themselves;
the furniture was of the Louis
Quinze style, the legs and frames of chairs
and sofas being elaborately carved and gilt,

while all the furniture was of cream-coloured
satin, covered with garlands of
roses. Looking-glasses in heavy gilt frames
were in every direction, and some exceedingly
handsome pieces of Sevres were disposed
about the room on the consoles and
high marble chimney-piece. Altogether,
to Mr. Deveron, it looked as magnificent
and as uninhabitable a room as he had ever
chanced to see. There seemed no place
where anyone so disposed could sit down
to do anything, and the furniture was
arranged in a stiff and formal manner, as
if prepared for some great reception.

A small bright fire of beech-logs burnt
on the hearth, and close to it, on a high
straight backed gilt chair, sat a lady, so
small that at first Mr. Deveron overlooked
her altogether, but Leon drew him forward,
exclaiming,

Bonne Maman, il est arrive ! voici, mon
oncle Georges." And he knew the lady,
who rose and made him a graceful curtsey

of old-fashioned formality, was the Dowager
Marquise de la E-ochecaillou.

She was an extremely small old lady,
with a clear brown skin and piercing black
eyes, which looked all the brighter from
the contrast with her snow-white hair,
which was arranged in tiny curls under
her cap of fine old point d'Alencon. She
was dressed in black velvet, and ruffles of
the same lace were worn at the throat, and
shading the tiny delicate hands. She wore
extremely high-heeled shoes, with large
bows and diamond buckles, and a black
walking-stick with a gold crutch-shaped
handle leant against the mantel-piece at
her side.

"You are most welcome. Monsieur,"
she said, as she rose. " I wish the cause
of your visit were less sad, but it is well
that you are in time. Our poor Claire
longs so to see you."

The Marquise spoke very slowly, and
with a strong foreign accent, but her

English, to Mr. Deveron's great relief, was
perfectly comprehensible. Leon left the
room to see if his mother were yet awake,
and his uncle sat down to await his return,
and to exchange short observations on the
weather and his journey with the old lady.
Jeanne Penseee, Marquise de la Eoche-
caille, had been brought up, as all the
women of her house (she was a daughter
of the Due de la Vendee, who was one of
the chamberlains of Marie Antoinette), had
been, in a convent, and was married to the
young Comte de St. Sigolene as a family
arrangement, without its being thought in
the least necessary to consult either of
them. The marriage, however, turned
out a happier one than could have been
anticipated. The Comtesse was of so
sweet and amiable a disposition that it
would have been hard indeed not to love
her, and her husband was soon her devoted
slave. The great grief of the first years
of their married life was the want of children

; for five years passed before Leon
their eldest sod, was born. The young
Comtesse, whose own family, like that into
which she had married, were staunch adherents
of the Bourbons, had been made
lady-in-waiting to the Duchesse de Berry,
and that lady was godmother to her child.
The old Marquis, who had been long a
widower, died soon after his master, Louis
Xvii, and, when the revolution of 1830
sent Charles X. into exile, the Marquis and
Marquise retired to La Eochecaillou, and
firmly declined all overtures from the Orleanist
party. Two more children had
been born to them : a boy who was
drowned at ten years old, and a daughter.
Leon demanded the Army as his profession,
and saw good service under General
Lamoriciere in Algeria.

It was a bitter grief to his father, who
was a devoted adherent of Henri Cinq,
that his son, immediately after the coup
cVetatj proclaimed himself a Bonaparte.

This was not such a grief to his wife, who,
Legitimist as she was, openly preferred
the Bonaparte to the house of Orleans,
saying that it was less criminal to usurp
the place of a stranger than of one of your
own family. She was now even willing to
spend some little time occasionally in the
vast and gloomy hotel in the Faubourg St.
Germain, which had remained unvisited
since the abdication of Charles X. In
deference to her husband's wishes, all invitations
from anyone connected in anyway
with the reigning dynasty were invariably
declined ; but there were many
friends of her youth to be met with in the
Faubourg, and both she and the Marquis
greatly enjoyed their return to Paris. La
E-ochecaillou was somewhat gloomy now,
for Leon was naturally but little at home,
and their only daughter was married to
the Comte de Yarennes, and resided principally
in Paris.

The Marquis soon began to disquiet

VOL. I. F

himself respecting his son's marriage. He
was now nine and twenty, and, as his
father represented to him, it was fully
time he should marry and give him the
delight of seeing his grandson. Leon
promised compliance, but he had been
several times in England, and had there
imbibed a strong prejudice against the
French custom of the affair being arranged
by anyone but the parties themselves. It
was in vain that the old Marquis, who
could not understand such ideas, argued
that it was the custom of the country for
people of their rank to be so married, that
he and Leon's mother had been so, and
that no love-match could possibly have
been happier than their union had proved.
Leon smiled, and said it could hardly have
been otherwise with such people as his
parents, but he would bind himself by no
promise, and very shortly after this he
met Clare for the first time.

Young men, when violently in love, seldom



stop to consider the wishes of their
parents. Leon had been accepted by Glare-before
it even occurred to him to think
what might be his father's feelings on
hearing that he proposed to marry not
only an Englishwoman, but what would be
infinitely worse in his eyes — a Protestant.
But he was so desperately in love that he
put all such considerations aside, and at
length wrote from Brighton to tell his
parents that he was really married, and
was about to brings his bride home.

It was a terrible blow to both parents ;
the Marquis's dignity was hurt by the
secrecy of the affair, and by the fact that
his son had married beneath the rank with
which a De la Rochecaillou had a right tomate
; the Marquise, who was the most
devout of Catholics, shuddered at the
thought of a heretic, and almost considered
Leon's own soul lost by such a union.
But both parents loved their only son far
too well to allow the marriage, much as

f2

they disliked it, to make any breach between
them. They welcomed Clare withall
the cordiality which they could assume,
and in a very short time learnt to love her
very dearly. Clare repaid their affection ;
she loved them as she loved no one else
but her husband, and when the Marquise
held her grandson Leon at the font, she
almost forgot that her daughter-in-law
was of an alien faith, in the pride and
happiness of the moment.

The young Count and Countess of St.
Sigol^ne spent the greater part of their
time in Paris, entering into all the gaieties
which were so new to Clare, and which
she heartily enjoyed. After the old Marquis's
death, which, as has been before said,
occurred about three years after the marriage,
of a cold caught on his return from
paying his respects at Frohsdorf, the old
Marquise never left the chateau, and,
while Leon was absent in Italy with the
Emperor, her daughter-in-law remained

with her. Afterwards, lie and her husband
resumed their gay life in Paris, and
were both favourites at the Imperial
court. The Marquis was one of the
many who engaged in the Prussian wear
with a light heart, and the certainty of a
triumphant march to Berlin ; and even the
first reverses failed to shake his confidence
in ultimate victory. His death at Grave-motte
overwhelmed his wife, who adored
him, with despair. She had never, so the
old Marquise told Mr. Dover on during
Leon's absence from the room, held up her
head since, and she had allowed an internal
malady to go on so long without advice,
that now, when compelled to seek it, it
was too late to be of any avail.

Mamma sleeps still," said Leon, returning;
*' it is fine, is it not, Bonne
Maman ! She will awake so refreshed, so
well ! Perhaps she will be able to come
downstairs tomorrow."

Take your uncle to his room, mon

cher'' said his grandmother, making no
reply to his sanguine expectations, which
she well knew could never be realized.
Dinner will be ready in half an hour," she
continued, turning to Mr. Deveron, "and
I doubt not after that Claire will be awake
and will wish to see you."

A French bed-room, with the bed in an
alcove, and the rest of the apartment looking
very like a dainty boudoir, hardly gave
Mr. Deveron an idea of comfort. However,
a small fire, and a profusion of wax candles,
made the room look cheerful, and
Leon having summoned Baptiste, the
butler, or, as he styled himself, Maitre
d'Hotel, and given him all directions, as
his uncle was unable to communicate with
him, took his departure to his own room.

When Mr. Deveron re-appeared in the
saloon he found an addition to the party
in the shape of a priest, who he learned
resided at the chateau. The worthy man
could not speak a syllable of English, nor

Mr. Deveron of French, which was perhaps
as well, as the latter could hardly have
been induced to make himself agreeable to
anyone of whom he entertained such a
horror, not unmixed with dread, as a
Roman Catholic priest.

"Your sister — does not she dine with
us ?" he asked Leon.

She never quits Mamma if she can
help it, and now that she has slept so long
she would not for worlds be absent when
she wakes."

The dinner passed by with very little
conversation; it was excellent, and served
with much ceremony, Baptiste directing
the movements of three tall Footmen, clad
in gorgeous state liveries. The old Marquise
clung to all the stately old fashions
of her early days, and was daily served
with as much pomp and circumstance as
if her repast were a public "diner du Roi."
Mr. Deveron was remarking on the beauty
of the fruit, the purple grapes, velvety

peaches and large yellow plums, which
were all reposing amid cool green leaves
in small baskets of chased silver, when
Baptiste re-appeared, and, with a low bow
to the Marquise, said,

Madame la Marquise desire voir Monsieur
aussitot que possible."

You would like to go at once, no
doubt," said the old lady, and Leon conducted
him to his mother's room.

CHAPTER IV.

So live that when thy summons comes to join
The innumerable caravan which moves
To that mysterious realm where each shall take
His chamber in the silent halls of death,
Thou go not, like the quarry-slave at night
Scourged to his dungeon, but, sustained and soothed
By an unfaltering trust, approach thy grave,
Like one that wraps the drapery of his couch
About him, and lies down to pleasant dreams.

Thanatopsis — Bryant.

three-and-twenty years make a
-*- considerable change in the appearance
of most people, but Mr. Deveron was
hardie prepared for the vast alteration in
his sister. Clare Deveron had always been
fragile-looking, but the face that lay on
the elaborately embroidered lace-edged
pillow, seemed to be literally transparent;

the delicate mouth was drawn in and had
deep furrows traced round it by suffering,
and the fair brow was marked with lines
of sorrow. As Mr. Deveron entered the
room a girl, so small and slender as to appear
almost a child, was seated on the
edge of the bed, but on his appearance she
rose, and, at a sign from the invalid, stole
noiselessly from the room.

Leave us, Leon, my child," said Madame
de la Rochecaillou in a feeble voice,
as he came to the bedside and pressed his
lips to her forehead. " I wish to speak
to your uncle alone."

You do feel better to-night, mother,"
said the young man, inquiringly, as he
turned to depart, '' you have had such a
long sleep, and "

'' It has given me more strength for this
interview," said his mother, with a smile
and a fond pressure of his hand. 'now
go, dear boy. I must not waste the little
strength I have left."

Leon departed, and Mr. Deveron sat
down by his sister's side.

"I am truly sorry to find you so ill,
Clare," he said. '' What advice have you
had? Is there anyone you would like to
see r

Doctors can do nothing for me' said
his sister, with a faint smile; "you are the
only person I wanted to see. Thank you
for coming so quickly."

I was very glad to come ? Is there
anything I can do for you ?"

Yes ; there is a great, unspeakable
favour I wish to ask of you. But first I
must tell you a little of my life. I daresay
in a general way you would have been
right, that the difference of our faith
might have made my dearest husband and
myself unhappy. I have seen it a fruitful
source of misery in many instances; I am
sure generally you would have been right.
But I want you to know that it never was
a trouble to us. I knew Leon was so

good, SO perfect, that no change of faith
could have made him better, and he was
tolerant of my faith and never interfered
with me. Indeed, he was annoyed when
his mother (Madame Mere he always called
her in jest ; she could not bear it ; it
sounded to her like Madame Letitia Bonaparte)
tried to make me listen to her confessor,
to ' take instruction,' as she called
it. She is a kind, good woman, but
devote, and the idea of her son's wife being
a heretic shocked and pained her ; nevertheless,
she was ever all that was kind tome,
and when she found that it annoyed
Leon, she left off urging the instruction
upon me. Ah, George ! though nothing
would ever make me a Roman Catholic,
believe me there are good and excellent
men and women amongst them, even
among the priests, when they are not
Jesuits. If it were not so, I should be
unhappy about my boy, my precious Leon,

who, of course, follows this father's faith."

I feared that must be the case. I
warned you the children must be Papists."

"But they were so good to me ; they let
me keep my Penseee."

'' Let you bring her up as a Protestant !
You don't say so !"

Yes. I was very ill when she was
born in Paris ; she was so delicate, we
hardly thought she would live, and Leon
asked if it would be a comfort to me. Of
course I was only too glad."

'but since — as she has grown older,
have they not striven to tamper with her ?
There seems to be a priest living in the
house."

Still I have kept Penseee. Madame
Mere has been most loyal; she knew it
was Leon's promise to me, and though
she dotes on the child, and it is naturally
painful to her views that she should be a
heretic, she has not only herself entirely

abstained from interference, but sbe has
contrived to impose silence on Pere Mason
her Directeur"

'' That is more than I could have supposed
possible."

'' But there is a danger. My sister-in-law,
Louise de Yarennes — she is a most
fascinating woman, Penseee adores her,
indeed it would be hard not to — everyone
who knows her does. She is an ardent
Catholic, and her desire is to save Pen see's
soul."

But you have frustrated this ? You
have kept the child ?"

eyes, hitherto, by never allowing her
to leave my side, by never suffering her to
be alone with Louise. I think — I hope
the child would not be easily influenced ;
but still she is very young. Poor child ! I
:am sure she must often have thought me
T-ery unkind for not allowing her to go to
ber aunt's room, when she has been staying
here, to see her dresses, and jewels,

and pretty things ; Louise herself is much
hurt about it, but T cannot help that."

"Certainly not; it is only your plain
duty."

*' But of course she does not see it in
our light. What she wishes — and it would
delight Madame Mere — is to make Penseee
a Catholic, and marry her to the Due de
la Caune, a man of sixty, and one of the
best partis in France."

But she is a child !''

•' No, she is seventeen and a few months.
Here girls are married out of the convents
at that age. Madame Mere and Louise
herself were married before they were
eighteen."

Preposterous ! How can a girl know
her own mind ?"

*' French girls are never supposed nor
expected to do so ; but I could not, independently
of religion, bear such a fate for
my Penseee. George, this is why I sent
for you. I want you to save her."

I ! My dear Clare, I should only be
too happy ; but what can I do ?"

** I want you to take her to live with
you, to be her guardian, to stand to her in
the place of a father. Leon is all that I
could wish, but he is young ; he is in the
Army; he will naturally be much away
from home ; besides, being himself a Catholic,
he could not be expected to see any
harm in Louise's wishes. I am sorry, very
sorry, to take the child from Madame
Mere, who loves her passionately, and will
miss her terribly, but it is better so ; it is
the only safety. And you will let her
come over for a visit in the winter. Louise
is always in Paris the, and the house is
triste ; it will brighten life for the grandmother,
to have her little sunbeam for a
month or two in the cold dark weather.
But I am talking as if all were settled.
Forgive me, George, I have not heard your
answer yet."

Mr. Deveron paused ; he never liked todo

anything rashly, and he was completely
taken by surprise. Though not exactly
governed by his wife, he yet was somewhat
apt, for the sake of domestic tranquillity,
to defer to her wishes, and he
hardly knew what would be her opinion of
the proposed new inmate. Very probably
she might dislike another young lady to
interfere with her daughters. Besides, it
was a very great responsibility ; the girl,
of course, in spite of all her mother's care,
must have imbibed French ways and notions
that might prove very embarrassing
in an English country home, for Mr.
Deveron was quite insular enough to believe
that all Continental manners and
customs must be quite different from, and
undoubtedly inferior to, English ones.
Perhaps Madame de Yarennes would not
allow herself to be defeated by her niece's
departure from La Rochecaillou, and might
enter into some conspiracy with the priests
of the Roman Catholic chapel in Arncester,
VOL. I. G

which would result in the catastrophe of
his niece being converted absolutely under
his roof. But yet, what could he say ordo?
His only sister, of whom he had
been so fond, from whom he had been
estranged for so many years, lay dying
before his eyes, and had sent for him to
make a last request that he would assist
her in snatching her child from the snares
of Rome. The girl would undoubtedly be
far safer at Arncester than at La Roche-caille;
even if he could have had the
heart to refuse his sister's dying request,
how could he reconcile it to his conscience,
thinking as he did of the iniquities of the
Woman Church, to leave his own niece to
fall a certain victim to its snares ?

The invalid's eyes were fixed searchingly
and imploringly on his face ; she saw
plainly that he was considering, that he
did not, as she had hoped would be the
case, accede without hesitation to her request.
The time occupied in reflection

was really extremely short, but to her it
seemed an age before his look of reflection
relaxed, and, turning to her with a smile,
he said —

It shall be as you wish, Clare. I
accept the trust."

Thank God !" said his sister, covering
her face with her thin wasted hands. After
a few moments she asked for a cordial that
stood on the table. Mr. Deveron gave it
to her, and suggested that she should now
try to sleep, and that they should continue
their conversation the next day. She
shook her head.

Let me say everything now : I may
have one of the fits of pain tomorrow, or
all may be over — the end may come at
any moment. Let me tell you of my little
Pansy, as I call her when we are alone together,
she and I. She is the dearest
child ! I am sure, George, you will not be
able to help loving her. I know in the old
days I did not make myself so pleasant as

g2

I might have done to Matilda. Ask her
to forgive me, and to show that she does
so by being kind to my child."

I am sure she will be so."

It was bold of Mr. Deveron to say this,
for he was by no means sure that his wife
would approve of their new inmate, and
was well aware that, when displeased, she
could show herself to be far from amiable.
However, having once given his consent,
he felt that it would be cruel to disturb
his sister with any doubts as to her child's
welcome.

** Does Penseee know what you propose?"
he asked. "I suppose you have
told Madame de la Rochecaillou ?"

'' No, 1 have spoken of it to no one. It
seemed to me better to say nothing till I
knew you would consent. You know I
was not even sure you were alive, or that
you would forgive me and come."

I am glad to have seen you once more,
Clare.

'' And I am thankful to you for coming,
beyond anything that I can express. You
will find Penseee a most loving and gentle
child. It is a hard pang to leave her and
Leon," and the mother's eyes filled with
tears.

Perhaps, after all, you may be mistaken,"
Mr. Deveron began ; but she stopped
him, and laid her hand on his.

It is a matter of hours, not days, with
me now," she said, faintly. ''I can talk
no more at present. You will stay for the
end, will you not, and take Penseee home
with you ? Bless you !" as he bowed his
head. " I have executed a deed appointing
you her guardian. Now go and send
her to me."

Mr. Deveron left the room, and when
he reached the salon, found it tenanted
only by the old Marquise and Penseee. The
young girl was very like her grandmother ;
she had the same slight, petite, upright
fissure, the same oval face and delicate

features, the same bright brown eyes ; but
Penseee's were larger and softer than those
of the elder lady, and her clear brunette
complexion had a lovely rose-flush on the
cheeks. Her wavy dark hair was turned
up from her brow over a low cushion, and
plaited in long loops at the back, intermingled
with one or two careless curls falling
on her neck.

*' Your mother wants you, Penseee," said
Mr. Deveron, and almost before the words
were uttered the girl had sprung up and
left the room. He took a seat opposite
the old lady, who was knitting busily.

You find our poor Claire very ill, I
fear," she said. ^^ Pauvre chere ! so young
so charming, it is sad "

She seems to be quite certain her case
is hopeless."

She has had the best advice from
Paris, and they all say so. She neglected
it too long at first. Her mind will be
easier now that she has seen you, Monsieur

It was evident from her impatience how
she longed to see you once more."

Mr. Deveron paused a moment to consider
whether it would be well to tell the
old lady the reason of his sister's summons.
It seemed to him almost underhand
not to tell her that he had just been
commissioned to carry away from her the
grand-daughter of whom she was so fond.
Besides, it struck him that it would be
more judicious that his sister's wishes
should be known before her death, so that
it might be clear to the family that he was
not exceeding his instructions. So he
decided that it would be best for him to
break the matter to Madame de la Roche-caille.


*• I suppose, madame," he said, 'you
are not aware why my sister was so anxious
to see me ?"

She looked surprised.

Mais non, monsieur ! Surely it understands
itself; you had parted many years

ago in displeasure; when one is dying one
wishes to be at peace with all the world,
above all with one's own family."

Yes, certainly ; but that was not quite
all — my sister wished to confide to me the
guardianship of my niece Penseee."

Madame de la Rochecaillou started and
dropped her knitting.

*' Her guardian ! what guardianship can
the dear child require but that of Leon
and myself? But doubtless it is but some
English form — some fancy "

*' Xo, madame ; my sister wishes that I
should be effectually my niece's guardian,
and that she should reside entirely with
me ; of course, paying you visits sometimes."


The old lady was much agitated, and a
tear rolled slowly down her brown cheek.

I am grieved," she said, simply ;
*' grieved more than I can say to lose the
dear child, but also that Claire should wish
such a thing. What does she fear ? Can

she not trust me to watch over my own
grandchild?"

It is from no distrust of you or of your
kindness, madame, I can assure you."

*' Then why is it ? The child is French,
a De la Rochecaillou ; surely her brother's
house is the proper place for her — I mean
no disrespect to monsieur."

^' Penseee is half English, madame, and
she is a Protestant."

Ah. !" — the old lady started, and
seemed at once to comprehend the situation
which had before bewildered her —
*rit is, then, that Claire fears we shall try
to convert la petite! But she knows I
have never done so."

"No, madame, and she does not fear
that you would do so now, but — you must
not be offended with me for saying so —
she fears that your daughter, Madame de
Yarennes, may not be equally discreet."

It is true," said the Marquise, after a
pause ; '*' Louise is very anxious that the

dear child should hold the one true faith,
1 can assure you, monsieur, it is not always
easy even for me, who love our Claire so
well, and know all her sweetness and goodness,
to abstain from interference."

She told me how kind you had been
to her, and how free she had been in her
faith."

Kind ! it would be hard to be otherwise
to so gentle a creature ; besides, my
Leon worshipped her. But about Penseee
is she really determined?"

'' Quite so, I think, madame ; she sent
for me on purpose, begged me to remain
here till — till all should be over, and to
take my niece back with me, and said that
she had executed a legal document constituting
me guardian."

The Marquise passed her hand across
her eyes ; she was evidently pained.

'' I am sure," continued Mr. Deveron,
feeling rather awkward, "that nothing
could be farther from my sister's thoughts

than to pain you ; lie spoke of your affection
for Penseee, and specially charged me
that she should visit you every winter,
but "

Every winter ! Ah, yes, I see ; ifc is
then that Louise is always in Paris."

Yes, so she said. She evidently fears
Madame de Varennes' influence ; she says
she is so very fascinating."

"Yes, she is. Well, of course, according
to her views, Claire is right, but it is a
blow to me. I am old, monsieur, and my
life is wrapped up in the young people.
My daughter has no children ; she has
always felt as a mother to our little
Penseee. She has always interested herself
in her marriage — a most unexceptionable
partly

So I understand. But, madame, my
sister is English, and cannot reconcile
herself to her child's life being disposed of
according to your customs."

"Ah, well! P think it answers as well

as yours. No one could be happier than
I and the Marquis, or than my Louise and
Monsieur de Varennes. But it is useless
that I trouble you, monsieur ; forgive an
old woman's disappointment at losing the
bright young life she loves so well. Her
mother has the best right to dispose of
her future. My Leon left her sole guardian
to both children."

Leon came in at that moment, and the
Marquise took the opportunity to fold up
her knitting, to wish Mr. Deveron goodnight,
and to withdraw to her own apartments.
Mr. Deveron proceeded to improve
his acquaintance with his nephew,
and was much pleased with his frank,
straightforward manner, " so unlike a
foreigner," as he said to himself, and with
his warm affection for his mother and
sister. Leon would not listen to the idea
of his mother's recovery being hopeless,
he was persistently sanguine.

"Yes, yes, I know, Manna says so," he

replied; "but she always looks on the
dark side of things, at least, ever since
that terrible day when we heard of poor
Papa. Before then she was always so gay,
so gay ! But she is so young still, so
young and beautiful ; it cannot be that she
should die."

Even younger people die very often,
Leon."

Yes ! yes !" with some impatience,
but they — they are not Mamma."

Mr. Deveron saw it was useless to pursue
the subject, and began to tell his
nephew of his mother's wishes respecting
Penseee. Leon was almost speechless with
astonishment.

"Penseee to go to England! To live
no more at Rochecaillou ! And Mamma
wishes this ? You are really serious, mon
oncle f

Yes, indeed, Leon. Is it likely I
should jest on such a subject ?"

No, no ! I beg your pardon ; but it

is SO strange, so unnatural ! Why should
Mamma wish to send Penseee away from
home?"

She will have a home with me," said
Mr. Deveron, who did not judge it necessary
to acquaint his nephew with all the
reasons which he had given to the Marquise";
"she will come over every year to
see your grandmother, and you must come
to Arncester sometimes to see her and
us."

Leon murmured something about liking
it very much, but he was evidently too
bewildered at the new idea that had been
presented to him of his sister's departure
to say much ; and, after seeing his uncle
to his room, he took a cigar and paced up
and down the garden in the moonlight,
trying hard to understand what it all
meant.

Meanwhile the coming change was being
broken to Penseee by her mother. They

had always been more like sisters than
mother and daughter, and Penseee understood
almost every thought of her mother's
heart. She quite knew why she was never
allowed to be alone with her fascinating-aunt
Louise, and in her youthful inexperience
was half indignant that Mamma
should not trust her principles sufficiently
to be sure that no persuasion, even from
her charming aunt, could shake her faith.
She knew better than anyone, save the
nurse who took the night duty, how ill
her mother was, and had no illusions as
to the possibility of her recovery ; but she
had never thought of anything beyond, or
imagined that it would bring any change
in the even tenor of her life.

My little Pansy !" said her mother's
feeble voice as she entered the room,
Come here, my darling ; I want to talk
to you."

"Are you not too tired, mother dear?"

said Pansy, stroking the thin hand. " My
uncle was with you so long. You must rest
now, and talk to me tomorrow."

There may be no tomorrow for me,
my Pansy. I must tell you now while I
can. My darling, when I am gone, I have
asked your uncle to be your guardian, and
to take you to live with him at Arncester."

To live at Arncester ! — in England ! —
to leave Bonne Maman, and Leon. Oh,
Mamma !" exclaimed Pansy in astonishment
and dismay.

You must think of it as my great wish,
dear ; it is for that that I sent for your
uncle all the way from England. My child,
it has been my great happiness to keep
you in my own faith : I have sheltered you
from any attempts to change it, but when
I am gone you will stand alone."

Surely you would trust me, mother."

Darling, I trust you to be all that is
sweet and good, but I know the specious
arguments, the blandishments, the clever

ways of making wrong seem right, that
will be brought to bear on you. You will
be assailed through your affections, and
you have too loving a heart, my Pansy, forme
to be sure you could resist."

For your sake I could do anything
mother."

Then, dear, accept your uncle cheerfully
as your guardian. You will find it a
very different life at Arncester from what
you have had here ; your uncle has girls
little older than you, and it will be a
healthier life for you than to be the only
young girl in this old chateau. You will
come to see your grandmother every year,
and doubtless Leon will come over to see
you. Promise me. Pansy, you will try
honestly to be happy at Arncester."

*' I said I would do anything for your
sake, mother, and of course I will try to
like what you think best for me ; but oh,
I wish — I wish I might stay here !"

I am afraid, dear, I have done wrong

VOL. I. H

in not accustoming you sooner to the idea,
but for so long I Loped I might be spared
to you, and I shrank from talking of what
was painful to us both. It was cowardice,
Pansy."

No, Mamma, it was tenderness for me.
You never think of yourself."

Still, child, it would have been truer
kindness to have told you sooner. But I
could not do so till I had asked your uncle's
consent ; he has accepted the trust most
kindly."

Pansy laid her head on her mother's
pillow ; she was afraid to speak, lest she
should sob. This severance from all she
knew, to go out into an utterly strange
world, seemed to her perfectly appalling ;
but so firm was her faith in her mother's
love and wisdom that she never thought
of questioning her decision, of appealing
against it. There was a long silence, which
was broken by Madame de la Rochecail-
lou.

*^As I said before, my Pansy, you will
find it a very different life. English habits
are different from what you have been
used to here. Do not set yourself against
new ways, my child, because they are
strange to you — you will find that they are
better suited to English customs than yours
would be ; and besides, an affectation of
singularity is always in bad taste. Your
uncle you will look upon as standing in the
place of your father, your aunt "

"Don't tell me to think of anyone as
being in your place, Mamma," said Pansy,
in a trembling voice. " I couldn't ! I
couldn't!"

Her mother stroked her hair fondly.

I could not wish you quite to do that,
my darling," she said ; " but you will try
to love her, Pansy, and give her your
obedience and respect. Of course I do
not say you can love these relations, who
are unfortunately strangers to you, all at

h2

once, as you love Bonne Maman whom you
have know all your life ; I only want you
not to begin by fancying you never can
love those with whom you are going to
live. Perhaps you may find it difficult at
first, you are not accustomed to young
people, and wills sometimes run counter to
each other, and tempers do not always suit.
It may be a trial for you, my Pansy, but it
will be good discipline, and you must not
expect always to find your life so smooth
as it has been hitherto. I do not say all
this to discourage you, my darling, only
that, if trials come, you may remember that
I warned you of them, and not imagine
that they are anything very terrible or
wonderful. Always be courteous and kind,
remember ' the soft answer that turneth
away wrath ' is better than the cleverest
sarcasm or the most convincing argument,
above all, be true, and hold to your word
if once given ; think of the La Rochecaillou
motto, ' Tiens ta foi'"

I will try to do all you wish, mother,"
murmured Pansy.

**My darling ! Now kiss me and go to
bed. Send me nurse, I think I could
sleep, my own little Pansy, my sweet little
Heartless, God bless you and make you
good and happy ! My heart feels light
to-night, now that I know you will be safe
with your uncle."

Poor Pansy's heart felt like lead as she
crept up to bed. She was a shy, timid
child, and dreaded unspeakably any intercourse
with strangers. For the seven
years that had elapsed since her father's
death, she had never left La Rochecaillou,
and the thought of finding herself among
people she had never before seen, and indeed
had hardly heard of, without a single
familiar face to comfort her, was perfectly
appalling. Mamma of course knew best,
but, oh ! if she might only have stayed
with Bonne Maman and Leon and sweet
Aunt Louise ! But she would not murmur-she

would try her very best to be happy,
aS mamma wished her to be, and with this
laudable resolve she sobbed herself to
sleep.

She was hurriedly aroused in the grey
dawn by the nurse. Madame was very
ill, she must come at once. Instinctively
the poor child knew the end had come,
even before she saw Bonne Maman, Leon,
and her uncle all assembled round the bed,
before she caught a sight of her mother's
face.

'' My own little Pansy, my treasure, God

bless " One fond kiss, and all was

over. Pansy gave one wild, sobbing cry.
and fell fainting into Leon's arms.

CHAPTER V.

I never spoke the word " farewell !"

But with an utterance faint and broken ;

A heart-sick yearning for the time
When it should never more be spoken.
Caroline Bowles.

Adieu, charmant pays de France,

Que je dois tant cherir !
Berceau de mon heureuse enfance,
Adieu ! te quitter, c'est mourir.
Les Adieux de Marie Stuart — Stranger.

rriHE time which Mr. Deveron spent at
-■- the chateau before his sister s funeral
hung very heavily on his hands. The old
Marquise was studiously civil to him, but
it was evident that she was hurt and
grieved at the care of her grand-daughter
being taken from her ; and he was entirely

dependent for companionship upon Leon.
He much liked what he saw of the boy,
but it was not the happiest time at which
to see him. Devoted to his mother, Leon
had always been sanguine as to her recovery
; it seemed to him impossible that she
could really be so ill as she supposed, or
that her malady could have a fatal termination.
The catastrophe, therefore, found
him unprepared, and prostrated him even
more than it did Pansy, who had been too
constantly with her mother to have been
able to deceive herself as to her condition.
Her grief was overwhelming and piteous
to behold, but it lacked the element of
surprise that so stunned her brother.

It was well for Leon that he was roused
by having to make all the necessary
arrangements for the funeral, which was
to take place at Tours, the nearest spot
where there was a Protestant cemetery.
Pere Masson, of course, took no part in
such proceedings, indeed he had always

greatly objected to the toleration with
which young Madame de la Kochecaillou's
heresy had been regarded, and to her
having been permitted to bring up her
daughter as she pleased. He had often
spoken very strongly to the old Marquise
on the subject, but, good Catholic as she
was, his representations on that point had
never seemed to have due weight with her.
Madame de Yarennes was far more sympathising,
and agreed with him perfectly;
and, little dreaming of the arrangements
which had been made for Pansy, he was
looking forward to her impending visit, to
arrange with her the means by which the
girl's conversion to the true faith should
be achieved. Mr. Deveron could, of
course, be of no assistance, owing to his
ignorance of the language, and it was,
after all, the best thing for the young man
to have a good deal to arrange, as it prevented
his abandoning himself to his
grief.

Mr. Deveron, in common with many
other English people, had an idea that
French people had no domestic affections,
that they were incapable of existing without
excitement, and that they never spent
more than a couple of days at a time at
their country seats, which were left in
charge of a steward, who was expected to
send every available farthing to be spent
in Paris. He could hardly contain his
astonishment at hearing that the old Marquise
had never left the chateau for
twenty years, that his sister and her husband
had spent several months each
year there, and that Madame de Yarennes
was always for four or five months at her
husband's chateau in Poitou. Certainly
there was no sign of want of affection.
Both Leon and his sister seemed absolutely
devoted to the old Marquise, Bonne Maman,
as they called her, and of her love
for them there could be no doubt. Either
the De la Rochecaillous were an exceptional

family, or Mr. Deveron's pre-conceived
notions were erroneous ; lie not
unnaturally came to the conclusion that
the first solution was the correct one.

Of Pansy, during the days preceding
the funeral, he saw very little ; when she
did appear she was very gentle, but very
quiet. She bore in mind all that her
mother had said during that last interview,
and was striving with all her might to
accept the prospect before her with resignation,
if not with cheerfulness ; but, in
spite of all her efforts, her heart often sank
within her at the thought of leaving everyone
she knew and loved, and going out
into the world of strangers. Sometimes
it seemed more than she could possibly
bear ; she felt as if she must fly to her
uncle and beg him to leave her at La
E-ochecaillou — at any rate, for a time. But
then she remembered that she had promised
her mother — that mother whom she
had loved so very dearly — that she would

cheerfully obey her wishes and endeavour
to make herself at home in the strange
English household. So complete had been
the sympathy between Madame de la
liochecaillou and her child that Pansy had
never even thought of questioning the very
slightest of her mother's wishes, and was
almost shocked at herself, and terrified at
her own wickedness, when she realised
that she had actually been contemplating
disobedience. The weary days before the
funeral seemed to her to fly only too
quickly, for her uncle had told her that,
the day after the ceremony, he must set
out on his journey homeward.

The day before the funeral, Madame de
Yarennes arrived, and very great was her
surprise and indignation when she heard
what had been decided for her niece. She
had laid her plans so differently ; had been
so persuaded that she would experience
little difficulty in inducing the girl, who
was so attached to her, to become a Roman

Catholic, and that then her splendid marriage
to the Due de la Caune would be a
certainty. She tried to persuade her
mother to exert her authority to forbid
Pansy's departure, but the old lady positively
refused.

I am more sorry than you can be,
Louise ; the child is very, very dear to me,
and I shall miss her at every hour of the
day. Also, I know she will miss me, and
I fear she will not be so happy in her
English home as she would be here, where
we all know and love her.' But it was
poor Claire's great wish, and I would not
attempt to oppose it, even if I had the
power, which I have not. Claire left a
perfectly legal document leaving the child
to her brother."

Had she the power ? I should dispute
it; Mr. Deveron cannot be very
anxious to have her, he would easily give
way."

I shall neither say nor do anything. I

had rather it remained as poor Claire
wished. The wishes of the dead are
sacred."

And, talk as Madame de Varennes and
Pere Masson, who perfectly agreed with
her, mio^ht, they could not change Madame
de la Rochecaillou's mind.

On the return of Mr. Deveron and Leon
from Tours, the former saw his niece, and
expressed a hope that she would be ready
to start with him the following day.
Madame de Varennes declared the notice
was too short, and tried to arrange that
Penseee should follow her uncle in a week
or two ; but Mr. Deveron pointed out the
inconvenience of this, and Pansy at once
professed herself perfectly ready to go
with him. She felt that, as the parting
was to be, the sooner it was over the
better. Madame de Varennes was quite
provoked, for she had hoped to prolong
the 'week or two" indefinitely, and to
keep Penseee at La Rochecaillou. It would

give "her considerable eclat if she could
convert her niece, and also marry her to
the old Due de la Caune, the representative
of one of the oldest families in France,
who would by no means have disapproved
of the girl's fortune. Penseee inherited
her mother's fortune of £10,000, which
her father had always refused to touch,
and left exclusively to his wife, and which
sounded very magnificent in francs.

However, there was nothing more she
could do, and the next morning she saw
Penseee, looking very pale, but perfectly
calm and tearless, setting forth to accompany
her uncle back to England. Leon,
whose leave of absence was up, bore them
company as far as Paris, Mr. Deveron
having determined to return by that route,
and avoid the necessity of sleeping at
Angers or Havre.

Pansy watched with sad eyes the fertile
Loire country which she was leaving
behind fly past her. The vintage was

over, but the woods were in all the glorjr
of their early autumnal dress, the day was
^varm, calm, and still, and the beautiful
windsor river was as blue as the cloudless

o

sky which it reflected. She sat very quiet,
looking out of the window, and her uncle,
who was secretly rather shy of her, was
not sorry to leave her to her own thoughts,
and to talk to his nephew, of whom he had
naturally seen more, and whom he liked
excessively. Leon rather startled him
sometimes by his open Bonapartism, and
his avowed belief that the re-establishment
of the Imperial regime was only an affair
of months. It did not seem to him altogether
right for a young man who was
actually serving the Republic, yet so firm
was his own conviction that Bonapartism
was the only hope for France that he could
not reprove his nephew, as he felt he
ought to do. Leon's regiment was at
present at Lyons, and, after spending one
day in Paris, he left to rejoin it, his uncle

and sister setting out the ensuing day for
England.

It was a great struggle to Pansy not to
throw her arms round his neck and cry as
if her heart would break ; it was only the
thought of her mother, and of the self-control
which she had always striven to
teach her, that enabled her to restrain
herself. But, as might be expected, the
strong effort by which alone she controlled
herself rendered her manner cold and unnatural,
and Mr. Deveron, while thankful
to escape the lamentations he had anticipated,
thought that his niece could have
little natural affection.

Their journey was somewhat wearisome
to both, for Pansy was naturally hardly in
the mood for asking questions or making
conversation, and her uncle did not know
what to talk to her about. He was greatly
surprised and relieved to find that she
proved a good sailor, and when they were
once on English soil, conversation, of a

VOL. I. I

kind, was easier, as be was able to point
out places to ber, and tell ber their names.
He noticed with approval that sbe did not
merely say " Yes," or, " Ob, indeed !" but
generally knew something of the places be
mentioned, or asked a question as to why
they were worth noticing. They spent
one night in London, in an botel that
seemed to Pansy the darkest and grimmest
place sbe bad ever seen ; and then,
to Mr. Deveron's infinite rejoicing, be
found himself on bis road borne. His absences
were so rare, and generally so short,
that be could not divest himself of the
idea that all sorts of things must bave
happened since be left borne, and that be
should find bis presence greatly needed.

As the day wore on, Pansy's nervousness
increased. Sbe bad by this time
grown somewhat accustomed to ber uncle,
but what sbe dreaded was the introduction
to ber cousins. Sbe knew nothing of any
young people, and shrank from the unknown

with nervous timidity. Of Mrs.
Deveron she felt nothing like the same
apprehension : of course she would not belike
her darling mother — no one ever could
but still she had some experience to
guide her in her ideas of elderly people,
while of young ones she knew absolutely
nothing. She felt it quite a relief that no
one met them at the station, but her uncle
seemed considerably surprised and rather
annoyed.

There had been much astonishment in
the market-place on the receipt of Mr.
Deverons letter, announcing that his
sister had left Pansy to his guardianship,
and that she would return with him to
Arncester.

Well ! I'm not easily surprised," said
Mrs. Deveron, laying down the letter ;
"but that Clare should have thought of
such a thing, and still more that your Papa
should have consented, takes my breath
away."

i2

Mr. Deveron's letters were of the most
cursory description, and he had said nothing
about his sister's reasons for wishing
her daughter to leave France.

"That he should be willing to have a
Roman Catholic after all I've heard him
say !" continued Mrs. Deveron. " Well,
well ! when all's said and done what odd
contradictory creatures men are, to be
sure !"

*does he say whether she is pretty or
not, Mamma ?" asked Julia.

My dear, he says nothing but just the
fact. Men never do write letters that tell
you anything. He couldn't have been
busy either."

"It will be a bore having a third to
divide the going out; we have none too
much as it is," said Julia, discontentedly.

"Well, she will be in too deep mourning
to interfere in that way yet awhile," said
her mother; 'but that is a sort of thing
that would never enter your Papa's head

as an objection. I doubt if he Avould
understand it if be was told."

Of course a French girl will be very
frivolous and silly," said Sophronia; "she
will be no companion for me, I'm sure."

I only hope she mayn't be a great
upset in the house," said Mrs. Deveron ;
"her mother and I never got on well
together. Clare had a sharp tongue."

"What is she called?" asked Julia.
If she were English, she would be Lady
Penseee as a Marquis's daughter. What is
it in French ?"

I'm sure I haven't a notion," owned
her mother, reluctantly. " Soph ! you
know everything — what is it ?"

This phrase, "you know everything,"
was quite a household word of the Develops
with regard to Sophronia, and she
had heard it until she implicitly believed it
to be true. Her infinitesimal smattering
of knowledge so often enabled her to
enlighten those of the family who knew, if

possible, less, that she had grown to believe
herself quite infallible, and was always
ready to contradict anyone who ventured
to differ from her. Even when, as in the
present instance, she was right, she gave
the information in a manner that testified.
contempt for anyone less well instructed.

*' Dear me, Julia, I wonder you can ask
such a thing ! Of course there is no title
like ' lady ' in France ; all their peerage is
different. She is Mademoiselle de la
E-ochecaillou. Even the daughters of
royal dukes are only Mademoiselle. You
might remember that in History !"

'' I do remember something about ' La
grande Mademoiselle,' " said Julia, meekly.
*' Of course you're right, Soph ; you always
are.

And she has no precedence in England,"
continued Sophronia, who was considered
to be an authority on etiquette ; "it is
only by courtesy that any foreigner ever
has any."

Oh, well ! that makes matters* very
easy," said Mrs. Deveron ; " I shan't be
always afraid of forgetting. Which room
had she better have ?"

The blue," said Julia ; *' it is very
comfortable, and perhaps she may take a
fancy to sit there, and not always want to
be with us. It will be a bore having a
stranger always. I wonder if she can talk
English?"

It will be a very good thing for your
French if she cannot."

''Oh, bother! What is the use? It
would be as bad as school over again."

From the time of the first announcement
till the day when the travellers were
expected, speculations concerning the new
cousin were the chief topic of conversation
in the market-place. A few further details
were gleaned from Mr. Deveron's
letters, namely, that Pansy was a Protestant,
had inherited her mother's fortune, and
seemed very quiet. Mrs. Deveron invested

herself in most orthodox mourning, v>^ith a
larger amount of crape than she would
have deemed necessary had her sister-in-law
not been a Marquise, and consequently
a pleasant subject of conversation. She
wished her niece had been left quietly in
Trance, but it could not be helped, as she
told the girls, and so had better be made
the best of. After all, it would not interfere
with their going out at present, and,
before Pansy's mourning allowed of her
going into society, perhaps one of them
might be married.

It was into this household, inclined to
receive her as an inmate to be endured
rather than enthusiastically welcomed, that
Pansy made her entry at the end of her
long day's journey.

Her uncle did not seem to think much
introduction necessary. He kissed his wife
and daughters, and then, saying, " Here is
Pansy. Pansy, my dear, here are your
aunt and cousins," asked if his letters were

in the study, and went off immediately in
search of them.

Perhaps it is hardly correct to say that
Pansy was shy, but she had seen very few
strangers in her life, and felt very strange
and out of place. She longed for some one
to take her in her arms aud kiss her, as her
mother or Bonne Maman would have done,
and her heart swelled, and the tears rose
in her eyes, when she was received much
as if she had come to pay a morning visit.
To do Mrs. Deveron and her daughters
justice, they did not mean to be unkind
or inhospitable ; they were only stiff and
uncomfortable, and hardly knew what to
say to their new inmate. They were all
relieved to find that she spoke perfect
English, and were quite satisfied that her
personal appearance would in no way interfere
with the girls' prospects. Pansy's
slender, high-bred look was entirely thrown
away upon them, their canons of beauty
being of an infinitely larger and more

florid type. They felt quite at a loss wHat
to say to bcr, and it was a relief when Mrs.
Deveron took her upstairs, and told her
dinner would be ready in half an hour.

CHAPTER VI.

It is success that colours all in life :
Success makes fools admired, makes villains honest.
All the proud virtue of this vaunting world
Fawns on success and power, howe'er acquired.

Thomson''

A Annette," said Mr. Delmar, coming
-^^ into the drawings-room at Daleford
one very cold evening in January, on ibis
return from hunting, *' do you remember
that young Marquis and Marquise de la
Rochecaillou that we met once at Horn-burg
?"

'* Remember them ! Why, yes, Henry,
I should think so ! Don't you remember
how kind she was in lending me her little
girl's nurse, when Edith was so ill and we

would get no one ? But what makes you
think of them now ?"

"Because I never knew till to-day that
Madame de la E;Ochecaillou was a sister of
Deveron, the banker in Arncester — you
know she was English."

Yes. How strange it is how very
small the world is ! IIow came you to
hear it ? I should be 2:lad to see her

again.

You will never be able to do that, she
died last September. Her husband, it
seems, was killed in the Franco-German
war, at Gravelotte, I think. The way I
came to hear of it was that I asked who
an interesting-looking girl in deep mourning
was, who was with Mrs. Deveron at
the meet to-day, and I heard it was Mademoiselle
de la Eochecaillou, who, it seems,
is to live with her uncle. You said you
would like to have seen Madame de la
Rochecaillou again — couldn't we do something
kind to her child ?"

Mrs. Delmar hesitated ; she saw at once,
which her husband did not, that no civility
could be offered to Mademoiselle de la
Eochecaillou while she resided under her
uncle's roof, without including that uncle's
wife and daughters. She had, as she reflected,
no reason against knowing Mrs.
Deveron, except that it was somehow the
custom of the county only to recognise the
banker himself; but Mrs. Delmar was
quite independent-spirited enough, and of
sufficient importance in the county, to have
no fears of compromising her position.
Still it was a new idea, and she said —

I suppose you don't remember that if
I call on the girl I must also call on Mrs.
Deveron. What do you say? I have
really no objection, and I should like todo
something for the daughter of the
woman who was so sympathising and helpful
to me. But you must realise where it
leads us."

Well, really, Annette, if as you say

j-ou have no objection, I don't see why you
shouldn't do it; I believe she is a very
worthy sort of woman, and it will do us
no harm. Deveron is a very good fellow,
and I daresay it will please him. He has
rather a pretty daughter out now, who
was riding to-day, and went well. Then
you will call ?"

** I think it would be rather awkward to
call suddenly, having omitted to do so all
these years. The Deverons are sure to beat
the Hunt Ball next week, and I will
make Mrs. Vernon introduce me, and say
something civil about Mademoiselle de la
Rochecaillou."

Yes, and then you can look at her first
and see what you think of her."

Hardly likely that she will be there if
her mother only died in September."

** Ah ! I daresay you are right. Well,
it is time for me to go and dress."

More than three months had elapsed
since Pansy's arrival beneath her uncle's

roof, and she had grown quite used to the
routine of the family, different as it was
from anything to which she was accustomed.
The last seven years of her life
had been passed entirely in a fine old
chateau, with well-kept formal gardens, in
which she wandered at will; and among
peasants with almost all of whom she was
familiar. She was accustomed to going,
either with her mother, or, after Madame
de la Eochecaillou's health began to fail,
by herself, to all the cottages, and to being
regarded as a sort of good fairy when she
brought a shawl which Bonne Maman had
knitted for one old woman, or a pair of
stockings for another, or a little frock
made by herself, under her mother's direction,
for one of the children. She had
known them all so well, and been so
adored by them, as cette petite ange Mademoiselle
Penseee, that she greatly missed the
constant interest and occupation. It
seemed a strange confinement to live in a

town, and the garden, charming as it was,
seemed very restricted after the handsome
grounds of La E;Ochecaillou.

The winter set in early, and with considerable
severity; and, before it did so,
Pansy was hardly sufficiently accustomed
to her surroundings to find out any of the
pretty spots which abounded in the neighbourhood.
Her cousins abhorred a country
walk ; their only idea of pleasure in exercise
was the people whom they might meet,
and the monotonous length of Arne Street
was far more fascinating to them than the
most beautiful lane or river walk.

When Pansy went out with them, they
always scrupulously introduced anyone
they met to her, but then proceeded entirely
to monopolise the stranger's attention
; and when Pansy listened to the
conversation, it had little interest for her,
consisting, as it did, of jokes and pieces of
chaff, comprehensible only to the initiated.
Both her mother and grandmother were

very cultivated and well-read women, for
Clare, always intellectually inclined, had
read immensely after her marriage. Pansy
was exceptionally well educated, and had
read more than most girls of her age, and
she found a great contrast between the
talk about books and the thoughts which
they suggested to which she had been accustomed,
and the trashy chit-chat which
seemed to be her cousins' only idea of conversation.
Sometimes some utterance of
Sophronia*s would give her a hope of some
interesting conversation, and she would
endeavour to pursue the subject, but always
found her wishes evaded. She had
not the experience and knowledge of the
world requisite to enlighten her as to the
reason why her cousin so abruptly changed
the subject. Really, Sophronia was afraid
of being drawn beyond her depth, and
perhaps proved to be fallible ; but Pansy,
who was very diffident, imagined that her
cousin was far too clever to be troubled

VOL. I. K

by discussing the subject with anyone so
ignorant as herself, and only wished that
she knew more, so as to be more companionable.


When all her possessions were sent to
her from La Rochecaillou, her cousins were
amazed at her large library.

"Whatever did you trouble to bring all
those books for?" said Mrs. Deveron.
*' There's a capital circulating library in
the town in connection with Muche, and
you could get anything you want."

•'But these are my own pet books," said
Pansy, " all given me by mamma and
Bonne Maman ; ifc would be like being
without friends. Indeed I will keep them
all quite tidily in my own room."

They were all good standard works —
Racine and Corneille, Tasso, Dante, Moliere,
Metastasio, Shakespeare, and all the best
English poets. Madame de la Rochecail-
lou had been devoted to poetry, and her
daughter had been accustomed to read to

her a great deal, and to have her taste
formed by afterwards discussing the beauties
of what she had read. There were
books of history, travels, and essays as
well, all bearing marks of diligent use,
and very unlike the works selected by
Mrs. Deveron from the Arncester Library.
She and Julia read nothing but the lightest
fiction : Sophronia was fond of ordering
books with appalling scientific titles ; these
she skimmed occasionally, taking notes of
the longest and hardest words, but they
generally lay ostentatiously on the table,
where they could not fail to be seen by
visitors. None of Pans's books were
familiar to either of the sisters ; all they
knew of the standard literature of their
own or any other country being the extracts
which they had been required to
learn at school, and which had not awakened
in them the slightest desire to know
more of their authors.

In the four months she had spent at

k2

Arncester, Pansy bad settled down into
her place in the household. She had none
of the trials to endure which she had half
anticipated from her mother's warnings ;
her aunt was very kind to her, and her
cousins, though not congenial, were always
amiable to her. There was really nothing
to bear, except the want of companionship,
which she felt bitterly — the absence of
anyone to whom she could talk, either of
the books she read, or of her own thoughts
and fancies. Like most girls who have
been brought up without young companions,
Pansy was very imaginative, her own
thoughts and visions having stood to her
in lieu of playfellows. Her mother had
always encouraged her to talk to her of
her day-dreams, and she missed terribly
the power of talking openly of all her
thoughts and feeliuo^s.

Once or twice when she had imparted
some of her fancies to Julia, her cousin
had laughed and said, " How odd !" and

what was worse had referred to " Pansy's
whims " before the others, and had 'chaffed
" her about them. It was all very good-humoured
and not at all unkindly meant,
but Pansy was extremely sensitive, and
shrank from being laughed at, even more
than young girls in general. Her uncle
was always kind, but she saw very little of
him, and it never seemed to be thought of,
even by his own daughters, to talk to him
of their thoughts and feelings. Conversation
always turned on what had been done
and what had been seen during the day,
or any anticipated gaiety in the town.

Of course at first Pansy's deep mourning
rendered it impossible that she should
share in any of the gaieties that took
place, and for the first three months she
was allowed to dine upstairs whenever
there was a dinner-party at home ; but at
the expiration of that time her aunt
decreed that she was not to " mope " any
longer, and insisted that she should appear

at home, even though she did not go out.
The one dinner-parfcy that had since been
given in the market-place had therefore
been graced by her presence, and to her
had not seemed a very amusing entertainment.
She was at a complete loss to
understand why both her cousins, on the
departure of the guests, seemed annoyed
and put out. She had no conception that
the reason why they had hitherto got on so
well was that she, having seen no one,
had been unable to interfere with any of
their friends. Julia, herself a born flirt,
and always desirous of attracting anyone
who seemed to be paying attention to one
of her friends, was excessively jealous of
any interference with anyone whom she
herself liked, and young Mr. Vernon had
evinced a most unwelcome admiration of
Pansy's singing of two little French songs.
Pansy had no pretension to be a great
performer, but she had a very sweet
though not powerful voice, and as she had

never learnt the art of refusing to do what
she was asked in order to make her
compliance on entreaty a greater favour,
she had sat down as soon as she was
requested and sung two little peasant
chansons, which, being quite a novelty and
sung by a stranger, had created a sensation
which Julia's better-known songs had failed
to do. Mr. Harry Yernon had been
specially enthusiastic, and had hung about
her during the rest of the evening, in a
way that had greatly roused Julia's wrath.
Sophronia had been offended in another
way. A discussion had arisen as to the
source of a line which Mr. Musgrave had
quoted.

*' Although the day be never so long,
At length it bringeth to evensong."

He said himself that he did not know
whence it came, and two or three suggestions
had been made, when he appealed to
Sophronia as certain to know. Such au

appeal was never made in vain, and lie
answered at once and without hesitation
that Whittier was the author. No one
knew better, and very few liked to
acknowledge their ignorance of the very
name of the American poet. But Pansy,
who sat on the other side of Mr. Musgrave,
said to him quietly, when the conversation
had been resumed,

I think Sophronia has confused the
line you quoted with another — it is not by
Whittier, but in an old poem by Stephen
Hawes — ^ Passe Tyme of Pleasure.' "

If Mr. Musgrave had been wise he
would have kept the information to himself,
but, like Pansy, he was innocently
unconscious that Sophronia's claims to universal
information were quite imaginary,
and conceived that she would be only too
glad to have her mistake corrected ; he
therefore proceeded to impart to her what
Pansy had just said. Unfortunately, there
was at that moment a pause in the conversation,

several persons heard the communication,
and Arthur exclaimed,

So, Soph, you're not always right,
after all !"

Sophronia was very angry, but Pansy,
who happened to be talking to her neighbour,
did not hear what passed, and never
connected her observation to Mr. Musgrave
with Sophronia*s evident ill-temper after
the departure of the guests. She had yet
to learn that much of her cousins' amiability
was owing to her never yet having
crossed their path. When she did so, no
matter how unconsciously, she would find
that selfish and frivolous natures were
capable of a good deal of petty spitefulness,
which, though she hardly understood
its cause, would considerably mar her
comfort. Her Cousin Arthur was the one
of the family whom she liked the best ; he
was honest and straightforward, far more
refined than his sisters, whose flirting and
somewhat underbred manners he greatly

disliked ; and, though by no means well-read
himself, yet quite capable of appreciating
culture in others. He had a very
high ideal standard of what women should
be, which must certainly have been evolved
out of his inner consciousness, for it could
not have been founded on any of the
young ladies in Arncester ; and Mrs. Mor-dan,
who most nearly approached his
views, yet did not quite fulfil them.
Pansy's gentleness and extreme courtesy
charmed him ; she always seemed anxious
to smooth over anything disagreeable, and
to say what was pleasant if it was possible ;
if it was not, she carefully kept silence.
He contrasted her with his sisters, who
were both addicted to sharp speeches
which they believed to be clever, and to
reminding people of what they wished
particularly to forget, by way of '' fun and
chaff;" and Pansy's virtues rose in his
estimation by the comparison. He was
the only one of the household who thought

her pretty ; his mother, herself a large
woman, exclaimed in amazement at his
finding any beauty in '' such a scrap of a
child." Julia, whose complexion was lovely,
wondered at his admiring anyone " as
brown as a berry;" and Sophronia '' could
not admire a face where there was no sign
of intellect."

After bis first expression of opinion,
Arthur was wise enough to keep his own
counsel, but, perhaps owing to his silence,
he thought the more, and by the time Pansy
had been with them four months was very
far on the way to being seriously in love
with her. His companionship was a great
comfort to Pansy. He attended very
assiduously to business in the Bank, and
she did not see a very great deal of him -
but he discovered that she was very fond
of exercise, and enjoyed country walks
amazingly, though she did not care for the
promenades up and down High Street and
Arne Street that delighted his sisters

'From the time when he made this discovery,
he generally offered to take her fora
walk once or twice a week, and in
this way she made acquaintance with all
the prettiest spots in the neighbourhood.
gradually she learnt to talk to her cousin
more openly than she had ever done to
anyone except her mother, and though of
course it was not the same thing, still it
was a very great comfort to her. Julia
and Sophronia soon began to joke her
about Arthur, but, fortunately for her
comfort and serenity, she did not in the
least understand what they meant.

She had been brought up without ever
hearing any of the silly vulgar jokes about
love and lovers in which under-bred people,
and indeed sometimes even those who have
not the excuse of being such, so often indulge,
with the inevitable result of destroying
the delicacy of mind of any young
people who may hear them. Sophronia
and Julia had been joked about their

lovers, real or imaginary, by their mother
and her friends, ever since their first
child's party; as a natural consequence
lovers were always in their minds, pretty
well to the exclusion of love itself. There
was no mystery, no delicate reserve in
their thoughts of the great passion, they
had a trick of regarding every man who
spoke to them civilly as a lover, and were
rather mortified if they were not '' chaffed "
about him by their friends.

Pansy, on the contrary, had heard nothing
of love but what she had read in
books, and when she thought of it at all,
which was very seldom, for her mind was
still singularly childlike, it was as a sacred
mystery which made her heart beat and
her cheeks burn. When she heard her
cousins and their young friends laughing
at each other about different gentlemen, it
never occurred to her that there was any
love in the matter ; it sounded very strange,
and it somehow jarred her, but she never

connected it Tritli love or marriage. Arthur
saw that she was quite unconscious, and
refrained from speaking to his sisters so
sharply as he otherwise might have done,
lest their answers should enlighten her.

The drive to the meet with her aunt had
been a great pleasure to Pansy, who had
never seen anything like it before. The
hounds had met at Arlington Common, a
tract of oforse and heath some six miles
from Arncester; the meet was under a
clump of splendid oaks at one end of the
common, which afforded a certain amount
of shelter for the spectators, and from
which there was a view over the heath up
the Valley of the Arne, with the castle and
church of Arncester in the middle distance,
and the hills of Yorkshire closing in the
view. There was a bright sun and a large
field, the red coats showing well on the
dark heath, and altogether it was a bright
spectacle that gave Pansy infinite pleasure.
She did not in the least envy Julia, who,

mounted on a pretty chestnut, was receiving
much attention from Mr. Harry
Vernon and one or two others, and who,
despite her father's directions that she was
to keep close to him, had every intention
of distinguishing herself by going straight.

Pansy had heard enough to make her
aware that the " county people " did not
call on her aunt, and that the latter was
very anxious that they should do so. She
knew nothing of English life, and did not
in the least understand all that was implied,
but she could not help wondering
why her aunt should wish to be visited by
anyone who apparently did not wish to
know her.

The Hunt Ball gave rise to an immense
amount of conversation ; it was always a
great event in Arncester, for all the houses
in the neighbourhood were filled for it,
and the townsfolk liked to see the smart
London people who came down to stay
with their friends for the occasion. But

this year there was a drawback to the
perfect felicity of the occasion in the fact
that one of the great ladies of the county,
Lady Peveril, of Stanmore, was going to
give a ball two nights after, and to this
the Deverons were not invited, with the
exception of Arthur, who had been at
Rugby with young Sir Julian, Lady Several's
son. His being asked made his sisters
even more unhappy at their exclusion. It
really seemed too hard, Julia said, with
tears in her eyes, that he, who cared so
little for gaiety, should have such a treat,
and that they, who would give anything to
go, should be omitted. He might ask Sir
Julian.

''No, that I certainly neither can nor
will do," said Arthur, decidedly : ^' but I'll
tell you what, Julia, if I possibly can, I'll
introduce Peveril to you at the Hunt Ball."

Pansy saw her aunt and cousins attired
in all their finery before she went to bed,
and thought Julia looked excessively

pretty — sbe was the sort of girl who almost
always looked her best in a ball-room. A
sort of wish that she were going too, crossed
Pansy's mind : it seemed as if it would
be so pleasant to see the lights, and hear
the music, and feel herself flying round in a
valse. It pleased her to hear Arthur say,

"I wish to goodness you were coming
with us, Pansy !" though she felt almost
shocked at herself for wishing such a
thing. Had she forgotten poor mamma
so soon ?

The next morning Pansy, her uncle
and Arthur, breakfasted alone. Arthur
testified that the ball had been capital,
that they had all enjoyed themselves excessively,
and that his mother had been
much pleased by Mrs. Delmar asking to
be introduced to her.

*' She knew something of you, Pansy,
that was the reason," he said.

*' Of me !" said Pansy, looking up in
surprise : *' how can that be ?"

VOL. I. L

I don't know, but mother said something
about it ; yes, I'm sure it was for you
that she wished to make the acquaintance."

"I never heard of such a person," said
Pansy ; '' at least I have heard Aunt Matilda
mention the name, that is all."

But when Mrs. Deveron and the girls
made their appearance, the matter was
explained ; and Pansy found that, owing
to no act of her own, she was in the highest
favour. It was owing to her that Mrs.
Delmar of Daleford, one of the most
exclusive of the Meadowshire ladies, had
asked to be introduced to Mrs. Deveron,
and had intimated her intention of calling.
This in itself, before the eyes of assembled
Arncester, was much, but there was even
more to come. Arthur had fulfilled his
promise of introducing Sir Julian Peveril to
Julia, and that young man being rather
impressible, and easily smitten by a pretty
face, had paid her a great deal of attention.
He had asked her to dance with him at his

mother's ball, and on hearing that they
had not the pleasure of knowing Lady
Peveril, and were not invited, he had said
something about seeing about that. Shortly
after they had seen him go to his mother
and say something, which, by her look,
was evidently about them. When, a little
after, Mrs. Del mar had been introduced
and was talking to Mrs. Deveron, Lady
Peveril had joined the group, had asked
her to present her to Mrs. Deveron, and
had said some gracious words about
hoping to see her and her daughters at
her ball, intimating that a card should
be sent.

And I don't believe she'd have asked
us if she hadn't seen us talking to Mrs.
Delmar !" cried Julia ;" she didn't look
a bit like it when Sir Julian went to
her; so you see, Pansy, we owe it all to
you :" and she gave her cousin a hug that
nearly took away her breath.

It's a good beginning, the two best

l2

houses in the county," said Mrs. Deveron^
with infinite satisfaction ; " but come, girls,
we have no time to lose, if you are to have
new dresses for Stanmore. Come along
to Miss Dent's and let us see what we can
do in the time," and the three ladies
bustled away to the dressmakers with
their hearts full of the utmost satisfaction.

CHAPTER VII.

That incessant envy wherewith the common rate of
mankind pursues all superior natures to their own.

Swift.

Envy will merit as its shade pursue,

But, like a shadow, proves the substance true.

Essay on Criticism — Pope.

^'TTTILL you come out for a walk,
* Pansy?" said Arthur, coming
into the drawing-room rather late in the
afternoon after Lady Peveril's ball.

What, now ?" exclaimed Julia, as Pansy
rose. " Why, you'll be benighted !"

There's plenty of time for a turn if
Pansy likes," said Arthur, as his cousin
left the room. " She looked very pale this
morning, but I couldn't get away sooner.

Why, Pansy, you are quick !" as she looked
in, ready equipped.

They walked quickly along the frosty
road that led by the shortest route into
the country. Pansy was glad of the exercise.
She had heard of nothing the whole
day but the delights of the ball, and somehow
the way in which her cousins had
talked of their different partners had jarred
her without her being aware of the cause.
The sharp frosty air had a reviving effect,
and after ten minutes she felt as brisk and
fresh as possible.

"lam so glad you came for me," she
said. " I do feel so much the better."

Well, to tell you the truth, Pansy, I
expected you'd have had about enough of
the ball. I suppose you've heard of nothing
else all day, have you?"

Well, not much else," Pansy was forced
to confess.

'' I guessed as much. Well, I'm sure
I'm very glad the girls had the pleasure.

but somehow I wish — I don't quite know
what I do wish ; but I feel as if it were
lowering ourselves to make such a fuss
about the ' county people.' We're quite as
good as they are in our own way, and I
don't like seeing my mother so regularly
upset because by chance — it really is nothing
else — two county ladies are going to
call on her."

"I don't suppose I quite understand,"
said Pansy, not liking quite to agree, because
that might be construed into disapproval
of her aunt and cousins. ''I do
not understand all your English ways.
Are not these county people nice ?"

*' Yes, Pansy. I honestly confess they
are much nicer than the generality of the
people in Arncester. You see, they are in
an assured position ; they are not always
aspiring to 'get on,' to know some one
finer, or to go somewhere where others
are not invited. Their manners are better
and quieter, and they have the appearance

of never thinking of themselves at all. If
it were because of their superior attractions
that my mother and sisters were so
anxious to know them, I should not mind ;
but it is because they think it is ' getting
on,' because other people in our set don't
do it. They don't care in the least for the
people themselves, — it is only their position.
It is terribly vulgar."

Pansy hardly knew what to say. In sofar
as she understood the case, she quite
agreed with him, but she would not condemn
her aunt and cousins.

Before she could speak Arthur went
on —

"It is such a comfort to have you to talk
to. Pansy ; you are so different. Somehow
last night I felt almost ashamed of the
girls. Their manners are not quiet like
the Miss Peverils or the Miss Delmars. I
don't know what it is, one seems to see
them all over the place."

Poor Arthur! he felt, though he could

not quite express, his sisters' lack of repose.


"It is the same in a way always," he
went on. " What is it that they do, Pansy?
You are quite different ; one never seems
to see you move about. You are always
still and quiet. Why are they so unlike
you and — and others ?"

It was an awkward question, and also
one which Pansy knew far too little of the
world to be able to answer clearly ; so she
could only laugh and say that it required
some one who knew more of the habits of
society than she did to enlighten him. And
then she suggested that it was almost time
to turn their faces homeward, or they should
be benighted.

I do enjoy these walks so much," said
Arthur, as they began to retrace their
steps. " You mustn't let me tire you.
Pansy, but it is such a pleasure having
you to talk to ; somehow you always seem
to understand me."

'' I am very glad," said Pansy, half
laughing ; " somehow these walks make
me feel more like home than anything
else. You know " — half apologetically, as
if afraid she might seem to speak slightingly
of Sophronia and Julia's society — " I
have never had anyone young to talk to
but Leon, and I don't think I know the
things girls in general like to talk about.
I must seem very dull to the girls, for I
know nothing of balls or picnics as they
do."

You'll begin to go out a little soon,
though, won't you ? I'm sure you dance
beautifully. I'm afraid it must be very
dull for you here, knowing no one, and
you must miss your brother awfully. I
suppose he'll come and see you ? I hope
you don't hate being here instead of at La
Eochecaillou ?"

*' Mamma wished it — I could never dislike
what she wished," said Pansy. '' Besides,"
she added, hastily, '* indeed you

must not think I am not Happy. At first,
of course, it was all strange, and I missed
the gardens, and the poor people, and
Bonne Maman, and Leon ; and even now,
sometimes, I feel as if I would give anything;'
to see them ao'ain : but indeed I am
quite happy — you are all so kind to me."

"I'm sure we should be brutes if we
weren't. I say, Pansy, promise me, if
ever anything annoys you, or you want
anything done, you'll come straight to me,
and I'll put it right for you, if it is to be
done. Promise T'

Indeed I will," said Pansy ; " but why
should you fancy I should want anything ?"

*' I don't know — you might — and I
should like to do anything I could for
you. Hullo ! how fast we must have
walked ! Here we are at home. I'm very
sorry."

'^ Cousin Arthur" was mentioned so frequently
in Pansy's letters to her grandmother
that Madame de la Rochecaillou

began to imagine that, unknown to herself,
the child was falling in love with the
cousin who seemed so kind to her. She
regarded with aversion the idea of a marriage
between cousins, but she felt that it
was not her place to interfere. Pansy had
been deliberately placed in her uncle's
family by her mother, and anything that
resulted therefrom must, the old lady felt,
be accepted by her without remonstrance.
She wrote the girl long letters, and contrived
with infinite tact, Awhile always
seeming interested in what Pansy wrote
about, never to make any comment on
what she said about her relatives.

Madame de la Eochecaillou was a very
shrewd woman, and knew the world well ;
allowing for her slight acquaintance with
English manners, she had a very tolerable
idea of the Deveron household. Mr.
Deveron she had liked : he was hon hour
geoWj or perhaps something rather above
it ; his wife was inferior to him in birth

and breeding, and anxious to be a fine
lady ; her daughters evidently followed in
her steps, and the son in his father's. He
was doubtless hon enfant, but not a proper
match, even apart from the relationship,
for Penseee de la Eochecaillou. Still the
old lady felt that she could do nothing,
least of all give Pansy herself any warning
on the subject. She would have seen no
impropriety in marrying the girl, without
once consulting her, to a man whom she
had never seen, and for whom it was
hardly probable that she could ever care,
such was the French plan to which she
was accustomed ; it had answered well in
many instances with which she was acquainted,
and she saw no harm in it ; but
it would have seemed to her the gravest
indecorum to speak to the girl of love,
even if it were only to warn her against
possible entanglement. She was now
entirely under the strange English system
of freedom, with which Madame de

la Eochecaillou felt her incapacity to interfere.


Pansy was sitting in her own room on
the afternoon of the day after her walk
with Arthur. She spent a good deal of
time there, for it was pleasant to read
alone than when disturbed by the chatter
in the drawing-room. It was a pretty,
old-fashioned room, panelled with oak and
having deep window-seats, which, being
covered with cushions, formed luxurious
lounges. In one of these was Pansy's
usual nest, and she was there established
on this particular afternoon with a volume
of Lamartine's poems in her hand. She
had been reading, in " Les Premieres
Meditations," " Le Poete Mourant," which
had been an especial favourite of her
mother's, and which was the last poem she
had read to her. Pansy knew it by heart,
but she liked to hold the book open, and
go back in imagination to the time when
she had last read it.

^' Ah ! qu'il pleure, celui dont les mains acharnees,
S'attachant comme un lieiTe aux debris des anne's,
Voit avec I'avenir s'ecouler son espoir !
Pour moi qui n'ait point pris racine sur la terre,
Je men vais sans effort, comme Inhere leger
Qu'enleve le souffle du soir."

As she read this, her mother's favourite
verse, the scene of that last day at La
Eochecaillou rose up before her eyes. Her
mother, white and feeble, lying in her bed
in the alcove surrounded with lace curtains
lined with pink, the view from the windows
of the formal gardens, the trees in
their autumnal garb, the distant windings
of the silvery Loire — she seemed to see it
all, even the brown sail of one of the great
hay-boats, showing a bright tawny yellow
in the afternoon sun. She heard the
whispering of the wind among the trees,
and the sound of the Angelus from the little
church at the foot of the castle hill, while
her bodily eyes rested on the leafless trees,
the dark cedar and the grey walls of the
old castle standing out sharply against the

clear frosty sky, and the only sounds were
the bum of the town and the whistle of a
shunting goods' train. Her reverie was
broken by Julia, who came to summon her
to the drawing-room.

"Mamma wants you to come down and
see Mrs. Delmar, Pansy. She says she
knew your mother, and remembers you asa
child. Why, I declare you re going down
without looking in the glass !"

Am T untidy ?" asked Pansy, stopping
short and looking dismayed.

Oh, no ! you are all right — only it
seemed so odd," answered Julia, who herself
never missed an opportunity of contemplating
her own charms.

Mrs. Delmar had come to the conclusion
that she did not particularly care about
Mrs. Deveron or her daughters, and was
almost beginning to wish that she had not
been so precipitate in making an acquaintance
which she well knew she should never
be able to drop, when Pansy entered. Mrs.

Delmar at once saw how different she
seemed from her relatives, and was struck
bj the self-possession and utter absence of
self-consciousness in her manners.

I am so glad to see you, Mademoiselle
de la Rochecaillou," she said ; " your
mother was more than kind to me when I
was in trouble years ago at Homburg.
She lent me your nurse when my girl
Edith was very ill. I remember you then
a tiny little child, but you were too young
for it to be possible for you to remember
me."

I do not even recollect Homburg,'^
said Pansy.

'' No, I should think not. I doubt if
you could have been more than three years
old. I have always wished so much to see
your mother again, but, as I regret to
hear that is impossible, you must let us
see something of you. I have been asking
your aunt to bring you to dine with us
next week."

VOL. I. M

But I am in such deep mourning ; I
have been nowhere yet," said Pansy, blushing;
"but it is very kind of you to think
of me. I am so glad to see anyone who
knew Mamma."

It is not a large party ; you must not
let your mourning interfere. You are
not like your mother, nor, so far as I can
recollect, very like your father."

'' I am more like him of the two," said
Pansy. "I am supposed to be so very
like Grandmamma, his mother."

'' Your colouring is so different from
your mother's, but I fancy I see some
likeness when you smile ;" said Mrs. Delmar,
and was rewarded by the look of
delight that overspread the girl's face ;
nothing could have pleased Pansy more.

Then we shall hope to see you on
Wednesday," said Mrs. Delmar, after a
little more conversation, rising to take her
leave, and declining Mrs. Deveron's pressing
invitation to stay to tea, on the plea

that she had promised to look iu for that
meal upon Mrs. Mordan. " Good-bye,
Mademoiselle de la Rochecaillou. I wonder
if, in consideration of my having known
you so long ago, you would let me call you
Penseee ; it is such a pretty name, and so
much less formal."

^* I shall be only too pleased," said
Pansy, smiling. " I hardly know myself
yet as Mademoiselle de la Rochecaillou. I
was always Penseee at home."

We call her little Pansy," said Mrs.
Deveron ; " she is such a slip of a girl."

Mamma used to call me that too,"
said Pansy, in a low voice.

"Well, then, good-bye, Penseee. I hope
you and my girls will be great friends."

Mrs. Deveron and her daughters were
full of delight at the idea of dining at
Daleford, and during the next few days
many visits were paid with the object of
promulgating the fact among their less
fortunate friends and arousing their envy

M 2

of their superior good fortune. On the
strength of this, of the Stanmore ball, and
of Lady Peveril having left cards in the
market-place, the two girls, to their
brother Arthur's intense annoyance, began
to give themselves little airs of importance,
as if some of their town friends
where no longer good enough for them.

*' How can you be so silly and vulgar'*
he said, impatiently, one day, when Julia
remarked that " she wished Lizzie Brandon
would not come and talk to her at
the Covert-side ; she was not at all a person
she wished to be seen talking to."
Lizzie Brandon is a very good sort of
girl, and has been a friend of yours ever
since you could speak. Is it because she
is shabbily dressed that you are ashamed
of her? And how is she different from
what she has always been that you want
to cut her now ? Surely it can't be
because, by the mere accident of Mrs.
Delmar's having been acquainted with

Aunt Clare, she has called upon us ! She
would never have thought of doing such a
thing, which she has not done all these
years, if Pansy had not been here, and you
know that quite well."

Lady Peveril did not call because of
Pansy," said Sophronia.

No ; but that again was an accident.
I happened to be at school with Peveril,
and he always was a good-natured fellow ;
when 1 introduced him to you, he didn't
like to leave you out. Don't fancy it was
any wish on Lady Peveril's part to know
us ; it was just kindness."

I wish papa would leave this horrid
market-place," said Julia, discontentedly ;
*' I'm sure I don't wonder at no one liking
to come here, nasty vulgar place ! If it
were only Arne Street, like the Vernon s !
But we ought to have a country place, and
take a position as county people."

It would take two generations to do
that," said Arthur j "besides, it would be

very inconvenient for the business, but of
course you never think of that."

It was Sophronia's turn to dine out the
night of the dinner at Daleford, and Julia
lamented it so much, and envied her so
openly, that Pansy felt quite uncomfortable,
and apologised for usurping one place.

Oh, it isn't your fault," answered
Julia; *ewe should never have known
them but for you, and of course you must
go, but it is hard it shouldn't be my turn ;
if Soph were a bit nice, she'd change with
me."

Pansy said no more, but it gave her the
first uncomfortable feeling of being in her
cousins' way. Hitherto her mourning had
prevented any clashing of their interests,
and it had never occurred to her inexperience
that one young lady more or less
made any difference. She was sorry. She
was young, and the thought of society was
extremely pleasant to her, still it would bea
great drawback to her pleasure if her

enjoyment was to be purchased at the expense
of her cousins' amusements.

The party at Daleford was not a very
large one ; Mr. and Mrs. Delmar, their
two daughters and two sons, Sir Julian
Peveril and his eldest sister, Mr. Mus-grave,
the clergyman of the parish, Mr.
Walworth and his wife, and a Mr. Campbell,
a college friend of young Mr. Delmar,
with the Deverons, formed the party.
Mr. Delmar of course took Miss Peveril,
Mrs. Deveron being placed on his left hand,
and Pansy, who fell to the share of Mr.
Laurence Delmar, found Sir Julian Several,
of whom in the last few days she had
heard so much, on her right hand. She
did not wonder that the girls had liked
him, for he seemed most cheerful and
pleasant, and he and Mr. Delmar between
them made the dinner time pass so enjoyably
that she was quite sorry when Mrs.
Delmar gave the signal for adjournment
to the drawing-room. But there, too, she

enjoyed herself. Mrs. Delmar took particular
notice of her, and her eldest daughter
and Miss Peveril made her feel as if
she had known them all her life.

'you sing, I am sure," said Sir Julian,
coming to her when the gentlemen appeared.
" Miss Delmar, do ask her."

Pansy made none of the difficulties
which Julia would have considered orthodox
; she rose at once and went to the
piano, without the slightest nervousness or
self-consciousness. Her sweet voice caused
an immediate silence, and at the end of her
little French song another was requested.

"Does your cousin play or sing?" asked
Miss Delmar, when the expressions of
admiration had died away ; and Pansy
having replied that she played beautifully,
Sophronia was requested 'to favour the
company, and, after considerable pressing,
consented to send for her music. The
piece she selected was appallingly difficult,
absolutely destitute of air, dismal, depressions,

and ugly to the last degree. After
the first half-page everyone was talking
loudly, with the exception of Miss Delmar,
who sat by the piano listening politely, and
wondering to herself how anyone could
have taken all the trouble requisite to learn
anything so truly hideous.

Sophronia stopped at last, and looked
round with an air of triumph, but was
mortified to perceive that, excepting Miss
Delmar, who said all that was requisite
about the difficulty of the piece, no one
seemed even aware that she had stopped.
How different it had been when Pansy
had finished her songs, and Sophronia
began to feel jealous and discontented.
Mr. Musgrave came presently and began
to talk to her, but she was watching the
group of which Pansy was the centre, and
was hurt that both the young men of the
house and Sir Julian were laughing and
talking with her and Miss Peveril, instead
of paying her any attention. Her thoughts

wandered from what Mr. Musgrave was
saying to her, and she once or twice
answered so completely at random as to
surprise him greatly.

*you must come over and spend the
day with us, and let us make real acquaintance,"
said Mrs. Delmar to Pansy, when
Mrs. Deveron rose to take leave. " I will
write to your aunt in a few days, and. ask
her to settle a convenient day. . Goodnight.
I am very glad indeed to have
seen you."

A very pleasant party," said Mr.
Deveron, when they were settled in the
carriage — " did you not think so, Matilda?"

'pretty well," replied his wife, who,
studiously polite as everyone had been to
her, had felt sometimes a subtle something
that divided her from them ; " but what in
the world was Mrs. Delmar about to send
a girl like Miss Peveril in to dinner first ?
Mr. Delmar should have taken me : I was
the greatest stranger."

Nonsense, Mamma — she is a baronet's
daughter. Mrs. Delmar was quite right,"
said Sophronia. "Precedence has nothing
to do with being married, or strangers,
or anything but birth. But did you see
all those plates and cups put in a glass
case in the drawing-room ? They're just
the same as we have in the housekeeper's
room. I'd have something better in a
glass case if I were Mrs. Delmar."

'^ Mr. Delmar told me they were very
old, and they valued them very highly,"
said Pansy. '' He asked me if I understood
china, and I said no — that I only
knew what I thought pretty — and he
laughed, and said then he supposed I
should not appreciate them any the more
for hearing they were Chelsea with the
raised anchor."

A raised anchor ! — that is on the back
of all ours," said Mrs. Deveron. " Chelsea I
why, that is what is so fashionable now,
what people give no end of money for at

.sales. To think of our having such a
thing, and never knowing it ! I'll get a
common set for the housekeeper's room
tomorrow, and we'll put this up in the
drawing-room — it will look well over the
fireplace."

"Julia," said Sophronia, when the sisters
were together in their room, " for all her
looking so quiet, Pansy'll be a bore. She
got all the men round her to-night,
looking as innocent as a baby all the
time."

What can they see in a little insignificant
thing like that ? She isn't a bit
pretty."

No, nor at all clever ; she can't talk
science at all."

You see what Arthur thinks of her —
he said yesterday he wished we'd copy her
manners, she was so quiet."

'rand she has no style."

You hardly see her in a room."

-"' And yet, as I tell you, Sir Julian and

both the Delmars stuck to her all the
evening."

'' I'm afraid you didn't enjoy yourself,
Soph."

Oh, yes, I did ; they were very civil ;
the youngest, Ernest, took me in to dinner,
and was good fun, but he called Pansy
pretty."

"Pretty! — what odd creatures men
are !"

Mrs. Deveron the next morning fulfilled
her intention of seizing on the housekeeper's
room china ; it really was the
very finest Chelsea, and any connoisseur
would have wrung his hands at the thought
of the ill-usage it had received, and the
quantity of it that had been broken. Still
there was a good deal of it left, and though
in their hearts Mrs. Deveron and her
daughters thought it perfectly hideous, it
looked very beautiful on the carved oak
shelves and brackets which covered the
wall over the drawing-room chimney-piece

Often and often Mrs. Deveron, whose taste
was all for modern forms and garish
colours, had tried to persuade her husband
to let her remove the beautiful oak
panelling, and replace it with a white and
gold paper, and a mirror over the fireplace,
but he had always refused, not so much
from superior knowledge or good taste as
from a conservative liking to see things
about him as they had always been. Even
Mrs. Deveron's taste in carpets and curtains
was unable utterly to vulgarize a
room toned down by exquisitely carved
oak walls and ceiling, and the old Chelsea,
when placed in its new home, gave a refinement
to the room of which she was
little aware.

Pansy, who knew nothing whatsoever
of taste in theory, had yet an extremely
sensitive eye, and her delight at the new
arrangement quite surprised her aunt, who
herself thought her priceless treasures
more ugly than she could say.

Now that she had once dined out, Mr.
Deveron told his wife that Pansy must
take her share with the girls in all gaieties,
and that her name must be on the visiting-cards.
Mrs. Deveron demurred, and said
she did not think Pansy would care to go
out so soon ; but, when her husband was in
earnest about anything, she had always to
give way, and the present circumstance
was no exception to the rule. Pansy,
always thoughtful of others, begged her
cousins to go to those parties they liked
and leave her those for which they did not
care; but this resulted in their always
liking everything and in her uncle's interference,
with the decree that there should
be no choosing, but that they should take
everything in its regular turn. This was
the source of much heartburning to the
two daughters, and quite oblivious of how
amiable Pansy had been, and how desirous
not to interfere with their pleasures, they
grumbled a good deal to their mother and

to each other about how much she was in
the way. Mrs. Deveron entered into their
feelings, but she did not dare to disobey
her husband. She had never been pleased
at the idea of his having consented to
receive Pansy without even consulting her,
and had at once foreseen the annoyance to
her own girls of having a third young lady
in the house.

Now that the first delight at having
secured the entree at Daleford was over,
she conveniently forgot that it was to
Pansy's presence in her house that she
owed it ; and when Mrs. Delmar wrote
to hope that Mademoiselle de la Roche-caille
might spend a day in the ensuing
week with her daughters, one of whom
would call for her in the pony-carriage at
eleven o'clock, she chose to be offended
that one of her own daughters was not
asked as well, and said such unkind things
that Pansy, totally unused to hearing anything
of the kind, was appalled, and begged

to be allowed to refuse. But this did not
suit Mrs. Deveron.

No ; as you are asked, I suppose you
must go — it will not do to offend Mrs.
Delmar, but sbe ought to know better
than to single you out, and put such a
slight on your cousins. You should let
her see what we think of it ; but there ! I
daresay you think it is all right. Your
mother always seemed to think she was to
be treated differently from other people !"

Poor Pansy was too bewildered quite to
understand all that her aunt meant ; she
would have liked to appeal to Arthur for
explanation, but feared it would pain him
if she repeated any of the speeches which,
though but imperfectly comprehended,
were, she could not help feeling, unkind ;
so she said nothing, and only kept even
more than usual to her own room.

Her day at Daleford, alone with Mrs.
Delmar and her daughters, was extremely
pleasant ; they were genial, cultivated wool.

I. N

men, not remarkably clever, hut quite
capable of appreciating talent in others,
and their ordinary conversation was of a
far higher type than that to which Pansy
was accustomed in the market-place.
Pansy was far more at borne with them on
this their second meeting than she was
with her aunt and cousins after nearly
five months' intercourse ; on such topics as
books, music, and work she could talk and
understand what was said, which was far
from being the case with the constant
gossip about their acquaintances, which
was Julia and Sophronia's only idea of
conversation. The only drawback to her
pleasure was the feeling that, owing to it,
she had, in some incomprehensible manner,
displeased her aunt ; and, accustomed to
say whatever was in her mind to her
mother and grandmother, she exclaimed,
when Mrs. Delmar, on her departure,
expressed a hope that they should often
see her again in the same way.

It is very kind of you, and it is so
pleasant, I cannot tell you how pleasant,
but I am afraid — that is, I think — my
aunt thought it ought to be one of my
cousins."

Mrs. Delmar smiled ; she saw the state
of things at a glance.

I understand, my dear," she said ; " do
not distress yourself, but it is your mother's
daughter I wish to see, and we
must indulge ourselves by having you
sometimes." Then, as Pansy, somewhat
comforted, departed, she said to her
daughters —

Poor little girl ! I am afraid it will not
be a very congenial home ; she is so gentle
and refined, and Mrs. Deveron and her
girls — well ! I suppose what one would
expect a Miss Morris and her daughters to
be. We will do what we can for her ; but,
if she is exposed to annoyance at home,
perhaps we shall be doing her no real
kindness."

n2

As soon as she reached home, Pansy
was subjected to a rigorous cross-examination
as to whom she had seen and what she
had done ; and when her cousins had
elicited that neither Mr. Delmar nor his
sons had been at home, and that Pansy
had seen no one but the three ladies, they
were less inclined to be envious, and did
not grudge her her solitary visit.

How odd to ask anyone when the men
were out!" said Julia. '* Where were they
gone, Pansy ?"

I don t know, I am sure ; I never
thought about them''

"Well, at any rate, I suppose you heard
some news," said Mrs. Deveron, somewhat
mollified by the discovery of what a very
dull visit her niece must have had. ^' Come,
Pansy, let us hear all you heard."

But Pansy had no news to tell.

They talked of books and music and
work, and Miss Delmar showed me her
sketch-book, all the drawings she had done

in Switzerland last year, and her sister 'had
painted all the wild flowers they found,
and they told me all about the places, and
how much they had enjoyed themselves,
until I almost fancied I had been there
too."

'•' Had Miss Delmar drawn the flowers
botanically?" asked Sophronia ; "had she
drawn all the parts separately ? the corolla,
and the calyx, and the stamens and pistils ?
And had she classed them in the natural
orders, or according to Linnaeus ?"

"I am afraid I don't know," said Pansy,
looking puzzled. " She had drawn sprays
of the flowers — I don't remember seeing
any pieces of them, and I know the names
were in English, not in Latin, for I was
glad because I could understand them."

Oh ! just school-girls' drawings," said
Sophronia, contemptuously.

CHAPTER Viii.

Oh. sweet Fancy ! let her loose ;
EverYthing is spoilt by use :
Where's the cheek that doth not fade,
Too much gazed at ? Where's the maid
Whose lip mature is ever new ?
Where's the eye, however blue,
Doth not weary ? Where's the face
One would meet in every place ?
Where's the voice, however soft,
One would hear so very oft ?
At a touch sweet Pleasure melted
Like to bubbles when rain pelted.

Let the winged Fancy roam.
Pleasure never is at home.

i^aw^— Keats.

"r)AXSY found that her life was decidedly
-■- less pleasant, now that she had begun
to go into society, than had previously
been the case. It was not that she did

not enjoy it, but her cousins were by no
means so amiable to her, and sometimes
her aunt complained that she was 'forward"
and "flirting," when the poor girl
could by no means divine what her fault
had been. Such complaints were generally
made when they had met the Delmars,
or any other of the county people, for with
the townsfolk Pansy was by no means
popular. She did not understand the
somewhat familiar chaff which, by the
young men of the town, was supposed to
represent wit ; and had no interest in discussing
lovers and flirtations, which seemed
to be the only topics on which their sisters
could converse.

When they dined, therefore, in the town
set, Julia or Sophronia were tolerably certain
to be preferred to her, and she spent
her evening either in silence, or in talking
to one of the older ladies ; but when they
met any of what her cousins, to Arthur's
infinite disgust, called " the swells," they

were sure to gravitate to Pansy, and nothing
would persuade Mrs. Deveron or her
daughters that she did not exert all her
endeavours to attract them. It was not
that the two young Delmars, or any of
their friends who asked to be introduced to
her, were in love with Pansy, but she suited
them better than the forward, flirting Miss
Deverons ; her manners had the calm repose
to which they were accustomed in
their own class, and she did not giggle.
But of course the Deveron girls, who were
extremely well satisfied with themselves,
never divined the real reason, and set
it down entirely to Pansy's " sly ways."

She never takes the trouble, except for
the real swells," said Julia, angrily, one
evening. " She has such a way of using
those great eyes of hers ! Ernest Delmar
was coming to ask me to dance, I'm sure,
to-night, when she looked at him and he
turned off to her. Men are always fools
about eyes."

*' I don't think you need complain," said
Sophronia, sulkily. "Ernest Delmar is
only a younger son, and no good, and you
say you danced twice with Sir Julian. She
never interferes either between you and
Harry Yernon, but she kept Mr. Musgrave
to herself all yesterday evening, arguing
about the women of Shakespeare ; as if he
cared what she thought I"

Pansy was too utterly unconscious of
the crimes of which she was suspected
to understand the innuendoes which her
cousins launched against her, but as nothing
would have persuaded them of this,
her calmness under them only enraged
them the more. Arthur's persistent advocacy
and friendship, though very pleasant,
really availed her nothing, for his sisters
regarded it as a further aggravation that
Pansy should have "bewitched" him.

Sophronia had taught herself to consider
Mr. Musgrave as so completely her own
property that his defection even for one

evening was a thing she could not endure.
He was a worthy but somewhat vain and
weak-minded young man, much attached
to the sound of his own voice, and So-chronic's
attraction for him lay chiefly in
the fact that, as she set up for being
scientific, and for reading books of which
no other young lady in Arncester knew
even the names, he could talk to her of the
subjects that interested him. So content
was he to talk himself that he had never
discovered that Sophronia's learning lay
chiefly in a few hard words and a little
scientific argos, which she had sufficient
intelligence generally to produce at the
right moment. If he had really considered,
that is, if he had not been perfectly contented
with a monologue and an admiring
auditor, he must long ago have discovered
that her information was quite superficial,
and that she was totally ignorant of the
meaning of more than half he said.

His conversation with Pansy had been

the merest accident, and had certainly not
been courted by her, but he had taken up
something which she had said to Arthur
about Rosalind, and had proceeded to hold
forth, much to his own delectation, on that
character, and on the rest of Shakespeare's
heroines. As to Pansy's arguing, that existed
only in Sophronia's imagination, for
no opportunity was given her, even if she
had wished to do so. Mr. Musgrave,
pleased with his own eloquence, went on
complacently stating his opinions, which
were neither novel nor original, and required
no response ; indeed he fully believed
he had only been eliciting his companion's
views, and spoke of her as a very
intelligent girl.

Arthur's eyes were quite sharp enough
to perceive that Pansy was no longer the
favourite she had been with his mother
and sisters, and he exerted himself as much
as he could to make up to her for it ; but
Pansy felt, though she could not understand

the reason, that, whenever she and
Arthur were much together, Mrs. Deveron
or one of the girls was sure to say something
which, though she did not quite
comprehend it, made her feel shy and
uncomfortable. She regarded Arthur as a
sort of brother, and was as unembarrassed
in talking to him as if he had been Leon ;
indeed, much as at Arncester she heard of
love, or rather of lovers, it never seemed
to strike her that such things could affect
her. This is not unfrequently the case
with girls who have been brought up
without young companions, and free from
the silly jokes that tend so surely to
vulgarise the mind, and destroy all
poetry and tenderness of sentiment ; Pansy
simply never thought of marriage or of
possible lovers at all She had a sort of
dreamy notion of the delight of being
loved, of being the first in some one's
affections, but the " some one " never took
form or shape, but remained as vague and

impersonal as a poet's vision. The way in
which her cousins talked jarred her taste,
and hearing once or twice her uncle
reprove them for talking of their male
acquaintances by their Christian names,
she wondered exceedingly to hear them still
talk of 'harry Vernon" and sternest
Delmar," the latter more especially, as they
really hardly knew anything of him.

The return dinner to the Delmars had
been for some time on Mrs. Deveron's
mind, and would long since have taken
place if she had not been changing her
cook. Such a solemnity as entertaining
her new acquaintances could not be allowed
to run the risk of proving a failure ; so, until
the new artiste had been pronounced a success,
Mrs. Deveron was prudent enough to
wait. But at length she considered that all
was satisfactory, and an invitation was despatched
to Daleford. which was accepted
by Mr. and Mrs. Delmar and their eldest
son and daughter. The invitation which had

been sent to Stanmore was less fortunate.

'^ Really, Julian," said Lady Peveril,
laying down the note, "it was-all very
well being civil when you wished it, and
asking the Deverons to the ball, and of
course I called afterwards : you might
take it into your head to stand for the
county some day, and then such things
are remembered ; but to go and dine there
is more than can be expected of me. Mr.
Deveron and his son are all very well, but
the ladies are — not good style."

'* There is rather a nice niece, Mademoiselle
de la Hochecaillou, staying with
them," said Sir Julian ; *' she is quite a
lady. Didn't you think so, Aura ? we met
her, you know, at Daleford."

Very nice, quite different from Miss
Deveron."

The other sister Julia is nice, — she is
really pretty."

Yes — in a certain style, — but no manners,

you know. I saw her at the ball
here."

Well, mother, I think I shall go," said
Sir Julian.

My dear boy, it is quite different for
you," said his mother, who would gladly
have prevented his going, knowing that it
was his weakness to be caught by a
pretty face, and to be far more civil than
there was ans necessity for ; but who was a
very wise woman, and quite aware that
opposition was the one thing likely to fix an
undesirable idea in the masculine mind ;
"young Mr. Deveron was rather a friend of
yours at Rugby, and if you like to go there
is no reason you should not, but it is quite
another thing for Aura and me."

^' I don't see what harm it would do
you," said Sir Julian, whose fancy was rather
smitten by Julia's pretty face, and evident
admiration of himself.

Harm — well, no perhaps not, but we

don't care to drive eight miles to dine with
people with whom we have no interests in
common."

'well, I shall go," said Sir Julian,
shortly. " I don't mind the drive."

How odd he should want to go !" said
Miss Peveril, when he left the room,

"My dear Aura," said her mother, "a
man will go anywhere where he is flattered
; and only think what a luminary Julian
is on the Deveron horizon. I should not
wonder if Miss — Julia, didn't he say? —
was fancying herself Lady Peveril already."


*' Mamma, you don't think he would !"

My dear, a very little opposition would,
I have no doubt, make him do that, or
anything else that is foolish. If he even
guessed that I was in any alarm about
this girl, it might do mischief. You perceive,
I only spoke of them as not suiting
us ; if I had said anything about not liking
him to go, he would have thought it of importance

; now I hope he will go and amuse
himself, and yet no harm will be done.
The only hope of managing a susceptible
young man is to try the rule of contrary'*

It is rather hard on her."

'^My dear Aura, pray don't be sentimental
on that score ! You saw yourself
what the girls were — loud, flirting girls,
without an idea of manners. Don't fancy
Miss Julia is in love with Julian ; she
would dearly like to be Lady Peveril, that
is all."

But that doesn't make it right for him
to go there and flirt with her, and encourage
such hopes, if she entertains them."

"I don't want him to go, but if I opposed
it he would go twice as much ; my
only fear is of his letting himself be drawn,
too far; girls of that sort are always very
deep and designing. However, I hope my
refusing to go will keep him in mind that
he is out of his own set. Write the note,
dear, will you ?''

VOL. I. o

194 LITTLE Pans.

*' What excuse am I to make ?"
"I think you had better only say that
we 'regret we are unable.' You know, it
is rather presumptuous their asking us, as
if we were on an equality."

Mrs. Deveron was much mortified at
Lady Peveril's refusal. Julia was rather
relieved, as she thought she should enjoy
herself far more with Sir Julian without
the consciousness that his mother's cold
grey eye was resting upon her. The young
baronet was rather impressionable about
good looks, and Julia's prettiness was of
the type which at the moment (for he was
very changeable) he most admired. He had
a way of making flattering speeches, which,
though not such direct compliments as those
to which Julia was accustomed from her
Arncester admirers, were still satisfactory
to her vanity, and caused her to indulge in
pleasant day-dreams of the time when she
should be Lady Peveril, of Stanmore Chase,
and one of the great ladies of the county.

It was true she had seen very little of Sir
Julian, but she had a very comfortable
belief in her own perfections, and entertained
no doubt that he had fallen in love
with her at first sight at the Hunt Ball.
Mrs. Deveron was nearly as sanguine asher
daughter, but Lady Peveril's refusal
of her invitation filled her with misgivings.

"It is clear she doesn't approve, Julia,"
she said ; "and she is said to have such
influence over him."

'* Oh, don't worry, Mamma," returned
Julia ; " just leave me to manage him and
it will be all right. Keep Pansy out of his
way, and Harry Vernon out of mine, and I
shall do very well."

'' He must take me, of course, and you
must sit next him. Who shall take you ?"

*'Mr. Musgrave, and Sophronia must be
next him with Mr. Delmar. Give Harry
Yernon to Pansy, and, if you can, put him
on my side of the table."

These able dispositions were accurately

o2

carried out to the satisfaction of everyone
but Mr. Delmar, who would have preferred
Pansy to Sophronia, and Mr. Vernon, who
could not understand why he did not as
usual take Julia. Mrs. Deveron devoted
all her conversation to Mr. Delmar, wha
sat on her right hand, and Sir Julian was
left free to make himself agreeable to his
neighbour, which he did not fail to do.
If Lady Peveril could but have seen him
hanging over Julia's chair in the drawing-room
after dinner, she might have felt less
confident than was the case as to the recollection
that she had refused to honour
the banquet by her presence, preventing
her son from forgetting that she did not
consider his entertainers as equals. Before
he took his leave that evening, he had invited
Mrs. Deveron and the young ladies
to come to breakfast at Stanmore when
the hounds met there the ensuing week,
and had promised Julia to devote himself
especially to her service, and show her all

the short cuts through the rides of the
Chase. He seemed quite astonished that
she had never seen the grounds, forgetting
that the gates were, by his mother's order,
rigorously kept closed, the place being
hers for her life ; and began to make plans
for a grand picnic to be held in the Chase
when the season would permit.

The immediate effect of Sir Julian's
open admiration, and of Julia's evident
encouragement thereof, was that, when
she chanced to be out alone the ensuing
day, she was waylaid by Harry Yernon.
Hitherto he had believed himself quite
sure of being first in Julia's regard — had
imagined that he had only to ask and
have, and had therefore been in no particular
hurry about the matter. But the
sight of Sir Julian's devotion had alarmed
him, and he had resolved no longer to
trifle with his fate.

Julia had an uneasy feeling as soon ashe
joined her that he had something more

important than usual to say, and tried her
utmost to ward off any serious conversation
by the laughing badinage for which
she was famous. But Mr. Vernon meant
to ask a question, and had no intention of
allowing himself to be prevented from
doing so. He passed by Julia's jesting
talk in silence, and when at length she
stopped, he said,

"I am glad to have met you alone;
there is something I want particularly to
say to you. Last night I thought — I
fancied — that there was something between
you and Sir Julian Peveril."

This was hardly how he had meant to
begin, but the words came almost before
he knew it. He had meant to break
ground more cautiously, but, now that the
words were uttered, he was hardly sorry :
it was well to come to the point at once.

Julia, on her part, was puzzled how to
answer. She believed that she had, in her
own inelegant phraseology, " caught " Sir

Julian, but of course he had as yet " said
nothing," and, after all, her hopes might
prove deceptive. The last thing she desired
was to have to refuse Harry Vernon,
whom she wished to keep as her devoted
adorer faute de mieux. From the moment
when he had joined her she had been
dreading some decisive speech on his part,
and wondering how she should contrive to
parry it. She replied, after a slight pause,

Between us ! — of course there was — a
great deal of fun. He is very amusing."

It did not look much like fun when he
was leaning over your chair and whispering
in your ear. I beg your pardon, Ju —
Miss Deveron, but it is a matter of moment
to me."

How absurd ! — why, he is quite a
stranger ! We never knew him till the
Hunt Ball. Of course he is very pleasant
and amusing, but it is not like old friends."

He stopped short, and turned so as to
stand in front of her.

'' You honestly mean that — you think
more of old friends than of new ?"

Of course I do," said Julia, who was
rapidly revolving in her mind whether it
would not be better policy to accept Harry
Yernon if he absolutely proposed to her,
and then to throw him over when Sir
Julian "came to the point," than to
quarrel with one suitor before she was
sure of the other. " Of course new acquaintances
are very pleasant, and I don't
see why one shouldn't amuse oneself with
them, but it takes time to make friends."

Harry Yernon hesitated ; he knew that
for two years, until he was five-and-twenty,
when, by the terms of his godfather's
will, he would inherit a small
property in Rockshire, it was utterly out
of the question that he could marry, and
he had always strenuously determined
that, though he had loved her for four
years, he would never speak to Julia of his
love until he could ask her to marry him.

It seemed to him unfair to bind her by a
long engagement. Jealousy of Sir Julian
had stung him so keenly on the previous
evening that he felt he could keep silence
no longer, but must 'put his fortune to
the touch," and learn if there were any
hope for him, or whether he had better
accede to his father's wishes and go abroad
for the next two years. But now that
Julia had so pointedly twice professed her
preference of old friends over new, he
paused before saying all that he had meant
to do, and that pause saved Julia the
question which she so dreaded having to
answer. Before he could make up his
mind whether to ask it or not, Sophronia
and Pansy came in sight, and Julia felt,
with a sigh of relief, that she was saved.

Of course Lady Peveril was not slow to
hear of her son's devotion to " the pretty
Miss Deveron ;" indeed, if kind friends
had not been ready to enlighten her, his
frequent rides over to Arncester would

have made her suspicious. She was rather
disappointed that her refusal to accept
Mrs. Deveron's invitation should not have
at any rate prevented her son from asking
that lady and her daughters to the hunt
breakfast ; but beyond a slight elevation
of her eyebrows when he told her, which
made him feel that he had done what she
considered outre ^ she took no notice. But
she was none the less awake to the danger
that, while in his state of admiration for
Miss Deveron's pretty face, he might be
drawn into saying something which might
be taken hold of, and might find himself
entangled past recall, just as his fickle
fancy was leading him to worship at some
other shrine. Happily he was going to
spend a few days in Yorkshire; on his
return, she was determined that a counter-attraction
should be provided for him at
home.

The day of the meet at Stanmore was
an ideal hunting morning, and Pansy

enjoyed beyond everything the drive
through the fresh morning air. As they
entered the Chase she grew quite enthusiastic
; the ground rose and fell most
picturesquely, and the wintry sun turned
the dead bracken to burnished gold, and
lit up the fine old oaks and the Scotch fir
that crowned several of the higher knolls.
In front of the house was a small sheet of
water, and on the turf between it and the
chief entrance were the hounds, the redcoats
making a most picturesque point in
the landscape. Mr. Deveron had preferred
to ride, but Julia's horse had been sent
on. Acting on Sir Julian's invitation, the
ladies left the carriage and entered the
house.

The breakfast was laid out in the great
hall, and the tables were well-filled, but
neither Lady Peveril nor any other ladies
were present. Sir Julian came forward
and greeted them, and then they were
ushered by the butler into the saloon,

where were Lady Peveril, some guests
staying in the house, and several ladies
from the neighbourhood, but no one with
whom they were acquainted. Lady Peveril
came forward at once.

*mrs. Deveron, this is an unexpected
pleasure !" she said, thereby leaving it to
be conjectured that Sir Julian had never
mentioned the invitation he had given.
*' It must be a very long drive for you. Ah !
I see your daughter is going to ride. There
will be a good many ladies out to-day. My
eldest daughter is going out, and so is Lady
Violet Yalton, who is staying here. Will
you have some tea or coffee after your long
drive? It is in the next room. Is this
your niece of whom I have heard from
Mrs. Delmar ? I suppose. Mademoiselle
de la Rochecaillou, that you do not hunt?
Hiding is hardly so universal in France
for ladies as it is here."

And after a few more remarks about the
weather. Lady Peveril turned to welcome

some fresh arrivals, leaving her unwelcome
guests, who felt themselves out of place
among so many strangers, to make their
way to the smaller drawing-room, and
drink some coffee by way of something todo.


After a very short interval, but which
seemed to them an age, Miss Peveril and
another young lady made their appearance
in their habits. Lady Yiolet Valton was a
very pretty girl, with a delicate complexion,
rich auburn hair, and a lovely, slender
figure, set off to the best advantage by her
well-fitting habit. Almost directly after
their entrance Sir Julian made his appearance,
and announced it was time to
start.

"Now remember, Sir Julian," said a
handsome, well-preserved lady, in bronze
velvet, who sat by the fire, *'I have only
allowed Yiolet to go out to-day on the
strength of your promise to take care of
her. She is so timid, and with a strange

horse, and in a new country, I shall be
miserable till she comes back."

You may trust her to me, Lady Vale-hurst,"
said Sir Julian, laughing. *' I will
promise never to leave Lady Violet's side
unless she rides away from me. Firefly is
very fast. Will you come now ?" he continued,
turning to the young lady. " The
Master is getting impatient."

And without another word to Julia,
without, indeed, seeming to notice her
presence, he led the way to the hall.

Shall we go and see them start ?" said
Lady Peveril to Mrs. Deveron, who happened
to be near her, and all the ladies went
out into the hall ; those who had on their
walking things grouped themselves outside
on the steps, talking and laughing
with their mounted friends, the others disposed
themselves in the recessed windows.
Julia was just in time to see Sir Julian
mount his sister, and then turn to Lady
Violet with some jest ; they were evidently

on the best of terms. A beautiful bay
mare was led up for her, and he put her
up, taking, as Julia thought, a quite unnecessary
time in arranging her habit and
stirrup ; than he swung himself on to his
own hunter, and moved off at her side,
evidently with no thought of anyone else.

It was so different from what Julia had
pictured to herself ! She was to have had
all that attention, and now it really seemed
as if he had quite forgotten that he had
ever asked them to come over, or promised
to take care of her, and show her the Chase.
As her father put her on her horse, she
could have cried with vexation, and wished
most devoutly she had not come.

*' I suppose you will follow a little? It
is really very pretty in the upper part of
the Chase, and very often you can see a
good deal of the run," said Lady Peveril
to Mrs. Deveron, as that lady advanced to
take leave. '' You should turn to the right
along the side of the lake, and take the

second turning to the left. Good morning."


Pansy could not understand why, as
soon as they drove from the door, her
aunt and Sophronia began to abuse Lady
Peveril. To her, quite innocent of any
dessous des cartes she had appeared so civil ;
she had no idea of all the disappointment
under which her aunt was labouring.

An unexpected pleasure, indeed ! As
if he hadn't told her !"

'• And she never introduced us as she
did the Lexington, who came just after
lis ! I heard that girl in brown and yellow
ask who the people were who evidently
weren't expected."

Following many other carriages, the
Deveron landau presently found itself at
the top of the highest ground in the Chase,
looking over some osier-beds, where the
hounds were just being thrown in. Pansy
was in delight with the exquisite view, for
over the low ground on the other side oP

the valley could be seen the Rockshire
hills, looking most picturesque in the soft,
clear February sunshine. If only she had
had some sympathetic companion ! Her
aunt and Sophronia cared nothing whatsoever
for scenery, as she well knew, and
were only occupied in looking for any
acquaintances among those in carriages or
on horseback. Very soon Mrs. Deveron
perceived that the Daleford carriage was
near them, and, as its occupants had
alighted, she proceeded to do the same.

I did not see you at Stanmore just
now," she began ; " were you late ?"

** Oh, no ! but we only drove over to the
meet; we were not asked to breakfast."

Oh, really ! Sir Julian asked us '^

*' Ah, yes ! he always does say something
about it ; but then, of course, as the place
is Lady Peveril's, it is not quite the same
thing. Pansy, after what you said the
other day about colour, you must enjoy
this view," and Mrs. Delmar continued to

VOL. I. p

talk to her little friend for some time, to
enable Mrs. Deveron to get over her
chagrin at finding that she had availed
herself of an invitation that was considered
a mere faeon che parler by her more aristocratic
neighbour.

CHAPTER IX.

I cannot love him ;
Yet I suppose him virtuous, know him noble,
Of great estate, of fresh and stainless youth ;
In voices well-divulged, free, learn' d, and valiant,
And in dimension, and the shape of nature,
A gracious person ; but yet I cannot love him.

Twelfth Night. Act 1, Sc. 5.

Didst thou know as I do

The pangs and tortures of a slighted love.

Thou wouldst not wonder at this sudden change ;

For when ill-treated it turns all to hate —

And the then darling of our soul's revenge.

Powell.

Julia and her father returned early.
^ There had been but poor sport, as
the fox that had been found in the osier-beds
had soon been lost, and, the two next
coverts being drawn blank, Mr. Deveron

r2

had not thought it worth while to go still
further from home. Julia had no wish to
prolong the day ; whenever she caught
sight of Sir Julian he was in close attendance
on Lady Violet, and nothing could
exceed her mortification, unless indeed it
were her mother's.

It was unfortunate for Mrs. Deveron
that her introduction to Mrs. Delmar and
to Lady Peveril should have occurred
simultaneously. After having longed for
so many years for the entree into the county
set, it was more than her mental equilibrium
could stand to be introduced to both
in one evening; and the envy of all her
Arncester acquaintances at her invitation
to the Stanmore ball, together with Sir
Julian's attentions to Julia, had fairly
turned her head. Perhaps she had never
in her life felt more thoroughly uncomfortable
than when Mrs. Delmar intimated
that she should not think of going to a
hunt breakfast at Stanmore without a

especial invitation from Lady Peveril ! How
heartily she wished that she had held ber
tongue, and not admitted that they had
gone on Sir Julian's invitation.

It certainly was no fault of Pansy's, butin
her annoyance, her aunt almost hated
her, as the friend of the woman who had
witnessed her mortification.

I wonder you did not see, Pansy," she
remarked, as soon as they were settled
aorain in the carriage, and were on their
way homewards, 'that you were keeping
Mrs. Delmar standing there when she
wanted to go. It is a pity you have so
little tact."

Mrs. Delmar was asking me to go and
spend the day there next week," said
Pansy ; " she said if you would let me goon
Wednesday, Nora should come over forme
in the pony-carriage as she did before.
Indeed, I don't think I kept her, it was
she who was talking, not I."

So great was Mrs. Deveron's present

state of irritation that a refusal to allow
Pansy to go to Daleford rose to her lips
but she recollected in time that this was
the only tie she had to an acquaintance she
valued so highly So she only said,

Well, I think it is very rude to ask
you alone in that way ; I suppose she does
not think us good enough to associate
with."

It is because of Mamma," said Pansy,
who was always puzzled to understand
what did or did not displease her aunt.*

It had always seemed so easy at home,
as she still in her heart called La Hoche-caille
; she knew exactly what Mamma
and Bonne Maman wished, there was
never any disturbing element that she

could not comprehend. But here

Pansy was especially humble-minded, and
not in the least inclined to fancy herself
superior to others; but, in spite of this and
of her very slight knowledge of the world,
she had somehow a feeling that her aunt

and cousins were — not quite nice. The
way in which the girls talked of their
various partners and acquaintances jarred
upon her notions of feminine modesty, and
though she took herself to task for this,
telling herself that it was merely the effect
of the difference between English and
French habits, yet the feeling remained,
and had been certainly intensified since
she had known the Delmars, and noted
how differently they talked.

The young men in Arncester, about
whom Sophronia and Julia chattered so
incessantly, appeared to her very uninteresting;
they seemed only able to talk a
sort of jesting language, which never
referred to anything deeper than the last
party, or some old joke with which of
course she was unacquainted. They, on
the other hand, thought her very dull,
said she had no " go " in her, and was not
half so "jolly" as either of her cousins.
The only people to whom she talked with

pleasure in the town were the rector and
his wife, and Mrs. Mordan was too busy
with her children, and her multifarious
duties as a clergyman's wife, to be much
of a companion for her. She had indeed
asked her to go to see her whenever she
liked, and Pansy had done so once or
twice, but each time there had been some
interruption, Mrs. Mordan had been called
away on some errand or another, and had
left her with an apology, and Pansy felt
too shy to intrude on one whose time was
so valuable. Thus, until her acquaintance
with the Delmars, she had had no congenial
companions, and enjoyed her visits
to Daleford accordingly, hardly comprehending
how bitterly jealous her relatives
were of the favour shown to her.

The Deveron girls had been pacified, on
her first visit, by hearing that she had
seen only the ladies of the family, which
they would have considered very dull, but
on this second occasion, Pansy, when questioned,

narrated that not only had the tyro
sons been at home, but that two friends of
theirs — Lord Thrum and Mr. Dennis
were, she thought, their names — were
staying there, and, the afternoon having
proved wet, had spent the time between
singing glees and part-songs, and instructing
her how to play pool.

It is a good thing to be you, I must
say !" exclaimed Julia, discontentedly.
You go out and amuse yourself for the
day, and here have we been as dull as
ditch water, without a soul to come and
see us."

Pansy felt that this was not her fault,
and did not know what to answer, so she
said nothing.

*eat any rate," said Mrs. Deveron,
crossly, " as you have such advantages,
you might at least tell us something amusing,
instead of sitting there with your lips
pursed up as if it was too much trouble to
speak."

Everyone must at some time have experienced
the dreadful difficulty of being
expected to give any account of a conversation
which, although it seemed very
bright and sparkling at the time, had
nothing in it sufficiently valuable to render
it worthy of serious repetition. Pansy
hardly knew where to begin, but, feeling
that anything would seem more gracious
than to remain silent after such a speech,
she hastily began to retail such scraps of
the afternoon's talk as occurred to her.

Well," Mrs. Deveron observed, disdainfully,
" I thought the Delmars were byway
of goijig in for intellect, and culture,
and all that sort of thing. I'm sure anything
you've told us might have been said
by anybody. How long do Lord Thrum
and the other stay ?"

I did not hear."

*' Do you mean to say sou didn't ask ?"

No, Aunt Matilda ; I didn't know you
knew them, or would care to hear."

'gracious! child, one always wants to
hear everything — remember that in future,
and keep your eyes and ears open, so as
to be of some use."

It was a great annoyance to Pansy that,
ever since the famous evening when he
had held fast to her on the subject of
Shakespeare's heroines, Mr. Musgrave,
finding what an excellent listener she was,
which to him constituted '' an intelligent
companion," would attach himself to her
whenever they met. She did not dislike
him personally — indeed, as there was
always a topic of some sort in his conversation,
she infinitely preferred it to that
of the majority of the young men she
met ; but, little instructed as she was in
all her cousins' manoeuvres, she could not
help being aware that Sophronia regarded
him as her absolute property, and greatly
resented his talking to anyone else. Poor
Pansy exhausted all her ingenuity in endeavours
to avoid him, but it did not pacis j

Sophronia, who persisted in believing that
her cousin did her utmost to attract him,
and said bitter things about her flirting
propensities, more than half of which
passed without being understood over
Tansy's head, though she could not help
'being aware that she was unjustly held
responsible for Mr. Musgrave's defection.

This had gone on for some time, when
Julia one morning came into the drawing-room,
where Sophronia and Pansy were
sitting — Pansy painting some menu cards
with wreaths of wild flowers, and Sophro-
nia apparently reading one of Professor
Huxley's '' Science Primers."

I say, Soph," she began, " I've got a
piece of news — guess what it is."

The Lancers are going to give a dance
before they go ; Captain James told me
yesterday."

Did he ? Why didn't you say so before
? No, it isn't that ; it interests you."

Me ! Mrs. Youths has withdrawn her

opposition to scientific books in the Book

Club ?"

** Wrong again ; it's about a man."

You know I hate nothing so much

as guessing," said Sophronia, peevishly.

About a man, you say : Harry Vernon has

proposed to Emma Bellenden ?"

'' I said it interested you ; I don't know

what Harry would have to do with you,.

11 »

m sure.

'* Well, I shan't trouble myself to guess
any more. If you like to tell me you can,
and if you don't, I daresay I shall hear in
good time. I want to read this thing on
protoplasm."

That means a poultice, doesn't it ?
Well, Soph, I know you're dying of curiosity,
so I'll be merciful. It's about Mr.
Musgrave. His cousin has given him a
living in Yorkshire, a very good one, and
he's going away at once."

"You don't mean it! When does he
go ?" exclaimed Sophronia, springing up

sand dropping her book, thereby revealing
to Pansy's astonished eyes that a novel
was sheltered inside Protoplasm, and that
it was that which her cousin was studying.
"Who is his cousin? where is the
living ? and what is it worth ?"

"I have told you all I know. It was
only announced to-day, Mrs. Dawson said."

I'd give a great deal to know. Pansy,
did he say anything to you last night?
You kept him carefully to yourself."

I suppose as everyone knows now, I
may say," said Pansy, '' he told me a week
ago that his cousin, Mr. Lexington, had
offered him the living of Woodthorpe, five
miles from York, and that it was worth
£1,200 a year, but he begged me to say
nothing about it until it was announced.
He had only just got the letter, and hadn't
even told Mr. Mordan."

Perhaps he asked you to go there with
him?" said Sophronia, angrily, chagrined
'beyond measure that the disclosure had

been made to her cousin instead of to her.

Pansjj looked up in amazement; then,
quietly saying, '* You are joking*' she rose
and left the room.

Do you think that there can be anything
between them?" asked Sophronia,
almost before the door was closed.

No," answered Julia, positively. '' I
think she only liked to flirt with him to
tease you. She'll want Laurence Delmar,
or one of that set."

Or Arthur."

You mean because he's so silly about
her, — that's only to plague us. All men
like to find fault with their sisters and
thrust some other girl down their throats.
I don't believe he really thinks of her."

Well, I daresay a little plain thing like
that would be glad enough to get him or
anyone else. But about Mr. Musgrave — I
wonder "

'well, Soph, if he doesn't propose to
you, I'm sure it'll be an awful shame, seeing

how he's always been hanging about
you. Why, I declare T believe he's coming
now ; that's just like his ring."

But it proved to be not Mr. Musgrave,
but one of the Yernon girls, who frequently
came in towards tea-time for a gossip.
While they were in the midst of a not
very edifying conversation respecting each
other s flirtations, interspersed with much
giggling, Mr. Deveron put his head into
the room.

Is Pansy here ?"

"No, Papa," answered Julia ; " she went
upstairs about half an hour ago."

"Just ask her to come to me in the
study for a few minutes. I want to speak
to her."

"Wants me? Uncle George?" said
Pansy, looking up from her book in intense
surprise when Julia gave her
message. "What can he want with
me?"

"T don't know, I'm sure; but you'd

better make haste, Papa doesn't like to be
kept waiting."

Can it be any bad news, — anything
about Leon or Bonne Maman ?" said Pansy,
turning very pale. *' Oh, Julia ! did he say
nothing?"

"Nothing at all, and the sooner you go
down the sooner you'll know what it is."

Yes ; but," said Pansy, pausing on tho
landing, ''if it were to be bad news, Julia,
one would be glad to put it off as long a&
possible."

Oh ! I don't know— I'd rather get it
over. Besides, who says it is bad news?
He only said he wanted to speak to you."

After a timid pause at her uncle's doors
Pansy knocked and entered. He looked
up and smiled.

Ah, Pansy, here you are. I sent Julia
for you."

"It — it isn't anything about Leon?"^
asked Pansy, anxiously, her voice trembling.


VOL. I. Q

"Eh? What? About Leon? No, it
is something about yourself, Pansy. Mr.
Musgrave spoke to me to-day."

"Mr. Musgrave ?"

Pansy looked up in complete bewilderment.
What could anvthinof he miorht
have said to her uncle have to do with
her ?

He made some apology for speaking
to me first," continued Mr. Deveron, quite
unconscious of his niece's astonishment ;
"he seemed to think that, having been
brought up in France, you would prefer it,
and also he wished to tell me how his fortunes
had improved, though he said he had
told you a week ago. I told him that if
you liked him he had my good wishes, but
that I could not answer for you. T promised
to tell you he had my approval. I
have always liked the young man, and believe
him to be a really good fellow, but,
as I told him, I had never suspected this

love-affair. He will come to you for Ins
answer tomorrow morning."

Pansy sat transfixed with amazement.

To-morrow morning ! His answer !"
she gasped. " Uncle George, what do you
mean ?"

It was Mr. Deveron's turn to be astonished.


"Why, my dear," he said, ''I think I
may rather ask what you mean by looking
surprised. Mr. Musgrave stopped me today
to beg my consent to his asking you
to be his wife, and, as I told you, stated
that he took the unusual step of speaking
to me first, because he thought it would
be more in accordance with your French
notions of propriety. He seemed to have
no doubt of what your answer would be."

I don't understand — it is quite impossible
! He could not have meant me 1"
exclaimed Pansy, in astonished dismay.

But I tell you he did, my dear," said

q2

Mr. Deveron, quietly. **I believe it is the
correct thing for young ladies to profess
astonishment when they are proposed to,
but it seenQS to me a very silly custom ; it
is much more sensible to give a clear
answer at once. But it is really absurd
for you to pretend ignorance, Pansy. Did
not Mr. Musgrave confide to you his change
of fortune a week ago ?"

eyes, he did, but "

"Well, my dear, it seems to me you
must have known tolerably well what that
meant. It is not likely he would have
made a confidante of you, if, from the encouragement
you had given him, he had
not thought it would be of special interest
to you. Indeed, as I said just now, he
seemed not to have the slightest doubt as
to the answer you would give him tomorrow."


"But I cannot, indeed — it is all a mistake.
I never even thought of such a
thing," cried Pansy, in desperation.

Her uncle began to perceive that she
was really in earnest, that it was by no
means a case of young lady's coyness, ashe
had at first supposed. Her appearance
and the accent of distress were too genuine
for him to doubt that she was really taken
by surprise. Still he thought that probably
she was only startled. Mr. Musgrave
could never have been so confident without
good grounds. Mr. Deverou, beings himself

<) O I CD

anything but conceited or self-satisfied,
could hardly realize the powers of self-deception
of a young man on such excellent
terms with himself. He paused for a
minute or two, and then said,

You surely do not mean, Pansy, that
Mr. Musgrave is mistaken, that you do not
care for him?"

Not in the very least," answered Pansy,
promptly.

Well, but, my dear, I am afraid, then,
that you have been flirting with him, and
leading him on in a — well, in a reprehensible

manner. He must have felt very
sure of you to take you into his confidence
so long before anyone else."

He may have been sure, Uncle George,
but indeed it is no fault of mine. I never
once thought of such a thing."

*' But, my dear, he certainly has paid
you a great deal of attention. You surely
are aware of that ?"

Yes ; but indeed I always tried to
prevent him."

But why? he is a very superior young
man, of excellent family, with plenty to
say for himself, and he will now be in a
very good position. You might do much
worse, Pansy."

But I don't want to be married at all,"
cried Pansy, beginning to entertain a dread,
that her uncle was going to press her acceptance
of a man to whom she was perfectly
indifferent.

But then, my dear, why did you give

him false hopes ? It will be a terrible disappointment
to him."

^' Uncle George, it never once entered
my head that he came here to see me. I
thought — we all thought — he belonged to
Sophronia. Perhaps I oughtn't to have
said that — perhaps she wouldn't like it —
but indeed we did."

''Sophronia!" said Mr. Deveron, in surprise.
The chatter about lovers was always
stopped in his presence, and, like many
other elderly gentlemen, he was not very
observant in such matters. Besides, he
had a firm belief that it was only pretty
girls who had attention paid them, and
Sophronia was undoubtedly plain ; if it
had been Julia he would not have been so
surprised. " Sophronia !" he said again ;
what could have put such an idea into
your head ?"

But he was always with her until quite
lately," said Pansy, earnestly; "and I

know she did not like his talking to me
instead : that was one reason why I always
tried to keep out of his way. But, oh !
please, you must not say anything of this ;
I only told you to show that indeed I never
once thought of his liking me."

Well, it is very annoying," said Mr.
Deverou, who was greatly put out by the
idea of a daughter of his having been paid
attention to and then deserted even for his
own niece — ** very annoying indeed. You
will have to make your meaning very plain
tomorrow, Pansy, for, as I tell you, Mr.
Musgrave seemed to anticipate no difficulty."


Pansy's wild-rose colour deepened, and
she held up her head ; her uncle was fairly
astonished to see how pretty she was.

*' There shall be no mistake," she said,
proudly ; then, with a look almost of terror
" But surely, uncle, I need not see him?
You can tell him that it is all a mistake."

No, indeed, my dear, I cannot do that,

and I am sure he would never believe me.
No, he has a right to hear his sentence
from your own lips."

"But I do not know what to say. Oh,
Uncle George ! do please tell him yourself."

*^ Now, Pansy, be reasonable. I cannot
undertake such a task. There is nothing
to be afraid of; you have only to give a
plain answer to a plain question. Only,
remember this : do not let any hint respecting
Sophronia escape you."

*' Oh, uncle, of course not ! You do
not think I would ! And you will not let
them know I told you."

'' No, you may rely upon my discretion,"
said her uncle, smiling ; *' it is curious,
Pansy, how you remind me of your grandmother
when you hold up your head as
you did just now."

'' Of Bonne Maman ?" said Pansy ; '' yes,
I know. Poor Mamma always said I was
so like her."

Fearful of being cross-questioned by her

cousins as to what her uncle could possibly
have wanted with her so long, Pansy made
her escape to her own room, and sat down
by the fire to meditate on the astonishing
news she had heard. It seemed to her
perfectly incredible, and if Mr. Deveron
had not referred to Mr. Musgrave's having
confided to her his change of circumstances,
she would have been inclined to
think that he must have misunderstood,
and that the young clergyman had been
talking of Sophronia, and not of herself.
The idea of love and marriage had not
been perpetually before Pansy's mind as it
had been before that of her cousins, and,
now that it was suddenly forced upon her,
she felt thoroughly bewildered. It seemed
as if she had grown years older since she
entered the study. The thought of the
next morning's impending interview haunted
her like a nightmare ; her gentle, yielding
nature made it always difficult for her
to say No, and she was sure that in this

instance, when the answer bad to be given
to so important a question, it would be
even harder than usual. She sat meditating;
till she was almost late for dinner, and
felt thankful, as she ran downstairs, that
there were two or three guests, so that
she could escape the dreaded questioning.
When she opened her eyes the next
morning, it was with a sense of something
unpleasant impending, what she could not
at first remember ; but gradually the recollection
of what was before her became
distinct, and rendered her unspeakably
uncomfortable. She ate hardly any breakfast,
disappeared as soon as possible to her
own room, and sat there unable to do anything,
watching the hands of the clock,
and wishing devoutly that her ordeal was
over. Yet when she heard the door-bell
ring, and when a few minutes afterwards
the butler knocked at the door and
announced that his master would be glad
to speak with her in the study, she would

gladly have yet further postponed the evil
hour. Her uncle met her at the foot of
the stairs, and could not help smiling at
her woebegone countenance.

Cheer up, Pansy," he said, kindly ;
'•'you look as if you were going to be
hanged. It is nothing so very dreadful,
and it will soon be over."

Pansy never knew how she found herself
in the study with the door closed
behind her. Mr. Musgrave was standing
with his back to the fire, and at once
advanced to meet her.

Your uncle has no doubt told you my
errand, Mademoiselle de la Rochecaillou,"
he said. '' I trust you will forgive my
having, in deference to French customs,
spoken to him first, and that you will
accord me a favourable answer."

His tone implied a certainty of success
that would have been patent to a more
experienced ear than Pansy's, but she was
far too nervous to observe it.

*' Silence they say gives consents.' lie
said, after a pause. "May I take yours in
that light ? Tt will make me the happiest
of men."

Oh, no, indeed you must not ; it is alla
dreadful mistake !" cried Pansy, shrinking
back as he tried to take her hand.
*' I — I never even thought of such a
thing."

*but will you not think of it now?"
asked Mr. Musgrave, inexpressibly astonished
at her words, and unable to realise
that he was actually being refused. "And
surely, Mademoiselle de la Eochecaillou,
you must have understood my meaning-when
I told you a week ago of my prospects
? You have always given me such
sweet encouragement that you can hardly
be surprised that I should hope "

I never once thought of such a thing,"
said Pansy, " and I begged Uncle George
to tell you so, but he said I must do it
myself, or you would not be satisfied. I

never meant to encourage you. If I have
done wrong, I am very sorry, but I don't
know how, when you talked to me, I could
help answering."

*but are you really in earnest? You
must surely have been aware of my devotion,
have noticed how I sought you in
preference to others."

No, indeed," said Pansy ; '' as I tell
you, I never thought of such a thing."

But you will give me hope ? "You will
not refuse me altogether ?" cried the young-man,
absolutely bewildered at the unexpected
turn of events. *' Pansy, say that
I may hope, that you will be mine some
day."

I can say nothing of the kind, for it
would not be true," said Pansy; "and,"
drawing herself up in a stately manner,
'you have no right to call me by my
name; I am Mademoiselle de la ."


'rand you really mean it?" said Mr.

Musgrave, in whom astonishment was at
the moment more active than even mortification.


Yes."

Then there is nothing further to be
said. Forgive me, Mademoiselle de la
Eochecaillou " — he gave a satirically prolonged
emphasis to the name — *' for intruding
upon you, but, had it not been for
your encouragement, I should never have
presumed to do so ;" and, with a low bow
and an ill-assumed air of indifference, he
quitted the room, leaving Pansy intensely
thankful that the ordeal was over, but
beyond measure indignant at his parting
words.

CHAPTER X.

He that wants money, means, and content, is without
three good friends.

As You Like It. Act 3, Sc. 2.

Pansy devoutly hoped that the fact of
-■- her interview with Mr. Musgrave
might not transpire ; she knew it would
be a great disappointment to Sophronia,
and felt that, though she was really perfectly
innocent, she would yet be held
guilty of having encouraged him, and
diverted his allegiance from the proper
quarter. But, unfortunately for her hopes,
Mrs. Deveron saw his departure from the
window, and knowing that her husband
eras out, and finding that her daughters

had neither seen nor heard anything of
him, cross-questioned everyone till she
elicited that he had " asked for master,"
who had sent up for Mademoiselle de la
Eochecaillou, and had gone out as soon as
she came down.

Then they were alone together for
nearly half an hour !" exclaimed Sophro-
nia, angrily. '' I declare it is too bad !"

I thought she was trying to get him
away from you," chimed in Julia. " Don't
you remember her saying yesterday he
had told her a week ago about this living
he has got ? I thought that sounded
suspicious."

'' And your father must have been in
their confidence," said Mrs. Deveron. " I
cannot think why he did not tell me. He
must know that it is quite different from
what we had a right to expect."

When Pansy made her appearance just
before luncheon, she felt at once that
something was wrong ; no one spoke to

VOL. I, R

her all through the meal ; but when, as
soon as it was over, she was going upstairs
again, her aunt called her back.

Come here for a moment, Pansjj. I
think you have something to tell me."

No, Aunt Matilda, nothing," said Pansy,
quietly, but colouring violently.

Nothing ! Perhaps, Pansy, you do
not realise that I stand in the place of
your mother, and have a right to demand
your confidence."

To think of Aunt Matilda claiming to
hold her mother's place ! Pansy could
hardly bear the thought, but she answered
quietly,

I have nothing to tell you, Aunt
Matilda."

Pansy, you are equivocating. Do you
think I don't know that you were shut
up alone with Mr. Musgrave in the study
for half an hour this morning? What
was he saying to you ? I insist upon
knowing."

'^ Then you must ask him, Aunt Matilda,"
said Pansy, with the proud movement
that had so struck her uncle the day
before. '' I do not feel at liberty to repeat
a private conversation."

Don't be saucy," replied Mrs. Deveron,
who was fast losing her temper. " Answer
me at once. Are you engaged to Mr.
Musgrave ?"

No, certainly not."

Did he not propose to you ?"

I told you before, Aunt Matilda, you
must ask him. I can only answer what
affects myself."

*' Well, I think you are very impertinent.
I shall speak to your uncle."

But when Mrs. Deveron proceeded todo
so when he came in before dinner, she
obtained no sympathy from her husband.

'' Of course he proposed to her," said
Mr. Deveron ; " what else should he have
wanted to see her alone for? He spoke tome
yesterday, and asked me to prepare the

r2

way for him. I never saw anyone so surprised
as she was ; lie would not believe
me at first. Of course I pointed out to
her that it was a very good marriage, and
that I was quite ready to give my consent,
but she would not hear of it. Poor little
thing! she seemed perfectly terrified at the
idea of seeing him, and begged me to give
him his answer ; but of course I could not
do that."

*swell, I call it a great shame. He
paid so much attention to Sophronia, I was
quite prepared for his proposing any day.
It is too bad to have him seduced away by
a little flirting minx who doesn't think
him good enough for her after all ! What
does she expect, I wonder !"

It strikes me," said Mr. Deveron,
leaning back in his chair and yawning,
"that Pansy has none of that . breathless
anxiety to be married which so many girls
have. I daresay she will fall in love some
day like other people, but I fancy she

"will never marry for marrying's sake."

More's the pity ! She'll take a fancy
to some one utterly unsuitable, and we
shall have that trouble on our hands!
And, meanwhile, here she stays flirting
and taking people away from the girls."

"My dear Matte, you are talking nonsense.
Pansy is no flirt, and, if Musgrave
had ever had any intention of proposing to
Sophronia, depend upon it he would have
done so. Men may be weak and easily
led astray by fascinating girls, but really
they are not quite such fools as you seem
to think. One thing I must insist upon :
however vexed you or Sophronia may beat
the failure of your hopes, you are not to
visit it upon Pansy, who has done no
harm. She certainly neither expected nor
wished to be proposed to."

^' Stuff!"

You are mistaken ; however, whether
you are so or not, bear in mind what I
say : Pansy is not to be annoyed in anyway

because you and Sophronia choose to
take an exaggerated view of whatever
attention Mr. Musgrave has paid her.
That is the worst of plain girls, they always
fancy that if a man is ordinarily
civil to them he is desperately in love."

A nice thing to say of your own
daughter !"

Her being my daughter by no means
prevents my knowing that she is plain ! I
hoped that all her sciences and ologies
would have kept her clear of the usual
folly."

** I assure you, George, he did pay her a
great deal of attention."

'' Well, he changed his mind, and he will
soon be gone now, so she had better forget
all about him. I never noticed any attention
on his part."

After her husband's injunctions, Mrs.
Deveron could of course say nothing more
to Pansy, but the girl felt very plainly
that she was in disgrace, and kept even

more to herself than usual. There was a
more than ordinary pressure of business
at the Bank past at this time, and she saw
less of Arthur than was usually the case.
She missed the walks with him very much,
though she had now grown sufficiently
acquainted with the neighbourhood to take
exploring rambles by herself. Excepting
when in company with her cousins, she
carefully avoided the town, neither the
shops in the High Street, nor the chance
of meeting acquaintances in Arne Street,
having any charms for her. She often at
this time longed exceedingly to be back
once more at La Rochecaillou, reading to
her grandmother and going about among
the poor and sick whom she had known
from her childhood. She had once expressed
a timid wish to ask Mrs. Mordan
whether there were not some poor people
in Arncester whom she might visit, but
Mrs. Deveron had at once taken alarm and
put a veto on her doing so.

I have no opinion of district-visiting
for young girls, they hear and see a great
deal that they had better not ; besides, in
the long run, they always catch something.
Into, I can't have it, Pansy." And thereof
course, had been an end of it.

But the girl felt the utter restlessness of
lier life, though most people would have
considered her life at Arncester far more
cheerful than it had been in the old French
chateau. There was a great deal of society
in the town, and as Mr. Deveron insisted
on his niece's taking her full share of the
gaiety there might be, she had a good deal
of going out, while at La Rochecaillou she
had never seen anyone but her mother and
grandmother, excepting during the summer
visits of Madame de Varennes to the chateau.
But then she had been in such full
union and sympathy with them, they read
together, talked together, liked the same
books, were interested in the same things.
But now with the young companions generally

judged so necessary for a girl's happiness,
lie did not seem to have any interests
in common. Even Arthur, kind as he was
to her, and much as she liked him, was not
very well able to talk about books, which,
knowing nothing of the world, and not
specially caring for the specimen of it now
presented to her, were all that she could
converse about with much interest. So
that, except when she spent the day at Dale-ford,
whose inhabitants were thoroughly
congenial to her. Pansy was thrown principally
upon her own thoughts for companionship,
and often longed inexpressibly for
some change in her life. She was not to
go to La Rochecaillou till November, and
the nine intervening months seemed very
long to look forward to.

Madame de Yarennes had at first written
very frequently to her niece, hoping to
establish an influence over her, and not
altogether despairing, despite the difficulties
interposed by absence, of accomplishing

her conversion, and also the marriage,
on which her heart was much set, with the
Due de la Caune. But gradually her
letters had grown both shorter and less
frequent, the reason being that an orphan
niece of Monsieur varennes had just come
to live with them, and Madame de Yarennes,
who took up everything in which she was
concerned with the greatest vehemence
was so occupied with plans for her proper
establishment in life that she had little
time or thought to spare for the distant
Penseee. Pansy realized that it was to the
advent of Marie de Yarennes that her aunt's
increasing intervals of silence were due,
and felt even more lonely than she had
done before.

It was about three weeks after Mr. Mus-grave's
interview with Pansy that Mrs.
Deveron gave an exclamation of delight
one morning on opening a letter.

Oh ! how delightful ! Hubert is coming
home for a fortnight."

What has made him so gracious ?''
asked Mr. Deveron, rather drily. " He
could spare us none of his long leave."

Oh ! come now, George, you must not
be hard upon him. He is so popular, and
had so many invitations — Lord Barton,
and Sir Henry Thalers, and Lord Cibber
and "

*' That will do, Matilda. The peerage
was much more attractive than his own
family."

'' Dear boy ! he is so fond of society !"

Especially when it is a sphere above
him. Well, we shall be very glad to see
him, I am sure. I only hope it is affection,
not money, that prompts his visit."

You are always so hard upon him."

'' Hard ! Well, come, Matte, you have
hardly the right to say that. You know
how extravagant he has been, and that I
have paid his debts twice."

Well, after all, it was not so very

much. You forget it is a very aristocratic
regiment."

No, indeed I do not, for I have good
cause to know it. If he gets into another
money scrape, I shall insist on his exchanging
into an infantry regiment."

Mrs. Deveron gave an exclamation of
dismay.

*' George, you can't mean what you say !
Think what a superior set he is in."

I don't see that that is any advantage ;
indeed, if it makes him extravagant, it is
precisely the contrary. However, we need
not anticipate evil ; perhaps Hubert's visit
has nothing to do with money."

His mother and sisters seemed to regard
Hubert as such a model of all earthly
perfection that Pansy could not help feeling
her curiosity rather excited about him.
It would be very pleasant if he were as
nice as Arthur, who was her one real friend
in the family. Not an idea had Pansy
that Arthur's feeling for her was in anyway

different from hers for him, of an
honest cousinly affection. He was not
very demonstrative, and it seemed so
natural that he should be her companion,
taking in a way the place that Leon had
hitherto filled, that she never gave a
thought to his possible feelings, and really
hardly understood the innuendoes in which
his sisters occasionally indulged.

Hubert arrived about three days after
the above conversation, and was received
with positive rapture. Why it should be
so rather puzzled Pansy, for he certainly
took no pains to ingratiate himself with
his mother and sisters ; distressing the
former by complaints of this, that, or the
other in the comfortably-ordered house,
and drawing comparisons between the
way in which " things were done," and
what he was accustomed to at the great
houses where he stayed ; and snubbing the
latter as to their dress, manners, and
associates.

Really, mother, I can't think how you
can let Julia go on as she does with that
Yernon fellow," he said, when he had been
at home two or three days ; *' she positively
throws herself at his head. It's awfully
bad form, such a cad as he is too !"

Oh ! Hubert, we have known him so
long, and he is quite one of the nicest
young men in the town."

"You shouldn't let the girls mix with
the townspeople."

But, my dear boy, we know no loue
else except the Delmars ; the girls would
have no society."

"Much better have none than have it
bad. If we are sent to Rockton, I shall hate
our fellows who are quartered here to see
my sisters running after the tag-rag and
bob-tail of a little pokey town. I can't
think how you ever let them get into the
set."

Poor Mrs. Deveron I she stood in such
awe of her fastidious second son that she

hardly dared to point out that many of the
worthy people whom he so sweepingly
condemned were his father's life-long:
friends, and that even had she been willing
(which she was not) to drop them and
thus cut herself off from all society, she
would not have been permitted to do so.
Once or twice she had essayed to cut one
or two of their early acquaintances who
had somewhat fallen behind in the race of
life, and each time her husband had frustrated
her design, and insisted on her
being more than ordinarily civil to the
persons in question. Still it was very
dreadful to her to hear their society so
despised by Hubert, who, "of course, must
know best," considering the exalted circle
into which he seemed to have obtained
entrance.

It would be so much better they
shouldn't go out at all," he continued, calmly
ignoring whether they might not thereby
lose all the amusement they had. " Only

think how awkward it would be if one of
them got entangled with one of those cads.
It would be sure to leak out somehow, and
I should never hear the last of it."

'' But we have known all these people
for years' his mother ventured to say,
humbly ; *' and, besides, we know no one
else."

Then they've got such bad manners,"
pursued the remorseless critic. ^' They're
more, I declare, like barmaid than ladies,
giggling, and shrieking, and letting every
man say what he likes. If they could only
see Lady Muriel Barton, or Lady Violet
Yalton."

Lady Violet Valton ! Oh ! we saw herat
Stanmore," said his mother ; " a forward,
flirting thing, I'm sure."

Not a bit of it. Her manners are
perfect. But when did you see her ? She
wasn't at the Stanmore Ball, I know."

''No, it was at the meet." And, with
considerable reluctance, Mrs. Deveron told

her son the story of that day, exactly as
it had happened, anxious to see whether
he considered that she had been guilty of
so heinous a social crime as Mrs. Delmar
evidently did.

Poor mother ! Well, you did mull it
awfully," was all the consolation he gave
her ; " but if Julia didn't know better how
to behave with Sir Julian than she did last
night with young Vernon, she'd have no
chance any way. Why can't the girls copy
Pansy ? Her manners are perfect."

Pansy ! My dear Hubert ! a little, insignificant,
ugly, brown thing ! You can't
mean to compare her with Julia !"

She's a precious sight better-looking
than Julia ever will be, and, what's better,
she looks thorough-bred to the tips of her
fingers, and doesn't giggle and roll her
eyes about. Has she got any money ?"

Only her mother's £10,000."

'* I say, mother, can you manage to get
me some money from the governor r He

VOL. I. S

cut up SO rough last time I exceeded my
allowance, I don't like to ask him myself."

Oh ! Hubert, I do hope it is not much.
It is very odd, when I said you were coming
home, he wondered if it had anything
to do with money. He was vexed, you
see, that you didn't come here in your
long leave."

Well, you see, I did intend to, but this
place is so awfully slow, and there's really
nobody one cares to speak to. But what
did my father say about money ?"

Oh ! he said you were very extravagant.
I never can make him understand
that in the life you live, and among the
people you associate with, expense is inevitable,
that you must do like others.
But he said that if you applied to him
again, he should insist on your exchanging
into an infantry regiment."

What ? Leave the cavalry ? He never
could have meant it !" cried Hubert, aghast"'

Why, I've spent nothing compared with
other fellows."

Ah ! I said that to him, and he answered
that ' other people, and what they
did, were no concern of his, but that he
did not mean to encourage his younger son
in reckless extravagance.' "

'' It all comes of Arthur beinsr such a
milksop," said Hubert, discontentedly.
My father thinks that because he never
wants money, no one else can either — as if
there were anything to spend it on in this
hole ! But I say, mother, what is to be
done?"

"Is it much, Hubert? Can't it wait?
Your father paid all your debts last year,
surely the tradesmen "

"Oh! it isn't tradesmen, I shouldn't
care a straw then. Of course they could
wait any time ; but, worse luck, it's a debt
of honour, it must be paid."

*abetting ! — oh ! Hubert, you know how

s2

angry your father would be ; and — and
really, you know, that isn't necessary, as I
always tell him your other expenses are."

Psha ! a man must do like others he
lives with ; besides, it wasn't betting — it
was baccarat."

Gambling ! — your father would say it
was just as bad."

Well, can you suggest any way of
my getting the money without asking
him ? Have it I must — I came home on
purpose."

How much is it?"

Two hundred I must have. It's a
pitiful sum to make a fuss about, but I've
overdrawn a little already."

*'-Do you owe much else ?"

*' No — at least, I think not — a few
pounds here and there."

'' Could you make £150 do ?"

No, I couldn't ; I owe Bertram the
£200, and I couldn't pay him in instalments."


'' Do you mean Lord Bertram, the Duke
of Fenshire's son ? Oh ! of course it must
be paid at once'*

Mrs. Deveron thought immediate payment
far more necessary, the creditor
being the rich Marquis of Bertram, than
if it had been anyone of slender means,
but less august descent.

I'll be back in a moment," she said,
as she left the room ; " I think I can do
something."

Mrs. Deveron went first to her ovv-n
room, and, opening her desk, began to
count the notes and gold therein. Mr.
Deveron always paid his wife's and daughters'
allowances to them in money, which
he for some reason preferred to letting
them have an account at the bank and
cheque-books. Mrs. Deveron counted her
own money, and then went to the girls'
room.

Soph — Julia, can you help me ? Poor
Hubert is in great want of £200 ; he owes

it to Lord Bertram, the Duke of Fenshire's
son, you know, and he aren't ask Papa
for it, because he said the other day that,
if Hubert asked for money again, he should
make him exchange into the Infantry. Such
a dreadful thing, you know, losing all his
nice acquaintances and all he has gained f
I can think of nothing but making up the
money between us. I can give him £110,
and keep a little to go on with. Can you
help?"

The girls looked rather aghast ; if such
a thing had been asked of them to do
Arthur some important service, they would
have thought it the greatest of hardships
and in all probability have refused pointblank
; but Hubert was the hero of the
family, and they had an indistinct idea
that his social triumphs were somehow
reflected on them. If they did not know
exalted personages themselves, it was still
something to be able to talk familiarly of

their brother's aristocratic acquaintances.
But even with the will to help him, the
could not produce the required £90, and
dismay was again taking possession of
Mrs. Deveron, when Julia exclaimed,

Mamma, why shouldn't you ask Pansy
to help ? She's got plenty of money, and
she's awfully good-natured."

Ask Pansy ! Impossible !" said Mrs.
Deveron, hastily ; but the longer she
thought, the surer it seemed that there
was no other way of obtaining the money
without her husband's knowledge. So,
though greatly disliking her errand, she
knocked at Pansy's door.

My dear," she said, as Pansy looked
up in surprise at seeing who was her
visitor, " I have come to ask you to do mea
favour."

*' I'm sure I shall be very glad if I can,
Aunt Matilda," answered Pansy, readily.

'* Well, my dear, I am afraid you will

think it very strange, but — it is for Hubert.
You see, your uncle hardly understands
all that young men require in such
an expensive regiment, and — he is in great
want of a particular sum of money, and
aren't ask his father for it. The girls
and I have been trying to make it up between
us, but we can't manage it, and we
were at our wits' end till Julia said that
you were so good-natured she thought you
would help us if you could. Of course,
you know. Pansy, it will be quite safe ; I
will pay you again as soon as possible."

*' Oh ! yes, I am sure you will, Aunt
Matilda, and indeed I shall be so glad to
help, but — I am afraid I have not so very
much — how much would be enough ?"

Could you let me have £50, my dear ?
Of course, I mean without inconvenience ;
you must not leave yourself without anything."


I think I can," and after a few minutes
Pansy produced the required sum, and received

a warmer kiss from her aunt in
return than had ever yet fallen to her
share.

Mrs. Deveron turned round at the door
to say —

I'm sure, my love, I can rely upon you
to say nothing of all this to your uncle. If
he knew, it would have the worst effect on
dear Hubert's prospects," and Pansy willingly
promised secrecy.

*^ What a time you have been !" was
Hubert's greeting to his mother when she
returned.

Never mind, my dear boy, I have got
what you wanted."

'what, the money! You don't mean
it ! What a good old mater you are 1" and
he gave her the unaccustomed honour of a
kiss. " Well, this is a relief, and I'll keep
out of such a scrape again. After all,
baccarat's awfully stupid."

You know, Hubert, it's a thing I
should never be able to do again. It's the

merest chance I hadn't paid all my winter
bills with the money ; now they must wait.
And then I had to ask Pansy to help me
to make it up."

Oh, I say! you surely didn't do that !"^

My dear boy, there was no other way
but going to your father. You needn't be
afraid ; she promised not to say a word."

"Well, beggars can't be choosers, but —
I don't like it. It's an awful relief to have
got the money, though, anyhow."

"Wouldn't it be a good thing if you
were to marry — some one with money, of
course ?" suoforested his mother.

'every easy to say, but where am I to
find her ? Heiresses are not easy to find
in the upper classes, and I'm not like
Bertram, and Aviemore, and fellows of
that sort", who can go into the City and
choose a wife for her money-bags, and
know no one will ever ask who she was.
She's their wife, and that's enough ; now
my wife must be somebody, or she'll drag

me down, and I shall lose all the good I've
got. Don't you see ?"

Yes, Mrs. Deveron saw perfectly, and
her heart yearned for some blue-blooded
damsel as a daughter-in-law ; yet she was
too wise to counsel her extravagant son to
make a poor marriage, and observed, as he
left the room,

Well, you had better keep your eyes
open, and see if }/ou cannot find some one
desirable in both ways."

CHAPTER XI.

D'etat plaisir de voir danser la jeiine fille !
Sa basque agitate ses toilettes d'azur,
Ses grands yeux noirs brilliant sous la noire mantille,
Telle une double etoile au front des nights scintille
Sous les plis d'un nuage obscur.

Mais elle, par la valse ou la ronde imported,
Volant, et revenait, et ne respirait pas,
Et s'enivrait des sons de la flute vantee,
Des fleurs, des lustres door, de la fete enchanted,
Du bruit des voix, du bruit des pas.
Les Orientales (Fantom) — Victor Hugo.

II til. Devon was much surprised
^-^ when the first days of Hubert's visit
passed off without any request for money.
He began to think he must be wrong,
which he did not like, as it rather reflected
on his judgment, and yet he was relieved.

for he had begun to think that he had
done a foolish thing in listening to his
wife and allowing the bos to enter a fashionable
and expensive regiment. Mr.
Deveron had none of the hankering after
higher social position which was the constant
thought of his wife and daughters. He
was quite satisfied with his position in the
middle class, as the Banker and townsman
of Arncester, and liked his old friends
there too well to be willing to neglect
them for others, were they " county people
" or not. He began to think Hubert
had, after all, only come home to see them,
and dismissed his former suspicions from
his mind.

I can't think how you girls can go
lounging up and down Arne Street all
day," said Hubert, the day after he had
obtained the money from his mother; "it's
such bad form, looks as if you had nothing
to do, and were always watching for the
fellows from barracks."

Julia tossed her head.

I'm sure there's no one there worth
thinking of. Why, they're all married."

Well, it's bad style, I can tell you."

But it's the only chance of seeing a
creature ; no one comes up to this stupid
part of the town."

Where's Pansy ? I should fancy she
didn't scour Arne Street all day too."

"Pansy! Oh, no; she goes off and
prowls about the lanes and the country by
herself, except when Arthur goes too."

*' Arthur ! Oh, is he smitten ?"

"Smitten! — by that little insignificant
thing ! Oh, dear, no !"

I tell you what it is, Julia, don't go
and fancy Pansy is plain ; she mayn't be a
woman's beauty, but she is an uncommonly
pretty girl, and it would be a precious
good thing if you and Soph would copy
her manners ; she might be a duchess !"

Well, I'm sure, I wonder what next !"

"It's a fact, I assure you, and I suppose

you'll allow I ought to know a little more
about it than you."

This was unanswerable ; Julia could
only pout, and owe Pansy a grudge for
being considered better style than herself.

Pansy," said Hubert, intercepting her
in the hall as she was starting for a walk
after luncheon, " will you accept me for
an escort instead of Arthur? — he hasn't
come in yet."

But indeed I generally go alone," said
Pansy, who was afraid he thought it
necessary to provide an escort for her.
'pray do not trouble about me."

^' No trouble, but a pleasure," said
Hubert, opening the door. " I think you
are so right, Pansy, to strike out a line of
your own, and not always stick to the
streets. I tell the girls it is very bad
style."

Of course I know nothing about that,"
said Pansy, "but it does not amuse me. All
the people are not old friends to me, as

they are to your sisters, and I am so much
more used to woods and fields. I never
feel so lonely when T am out in the lanes
as I do in the streets."

*' That's curious," said Hubert, who had
not the slightest love for the country,
excepting as a place where hunting and
shooting might be enjoyed ; " but of
course the society in this pokey place is
very different from what you have always
been used to."

But I have never been used to any,"
said Pansy, smiling ; " at La Eochecaillou
it is only a little village, and there are no,
what you would call, neighbours, only just
the farmers and poor people."

I thought, of course, you went to
Paris."

'* No ; Mamma never left the chateau
after poor Papa died."

'rit is a pity; you would shine in a
society like that of Paris."

"Do you know it well?" said Pansy,

quite unconscious of the compliment.
Bonne Maman says there can be no
society under the Republic, — but then she
is Legitimate."

*' Ah !" said Hubert, who felt too insecure
in his knowledge of French politics
to venture on much discussion. He was
by no means clear as to which of the various
claimants to the French crown it was
to whom the Legitimists owed allegiance :
Paris is a charming place."

"Leon likes it, but he has not been
there much."

'* Leon ! that's your brother ?"

Yes — oh ! I hope he will come over
soon now, Uncle George asked him, and
he says he hopes to be able to come in
April. It seems such a time since I saw
him."

It must seem longer to him, at least I
know it would to me."

This was said with what Hubert considered
an irresistible smile : he could

VOL. I. T

never help trying to rake love to any girl
lie might be with.

'* Oh, I don't think so," said the unconscious
Pansy ; " of course he has so much
to do with his regiment, the time must
pass faster with him than it does with me.
Dear Leon ! it will interest and amuse him
so much to see England, which poor Mamma
used to tell us about."

There did not seem anything very
interesting to be extracted from conversation
about Leon, so Hubert tried something
more personal.

'* I wanted to see you alone, Pansy," he
said, " to thank you for something you did
yesterday. My mother told me. It was
quite too awfully good of you, and you
really hardly know me''

"You mean about the money," said
Pansy, who had at first looked puzzled :
*^ but that was nothing. I was very glad
indeed to help Aunt Matilda, only "

*' Only what ?"

"You must not be offended," — blushing
deeply, and looking as Hubert thought
prettier than ever — " only — I — is it quite
honest not to let my uncle know ?"

Honest ! My dear Pansy, what do
you mean ?"

"I may be wrong, only — I have always
been brought up to think it wrong to hide
things. Aunt Matilda said Uncle George
would make you do something you did not
like, if he knew you wanted this money,
exchange I think she said. Now is it
quite honest to let him think you have not
been extravagant, and so escape doing
what you would dislike ?" and she stopped,
colouring violently at her own boldness.

"My dear little Pansy," said Hubert,
stopping and taking her hand, which she
left somewhat unwillingly in his ; " you
are the sweetest little Mentor a man need
wish for, and I'm awfully obliged to you
for the interest you take in me. But I
assure you in this instance you are wrong,

T 2

you don't know quite enough of tine
world, I am afraid, to understand me, if
I were to explain ; — this isn't extravagance
at all. It is nothing I have been spending
on myself, only a debt of honour to a
comrade, which must be paid, and for
which it would be hard to have to give up
one's prospects in life."

*' I daresay you are right," said Pansy
gently disengaging her hand ; " I know I
have no right to say anything, but surely,
if it is not extravagance, Uncle George
would understand and would not be
angry?

This was such plain sense that Hubert
hardly liked it, and he exclaimed quick-i'm

sure, Pansy, I'm very sorry to have
troubled you ! it was my mother's doing, I
should never have thought of such a thing.
You shall have the money as soon as
possible."

It was now Pansy's turn to be annoyed.

"I gave you no right to say such a
thing'' she said, with a haughtiness that
quite amazed her cousin, and commanded
his respect and admiration.

I beg your pardon," was all he could
think of to say.

Pansy was already rather frightened at
her own show of indignation.

It is I who should beg your pardon
for presuming to think I knew better than
you," she said, gently ; " of course, if it
were wrong, Aunt Matilda would not encourage
you. But you must not think
that I grudged the little help I gave ;
indeed I was very glad to be of use."

'' You are all that is kind," said Hubert,
enthusiastically, " and I'm sure I should
be much the better if you would take mein
hand and lecture me. Let us befriends,"
and, stopping in front of her, he
took both her hands in his.

Pansy did not like it at all ; she felt shy
and nervous — why she hardly knew, and

the bold, admiring gaze of Hubert's dark
eyes made her extremely uncomfortable ;
it was very different from her quiet, comfortable
walks with Arthur, though, if she
had only known it, he really felt the passion
that Hubert only simulated. Hubert
honestly believed himself irresistible, and
never missed an opportunity of trjnng his
power on any girl who pleased his fancy.
He was, in fact, an incorrigible flirt, and
unfortunately, each fresh success only disposed
him to sigh for further conquests.
Nothing would have persuaded him that,
when Pansy blushed and lowered her eyes
under his admiring gaze, she was not falling
desperately in love with him, and he
congratulated himself on the pleasant little
excitement that was thus provided for
lira during the rest of his stay in so dull
a place as he considered Arncester. He
really thought Pansy very pretty, and
quite appreciated her refinement of look
and manner, but she had not in the least

touched his heart. That, in so far as it existed,
excepting for himself, was, to the
best of his present belief, in the possession
of Lady Violet Valton, the young lady
whose presence at Stanmore had so cruelly
defeated all Julia's schemes of enjoyment
at the meet. He had met her at Lord
Barton s ; she, being herself no mean adept
in flirtation, had encouraged his attentions,
and he believed himself to be desperately
in love with her. As she was an only
child, and an heiress as well as a beauty,
he was very likely to try his fate, but that
it would be what he hoped and expected
was extremely improbable. However, this
was no obstacle to his endeavouring to
make Pansy in love with him, and, as he
saw her blush and look down, he felt no
doubt whatever that she was besrinninjx to
feel his power. As he stood with her
hands in his, and thought how pretty and
refined she looked, no suspicion crossed
his mind that she did not think him most

fascinating. If be bad only known bow
sbe longed to be free, to withdraw the
bands wbicb be belt so closely clasped,
and, above all, to escape from the bold
stare of bis eyes, be would bave been
genuinely surprised. Having no notion
of such a thing, be resolved to press ibis
advantage.

*now you forgive me, Pansy," be said,
gently, and, when be chose, bis voice
could be very low and soft, it bad made
the hearts of various innocent damsels
throb and ache ere now, '* give me a kiss
just one. Ob !" as sbe started back and
struggled to free ber bands, '* I cannot let
you go ; you know, there is no barm in
kissing your cousin."

But be bad roused Pansy now, and,
with a violent effort, sbe released herself
from bis grasp, and. springing to a little
distance, stood there quivering with anger.
Pretty as be bad thought ber before,
Hubert was fairly, astonished by ber

beauty as sie stood there flushed with
excitement, and with her great brown eyes
blazing like stars.

'' How dare you ?" she exclaimed, almost
stamping with indignation. " How dare
you ? Beg my pardon directly !"

"But, Pansy "

Don't call me Pansy ; I never gave
you leave !"

But Arthur does."

*' Arthur is different; he never insulted
me!"

Insulted you ! Oh ! come now, Pansy,
we're cousins, you know, after all."

"Are you going to beg my pardon?"

"What for? I'm awfully sorry if I've
offended you, but you've no idea how
awfully pretty you look in a passion."

By this time Pansy's first blaze of anger
was beginning to cool, and she was thinking
that perhaps it was her ignorance of
English habits that had made her cousin's
suggestion appear so very dreadful. Perhaps

it was au English custom for j'oung"
men to kiss their cousins, and, though she
felt that she could never submit to it,
perhaps she had been foolish in being so
angry about it. And he was certainly
right in saying that Arthur always called
her by her Christian name, had always
done so ever since her j&rst arrival at Arn-chester,
without permission either asked
or given. A great dread of having made
herself ridiculous came over her, and,
without a word, she turned away and
walked hastily down the lane. Hubert
followed.

*' You don't think you're going to runaway
from me like that, do you ?" he said,
half laughing. *' Why, Pansy, are cousins
so different in France that it should be a
deadly crime for one to ask the other to
kiss him ? If it is, England is a pleasant
place to my mind. I'm awfully sorry
though, to have startled you so. Come,
shake hands and be friends."

So adjured Pansy could only comply ;
evidently it was her own ignorance that
had made the proposition seem so shocking,
for Hubert appeared perfectly unaware
of there being any valid cause for her
displeasure ; so she stopped and shook
hands half reluctantly, and blushing deeply,
half with shyness and half with annoyance,
Hubert retained her hand some little
time as be said,

"By Jove ! Pansy, what a rage you were
in ! It's lucky you don't know how becoming
it is, or I'm afraid you'd turn into
a regular little spitfire ! "Well, now it's allover,
say we're friends again."

"Oh, yes, we are friends," said Pansy,
regaining possession of her hand, and feeling
very shy and uncomfortable.

That's right ; but I shall require proof.
Oh ! don't be afraid," as she involuntarily
shrank to the other side of the narrow
lane, " I'm not going to shock your French
proprieties again, I assure you; I only

want you to give me the first valse at the
Yernons' dance tomorrow night."

This seemed a very simple thing, and
Pansy consented with alacrity, but .Hubert
continued,

And the supper valse, and the second
galop."

"Three dances! Oh! I couldn't," said
Pansy.

'* What ? Who are you engaged to ?"

To no one ; at least, excepting to
Arthur for the second valse, but "

But you really owe me some amends
for being in such a furious passion with
me all about nothing, and three dances is
nothing at all for cousins."

Evidently, Pansy thought, she was not
au fait of this relationship ; doubtless
Hubert was right, but she infinitely preferred
the views which Arthur seemed to
entertain of it to his. However, she did
not feel inclined to argue on the subject,
and agreed to the three dances ; and

Hubert, having got his own way, set himself
to talk amusingly to her of the world
he lived in, and to be, as he believed,
extremely fascinating. Pansy was certainly
amused at the various stories told
her, though she could not help observing
to herself that they were not invariably
good-natured, but she was by no means
sorry to find herself almost at home.
They were not more than a couple of
hundred yards from the house when they
met Arthur.

"What an immense walk you must
have taken !" he exclaimed. " It is nearly
five o'clock. Pansy, I hope you are not
very tired."

I am quite as well able to take care of
Pansy as you, I should hope," returned
Hubert, carelessly ; " we've only been
round by the Harden lanes."

Arthur was looking at Pansy, and could
not make out a new expression that he
seemed to see on her face. Could it be

that Hubert's fascination, in which, hearing
of it constantly fi'om his mother and
sisters, he had learnt implicitly to believe,
had already in these few days had its effect
on his cousin ? The shock of pain that he
felt at the thought, made him know the
true state of his own heart better than he
had ever done before. He knew that he
loved his little cousin passionately, and
that he was horribly jealous of his handsome
brother, whose advantages and fascinations
he greatly over-estimated. Surely
it was hard that Hubert, v/ho lived among
gay and fashionable people, could not be
content to fascinate and enslave one of
their number, but must come down to
quiet Arncester and pluck from his
brother's grasp the little heartless which
it was his dearest hope to win. He forgot
that, until the moment when the demon
of jealousy had been aroused in him by
the new expression (which in reality was
rather one of puzzled annoyance) on.

Pansy's countenance, and the half defined
proprietorship of Hubert's manner, he had
never given her any sign of his own preference.
It never occurred to him as
possible that his brother could regard
Pansy as a sort of plaything, a pretty and
refined girl to be flattered and fascinated
for his pleasure, and to relieve the dulness
of a fortnight spent in a quiet and uncongenial
town. He took it for granted that
Hubert was in earnest, as he was ; and
could not avoid a bitter feeling that it was
very hard. Hubert saw scores of girls of
higher station, and, possibly, though in his
secret heart Arthur hardly thought such a
thing could be, of greater beauty. Why
could he not have fallen in love with one
of them, and not have come home to take
from his brother his one ewe lamb ?

Thoughts like these were passing
through Arthur's mind the whole evening,
as Hubert sat by the piano asking for one
song after another, and congratulating his

cousin on singing something different
from the common run of young ladies'
songs. Some of Pansy's ballads were
those sung at the vintage, or on other
occasions by the peasants of the sunny
region of the Loire, and were decidedly
novel in an English drawing-room. Mrs.
Deveron hardly knew whether she approved
of them ; they were unconventional,
unlike anyone else, she " only hoped
Pansy would not be thought odd for
singing such strange things."

Mrs. Yernon's dance the ensuing night
was the first regular dance to which Pansy
had been, though there had once or twice
been dancing after a dinner-party where
there had been more than the customary
number of young people. She had demurred
about going, pleading her mourning,
but her uncle had told her he really
wished it, and she had therefore agreed to
go ; and Mrs. Delmar, to whom she had
mentioned the circumstance, had told her

lie had done quite right. Though she
really did uot very much care to go, she
yet could not help feeling some little excitement
at the prospect, and as Mrs.
Yernon, being a great friend of the
Deverons, had asked both her cousins as
well, she had not the uncomfortable feeling
of taking a place which one of them
would otherwise have occupied. Very
delicate and pretty she looked in her black
gauzy dress, with snowdrops in her hair
and in her bosom. As soon as they
entered the room, Laurence Delmar came
up to her (the Yernons' was the only
house in Arncester at which some of the
county people visited) and asked for the
first valse, but, almost before she could
reply, Hubert claimed her. '' Ours, Pansy !"
and she was flying round the room with him
to the strains of " Geliebt und verloren."

It certainly was very pleasant ; she
could not deny that, though she felt a
little indignant at the determined way in

VOL. I. u

which he took possession of her. Hubert
was a perfect dancer, and Pansy really
enjoyed the long, easy swing which was so
different from Arthur's rather stiff and
jerky performance, or the spasmodic gyrations
of some of the Arncester young
men.

"Well done, Pansy!" exclaimed her
cousin, when at length they paused. " I
felt sure you could dance, and you can
and no mistake. You must give me more
than the three dances. I'm at home so
seldom, you know, you ought to indulge
me, and you can dance with all these
people at any time. And let me congratulate
you on being the belle of the
ball."

*' Don't talk such nonsense, please."

Pansy was unused to pretty speeches,

and her feeling, instead of being one of

pleasure at the compliment, was rather of

annoyance that Hubert should think her

SO vain and foolish as to believe such a
thing.

"It isn't nonsense, but sober earnest.
There is not anyone to compare with you."

'' There are Julia and Miss Delmar, and
oh ! ever so many more. Let us go on,
please, and don't talk such nonsense ; I
don't like it."

During the whole evening Hubert devoted
himself to his cousin, who, quite
unaware of ball-room etiquette and punctilio,
found it easier to dance with him
whenever he asked her than to excuse
herself. Her aunt looked on in considerable
dismay. What could be the meaning
of it, but that Hubert had perversely
chosen to fall in love with that insignificant
little brown thing, whom by no possibility
could he ever marry : he who might
choose, as she fondly believed, among the
great and fashionable of the earth. Hubert
must marry some one with money ;

u2

with his expensive tastes, and the society
he had been used to it was absolutely
imperative ; but knowing, as she did, his
obstinacy as to having his own way, she
fairly trembled at the thought of what
might happen if he once took it into his
head to fall in love with his cousin. What
could be his attraction ? The girl was
plain, according to her ideas, and decidedly
dull — never seemed to have anything to
talk about except stupid books ; it reals
could be nothing but perversity on Hubert's
part, but it was a perversity that might
have most inconvenient consequences.
She would have liked to shake Pansy, but
the recollection of the readiness with which
the girl had lent the money, which saved
her from the necessity of letting Mr. Severn
know of her darling's extravagance,
modified her anger. Hubert pretty well
guessed his mother's state of mind, and
contrived to keep Pansy away from her
side when she was not dancing, for fear

she should forbid her to dance with him
any more. He felt sure Pansy would obey,
but, at the same time, he was Yevj far
from guessing that she really had no particular
pleasure in dancing with him, excepting
that he danced very well. He
preferred to imagine that she was rapidly
falling in love with him, and was spending
a most happy evening.

It certainly looked like it. Mrs. Delmar,
who had taken a very cordial fancy to
Pansy, was surprised and pained to see her
make herself so very conspicuous; it was impossible
for anyone to help observing how
incessantly the cousins were together, and,
as she said to herself, even if they were
engaged, which was hardly likely, as he
had been at home barely a week, it would
have been better taste, and more what she
would have expected of Pansy, not to
officier the fact quite so publicly. Altogether,
she was disappointed in her protegee
; the fine fibre of her mind and taste

must, she feared, be getting warped among
the coarser natures and perceptions of the
Deverons.

But the person who was the most perturbed,
and suffered the most, was naturally
Arthur. He had hardly commenced
his valse with Pansy before, by an unlucky
chance, he trod on and tore her dress, and
Hubert, passing at the moment, had
laughed and said,

Poor little Pansy ! I take better care
of you than that, don't I r"

Vexed with his own awkwardness, Arthur
danced less well than usual, and contrived
to bring his partner into violent
collisions with one or two other couples;
and though Pansy was everything that
was amiable about the matter, and assured
him that it didn't signify in the least, and
that she wasn't at all hurt, he could not
help feeling how she must contrast him
with Hubert, greatly to his brother's advantage.
And so, though his heart ached

as he saw her dance time after time with
Hubert, he absolutely lacked the courage
to ask her again, feeling that he had no
right to inflict his awkwardness upon her,
when she had a far better partner whom she
evidently preferred. He made an heroic
effort to look and behave as usual, but it was
not attended with the success it deserved,
and Julia, passing him in the Lancers,
asked him if he had a toothache that he
looked so dismal. A heartache would
have been nearer the mark.

Chapter XII.

Prithee forgive me ;
I did but chide in jest ; the best loves use it
Sometimes : it sets an edge upon affection.
When we invite our best friends to a feast,
'Tis not all sweetmeats that we set before them ;
There's somewhat sharp and salt, both to whet appetite
And make them taste their wine well ; so, methinks.
After a friendly, sharp, and savoury chiding,
A kiss tastes wondrous well, and full o' th' grape.

jftlDDLETON.

"T REALLY think T shall speak to
-■- Pansy," said Mrs. Delmar to her
eldest daughter the next morning ; " it is
a great pity she should get herself talked
about, and very probably it was only
ignorance of what is usual that made her
officier herself so with her cousin last

night. The Miss Deverons seem inclined
to that style of behaviour themselves,
and she is not likely to have had
any warning."

''I wish you would, Mamma," said Nora
Delmar, looking up from her drawing ;
^' she is such a dear, sby, little thing, I am
sure she would be horrified at the idea of
being talked about. It was a shame of
her cousin to do it ; he, at any rate, knew
better."

She looked as if she liked it, though, I
must say."

Did you think so ? To me, she seemed
as if she were rather bewildered, and
couldn't help herself. Of course, he happens
to be a far better dancer than anyone
here. I daresay she liked that."

She looked very pretty."

'eyes, didn't she? When I see her
with the Deverons, I always think of a lily
of the valley springing up by accident in a
bed of tulips."

You are always fanciful, Nora. Well,
write and ask the child to spend the day
on Wednesday ; you can go for her in the
pony-carriage as usual."

Hubert had taken it for granted that,
during the week that remained of his stay
at home, he should be able to amuse himself
by prosecuting his flirtation with
Pansy ; and felt no doubt that, on his departure,
she would be broken-hearted and
would pine for his return to Arncester.
He was accustomed to regard himself as
irresistible, and thought that, of course,
anyone so young and inexperienced as his
cousin could not fail to succumb to his
fascinations. He quite understood his
mother's and sisters' manoeuvres to keep
him and Pansy apart, guessing that they
had taken fright at his determined appropriation
of her at the ball ; but their
arrangements affected him very little, and
could easily and at once have been overruled
; it was Pansy herself who foiled

him. He could not tell how it was, but
she contrived entirely to avoid ever being
alone with him, and that without doing anything
which seemed in the least unusual or
remarkable. Hubert was piqued ; he was
far from imagining that she really wished
to avoid him, he conceived that it was only
coquetry, intended to lead him on.

But after a day or two he began to be
fairly puzzled ; Pansy was absolutely unapproachable.
He tried to waylay her
when she was going out in the afternoon,
but she always contrived to evade him and
to slip out unperceived. Once he asked
her to walk with him that afternoon, and
she answered, without an instant's hesitation,
that she was not going out, as she
had a letter to finish to her grandmother ;
and when he suggested that it was a lovely
afternoon, and that the letter might wait
for once, she said she should be very sorry
to disappoint grand mamma, who expected
her letter on a certain day. Hubert could

not make it out ; it almost looked as if she
really wanted to avoid him, and yet that
could hardly be possible. Could his mother
have spoken to her? He hardly
thought so, and, when he questioned heron
the subject, she utterly denied it.

Mrs. Deveron eras infinitely relieved at
the turn which affairs had taken, and felt
at times what a debt of gratitude she
owed her niece ; and yet, with the inconsistency
of human nature, she felt almost
inclined to be angry with Pansy for her
evident insensibility to Hubert's manifold
perfections. She really seemed to regard
him no more than if he were the stupidest
boy in the Arncester Grammar School ! he
who, by his own account, which she never
even imagined to be exaggerated, eras the
favoured swain of so many aristocratic
dames and damsels. Really, Pansy was
very like her mother in some things, and
gave' herself great airs. If neither Hubert
nor Mr. Musgrave pleased her, whom, would

lie find good enough? Of Arthur's feelings
respecting Pansy his mother had not
the faintest idea, or she would not have
allowed their comfortable friendship to be
so undisturbed.

Arthur was somewhat re-assured by
Pansy's conduct, which he watched with a
breathless attention that rather militated
against his usual careful application to his
work at the Bank. It seemed clear that
Pansy could not be so very much fascinated
by Hubert as he had feared was the
case, or she would not avoid him so very
persistently. Perhaps, after all, it was
only that he was a better dancer, a superiority
which Arthur frankly conceded to
him, and that it was only in a ball-room
that she preferred him. If that were all
it did not matter, and, when Hubert's short
leave came to an end, their comfortable
walks and talks, which were the great joy
of his life, would be resumed. So Arthur
satisfied himself, by no means understanding

that Pansy was as little in love with
him as she was with Hubert.

An invitation for Pansy to Daleford
always somewhat upset Mrs. Deveron*s
temper : she deemed it a slight that neither
of her own girls was ever invited to
accompany her. So when, on the Tuesday
morning, Pansy intimated that she was
asked to spend the ensuing day with
the Delmars, she spoke, as usual, very
angrily.

"Really, if they don't think us worth
noticing, I think it would be better taste
if you were not quite so fond of people
who are ashamed of your relations, and
will probably teach you to be the same."

Eh ? What is that ?" asked Mr. Deva
who seldom paid much attention to
the conversation that went on over the
letters at breakfast, being generally absorbed
in his own correspondence.

"I said," replied Mrs. Deveron, who was
rather sorry that her unusually sharp tones

had attracted her husband's attention,
"that it is very rude of the Delmars to
ask Pansy for the day, and never to ask
one of our own girls to go with her. It
looks as if they did not think us worth
noticing."

Well, as they only made acquaintance
on Pansy's account there is nothing wonderful
in it ; besides, you have dined at
Daleford, and they have dined here — what
more would you have ? Do you like going-there,
Pansy, my child ?"

'every much indeed, uncle; they are
very kind, and I am very fond of them."

Then, Matilda, Pansy is to go there
when she likes, and do not try to spoil her
pleasure by persuading her that the girls
ought to be asked too. There is nothing
in the least remarkable in their invitmo^
her alone."

'' I will drive you over in the dog-cart,
Pansy," suggested Hubert.

Thank you very much," said Pansy,

quietly, "but that is all settled; Nora
comes for me in the pony-carriage."

Well, then, I'll come for you."

No, thank you ; Mrs. Delmar says they
will hv'mcr me home."

Mrs. Deveron was pleased that there
should be no tete-astute drive, and yet she
felt indignant that Pansy should not show
the least vexation at missing it. She was
duly thankful that the girl was not in love
with her cousin, as it might have increased
his admiration and produced very undesirable
complications, and yet she could
hardly forgive her for proving insensible
to his charms. Besides, she was irritated
at her husband's having interfered, and soit
was in a very ungracious manner that
she said,

"Oh! very well, you must go, I suppose,
and I am not to say what I think about
it."

Pansy accepted the permission, and took
no notice of the manner in which it was

accorded ; she always found it better to
think as little of her aunt's way of doing
or saying things as was possible.

It always seemed such a rest to her
mind to spend the day at Daleford.
Everything there appeared to go smoothly,
there seemed no fear that a chance word
Twould lead to uncomfortable bickering.
Now in the market-place the most innocent
observations were often seized upon
as meaning something quite different from
their obvious interpretation, and were
wrangled over, and made subjects of most
disagreeable recrimination. At Daleford
all the family seemed to understand each
other perfectly, and to live together in
harmony and good will.

It was after luncheon that Mrs. Delmar
spoke to Pansy, as she had told her daughter
she should do. She had taken her to her
dressing-room to show her a drawing, and,
when it had been examined, she seated herself
on the sofa and drew the girl to her.

VOL. I. X

My dear," she said, " I have not
known you very long, but I do not think
you are a silly girl likely to be hurt or
offended with an old woman who wants todo
you a service. Do you mind my
speaking to you as if you were one of my
own girls?"

Oh, no ! indeed I should be glad," said
Pansy, flushing and trembling in her
anxiety to know what this could mean.

'well, then, dear, I think it was only
your want of knowledge of the world that
made you dance so often the other night
with your cousin. It is not usual to do
so, and he should not have made you conspicuous."


Conspicuous !" and Pansy grew crimson.
" That is what Mamma always said
a woman should never be. Oh ! Mrs.
Delmar, I am so sorry ; what shall I do ?"

My dear, I do not want you to distress
yourself; I was only anxious to put you
on your guard against another time. It

was much more his fault than yours, for
he must have known better, which you did
not. After all, he is your cousin, and it
does not so very much matter, only it
makes people say "

"What?" asked Pansy, looking up
eagerly.

Well, dear, that you are either engaged
or about to be so."

Oh ! but it isn't so, indeed," said
Pansy, simply; then, after a pause, "May
I ask you something ? — you won't think
me very silly ?"

No, dear child ; I am glad to help you
in any perplexity. What is it ?"

"You see I know nothing of English
ways, I suppose," said Pansy, hesitatingly,
and at home at La Rochecaillou we never
saw anyone, and I had no cousins; but is
it usual — that is, I mean a matter of
course, that one's cousins — men, I mean —
should kiss one?"

"By no means, and certainly not if you

X 2

do not wish it. Do you mind telling me
why you ask ?"

Oh, no ! I could tell you anything ;
it seems almost as if I were talking to
Mamma," said Pansy, simply. ** Hubert
said something that made me angry— I
cannot tell you what that was, because it
is about him, not me, — and then he took
both my hands and said we must make it
up, and that he must kiss me ; I was quite
furious and got away from him, and he
didn't do it, but he said that it was the
English custom, and that all cousins did
it, — but I knew that wasn't quite true,
because Arthur never offered to do it, —
but I wasn't sure if I had not been silly
and made an absurd fuss just from ignorance,
and so, when he asked me to dance
so much, and talked of its being some
reparation for my having been so angry
with him about nothing, I did not quite
know how to refuse."

"I quite see; in fact, he took an unwarrantable

advantage of your inexperience.
My dear, do not encourage him to
say impertinent things to you."

"" I have kept quite out of his way ever
since ; he has waited in the hall to walk
with me, but I have slipped out by the
garden."

Wise child ! Does he stay long?"

Oh, no ! he goes the day after tomorrow,"
said Pansy, with an air of such evident
relief that Mrs. Delmar could hardly
help laughing. It was very clear that no
danger was to be apprehended for Pansy
from her cousin's fascinations.

The girl had become a very great
favourite with them all ; she was so absolutely
free from conceit or self-consciousness,
and yet so infinitely superior in their
opinion to the ordinary run of young
ladies. Every member of the family had
in turn remarked how incompatible her
nature must be with that of her companions
and surroundings. But they loyally

abstained from mentioning her relations
feeling that, if they were distasteful to her,
it was kinder not to remind her of the
fact, while, if the were not, it would be a
sad pity to disturb her contentment.

*' Do you think it was very wrong ? —
about the dancing, I mean ? Aunt Matilda
did not find fault," was Pansy's next
observation.

Wrong, dear ? Well, that is a strong
word, unconventional and unadvisable;
but I can easily see how it happened. I
daresay your aunt thought that between
cousins it didn't matter."

^' I wish you could have told me at the
time. Please believe how much obliged I
am to you for telling me now," and she
put her hand into Mrs. Delmar's. " Will
sou always tell me when you see me do
anything wrong ? I would rather hear it
from you than anyone."

Mrs. Delmar bent down and kissed her.

I don't think I am likely to have much

fault to find with you, Pansy; but you
may depend, dear, that I will give you
advice whenever I think you want it. Ah !
Nora," as her daughter entered the room,
'* you must have thought we were lost.
Pansy and I have been having a little talk
up here."

'' I can't tell you how sweetly she took
my little lecture, Nora," she said that
evening. "No idea of defending herself,
but only such dismay at having done anything
wrong. She begged me to constitute
myself her Mentor for the future.
That cousin has evidently been making
violent love to her, and she did not like it
at all, though she hardly knew how to
escape. Her relief when she said he was
going the day after tomorrow was almost
ludicrous."

Pansy's persistent avoidance of Hubert
had piqued him to such a degree that he was
determined that, by some means or other,
he would have a private interview with

her before bis departure. He had watched
so often for her in the hall, only to find
that she had eluded him, that he suspected
she must slip out through the garden, and
posted himself at a window whence, himself
unobserved, he could watch the gate
aud see which way she went. True to
his expectations, Pansy presently issued
from the garden-gate, and set off in the
direction of the very lanes where they had
taken their walk together.

Giving sufficient time for her not to

perceive that she was followed, Hubert

presently started in pursuit. He was very

uncertain as to what it was that he meant

to say to her, being only clear that it

must be something that should breakdown

her fence of coquetry, and force her

to show that she cared for him. That she

did so, and was only avoiding him to lead

him on, Hubert had no more doubt than

he had of his own existence. He let

Pansy get a considerable distance from

home, and then, availing himself of his
knowledge of the country, he sprang over
a hedge, took a short cut across a field,
and met her, in the most natural manner
in the world, round a corner.

Pansy started violently, coloured, and
felt excessively annoyed. She had been
congratulating herself so much on the
dexterity with which she had avoided
Hubert's society, and now, after all, she
found herself at his mercy, for there was
no way of escape.

Well met, Pansy !" exclaimed Hubert,
turning and walking by her side. " I
thought we were never going to have a
nice comfortable talk again. Where have
you hidden yourself all this week ?"

'* I have not hidden myself," said Pansy.

'eyes, you have — at least, from me. I
have watched for you every afternoon fora
walk, and you have always escaped me
somehow."

Pansy said nothing ; it did not seem to

her that an answer was necessary. She
could not forgive Hubert for having made
her, as Mrs. Delmar had said, " conspicuous
" — the one thing that she had always
heard her mother and grandmother agree
that a woman should never be. She did
not want to talk to him, still less did she
wish to say anything rude, and she feared
that, if he began to question her as to
why she had avoided him, she might say
something that he would not like. So she
quickened her pace, wishing devoutly that
the walk was over, that they might meet
some one, that anything, in short, might
happen to break up their tete-astute. But
no such relief was vouchsafed her, and
Hubert had no intention of having a silent
"walk, so he began :

Pansy, do you know I am going away
tomorrow ?"

^' Yes ; I think it was always settled you
were to go on Friday, was it not ?"

** I'm awfully sorry to go."

"Are you? I thought you found Arn-chester
so dull."

The little coquette ! — fishing for a
compliment !" thought Hubert ; then he
said, " Well, I used to, certainly, but I
haven't this time."

Again no answer.

** Pansy, can't you guess why?"

I ? No, how should I ? Because of
Mrs. Vernon's dance, do you mean ?"

No, not because of that, though it was
very pleasant, but because of the one person
who made that and everything else delightful
: I think you know whom I mean."

Yes, Pansy knew perfectly, and felt
very angry indeed that he should talk to
her like this. He would not have done soif
his mother or sisters had been present ;
it was insulting that he should take advantage
of her being alone and defenceless
; so she said, in a cold, stiff tone,

'' I don't think it is necessary to talk
nonsense."

'* Nonsense ! — you have no right to say
that. JN'ow, Pansy, haven't I been trying
to be with you ever since I came home ?
Eut since that night at the Yernons — you
were very nice to me then — you've snubbed
me awfully. What have I done to you ?
I'm sure it isn't my fault ; I've been with
you whenever you'd let me."

*' You had no business to make me so
conspicuous at the dance," said Pansy,
colouring violently; 'rib was ungenerous
when you know I know nothing of English
ways. How could you do such a thing ?"

What, dance with the prettiest and
nicest girl in the room ? Why shouldn't I ?"

'' You know it Vv^as not the custom, that
you were making me do Vv'hat was conspicuous,
and unusual, and not nice ! I
did not know — I cannot forgive you !"

But, Pansy, you don't mean you didn't
like it ! Come, now, you know you did, or
you wouldn't have done it."

You danced pretty well, — I liked that,

said Pansjj. " It was not like Leon, but it
was better than seme of the others. But
I would rather not have danced all night
than have been made conspicuous, — it is
what Mamma said a woman should never
be."

And who says you were ? It is all
humbug! I suppose it is some of the
girls' nonsense."

'*No, indeed."

Then who has put such stuff into your
head?"

*mrs. Delmar spoke to me."

"Mrs. Delmar! What business has she
to interfere, I should like to know !"

'^ She was a friend of Mamma's, and is
very kind to me. She said she thought it
was only ignorance that had me do such a
thing."

"Deuced impertinent of her, the old
cat !"

'* On the contrary, I think it was very
kind. Be good enough to speak respectfully

of her, — she is a great friend of
mine."

But I say, Pansy, you don't mean to
say you are really angry? Why, most
girls would think it the greatest compliment
one could pay them to dance with
them all night."

"It is a compliment I do not care for."

"But you liked it until this nonsense
had been put into your head."

"No, I did not, only I did not know
how to help myself."

It was said so naturally, with such evident
truth, that it stung Hubert's self-esteem
; but this was only for a moment ;
his vanity quickly persuaded him that his
cousin was only pretending anger to induce
him to pay her more open compliments,
so he said,

"I don't think you mean that, Pansy.
Why should you dislike me ? I have done
nothing to offend you, I'm sure, except
admire you, and pretty girls don't dislike

that generally ! Don't you know how
awfully cut up I am at going away and
leaving you ? You must know it, Pansy,
girls always feel when they are loved."

"J feel nothing of the sort," said Pansy,
calmly.

What ! surely you are not so cold !
Pansy, you cannot have forgotten the last
time we walked in these very lanes ?"

"]S[o," said Pansy, stopping and looking
straight into his eyes. " I have neither
forgotten nor forgiven it, — I doubt if I
ever shall."

Even Hubert, serenely confident as he
was in his own powers of fascination,
could not delude himself into the belief
that his cousin was only leading him on
for the purpose of being flattered and
complimented. It suddenly began to
dawn upon him that Pansy had been in
earnest all through, that she had been
really angry at his attempt to kiss her,
and that she had so persistently avoided

him, not to lead him on and make him seek
her, but because she really disliked his
company It was a terrible blow to his
vanity, and one to which he was not accustomed.
For a few moments he hated
Pansy with all his heart, and yet at the
same time he was conscious of a stronger
desire than ever to make her fall in love
with him. He almost began to fancy he
was half in love with her, so great was the
stimulant of the unexpected shock of her
indifference. It was in a different tone
from that in which he had yet spoken
that he said,

'*I am sure, Pansy, I am very sorry if I
have really displeased yon, but I cannot
think why you should be so angry. I
have done nothing unusual, and surely
you cannot be offended with me for liking
you so much and doing my best to show
it?"

His tone was so altered, he seemed so
hurt and sorry, that Pansy, who was the

most tenderhearted little creature imaginable,
and was already half-frightened a;fer
her own vehemence, began to relent, and
to think that she had perhaps been too
angry, had said too much. If only she
had not had the evil fortune to meet him
that afternoon, how much annoyance she
could have escaped ! and she wished devoutly
that she were safely at home, but
they were still at least a mile and a half
off, and she must make the best of the
situation. So she said']

think, please, we had better say no
more about it. Perhaps I have said too
much ; if I have I beg your pardon, but I
was very hurt and angry at your taking
advantage of my inexperience. Please
let us talk of something else. Do you
know, Leon is coming to stay here ? Uncle
George asked him to copse when he could,
and he wrote this morning to say he had
got leave."

That will be very nice for you. But,

VOL. I. Y

Pans J, I must talk a little more, — sap you
are not angry now, that you don't dislike
me. I should be so very unhappy if you
did."

In her secret heart, Pansy did dislike
him, for he had made her more uncomfortable
than anyone had ever done before, but
it was impossible, as she felt, to say so. So
she murmured something incomprehensible
about never disliking anyone, and quickened
her pace so decidedly that it was not very
long before they reached home, when she at
once escaped to her own room, and during
the evening Hubert found it quite impossible
to get speech of her.

He was very seriously mortified ; it was
the first decided repulse he had ever received,
and, coming from a quarter where
he had anticipated an easy conquest, was
doubly annoying. It was not that he was
really in the least in love with Pansy, all
the affection which he could spare from
himself was centred on Lady Violet Valton,

but lie could not bear the feelings of beiuo:
disregarded by a little girl whom he had
looked upon as the certain victim of his
fascinations.

But a still ruder shock was in store for
him". At breakfast the next morning
Sophronia read out the following announcement
: —

"■ We are authorised to state that a
matrimonial alliance is arranged, and will
shortly take place, between Lady Violet
Yalton, only child of the Earl of Yalehurst,
and Lord Lapland, eldest son of the Earl
of Bogcastle."

^' There !" she exclaimed ; '' so you see
there was nothing between her and Sir
Julian after all !"

So engaged were Mrs. Deveron and
her daughters with this aspect of the
question that they never observed that
Hubert started as if he had been shot, and
turned very white. It was a terrible
blow to him.

y2

Lady Violet, beautiful and an heiress,
had been very wilful, and had given her
mother endless trouble and anxiety by her
violent flirtations. But there was no one
about whom Lady Yalehurst had been so
thoroughly alarmed as about the handsome
young Lancer, for Lady Yiolet had chosen
to encourage and lead him on in the most
decided manner. Hubert's hopes had, not
unwarrantably, risen extremely high, audit
would have been no consolation to him to
remember, even had he done so, that this
fate of being led on and then dropped
without a word, was precisely what he had
inflicted on several innocent girls, more
loving than wise, and had been fully prepared
to entail upon his cousin.

There was one letter for him sealed
with a fantastic monogram surmounted
by a coronet, which he crushed into his
pocket and never opened till he was
alone in the train. It was from Lady
Valehurst.

Dear Mr. Deveron, — We have seen sa
much of you recently that I do not like you
to learn from the papers the news of dearest
Vi's marriage. It is a long attachment ;
indeed she says Lapland is the only person
to whom she has ever given a thought. It
is delightful to see dearest Yi so happy ;
it would be quite impossible to find two
people better suited to each other. Yi has
just come in, and, hearing I am writing to
you, sends her kind regards, and says that,
if you really meant what you said the
other day about never having destroyed
one or two notes she wrote you, she would
be glad if you would send them to her,
that she may have the satisfaction of burning
them ; she is always so particular
about burning letters. "We go to town tomorrow
for the trousseau ; . the wedding is
to be in April. Perhaps, if you happen to
be in London, we may meet.
Truly yours,

Hekmione Yalehuest."

Two or three notes " was Lady Violet's
convenient way of describing a tolerably
large packet of letters still in Hubert's
possession, and certainly containing sufficient
compromising matter to render it
very natural that she would wish to satisfy
herself as to their destruction. It was
doubtless a great relief to her — it certainly
was to Lady Yalehurst — when' the packet
was returned the ensuing day.

END OF THE FIRST VOLUME.

LONDON : PRINTED BY DUNCAN MACDONALD, BL.ENHEDI HOUSE.

OF THE

UN Diversity

or ILLINOIS

V.2

VOL. II.

BY

MES. Randolph

Author OF

GENTIANELLA," "WILD HYACINTH,
"WOOD ANEMONE," "GENISTA,"

&c., &c.

The garden's gem,
Heart'sease.

Leigh Hurt.

IN THREE VOLUMES.
VOL. IL

LONDON:
HURST AND BLACKETT, PUBLISHERS,

13, GREAT MARLBOROUGH STREET.

1881.

All ri<jhls reserved.

V, 9s

LITTLE PANSY

CHAPTER I.

No ! Let the eagle change his plume,
The leaf its hue, the flower its bloom ;
But ties around his heart were spun.
That could not, would not, be undone.

O'Connor's Child — Campbell.

"pANSY'S relief at Hubert's departure
■-■- was unspeakable. She had no longer
any fear of being watched when she went
out, or of having her ignorance and inexperience
taken advantage of. But Hubert's
observations about cousins had not
been without their effect, and she was
shyer and less comfortable with Arthur
than had hitherto been the case.

VOL. II. B

Arthur's time was rather f ally occupied,
but he did not fail to perceive that his
cousin was less at her ease with him than
formerly, and it troubled him greatly. He
was by no means self-satisfied, and was so
accustomed to hear his brother spoken of
by his mother and sisters as being irresistible,
that he was inclined to think that
Hubert had only to appear to throw him
into the background. He had, of course,
no clue to what had passed between Hubert
and Pansy, but the former had made
it abundantly clear that it was his pleasure
to devote himself to his cousin, and at the
first she had not seemed to repel him ;
indeed, during that evening at Mrs. Vernon's,
it had seemed to Arthur's anxious
eyes that his brother was carrying all
before him. He had never ventured to
think that Pansy understood, much less
that she encouraged him ; and was terribly
depressed by seeing himself, as he thought,
supplanted. But later he had begun to

doubt, to consider that, if Pansy really
was fond of Hubert, she certainly had a
strange method of showing her preference,
as she persistently and successfully avoided
him.

But it was not till after his brother's departure,
when Pansy at once resumed her
old habits, and seemed as if a weight had
been removed from her spirits, that he
began seriously to think that he had been
mistaken, that she had not specially cared
for Hubert, and that her conduct at Mrs.
Yernon's had been merely an appreciation
of his superior powers of dancing. Still
he was not quite sure : there certainly was
some subtle difference in his cousin's manner
which was to be felt rather than described,
as if she were holding back from
him and endeavouring to keep herself out
of his way, instead of at once resuming
their old relations.

There was a good deal to be done at the
Bank, and it was seldom that he had an

b5?

afternoon disengaged, but when he had it
seemed to him that it was less easy to
compass a solitary walk with Pansjj than
it had formerly been, and that when they
did set off together she was neither so
communicative nor so cheerful as had once
been the case. This distressed him greatly,
but he did not know what to do ; he was
far too diffident of his own powers of
pleasing to imagine that there would be
any use in his putting his fortune to the
touch, and he could think of no other
method of easing his mind. He could
only wait, and trust to time to enable him
to win the cousin without whom he had
already begun to feel that life would be
valueless.

Mrs. Deveron had not the faintest idea
of her son's sentiments. Reticence in
love affairs was beyond the comprehension
of either herself or her daughters ; indeed,
the girls, whose heads were ever full of lovers,
though they neither knew nor thought

anything about love, would Lave cared
little for an adorer who did not make his
worship a thing conspicuous to their whole
acquaintance, and cause them to be rallied
and chaffed on their last " conquest."
Such devotion as Hubert had shown to
Pansy at Mrs. Vernon's was within their
comprehension, and exactly after their own
hearts ; they would have laughed to scorn
Mrs. Delmar's remarks as to the desirability
of a girl being made conspicuous,
and would have been totally unable to
comprehend Pansy's agony at the idea of
having made herself so. They were both
far too self-satisfied to take any heed of
Arthur's occasional strictures on their
conduct, and, when he praised Pansy, set
it down to a fraternal wish to say something
which he thought would be disagreeable
to them. Hubert's avowed admiration
of her had considerably astonished them,
and had for the time rendered Mrs. Severn
extremely uneasy ; but owing to

Pansy's conduct, for which she was most
thankful, though at the same time amazed
and offended, her apprehensions had been
dispersed, and she and the girls agreed that
his admiration had been only his way of
showing his contempt for the attractions
of any of the Arncester set.

Of course, dear fellow," said his admiring
mother, " it is very different from
what he is accustomed to ■"

"It is very hard he should have all the
chances, and we none," grumbled Julia.

"Well, I don't know," said Sophronia.
'' I never could find out that he ever had
any really intellectual society — that is what
I want."

"Oh! Soph, grapes are sour! You
know you'd give jour ears for all his grand
friends and gay parties, if you could only
get them."

He may be able to do something when
they come to Rockville," said Mrs. Severn.
"It will be delightful if he is on the

detachment here ; then, at any rate, we
must know some of his brother officers."

He won't come to Arncester if he can
help it."

''If he does, girls, you really must try
to please him, and listen to what he says.
After all, he must know better what his
brother officers think of things than we
do."

Julia pouted.

A precious dull life we should have
then I soever to walk in High Street or
Arne Street ! eye should have to take
stupid country walks like Pansy !"

"Well, it will be time enough to trouble
about it when it comes," said Sophronia.
Julia, put on your hat and come down to
the library ; I want to order Dr. Franz
Schimmelperenhauser's ' Phenomenology.' "

"Gracious powers! what on earth is
that ?"

"A history of remarkable things."

I'm sure you ought to be put in it for

wanting such a thing ! Well, I'll come. I
want some lisse frilling at Dunham's, and
we can go on to Arne Street and ask how
Mrs. Troyte's headache is."

About the middle of April, Pansy
received a letter from Leon to say that he
had at last got his leave, and hoped to beat
Arncester the ensuing week. The girl
seemed perfectly inspired with the delight
of looking forward to his arrival; she
moved about the house with a dancing
step, singing snatches of her gayest ballads,
till even her uncle observed it, and
told her it was quite inspiriting to hear
her. That a mere brother's advent could
cause such heartfelt delight was incomprehensible
to the Deveron girls.

"I declare, Pansy," Julia exclaimed,
^' your brother ought to be flattered if he
only knew how you appreciate the thought
of seeing him. Why, you couldn't be more
excited if he were your lover !"

But he is my brother," said Pansy.

Yes, I know. Well, it would be a long
time before Hubert's coming home put us
into such a state of mind !"

^* But you have father and mother and a
brother always with you," said Pansy; "it
is so different. Leon and T are alone in
the world, except, of course, Bonne
Maman and Aunt Louise, whom I haven't
seen for — oh ! so long. It is natural we
should be all-in-all to each other."

'all very pretty till he falls in love, or
you do."

Oh ! I never shall," said Pansy, with a
tone of such perfect conviction that both
her cousins shrieked with laughter.

Early days to make up your mind !
Why, you're not eighteen yet ! Wait till
you're tried," cried Sophronia.

'sand is Leon never to fall in love
either?" asked Julia.

'* Things are so different in France,"
said Pansy, hesitating ; " it does not seem
necessary for people to fall in love as they

do here. Of course Leon will marry, but
you know it is all settled by the parent sand
people hardly see each other till they
meet to sign the contract. Mamma always
said it seemed dreadful to English people ;
but that she really believed that in France
people were quite as happy as in
England."

'' Oh ! then you mean to marry without
being in love, do you ? For shame, Pansy I
And you who read all that sentimental
poetry too f

*' I never said I should marry," said
Pansy, quietly. " I think it is most likely
I never shall."

Certainly, she thought to herself, she
had never yet seen anyone whom she
could even imagine herself accepting as a
life-long companion. But she wished very
much that she had never said what she
had, when she heard the garbled versions
of her speech which her cousins amused
themselves by repeating. Though not

particularly sby, Pansy was very sensitive
and consequently suffered agonies from
the "chaff" which formed her cousins
only idea of jesting. Arthur alone perceived
that she was uncomfortable, and
tbougli he did not fully comprehend what
it was she had said, or quite understand
why the incessant jokes rendered her so
manifestly ill at ease, it was quite sufficient
for him to see that she suffered ; and
he earned her extreme gratitude by the
perseverance with which he shielded her
from bis sisters' ridicule. Gradually Pansy
fell back into almost ber old confidential
intercourse with him, though be still felt
a slight difference— a shadow which bad
never come between them until after Hubert
made bis appearance.

It was to Arthur that Pansy poured
out most of her delight at Leon's expected
visit; she never took into consideration
bow different things would be at Ancestor
from what they bad been at La Koche-

caille. There the brother and sister had
been all-in-all to each other, and inseparable
companions, for there was no one else
to whom they could talk, excepting the
gardeners or the peasants, and it never
struck Pansy as possible that her brother
might find the society of his cousins and
their friends more amusing than a constant
iete-a-teie with her. She went lovingly
through all the walks with which she
had now become so familiar, pausing constantly
to think what Leon would say to
this, and how he would admire that, feeling
and observing even more attentively, from
the fancy that she was looking through
his eyes, the vast difference between 
and France.

It was lovely April weather as she wandered
among the lanes and through the
woods by the river, admiring the varying
shades of green developed by the budding
trees, and hoping that Leon would arrive
before the beauty of the primroses and

-wild hyacinths, of the wood-sorrel, cuckoo-pint,
and wood-anemones was a thing of
the past. Poor child ! it was natural that,
separated for seven whole months from
those with whom her whole life had been
passed, she should look forward with ecstasy
to seeing her brother again, and fancy
him even more charming than was really
the case.

The train by which Leon was to arrive
was due but a very short time before dinner,
and Mrs. Deveron absolutely forbade
Pansy's going down to meet him, declaring
that she would not be in time for dinner,
and that they must be punctual, as it was
the night of the dance to be given by the
officers of the detachment at Arncester,
previous to their rejoining the head quarters
at Stockton. Pansy had begged so
earnestly to be excused from going to this
dance, for the purpose of staying at home
with Leon, that her aunt had consented,
and the girl had ventured to suggest that

her toilette would not be very elaborate,
-and that sbe could dress as quickly as
Leon, but Mrs. Deveron had made up her
mind, and replied crossly that sbe hoped
Pansy would make herself look respectable,
as two or three people were coming
to dinner. Pansy was very sorry to hear
it; it seemed to her almost unkind of her
aunt to have asked anyone that first night,
and sbe had to take herself severely to
task, telling herself that it was too foolish
to expect that Leon's arrival should be as
great an event to everyone else as it was
to her, and comforting herself with the
thought of the delightful evening they
should have alone together.

"Does not Leon like dancing? I
thought Frenchmen, particularly officers,
were always so fond of it," said Julia at
tea-time.

Oh ! he is very fond of it indeed," said
Pansy, innocently; "and he dances beautifully."


^' Then, of course, he will like to come
with us ; Captain James dines here tonight,
so there is no difficulty about an
invitation. Whjr, Pansy, what is the matter
? You look as if you had seen a ghost !"

A ghost could hardly have given Pansy
a greater shock of surprise than did this
suggestion of Julia's, that Leon, whom she
had not seen for seven whole months,
which to her had seemed very long, could
possibly prefer a dance among strangers
to an evenings alone with her, exchano^inof
notes on all that had passed since they
last met. For a moment she was absolutely
dismayed at such an idea, but
speedily recovered herself, reflecting that,
after all, it was only a suggestion of Julia's,
who could, of course, know nothing about
what Leon was likely to prefer, and judged
of others' wishes by what her own would
be. She said nothing, and went up to
dress early, so as to be ready to greet
Leon on his arrival.

She flew down to the hall when she
heard the bell, and opened the door herself,
to the great scandal of the butler
when he arrived upon the scene.

Oh, Leon ! dear Leon ! how glad I am
to see you !" she exclaimed, as, regardless
of the servants, she threw herself into his
arms ; " are you quite well and not tired ?
Let me show you your room ; you must be
quick, for dinner is in twenty minutes, and
you must not be late, for they are going
to a ball."

^' A ball !^' Leon stopped short as he
was beginning to take off his coat. " And
I haven't brought my uniform."

Oh ! I am not going," said Pansy; 'ewe
shall have such a pleasant evening together.
I had quite a long letter from
Bonne Maman this morning, which I will
read you, and there is a note from Aunt
Louise. But I must go now, Leon, or you
Till not be ready. Oh ! how glad I am to
see you again !"

Sophronia and Julia were exceedingly
curious to see their cousin, and were down
in better time than usual in consequence.
Leon must have made good use of his
time, for he was not at all late, and it was
with immense pride that Pansy saw him
enter the room and shake hands with his
uncle, who welcomed him with much cordiality.
Mrs. Deveron looked extremely
surprised when her nephew, on being presented
to her, proceeded to salute her on
both cheeks ; but, as soon as she recovered
from her astonishment, she had time to
perceive that the young Marquis was exceedingly
handsome.

Leon de la Eochecaillou was much taller
than is usual with his countrymen, and
had a slight, athletic figure which made
him look taller than he really was. His
curly golden hair was clipped very close,
and he had no whiskers, only a sweeping
moustache and small imperial. He had
inherited his mother's fair colouring and

VOL. II. c

large blue eyes, but his features were his
father's, and, unlike as a casual observer
would have judged them to be, there was
yet at times a curious likeness between
him and Pansy. Mr. Deveron patted his
niece's shoulder and told her he was very
glad to see her brother, and that it was
worth something to see her look so happy.
Happy indeed Pansy was ; far too much so
to endeavour to make herself agreeable to
the gentleman who took her in to dinner.
She could do nothing but watch Leon, and
hug herself at the thought of their
impending delightful tete-astute, Arthur,
watching her from the other side of the
table, sighed as he thought what he would
give to call such a look of happiness to her
face.

So matters continued till the middle of
dinner, when, to Pansy's dismay, she heard
her aunt say to Leon, who was, of course,
seated next to her,

I hope you are not tired. The officers

here give a ball to-night, a farewell, I am
sorry to say, and Captain James begs me
to say they will be delighted to see you."

Certainly," said Captain James, hearing
his name mentioned. *' We shall be most
happy to see Monsieur de la Rochecaillou."

You are very kind," said Leon ; his
English was not so perfect as his sister's,
but it is unnecessary to trouble the reader
with his peculiarities of idiom. '' I should
enjoy it of all things, but I am very sorry
I have not brought my uniform."

Oh ! that does not matter. No one
else will be in uniform."

'really! Oh ! then I shall be charmed."
And turning to Julia, who sat on his other
hand, " I am more fond of dancing than I
can say."

Pansy has told us how beautifully you
dance."

'' And so does she. 1 know no one who
dances better."

'* She gave up going to-night. She fancy



cried you would like to stay at home and
talk."

*' Talk ! but there is plenty of time tomorrow
— the next day."

Poor Pansy heard it all, and could with
difficulty repress her tears. It was so very
different from what she had expected. She
had had such a pleasant vision of Leon
seated oq the sofa with her, and interchanging
news of all that had happened to
them since their separation; it was thus
that the first evening after his return had
always been spent at La Eochecaillou, and
it did not occur to her that there, there had
been nothing more amusing to do, and that
it was very natural that Leon should prefer
going to the ball that night, and talking to
her the next day. It seemed as if he did
not care to be with her once more, to hear
all she had been doing and thinking during
those seven long months, or to compare
notes as to what they had heard from home
and from Bonne Maman. It was a bitter

disappointment ; a lump rose in her throat,
and a mist before her eyes, as she thought
of the long evening she should now spend
alone, and of the dreadful possibility that
Leon no longer cared for her as he used todo.
Arthur saw her distress, and compassionate
her so much that he stopped
his mother as she was leaving the room to
whisper,

Pansy only stayed at home for Leon's
sake. Of course now you will tell her
she must go."

Oh ! I don't think she cares."

*eyes, she does. Don't leave her at
home to mourn over the loss of their talk.
She looked so disappointed when he accepted."


Selfish little thing ! Why shouldn't he
enjoy himself ? Well, she can come if she
can be ready in time."

Pansy was surprised when her aunt told
her, not very amiably, that now that Leon
was going to the ball it was nonsense her

staying at home, and that she had better
run up at once, and not keep them waiting.
It was on the girl's lips to say that she did
not care to go, she felt too disappointed to
enjoy herself ; but then it occurred to her
that if she did not Leon might be sorry,
might reproach himself for having left her.
Their greeting in the hall had been so
hurried that doubtless he had not understood
what she had said about staying at
home, and, when he accepted the invitation,
quite believed that she was going too.
Yes, of course that was it. How foolish
of her to think that Leon was changed, or
anything but the best and dearest brother
in the world ! It was too foolish of her to
imagine that he must at once understand
the little plan she had elaborated, when
she had never had a moment in which to
explain it to him. All this passed through
her mind as she assured her aunt she
would not be long, and flew upstairs to get
ready.

While she was dressing, she dwelt on
the pleasure of being at a ball with Leon,
of seeing him enjoy himself, and knowing
how everyone must admire him. But she
was terribly shocked when, meeting her in
the hall, he exclaimed —

'* How, Pansy ! in black ! — surely that is
not fitting for a ball."

But I am in mourning," and her face
of dismay brought back to him the remembrance
of who it was they had lost,
and made him feel ashamed of what he
had said.

It was not that Leon had not sincerely
mourned his mother, or that he did not
still feel her loss when he thought about
it, but his feelings, though warm, were not
very deep, and in the constant distractions
of his military life he found no difficulty
in forgetting. It was a terrible shock to
Pansy, and it was quite as well that she
had no time to think of it, but found her
aunt and cousins impatient to start.

I want to introduce you to Mrs. Delmar
; she knew Mamma, and has been so
kind to me," she said to Leon, as soon as
the were in the ball-room ; and she at
once led him up to the Daleford party,
causing Julia to observe to her sister,

'just look at Pansy! — thinking of no
one but the Delmars, as usual. I suppose
she wants to keep him entirely for that
set— yes, I declare she's introducing him
to that stuck-up Miss Peveril. I declare
we have the best right to him."

Pansy never thought, as her cousins
supposed, about " set," but she naturally
introduced her brother to those who were
her chief friends, and whom she considered
the nicest, and was much surprised to
observe that Leon seemed to prefer dancing
with her cousins and their acquaintances.
She had seen too little of the
world, and was not a sufficiently good
judge of character to fathom that Leon,
besides having the full masculine belief in

worship being his due, had rather more
than his share of vanity, and preferred
those who ministered to it, and thought ita
very fine thing to dance with a handsome
young French Marquis, to those who, like
the Delmars and the Peverils, regarded
him simply as an equal, and were by no
means unduly elated by his asking them
to dance.

English society was perfectly new to
him, and he was only aware that in many
respects it differed greatly from what he
was accustomed to, especially in the freedom
allowed to girls, so that the forward
manners of the Arncester young ladies did
not strike him as incorrect — he imagined
that it was the usual English manner, and
that the Delmars and Miss Peveril, who
were colder and less demonstrative, did
not, ior some reason, like him. He was
sorry for it, as it might vex Pansy ; but,
after all, he was enjoying himself very
much, and what did it matter with whom

be did so ? Julia was triumphant.

^' He is ever so much nicer than Pansy,"
she said to Sophronia, as they were going
to bed ; " be gives himself no airs, and is
so pleasant and cheery."

So you seem to think " — Sophronia's
evening had not been quite so pleasant as
she had expected. " He has no real conversation,
and has never read anything."

Perhaps not ; if he has, I hope he
won't tell me about it — book-talk is a bore.
He valses divinely," and Julia went to bed
to dream of her fascinating cousin.

CHAPTER II.

She is persuaded I will marry her, out of her own
love and flattery, not out of my promise.

Othello. Act 4, Sc. 1.

"PjAlSi SY rose the next inorniDg with the
-^ delightful consciousness that Leon
T\'as once more under the same roof, and
began to lay plans for the full enjoyment
of the da3^ She never doubted that they
should spend it together, chiefly alone, and
paused in her toilette to collect the various
letters from her grandmother and aunt
which she specially wished to show him,
and to read some passages over again, so
that it was very late when she reached the
breakfast-table. Almost the first words
she heard told her that, for that day at

least, her hopes were not likely to be fulfilled.
Leon, seated between his two
cousins, and apparently greatly enjoying
the novelty of being allowed to talk and
laugh unrestrainedly with girls, was busily
laying out the day. They were to show
him the beauties of Arncester in the morning,
and in the afternoon he was to have a
ride with Julia and her father. 'No one
evidently thought of Pansy's having any
claim upon him, and it was only Arthur
who noticed the look of bitter disappointment
that came over her face.

"You really might have a little consideration
for Pansy," he said, half angrily,
to his sisters, finding them alone after
breakfast.

Both looked up in surprise.

'* Pansy? consideration? What is the
matter ? what does she want ?"

It would be nothing very wonderful if
she wanted a quiet talk with her own brother,
whom she has not seen for so long."

Oh ! but she'll have lots of time for
that," said SophroDia.

"Besides," said Julia, "I am sure he is
eager enough about going everywhere and
seeing everything. He doesn't seem at all
to want to stop moping at home with
Pansy ; what could she have to say ?"

I declare," said Arthur, angrily, " I
don't believe you either of you in the least
understand what natural affection means !"

*' I don't understand a brother and sister
wanting to go prosing about together if
there's anyone else to talk to," said Julia,
pertly.

'but unfortunately you are not like
Pansy," said Arthur.

Unfortunately ! I am sure I've no
wish to change !"

''I daresay not; everyone knows you
are very conceited," said Arthur, as he left
the room, wishing with all his heart he
could do something to mitigate his little-cousin's
disappointment.

It certainly was a great blow to Pansy,
and she was so fearful of betraying that it
was so and distressing Leon that she took
refuge immediately after breakfast in her
own room. The little heap of letters tied
with blue ribbon lay where she had placed
them, ready to fetch when she got Leon all
to herself, and the sight of them brought
the tears to her eyes.

"He does not care for you," she said,
half aloud, taking them up and returning
them to their usual resting-place in her
desk; "he cares to talk and laugh more
than to read what Bonne Maman says."
Here two large tears fell on the packet.
'' Oh ! how sad that he should be so
changed !"

But no sooner were the words uttered
than she reproached herself for the thought.
Of course Leon heard from Bonne Maman
as well as she did, it was very foolish of
her to expect him to care for talking over
the letters as she did — men, Mamma had

always said, were very different iu their
feelings from women, and did not care
about the same things. She would like to
hear all that he had been doing and thinking
during the seven months that had seemed
so long to her, but she would not be selfish,
she would let him enjoy all the novelty of
the English life which evidently amused
him so much, and then, when the first
freshness had worn off, she should be sure
to hear all she wanted to know. And,
having make this resolve, Pansy went to
the window, and felt her heart swell with
jealousy as she saw Leon sauntering by
Julia's side, and carrying on an evidently
amusing conversation.

It was a lovely morning, bright and balmy
as May, the beds on the turf bright with
crocuses, hyacinths, and tulips, while in the
borders were the yellow berberis and crimson
ribes, and innumerable tufts of pink and
blue hepatica, and dark velvety auriculas.
The birds were singing merrily, and in one

corner of the garden a nightingale was pouring
forth his flood of song; all seemed happy
but herself, Pansy thought, and a burst of
laughter from Julia and Leon brought the
tears once more to her eyes.

In his great anxiety to comfort his little
cousin for her great disappointment,
Arthur contrived to get free from the
Bank directly after luncheon, and offered
himself as an escort to Pansy in her afternoon
walk. The riding party had just
started in high spirits, and Pansy, who
had been watching them, was divided
between her pleasure in seeing Leon's
enjoyment, and her disappointment at not
having him to herself. She was really
glad of Arthur's company : it would prevent
her brooding over the difference between
what she had expected this day to be, and
what it really was.

Arthur was undecided as to whether it
would be best to refer to her trouble or
not, but his desire to play the part of

comforter decided him, and he said,

I am sorry Julia was so thoughtless as
to carry Leon off to-day ; you must be
lonorinor to talk to him''

*' Oh ! I am glad he should enjoy himself,
and it is such a lovely day," said
Pansy, colouring ; but Arthur discerned
tears in her eyes.

'* What an unselfish little thing you are,
Pansy !"

Xo, indeed I am not," said Pansy,
looking distressed -, and she continued,
after a pause, ^' Of course I am glad Leon
should enjoy himself, but J. am afraid I
was selfish, and wanted him to enjoy
himself in my way instead of his own, and
was a little disappointed that he did
not."

*you wanted a real good talk; it
would have been very strange if you
hadn't."

Ah ! but I had settled so exactly how
it was all to be. I never thought of his

VOL. II. I>

liking to go to the ball, though I ought to
bave known low fond lie is of dancing.

Still I thought as all were strangers

And I had made such a little picture of
how we should sit on the sofa by the fire
together, all alone, and tell each other all
our thoughts for the last seven months : it
would have been like home again ; and I
had Bonne Maman s letters to show him.
But I ought not to have been disappointed.
Dear Mamma always warned me against
making plans for other people. She said
many of the disappointments, and a great
deal of the bitterness of life, came
from people settling exactly how certain
scenes would be, idealising them, she called
it, and then being vexed and hurt because
the reality was different. And you see
that is just what I did. I had a lean
ideal of Leon sitting at home with me,
which would have been very dull for him,
and when he did not I was cross and
disappointed, instead of being glad that he

should GDJoy himself. Oh ! you mustn't
call me unselfish !"

'' Well, I wonder Leon hadn't better
taste than to leave you to-day."

"It is all so new for him ; he has never
been in England before, you know, and it
is all so different from home."

"You always call La Eochecaillou
home, Pansy. Don't you feel at home
here?"

"You are all very kind," said Pansy,
hurriedly, and colouring violently ; " it is
not that — you must not think I am ungrateful,
but Mamma was at La Eoche-
caille — it will be always different from
any other place — you must not mind that."

jSiO, no ! I understand ; it was only
that I was afraid, Pansy, you are unhappy
here."

Unhappy ! No," said Pansy ; " I should
be very ungrateful if I were. Of course,
I was sorry to leave Bonne Maman and
the poor people I had always known ; but

when Mamma said she wished it, I knew
it was right."

There was a pause. Arthur could quot
help thinking how different this perfect
dependence on her mother's infallible
wisdom was from his own sisters' general
practice of putting their own judgment
above their mother's, and asserting their
perfect independence of opinion. It had
never struck him before how hard it must
have seemed to Pansy to leave all the
people and things for which she cared, and
which she had ever known, and to take up
her abode among those who, although
relations, were still absolute strangers.
How sweetly she had borne it ! How
ready she had shown herself to fall into
all their ways, and to be thankful for the
smallest kindness ! As he thought of all
this, his cousin seemed to him more
charming than she had ever done before,
and he said, impetuously,

I wish you liked this place, Pansy —
liked being here, I meanes

"But indeed, Arthur, you must not
think I do not ; it is only that seven
months cannot make a place so much
home as seven years. We had never left
La Rochecaillou all that time."

"I wish you felt this as your home —
for ever."

"But so I do. I know, when Mamma
asked Uncle George to take me, she did
not wish me ever to go back, except, of
course, sometimes to see Bonne Maman."

There was a long pause, and then
Arthur, his heart beating very fast, and
the colour rising to his cheeks, said,

Pansy, I want to ask you a question."

Yes," said Pansy, looking towards him
with a face of such perfect innocence of
any suspicion of his feelings that he felt ab
once that to ask what he had intended was
both useless and impossible.

S LITTLE PANSY,

He had intended to put this fortune ta
the touch, to ask her if she thought she
could ever grow to care for him, but, in
the face of her absolute unconsciousness, he
saw that such a question would be premature,
and possibly injurious to the hopes he
entertained. Self-satisfaction was by no
means one of Arthur's characteristics ; he
was indeed somewhat apt unnecessarily to
depreciate himself, and it never occurred
to him, as it would in all probability have
done to Hubert, to attribute Pansy's
apparent unconsciousness to coquetry and
a wish to lead him on. So, with a violent
effort, he changed the question that had
trembled on his lips to, " Why do you
prefer these lanes to the other walks
about ?"

He was unable to make it sound quite
natural, and even Pansy, ignorant as she
really was of what had been really in his
thoughts, could not help wondering why

he had looked so strange and excited over
such a simple question ; but she replied,
without hesitation,

Only look at this lane, and tell me if it
is possible to see anything prettier."

It was indeed a pretty spot. The lane
was hollow, with steep banks crowned with
beech-trees, the fresh budding leaves of
which formed a delicate tracery overhead
against the deep blue sky, flecked with
tiny white fleecy clouds ; the silvery stems,
and the exposed interlacing roots, had
large patches of close-growing velvet moss
spread thickly over them. At the top of
the bank, between the trees, were large
clumps of gorse, with numerous heads of
golden bloom, primroses grew in rich
abundance everywhere, and at the bottom
of the lane, where a tiny rivulet, crossed
by a picturesque wooden bridge covered
with ivy, meandered through a little copse
of oak and birch, the ground was covered

with wild hyacinth and brilliant green
mercury, with here and there some of the
silvery white allium.

'* Isn't this pretty enough to make one
want to come and look at it every day just
now ?" said Pansy ; *' and its great beauty
will not last so very long, the flowers will
fade, and then other places may be prettier
all have their turn ; at least, they had in
France. '^

'' Is-it very pretty there ?"

*' I do not know that it is really any
prettier than this," said Pansy. ^'Meadow-
shire is very pretty. Perhaps there is
more colour in France, and certainly the
people — the peasants, I mean — are more
picturesque. And then we have the vintage,
that is a feast of colour you can never
have, and our people are more cheerful,
they dance and sing, and there seems more
life."

Whether Arthur was prepared to prosecute
his researches into the differences

between the life of the country of the
Loire and Meadowshire cannot be told, for
at that moment Leon and Julia came upon
them suddenly round a corner of the
lane.

We have had such a lovely ride !" exclaimed
Julia. " TVe have been round a
bit of Stanmore Chase."

"Not inside, surely ?" said Arthur.

"No. So disagreeable of that grumpy
old Lady Peveril to shut the gates; but
we went round by the upper lodge, and
looked all over the place. Papa remembered
he wanted to see some one at Grain-thorpe,
so he left us at the Stanmore crossroads."


"And we have come home all across
country's said Leon, exultingly. "Ah!
Pansy, it was delicious ! I wish you could
ride like Julia."

It was so evident that he had been enjoying
himself immensely that his sister
could not find it in her heart to grudge

Lin this pleasure, much as she longed to
have him all to herself.

across country!" said Arthur. "I
hope, Julia, you were careful to avoid the
young wheat."

I am sure I never thought about it,"
said Julia, carelessly. " We came straight,
just like hunting. Did we come over wheat,
Leon?"

One large field, I think, where the old
man shouted at us so."

'' Ah ! of course ! Thomas Grandly's
thirty acre field !" said Arthur. " It is
right in your line. Julia ought to have
known better."

"What harm could it do?" said Julia.
You went over it yourself last month."

*' When hounds were running hard — but
to do it in cold blood ! Well, it's no use
talking ; women can't understand."

^' Come on, Leon," said Julia, putting
her horse into a trot. " He's only out of
temper, as usual. Let's leave him to growl

to Pansy ; she never seems to mind."
Pansy's hopes of getting Leon to herself
were apparently never destined to lye fulfilled.
There was always something to
prevent it — some walk he was to take,
some place he was to see, something or
another that he and Julia were to do together.
He had speedily become Julia's
shadow ; she amused him, and, above all
things, she flattered the vanity of which
Leon had his full share. It was very
pleasant to have a pretty girl so anxious
to be with him, so ready to amuse him, so
delighted to show him everything there
was to see. Already he fancied himself in
love with her. Love was not a very deep
sentiment in Leon's somewhat shallow nature
; he had already been through various
phases of it more than once. But his soft
glances and sweet speeches had aroused
in Julia the love that she had never before
felt, and every moment seemed to her
wasted that was not spent with Leon

]^o thought of the future disturbed liiru ;
it was natural to him, when he saw a
pretty woman, to make love to her ; the,
to him extraordinary, freedom allowed to
English girls, gave him unusual opportunities,
of which he was by no means slow
to avail himself, but of marriage to follow
on pleasant love-making he never once
dreamt, nor of the effect which his conduct
might have on his cousin's peace of
mind.

All Leon's former flirtations had been
with married women, and of a love-affair,
brought to its logical conclusion in a marriage,
he never once thought. His grandmother
had already chosen him his wife,
a Mademoiselle de la Questembert, an
heiress of Brittany, at present pursuing
her education in the Convent of the Sacre
Coeur. He had been given to understand
that he was to marry her when she was
eighteen, which would be in two years'
time, and it had never occurred to him to

question Lis grandmother's choice. It
was thus that marriages were generally
arranged among persons of their degree ;
the young lady's dot would be very acceptable,
as the De la Rochecaillous were by
no means overburdened with wealth. He
had been assured that Mademoiselle bid
fair to be pretty and distinguished-looking
nothing, in short, could suit more admirably
— but there could be no reason
that he should not have his amusements
and distractions in the meanwhile.

But Julia's thoughts were very different.
Among all the jokes she had always heard
and joined in respecting lovers, there had
been very little thought of real love, and
it was some time before she realised what
it was that made her feel so different from
what she had ever done in her whole life.
Hitherto it had been her great object always
ostentatiously to parade any attention
that was shown her ; she would hardly
have cared for the most fervent devotion

if some one had not been present to witness
it, and to talk about it afterwards ;
but now all was different. She was positively
shy, and tried to avoid notice when
she and Leon were together. She felt
tolerably certain that he cared for her —
indeed, he was by no means chary of his
honeyed speeches and impassioned glances,
and, having naturally no clue to his views
of love-making, she had no doubt that he
eras as much in love with her as she was
with him.

What troubled her was the thought of
what her father would say. She knew
that, though he allowed that her aunt's
marriage had not turned out so badly ashe
anticipated, he was fully convinced that
this was merely a strange accident, and
was quite as strongly prejudiced as before
against mixed marriages. Then, too, she
had heard him express strong disapproval
of the marriage of cousins, and Leon was
hier first cousin. It seemed hopeless to

think of obtaining his consent, and Julia
began to revolve in lier mind projects of
possible elopement. The idea of giving
up her own will to her father's was one
but little likely to occur to her.

If Leon had been told that he had never
showed any disposition to talk to his sister,
and that she was not unnaturally disappointed
at his neglect, he would have been
extremely surprised, and would have declared
that he was devoted to Pansy, and
was always talking to her. He was quite
satisfied with the conversation they had
together in public, when any of the others
could join, and had no idea of her longing
to question him as to all he had been
doing, thinking, and feeling. That had
been all very well at La Eochecaillou,
where there was nothing to do, and where
thoughts and feelings had to be talked of
in consequence of the paucity of events ;
but here, where there Vv^as a new country
to see, a new society to make acquaintance

with, and, above all, a pretty cousin with
whom to flirt, it was a very different
thing. But, as no one suggested to him
that Pansy was disappointed, it never occurred
to him that she was so, and he would
not in the least have understood the sob
she had such difficulty in suppressing when
he declined to read Bonne Maman's letter
which she offered him, and told her carelessly
that if there was any news in it she
could tell him, but that it was not likely
that there should be any from La Eoche-
caille.

And of what Leon would have considered
news there certainly was none. Madame
de la Eochecaillou wrote of the
things that she knew would interest her
grandchild, — of her own health and of the
progress of her piece of work, of the welfare
of the old servants and of the village
people to whom Pansy had been a ministering
angel, of the weather, and of the
aspect of the country and the gardens,

and, finally, of the anticipated visit of
Madame de Varennes, who was to be accompanied
by the niece Marie whom the
old Marquise had not yet seen. She sent
an affectionate message to Leon, bidding
Pansy tell him that he was but a poor
correspondent, and congratulating the girl
on the delight of having her brother with
her.

Pansy sighed as she read. It was all
very well to tell Arthur, who had seemed
inclined to blame Leon, that it was her
own fault for having set up an ideal of
what their meeting was to be, but to herself
she could not veil her sore and bitter
disappointment. It was all so different
from what she had expected. Leon was
so engrossed by Julia that he hardly seemed
to care to speak to her, and she knew
no more of what he had been doing during
their seven months' separation than the
day he arrived.

Neither Mr. nor Mrs. Deveron took any

VOL. II. E

notice of the flirtation between Julia and
Leon. Mr. Deveron saw comparatively
little of it, and, if he had seen more, would
never have dreamt of danger, being quite
sure that his daughter was aware of his
views as to difference of faith being an insuperable
obstacle to marriage, and also
that cousinship was nearly as insurmountable
a barrier. He liked what he saw of the
young man, — which, however, was not very
much, — better than he had ever believed it
possible that he could like a foreigner. He
seemed a nice, manly young fellow, could
ride, and talk English, and did not appear
to be so overwhelmed with conceit as his
ideal Frenchman was. It was a matter of
course that he should always be with his
cousins, and of course as Julia rode she
had the most of his company, but of any
danger of her falling in love with the
handsome young dragoon he never once
thought.

Mrs. Deveron was quite as little awake

to any danger. Leon made himself so
completely at home, and seemed so much
one of themselves, that she scarcely
thought of him at all, excepting when
some stranger appeared on the scene, and
she had the proud satisfaction of introducing
" my nephew, the Marquis de la Roche-caille,"
which title was to her a source of
never-ending delight. Besides, her only
idea of intercourse between young people
was some species of flirtation, and Leon
being especially a gentleman, his manner
of conducting it vas far more conspicuous
than anything she was usually accustomed
to see.

So it happened that no one took any
alarm, or indeed any particular notice, and
Julia, as unsuspicious of what was really
happening to her as anyone else, fell as deeply
in love with her cousin as it was possible to
her to do with anyone. The effect upon
her was extraordinary and immediate.
Instead of doing her utmost to attract

e2

LIBRARY ' — ~— . -
UNIVERSITY OP MHWHt

attention to Leon's devotion to her, as had
been her wont in all her former manifold
flirtations, she took infinite pains to keep
in the background, made no reply to Soph-ionia's
occasional remarks as to their
being inseparable, and developed a most
unusual fancy for sequestered walks and
rides, and avoided, most carefully, being
seen in the town with Leon. Sophronia
would have been more awake to what was
going on, had not her attention been occupied
by the arrival of a new head-master
of the Grammar School, very much younger
than any such official who had ever
before appeared in Arncester, and who,
apparently struck by some of her authorities
observations on literature the first
night he met her, had ever since paid her
considerable attention. Sophronia generally
took a great deal of trouble to insure
her literary observations being correct,
and only those who knew her well were
able to estimate how superficial her knowledge

was, and how entirely derived from
dictionaries and similar short and easy
roads to learning. Mr. l^ewsome was for
the present quite deceived, and he had
already fallen into the way of talking to
her more than to anyone else, and had
gone the length of confiding to her that
he was engaged in writing a novel, not of
the present day, that would be, it seemed
to him, in his position, too frivolous, but
of the middle ages, such as would require
infinite labour and research. In her
heart Sophronia thought it would be very
dull ; the nineteenth century was more
interesting to her than the fifteenth, and
historical research had no charms for her,
but she threw herself enthusiastically into
the subject, talked eagerly of "local colour
" and " details strictly in keeping," and,
knowing the names of various useful works
of reference, was really of some use to her
companion, who, completely deceived by
her skilful manipulation of an infinitesimal

amount of knowledge, believed her to
be possessed of an inexhaustible fund of
information, and eagerly confided to her all
the details of his cherished plot.

Naturally, being so well occupied herself,
Sophronia had little time to criticise
her sister's proceedings, and Julia enjoyed
an immunity from remark and 'chaff"
which she would certainly not otherwise
have obtained. And so three weeks of Leon's
visit of a month flew away almost before
she knew it had begun, and Julia was still
unaware how completely her heart had
passed out of her own keeping. That
she was in love with Leon she indeed
knew ; never before had she felt for anyone
what she did for him, but she had no
notion of the depth and strength of her
own feeling. That he cared for her she
did not doubt ; she already looked forward
with some trepidation to her father's displeasure,
and with a thrill of excitement
to the possible romance of an elopement

Leon had certainly done his utmost to win
her regard, and that without any thought
of the future. Knowing himself to be
virtually engaged (for, though there had
been no formal act of betrothal, there was
a full and perfect understanding between
Madame de la Rochecaillou and the
old Count de la Questembert that the
marriage was to take place as soon as
Madelon was eighteen), he felt perfectly
safe and as free to amuse himself with a
passing love affair with his cousin as he
had been to indulge in his previous affaires
de coeur.

There was a spice of novelty, too, which
was not without its charm. Hitherto the
sirens at whose shrines he had worshipped
had been married women older than himself,
and by no means coy in showing their
attachment and in leading him on to
declare his. But it was something quite
new to find himself enacting the part of
lover to a young girl who, though she

certainly encouraged him by showing her
preference for his society, yet was quite
ignorant of the trained wiles of the ladies
to whom he was accustomed. It was like
the scent of sweetbrier or wild thyme,
after a boudoir scented with Chypre or
Patchouli, and, almost without knowing
why, Leon enjoyed the difference — for a
change. There was a certain loss of excitement
certainly in the non-existence of
a possibly jealous husband, but there was
the compensation of perfect freedom and
unlimited tete-astute, Leon had begun to
believe himself very desperately in love ;
he had done so so often that he was well
acquainted with the symptoms, and to
groan over the thought of the necessity of
tearing himself away in a week's time.

It was something that he said of this, of
his despair that but one short week remained
to him of this earthly Paradise, that
first aroused Julia to the fact that her heart
was irrevocably given to her cousin. She

stammered, gasped, blushed, and, finally,
burst into a flood of tears. Leon bad
some experience of such scenes ; lie put
bis arm round ber, called ber endearing
names, and vowed eternal devotion. He
had done it so often before, — be was quite
sufficiently in love to do it most naturally
even without that previous practice ; but
be did not sufficiently take into consideration
the great difference of all the surrounding
circumstances. Mesdames de

B , de C , and de D , with whom

be bad before rehearsed such partings,
were all safely provided with legitimate
protectors, "eternal devotion" sworn to
them meant as much or as little as they
chose that it should do till some fresh
adorer replaced the departing swain ; and
Leon was very far indeed . from comprehending
that his soft speeches were implicitly
believed, and that his cousin was
fully persuaded that be had proposed to
her and that she bad accepted him.

Always desirous to postpone anything
unpleasant, Julia said nothing about her
father, and her anticipations of his opposition,
and it was not till two days before
her cousin's departure that, surprised that
he should have said nothing on the subject,
she said,

Leon, when shall you speak to Papa ?"

*' Speak ? What do you mean ?" asked
Leon, who was sitting at her feet on the
grass under the great pear-tree, white with
blossom.

'* About — about what you said to me the
other day. Oh ! Leon, I am afraid he will
be very angry. You know you are a
Catholic !"

But why should he be angry about
that ?" said Leon, looking puzzled. " And
why should he say anything about it?
He always has known, and he asked me
here. Why, he showed me himself where
our church was."

** Yes, but now You know how

angry he was with Aunt Clare for marrying
your father ; he never saw or even
heard from her all those years till she was
dying, and he is just as prejudiced now."

Leon looked bewildered.

I do not understand. Why should he
begin to think of this now, just as I go
away ?"

*' Oh ! Leon, don't you see ? When you
go to him and say we are engaged, I am
afraid — I know he will refuse his consent
because you are a Catholic. If he was
angry with Aunt Clare, is it likely he would
consent to let his own daughter marry
one?

At length Leon comprehended. His
cousin believed herself engaged to him I
Mais ces Anglaises ! was it not of right that
his countrymen called them eccentric ?
What had he said or done to. her that he
had not done to others before, and yet
never had such adventure befallen him?
He forgot for the moment the slight difference

— that his former adored ones had
been married. He shrank, however, from
telling her that she was mistaken. If he
could but be sure that she was right, that
his uncle would refuse his consent, it would
be the easiest way out of his difficulty to
propose for her in form, and to retire from
the scene with all the air of a disconsolate
and heart-broken lover. It was a role that
he flattered himself rather suited him. But
could he be quite sure ? His uncle had
forgiven his mother, he had apparently had
no objection to receiving him into his house,
and allowing him the freest intercourse
with his daughters, though well aware
that he was a Roman Catholic. Dared he
run the risk? It would never do to imperil
his relations with Mademoiselle de la
Questembert — her fortune would be invaluable
to La Rochecaillou ; besides, his
word was given. Still if he could be sure
of his uncle's refusal. Julia looked almost
prettier than he had ever seen her, as she

sat under the pear-tree, her cheeks flushed,
her blue eyes full of tears at the thought
of all the difficulties before them. At any
rate, he might as well enjoy himself a
little while longer. Until he had quite decided
that it would be dangerous to speak
to his uncle, he might as well continue to
make love to his cousin. So moving close
up to her, and putting his arm round her
as he kissed her cheek, he said,

*' Surely he could refuse you nothing,
Julia ! No one could !"

*' You don't know Papa, Leon. Nothing
would make him give way when he has
once made up his mind. And that is a
matter on which he would never change."

"You are sure of that?" with another
kiss.

Oh ! yes, quite. I know it will be no
good asking, though we must do it. But,
Leon — here, let me whisper in your ear —
we — we could do as Aunt Clare and your
father did — we can elope together."

So great was the shock of this suggestions
to Leon that it made him start suddenly
to his feet. Just as he had made up
his mind that his uncle was really safe, and
preparing himself to enact the becoming-part
first of a hopeful and then of a despairing
lover, the idea that Julia might
insist on such an masterpiece to the play as
she had proposed filled him with dismay
so excessive that, not knowing how far the
"English miss" might be prepared to insist
on the fulfilment of her programme,
he thought it best to be explicit.

'* Ma cousin's he said, looking at her
with an assumption of deep sorrow, "all
that I have told you as to my love, my
adoration of you, is but too true ; but —
but, alas 1 dearest, I cannot ask you of your
father, or I am sure he would not, he could
not, refuse me. But, you know our
French habits — our hearts are not allowed
to speak as are yours in your free, happy
England. I am betrothed to Madelon de

la Questembert — I must marry her in two
years. Pity me, . Julia ! pity my wrecked
life !" and his air of dejection would have
done credit to a first-rate actor.

Julia said nothing, but rose to her feet,
and, without a word or a look to Leon,
turned away and walked slowly towards
the house.

CHAPTER III.

I am a feather for each wind that blows.

Winters Tale. Act 2, Sc. 3.

Make thy doublet of changeable taffata, for thy mind
is a very opal ! 1 would have men of such constancy
put to sea, that their business might be everything,
and their intent everywhere.

Twelfth Night. Act 2, Sc. 4.

LEON remained where Julia had left
him, wishing very cordially that
this denouement could have been avoided.
It was not only that he was really fond of
her, and believed himself to be much more
in love than was actually the case, he felt
involuntarily that she despised him, and
his self-love was greatly hurt. But they
were certainly impayableSj these Meet
Anglaises ! What an idea that his cousin

should have proposed to him that they
should defy her father, and elope ! He
quite shuddered to think how very nearly
he had precipitated himself into an embarrassing
complication ! Julia's assurance
of her father's opposition had been
so positive that in another moment he could
have committed himself to the interesting
role of a despairing lover, and then how
doubly difficult it would have been to tell
her that he was already engaged ! Perhaps
all had happened for the best, and yet Leon
felt very far indeed from being either satisfied
or comfortable ; in truth, he felt for
the moment both small and ashamed of
himself. But his natural vanity was considerable
and before very long he had
succeeded in persuading himself that his
uncomfortable feelings were the result of
disappointed affection, and proceeded to
rail against the hard fate that obliged him
to marry an heiress, and which had bound
him to Madelon de la Questembert, whom

VOL. II. F

he had never even seen. He had quite
convinced himself that a hard fate and not
he was to blame, before the luncheon-bell
reminded him that he must encounter
Julia, and gave him an uncomfortable
feeling that perhaps those who heard her
story first might hardly see the circumstances
in precisely the same light that he
did. He wished the two days that remained
of his leave were only safely
over !

He need have had no apprehension that
Julia would have revealed what had passed
between them. When she left him in the
garden she was almost too stunned and
bewildered to be able to think clearly ; but
when she had reached her own room, and,
sitting down quietly, had begun to realise
what had actually happened, her shame
and dismay knew no bounds. It was
not only that she had given her heart
unasked — that would of itself have been
bad enough; but what had actually

occurred was far worse : she bad offered
ber love, and bad been rejected ! Disappointed
affection, wounded pride, the
agonizing thought of w^bat Leon must
think of ber forwardness, all combined to
render Julia so absolutely miserable that
sbe could hardly think collectedly. Sbe bad
loved Leon very dearly, the strongest
proof of wbicb was that sbe never once
blamed him for what bad happened, but
believed ber disappointment to be entirely
owing to ber own folly. Sbe might have
known that be would be too iuWy aware of
ber father's insuperable objections to their
marriage ever to think of it as possible,
and it was only ber own weakness that had
made her betray her feelings. What must
be think of ber ? And Julia, who, till her
heart bad been awakened by ber cousin,
bad never known either modesty or shyness,
covered ber burning face with ber bands
and wondered bow sbe should face him
again, bow sbe could endure the two days

f2

that still remained before his departure.

If she were as njuch in his company as
before, he might think that she still
persisted in claiming him, still adhered to
the proposal she wished so cordially she
had never made as to an elopement. On
the other hand, if she avoided him, as she
longed to do, he would understand how
completely her heart was given to him, and
would pity and despise her accordingly,
and the thought of this was more than she
could endure. If she had only the
strength, she felt that the best course that
she could pursue would be to appear
cheerful and unconcerned, and neither to
avoid Leon nor to seek his society. If she
had the strength ! But had she ? and,
with a burst of bitter tears, Julia realised,
for the first time, the power of the love
about which she had so long idly talked
and jested.

She was recalled to the consideration of
what must be done, by the sound of

Sophronia's voice in the garden with Leon :
of all things she dreaded that her sister
should guess what had befallen her, it
would be a never-ending subject of
teasing, and jokes on the subject would,
Julia felt, be more than she could endure.
So with a violent effort she choked back
her tears, bathed her eyes, and ran downstairs
without giving herself another
moment to think of her trouble.

'* Leon," she called at the bottom of the
stairs, " Leon ! what are you going to do
this afternoon ? Are we going to ride ?"

Leon looked round with astonishment
at beholding his cousin, apparently in
her usual spirits, standing on the steps
leading to the garden and making a bouquet
of one or two monthly roses and some leaves.
Was he dreaming? Had he not just told
her that he was engaged to some one else,
and could not accede to her proposal of an
elopement? He had dreaded tears, reproaches,
a scene, in short, and here was his

cousin as composed and as cheerful as ever.
He did not understand it, it was a terrible
blow to his vanity, for he was by no means
prepared to be so cheerfully relinquished.
So great was his amazement that ho did
not answer, and Julia continued,

"Leon, do you not hear? Are we to
ride, or what do you like to do ?"

She could not have understood him,
Leon reflected, — that could be the only
explanation of her conduct And, determined
not again to run into danger in a
tete-astute, he replied,

Ma cousine I should like to ride of all
things, but — la politesse — I must make my
adieux to cette charmante Madame Delmar.
I walk there this afternoon with Penseee."

*' I'm afraid we've kept you a great deal
from Pansy," said Julia. " You must come
back before long, and we will try to behave
better. Before you're married and
done for, you know. Soph," turning to her
sister, "did you know he was engaged?"

No ! I says why did you never tell
me?" said Sophronia. "T hope she's
awfully pretty. When is it to be? Is
she fair or dai^k ?"

"Dark, I believe," said Leon, rather
embarrassed by the fact that he had never
seen Madelon, and utterly bewildered by
Julia's manner. Surely he must have
dreamt that scene in the garden.

'' He can't tell you ; she's shut up in a
convent. I don't believe he's ever seen
her," said Julia, with a laugh, which an
attentive listener would have known was
forced.

'you don't mean it! Oh, Leon, how
can you ? What horrid things you do in
France !" cried Sophronia.

Leon was little inclined to defend himself
; he was half mortified and wholly bewildered
by Julia's gaiety. It was not
thus that the former objects of his adoration
had comforted themselves when separation
was imminent, — there had been

tears, sobs, hysterics, — anything but mirth.
Ah ! they were inexplicable ces Anglaises ;
but still Julia's seeming indifference, while
it both offended and puzzled him, made
him fancy himself more desperately in
love than ever, and caused him to heap
maledictions on his own poverty and the
unoffending head of Mademoiselle de la
Questembert.

'' Well," Julia went on, " I won't offer to
join you in your walk to Daleford. They're
great friends of Pansy's, but to my mind
they're very slow and stuck up. We'll
have our ride tomorrow. What a pity it
is you must go."

Julia hardly knew how she succeeded in
her design of appearing unconcerned, but
when luncheon was over, and Leon and
Pansy had set forth on their walk to Dale-ford,
she felt that if she were to keep up
her semblance of gaiety she must not give
herself time to think, and she therefore
announced her intention of going to the

Yernons. Sopbrouia would not go. Mr.
Newsome was to dine in the market-place
that evening, and there were some literary
data that she wished to have at her fingers'
ends, and must hunt up in various works
of reference. This was not the reason she
gave. Sophronia liked it to be believed
that she was a perfect well of knowledge,
and could answer all questions ois-hand, —
the books of reference were locked up in
her private cupboard.

If Harry Vernon had been at home that
afternoon, and if he had, as was his wont,
contrived to get Julia alone and apart
from the rest, the course of events might
have been materially altered. She was in
the state when she would have gladly
accepted anyone, to show Leon conclusively
that she cared nothing for him, and
was by no means disconcerted by hearing
of his engagement. Marriages made from
such a reason are far more frequent than
would be credited by those who are content

never to look below the smooth surface
of things, and, strangely enough,
they are very often those which the uninitiated
persist in terming desperate love-matches.
But, fortunately perhaps for
him, Harry Vernon was gone for a visit
of some weeks into Yorkshire ; and Julia
consoled herself, and drowned for the time
the thought of Leon's departure, and, still
worse, of his indifference, by a noisy flirtation
with a young officer who had just
joined the detachment at Arncester, and
who was only too delighted to find such
promise of amusement as Miss Deveron's
easy welcome opened before his expectations.
He at once characterised her as
an out and out jolly girl," though he
would have recoiled in infinite horror at
the thought of one of his own sisters copying
her manners and deportment. Of this
reservation Julia was of course in blissful
ignorance, and received with complacency
the jokes respecting her " new conquest '*

which followed Mr. Leslie's departure.
Meanwhile, Pansy's tete-astute with her
brother did not prove by any means so
delightful as she had anticipated. Though
she was thoroughly unselfish, and always
most anxious to find every excuse for
Leon's pre occupation and neglect of her,
she still had been unable to help feeling a
little hurt at his want of interest in all
she had so longed to talk over with him,
and his manifest preference for his cousin's
society. The idea that he and Julia had
fallen in love with each other never once
occurred to her : love was not a subject
ever present to her thoughts, as it was to
her cousin's, and knowing, as she did, her
uncle's objection to Roman Catholics, she
never would have thought of such a thing
as possible. Therefore, much as she tried
to make excuses for Leon, she could not
help being a little hurt at his conduct, and
to-day his silence hurt her still more. She
naturally did not understand that he was-turning

all that had happened over and
over' in his mind, vainly endeavouring to
understand Julia's conduct, and pitying
himself immensely for having to leave the
girl with v/hom he imagined himself to be
so desperately in love.

At length she broke the silence.

"And you really go the day after tomorrow,
Leon ? It does not seem a month
since you came."

Leon started, and half shook himself, as
if to recall his scattered thoughts.

"Yes, it must be Thursday, Penseee. I
am very sorry," with a portentous sigh.

And you will go to La llochecaillou ?
Ah, Leon, I envy you !"

I cannot think why ; you are far better
off here, with companions and amusement
of all sorts, than cooped up alone in the
chateau."

It seems so long since I saw Bonne
Maman," said Pansy, wistfully. " You will
give her my love, and tell her about me ?"

Well, you see, I don't think I am going
to La Rocliecaillou," said Leon. *' I
have only six days left, and Aunt Louise
asked me to stay with her in Paris. It
will be more amusing, you know ; the
chateau is so dull."

Bonne Maman will be very disappointed.
Couldn't you go even for one day ? Let
me read you the letter I got this morning.
She is looking forward so to seeing you."

Oh ! never mind the letter. One always
knows beforehand what the old lady
will say," said Leon, with a yawn; and
Pansy, deeply mortified, put the letter back
into her pocket without a word. "You
see it will be so much out of my way, and
there are lots qi things I want to do in
Paris, and Aunt Louise is going to give a
hal blanc, and I am to lead the cotillon with
Marie — they say no one does it so well. I
wish you were to be there, Penseee."

I would rather go home to La E-oche-
caille," said his sister, quietly.

Would you really ? How odd ! But
then girls are different. But you are to
go some time, are you not ?"

Yes, but not till November."

*' Well, that will be here soon, only six
months. And you are happy here, Penseee ?
I am sure they are all very fond of you."

*' They are very kind," said Pansy.

She did not care to tell her brother how
little sympathy or companionship she found
among her relatives. Formerly she would
have poured out to him every thought and
feeling, but now it seemed as if a barrier
had arisen between them, as if Leon no
longer cared to hear all she had to say, ashe
had once done. She hardly took sufficiently
into consideration the difference
between La Rochecaillou, where he had
nothing to do but to wander about with
lier, and Arncester, where he had had
plenty of amusement. So she relapsed
into silence, and little more was said till
they reached their destination.

At Daleford Pansy was always sure of a
hearty welcome, for lie was a prime
favourite with every member of the family.
]\lrs. Delmar's watchful eyes had fathomed
that the girl was in some way disappointed
in her brother, and she had also perceived
how inseparable Julia and Leon were,
though, as she said to her daughter,
*' Really Miss Deveron's flirtations were so
numerous that it was hardly likely her
handsome cousin should escape." Altogether
neither she nor Xora had taken
any" particular fancy to Leon, although
they were specially kind to him for Pansy's
sake, but they — I^ora more especially —
could not forgive him for preferring Julia's
society to that of her charming little friend.

Both mother and daughter observed that
Pansy was decidedly out of spirits, and
naturally concluded that this was caused
by her brother's approaching departure,
not understanding that it proceeded from
disappointment at the whole tenor of his

visit, and regret that her grandmother was
to be deprived of the pleasure of his company,
to which, as she well knew, she had
been eagerly looking forward. She determined
to try to persuade him to go, if
only for one day, to gladden the eyes of
the kind grandmother who loved him so
very dearly. Her entreaties had to be
considerably postponed, for Nora and her
eldest brother Laurence walked the greater
part of the way home with them, but as
soon as the last adieux had been said, and
they were again alone, she said, rather
nervously,

Leon, I do wish you would change
your mind, and go to La Rochecaillou, if
only for one day. Bonne Maman is old,
you know, and she has set her heart so on
seeing you. She will be terribly disappointed."


'* She should not expect it. I never said
I was going."

You said perhaps you would. Oh !

dear Leon, do go ! Surely you would like
to give her pleasure."

"You see, it is impossible; to-day is
Tuesday. I shall only just be in time for
Aunt Louise's ball."

Could you not run down from Paris ?
Or," as he shook his head impatiently,
** could you not give up Paris for once?
Surely it is better to make Bonne Maman
glad than to please yourself."

Leon laughed sarcastically — not a pleasant
laugh to hear.

"It is easy for you to talk," he said ;
you said just now you would rather goto
La E-ochecaillou than to Aunt Louise.
Now I prefer Paris to the dull old chateau.
Bonne Maman is all very well — of course
she is very kind and all that, but she can
hardly expect to keep a young man tied to
her apron-string."

A visit of two days in eight months
can hardly be called that, I think."

"Well, at any rate, I can't go now.

VOL. II. G

Perhaps when you're at the chateau, in
November, didn't you say ? I'll run down
for a few days."

Pansy said nothing ; she saw that there
was no use in pressing the point.

*' Perhaps, though," continued Leon, not
sorry to change the subject — " perhaps
there may be changes before then. I suppose,
Penseee, there is something between
you and that Mr. Delmar ?"

*' Something between us ? What do you
mean ?" said Pansy, innocently, really not
comprehending what he meant.

Don't be absurd ; I mean, he's making
love to you."

"No, that he isn't," exclaimed Pansy,
blushing furiously ; " why, he's — " but
there she stopped. She had heard from
his sisters of Laurence Delmar's love for a
girl who was engaged against her will to
another man, and in the first surprise of
her brother's assertion she had almost forgotten
that it was the secret of another,

and one that she was therefore not at
liberty to reveal, but she checked herself
in time, and said, after a pause — 'you are
quite mistaken."

Am I ?" said Leon, who was hardly
interested enough to insist much on his
supposed discovery ; " well, I may be mistaken,
but it looked very like it. You
ought to marry, Penseee ; it would be much
better for you to have a home of your own,
you know."

They are very kind to me here," said
Pansy; "I don't fancy I shall ever care to
marry."

"Oh! that is all nonsense; of course
you must. And besides, though they are,
you say, very kind to you, of course it's
hard on the girls to have a third to divide
the going out."

Oh !" cried Pansy, standing still and
looking desperately distressed — "oh, Leon!
you don't mean that they feel that and
complain ! I am so sorry ! I have begged

g2

SO hard and so often to be allowed to stay
at home, but Uncle George won't hear of
it. What can I do ?"

I don't see that you can do anything,"
said Leon ; " and as to your always moping
at home, of course that is out of the question
; Uncle George would not be doing you
justice if he allowed it. All you can do is
to marry as soon and as well as you can,
and have a home of your own. If you had
stayed in France, Bonne Mam an would
have arranged it all."

*' Ah, if I only might have stayed at La
Eochecaillou !" sighed Pansy.

*' You would really prefer it ? Well,
then, I cannot think why you should not
go back. You are old enough to know
your own mind, and Uncle George couldn't
object, I should think."

Oh, Leon ! you forget that it was dear
Mamma's own wish. She talked to me
about it that last night ; I could not disobey
her wishes."

Oh well ! of course, if you are sentimental
about it, that ends the matter," said
Leon. "I only meant that there was nothing
to prevent your doing what you liked."

Pansy was far from believing that her
uncle would be so ready to resign the
solemn trust which her mother had placed
in his hands on her death-bed, but she
could hardly think of this for the pain
she experienced at the light manner in
which Leon spoke of their mother's wishes.
How sadly he was altered ! He who
used to be so affectionate, so mindful of
his mother's lightest word ! Pansy, having
naturally little experience of character, did
not comprehend that Leon's was a nature
that required the constant presence of any
object of affection. He had no depth of
character, and with him out of sight was
truly out of mind. He was not a hypocrite,
he really felt the affection he professed
for those with whom he was, but
absence did not " make his heart sorrow

fonder," indeed, it must be confessed he
seldom thought of those from whom he
was separated. If he had at this moment
found himself at La Eochecaillou, he would
have been as devoted to his grandmother,
in all appearance, as in his boyish years, —
nay, he would really have himself believed
that he was so. It never dawned upon
him that Pansy's feelings could be hurt
by. what he had said, and, having a good
deal to ponder over in his relations with
Julia, he was not at all sorry for her
silence, which he attributed to her having
nothing to say : it had often struck him
as a pity that his sister had so much less
conversation than her cousins.

Julia contrived to play her appointed part
of indifference fairly well. She never dared
to give herself time to think of what must
have been Leon's opinion of her suggestion
respecting an elopement. She longed to
refer to it and tell him it had only been
intended as a jest, but she did not dare ta

trust herself; lie feared that, if he made in
reply any of the lover-like speeches to which
he had accustomed her, she might betray
herself. So she talked and jested to the
end, rode with him the last day, and forced
herself to appear in such high spirits
that no sentiment was possible, and got up
very early to give him his coffee before his
departure. Altogether, she fairly mystified
Leon, and her last words were —

Mind you pay us another visit before
long, we shall always be glad to see you."

He was so bewildered by her conduct
that he stood staring at her, and almost
forgot to kiss and wish Pansy good-bye.
During the whole of his journey to Paris,
he was occupied with speculations on the
strangeness of English girls, and with
meditations on his own despair at leaving
Julia ; but he had no sooner arrived in his
aunt's hotel than he became the willing
slave of her fascinations, and his Ancestor
experiences were speedily forgotten.

CHAPTER IV.

The flags and grasses o'er tliy head

Sweep tossing in the dewy spray :
They bend, they wave, they softly kiss

Thee as thou hurries far away.

The drooping foxgloves ope their cups,
While shining beetles slowly creep

Their fairy stems and clinging leaves,
Or rock themselves in dreams and sleep.

The Stream — Meta Erred.

T~\URING the whole of the morning
-■-^ succeeding Leon's departure, Julia
was in a state of incessant and restless
activity. She was really afraid to sit down
and allow herself to think, and roamed
about, busying herself with she hardly
knew what, and singing the gayest songs
she knew. No one guessed her secret :

Pansy was the last person in the world to
think of such, a thing, Mrs. Deveron regarded
Leon as only a nephew when she
was not parading him as a Marquis, and
Sophronia was far too deeply interested in
Mr. Newsome and his novel to be so sharp-sighted
as was usually the case. There
was a lawn-tennis tournament at Daleford
in the afternoon, to which all the party
were going, and Julia was repeatedly referring
to it, and declaring how delighted
she was to go.

Are you well, Julia ?" asked Pansy, as
they were waiting for the carriage — *' you
look so flushed."

Such, indeed, was the case. Julia was
unusually white, with the exception of two
vivid crimson spots on her cheeks.

I never felt better in my life," returned
Julia. '' Oh, dear ! how long the carriage
is in coming round ! We shall be so late,
all the sets will be made up."

After they had been at Daleford some

little time, Pansy, who did not particularly
care for lawn-tennis unless she were required
to make up a set, strolled off into
the pleasure-grounds with Edith Delmar,
the youngest daughter. They had been
absent longer than they supposed, for time
slips away quickly in congenial society,
when they were summoned by Laurence
Delmar.

I have had such a hunt for you," he
said. " Mademoiselle de la Rochecaillou,
your aunt is asking for you ; your cousin
is unwell, and they want to get her home."

"Which is it?— Julia?" asked Pansy,
as they began to walk rapidly towards the
house. *' I thought she looked ill before
we started, but she said she never felt
better. What is it?"

'' A sort of fainting-fit, but it was difficult
to revive her, and Mrs. Deveron is
anxious to get her home, though my mother
begged she might remain here."

The carriage was at the door ; they were

only waiting for Pansy, and Mrs. Deveron,
who, like many other people, became cross
when she was worried or uneasy, wondered
all the way home how her niece could be
so inconsiderate " as to go wandering off
where no one could find her — why could
she not stay where everyone else did ?
Pansy was quite silent ; she never answered
her aunt when she was in one of her faultfinding
moods, though unreasonable blame
was a thing to which she had never been
subjected before her arrival at Arncester.
The thought of her last conversation with
her mother always closed her lips ; she
had at first tried to follow her recommendation
of " the soft answer that turneth
away wrath," but she soon found that
silence was far better, for the answer, soft
as it might be, generally seemed to be
provocative of anger. She realised now
that her aunt was frightened and anxious
about Julia, and pitied her too much to
feel annoyed at her scolding.

Julia had recovered from her fainting-fit,
but she lay back in the corner of the
carriage as still as if in a trance, with her
eyes wide open, and did not answer when
spoken to. The first thing she said was,
when she had been half carried, half
supported to her room, and heard the
order given to send for Dr. Bedford,

'' Don't send for him, I am quite well,
I want no one ; I only want to go to bed, I
am tired."

The thought of the doctor seemed to
excite her so much that Mrs. Deveron,
against her better judgment, did not send
for him. Julia went to bed, and in a
little while appeared to have fallen peacefully
asleep. Soothing more was heard
till about half-past nine, when, as Pansy
was passing her door on her way to her
own room to fetch a book, she heard a
constant muttering, and knowing that
everyone was downstairs, so that there
was no one for her to talk to, she knocked,

and, receiving no reply, gently entered.

It was at once clear to her that something
was very much amiss. Julia was
sitting up in bed talking rapidly to herself,
and, even by the dim light of the night-light,
Pansy could see that her cheeks
were scarlet and her eyes positively
blazing. In the moment she remained she
heard that Julia's talk was all of Leon ; she
seemed to be talking to him, and proposing
that they should go somewhere together.
Closing the door noiselessly, Pansy went
down to the drawing-room.

"Aunt Matilda, I am afraid Julia is very
ill ; she is sitting up in bed talking very
fast, and I don't think she knows what she
is saying."

"Dear me, Pansy, what business had
you to go and disturb her?" cried Mrs.
Deveron, angrily.

"I heard her talking as I passed the
door, and went in to see if she wanted
anything," answered Pansy, gently. " Indeed,

Aunt Matilda, I wish you would go
and see her."

When Mrs. Deveron reached her daughter's
room she was thoroughly alarmed,
rang the bell violently, and sent at once
for Dr. Bedford. He was away attending
a patient in the country, and, during the
weary hours that elapsed before his arrival,
she sat by her child's bedside listening to
the ravings of delirium, and marvelling
that the idea of the cousins falling in love
with each other had never occurred to her.
It was the constraint which Julia had put
upon herself during the last two days of
Leon's stay that had proved too much for
her, added to an attack of an insidious low
fever, of which there had been several cases
in Arncester during the spring. Dr.
Bedford from the first anticipated no
danger, but said that care would be
requisite, and that convalescence would
in all probability be tedious. The event
proved that he was right. Julia's severe

illness soon passed away, but she continued
weak and listless, and appeared to have
lost all interest in anything. The only
elinor that seemed to rouse her was the
sight of Pansy, to whom she had conceived
the most violent dislike ever since she had
heard that she was the first person who
had heard her ravings. She had elicited
from her mother that she had talked
incessantly of Leon and of eloping with
him, and nothing would persuade her that
Pansy would not repeat to him what she
had heard. In fact, Pansy had paid little
attention to what her cousin said, and it had
never occurred to her that there was any
foundation for her ravings other than her
recent constant companionship with Leon,
and her way of talking of everyone as a
possible or a certain lover. But, even if
she had been assured solemnly of this,
nothing would have persuaded Julia that
it was true, and her aversion to Pansy
grew so strong that when she rejoined the

family circle she could scarcely force herself
to treat her civilly. Mrs. Deveron,
too, felt a sort of grudge against her niece
as being the means whereby this trouble
had been brought upon them, for if she
had not been residing at Arncester, it was
not likely that Leon would ever have found
his way thither. Altogether Pansy found
herself looked coldly upon by everyone
except her uncle, of whom she saw very
little, and Arthur, who was unusually busy ;
neither of whom was aware of poor Julia's
disclosures, for Mrs. Deveron had sedulously
guarded the secret from her husband.

Feeling very keenly that she was looked
coldly upon, and considered de trop in the
home which she would so gladly have left
to return to La Rochecaillou, Pansy, profiting
by the bright weather of an unusually
early summer, began to spend more and
more of her time out of doors. She had
many favourite haunts, but none of which
she was so fond as of a certain spot near

the river, in the grounds of Kelmorton
Hall.

Lord Kelmore never visited the Hall,
greatly preferring another estate which he
possessed in the north of England, and
certain of the upper classes of the townsfolk
had permission to walk in the grounds
when they pleased. Mr. Deveron was, of
course, one of those possessed of this permission,
but Pansy was the only member
of the family in the market-place who ever
availed herself of it. Mrs. Deveron seldom
walked at all, and, if she did, quite agreed
with her daughters that High Street and
Arne Street were far more interesting than
the most lovely country walk. They belonged
to the very numerous class who
have positively no eyes for the beauties of
nature, who can admire a garden set out
in formal patterns of red, blue, and yellow,
or go into raptures over rare plants exhibited
at a flower-show, or growing in a
stove, but who simply never see the lovely

VOL. II. H

wayside flowers, and, if they did do so,
would not appreciate them, because they
are *' common."

Pansy, on the contrary saw every
flower that she passed, and loved them
all, from the stonecrop on the thatch totlie
waving: grasses in the meadow. She was
not a scientific botanist, and could not have
distributed her favourites into orders and
classes, or described them by their correct
Latin names, as Sophronia would have required,
but she knew their English appellations,
and regarded them almost as friends.
She did not press and dry them, and consign
them to the leaves of that somewhat
dreary volume, a Hortus Siccus, but she
wore garlands and bouquets of them, and
always decked her room with quantities
of her favourites.

Now that she felt herself in the way at
home, she profited by the fine weather to
be out as much as possible, and taking her
book, and very frequently some luncheon,

would spend the great-ter portion of the day
in her seat by the river. No one ever
asked where she went. Mrs. Deveron had
a vague idea that she spent her time " in
the woods," and conceived that so strange
a taste, as it seemed to her, was due to her
French habits ; Julia was only too thankful
to lose sight of her, and Sophronia, finding
that she could not be induced to regard
flowers botanically, could not comprehend
her interest in gathering them* Mr.
Deveron was rarely at home for luncheon,
a, meal he somewhat despised, and never
inquired what his niece did with her time,
concluding that she was always with the
other girls ; and Arthur had been sent on
some business matters to London, whence
it was extremely probable that he would
have to proceed to Germany. He was
the member of the family most congenial
to Pansy, and she was almost surprised to
find how much she missed him.

One morning in the middle of June,

h2

Pansy, with her luncheon in a little basket
and a volume of Lamartine in her hand,
set forth to spend a long day in her sylvan
retreat. The first part of the way was
hot and dusty, though it was still quite
early, as she had started immediately after
breakfast. But, after she had crossed the
bridge, the high-road was left behind, and,
climbing a somewhat awkward stile, her
further way led through meadows, now, to
her infinite relief, free from cows, for
Pansy was by no means heroic when in the
presence of horned cattle. The meadows,
nearly ripe for the scythe, were full of
lovely flowering grasses, of which she had
soon gathered a large handful, of the white
hemlock with its spotted stem and beautifully
cut leaves, of the yellow rattle, and
the white bladder campion. Further on,
after passing through a copse where the
purple betony and delicate little enchanter's
nightshade grew in profusion, was a
bit of waste ground, carpeted with silverweed,

with its small bright yellow flowers,
and with white clover, while here and
there grew clumps of the purple foxglove.
In the next field there was almost a red
glow from the quantities of the pyramidal
orchis that grew there. Here Pansy
paused a considerable time, not only to
gather it and its paler mauve cousins, but
to look for the rarer members of the
family, the green gnat, the fly and the bee
ophrys, of which a few specimens rewarded
a diligent search. Her hands were full
before she at length reached her favourite
spot, which merits some description.

The river here foamed and boiled among
arose boulders, all of which were covered
with mosses of various shades of green,
and fringed luxuriantly with ferns ; on the
opposite side a cliff rose somewhat abruptly,
and was crowned with a birchwood,
some stray trees growing out of crevices
in the rock, and mingling with the clematis
and the wild roses which availed themselves

of every stray lodgment of soil. On these
where Pansy stood was a small space
of mossy turf overshadowed by a fine old
oak, large pieces of rock cropped up
through the mossy soil, and at one end of
the little platform the ground became mora
rocky and rose abruptly, the rocks being
in many places covered with masses of the
various kinds of crossbill. Among these
rocks there sparkled a little cascade,
formed of a tiny rivulet fringed with the
bright green mares tail and the dusky
orange water avens; while at the spot
where it joined the main stream was a
perfect forest of the bright golden iris,
contrasting here and there with the pale
purple blossoms of the water-violet.

Some little way from the river-was a
bed of the white butterfly orchis filling the
air with its fragrance, and the whole was
shut in from observation by a high bank
where golden broom and blue vicia cracca,
yellow vetchling, and pink and white-flowered

bramble, grew together in wild
confusion. At some distant time, there
had evidently been a kind of summer-house
at the foot of the longest leap of the little
cascade, and its ruins, overgrown with
honeysuckle, clematis, wild roses, and the
bright green heart-shaped leaves of the
briony, formed a canopy for Pansy's seat,
a large boulder which had evidently been
placed there on purpose, while a thick tuft
of wild thyme shaped like a cushion formed
an excellent footstool. It was here that
Pansy spent much of her time, reading,
drawing, and occasionally, it must be confessed,
succumbing to the slumberous influence
of the heat, the hum of the insects,
and the sound of the river.

The little cascade had hollowed tiny
basins in many of the boulders over which
it leapt, and in the little pools thus formed
it was Pansy's first care to bestow her
flowers, to revive after their imprisonment
in her hand. Then she wandered about

her little domain, watching the warehouses
on the stones in the river, the
dragonflies skimming over the surface,
the rabbits, who were never disturbed,
and had grown quite used to her, finding
that she never hurt them, frisking about
under the trees. Tired at length of this,
she seated herself under her canopy and
read till it was time to eat her luncheon.
Then she had recourse to her flowers,
making them into tasteful bouquets, and
weaving the roses, clematis, and briony
into a wreath wherewith she crowned herself,
contemplating the effect in one of the
tiny pools. She then began to read again,
but the afternoon was hot and perfectly
still, the sound of the river was soothing,
she was slightly tired with her morning's
walk; gradually her eyes closed, the book
slid from her hands on to the grass, her
head fell against the honeysuckle-wreathed
trunk that supported the remains of the former
summer-house, and she fell fast asleep.

How long her slumber lasted she could
not tell, but she woke suddenly with a
start, to find an elderly, 
gentleman gazing at her with an
expression of considerable amusement. As
she started to her feet, scattering a shower
of flowers as she did so, he approached,
and, taking off his wide-awake, said —

"Pray do not let me disturb you. I
was merely strolling about, and was electrified
to find Titania reclining in her
bower."

I often come here — my uncle, Mr.
Deveron, has leave to use the grounds,"
said Pansy ; then, rather annoyed that she
should have been taken unawares, she
added, quickly — "I suppose it was the
heat. I did not know I was asleep !"

Her companion laughed softly.

"You have the unusual grace of candour,
young lady ! There is generally no
accusation that elicits such indignant denial
as that of being asleep in the day-time."

But I was," said Pansjj, looking
puzzled.

'sand therefore you will not deny it?
Again I say you have the unusual grace of
candour."

"Why should I not say what is true?"
said Pansy, looking puzzled ; " there is no
harm in going to sleep."

"Xo, indeed! it would be well if all
could amuse themselves so innocently. It
is a hot, tiring day, too."

Oh ! but it is so lovely," said Pansy,
who loved light and warmth, as was natural
in one accustomed to the bright and sunny
country of the Loire ; "what can be more
beautiful than it is here?"

"It is a pretty spot, certainly' said her
companion, looking round.

"It is more than pretty, I think," said
Pansy ; " but then I come here so often,
and' it grows more beautiful each time.
Perhaps you never saw it before."

"Not for a very long time, and when I

did it was hardly so fascinating ; there was
no Queen Titania."

*' Oh !" cried Pansy, with a sudden start
of remembrance, and putting her hand to
her hair. She had only just recollected
that she wore a crown of flowers instead
of her ordinary head-gear, and wondered
what her new acquaintance could think of
anything so strange.

It never occurred to the girl that it was
strange that he. should talk to her, or that
she was doing anything either wrong or
unusual in answering him. Strangers
had been rare at La Rochecaillou, but now
and again Pansy had encountered tourists
walking through the sunny, vine-clad
country of the silvery Loire, and neither
her mother nor the old Marquise had ever
said a word against the conversations
which the girl reported herself as having
had with them when they asked their way,
or questioned her respecting the objects of
interest in the neighbourhood. It had

never struck Mrs. Deveron to give her
niece any warning about not speaking to
strangers ; if she had thought about the
matter at all, she would have concluded
that Pansy had of course been instructed
in such a matter by her mother, but she
really never thought about it at all, taking
it for granted that the girl knew all that
her own girls did, as to the proprieties and
usages of life. So Pansy was quite unembarrassed
by any questions of etiquette,
but felt rather shy at being found somewhat
in masquerading guise.

That is a pity," said the stranger, as
she quickly disengaged the garland from
her hair; "it was admirably suited to the
place and the wearer —

Quite over-canopied with lush woodbine,
With sweet musk-roses, and with eglantine :
There sleeps Titania.' "

And here is the wild-thyme too," said
Pansy, smiling ; " it is lucky Puck was not

roaming about with his ' love in idleness.


Then you read Shakespeare. I am
glad to hear it: I thought young ladies
read nothing now but fast novels."

'' I do not read many novels'*

"And what do you read? "What book
have you got there ?"

Lamartine," said Pansy, handing it to
him.

He looked at the title-page.

'Tense Claire Jeanne de la Eochecail-
lou. But did you not say you were living
in Arncester with Mr. Deveron?"

*' Yes, he is my uncle ; I have been here
since Mamma died last autumn."

**I had forgotten. I remember now
ha^^ng heard of Deveron's sister's marriage.
I knew her once a little."

Oh, did you?" exclaimed Pansy, looking
up eagerly, '' it is so delightful to find
anyone who knew Mamma."

*^ Our acquaintance, if indeed I may

venture to call it so, was very slight : I
never spoke to her but once, but I admired
her greatly. I had not heard of her death.
Do you remain here long ?"

I am to stay here always," said Pansy,
"' except that in November I am to go to
La Rochecaillou, to see Bonne Maman for
two months ; Mamma wished me to live in
England."

*' Have you brothers and sisters ?"

Only one brother, Leon, he has just
l)een here for a month, but he is a soldier
and he was obliged to go, his leave was
up."

And do you like England, or do you,
like Marie Stuart, sigh for 'le charmant
pays de France ' ?"

*' I try not," said Pansy, doubtfully ;
** indeed I try, because Mamma wished me
to live here, and of course what she wished
must be right ; but it is so different. At
home I knew all the people, and I used to
^0 and talk to them and take them things.

but here my aunt does not like me to go
among the poor people, she thinks I shall
catch fever, but I never did at home."

Country and a town are dissent."

"Yes," said Pansy, with a sigh, "indeed
they are."

'' You miss the country life ?"

"I ought not," said Pansy; "the views
from the windows are beautiful, and I
come out here, or for other country walks,
as much as I please."

But still the life is not the same, I
understand. But surely you are not always
alone? I think Mr. Deveron has
daughters."

Yes, two, but they do not care for the
walks I do, — they think the lanes dull, and
prefer the streets."

"Well, I must be making my way homewards,
the sun is getting low ; and you
have some way to go, — ought you not to
be starting ?"

It is half-past six !" cried Pansy, in

dismay. " Oh ! I shall be so late. I had
no idea it was more than five o'clock."

'' Well, good-bye, I will not detain you,"
said the stranger, as she hastily caught up
her book and hat. " As you say you often
come here, I hope we may chance to meet
again," and, as after a hasty word of adieu
he saw Pansy's slight figure disappear almost
at a run among the trees, he stood
watching till she was quite lost to view,
and then, with a glance round the little
grassy platform, he gave a slight sigh, and
walked away in the opposite direction.

CHAPTER V.

Let still the woman take
An elder than herself ; so wears she to him,
So sways she level in her husband's heart.
For, boy, however we do praise ourselves.
Our fancies are more giddy and infirm,
More longing, wavering, sooner lost and won, •
Than women are.

Twelfth Night. Act 2, Sc. 4.

T)Y ^i^^ 0^ running nearly half the way,
-^-^ despite the heat, Pansy succeeded in
being in time for dinner, punctuality for
which meal was a grave sin in Mr. Severn's
eyes.

*what did you do with yourself this
lovely afternoon. Pansy ?" he asked, when
the dessert was on the table. " I looked
in at Mrs. Bannister's lawn-tennis, but you
were not there."

VOL. II. I

Pansy would not go' said Mrs. Severn,
anxious that her husband should not
think that she had omitted to ask her.
^' She preferred a long walk in the woods."

'rit was so pleasant," said Pansy, looking
at her uncle. " I went to my favourite
seat in the Kelmorton woods by the river."

*' Ah ! I believe the grounds are pretty.
I should think sou had them quite to
yourself."

Always until to-day," said Pansy ; *' but
this afternoon somehow I fell asleep, — I
suppose it was the heat, — and when I
awoke I found an old gentleman looking
at me."

Lucky he wasn't young," said Mrs.
Deveron, " or he might have chosen to win
a pair of gloves."

This speech was incomprehensible to
Pansy, and she did not understand why
her cousins laughed.

"What was he like?" asked Mr. Severn.


''He was old," said Pansy, "that is, I
suppose lie was about fifty, for this hair
and whiskers were grey, though he was
very rosy and happy-looking. He was not
very tall, and rather stout, and was dressed
in dark brown shooting things and knickerbockers
and bright purple stockings. He
had very bright blue eyes and a pleasant
voice."

"What! did he speak to you?" asked
Mrs. Deveron, sharply.

"Yes," said Pansy, quite innocent of
any offence, "he talked a little, and then
he picked up my book and saw my name
and said he knew Mamma once, — very
little, I suppose, for he said he could
hardly venture to call it an acquaintance."

'but really. Pansy," said Mrs. Deveron,
"you should be more careful. Surely you
know that you ought not to talk to
strangers, to people to whom you have
never been introduced ; it is most improper."


i2

Is it ? T am very sorry," said Pansy,
looking puzzled ; *' but at home — I mean
at La Rochecaillou — any strangers there
might be often asked me their way, and
what things there were to go and see, and
neither Mamma nor Bonne Maman ever
told me it was wrong."

France may be different — it won't do
in England," said Mrs. Deveron; remember
that, Pansy, or you'll be getting into
some scrape."

"Nonsense, Matilda," said Mr. Deveron,
impatiently ; " it is not as if the child had
been accosted in the street. From Pansy's
description, I recognise perfectly who the
old man was. It was old James Bush, who
farms the Kelmorton Home Farm. He is
just what Pansy describes, and I don't
wonder at her taking him for a gentleman
he has quite the manners of one. I
guessed who it was even before she mentioned
the bright purple stockings ; he
always wears them. Besides, I quite remember

he saw Clare once at the Yeomanry
Ball, and got introduced to her,
and came to me the next mornings to know
if I would sanction his ' paying her his
addresses.' Clare would not hear of it,
and there the matter ended. Pansy, my
dear, there is no reason sou should not
talk to Bush, if you like, whenever you
meet him."

"Well, of course he is different," said
Mrs. Deveron ; '' but Pansy should be
careful : it will never do for her to talk to
everyone she meets here, whatever it may
do in France."

I heard to-day," said Mr. Deveron,
'' that there was some likelihood of Lord
Kelmore coming down to the Hall for a
month or two. It must be nearly twenty
years since he was here last to stay."

'' He is quite an old man, isn't he, Papa ?"
asked Julia.

Old ! — oh, dear, no — five and forty at
the outside."

Is there a Lady Kelmore ?"

'' K'o, be has never married. He is not
too old to do it now, though, and cut out
his nephew, after all."

Who is the nephew ?"

*' The only child of his onlj^ brother
Ralph Morton. Ralph was in the Guards,
and though he got through the Crimea
without a wound, or even being invalided,
he died four years after, from the
effects of a malady contracted at Varna.
He married, as soon as he came home,
a Miss Wolverton, the daughter of Sir
Digby Wolverton, in Northumberland, and
had one son. His wife only survived him
about three years, and the boy has been
brought up as Lord Kelmore's heir*'

What a disappointment for him if his
uncle marries !"

'eyes, it would be, of course ; but young
Morton is very well off. His father had
an estate in Durham worth about £6,000
a year."

What is he ?"

In the Guards, his father's old regiment."


Does he live with his uncle ?"

'' I really know very little about him,
but I believe he lives in the family house
in Grosvenor Square. Lord Kelmore himself
is very little in London, I believe."

"And he is really coming to Kelmorton.
Will he be there any time ?"

I cannot tell you. I heard it to-day
from Tomlinson, who saw the head-gardener
one day last week, but he had heard
no particulars. I suppose it did not interest
him any more than it does us."

How can you talk like that, George ?"
said his wife, reproachfully. " The idea
of comparing Mr. Tomkinson, who is in no
society at all, with us ! What is to prevent
our meeting Lord Kelmore at Dale-ford
or at the Yernons' ? Besides, surely
you knew him formerly. You must call, of
course, and when he has returned the visit

we can ask him to dinner." And Mrs.
Deveron gave herself np to a moment's
delightful contemplation of the envy that
would be excited in the breasts of many of
her friends if they heard that she had had
Lord Kelmore to dinner.

I shall wait till I meet him, and see if
he remembers me," said her husband. " I
knew him very slightly, and it is twenty
years ago."

Mrs. Deveron said nothing, but she
privately determined that, so soon as Lord
Kelmore's arrival should be certain, her
husband's card should be left at the Hall,
whether by himself or not did not very
greatly matter. The interest in the addition
to the neighbourhood made her
quite oblivious for that evening of Pansy's
crime in allowing herself to enter into
conversation with a stranger. Only five
and forty ! She had looked into the Peerage,
and found that her husband's rough
guess as to age was correct. Of course it

was not quite a youuo^ man — in an inferior
walk of life Mrs. Deveron would have had
no hesitation in pronouncing it old, but
Peers have privileges and immunities not
vouchsafed to the common herd — it was
quite the prime of life, and just the period
when a man was likely to be most susceptible
to the fascinations of a young and
pretty girl. It would be a great chance
for Julia, and, having been awakened to
the fact of her daughter's unfortunate
attachment to Leon, she felt a nervous
anxiety to get her married.

Mrs. Deveron of course knew nothing of
the terms on which the cousins had parted,
and not unnaturally conceived that all
Julia's incoherent muttering about an
elopement referred to a proposal to that
effect on Leon's part. She had never once referred
to what Julia had said in her delirium
since her recovery, but she had watched the
letters very anxiously, and was both puzzled
and surprised to see no trace of a

foreign epistle among her daughter's correspondence.
She wondered more than
once whether Pansy were made a medium
of communication in the way of either
notes or messages, but Julia's very evident
dislike to her, which she took little pains
to conceal, rendered this solution improbable,
and, besides, Leon's letters to his
sister were decidedly few and far between.
So she could only conclude that Julia,
although undoubtedly desperately in love,
had refused to listen to the suggestion of
an elopement, or to engage in a clandestine
correspondence, and decided that the very
best means to put Leon and all the " love-rubbish"
out of her head would be to rouse
her ambition by a hint of the possibility of
her becoming Lady Kelmore.

She was hardly certain how she would
receive the suggestion, for Julia was apt
to call everyone over thirty "old and
frumpish," and might utterly refuse to
attempt to captivate an elderly suitor.

Mrs. Deveron was quite aware that it
would be of no use for her to attempt to
exert her authority in the matter : both
her daughters had very decided wills of
their own, and thought their own opinions
as good as, if not better than, their mother s.
She hoped, however, that by alluding to
Julia's delirious disclosures, and thus rousing
her pride, she might make her see
matters in the right light; if — and this she
confessed to herself was a danger—Julia
did not prefer the idea of the nephew to
that of the uncle. That would never do,
for the uncle might marry and deprive his
nephew of the title, and to see her daughter
a Peeress was a thing that seemed, to Mrs.
Deveron, to be more desirable than anything
else in the world.

Seated in the drawing-room with her
two daughters the next morning, she
turned the conversation on Lord Gilmore.


'' So absurd your father not wanting to

call ! However, I shall take care of that ;
I have always heard he is a most charming
mail, and. doubtless, he will have a
very pleasant house."

He must be rather stupid now he's so
old," said Sophronia.

''Xot at all: that is nonsense," said her
mother, sharply. *' Old and stupid at
five-and-forty I Why, a man is just in his
prime."

He's too old to valse, at any rate,"
said Julia.

"Life can't be all valuing," said Mrs.
Deveron, sententiously ; '' five-and-forty is
a very marring age. A man has sown
his wild oats, and is ready to settle down
satisfactorily. I should say Lord Kelmore
was sure to marry."

'rit won't do us anv o-ood unless we

o

know his wife," said Sophronia.

** That depends upon who his wife maybe,"
said her mother, so mysteriously that
both her daughters looked up inquiringly.

Have you heard anything, Mamma ?"^
asked Julia.

Xo, ray love, nothing ; but I have
been thinking that there is no reason why,
if you play your cards properly, you should
not be the chosen one."

*'0h, I say I" exclaimed Sophronia, "an
old fogey like that ! Besides," looking
rather resentful, " I am the eldest ; I don't
see why everything should be for Julia."

I thought you considered him to be
old enough for your grandfather," said her
mother, smiling; 'besides, really, Soph, I
think it is you who want everything.
Surely Mr. Newcome ought to be enough
for you."

He has said nothing yet," said Sophro-
nia, rather sulkily.

"Well, and after all, we have not even
seen Lord Kelmore yet," said Mrs. Severn
; "but seriously, Julia," she continued,
as Sophronia, looking somewhat sulky,
rose and left the room, "I do really think

you might have a good chance ; he is at the
age to be taken by a young, pretty girl."

"Ho is very old; it would be odiously
dull," said Julia, listlessly.

Dull ! My dear child, only think of
the position — thirty thousand a year, a
fine place here, a finer in Northumberland,
a house in Grosvenor Square, and
one of the oldest titles in England."

Yes, I suppose it is all very grand."

Evidently, Mrs. Deveron thought, if
Julia was to be roused to take some pains
about Lord Kelmore, it must be by some
remark about Leon which might hurt her
pride, so" she said, gravely,

Of course, Julia, I don't know what
passed between you and your cousin, but,
by what you said when you were ill, it was
quite clear sou were very fond of him.
Now I tell you plainly, it is of no use your
being sentimental about him, because nothing
would ever make your father consent.
He dislikes foreigners, he disapproves of

first cousins marrying, and there I quite
agree with him, and he would never hear
of a Roman Catholic."

I know all that."

'' Well, then, 3'ou can't think any more
about Leon. Come, don't go drooping
about as if you were wearing the willow,
pluck up your spirits and show him you
can do far better for yourself than to
marry a poor French Marquis."

Leon is engaged ; he has been so for
years to a Mademoiselle de la Questem-
bert," said Julia. " They are to be married
in two years' time."

Mrs. Deveron was puzzled. If Julia
knew this, what was the meaning of all
she had said in her illness, and of her
depression ever since ?

Well, I was really afraid you had lost
sour heart," she said ; '* I am sure Leon's
name was never off your lips, and you were
always going on about some elopement.
Was it all fancy and fever ?"

Julia turned red and white ; if she had
raved so much, of course Pansy must have
heard, and, judging her cousin's conduct
by what her own would have been, she felt
convinced that it must all have been repeated
as an excellent joke to Leon. She
hated Pansy more than ever, and felt it
would be a hard struggle to be decently
civil to her. But she had no notion of
confessing what she had suffered, or of in
any way taking her mother into her confidence,
though the thought of how sweet it
would be for Leon to hear that she had
made a splendid marriage determined her
not to turn a deaf ear to her advice respecting
Lord Kelmore, which she might
otherwise haVe been inclined to do on
account of his age. Of course, she thought
to herself, she might marry Harry Yernon
at any time, but there would be no eclat
about that, nothing to show Leon that she
had done infinitely better for herself, and
need not in the least regret him.

The idea began to please her ; she felt
that it would mortify him to think that she
had so easily and quickly consoled herself,
and — had " done so much better." She
was very far from understanding Leon's
mercurial temperament, or from realising
that, after for about a day and a half believing
himself to be heart-broken at
leaving her, he had dismissed Arncester
and all its inhabitants from his mind, and
was enjoying the present hour and the
company of a certain Madame de Montreville,
as much as if he had never talked
sentiment to her in the lanes, or believed
himself the victim of a hopeless attachment.
Julia's heart ached as she thought
of him, for she still loved him very dearly,
and the mere thought of any other man
was almost repulsive to her ; but revenge
is sweet, and she firmly believed that by
marrying well and soon she should revenge
herself most desperately upon Leon.
So she answered —

VOL. II. K

Of course, I always knew Papa would
never listen to anything between me and
Leon ; only lie Alas very miserable, and I
suppose that got on my mind when I was
ill ; there's no accounting for what one
says in fevers, you know."

"No, that is true," said Mrs. Deveron,
who was by no means convinced, but knew
better than to insist upon knowing anything
that her daughter might wish to

ID O c?

keep to herself. " Well, Julia, as I was
saying, Lord Kelmore is well worth trying
for, and you'll be a wise girl if you forget
any fancies about his being too old, and do
your best to marry him."

"I'll see about it, but I daresay, after
all, he isn't a marrying man," said Julia,
yawning. "Now, there's the nephew "

All very well if you can't get the
uncle, but young men are far more difficult
; and, besides, his uncle might marry,
and he would never be Lord Kelmore.

No, no — don't drop the substance for the
shadow."

'sit strikes me they are both pretty
shadowy."

"Well, of course, we can't expect anything
till Lord Kelmore comes. We can't
well see him when he's a couple of hundred
miles away. I do wish, Julia, you'd
listen to what I say, and lay it to heart,
instead of carping at everything; it's
enough to drive one wild."

Oh ! well, talking's no good. Was
there anything in Hubert's letter this
morning?"

'' There was one thing I was very thankful
for, the £50 which Pansy helped him
with. I am terribly afraid he's betting
very heavily ; he says he has * won a
cracker ' on the Derby, whatever that may
mean."

"Oh! well, so long as he has won, it's
all right."

K 2

*well, yes, for this Once, but it is sure
to make him do it again, and he may lose ;
and if your father knew, only think how
angry he would be : he has such a horror
of gambling."

*' I wonder he thought only of Pansy ;
he might have paid us too."

'' Ah ! well, I am very glad he thought
of her first."

"Well, I think it's very unfair that she
should get all, and we nothing."

*' My dear, you are really very unjust.
It was a very different thing Pansy's
making such a sacrifice for him from our
doing so : she was not at all called upon."

Oh, well, it's not worth making a fuss
about ; but of course, though it's very easy
to talk about good nature, it was all part
of her scheme for making him fall in love
with her. Don't you remember how she
went on with him at the Yernons' dance ?"

My dear Julia, I don't believe she
thought of anything of the sort."

Well, I don't care ; I only wish she'd
raarry anybody and get out of the house."

Why, I'm sure she's harmless enough."

I can't bear her ; she's a sneaking little
sly thing, and I'm sure she'll do some mischief
some day."

^' But, my dear, it was about you I
wanted to talk, not Pansy. Only think
what a great thing it would be, what a
fine position you would have, as Lady
Kelmore !"

Dear me. Mamma, where is the use of
worrying ? We haven't seen the old man
yet ; he may be a fright, or an old horror,
or a woman-hater, or heaven knows what.
It'll be quite time to tease me about him
when we see what he's like."

I'm sure, Julia," said poor Mrs. Severn,
feeling much aggrieved, "you needn't
be so pettish. I only speak for your good."

'* That's what people always tell you
when they say anything disagreeable," said
Julia, sulkily.

Really, Julia, you are very rude. I
declare I think I had better talk to Soph •
she will be rare sensible."

"Yes, but she isn't such a good card to
play," said Julia, who valued her own looks
very highly ; " besides, she's got her hands
full. Don't be cross, Mammy ; I daresay
it'll all come right, only you are so fond of
counting your chickens before they're even
in the egg,^^

*' Well, my dear," said her mother, easily
appeased, " of course there's no knowing
how things may turn out. All I want of
you is to do your best, and not to go and
make up your mind against him just because
he isn't a young dancing man."

To this Julia made no reply. She was
as fully determined as her mother could
desire to do all that in her lay to become
Lady Kelmore, partly because of the wealth
and the position, but still more for the
sake of, as she hoped, demonstrating to
Leon that she cared nothing for him. If

sbe could have but seen bim basking in
the smiles of pretty Madame de Montreville,
equally oblivious of her and of Ma-demon
de la Questembert, she would have
had some difficulty in believing her eyes.
Mrs. Deveron made some few more remarks,
to which her daughter vouchsafed
no answer, and then left the room, observing
that she must take Pansy the money
which Hubert had sent.

Pansy was very busily at work upon a
large folding screen which she was painting
with views and flowers, and which was
destined to find its way to the large drawing-room
of La Rochecaillou, and shelter the
old Marquise's chair from the draughts of
which she occasionally complained. It
was to have four leaves, with flowers of
the seasons : the winter one was of the
view from the garden beneath Pansy's
window, introducing the Castle and the
windings of the river with the Kelmorton
woods, and had holly and mistletoe, the

latter hanging from the brown branch of
an apple-tree over the holly-bush, beneath
which grew some beautiful Christmas
roses. Spring was also finished, and represented
a wood with the beech-trees
unfolding their tender leaves, and the
larches, fringed with their delicate pink
tassels, while the grass was full of wild
hyacinths and wood anemones, yellow
celandine, and white allium. It was, in
fact, a sketch of the wood, the great
beauty of which, in its spring dress, Pansy
had once pointed out to Arthur, in answer
to the question asked with such infinitely
greater eagerness than the occasion seemed
to warrant.

The leaf on which she was now occupied
was a sketch of her favourite seat by the
river-side, with its wealth of flowers ; but,
at the moment, her brush lay idle, and she
was turning over the leaves of the "Midsummer
Night's Dream," the idea of which
had been suggested to her the day before,

revelling in all the floral description of
which it is so full. She was just thinking
regretfully that Madame de la Eochecail-
lou, though able to speak and understand
English fairly well, would never be able to
appreciate the descriptions which she was
so enjoying, when she was astonished by
her aunt's appearance.

It was very unusual for Mrs. Deveron
to come up to her niece's room, and Pansy
rose, both looking and feeling surprised.

"You did not expect to see me," said
Mrs. Deveron, who was more than a little
out of breath after mounting the stairs,
and subsided on to the sofa; "it is not
often I pay you a visit, but T came to
bring you the £50 you were so kind as
to help me with for Hubert, and many
thanks to you, my dear, for lending it."

'^ T am glad it was of use," said Pansy,
quietly, but colouring crimson as she
recalled all that had passed between
Hubert and herself.

Mrs. Deveron did not understand the
blush, and began to wonder whether Julia
was more sharp-sighted than herself,
whether Pansy had really had any designs
upon her handsome cousin. Well, at any
rate, he was safe at present, and when he
came on detachment to Arncester from
Rockton, which he possibly might do before
long, she was prepared to be Argus-eyed
in her watchfulness.

'' You've made your room very pretty, T
must say," she said, looking round at the
various decorations which Pansy, by the
aid of a little cretonne, muslin, and ribbon,
had arranged.

The girl had the French fancy for a bed
in an alcove, and she had taken advantage
of a small recess to push a portion of the
bed into it, and then, having obtained
leave to have a curved brass rod fastened
to the wall, to encircle it with curtains.
The washing-stand was hidden by a screen
painted with views of La Eochecaillou and

the neighbourhood, and the looking-glass
was enveloped in muslin draperies, while
all toilet accessories where concealed in
drawers. It looked more like a boudoir
than a bed-room, and though the soft
green draperies, enlivened only here and
there by knots of pink ribbon, were rather
too quiet for Mrs. Deveron's somewhat
pronounced taste, even she was constrained
to allow that the whole effect was very
pretty.

'really you paint very prettily," she
said, "and yet you never had masters, I
suppose? You were too young when you
left Paris."

'mamma was very fond of drawing;
she taught me at first," said Pansy, '' and
then afterwards Pere Masson helped me ;
he drew beautifully."

"And where is this place?" said Mrs.
Deveron, surveying the panel of summer
on which Pansy was engaged. " Is it
fancy out of your own head ?"

Oh, no ! that is the place by the river
in the Kelinorton grounds which I am so
fond of. It is there I spent the day yesterday.
I often do."

Ah ! that reminds me. Of course, my
dear, Farmer Bush does not matter, — there
is no harm in your talking to him if you
like, none at all ; but you must remember
it is not correct to talk to those you don't
know."

"I will recollect indeed, Aunt Matilda,"
said Pansy; "but T am glad I may talk to
old Farmer Bush. He seemed such a nice
old man, and I liked him so much."

"Well, child, you have odd tastes and
fancies, I must say. There is the visitor s
bell. I wonder who it is ?" and Mrs. Severn
hastened down to the drawing-room.

Chapter VI.

And either tropic now
'Gan thunder, and both ends of heav'n the clouds
From many a horrid rift abortive pour'd
Fierce rain nth lightning mix'd, water with fire
In ruin reconciled : nor slept the winds
Within their stony caves, but rush'd abroad
From the four hinges of the world, and fell
On the vext wilderness, whose tallest pines,
Though rooted deep as high, and sturdiest oaks
Bow'd their stiff necks, loaded with stormy blasts
Or torn up sheer.

Paradise RerjainecL Book 4.

'"r)AXSY felt that of course she knew
-■- DotliiDg of the peculiarities of English
farmers ; still she could not help thinking
that Mr. Bush was very superior, both
in appearance and manners, to what she
should have expected. She was very glad

that her aunt had granted permission that
she should talk to him, — he had interested
and pleased her greatly. But how different
things were in Euo^land from what she
was used to in France ! Fancy Jacques
Felimart, the largest farmer in the neighbourhood
of La Eochecaillou, who was so
much thought of in the district and respected
in St. Sigolene, knowing and 
Racine as this English farmer had done
Shakespeare ! And as for Jacques having
the slightest idea of any language but his
own, he would have been quite as likely to
discourse eloquently in Sanscrit or Urdu
as to quote an English poem as Mr. Bush
had done Stranger, though his accent certainly
left much to be desired. Felimart
had certainly never heard of Tennyson,
though Mr. Bush seemed perfectly acquainted
with Lamartine. Pansy thought
of what she had occasionally heard her
mother say of the great farmers of England,
who held thousands of acres, and

were nearly as cultivated and as well educated
as the men whose land they farmed.
To this class Mr. Bush evidently belonged,
and as he seemed to have more feeing for
literature than she had yet found in anyone
in Arncester, she felt really rejoiced
that they had met, and that her aunt allowed
that there was no impropriety in her
talking to him.

For two or three days she had no chance
of returning to her favourite seat, for there
were different garden-parties, and her uncle
was so very particular as to her taking her
share in all gaieties, that she could not excuse
herself. At length, however, she was
free for a long day by the river, this time
with her sketch-book and paint-box, to
collect fresh details for her panel. She
felt almost disappointed that the morning
passed away without any sign of her friend,
but then she remembered how often she
had spent hours there without seeing anyone,
and supposed that it was quite an

accident that bad brought Mr. Bush into
that nook, where certainly there was nothing
specially interesting from a farming
point of view. But when, after a steady
morning's work with her brush, she had
eaten her luncheon and settled herself in
her bower with a volume of American
poetry, she suddenly saw the figure in the
brown suit and purple stockings coming
down a glade towards her.

^' Titania again," he said, taking ois his
wide-awake in a manner infinitely less rustic
than might have been expected from Farmer
Bush, '^ but not asleep this time."

"No, I suppose it was the heat that
day," responded Pansy, as he, after a moment's
pause, seated himself on the grass
at her feet, " there is a cooler air
now."

I hardly feel that. It is very sultry,
and there is thunder in the air."

You don't think there will be a storm
soon, do you ?" said Pansy, looking up apprehensively.

'' Ought I to go home? I
am so afraid of thunder."

No, I fancy it will come to-night. I
see you have a sketch-book there. May I
see what you have been doing ?"

'* It is not much. They are only studies
for Bonne Maman's screen," said Pansy ;
and then, as he slowly turned over the
leaves, stopping here, and giving a word
of approval there, he showed by his remarks
such an appreciation of art and
beauty that she straightway forgot that
this was a farmer to whom her aunt considered
it a condescension that she should
speak, and began unconsciously to talk as
if he were an old friend. She showed him
little sketches that had been done at La
Eochecaillou, described the place and her
life there, and, without being herself aware
of it, let it be very clearly seen how
much more her heart was in France than
in Meadowshire.

** Were you late the other day?" asked

VOL. IT. L

her companion, at length. " Scarcely, I
should think, if you kept up the pace at
which you started. You seemed inclined
to emulate Camilla.

Swift Camilla scours the plain,
Flies o'er th' unbending corn, or skims along the main'"

*' It was too hot to run quite all the way,"
said Pansy, smiling, "but I was not very
late. When I told them about meeting
you they could not think at first who you
were, till I mentioned your brilliant purple
stockings, and then Uncle George knew at
once that you were Mr. Bush ; he said you
always wore them."

A comical smile, which she did not in
the least comprehend, passed over her
companion's face, but he said, quietly,

'*I generally do — it is my favourite
colour. Did your uncle say anything
more about me ?"

Yes. When Aunt Matilda said it was
very wrong of me to have talked to a

stranger, he said there could be no possible
harm, and then I said you knew Mamma a
little, and he remembered the Yeomanry
Ball, and "

But here Pansy became confused by the
sudden recollection that her uncle had
spoken of Mr. Bush's wish to approach her
mother as a presumption not to be tolerated,
and stopped, blushing, and feeling
very uncomfortable.

Yes, that Yeomanry Ball, I remember
it well," said her companion. "It was the
only time I ever saw your mother. I left
home soon after, and when I returned she
was married. You are not like her."

''No, so they all say," answered Pansy,
sadly : it was a real grief to her to bear no
likeness whatsoever to the mother whom
she had so adored. "' I am most like Bonne
Maman, Papa s mother."

Ah ! that is the lady whom you are to
visit in the autumn ?"

"Yes, in November: oh, it will be

l2

delightful!" and the girl's eyes sparkled
and her cheeks flushed.

He smiled. '' You are evidently only half
acclimatised yet; you are like a bird of
passage, and look longingly towards the
sunny south''

"It is hardly that," said Pansy, thoughtfully.
"It is that Bonne Maman cares for
the books and things that I care for, and
no one does here."

"I^otyour cousins?"

Oh, no ! Julia only reads novels, and
Sophronia reads clever books that I don't
understand, but she doesn't care for
biography or poetry !"

What book have you to-day ? Ah !"—
as he picked it up, — 'american Poetry !"
and he proceeded to turn over the leaves
lingeringly, reading here and there a few
lines, first from Bryant's " Thanatopsis "
and his *' Forest Hymn," then dwelling on
one or two passages in Longfellow, and in
Halle's " Marco Buzzards," pausing

longer over Lowell's " Vision of Sir
Launfal," and finally reading from beginning
to end Whittier's 'maud Muller."
'* That is too true, indeed," he said, as he
closed the book with a sigh.

For of all sad words of tongue or pen,
The saddest are these, ' It might have been !' ''

»
Yes, indeed !" said Pansy, gently.

She fancied that he was thinking of her

mother, and felt a tender pity for him ; he

seemed so very nice, it appeared to be very

hard that her uncle should not have

allowed him to plead his own cause with

her. The contrast between him and

Jacques Felimart again forcibly struck

Pansy : she noticed that his hands were

white and delicate, and that altogether he

had an air of perfect refinement which

greatly surprised her. Evidently her

mother was quite right in what she

had told her of the difference between

English and French farmers. Her companion

looked up at her with a smile.
"I hope, Queen Titania, you do not give
that unhesitating assent from your own
personal experience ? No ! no ! you are
far too young, and, besides, your face tells
no tales, you have had no history yet,
happily for you. But, while we have been
chatting here, I fear the storm has come
upon us unawares, that was a mutter of
thunder just now, it is quite impossible
that you can go home through it. Don't
be frightened ; come with me and you
shall be in shelter in a few minutes, but
we must lose no time."

Pansy sprang to her feet, looking very
pale ; she was terribly nervous about thunder,
and was already trembling from head
to foot.

Take my arm," said her new friend,
and she was salad to clings to him, as a
vivid flash made her start and shiver.

He led her thrush a dense wood into
which she had never before penetrated.

and which, terrified as she was, made her
recall Spenser's description of a somewhat
similar one.

Loftier trees, clad-with sommer's pride,
Did spread so broad that heaven's light did hide,
Not peaceable with power of any starr."

What was more satisfactory to her at
that moment, they were really so thick as
almost to hide the lightning, which, as the
storm rapidly approached, became momentarily
more and more vivid. As they
reached the edge of the wood, a terrible
flash made her shrink closer to her companion's
side.

Poor child ! shut your eyes," he said,
and, taking her slight form in his arms, he
carried her along at a rapid pace, she only
too glad to veil her eyes from the dreaded
lightning against his shoulder, and never
opening them till she found herself laid
gently down on a sofa. Her guardian at
once walked across to the windows, closed

the shutters, and then proceeded to light a
pair of tall candles on the chimney-piece.

There !" he said, " I cannot prevent
your hearing the thunder, but, at any rate,
here you cannot see the lightning. Lie
still," as she was about to rise ; *' a fit of
terror such as made you tremble so just
now is very exhausting — lie still and resta
little, the storm is already beginning to
pass away."

It is very foolish of me," said Pansy ;
** indeed, 1 try not to give way, but it is
not only that I am so frightened — it seems
as if as soon as the first flash came I was
half paralysed."

Exactly ; it affects your nerves ; it is
not at all uncommon. Don't talk if you
would rather be quiet."

Oh, I am all right now ; and then, you
know, I can't see the lightning," returned
Pansy. " Oh ! what should I have done if
I had been half-way home and had been
caught in this !"

I am very glad you were not."

"Do you know, much as I have wandered
about the place, I never was in that
very thick part of the wood before — I did
not know there was such a short cat from
the river to the Home Farm."

'* You are not at the Home Farm ; it
would have taken much longer to get
there, and there was no time to be lost if
we were not to be wet through and through.
There ! listen to the rain now, it is like a
waterspout."

"Then where am I?"

In the business-room at Kelmorton."

"At Kelmorton! at the Hall!" said
Pansy, in a voice almost of awe. " Oh !
how Aunt Matilda and Julia would like to
be in my place !"

"Would they? why?"

Oh, because they have never seen it,
and they were talking about it the other
day when Uncle George said that Lord
Kelmorton was coming home soon."

They might have seen it if they had
cared. Ever since he has been away it has
been shown two days in the week."

So uncle said, but Aunt Matilda did
not seem to like the idea, and said it would
be levelling herself with the townspeople,
and unless she went there as a guest she
could never go at all."

The storm is over now ; would you
like to see a little of the house before you
go home? But stay, do you think you
feel equal to walking? there is a pony-trap
''

*' Oh ! no, no, thank you very much''
cried Pansy; "indeed I am quite able; I
would rather walk. They would think it
so strange, and perhaps Aunt Matilda
would not like it."

"It shall, of course, be as you like.
Wait for me here one moment, and I will
come and take you to the picture-gallery."

He left the room, and Pansy remained
half seated, half lying, on the sofa, thinking

that out of a fairy-tale nothing before
had ever been so charming and delightful !
To be saved from the dreadful storm by
the nice old farmer, who was so thoughtful,
aud pleasant, and cultivated, and now
to be about to see beautiful pictures and
the house, which, as her aunt was so
anxious to visit it, must, she supposed, be
exceptionally well worth seeing. In all
the months that she had spent at Arn-chester,
Pansy had not yet fathomed that
county people and county society were
what her aunt's soul hungered after, and
that she cared not one jot for their pictures
or other aesthetic properties, excepting indeed
as topics of conversation useful in
proclaiming her acquaintance with their
owners.

After a short interval, Mr. Bush returned,
and they proceeded through one
or two narrow passages into the great
hall, which rose the whole height of the
house, and from which a broad double oak

staircase led up to a richly-carved oak
gallery. Armour, banners, and coats-farms
were artistically arranged, and atone
end was a magnificent picture of dead
game by Sneers. They made but a slight
pause here, and then Mr. Bush threw open
the door of the great saloon. It was a
splendid room, and Pansy gave a cry of
delight. The walls were hung with brocaded
satin of a beautiful golden brown
shade, the panels separated by a kind of
flat pillars of a deep bluish grey, with very
rich and delicate arabesques of gold. The
ceiling and the chimney-piece, which, with
its elaborate canopy, reached to the roof,
were fine specimens of the exquisite carving
of Trifling Gibbons, and fine scrolls
of fruit and flowers stood out in high
relief. The parquet floor was thickly
spread with rich-coloured Persian rugs,
the furniture was of fine French tapestry,
and the three windows, all of them large
bays, were shaded by brocaded curtains of

a beautiful shade of subdued gold. Beautiful
cabinets, rare old china, magnificent
specimens of ivory, including some fine
figures, were everywhere in profusion, and
Pansy felt she could have spent a whole
day in examining them with pleasure.

'* But it looks just as if it were lived
in," she said at length.

*lord Kelmore is expected almost immediately,
and he will probably have
friends to stay with him ; every room is
ready."

It is very beautiful," said Pansy. " Oh !
how glad I am now that the storm came !
But I am afraid I shall never be able to
describe one half of it to Aunt Matilda.
Why, this is unfurnished !" as he opened the
door of a small octagon room. " Oh ! what
a delicious view ! Beautiful as the great
saloon is, I think it is here I would sit
when I was alone."

The view was indeed lovely. The garden
was hardly jet in its full summer

beauty, but the promise was sufficient to
show bow brilliant a few short weeks
would make it. Beyond it was a stretch
of velvet turf, studded with magnificent
oak and Spanish chestnut trees, from beneath
which the deer, terrified by the
storm, were but just venturing to emerge.
Beyond this was the river, the opposite
bank presenting alternately rich woods
and grey rocks veiled with ivy and wild
roses ; while in the far background rose
mountain peaks beyond the softer Yorkshire
hills. The storm had refreshed the
thirsty earth, the grass and trees Vv^ore
their freshest green, the flowers had raised
their drooping heads, the birds twittered
in the branches, and all Nature seemed
thankful and rejoicing.

So this would be your nest, would it ?"
said Mr. Bush. 'rit was the late Lady
Kelmore's boudoir, and, as it wanted refurnishing,
her son took the fancy to leave
it vacant. Perhaps he meant his wife to

furnish it to her taste, but the years have
passed, and now he is a middle-aged man,
and has never brought home a bride.
Suppose it were yours, what would you do
with it ?"

It should be all a soft dove grey," said
Pansy ; '' there is so much colour outside,
it would want little here. There should
be comfortable lounges in every corner ;
here in the centre of this wall should bethe
book-case with all my favourite books ;
there in that corner should be the piano,
and here my easel ; and then flowers —
there should be flowers, chiefly roses,
everywhere."

"It is time you should see the gallery,"
and he led her into the long oak gallery,
with its splendid wealth of pictures — its
Rubens and Rembrandt, its Cups,
Teniers, and Euysdaels, to say nothing of
the family portraits, the Holbein, Van-decks,
and Lely, the Gainsborough, Sir
Joshua, and Omnes. Pansy could have

spent hours there feasting on the pictures
and also in admiration of the splendid
painted old Italian coffers, which were,
her companion told her, filled with rare
old dresses of various epochs. But time
was passing swiftly; she was hurried on,
and felt a sort of bewildered sense of
having passed through a world of treasures
without really seeing any.

"I think this is really something like
you," said her companion, pausing before
a picture at the farther end of the gallery ;
and, looking up. Pansy saw a lovely girl
in the powder, hoop, and brocades of the
Georgian era.

I can't be a judge of my own likeness,"
she said, smiling, but she looked and looked
again, and thought that, if indeed there
were a resemblance, her own face must be
fairer than she supposed it to be. " Who
is it?"

'* A Lady Kelmore, the great-grandmother
of the present lord. Poor thing,

hers was an iinbappj fate ! Heaven grant
yours may be a fairer one !"

** What happened to her ?"

She loved a man who worshipped her,
but he was a Jacobite, and was out in '45
with Prince Charles. She came of an old
Northumberland family, who were loyally
attached to the House of Hanover, and her
father would not listen to her tears and
prayers, but married her, whether she
would or not, to Lord Kelmore's eldest
son.

"Poor thing!"

** But that is not all. Just after her son
was born, when they were at Hartfell, the
other place in Northumberland, her former
lover came to her and begged for shelter.
She was alone at the time, her father-in-law
and husband being out hunting, and
she never thought of refusing. But that
night he was traced to Hartfell, and the
old lord had the house searched, and gave
him up — he was shot trying to escape.

VOL. II. M

'' And she ?"

^* Poor thing ! she went mad, and died
two years after."

I don't wonder, poor thing !" said
Pansy, turning to look at the portrait
again with deeper interest.

'' I am afraid, if you are to walk home,
we must be going now," said her companion.
" Doubtless, when his Lordship
comes, you will often be here, and can look
at all the pictures at your leisure."

How I should like it ! It would take
weeks to see them properly," said Pansy,
lingering and looking longingly down the
long gallery ; " but I am afraid I shall not
see it. I don't know why, but uncle and
aunt don't know what they call the ' county
people.' She wishes so that they did."

Mr. Bush said nothing; as he conducted
her back to the business-room, where, in
their absence, tea and bread and butter
had been provided for them.

How delightful !" cried Pansy. " And

I declare these are — strawberries! But"
and she looked puzzled — " it is too early
for the garden."

"Yes, but it is of no use their being
wasted in the hothouse, in two or three
days' time they would be uneatable, and
what good would that do anyone ?"

They are delicious," said Pansy, tasting
them with a sort of a^e. " There is no
fruit I like so well."

"And you have quite finished? "Well,
then, I can show you a short cub into the
path, that Avill take you home much quicker
than if you went back to Titania's bower."

As they emerged into the garden the
beneficent effects of the storm were apparent
on every side. The thirsty earth
sent forth a scent which was its incense of
thanksgiving, the plants and flowers, revived
by the thorough drenching, held up
their heads in renewed beauty, while the
birds sang their hymn of praise from every
bough. Crossing one corner of the garden,

M 2

and threading their way through some intricate
paths in the shrubbery, they soon
found themselves in the field full of
archives, which Pansy always had to cross
before reaching her favourite seat, and
very speedily reached the stile which led
into the high road.

"Good-bye," said Pansy, putting out her
hand as her companion took leave of her,
^' Thank you so very much. I can't tell you
how much I have enjoyed my afternoon !"

"In spite of your terror at the storm?"
with a smile.

Oh, yes ! and indeed it was the storm
that gave me the pleasure of seeing the
house and those lovely pictures. Goodbye
and thank you again. I must make
haste now."

He stood by the stile a few minutes
watching her light figure as she tripped
swiftly down the road. Just as he was
turning away, as she passed out of sight,
a barouche passed him containing three

ladies who favoured him with a prolonged
stare.

I declare I believe that must be
Pansy's old Farmer Bush !" cried Sophro-
nia. 'didn't you see his purple stockings
?

Very likely ; he looked a common sort
of a man," said Mrs. Deveron, with a
yawn. " How lucky it was we were at
Daleford when that storm came on ! It
gave you a long afternoon, and without
Pansy, too — quite a chance to get intimate.
How did you get on ?"

Laurence, the eldest, is very dull,"
said Julia ; " he asked me about books and
all sorts of stupid things, my opinion of
articles in magazines, and about art, and
all that. Ernest is some fun ; he began
to teach me billiards."

"Why, I thought Harry Vernon had
done that Ions: ao:o ?"

'' How stupid you are, Soph ! Of
course, unless you are a real good player,

it's much better to say you know nothing ;
there's nothing a man likes so much as
teaching you. I knew quite as well how
to make a bridge as he did, but I let him
put my hand in position over and over
again ; it pleased him and didn't hurt me."

'' I don't care about the girls," said
Sophronia ; " they don't seem to go in for
anything profound ; their reading is very
superficial"

Why, there is Pansy !" exclaimed Mrs.
Deveron. "Stop, James. Pansy, you had
better get in. Where in the world were
you in that storm ? Are you drenched ?"

"No, indeed I was quite in a fairy-tale,"
said Pansy ; *' that kind Mr. Bush was
with me, and, when he found I was frightened,
he took me into a very thick bit of
the wood, and then, when the rain began,
carried me to the house and shut the
shutters."

"The house? — the Home Farm, you
mean t

"No, to the Hall itself, and then he
asked me, when the storm was over, if I
would like to see the house, and we went
into the saloon, which looked just as if
some one were living there, and he said it
was because Lord Kelmore was expected
in a day or two, and would have the house
full; and then he showed me the picture-gallery,
and we had tea in the business-room,
and beautiful hothouse strawberries,
and then he showed me a short cut to the
path by the river."

Well, I'm sure !" exclaimed Mrs. Severn,
angry, she scarcely knew why :
'' Your friend the farmer doesn't seem to
stand upon ceremony ! Now remember,
Pansy, you are never to breathe a syllable
of having been at Kelmorton like this.
When we know Lord Kelmore, which weare
to do, it would never do for him to
know that one of the family had been
wandering about his house with a farmer
who evidently doesn't know his place.

Did you see many of the servants ?"

jSTo, not one."

That is a comfort. Remember, then,
not to say a word about Kelmorton, and,
really, I think the less you encourage that
forward old Bush bhe better."

CHAPTER VII.

Ambition is at distance
A goodly prospect, tempting to the view ;
The height delights us, and the mountain-top
Looks beautiful, because 'tis nigh to heaven :
But we ne'er think how sandy's the foundation,
What storms will batter, and what tempests shake it.

Otway.

XN spite of her solemn injunctions to her
-■- niece to say nothing of having been
taken over Kelmorton by Mr. Bush, Mrs.
Deveron showed herself by no means deficient
in curiosity as to what she had seen.
Pansy was questioned and cross-questioned,
till not a thing on which her eyes had
rested remained described; Mrs. Deveron
evidently thought her very stupid for not
having discovered who was coming to stay',

and if there were to be any gaieties, garden-parties,
or anything of that description.

'' You might have remembered how interesting
it would be to us," she observed,
when her niece confessed that she had never
once thought of asking ; " but that is always
the worst of you, Pansy, you are always
thinking of yourself, and never of others."

Now that Hubert had paid his debt to
Pansy, his mother felt far more at liberty
to find fault with her tian she had done
for a long time. Pansy never answered ;
she had lone a^o discovered that even the
gentlest replies seemed to irritate her aunt
and cousins, and that silence was far more
soothing than the soft answer which is proverbially
supposed to turn away wrath.

"j^ow if it had been Julia," continued
Mrs. Deveron, " she, I'll be bound, would
have known all the names of all the staying
company, and how many there were to
be to dinner each night. It's a pity you're

SO selfish, Pansy ; you could have found it
all out as easy as possible, and you seem to
have done nothing but stare at a pack of
stupid pictures !"

"They were so very beautiful," said
Pansy, liunibly.

*' Oh ! it's no use talking to Pansy," said
Julia, crossly, "she's like those stupid
Denial girls, who chatter about art and
fancy they know better than anyone else.
As if they'd dress like such guys if they did !
I declare Xora didn't seem to know to-day
that loungers were coming in again !"

"Don't get into the way of calling them
stupid, Julia," said her mother, in a warning
tone; "it'll be sure to get round to
them, and you know going to Daleford is a
great thing for us."

Oh ! I forgot Pansy might tell tales,"
said Julia, rudely; "well, I'm sure she may
for all I care. Daleford is dull, and I don't
care if I never go there again."

You don't think I should repeat what
you say, Julia ?" said Pansy, in a surprised
and grieved tone.

'' Oh, I don't know, I'm sure ! As likely
as not, I should say."

*' But indeed, no," said Pansy, earnestly,
"never think I would do such a thing;
indeed, Aunt Matilda, I would not."

No, no, my dear, I am sure you would
not," said Mrs. Deveron. 'julia seems to
have got the little black dog on her shoulder
this evening, I suppose she is upset with
the thunder. And you did not hear for
certain when Lord Kelmore was coming?"

No, I am so sorry, I did not know you
cared, x\unt Matilda. I could have asked
quite easily, but I did not know you knew
him."

"Neither do we, Pansy, my dear," said her
uncle, who had just come in ; " that is to say,
I knew him a little many years ago, but
your aunt never did. I am very glad you
did not ask questions about what did not in

the least concern you or us. There was
not the least harm in Bush's taking you over
the house, though I am rather surprised he
had the authority to do it. He must be on
good terms with the housekeeper."

We saw him as we drove home, a vult
old creature ; I wonder Pansy
likes to talk to him," said Sophronia.

'' He is not vulgar at all — I did not think
he looked so," said Pansy. " Indeed'
addressing her uncle, " I suppose it is
because I know nothing of your English
farmers, but he surprised me so much. He
quoted Shakespeare, and, though his accent
was very bad, he seemed quite at home in
Lamartine. Then to-day he took up my
book of American poets, and read out what
he said where some of his favourite pieces ;
he seemed to know them all."

John Bush ! you surprise me ! I
suppose there can be no mistake — it must
be he?"

Oh, yes ! I called him by his name."

"Ah! well, ray business with him has
always been eminently prosaic, he was
hardly likely to quote poetry to me. But
French does astonish me !"

-' His daughter was sent to one of those
trumpery boarding-schools in Rockton," said
]*vlrs. Deveron ; "I daresay he picked it up
from her."

Pansy's experiences of Kelmorton were
required from her again and again during
the next few days ; it really seemed as if
her aunt were bent on knowing the exact
position of each chair, table, and sofa in the
saloon. Of the pictures she did not care to
hear, excepting indeed of the portrait of the
unfortunate Lady Kelmore : that had a spice
of personal history and gossip, and was
therefore acceptable. Pansy for the next
few days was busily occupied in working
into her screen the studies she had made the
day of the storm, and also in trying to reproduce
from memory the view from the
unfurnished boudoir. She thought, if she

could only do it sufficiently well, it would,
with the appropriate colouring, form a
beautiful autumnal panel for her screen.
Perhaps Lord Kelraore would not stay very
long, and she might persuade her. kind ■\rr.
Bush to let her have another peep from the
windows of the octagon room.

More frequently than not, Mr. Deveron
did not make his appearance at luncheon ;
he said it interrupted him in the middle of
his work, and spoilt his dinner. Now that
Arthur was absent the four ladies generally
had their meal alone. A little less than a
week, however, after the day of the thunderstorm,
Mr. Deveron came in just before the
luncheon-bell rang, and, opening the 
door, said —

"Matilda, here is Lord Kelmore."
Delight and annoyance struggled for the
mastery in Mrs. Deveron's mind. It was
charming that he should come ; but she was
painfully conscious that her luncheon was
less elaborate than usual. Then she had

not changed her dress before luncheon, and
was distressed at being discovered by such a
visitor not en grande tenue ; and, what was
worse than all, Julia had a slight headache,
and was looking far from her best. Still it
was a very great delight that he should
come in this intimate way, and should break
bread in her house, which must surely
necessitate his asking her to his. So she
put aside her annoyances and welcomed
him most graciously, feeling already a glow
of delight at the envy which such a visit
would excite among her friends.

*' It is quite an event, your coming into
the neighbourhood, Lord Kelmore," she
began; "I am afraid to say how many
years it is since I remember Kelmorton inhabited."


Yes, I fear I have been a terrible absentee,"
said Lord Kelmore, smiling; "but
I got so used to Hartfell that somehow it
seemed impossible to tear myself away; I
had forgotten how pretty Kelmorton was."

Oh, it is lovely, and it is so good of you
to allow people to enjoy your beautiful
grounds."

I am glad they give you pleasure."

** Oh ! I am but a poor walker, but I
enjoy driving through, and the girls are
generally so occupied with their friends and
their pursuits ; but Mr. Deveron's niece, who
lives with us, Mademoiselle de la Roche-caille
(his sister married the Marquis de la
Rochecaillou, aide-de-camp, you know, to
the poor dear Emperor, a great favourite,
and severely wounded at Magenta), goes to
the river a great deal. Ah ! here she is !"
as Pansy entered the room.

How do you do, Mr. Bush ?" said Pansy,
quietly, though her astonishment at finding
him established in her aunt's drawing-room
was excessive ; " I have told my aunt how
kind you were in giving me shelter from
the storm and showing me Kelmorton the
other day."

*' Mr. Bush ! Pansy, what are you think-vol.

II. N

ing of?" cried Mrs. Deveron, ti dismay —
*' don't you know this is Lord Kelmore ?"

Lord Kelmore !" exclaimed Pansy, blushing
with surprise. " Then it was all a mistake,
but it was equally kind of you. Ah !"
she continued, looking up half laughing,
*' then I need not have been so surprised at
your quoting Shakespeare."

'^ I confess'' said Lord Kelmore, smiling,
^' I don't fancy my worthy friend John Bush
has any intimate acquaintance with Titania.
But I owe you an apology, Mademoiselle
de la Rochecaillou, for having allowed you
to remain under an error. I acknowledge
it was unjustifiable, but I was afraid, if I
revealed myself, it might disturb our comfortable
relations. Will you forgive me ?"

"There is nothing to forgive," said Pansy,
putting her hand into the one held out to
her; 'sit is I who should apologise for being
so unceremonious."

I sincerely trust you will never be less
so. I have a very pleasant recollection of

the seat by the river. But do gratify my
curiosity in one respect. Why were you so
convinced that I was John Bush ?"

**' Because " and then, seeing her aunt

frowning and making signs to her, she
stopped, and, before his wife could interpose,
her uncle came to her aid.

It all hinged on your violet stockings,"
he said, laughing. " Pansy described your
first interview, and though I was considerably
surprised to hear of Bush quoting
poetry, or wasting an afternoon by the
river, we could think of no one else answering
to the description she gave, more especially
as he invariably wears bright purple
stockings."

•' I remember, so he does," said Lord
Kelmore, laughing heartily. " I wonder,
Mademoiselle, you recognized me without
them to-day."

I did miss them' said Pansy.

Such talk seemed to Mrs. Deveron foolish
and injudicious. Lord Kelmore might choose

n2

to laugh it off, but he must of course be
desperately annoyed and offended at being
mistaken for one of his own farmers, and it
was too tiresome of Mr. Deveron to harp
upon it. There was one comfort, the blunder
had been made by Pansy, who might
perhaps be excused on the score of her
small acquaintance with England, and not
by one of her own daughters.

*' You must not feel too much offended
by my niece's mistake. Lord Kelmore," she
hastened to say. " I am sure she is sincerely
distressed, as we all must be, at such
a mistake having been made. Her excuse
must be that she has been but a very short
time in England, and, of course, is not able
to discriminate as others might do."

*^ My dear Mrs. Deveron, pray don't
apologise ; it was the most natural mistake
in the world, and anything that made me
acquainted with your niece is to be rejoiced
at. Mademoiselle de la Kochecaillou, I told
you the other day I had known your

mother slightly, but I did not tell you

that I knew your father well before he
*/

married."

'papa! — oh, I am so glad!" cried Pansy,
flushing with pleasure.

''Do you mean to stay long at Kelmor-
ton ?" asked Mrs. Deveron, who thought
there had been quite enough reference to
Pansy. Of course, it was very good-natured
of Lord Keluiore to make so light of it, but
it was nonsense to try to persuade her he
was not annoyed all the same.

Well, I hardly know. Three or four
months certainly, perhaps all the winter.
I have been so long an absentee, I have
terrible arrears of hospitality to make up.
I mean to begin next week with a garden-party
; I shall hope to see you and Mr.
Deveron and the three young ladies. I
have not sent out the invitations yet, but
yours will arrive in due course."

"I am sure we shall be delighted."

I am expecting my sister, Mrs. Sara-bourne,

tomorrow. She has promised todo
the honours for me."

This intelligence did not particularly
please Mrs. Deveron ; she would infinitely
have preferred that Lord Kelraore should
have had no female relative with him. A
woman would be so lynx-eyed, and would
be sure at once to fathom her designs respecting
Julia. But it could not be helped,
and so she resolved to bear it with the best
grace she could.

'' And your nephew — do you expect
him ?" she inquired.

No ; I am sorry to say at present he
cannot get leave, and soon there will be the
Autumn Manoeuvres, which will of course
detain him. I hope, however, he will be
here before the end of the autumn "

Luncheon was at this moment announced,
and Mrs. Deveron was somewhat consoled
for its being less elaborate than usual by
seeing Julia sitting next to Lord Kelmore,
and — having apparently forgotten her headache

— looking quite her best, and chatting
away as merrily as possible. He seemed
fully to enter into the conversation, and, as
Mrs. Deveron's attentive ear caught one or
two graceful, old-fashioned compliments,
she hugged herself with delight at the
thought that all was arranging itself according
to her fondest hopes. They Averse the
first persons asked to the garden-party, Lord
Kelraore had paid his first visit to them, and
was lunching with them just as if they were
quite old and intimate friends. Could anything
possibly be more in accordance with
her wishes ? Already Mrs. Deveron began
to fancy herself talking of " My daughter.
Lady Kelmore," and to settle which of her
Arncester acquaintances she must, under such
circumstances, erase from her visiting list.

Lord Kelmore appeared to be in no haste
to take his departure, but lingered in the
garden talking to the girls for a considerable
time after luncheon. He seemed quite surprised
to find Meadowshire so pretty, but

he had not very much opportunity for talking,
for Julia, greatly elated by his visit,
took possession of the conversation, and proceeded
to make herself, as she conceived,
most fascinating. Her mother's observation
that "a pretty, young, bright girl was most
likely to take an old man's fancy," had sunk
deeply into her mind, and she chattered,
and giggled, and looked up at him under
her long eyelashes, in a way which she conceived
it would be impossible for him to
resist. If she could only have known it,
every fresh exercise of such fascinations
roused in his mind a feeling of wonder how
so under-bred a girl could by possibility be
cousin to the refined, dignified Pansy, who
looked so like a little princess, and had such
perfect manners ; though, as she had told
him, she had never seen anything of the
world.

While they were lounsrinsj about the
garden, Mrs. Deverou, who was overflowing
with pride and delight, was gratified by

calls from two of her acquaintances, to
whom, with assumed indifference, she pointed
out Lord Kelmore walking by Julia's
side, and referred incidentally to the garden-party
to which they were invited, rejoicing
unspeakably in the amount of envy she was
exciting.

There's some talk," said Mrs. Tomkinson,
one of her visitors, " of the nephew, young
Mr. Morton, standing for Arncester at the
next election. I daresay that's what has
made Lord Kelmore remember there is such
a place. I'm sure he's forgotten it long
enough."

'but there's no election coming on at
present."

Well, I don't know. They do say Mr.
Venables is very ill, and means to resign.
Mark my words, it's that has brought his
Lordship down to see how the land lies.
He mayn't have it all his own way, for all he
does own Kelraorton."

"Why? how do you mean?" asked Mrs.

Deveron, but Mrs. Tomkinson pursed up
her lips, looked mysterious, and declined to
say any more, excepting that the Morton
politics were Conservative, and that Lord
Kelmore might discover that Arncester
people were not disposed to be so retrograde
(she placed the accent, by the way,
very strongly upon the g !) as himself. In
the absence of matters of stronger interest,
Mrs. Deveron might have grown excited
over such information, but at present she
was far too much occupied in watching
Julia pinning a rosebud into Lord Kelp
ore's button-hole, and drawing flattering
auguries from so auspicious a commencement.

When Lord Kelmore at length took his
leave, and Pansy had retired to her own
room, Mrs. Deveron and her daughters
were left together.

"Well, Julia," said her mother, "I think
you have begun well."

Julia pouted.

"After all, it's very hard work; he's

old and stiff, — not a bit of fun in him."

"He talks like Sir Charles Grandison,"
said Sophronia, who knew little of that
famous work other than what she had
gleaned from literary encyclopedias.

"He has the manners of the old school,"
said Mrs. Deveron. " It's rather stiff, of
course, but you must put up with that.
And, whatever you do, Julia, don't let him
hear you talk slang, or call men by their
Christian names. Of course it'll be rather
troublesome to remember, but such a prize
is worth a little trouble."

"I wish his nephew were coming down"'
said Julia.

I am sure I'm thankful he's not," said
her mother. 'you'd go neglecting the substance
for the shadow, and spoiling all your
chances."

He talks of giving a ball," said Sophro-
nia. " And of course he must ask us. As
soon as we have made acquaintance with
Mrs. Sambourne, we must ask them to dinner.

It is a great thing having been asked
to the garden-party before anyone else. I
do think now we shall really get into the
county set, and it'll make it so much nicer
when Hubert is quartered here. He was
always so vexed at our only knowing the
town people."

Well, Soph," said her father that evening,
"what do you say now to Pansy's
friend ? Do you still wonder how she
could like to talk to such a vulo^ar-lookinfjj
old man ?"

There was no answer, — no one approved
of the reminiscence.

''He seems quite fascinated with you,
Pansy," continued Mr. Deveron, blissfully
unconscious of the wrath he was arousing.
"Let me congratulate you on your conquest."


'* Mr. Deveron," said his wife, angrily,
*'I wonder you are not ashamed of putting
such nonsense into the girl's head."

"Eh? what?" said Mr. Deveron, divining

from her tone that something was wrong.
** Why, what harm have I done? I assure
you he was quite enthusiastic."

'* Pansy thinks a great deal too much of
herself and her intellect already," said Mrs.
Deveron, " without your trying to turn her
head."

"Do you know, Pansy," said her uncle,
*' I thought you were a quiet little mouse,
busy with your books and drawing. Lord
Kelmore seemed much interested in your
sketches."

"He was very good-natured, and said
they were pretty," answered Pansy. "I
told him they were for a screen I am doing
for Bonne Maman."

The reason of her aunt's unusual crossness
was quite unintelligible to Pansy, so she
accepted it meekly as one of the many things
which she did not understand, and went
quietly on her way. It was this way of
seeming never to comprehend why she was
annoyed that made Mrs. Deveron firmly

believe that Pansy was sly and artful. The
reason of her vexation was so obvious to
her that she could not believe that her niece,
perfectly unconscious of any cause of offence,
was absolutely unaware of what it was that
had displeased her. But she said no more ;
it would never do, by making too much of
what Mr. Deveron had said, to let Pansy
imagine that she had made any impression
on Lord Kelraore. If she could but have
seen her niece's mind, and realised how
little Pansy understood of all that was
meant by what she saw and heard, her
astonishment would have been intense.
Pansy's mind was still far more pure and
childlike than her cousins' had been at ten
years old. She had never been introduced
to juvenile parties, and inspired in her babyhood
with the precocious envies and vanities
of maturity, nor had love been a perpetual
theme of conversation, a subject of
joking and insinuation, as it had been from
their tenderest years to Sophronia and

Julia. When love had been spoken of at
all, it had been with due reverence as a
holy and sublime passion ; there had never
been any of the jesting about lovers which
serves to render the idea so common and
vulgar. Madame de la Rochecaillou was
far too refined a woman ever to have tolerated
such conversation, and her mother-in-law
was far too much a grande dame de
Ancien regime to have endured anything
that would have seemed to her so decidedly
mauvais ton. So the idea of love had never
been vulgarised to her as it had of necessity
been to her cousins. When she thought of
it at all, which was indeed but very seldom,
it was with a certain awe as a solemn mystery
to be dreamt of reverently, not as a
joke to be giggled at.

But the difference between Pansy and
her own daughters was one far beyond Mrs.
Deveron's comprehension ; she had a sort of
general belief that all girls were alike, and
it would have been almost impossible to

persuade her that Pansy positively disliked
being joked about any attention paid her,
and dreaded nothing so much as attractions:
notice in any way. It even hurt Pansy's
sense of delicacy to hear the way in which
her aunt and cousins discussed the gentlemen
of their acquaintance, and though little
inclined to be censorious, and always willing
to imagine that things struck her unfavourably
only because they were different from
what she was accustomed to, she could not
help feeling that these conversations were
such as her mother would greatly have disapproved.


For the next few days Mrs. Deveron was
in a fever of expectation and of uncertainty
whether it was not her duty to call first
upon Mrs. Sambourne. If it had not been
for her husband, she would certainly have
done so, on the plea that that lady was
quite a stranger in the county ; but Mr.
Deveron was very determined.

Perhaps I don't know much about etiquette,

Matilda," he said, as she tried to
persuade him that it was her absolute duty
to call first at Kelmorton ; *' but on this
point I am quite clear. Neither you nor
anyone belonging to me shall do anything
that can be considered pushing if I can help
it, and you will wait to call on Mrs. Sam-bourne
till she has called upon you. It is
not at all as if we were county people, and
you had known her formerly. My former
acquaintance with Lord Kelmore was entirely
a business one, and, though he renewed
it socially the other day, it by no
means follows that his sister may care to
know us. As for the garden-party, of
course you can leave cards after that, but I
can tell you it is no distinction, as you seem
to imagine ; everyone in the town has been
asked. I believe there is some idea that
old Venables is going to apply for the Chiltern
Hundreds, and that young Everard
Morton is to stand, so it is probably electioneering
that brings Lord Kelmore to

VOL. II. O

Meadowshire, and you must remember that
all civility has an object."

"Mrs. Tomkinson said something about it
the other day, and that Mr. Morton oughtn't
have it all his own way."

*' Well, there's some idea of Tomkinson
himself standing."

"Tomkinson!" exclaimed Mrs. Deveron,
in horror. " What, a horrid Radical grocer
stand against Lord Kelmore's nephew ! Impossible
!"

Her husband laughed.

"I'm not at all sure Tomkinson wouldn't
have the best chance of the two. He's well
known, and Mr. Morton has never been
even seen. But, Matilda, don't pretend to
look down on the Tomlinson, or any nonsense
of that sort ; they're quite as good as
we are, and what difference does it make
that I deal in money and he deals — or
rather dealt, for, as you know, he retired
six years ago — in figs? The principle is
the same, so don't talk nonsense."

Poor Mrs. Deveron ! She who was ambitious,
who considered herself so superior
to the townsfolk, who already saw herself
the mother of a peeress, and universally
received in the county set, to be told she
was no whit superior to the wife of a retired
grocer, the first of her acquaintances whom
she had mentally resolved to drop ! Mr.
Deveron could hardly have inflicted a more
bitter blow, but consolation was at hand.
The butler opened the study door and
announced that "Lord Kelmore and Mrs.
Sambourne were in the drawing-room."

o2

CHAPTER VIII.

An old, a grave, discreet man is fittest to discourse
of love matters ; because he hath likely more experience,
observed more, hath a more staid judgment, can
better discern, resolve, discuss, advise, give better
cautions and more solid precepts, better inform his
auditors in such a subject, and, by reason of his riper
years, sooner divert.

Burton.

II /TRS. Tambourine was five years
-^^^ older than her brother, and was a
tall, slender person, with fair hair slightly
faded and tinged with grey, a marble complexion,
dark eyes, and a peculiarly soft
voice. Sonne persons found this voice somewhat
aggravating, as she had a way of
rather drawling her words, which occasionally
inclined energetic persons to shake her,

or to take some equally pronounced measures
for showing their irritation. She had
married at twenty Mr. Sambourne, a gentleman
with a very fine estate in Warwickshire ;
but, as she had no children, the estate, on
his death some ten years before the commencement
of this history, passed to a distant
cousin, and she was left, a well-endowed
widow, to settle where she chose. Lord
Kelmore had at once begged her to make
her home with him, but she had, with
many thanks, declined his offer. She was
an eminently sensible woman, and quite
realized that, to have a lady to take charge
of his house and receive his friends, would
quite put an end to any chance of his
marrying, which she considered it most
desirable that he should do. Their nephew,
Everard Morton, the heir presumptive, was
exceedingly well provided for, having an
estate worth about six thousand a year, and
she thought it an extreme pity that her
brother, who was so very amiable, and so

well suited to enjoy the pleasures of domestic
life, should remain single, as she vas
certain he would do if she made her home
with him. It must be acknowledged that
her views of duty and pleasure agreed most
admirably.

For the twenty years of her married life
Mr. Sambourne had insisted on living entirely
in the country, grudging his wife the
relaxation of even a month in London ; and
it was not wonderful that being an intelligent
woman, and one fond of, and calculated
to shine in, society, she felt inclined to
vow that she would never again set foot out
of the Metropolis. Even now, when for
two years she had been mistress of her own
actions, and had spent almost the whole
time in her pleasant house in Eaton Square,
she could not look back without a shudder
to the dismal summers, and still more dreary
winters, that she had passed at Walsingham
with no topics of conversation but hounds,
horses, turnips, shooting, and trout. Even

though she knew that life could never be
so intolerable at Hartfell, for her brother
was a sociable man, and addicted to literary
pursuits such as were sympathetic to her,
she felt that the life would now be most
distasteful to her. So she undertook the
part of hostess for her brother in London,
or when he had any party at Hartfell at
which he specially wished her to be present,
but at other times she led her own life, with
a completeness only possible in the absolute
freedom of London.

Her house was always open to her nephew,
Everard Morton, and, though he actually
lived at his uncle's house in Grosvenor
Square, he spent a good deal of time with
his aunt. She was absolutely devoted to
him, as was he to her, but she always endeavoured
to prevent his regarding himself
as the heir, maintaining that his uncle was
certain to marry. She had taken vast pains
to render her nephew more intellectual than
the majority of the young men of his own

age, and her efforts had been crowned with
success, for Everard Morton did not consider
it his duty to despise either books or
those who read them, took a really intelligent
interest in the topics and politics of the
day, and, though exceedingly fond of all
field sports, found it perfectly possible to
talk of other things.

When first Lord Kelmore wrote to tell
his sister of the possible vacancy for Arn-chester,
and to ask her to come down and do
the honours for him in Everard's interest,
she accepted with infinite reluctance. She
had never been at Kelmorton since her
marriage, and the thought of it at once
brought back all the girlish dreams in which
she had then indulged, with the recollection
of how soon all her hopes of their realization
had been quenched by the stolid self-satisfaction
of her husband. Mr. Sarabourne
had honestly believed that he, and everything
that was his, was absolutely perfect ;
and to all his wife's desire for society, and

for some change, in the monotony of her
existence, he persistently turned a deaf ear.
Had she not married him ? — and did she not
live at Walsingham? What more could a
reasonable woman require ?

But she would not let her own feelings
stand in the way of Everard's interests. If
there were canvassing to be done, and
constituents to be conciliated, a lady's help
would, she knew, be invaluable ; and she
accepted her brother's invitation at once,
though without pledging herself as to the
time she would remain in Meadowshire. It
was a pity that Everard could not comedown
himself, but there was some time yQ%,
Mr. Venables had not yet resigned, and,
after all, it would perhaps be just as well
that she should have all the carte du pays at
her fingers' ends before her nephew appeared
upon the scene, and thus prevent his
making any mistakes from want of the requisite
information.

The three days which she had spent at

Kelmorton had enabled her to conquer all
her painful reminiscences, and she was now
quite ready to begin the business for which
she had been summoned. It had struck
her that of all the names which her brother
mentioned that of Deveron recurred the
most frequently, and she was rather surprised
to hear that the only visit which he
had yet paid was to the banker's house ;
her curiosity was on the qui vive, and she
determined to watch very narrowly all that
passed in the market-place. It was her
great desire that her brother should marry,
but then it must be some one perfectly suitable
in rank and station — no one that he
was at all likely to find in Arncester.
There had hardly been time yet for mischief
to have been done, she thought ; besides,
was it likely that, having remained
fancy-free as he had done all these years,
he should suddenly succumb to an Ancestor
damsel utterly out of his sphere ? No,
most unHkelv. Still Mrs. Sambourne was

somewhat disquieted, and felt decidedly
anxious to make the acquaintance of the
banker's wife and daughters.

When, after calling on Mrs. Mordan, and
being greatly pleased both with her and
her husband, they were ushered into Mrs.
Deveron's drawing-room, its sole occupant
Alas Pansy, and Mrs. Sambourne was quite
astonished to find so perfectly ladylike and
well-bred a young lady — one whom, as she
said to herself, she should not object to
introducing in the most exclusive and fastidious
circles. She did not clearly, at the
moment, make out who Pansy was, but it
was evident that she was domiciled in the
market-place, and, if the rest of the family
were anything like her, she had no objection
to her brother's seeing as much of them as he
pleased. But this dream was dispelled by the
entrance of Mrs. Deveron, far too delighted
at the visit not to show her elation unduly.

So kind of you, I'm sure, to call so
soon ! I take it as a great favour. Pansy,,

dear, run up to your cousins' room and tell
them to come down — that Lord Kelmore
and Mrs. Sambourne are here. What a
lovely day !" she continued, turning to Mrs.
Sambourne. '^ We are so delighted to have
Kelmorton inhabited again. How long it
is since you have been here !"

"Thirty years," said her guest, calmly,
thinking that in former days Kelmorton's
being inhabited or not would have made
little difference to Mrs. Deveron or anyone
of her calibre.

'thirty years ! Dear me ! how changed
j^ou must find everything ! But Lord Gilmore
has been a sad absentee, too. We
must try to make it so pleasant to him
that he won't be inclined to run away again
for so long."

"WE! — the woman is absolutely trying
to put herself on a level with US !" thought
Mrs. Sambourne, indignantly ; but she was
spared the necessity of making any reply
by the entrance of Sophronia and Julia.

Lord Kelmore looked wistfully towards
the door, but Julia closed it behind her —
Pansy did not re-appear. In spite of all
Mrs. Deveron's efforts, the conversation languished.
Mrs. Sambourne was noted in her
own circle for her powers of making herself
agreeable, and of inducing the shyest and
dullest of her acquaintance to talk so well
as to surprise even themselves ; but she did
not seem disposed to display her talents on
this occasion, and confined herself to polite
answers to the questions which Mrs. Severn
put to her. That lady, though unaware
what was the matter, was painfully aware
that the visit was not a success, and in her
annoyance she talked faster, laughed louder,
and asked more questions than she would
otherwise have done.

After as short a visit as was consistent
with politeness, Mrs. Sambourne rose to
take leave, negativing the suggestion that
they should remain to tea, by saying they
had some more visits to pay.

We shall see you all on Thursday," said
Lord Kelmore, as he shook hands ; " be
sure you come in good time, the card says
half-past three, I think, and perhaps, I don't
know, perhaps we may wind up with a little
dancing. Pray wish your cousin good-bye
for me. Miss Deveron, and tell her I hope
she has not quite forsaken her haunt by the
river."

'there is no need to give Pansy that
message. Soph," said her mother, when the
guests had departed. '* I am glad she had the
sense not to come down again with you,
though I hardly expected it of her. Of
course I don't fancy she could interfere with
Julia's chance, still there's no need she
should go quoting poetry and rubbish by
the river with his lordship."

''I don't think Mrs. Sambourne liked
coming," said Sophronia.

I daresay she wondered how we could
live in this horrid, vulgar market-place," said
Julia ; "if Papa would only live in Arne

Street, or take a place a little way in the
country, it would be quite different."

I thought she was a nasty, stuck-up
thing," said Mrs. Deveron, sharply ; *' looked
as if she thought we weren't fit to speak to.
You must be very careful though, Julia, not
to offend her, she's sure to have great influence
over him."

Well, Edith, what do you think of her ?"
asked Lord Kelmore, as they drove from
the market-place on their way to call on
Mrs. Vernon in Arne Street.

Mrs. Sambourne felt overwhelmed with
dismay; "she!" had it already come to
this? How inscrutable are the fancies of
men ! That her brother, a sensible man. as
she had always believed him to be, and
particularly sensitive as to refinement in
women, should, in two interviews, have
fallen a victim to mere pink and white
prettiness, even coupled with the fearful
drawbacks of underbred manners and an
insupportable mother ! It was too astonishing

! but she felt that nothing would be so
unwise as to show immediate signs of disapproval,
so she said, quietly —

"She? I suppose you mean the pretty
one? She is very pretty certainly, such
lovely colouring, rather like that Greuze of
mine, don't you think? But I should
imagine she was now very like what her
mother was at her age, and would probably
develop into much the same sort of
person."

*^ Poor Julia ! what a gloomy prospect !"
said Lord Kelmore, laughing ; 'really, Edith,
I beg your pardon for being so vague, but
that was not the ' emphatic she ' of whom
I was thinking ; I meant Mademoiselle de
la Rochecaillou."

You mean the girl who was there when
we went in ? I never saw more simple or
more perfect manners. By what strange
freak of fortune does she find herself in
what I should think must be uncongenial
society ?"

Lord Kelmore briefly explained the
relationship, and proceeded to give an
account of his own acquaintance with Pansy,
to which his sister listened thoughtfully.
It was quite evident to her that he was
very much impressed ; that, if not absolutely
in love as yet, he was on the high way
to being so. So far as she could judge in
one short interview, the girl herself was
unobjectionable, and, though her relatives
were a drawback, still as her brother resided
principally Northumberland, and would
probably not revisit Meadowshire when the
election, if indeed it took place, was once
over, that really would not be insurmountable.
All this was passing through her
mind as she talked to Mrs. Vernon, learnt
something of the social politics of Arncester,
and arranged all that she heard in her mind
for future use. She must see a little more
of this girl, of course, before she could give
her unqualified approbation to her as the
future Lady Kelmore. She would have

VOL. II. p

considered some one a little older more
suitable, but she was so anxious that he
should marry, being persuaded that it would
be greatly for his happiness and comfort
to do so, that she was not disposed to make
that an objection, now that after so many
years of impenetrability he was evidently
impressed. It never occurred to her to
think of what Pansy's opinion of the matter
might be ; having no daughters herself,
she knew little or nothing of girls' natures ;
besides, what could anyone desire better
than to become Lady Kelmore with a magnificent
position and fine fortune ? Kelmore
was certain to be a most kind husband,
indeed he was uniformly kind to everyone ;
his wife would have a very happy fate. Before
she reached home, Mrs. Sambourne had
settled that if, after she had had a little conversation
with Pansy, she found no reason
to alter her good opinion of her, she would
promote her brother's wishes in every way
in her power.

Mrs. Deveron was very much annoyed
that her husband would not start so early
on the Thursday afternoon as she considered
advisable. She had visions that, if they
arrived before anyone else, Lord Kelmore
might offer to show Julia the garden, and,
even if anything so desirable did not occur,
it would be a great thing to be found there,
as if on terms of intimacy, by the county
people when they arrived, and very likely
to be introduced to them. But Mr. Severn
had decreed that half-past four would be
ample time for them to arrive ; and, when he
had once made up his mind, there was, as
his wife knew, very little use in struggling
against his decision.

'everyone will be there, we shall only
be a part of the crowd," she said, peevishly,
and he replied —

My dear, that is all we can be anyhow,"
and turned a deaf ear when she muttered
that they were the first people Lord Kelp



more had called upon, and were different
from the rest.

Julia looked excessively pretty in a gauzy
blue toilette, with a rustic hat, and wreath
of wild roses. Mrs. Sambourne, as she
shook hands with her, thought that really
if her brother had been taken captive by
the eye, and had succumbed to this excessively
pretty girl, there would have been
some excuse for him. But as, while courteously
welcoming all the guests, and contriving
to say the right thing to each, she
kept her eye constantly on the Deveron
party, and noted Julia's flirting and, to her,
most objectionable manner, she felt she
could not be too thankful that such was not
the case. And yet Julia that day was very
much on her best behaviour. She had
seriously taken her mother's advice to heart,
and combined with her lonsrinuj desire to
wound and mortify Leon by showing him
she did not care for him, and could "do

much better," it had quite determined her
to marry Lord Kelmore. Of there being
any doubt of her success she never dreamt ;
she had the very highest opinion of her own
good looks, and she had had so many flirtations
that she believed she could attract
anyone. To her great relief Harry Vernon
was still absent, for she felt that his watchful
affection would at once take alarm, and she
did not wish to have to refuse him till her
grand prize was safely landed.

Watching attentively as Mrs. Sambourne
did, she saw that Julia seemed determined
never to leave Lord Kelmore's side. Ashen
he moved away to speak to various guests
she did not immediately and openly follow
him, but very speedily, in some incomprehensible
manner, she was ao^ain beside him,
with her mother close by. Mrs. Sambourne
noticed that her brother frequently looked
round, in search apparently of some one, and
guessed that it was Pansy of whom he was

in quest. She had moved away with her
uncle as if to explore the gardens, and had
not re-appeared.

Mrs. Sambourne began to see a little of
how matters were arranging themselves, and
to think she saw that Mrs. Deveron imagined
that Lord Kelraore's empressement
was caused by admiration for her pretty
daughter, and not for her niece. Well,
there was, she conceived, no danger that,
being more fascinated than he was himself
at all aware by Pansy, he should give even
a passing thought to her cousin ; and it
would therefore be best for her not to move
in the matter, but to leave affairs to arrange
themselves, only watching the course of
events with care and interest. Ah ! there
was Pansy at last, sauntering back b}' her
uncle's side, and looking perfectly contented
with his society. She saw her brother's face
brighten, and in a very few moments he was
at her side.

'* You have been exploring the gardens"'

he said. "I am sorry I could not accompany
you, there are many things I should
like to have pointed out, but of course I was
obliged to remain here. I think, though,
now that all our friends have arrived, and
perhaps I could be spared for a little — will
you come and see the conservatory?"

Before Pansy could reply Julia exclaimed,
'' Oh ! thank you. I should like it of all
things."

Lord Kelmore was surprised and puzzled ;
he had never once thought of Julia, and had
intended his invitation exclusively for Pansy
However, he concluded that he had not made
himself clearly understood, and did what he
could to remedy his omission by pointedly
asking Pansy to accompany them. Quite
unaware how much Julia wished her away,
she at once agreed, and all three turned
their steps towards another part of the
gardens. Of course they constantly met
people to whom Lord Kelmore had to stop
and speak, and Julia took every opportunity

of putting herself forward, and of remarking
upon her host's kindness in insisting on
showing her the conservatory himself. She
really thought that the invitation had been
addressed to herself, never once dreaming
that it had been intended for her cousin
who stood beside her. On reaching the
conservatory she was full of raptures.

"Oh ! how beautiful, how very, very
lovely ! Oh ! Lord Kelraore, how stood of
you to brins: me here 1 It is the most charming
thin I ever saw !"

It certainly was a pretty spot. Evidently
as much care was lavished on the Kelmorton
gardens as if their owner lived there, and
the beauty of the flowers was increased by
the profusion of green with which they "were
surrounded. The gardener did not appear
to have that love for unrelieved masses of
colour so common with his class, and ferns
and other green plants showed off the
brilliant tints and delicate forms to the best
advantage. The conservatory was rather in

the shape of a temple, and under its central
dome was a white marble fountain, edged
with a fringe of lycopodium and maiden
hair, and with luxuriously cushioned seats
placed round it. From the roof hung the
beautiful bells of the red and the white
lapageria, the crimson laconia at the end of
its thread-like stem, the pale blue plumbago,
and dark purple cobble, the whole mingling
with the pure star-like flowers of the Cape
jessamine.

How do you like it. Mademoiselle de la
Rochecaillou ?" asked Lord Kelmore.

It is like Fairyland," said Pansy, in a
low voice : flowers were almost a passion
with her.

Like Fairyland ! — what nonsense !" cried
Julia, contemptuously — " as if you or anyone
else know what it was like ! Isn't it
childish of her. Lord Kelmore ? Oh ! I
think it is quite awfully nice ; and how
lovely it would be lit up, if you gave a
ball, with Chinese lanterns and things, like

the one at Stanmore Chase last winter."
Nothing could make it prettier than it
is now," said Pansy. " How beautiful those
white bells are !" pointing to the lapageria.
"Of all flowers, I think white ones are the
most lovely."

Lord Kelraore took a knife from his
pocket, and proceeded to form a beautiful
bouquet of white flowers, tastefully inter-minded
with fern. As he came back with
it in his hand towards the two girls, Julia
rose.

Oh ! how quite too good of you !" she
said, putting out her hand for it — " fancy
your cutting all those beautiful flowers forme
!"

I am going to cut some for you directly,"
said Lord Kelmore, rather taken aback by
her assuming that the flowers were for her ;
"we will come and choose them, but these
are for Mademoiselle de la Rochecaillou.
She prefers white flowers, and doubtless
you like something gayer."

Julia soon proved that she did, as she
walked about the conservatory by Lord
Kelmore's side ; and as he cut whatever she
admired, she soon obtained what she wished
for — a bouquet sufficiently large to attract
everyone's attention. It pleased her far
better than the few white flowers which
Pansy had fastened into the front of her
dress.

When they returned to the fountain, they
found Xora Delmar and her eldest brother
seated with Pansy, and it was from the
anxiety with which Lord Kelmore watched
her manner towards the young man that
he first learned to understand whither his
thoughts wei^e tending.

He was fast falling in love with Pansy !

He who, up to his present age of forty-seven,
had never seen the woman who
could make his heart throb or his breathing
quicken, had at length met his fate ; and it
lead come in the shape of a girl young
enough to be his daughter, and dio was as

simple and innocent as a little child. He
could hardly credit his own senses — he
must be dreaming — but the very evident
relief with which he perceived that Pansy
seemed perfectly composed in Laurence
Delmar's presence, and indifferent as to
whether she spoke to him or to his sister,
soon convinced him that he was awake.

As they walked back to the house. Pansy
went first with the young Delmars, and
Lord Kelmore was so absorbed in amazement
at the discovery of his own feelings,
and in watching Pansy's behaviour to Mr.
Delmar, that he fell an easy prey to Julia,
who kept far enough behind to ensure a
perfect tete-astute, and cast down her eyes
when he spoke, and looked conscious, in a
manner that must, she felt sure, excite
comment, and make people talk of the
attention which Lord Kelmore was paying
her.

Mrs. Sambourne's quick eye took in the
whole situation at a glance, and without

any apparent effort she changed the order
of things. Julia tried to keep her escort
away on the outskirts of the company, now
convene: towards the house for refreshment,
but by a dexterous, though almost
imperceptible, change of position, Mrs.
Sambourne contrived to find herself, to all
appearance accidentally, close to them.

'*Ah! Miss Deveron," she said, "I see
you have been to the conservatory : it is in
great beauty just now. I am glad my brother
remembered to cut you some flowers.
Let me introduce Captain Borrodaile to
you ; he will take you into the diningroom.
Kelmore, the collation is ready,
and some of our friends have rather far to
go. Hadn't you better take in Lady
Peveril ?"

Of course Lord Kelmore had to do his
duty as a host, and he had no opportunity
of speaking to Pansy until, just as the party
was breaking up, he found her standing
alone just outside the bow-window.

*did sour cousin give you my message
the other day ?" he said, and as she looked
up and said,

'' Message ? No. What was it ?"

I wanted to know if you had quite forsaken
your seat by the river," ho continued.

"Oh, no !" said Pansy, quite unconscious
of anything peculiar in his manner ; " only I
have been so busy working up the sketches
I had got. Perhaps I shall go again tomorrow."


"Then I — "Lord Kelmore was beginning,
but at that moment Mrs. Deveron and her
daughters appeared, and there was no time
for anything but adieux and declarations of
how delightful the day had been.

But Pansy felt rather surprised at the
warm pressure which Lord Kelmore gave
her hand as he put her into the carriage.

CHAPTER IX.

Oh ! a Fancy Ball's a strange affair,

Made up of silks and leathers ;
Light heads, light heels, false hearts, false hair,

Pins, paint, and ostrich-feathers.

Prayed.

1 TRS. DEVEPtOX was very well satisfied
XtX ^yjj^}^ ii^Q ^yr^y jj^ whlcli everything
had occurred at the Kehuorton garden-party.
Several Arncester acquaintances
who had seen Julia walking back from
the conservatory at Lord Kelraore's side,
and had marked the large bouquet that she
carried, had indulged in hints and jokes,
which confirmed her own opinion that all
was arranging itself according to her wishes.
Certainly Julia had looked her very best —

it was no wonder that Lord Keltnore should
be fascinated ; and she gave herself up to delicious
day-dreams of grandeur and delight.

Pansy was equally unconscious of her
aunt and cousin's hopes, and of Lord Gilmore's
feelings towards herself. She too
had greatly enjoyed the day ; she liked to
see the beautiful house and gardens, for
with her artistic eye every form of beauty
was a real pleasure, and Mrs. Sambourne
had been particularly kind to her. Indeed,
Mrs. Sambourne had taken a great fancy to
her, and was not at all indisposed to see a
good del of her, quite apart from her
brother's evident attraction.

What a charming girl she seems !" she
said to Mrs. Delmar. '' I think she must
be rather out of her element ; neither her
aunt nor cousins seem at all the same style."

*'"N"o, they are not," replied Mrs. Delmar;
"I do not wish to say anything
against them, but they are neither intellectual
nor particularly refined, and Pansy is

both. We get her alone sometimes, but
not so often as both she and we would like ;
Mrs. Deveron is jealous of any attention
shown to her that is not extended to her
own daughters."

That is rather annoying."

Yes, it is. I am afraid Pansy has many
things to put up with, but she never complains
; indeed she rarely, if ever, refers to
her relations, but of course one does not
wish to make life harder for her by annoying
Mrs. Deveron."

*'N"o, of course not' said Mrs. Sam-bourne,
and there the conversation* ended ;
but she meditated much upon it, and came
to the conclusion that if her brother's regard
for Pansy were not an evanescent feeling,
and if he wished to see more of her, she
must make up her mind to see as much of
Mrs. Deveron, and to be as civil to her as
if it were her daughter whom Lord Gilmore
wished to marry. Any other course
would evidently cause Pansy discomfort,

VOL. II. Q

and it was after all but a small price to pay
for the delight of seeing her brother married
to anyone whom she thought satisfactory.

Most persons would have considered that
Mrs. Sambourne knew far too little of Pansy
to be at all justified in deciding that she would
be a suitable wife for her brother, but she
was firmly convinced that her first impressions
were always to be trusted, and indeed
was in the habit of saying that she
had never known them deceive her. She
was not a physiognomist in the sense of
knowing the strict rules by which she
should be guided, indeed she understood
nothing whatsoever of the theory of the
matter ; but she had an instinct which really
seemed infallible, and which stood her in
good stead in her impressions of character.
She was quite prepared to accept Pansy as
Lady Kelmore, though a little surprised and
amused at the nature of the force to which
the hitherto virgin fortress had surrendered.
As they sat at breakfast the ensuing

morning, discussing the party of the day
before, Mrs Sambourne was amused by the
persistent manner in which her brother
avoided the name which was, as she well
knew, uppermost in his thoughts.

In fact. Lord Kelmore was very considerably
puzzled and dismayed at the discovery
of his own feelings. He had passed, which
was for him a most unusual occurrence, a
sleepless night ; endeavouring to argue
himself out of the belief that he could
possibly be in love, — but in vain. Whenever
he believed himself to be succeeding, a
remembrance of Pansy's eyes, or of some
tone of her voice, would sweep away all the
sophistry of his arguments, and his work
was to commence afresh. He dreaded to
think what his sister would say. She had
always urged him to marry, but she would
surely think it ridiculous that he should
have fallen in love with a girl, almost a
child, of whom he had seen so little.

Mrs. Sambourne guessed his thoughts with

q2

tolerable accuracy, and, when all the other
guests had been lightly passed in review,
said carelessly,

"That little Mademoiselle de la Roche-caille
quite fulfilled the pleasing impression
she made upon me the other day ; she is a
remarkably nice little girl."

Lord Kelmore positively coloured.

^' I — I am glad you think so, Edith," he
said, " I — " but there he stopped, probably
not anxious to say any more respecting the
object of his thoughts in the presence of his
guests. Just before luncheon, however, he
entered the boudoir, whither his sister had
retired to write some letters, and began.

I am glad you like Mademoiselle de la
Rochecaillou, Edith, — I — I knew and liked
her father : don't you think we could show
her some civility, ask her to stay here for a
few days, or something of that sort? she
draws so well, and would greatly enjoy
being able to study the pictures at her
leisure ; she has seen very few, she says."

'^ And while she was enjoying the pictures,
you would greatly enjoy studying her," said
his sister, smiling and laying her hand on
his. *' My dear Kelmore," as he started and
coloured with a muttered ejaculation of
"what on earth are you talking about?"
'' I know your meaning as well as you do
yourself. You have fallen in love, for the
first time in your life, with this girl, and
when people take love-fever for the first
time at your age the fit is generally
severe. I guessed it at once, and I am
very glad you have chosen so nice a girl.
Oh ! yes, I know I know very little of her,
but my instincts never deceive me. I can
always trust my first impressions. Besides,
I was talking to her friend Mrs. Delmar."

There is nothing between her and
young Delmar, is there ?" asked Lord Gilmore,
with a sudden recollection of the
merry trio by the fountain.

"Ah! I know nothings of that. Mrs.
Delmar did not imply anything."

I was afraid you would think me foolish,
Edith ; I can hardly realise it myself
yet. And very likely, after all, I am only
having a glimpse of a fool's paradise. Why
should I expect a sweet young thing like
her to care for an old man like me ?"

"My dear Kelmore, why should she not?
Of course, that is, if there is no previous
attachment in the way. I fancy from my
own observation, and from what Mrs. Delmar
said, that she is not made very welcome
by her aunt and cousins*'

'then will you ask her here?"

*' I will, but we must not do so alone ;
Mrs. Delmar told me Mrs. Deveron was
jealous of the girl going there even for the
day if her own girls were not asked. I am
very sorry, but we have no right to bring
discomfort on the girl for our own pleasure j
we must ask the Deverons too."

'*Ah, well, if we have other people it
will not hurt us, and will, I daresay, please
them very much."

Here the footman entered with the
second post, and, as Mrs. Sanibourne
opened one of the letters, she handed her
brother a card on which Mr. and Mrs.
Deveron requested the honour of their
company at dinner in ten days' time.

'ewe shall have people here, shall we
not?"

'* Yes ; I must write and say so, and it
will be a good opportunity of asking them
to stay here. Let me see : shall I ask them
from Monday to Saturday ? — it can't be
next week, for we are quite full, and the
week after will not do as they have this
dinner, but the week after — the second
week in August — that will do, will it not ?"

*eyes, I wish it could be sooner;" then,
as his sister looked up smiling, "Don't
laugh at me, Edith ; as you say yourself, the
fever is strong."

'' I am not laughing, I am very glad,"
said Mrs. Sambourne ; ** but there is the
luncheon gong, and we must make our

appearance. I will write the invitation
afterwards. It is just as well that the
Delmars and Peverils are to stay here next
week ; I shall ask some other near neighbours
for the next one, not to make it too
marked. With the Deverons we will only
have people from a distance."

I can trust your tact to do everything
that is right," said her brother, feeling an
immense relief at having got his confession
over, and at the manner in which it had
been received.

That afternoon, having pleaded business
that required attention as a reason for not
accompanying his guests in an expedition to
some neighbouring ruins, and having seen
them take their departure, some on horseback
and some in carriages, Lord Kelmore
made his way to the seat by the river where
he hoped to find Pansy. She was there
painting busily, but, on his appearance, she
coloured and looked guilty and disturbed.
If she had not very much wished to make

her screen as perfect as she could, as a
present for her grandmother, she would not
have come at all. Mrs. Deveron, on hearing
that she was going to the river, had
objected a good deal, and had remarked
that, though it was all very well taking
possession of Lord Kelraore's grounds when
he was away, it did not look very well to
be running after him when he was there.

It is not Lord Kelmore, — I want to finish
my sketch," said Pansy, looking up in surprise
; and Mrs. Deveron did not like to say
too much, for fear, as she said to Julia, of
'^ putting notions into her head." But she
began to animadvert on her conduct the
previous day.

"Really, Pansy, I thought you knew
better than to be always hanging on your
cousins. When a gentleman walks with
one of them you ought not to go too.
Two's company, but three's trumpery,' is
an old saying, though perhaps you haven't
got it in France. Now when Lord Kelmore

took Julia to the conservatory you should
have known better than to go too. You
should have come to me or got some one to
take you if you wanted to go."

But he asked me, and Julia joined us,"
said Pansy, simply.

"Oh, I never!" cried Julia, 'what a
story ! Why, I answered him when he asked
me !"

'' Yes, but it was to me he spoke," said
Pansy, quietly.

"Isn't that a shame, mamma?" said Julia,
passionately : " Pansy can't speak the truth !"

*' It is a great pity you are not more
accurate, Pansy," said her aunt. "I daresay
you believe what you say, but it was not the
case. It comes from your great fault of
vanity and alway's thinking of yourself."

Pansy said no more, but the conversation
had made her very uncomfortable, and she
could not avoid a certain self-consciousness
when she saw Lord Kelmore. Until that
moment she had quite forgotten that she

had told hai the day before that she might
probably be in her old haunt that afternoon,
but as soon as she saw him she remembered
it, and thought that doubtless her aunt would
call it an appointment. Lord Kelmore was
too disturbed himself to notice her confusion.
The new sensation of love was very embarrassing
to him, and between his nervousness
and his fear of declaring himself too
soon, and thus injuring his prospects, he
was very far from the pleasant companion
for the first ten minutes that the supposed
Mr. Bush had proved himself.

However, in a little while, matters improved
; Pansy forgot her self-consciousness
as she showed what she had been working
at, and they fell into the style of their
earlier interviews.

"Would you not like to see the picture-gallery
again ? asked Lord Kelmore, as
Pansy, while they were talking of paintings,
remarked hove few she had seen.

Yes, I should very much indeed."

Will you come now ?"

I — I think not — I am afraid my aunt
would not like it," said Pansy, colouring
violently.

'^ Why, surely there could be no objection."


I don't know why," said Pansy, which
was indeed perfectly true, " but she seemed
quite annoyed at my coming here to-day,
and said it was quite different now you were
at home."

"I am sure I hope it will make no
difference ; I shall be most distressed if it
does. AVell, I suppose we must postpone
the pictures, but I hope only for a short
time. My sister is writing to ask Mr. and Mrs.
Deveron and you young ladies to spend a
few days at Kelmorton."

Oh, how very delightful!" cried Pansy
in delight ; then her face fell a little as she
continued, "but I don't suppose I shall
come. You know we cannot go out three
together, so we take it in turns, and

Sophronia and Julia would enjoy it so
much."

I hope they will, but most certainly we
shall not spare you. My sister has I know
specially invited you, and we shall take no
denial."

Indeed, I should like it," said Pansy,
*' and if I come, oh ! please may I take a
sketch from that pretty empty octagon-room ?
I do so want it for the autumn leaf of
Bonne Maman's screen."

'* My dear Mademoiselle de la Eoche-
caille, you shall do anything and everything
in my house that you desire, if you
will only give me the pleasure of seeing you
there."

*' How kind you are !" said Pansy, looking
up at him in a way that made his heart
beat. " Indeed I shall like it of all things.
Do you know I have longed to go through
the picture-gallery, and really look at them
all. It was only a glimpse that day, except
of the unhappy lady."

■ ''Ah ! yes, poor thing; but you must not
sadden yourself with thinking of her, or I
shall be sorry I told you the story."

"It is time for me to be going home
now," said Pansy, beginning to put away
her sketching apparatus. ''I have enough
studies here to finish this leaf of my screen."

"Then shall you not come here again ?"

"Notjusiyet, I think. Aunt Matilda
seemed so vexed to-day, though I cannot
understand why."

Neither could Lord Kelmore, who was
blissfully unconscious of any designs upon
him on the part of. Mrs. Deveron or her
daughter. He walked with Pansy through
the fields, and, when he parted from her,
was more in love than ever.

Very great was Mrs. Deveron's elation on
receiving, the next morning, the invitation
to Kelmorton. It was, she felt, an immense
piece of promotion. Henceforth lie could
hold up her head with the county people, and
look down upon " mere townsfolk." Mr.

Deveron was away, having started very
early to Rockton on business, and she said
nothing till alone with her daughters in the
drawing-room, when she imparted the great
news.

She has asked you all three, but I don't
think it would do to go in such a number;
besides, I don't want to take Pansy, she is
always in the way, whether she does it on
purpose or not. I shall not tell her she is
asked."

But what will Papa say?" asked Julia.
*' He always makes such a fuss about Pansy
going everywhere."

We need not show him the letter. Stay,
we have all read it, I may as well burn it —
that will be safe."

But suppose," said Sophronia, " that
Lord Kelmore meets Pansy again by the river,
and tells her she was asked — what then ?"

We must stop her going to the river.
Pansy," as her niece entered the room, '' I
did not say much about your going to the

river yesterday, as you said you had something
to finish, but you must not go again
while the family are at Kelmorton."

*' I have quite finished," said Pansy,
quietly. *' I told Lord Kelmore yesterday
that I had more than enough sketches to
finish that panel, and I asked him, when we
go to Kelmorton, as he said we were to do,
to let me take the sketch for the fourth out
of the boudoir window."

Mother and daughters looked at each
other, and Mrs. Deveron gave a sigh of
thankfulness that she had not committed
herself by refusing for Pansy, who, it seemed,
had actually known of the invitation
before they did. Still she felt immensely
annoyed and provoked that her scheme for
leaving the field clear for her own girls
should thus have proved abortive, and spoke
with much annoyance.

"Really, Pansy, you are the most extraordinary
girl I ever knew ! Why should
you make a secret of having seen Lord

Kelmore yesterday ? It would have been
only natural to tell us, only your duty, I
may say. And what an unaccountable thing
that you should not have mentioned this
invitation, as you knew of it. I can't think
why you should be so sly."

'*I did not mean to be, Aunt Matilda,"
said Pansy, gently; "but you never have
seemed to care about hearing about what I
do by the river, and I never thought Lord
Kelmore made any difference."

'' Grant me patience ! Child, are you an
absolute fool?" exclaimed Mrs. Deverou,
quite losing her temper. '' What could it
signify to anyone whether you saw a few
weeds more or less, or painted them well
or ill ? That is all you have ever had to
tell of the river hitherto. But to pretend
that you don't know that everything Lord
Kelmore, who is one of the first people in
the county, either does or says is interesting,
is too silly ; and you know as well as
possible we should be delighted to hear we

VOL. II. R

were to be asked to stay at Kelmorton.
It was all a bit of nasty spite, — you were
determined you would not be the person to
tell us anything pleasant. Oh! don't answer
me," as Pansy essayed to speak ; " I
won't stand ijny impertinence ; but remember
this, you are not to go to the river or
anywhere inside the Kelmorton gates alone.
It is all very well your setting your cap at
Lord Kelmore, but I won't have you stealing
a march upon Julia and spoiling her
prospects."

Half of this speech, and all the spirit
which animated it, were Greek to Pansy;
she only understood that her aunt was annoyed
that she had not mentioned her interview
with Lord Kelmore, and, as she
withdrew hastily to her own room, she resolved
she would never so offend again, —
rather than do so she would obtrude any
little adventures she might have, at the risk
of their being pronounced uninteresting.

'mamma, you should not have scolded

her so ; she will tell Lord Kelmore, as they
are such friends," said Sophronia.

I really couldn't help it," said her mother,
who, now that her wrath had somewhat
cooled, was beginning to fear she had
let her tongue outrun her discretion. "It
was too aggravating to hear her pretend
she didn't know wc should care. Well, it
can't be helped now, and we have plainly to
think of. As you arc; both asked, you shall
go; they must mean it, for she says ' l)olli
your daughters, and also your charming
niece.' Humph 1 if she saw more of her I
don't think she'd find anything so vc-ry
charming, I'm sure I don't. It's as we'll I
hadn't burnt the letter, — your father might
say three girls were too many, and it'll be
useful to show him. Now let's think of the
gowns you will want," and the rest of the
morning was spent in the discussion of dress.

Mrs. Deveron regarded this invitation as
proof positive that Julia's fascinations had
made an impression on Lord Kelmore, but

It 2

she carefully abstained from giving the faintest
hint of her belief to her husband. His
views and hers did not agree, and she knew
that if he were aware of her aspirations, and
of her intention of, as she said to herself,
moving heaven and earth " to make her
daughter Lady Kelmore, he would, as likely
as not, have refused to allow the visit to
Kelmorton to take place. As it was, he
greatly disliked the idea, and complained
that it was very hard that because there
was a probability of an election, and Lord
Kelmore wished to do popularity for his
nephew, that he should be dragged away
from his own home for a week.

Mrs. Deveron's feelings were rather
shocked on hearing that the Yernons were
asked to stay the week before she was, but
she somewhat revived on hearing that they
were only asked for two nights, and observed
to Julia that doubtless Lord Kelmore
did not wish to make their invitation appear
too prononce a step. The girls were in a

State of excitement quite incomprehensible
to Pansy, though she too looked forward
very much to the visit, and to the enjoyment
of the picture-gallery. She could not
understand why they should think it necessary
to have so many new dresses, and was
very modest in her own preparations.

But, two days after the invitation had
been accepted, Julia brought in from the
Vernon', where she had been having tea,
the startling news that, on the Friday during'
their visit, there was to be a fancy ball, and
the next morning a card from Kelmorton
confirmed the intelligence. Nothing could
exceed the excitement; and, if the time had
not been so short that a speedy choice was
imperative, a decision would never have
been come to at all. It was Mr. Newsome
who decided the matter for Sophronia, for,
dropping in to tea while they were still in
the agonies of doubt, he talked so eloquently
of the beauties of Italian dress in the sixteenth
century that she determined to try

it ; and, on his saying that he had some
books of costumes of that period, Mrs.
Deveron begged of him to dine with them
quietly that evening, and bring them with
him. It resulted in Sophronia's selection of
the dress of one of the Medici wives, Mr.
Newcome selecting that of her husband.
Julia looked over the book, but could find
nothing she liked, and felt rather cross and
afTcrrieved that there was no one to brinsr
prints for her to choose from. Mr. Newcome
suggested " Aurora " as eminently
suitable, but she replied rather snappishly
that it was so common, and at length, after
much indecision, declared that she should
20 as " Undine," *' because then she could
let down her hair, and people couldn't say
it was false any more*'

It was an incontrovertible reason, of
course ; but Mr. Newsome, as he looked at
hei, reflected that she would most certainly
represent that maiden before she had found
her sou].

"And you, Pansy?" asked her uncle;
*' what are you going to deck yourself in ?
Will you be a flower-girl and sell pansies,
and take me for your blind, old father?"

"Nonsense, George's said his wife,
quickly ; " I have settled for us. Look,
here is an Italian senator which will suit
you perfectly, and this Venetian lady will
do for me."

"As you please for yourself, Matilda;
but, with my respectable bald head and fair
whiskers, I am not much like an Italian.
Xo — I've got an old dress upstairs that will
do admirably. I shall go as Sir Roger de
Coverley."

"Mamma, there's an old Queen Anne
dress upstairs; why don't you wear that?"
said Julia, and after some discussion it was
so settled.

"Well but Pansy?" said her uncle;
'* haven't you made up your mind? Why
not Titania, Pansy, as your friend Mr. Bush
called you ?"

No — oil, no !" said Pansy, blushing, as
she saw her aunt look very angry ; " indeed,
Uncle George, it wouldn't suit me at all.
No, I thought of a French peasant dress,
like what our people wear at La Eoche-
caille. Bonne Maman would send me one
over."

'' It will do very well," said Mrs. Severn
; "a grand dress wouldn't suit Pansy at
all, she is too small and childish-looking.
Well, then, we are all settled, and there is
only the business of getting the things made.
You are sure, Mr. Newsome, it does not
inconvenience you to let us keep this book?
it will be an immense help."

"" I shall be only too glad," said Mr.
Newsome, who then settled himself to enjoy
one of Sophronia's most difficult and inharmonious
pieces. He knew little or nothing
of music, but had an immense admiration
for her playing, because it seemed to him
so superhumanly difficult.

The interval between this evening and

the commencement of the Kelmorton visit
was spent in an atmosphere of dress, and of
excitement as to the prospect before them.
Lord Kelmorton called in the market-place
twice, thereby confirming Mrs. Deverons
belief in his captivation by Julia, but he did
not see Pansy, and was obliged to comfort
himself with the reflection that, when she
was under his own roof, he should be able
to see her when he pleased.

CHAPTER X.

And though it be a waking dream.
Yet let it like an odour rise

To all the senses here,
And fall like sleep upon their eyes,

Or music in their ear.

The Vision of Delight — Ben Jonson.

rriHE great day at length arrived, and,
-*- her heart swelling with gratified pride
and magnificent hopes, Mrs. Deveron, with
her daughters and Pansy, drove up to the
door at Kennington : Mr. Deveron had gone
on business to a neighbouring town, and
would join them in time for dinner. Pansy
had never seen her aunt in such a state of
delight, indifferently veiled b}^ a semblance
of carelessness, and wondered to herself
why she should care so very much for this

visit, more especially as she had more than
once heard her call Mrs. Sambourne dull
and " stuck-up." She had not learnt to
comprehend the paradisaical satisfaction of
consorting with county families ; and of any
suspicion of her aunt and cousins' further
aspirations she was as innocent as a child.

Lord Kelmore and two or three other
gentlemen were standing on the steps as
they drove up, and he himself ushered them
into the great hall, where Mrs. Sambourne,
with the ladies of the party, was presiding
at the tea-table. Tea was always served in
the hall at Kelmorton — indeed, that apartment
was so handsome and luxurious that
it was very frequently used as a sitting-room
in the daytime. Mrs. Sambourne
duly introduced the new-comers to the
assembled portland Mrs. Deveron, though
slightly disappointed that there were no
county people among them with whom she
might have made useful acquaintance, was
yet gratified by finding that there were

various persons of title and consideration.
Altogether, when she had been conducted
to her pleasant room, and had arrayed herself
in her handsome new toilette, and seen
that her daughters, Julia especially, were
looking their very best, she was prepared
to go down to dinner in an extremely
happy frame of mind.

But where was Pansy? Her aunt had
never thought of telling her that she must
wait to go down with her, and when at
length she sent the maid to see if she was
ready, it appeared she had already left her
room, having naturally no intuition that it
was w^ronsj that she should do so. Mrs.
Deveron was extremely indignant, and her
wrath waxed still hotter when, on the
groom of the chambers throwing open the
door of the saloon, she found that her niece
and Lord Kelmore were the sole occupants
of the room, and were standing together in
one of the windows, looking at the last rays
of the sunset on the woods.

'you should have waited for me, Pansy,
and not have come down alone," she said,
in an ostentatiously sweet tone, but all her
efforts could not veil the annoyance she felt,
and Lord Kelmore, struck by the ill-concealed
acidity of her tone, thought that his sister
had been quite right in supposing that
Pansy's life was not too happy a one.
Well, he asked nothing better than to deliver
her from it — it was only fear of injuring
his own cause by undue precipitancy that
kept him silent.

The room filled rapidly, dinner was announced,
and Mrs. Deveron, when she looked
round after being seated, perceived, to
her great annoyance, that Julia was at
some distance from Lord Kelmore, while
Pansy was actually seated on his left hand.

*' It's all very well her pretending to be so
innocent and unsophisticated," she thought;
'she's trying for him just as hard as she
can ; however, it's quite clear it's Julia he
fancies, he has been twice to the house since

the garden-party, and talked to her most of
the time."

'' You sing, I know, Miss Deveron," said
Mrs. Sambourne, after dinner ; "Mrs. Dehuar
told us so the other day ; will you favour us ?''

Mrs. Delmar had said very little of Julia's
singing, and a great deal about Pansy's, but
Mrs. Sambourne wished to make everything
smooth and pleasant for the girl to whom
she had taken a great fancy, and wisely
guessed that to please and flatter Mrs. Severn's
daughter, was the best way to
render her oblivious of her niece. She saw
plainly the hopes that had arisen in that
lady's mind, and had no objection to assisting
her to indulge them, if, by so doing,
Pansy and her brother were left unmolested
and unobserved.

Oh, I sing very little," protested Julia,
who thought it necessary to require a great
deal of pressing.

Under ordinary circumstances, Mrs. Sam-bourne
never asked a young lady twice,

and several of the company, who knew her
habits well, were astonished to hear her
reiterate her request, and even call her
brother to enforce it. To his entreaties
Julia at once yielded, and sang one or two
of her most ambitious songs, which were
not always her best. The applause would
not have been great had not Mrs. Sam-bourne
led it, and the young lady who,
presuming on the way in which Miss Severn
had been solicited, gave herself the air
of being coy about singing, was somewhat
astonished to find that her first negative was
accepted and no further persuasion used.
This gratified Mrs. Deveron immensely ; it
was evident that Julia was thought worthy
of persuasion, she was made a person of
consequence, and of course that could only
have one meaning. After that it would
have required some remarkably plain
speaking to persuade Mrs. Deveron that
Lord Kelmore was not really in love with
her daughter.

After Sophronia had played a piece of
wonderful intricacy, Pansy sang one or
two of her French peasant songs. She sang
without notes, so Lord Kelmore could not
turn over the leaves for her, as he had
assiduously done for Julia ; he did not even
remain near the piano, but sat in an armchair
apart, looking, as Mrs. Deveron
thought, terribly bored. It was not wonderful
— such singing was not much worth
listening to ; and when Pansy, at the request
of one of the younger guests, was beginning
a third song, she swept up to the piano and
put a stop to it.

That will do, Pansy dear, you must not
monopolise the piano. You have done your
best, but people do not care much for such
little country songs. She has been out so
little " — turning apologetically to Lord Gilmore
— "that she doesn't quite understand
Tes convenances yet."

*' I am sure it is a great disappointment
to us all not to hear the song we were

hoping for," said Lord Kelmore. " Still of
course we should be much distressed by
tiring Mademoiselle de la Eochecaillou.
Thank you very much for those two songs. I
have seldom heard anything more pathetic."

There was so much conversation about
the songs, and so much critical admiration of
the way in which Pansy had sung them, that
her aunt almost wished she had not interfered.
Still it had broken the silence, and
Julia could now approach Lord Kelmore,
and chatter to him, which was impossible
before.

Though the evening was sweet in many
ways to Mrs. Deveron, she confessed to herself
in her secret heart that it was very dull.
Mrs. Sambourne took pains that she should
not feel herself neglected, but, accustomed
only to the constant gossip and tittle-tattle
of a country town, she had no topics in
common with any of the ladies staying in
the house. They talked to her of the
beauty of the neighbourhood, and asked

VOL. II, s

which were the prettiest views, but she had
neither eye nor soul for picturesque scenery,
and the conversation flagged. Then one
lady tried books, but she liked only travels
and biography, and Mrs. Deveron only the
lightest novels. The conversation pleased
her most when it turned upon people, although
they were persons whom she only
knew by name, and she was rather surprised
when lier contributions to any discussion,
founded, not, of course, on personal knowledge,
but on paragraphs in the society
papers, were either gently ignored, or remarked
upon as being entirely devoid of
foundation. She wondered if the evenings
were always like this at Kelmorton. How
much better it would have been to set the
young people to dance, or to play a round
game, and to have whist for the elders !

Mrs. Deveron was one of those not uncommon
people who ruin society by their
belief that no one can possibly be amused if
they are not "doing something," and have

no conception of the superior pleasure derived
by many persons from quiet conversation.
These are the people who would
rather have dreary-recitals" of pieces that
everyone knows by heart, or the most
mediocre amateur singing, than allow their
friends to enjoy themselves by talking comfortably
together. She was by no means
sorry when Mrs. Sambourne gave the signal
to retire for the night, and, as she yawned
over her undressing, thought that if the days
were as bad the visit would seem very long.
When Julia was Lady Kelmore she must
^' wake the place up a bit."

Would you like to see the picture-gallery
?" said Mrs. Sambourne after breakfast
the next morning ; and, though she knew
little and cared less about pictures, Mrs.
Deveron knew too well that it was a thing
to see and to talk about to decline, and, it
being a very wet morning, every member of
the party adjourned to the gallery together.

Now you must show me everything,"

s2

said Julia, attaching herself to Lord Gilmore,
"and tell lue what I am particularly
to admire. I'm awfully ignorant about
pictures — I've seen so few."

Lord Kelmore hardly desired her company,
but of course he could not say so, and
replied,

You had better listen, then, to the information
I am going to give Mademoiselle
de la Rochecaillou. It is an old promise
that I should have the pleasure of introducing
her to the pictures."

Of this pleasure Lord Kelmore had no
intention of being deprived, and Julia, who
only regarded a picture as a vehicle for the
gentleman with her to pay her some compliment,
grew inexpressibly weary of her
cousin's remarks and of their companion's
explanations. He was very courteous, and
included her in the conversation whenever
there was an opportunity, but she was too
thoroughly uninterested not to be at a disadvantage,
and would gladly have been

amusing herself with some of the youn^^
men of the party, had she not firmly believed
that she was forwarding her prospects.
It never occurred to her that Lord
Kelmore could prefer Pansy's company to
hers, and thought it very stupid of her
cousin not to see that she was in the way.
Pansy was in extreme delight ; she had
never before seen such treasures, and Lord
Kelmore so evidently enjoyed answering
her questions and remarks that she felt no
diffidence in asking everything she wished to
know, or in making every observation that
occurred to her. Sophronia was holding
forth on scraps of knowledge culled from
various dictionaries of painters, considerably
edifviniz; one or two of her auditors, and
still more considerably boring the rest.
Mrs. Deveron had said, " oh !" " ah !" and
"yes," at appropriate intervals, and was
hoping that the exhibition was nearly over,
when one of the young ladies, Lady Rose
Zetland, exclaimed.

'why, Lord Kelmore, do look here I
Here is a picture as like Mademoiselle de la
Rochecaillou as if it had been painted for
her !"

*' I told you there was a likeness' said
Lord Kelmore to Pansy.

**^ ' likeness !" cried Lady Rose. "It is
more than that ; it is herself If she were
only powdered and dressed in that white
brocade. Oh ! Mademoiselle de la Eoche-
caille, do dress like that on Friday night."
I am afraid I can hardly do that," said
Pansy, smiling.

What are you going to wear ?" asked
Mrs. Sambourne.

I was crowns to wear the dress of one of
our peasants of the Loire country," said
Pansy; "I wrote to Bonne Maman for it,
and she wrote to say it had started, but it
has never arrived. Uncle George promised
to inquire for it at Arncester to-day."

Whether it arrives or not," said Lord
Kelmore, eagerly, " do me the honour,.

Mademoiselle che la Rochecaillou, of wearing
the dress with which we can supply you. It
is the identical one in which that portrait
was painted ; and see, by a strange chance,
in the front of it she wears a small bouquet
of your name-flower ; it would be most
perfects*'

You are very kind," said Pansy, colouring,
" but — oh ! I am sure the peasant's
dress will come."

But, even if it does, do not refuse us
the pleasure of seeing you in this, which
would suit you admirably ; it would seem as
if the picture had stepped from its frame.
Edith!" calling to his sister, "come and add
your persuasions to mine, and induce Mademoiselle
de la Rochecaillou to appear on
Friday as our great-grandmother."

"Oh, do!" echoed several voices, "it
would be so perfect."

Why can't you say yes at once, Pansy?"
said her aunt, crossly, for she did not at all
like her being the object of such general

attention. " It is ridiculous to pretend to
hesitate when all the time you have made
up your mind. Say yes directly, and thank
Lord Kelraore for beinsr so kind."

o

*nay, the thanks are due from me," said
Lord Kelmore, hastily; 'but if Mademoiselle
de la Rochecaillou has any dislike
to the idea, I hope she will say so. Not
even for the pleasure of seeing the picture
so charmingly reproduced, would I for a
moment wish that she should do anything
distasteful to her."

Oh, she has no dislike to the idea ; it
is only conceit and coquetry," said Mrs.
Deveron, spitefully.

Now in her secret heart Pansy lead a
very great repugnance to the idea of representing
the unhappy lady whose history
Lord Kelmore had told her on the day of
the thunderstorm. Without being exactly
superstitious, she was decidedly impressionable,
and felt as if, in personating the unhappy
Lady Kelmore, she must bring upon

herself the shadow of her misfortunes. But
it was clear that he was very desirous that
she should do so ; he had been very kind
to her, and she liked him very much ; it
would be most ungracious to refuse on what
was, of course, a silly fancy; and besides,
it would evidently expose her to some of
her aunt's disagreeable speeches, which she
dreaded, though she only half understood
them. So she looked up at Lord Kelmore
and said,

Oh, no ; I have no dislike, if you really
wish it. I thought perhaps it was only your
kindness because the dress hadn't come."

Mrs. Sambourne, meanwhile, had unlocked
the largest of the beautiful painted
Venetian coffers which were placed at intervals
down the gallery ; and, eagerly assisted
by the young ladies of the party, was taking
out one beautiful robe after another. Exclamations
of admiration were heard on all
sides ; the richness of the brocades, their
beautiful colours, the magnificence of the

embroidery, rendered all the ladies most
eloquent.

Oh r exclaimed Julia, clasping her
hands, as a robe of white silk, thick enough
to stand alone, and brocaded all over with
variegated roses, and with a petticoat of
silver cloth, embroidered with wreaths of
flowers, was spread out — "oh, how lovely!
How happy T should be if I could wear a
dress like that, if it were only for one
evenings !"

Do me the honour of wearing this, Miss
Deveron," said Lord Kelmore, who was always
anxious to give everyone pleasure, and
was naturally particularly anxious to please
anyone connected with Pansy. " 1 should
be much honoured if you would appear in
it on Friday."

Oh ! do you really mean it ? May I
really be dressed in that ?" cried Julia,
overjoyed. ''Oh, Lord Kelmore, you are
too kind ! I shall be so happy."

I am sure, Miss Deveron, I am delighted

that it should be in my power to make
you so so easily."

But your beautiful Undine dress, Julia,"
said Pansy, who saw, what her cousin did
not, that the proposed dress would be too
heavy for her height and appearance, and
therefore unbecorainoj.

Anyone can be Undine," returned Julia ;
then, in an undertone, which, however, was
not so low but that Mrs. Sambourne heard
it, she added — "Of course you're jealous,
but you needn't expect to get all the attention
when I'm by."

Lord Kelmore called Julia away before
Pansy could answer.

"There is the lady you are to represent,"
he said, pointing to a picture representing
a very beautiful, commanding-looking woman,
wearing the dress Julia had chosen,
and having her powdered hair turned over
a very high cushion. "That headdress will
add considerably to your stature, Miss Severn.
Curiously enough, it is the Lord KeU

more of that period, that lady's husband,
whose dress I have selected."

Quite a coincidence !" cried Julia, with
a dizcfle, and, though Lord Kelmore did not

C CO J / o

see what the coincidence was, he made no
observation.

Of course, it was necessary that the young
ladies should try on the dresses, to see what
alterations were necessary, and Mrs. Sam-bourne
accompanied Pansy to her room to
see what was required. The dress, however,
fitted as if it had been made for her.

When you have the powder on, the
likeness will really be quite curious," she
said ; " the dress suits you better than the
other will suit your cousin. She would
have been wiser to keep to Undine."

"And it was such a lovely dress," said
Pansy.

'' Well, this of yours is a great success.
Stay, have you any pearls ? You see, she
wears them. No ? Then I will lend you
mine ; we must have the dress complete."

How kind you are !" said Pansy.

That day was perforce spent indoors by
all the ladies, and indeed the rain was so
persistent as only to allow of the gentlemen
being out for a very short time. Lord Gilmore
would have liked to spend the whole
afternoon at Pansy's side, but he could not
neglect his duties as host, and even when
he began to talk to her he found that Julia
was invariably at his elbow, and interposed
her silly chatter between them and any
comfortable conversation. It annoyed him,
though he had no idea of its full significance
; but Mrs. Sambourne, who watched
the whole affair with a lynx eye and considerable
amusement, was perfectly au fait
of all the Deveron hopes and aspirations.
She did not intend to thwart them just at
present, not until her brother had made
such progress in his courtship of Pansy that
Mrs. Deveron would be unable to do any
mischief when she was rudely awakened
from her present dreams of grandeur.

The next morning was lovely, and after
breakfast, when the guests, in different
groups, were discussing the plans for the
day. Lord Kelraore came up to Pansy.

"Mademoiselle de la Rochecaillou, do
you still wish to take that sketch from the
boudoir ? 1 have had all placed in readiness
for you."

You are too kind to me," said Pansy,
looking up gratefully. '' I should like it of
all things ; I only hope it is not quite beyond
me."

Then will you come now ? I should
like to see you established before I so out."

Pansy ran upstairs for her paint-box, and
found Lord Kelmore awaiting her at the
bottom of the stairs. He led her along a
corridor which obviated the necessity of
their passing through the saloon. As he
opened the door Pansy gave an exclamation
of amazement.

Why, it has been furnished !"

To the minutest detail, the description

which she had given of how she would furnish
the room had been fulfilled. The walls
were hung with brocaded silk of a soft dove
grey ; the curtains were of the same hue,
but had a small pattern of pale pink roses
over them. The furniture principally
matched the walls, but here and there was
a chair or sofa covered with some Eastern-looking
material, and making a valuable
point of colour. The book-case and easel
stood in the positions she had indicated, and
there certainly were, as she had said there
should be, 'flowers everywhere." They
grew in jardinieres and in single pots concealed
in beautiful china vases, and there
were cut flowers in glasses and vases in every
direction.

Oh, it is lovely !" Pansy exclaimed, enthusiastically.


*' It is all thanks to you, then, Mademoiselle
de la Rochecaillou ; I have only followed
your suggestions implicitly."

*' But I never meant — I never thought

you were going to do it, or I should have
been afraid to say what I did."

"Then I am very glad you did not know ;
I owe you a really beautiful room. And
now, which point of view shall you select ?
Of course you are a little hampered by the
special shape of your screen."

I am afraid it is a very ambitious
undertaking," said Pansy, when after a little
discussion the view had been chosen and she
had seated herself. *' However, I can only
do my best, and dear Bonne Maman will
excuse all short-comings. I do like her to
see the places that please me."

Well, I shall not remain to interrupt
you, much as I should enjoy doing so,"
said Lord Kelmore, moving reluctantly
away : '' I shall come at luncheon time to
see what progress you have made."

Generally Pansy had full power of concentrating
her attention upon her work, but
now that she particularly wanted to make
the best of her time her thoughts would

wander. She felt so astonished at this room
having been furnished just as she had said
she would like it to be ! — it filled her with
amazement, and she could not help pausing
to look round it again and again. Then
she felt obliged to go and look at the books,
and see if there were any she would have
herself selected, and here was another
surprise, for there were the majority of her
favourites. Altogether, when Lord Kelmore
re-appeared, there was very little to show
him.

^' I could not help looking at the room,"
she said, apologetically : " I will do more
after luncheon."

*' No, indeed ! you are going with the
rest of the party, on an expedition to see
some ruins ; they are very picturesque, and I
shall enjoy showing them to you."

^'Then tomorrow morning," said Pansy.

But the next morning there was a thick
drizzling mist, and sketching was out of the
question.

VOL. II. T

'^ Edith," said Lord Kelmore, going to
the morning-room where his sister was
writing, '^ don't you think you could
persuade Mrs. Deveron to leave Mademoiselle
de la Rochecaillou here for a few
days ? The weather has been so unpropitious
she has not been able to get on with
her sketch, and her heart seems very much
set upon it."

His sister laid down her pen and looked
at him smilingly.

*' And your heart is set upon having her ?
It is of no use, Kelmore ; Mrs. Deveron would
never hear of leaving her here alone."

o

"It is very vexatious."

'^ If you really are very anxious, you
must ask the Deveron girls too."

*' Do you think it is absolutely necessary ?"

'* Quite, if you want your little Pansy.
She is a dear little thing, I like her more
every day."

"Everyone must. Yell, Edith, if you
think it must be so, will you arrange it ?"

Mrs. Sambourne sat back in her chair for
some minutes after her brother left the
room. She wondered greatly at his blindness
in not seeing what Julia's hopes were,
but she was very careful not to open his
eyes. If he understood what was going on,
he would, she well knew, at once do
something to undeceive Mrs. Deveron and
her daughter, and then she was quite sure
that Pansy would suffer. She had very
little sympathy for the Deverons, being
disgusted with the open way in which they
tried to take possession of her brother ;
besides, not caring very much for the feelings
of those not in her own set, whom she
unconsciously regarded as belonging to
a different order of beings : she wished
them to remain in their blissful delusion
until her brother had proposed to Pansy,
and then whatever they might say or do
would not much matter.

She would, however, have been rather dismayed
if she had heard what was at that

T 2

moment occurring to her brother. He was
crossing the hall, when he was waylaid by
Julia, who drew him into one of the window
recesses, and told him, with a giggle, she was
going to ask a great favour.

*' I hope it may be one that I can grant,"
said Lord Kelmore, courteously.

Oh ! yes, of course, or I shouldn't ask ,-
but you must promise beforehand."

That would be rather a leap in the dark
I think."

*' Oh ! but it is quite easy."

'then why not tell me?"

*' Because — oh ! you must promise ! You
will, won't you ?" Then, as Lord Kelmore
still hesitated, "There — silence gives consent
! You have promised ! Now I'll tell
you. I'm going to wear the dress as you
wished, it fits beautifully, but I've got no
jewels, the dress'll be nothing without them.
Will you lend me them to wear?"

The family jewels ! Even Lord Kelmore
was somewhat staggered, though he was far

from seeing all the bearings of the case as
his sister would have done, or from understanding
how much his compliance with so
strange a request would tend to make Julia
and her mother believe that he wished to
marry her. He was astonished and rather
annoyed, but his good nature was excessive ;
and, telling himself that the girl did not
know what an extraordinary thins she was
asking, he somewhat reluctantly consented.

CHAPTER XL

All love is sweet,
Given or returned. Common as light is love,
And its familiar voice wearies not ever.

They who inspire it most are fortunate
As I am now ; but those who feel it most
Are happier still.

Prometheus Unbound. Act 2, Sc. 5 — Shelley.

What though his hair be grey, he is not old in mind.
Miles Glorious. Act 3, Sc. 1 — Plautus.

'' T 'VE done it' cried Julia, bursting into
-*- her mother's room. ^' I'm to have
the jewels to match the picture !"

*' You don't say so !" returned her mother.
'' Well, I don't think there can be much
doubt as to his meaning now."

I wish he'd be quick about it. I should

dearly like to have it announced before
Hubert comes next week. He's always
snubbed us so, as if we were nobodies. I
should like to meet him with the news that
I'm going to be a great lady, and that if he
isn't civil I won't notice him."

A troop of the 23rd Lancers was to be
quartered at Arncester when the regiment
moved to Rockton, and Hubert's troop was
rather to his annoyance — the one selected.
He was rather ashamed that his brother
officers should see that his family was not in
the '' county set."

Mrs. Deveron felt immensely elated by
her daughter's information, and her satisfaction
was increased when, after luncheon,
Mrs. Sambourne asked if she would leave
the girls at Kelmorton for another week.
She felt so certain now of Lord Kelmore's
intentions respecting Julia that she felt no
uneasiness as to leaving Pansy also at the
Hall, though she made some feeble remonstrance
about leaving all three girls, and

suggested that her niece, at least, had better
return home with her. But Mrs. Sambourne
spoke so quietly, and without the slightest
reference to her brother, of its being a pity
that Mademoiselle de la Rochecaillou should
not have time and opportunity to finish the
sketch about which she was anxious, and
which had been delayed by the unpropitious
weather, that she consented to her remaining,
without the faintest suspicion that it
was entirely for her sake that the invitation
had been given. Her absolute unconsciousness
almost moved Mrs. Sambourne to compassion,
but she reflected that a hint of the
truth would probably defeat her object of
Pansy being allowed to remain. She had
not yet heard of the episode of the jewels ;
when she did, all vestige of compunction
faded from her mind.

'' I have something to tell you, girls," said
Mrs. Deveron, calling her daughters into
her room as they went up to dress. " You
are to stay hero for another week all three

of you. What do you say to that?"
"I don't care to stay," said Sophronia,
who had not found any of the party particularly
appreciative of her cleverness, and
wished herself back at Arncester, where she
could meet Mr. Newsome most days, and
enjoy the society of some one who appreciated,
or, in other words, flattered her ; "I'd
rather go home."

I do believe you're in love with Mr.
Newsome," observed her sister ; " but you
know, Soph, it's no use your fancying him
now. It would never do, when I am living
here as Lady Kelmore, for my sister to be the
wife of the Master of the Grammar School !"
"You're not Lady Kelmore yet'*
*' It is pretty clear what he means, Soph,"
said her mother ; '* there's something in
what Julia says. It would never do for you
to be in a hurry ; only think of all Julia will
be able to do for you, take you out in London,
and all that; you'd be mad to throw
yourself away just now."

Who ever said I was going to ?" said
Sophronia ; " I'm in no particular hurry, but
I may just as well wait at home, where I'm
amused, as here, where I'm not. Besides,
perhaps it isn't all so sure as you and Julia
think ; you were certain about Sir Julian."

'show you love to say disagreeable
things !"' said Julia, angrily. *' What is
that?" as there was a knock at the door.

It proved to be Pansy, who had come to
beg the loan of her aunt's glove-stretchers,
having broken her own.

"We are going to stay here another
week, Pansy," said Julia, more graciously
than she generally spoke to her cousin.

"Yes; so Lord Kelmore told me," said
Pansy.

"Lord Kelmore? where did you see
him ?" said Mrs. Deveron, sharply.

"He called me to come into the boudoir
to see the evening light on the river."

"He really is very good-natured to be
plagued with your nonsense ! Oh ! Pansy,

I wanted to tell you you can't wear jet, you
know, as you always do, with your fancy
dress ; what have you to put on ?"

Mrs. Sambourne offered to lend me her
pearls," said Pansy; "she said they were
quite necessary to the dress."

Well, I'm sure !" said Mrs. Deveron,
who was quite offended that Pansy should
share any of the attention which she considered
as Julia's exclusive due.

1 don't see," said Julia, crossly, " why
you need thrust yourself down on Lord
Kelmore's left hand every night ; it is very
presuming of you."

It is not my doing," said Pansy; "you
know he always tells everyone where they
are to sit."

Well, if you've stretched your gloves,
you'd better go now, we want to talk to
lamia," said Julia, and Pansy departed,
nothing loth.

"It is very odd he should not want me
next him," said Julia.

My dear, he doesn't want to make you
too conspicuous ; he is one of the old school."

Julia's wish that Lord Kelmore would
declare himself was not entirely prompted
by the motive she had avowed respecting
Hubert. It was chiefly that her father, on
his return from Arncester the previous day,
had mentioned meeting Harry Vernon ; he
would, of course, be at the ball, and she
would very gladly have avoided his eye
until her fate was settled. If his suspicions
were aroused he would, she felt sure, propose
to her at once ; she well remembered
the difficulty she had had in warding off the
catastrophe when he suspected her attachment
to Leon, and, though she had little
doubt that her fate was now settled, still
she prudently wished not to refuse one
suitor until the other had positively declared
himself. She did not know how to keep
out of Harry Vernon's way ; he had been
away from home for some time, and would
be sure to want to dance with her a great

deal, and of course Lord Kelmore would not
like it, so she must keep out of it somehow.
Oh ! if it were but all settled, and then she
could enjoy herself !

A beautiful sight was presented by the
picture-gallery at Kelmorton on the night
of the fancy-ball. Such an entertainment
had never before been given in Meadow-shire
; it had caused infinite excitement and
curiosity, and great efforts had been made
by everyone to appear their best on the
occasion. Dinner was rather early, and at
ten o'clock the house-party assembled in
the gallery to examine and criticise each
other's costumes. Perhaps no one was so
surprised as was Mr. Deveron when he saw
Julia appear. Mrs. Deveron had a fixed
belief in masculine ignorance of diplomacy,
and was determined not to afford him a
hint of what was going on until the proposal
was fairly made. So she had said nothing
of the dress or the jewels, for fear he
*' might take some crotchet into his head,"

and prevent Julia wearing them. Expecting
to see his daughter as Undine, and having
presented her with a rather expensive
dress for the occasion, he could scarcely'
believe his eyes when she sailed in in her
gorgeous brocade and jewels.

I see you are surprised, George," said
Mrs. Deveron, fearing that, in his astonishment,
he might express audible disapproval,
"but it was Lord Kelmore's wish ; it is after
that picture, and you see Pansy is dressed
after another one."

Well, I should prefer my own clothes
to borrowed ones," said mr. Deveron,
shortly. '' Julia has made a great mistake.
She would have looked very much better
in the Undine dress, which I am very sorry
I gave her."

Mr. Deveron was quite right ; pleased as
she was with herself and her surroundings,
Julia had never looked less well. The
heavy dress was too overpowering for her
plump, short figure, and all the beauty of

her fair wavy hair was concealed b}^ the
powder which had been stuck on with a
profusion of pomatum. Pansy, on the contrary,
looked her very best ; though small,
she was essentially dignified, and it really
seemed as if the unfortunate Lady Kelmore
had returned to life for one evening. Mrs.
Deveron was quite provoked at the admiration
her niece excited, and only recovered
herself when some of her Arncester friends
made significant observations as to Julia's
being:; attired as Lord Remove's wife, and
her wearing such splendid jewels.

It's easy to see which way the wind
blows," said one friend.

Let us know when we may congratulate
you," said another ; and Mrs. Deveron,
though protesting she could not conceive
what they meant, smiled, and bridled, and
looked as pleased as possible.

This ball was intended as a piece of electioneering
popularity, but daring the evening
Lord Kelmore heard that there would be

no vacancy at present : Mr. Enables' health
was slightly better, and, now that the Session
was over, he did not intend to retire.
Well, it appeared to be giving everyone a
great deal of pleasure, and he moved about
courteously among his guests, slightly disturbed,
however, by finding how persistently
Julia clung to his side. She could hardly
be said to be enjoying herself; her dress
was so stiff and heavy with its large hoop
as to render dancing inconvenient ; she was
pleased when people remarked on the
beauty of the dress and jewels, but it hardly
rewarded her for the discomfort, and she
felt Lord Kelmore the only refuge from
Harry Vernon, who was evidently surprised
and puzzled by the state of affairs, and tried
hard to get her alone, as a preliminary to
understanding them. Having heard from
his sisters that she was to be Undine, he
had attired himself in a knight's dress, and
called himself Sir Hildebrand, and though,
never having read the story, Julia was hazy

as to his connection with the character
which she was to have assumed, she yet
understood that it had been intended as a
piece of homage to her, and that he was
vexed at its being thrown away. It made
her very angry to see Pansy evidently admired,
and enjoying herself extremely, and
she also felt much aggrieved that, after what
she had said, Sophronia should allow Mr.
Newsome to be so constantly with her. Altogether,
excepting that she misconstrued Lord
Kelmore's necessary civility, and, believing he
was paying her immense attention, gave herself
airs accordingly, she spent a by no
means pleasant evening. One or two people,
Mrs. Delmar among them, noticed something
peculiar in Lord Kelmore's manner to
Pansy, and Mrs. Delmar, who knew him
too well — having often stayed at Hartfell —
to believe in Julia's power to attract him,
wondered if he were indeed fascinated by
her little favourite. If he were, what would
be Pansy's answer? Of course there was

VOL. II. ' U

a very great difference of age, but Lord
Kelmore was one of the kindest and most
genial of men; if she could but reconcile
herself to the age, she might be a very
happy woman.

It was evident Mrs. Sambourne liked her,
she took every opportunity of showing it ina
somewhat marked manner, and Mrs. Delmar
well knew how anxiously she wished
that her brother should marry. Pansy's
position in the Market-place was, she felt
sure, far from congenial, though the girl
carefully abstained from uttering a word
that could confirm her suspicions, and this
might incline her to listen more favourably
to Lord Kelmore's suit, if he preferred it,
than would otherwise be the case. Altogether,
she left Kelmorton with a strong
feeling of interest and curiosity as to what
the next few weeks might bring forth.

With all her ingenuity Julia had not been
able to elude Harry Vernon's determination
to know his fate. . Excited by the comments

he heard made, and the evident belief
that Mrs. Deveron, though denying
comprehension of what was meant, liked to
be mysteriously congratulated on her daughter's
prospects, he had at length, with much
difficulty, contrived to obtain a dance from
her, and, after one or two turns in silence,
had led her into the conservatory, which
opened out of a room at the end of the
picture-gallery.

'julia," he said, "is this true what
people are saying ?"

"What do they say?" asked Julia, doing
her best to look unconscious.

You know quite well what I mean.
They say that you are going to marry Lord
Kelmore."

There is one objection to that — he has
not asked me," returned Julia, lightly.

'' But if he does? It is clear he will, or
you would not be attired as the wife of the
character he has himself assumed, you would
not be decked in the Kelraore jewels. Julia,

tell me the truth; does your acceptance of
them for a night imply your willingness to
accept their owner for life ?"

I can't think why you should be full of
absurd ideas because of a fancy-dress !" said
Julia, peevishly. 'the valse is over, and I
am engaged for the next quadrille. Let us
uo back to Mamma."

Not till you have answered me," said
Harry Vernon, standing before her as she
rose. " Julia, I have no need to tell you
that I have loved you for long — give me a
true answer now. Can you love me well
enough to be my wife ?"

There was a pause, for Julia, sure as she
felt of Lord Kelmore, had a certain inward
terror of committing the imprudence of
breaking down her bridges and burning her
ships. She tried to temporise.

You have taken me by surprise — you
must give me a little time."

No," he said, and his voice was so stern
that she felt he was thoroughly in earnest.

''X03 Julia, I must have my answer now.
It can be no surprise to you, for I implied
nearly all 1 have said to-night when I spoke
to you in the spring when your cousin was
with you. You understood me then, and I
can give you no more time. Give me my
answer now, and oh, Julia ! let it be Yes I"

At the moment Julia almost hated him
for forcing her to speak when she wished to
be silent, and it was in a hard, cold voice
that she said,

*' I am very sorry, Mr. Vernon, but I cannot
say what you wish."

*' Do you really mean it, Julia? Are you
dazzled with the thought of a coronet and
jewels, a great name and unbounded wealth?
They will not give you the happiness of a
real love. Think again before you sacrifice
yourself to the Moloch of rank and wealth.
You cared for me once, — at least you gave
me ground to hope so."

I was so young," said Julia.

^' Too young to know your own mind ?

Are you sure you know it now ? Are you
certain it is your own inclination you are
consulting, and not your mother's ambition?
Julia, re-consider what you have said ; give
me a hope you will be my wife."

Julia was longing, with feverish impatience,
to conclude the interview, assuring
herself that Lord Kelmore would be surprised,
and perhaps offended, at her remaining
invisible so long, so she murmured,
hastily,

Ask me again in six months," and made
such a decided move towards the door that
he could no longer detain her.

He felt at the time that he was foolish, —
he almost understood that she only refrained
from refusing him definitely because she
was not quite certain of Lord Kelmore. It
hurt both his pride and his affection ; but he
loved her very dearly, and felt that he could
not bear to throw away even the chance of
winning her. Watching his host very narrowly
it did not appear to him that he was

o

very attentive to Julia, — his eyes were constantly
wandering instead to Mademoiselle
de la Rochecaillou ; but then that might
only be owing to the marvellous likeness
which existed between her and the picture ;
and Julia's dress, and, above all, the jewels,
seemed a clear proof of his intentions.

The next morning Mr. and Mrs. Deveron
returned home, taking Sophronia with them,
according to her wish, and it was agreed
that they should dine at Kelmorton the
ensuing Thursday, and take the two girls
home with them afterwards. As they drove
away, Mrs. Deveron's heart swelled with
pride as she saw Julia standing by Lord
Kelmore's side, he bending his head down
and smiling at some remark of hers.

"Not too fatigued to go on with your
sketch, Mademoiselle de la Rochecaillou?"
said Lord Kelmore, looking into the boudoir
soon after.

''No, I am not tired at all," said Pansy.
"Oh ! I was so amused last nidit ! I had

never seen anything of the sort before, and
had no idea how strange it looked to see
different characters so oddly matched."

Yes, and some of the dresses were
rather funny. Who is that Mr. Newsome
who had such a very handsome and correct
Italian dress ? I believe he came from Arn-chester,
but I am a little confused about people,
having been here so little."

He is only just come. He is the master
of the Grammar School, and, I believe, is
very clever. He is writing a novel of the
sixteenth century, and he designed Sophro-
nia's dress."

It was very correct. How well you are
getting on ! Shall you not visit our seat by
the river while you are here ?"

** Yes, indeed," said Pansy, and she fully
intended to do so, but it was bv no means
easy to find the time. She spent the morning
alone in the boudoir, for the sketch
was more difficult than anything she had
yet attempted, and she was anxious to doit

all the justice in her power; and in the
afternoons there was generally some expedition
or scheme of amusement, and Lord
Kelmore would not hear of her being left
out of it. How kind he was to her, Pansy
thought ! and she could not help giving a
sigh as she contrasted her life at Kelmorton,
where she was so considered and made
much of, with that in the Market-place,
where she was so often made to feel herself
in the way. She grew very fond both of
Lord Kelmore and Mrs. Sambourne, and
felt that she should be very sorry when the
time came to go home.

Lord Kelmore talked to her sometimes
about her father, and, though Pansy had
been but a child at the time of his death,
she liked to hear about him, for her mother
had always talked of him so much that his
memory had been kept green in his children's
minds.

It was the last day of the visit, and
Pansy was putting the last touches to her

sketch, when Lord Kelmore came in. After
duly admiring it he observed,

*' I don't think you have ever been down
to the river after all ?"

No," said Pansy; '' I have meant to go
every day, but you have always had some
pleasant plan for the afternoon, and the
days slip away really like magic."

*' I am delighted to find you think so.
Well, I will make no plan for you this
afternoon if you would like to go down
there."

"Yes, I should."

Well, if I were you, I would not start
too soon after luncheon ; the evening light
on the river is particularly pretty, and you
have not so long a walk before you as to
Ancestors'*

So when all had been dispersed on their
several ways, Pansy, who had spent the
time after luncheon in packing up her
drawing materials, sauntered forth through
the garden, blazing in its summer beauty.

and took the path towards the river. She
was very sorry that this charming visit had
come to an end, and that she would awake
the next morning to the solitary life which
she led in the Market-place — solitary, that
is to say, not for want of absolute companionship,
but of sympathy and affection.
Though Lord Kelmore was so much older
than herself, she felt not the slightest shyness
or hesitation in talking to him about
anything that interested her; he always
seemed so interested, and quite ready to
enter into any subject that pleased her.
She felt that the life in the Market-place
would be more irksome after such a pleasant
interlude. She crossed a meadow, gay
with the pretty pink centaury and tiny eyebright,
and, crossing a stile in the hedge,
bride which were growing in profusion the
purple bitter-sweet, and the violet-pencilled,
cream-coloured bells of the henbane, walked
through the thick shade of the wood to her
favourite seat.

The green of the trees she saw from her
rustic throne was duller than when she had
last sat there ; the wild roses were fewer,
and the sprays of the honeysuckle less frequent,
but by the stream were patches of
the lovely grass of Parnassus, water-lilies
starred the quiet reach of the river, while on
patches of earth on the rocks opposite were
tufts of heather bells, and their summits
glowed with purple heather. It was very
still, warm, and lovely, and Pansy leant
back in a delicious daybreak of all she had
enjoyed at Kelmorton, and should have to
tell to Bonne Maman, till she was aroused
by seeing Lord Kelmore standing before
her. He had changed his dress, and wore
the dark brown suit and purple stockings in
which she had first seen him. How impossible
it seemed now that she could ever
have believed him to be Mr. Bush of the
Home Farm ! She had now seen that
worthy man, and was able to appreciate the
difference.

"I longed for one more meeting here,"
said Lord Kelmore, as he approached ;
'show sorry I am this is the last day of
your visit !"

So am I," said Pansy, heartily.

*you really mean it? You have liked
being here ?"

"More than I can tell you," said Pansy.
You and Mrs. Sambourne are so kind,
and — you understand things, and care for
them that no one does in Arncester. They
are very kind." she added, hastily, "but — it
isn't the same."

"You find Arncester dull?"

"I don't mean dull like what Julia calls
it when there are no parties, or when no
one comes to call. It is that I get so tired
of talking only about people and hearing
tales about them, and that is all the talk I
ever hear, except when I go to Daleford.
It is so different from what it was at homes

"Yes — from what you have told me I
can well fancy that."

There was a pause; and then he said,
somewhat abruptly —

Mademoiselle de la Rochecaillou, do you
recollect the day when we first met here?"

When I was asleep and you called me
Titania?" said Pansy. 'eyes, indeed! I
wonder after that how we could ever have
believed you were Mr. Bush."

'* Do you remember what you said?"

"No," in a hesitating tone — "at least,
nothing particular."

"Think again ! it was apropos of Titsima. J'

Oh ! I know, that it was lucky there
was no Puck to press 'love in idleness' into
my eyes."

He came up to her and took her hand.

God knows how I wish there had been.
Tansy, for your love I would give everything
I possess. My child, do not tremble
nor look so bewildered; listen to me.
Pansy, I say nothing but the simple truth
when I tell you that up to the time I saw
you I had never even fancied myself in love,

but froQi that first day I have loved you as
I never dreamt I should love woman. At
first I strove to conquer it, but the feeling
was far too strong. Tell me truh^, child, if
you could love me, if sou could be my wife,
and make me the happiest of men. I know
that I am too old for you, old enough to be
your father ; I have told myself so scores of
times when I have striven to argue down
my passion, but it has been of no avail. As
I say, I am too old ; but, Pansy, my heart
is young, younger perhaps than that of men
years my juniors, and I would love you as
never woman was loved before. Your life
now is distasteful to you ; you say you have
been happy here. Come to me, Pansy, be
my own wife, and it shall be my one thought
by day and by night to make you happy and
shield you from care."

Pansy sat silent ; she was positively
stunned with amazement. That Lord Gilmore
should care for her, should think of
marrying her, was an idea that had never

once entered her mind, and now that it was
presented to her she could hardly grasp it.
Love and marriage were not constantly in
her thoughts as they were in those of her
cousins, and she had been brought up in an
atmosphere totally free from the vulgarism
of matrimonial speculation. The disparity
of age did not strike her as it would have
struck a girl brought up in England. Though
she had heard but little about such matters,
she knew that in France husbands were
chosen for their daughters by the parents,
and that as often as not they were much
older than the girls they married. Monsieur
de Varennes was years older than her
Aunt Louise, and her grandfather had been
twenty years older than Bonne Maman.
Anything over thirty appeared to Pansy to
be so far advanced in the vale of years that
forty or sixty seemed to her very much the
same thing. She did not know how old
Lord Kelmore was, but she felt he had
been very kind to her ; he was infinitely

more sympathetic to her than anyone she
had seen since she reached Arncester, and
it was bewilderment at his thinking of her
that kept her silent rather than any distaste
to his proposal. She had no romantic ideas
of the love that should be felt before marriage
was possible, chiefly, perhaps, because
she had never thought about it, and had no
apprehension of there being any danger that
her heart should awaken too late. But
Lord Kelmore, who naturally could not
fathom all her thoughts, feared that she
hesitated through the dread of giving him
pain, and when he could endure the silence
no longer, he said, in a voice that trembled
in spite of his efforts to make it steady,

I fear, my child, you cannot answer meas
I wish, but do not fear to pain me. I
must learn to bear it."

Pansy looked up.

** It is only that I am so surprised," she
said. " Can it be true ? — do you really
mean it ?"

VOL. n. X

Mean it ! Pansy, I do not think you
can doubt it."

No — only it seems so wonderful. You
are so kind, but I never, never thought of
this."

*' But now you do, can you say you love
me, Pansy — that you will be my wife ?"

"Yes," said Pansy, simply, "I will; 1
shall like to live with you always."

He took her in his arras and kissed her
fondly, with no shadow of doubt as to
whether she realised what she was doing —
whether, indeed, she knew what love was.
He was almost as much a novice as was
Pansy herself, or it must surely have struck
him that a girl really in love would hardly
have accepted his proposal so calmly and
frankly without a blush, and with eyes not
cast down. But this did not occur to him ;
he had got what he wished, and was perfectly
happy and contented"'

How surprised everyone will be !" said
Pansy, after a considerable time spent in

dovelike endearments. She liked Lord
Kelmore very much, she was quite content
in her childish ignorance to promise to
marry him, but she wondered why he could
not sit comfortably on the cushion of wild
thyme at her feet, as he had been content
to do during their early interviews, instead
of beside her, with his arm round her waist,
and she wished very cordially he would
not kiss her so often, though she did not
like to resist : she never liked being kissed.

'* One person will not be."

"Who is that?"

My sister."

Mrs. Sambourne ? — then that is why
she has been so kind to me."

Not entirely, dear ; she was charmed
with you for your own sake — who could
help it?"

I think they will be very much surprised
in the Market-place."

Well, perhaps," and it for the first time
struck Lord Kelmore how devoted Julia

x2

had been to him during the whole of her
visit. " I shall speak to your uncle, Pansy,
to-night after dinner."

Uncle George is always very kind," said
Pansy, " but I never see much of him — he
is always so busy."

*' And I am afraid you have not had a
very congenial home."

*' Oh, indeed they are very kind !" exclaimed
Pansy ; " only they do not care for
the same things."

It was quite late, almost dinner-time, before
Lord Kelmore opened the door of his
sister's boudoir, and said,

Edith, I bring you your future sister."

As he spoke it sounded so strange to
Pansy ; she could hardly believe it was she
who was the topic of conversation. She
sister to Mrs. Sambourne ! It seemed impossible,
and almost ridiculous. But yet,
accustomed as she had been to loving caresses
all her life, it was very sweet to find
herself taken into Mrs. Sambourne's arras,

and embraced with a fervency which she
had not felt since she left La Rochecaillou.

You will be very dear to us, Pansy,"
was all Mrs. Sambourne said, but her
manner spoke volumes, and no further
words were needed.

"When shall you declare your intentions
?" she said, when Pansy had left the
room.

'' I shall tell Mr. Deveron to-night."

"I wonder if he looks upon you so entirely
as a prospective son-in-law as his wife
does?"

I can't imagine what makes you think
that."

I daresay not. Your eyes have been
fixed on Pansy, and you have been naturally
blind to everything else, while I have been
free to use my eyes, and have been considerably
diverted by what I have seen."

'* Edith, it is not like you to be malicious."

"Well, Kelmore, I was thoroughly disgusted.
You never gave Miss Deveron the

least reason to think you cared about her,
except lending her the jewels, which wa
weak of you, I admit. All our friends here
saw quite well who it was you cared for. I
confess I should like to see Mrs. Deveron's
face when she knows it. I only hope she
won't make Pansy very uncomfortable."

"Dear child! — it will not be for long.
Edith, I am happier than I ever believed it
possible I could be."

I don't doubt it ; but there is the ,
and you must control your raptures
for the prosaic considerations of toilette and
dinner."

CHAPTER XII.

It many times falls out that we deem ourselves much
deceived in others, because we first deceived ourselves.

Sir Philip Sidney.

Many a man has a kind of kaleidoscope, where the
bits of broken glass are his own merits and fortunes,
and they fall into harmonious arrangements, and delight
him, often most mischievously, and to his ultimate
detriment ; but they are a present pleasure.

Helps.

11 TRS. Severn had been waiting with
-^'-^ the greatest impatience for tidings
from Julia, expecting every day to hear that
their hopes had been fulfilled. Each day
Julia wrote, and said what her own egregious
vanity caused her firmly to believe, that
Lord Kelmore was paying her immense
attention," and that 'all must be settled

directly." Her mother never doubted that
she was right, and set off on her drive to
Kelmorton with a strong hope that on this
last day " he must have said something."
But Julia looked just as usual, and contrived
to whisper to her that nothing had happened.

Dinner passed off as usual, but afterwards,
when the gentlemen came into the drawing-room,
neither Lord Kelmore nor Mr. Severn
made their appearance. As the time
passed and they were still absent, the mother
and daughter looked at each other, and the
same idea was in both their minds. Lord
Kelmore was evidently old-fashioned, and
thought it correct to assure himself of the
father's consent before venturing to address
the young lady herself.

"It can be nothing else," thought Mrs.
Deveron. "Even if there were any business
to be settled between them, which isn't
likely, Lord Kelmore is the last man to take
such a time to talk of it and neglect his
visitors."

It Struck her what unusual notice Mrs.
Sambourne took of Pansy, but it did not in
the least enlighten her. She did not like
Mrs. Sambourne, not thinking that lady
*' under the circumstances" was sufficiently
civil to her, and she looked forward with
delight to the thought of her annoyance at
finding that her brother had '' made up his
mind for himself, and got out of her leading-strings."


At length the two gentlemen appeared
during one of Pansy's songs, and Lord
Kelmore at once crossed over to the piano,
while Mr. Deveron sat down by Mrs. Sam-bourne,
and was soon engaged in an apparently
interesting conversation. Mrs. Severn's
impatience knew no bounds, and the
moment the carriage was announced she
rose to take leave, seeing that she should
hear nothing till they were alone. Lord
Kelmore accompanied them to the door,
thanked her for having spared her two
young ladies for so long, and put them into

the omnibus, but she could not see that he
took any particularly affectionate leave of
Julia, and his fervent pressure of Pansy's
hand of course passed unnoticed.

The carriage-door was hardly shut, and
they had hardly started, when Mrs. Severn
began.

Well, George ? what did Lord Kelmore
say?"

What people generally do on such occasions,
I suppose, Matilda. Asked my
consent after he had made sure of the young
lady's, and assured me he had never known
what happiness was before. Pansy, you
little quiet Puss, I congratulate you on
your conquest."

*' Do be serious, George. I am not talking
of Pansy, but of Lord Kelmore and
Julia ; of course it could only have been
that which kept you so long."

Julia ! her name was never even mentioned,
— why should it be ? He kept me to tell
me Pansy had accepted him this afternoon,

and to ask my consent, which I need not
say I gave most willingly. I wish you joy
with all my heart, Pansy ; he is a fine fellow,
and you will be very happy with him."

'' George, are you mad ?" almost screamed
his wife ; ^' you cannot mean that he has
been trifling with Julia ? that she has been
supplanted by the foreign serpent we have
warmed and cherished ? You must be
dreaming !"

*' I am not dreaming, and, as to his trifling
with Julia, you must be out of your senses
to think of such a thing. He told me
to-night he had loved Pansy, and determined
to win her if possible, from the first day
lie met her by the river. All the civility
we have received, has been exclusively for
her sake. If Julia has fancied he was
paying her attention, she has been deceived
by her own vanity, and nothing else."

*' It is the most iniquitous shame I ever
heard ! I am surprised at your defending
it ! Why, his attentions at the ball were so

marked, many people congratulated me,
and then his "lending her the family jewels !
it was tantamount to an offer ! I insist,
George, on your calling him to account !"

And I might have worn that lovely
Undine dress, instead of that clumsy old
brocade," cried Julia, bursting into tears.

*' It would have been much better taste
if you had," said her father ; " it was not
like Pansy, who was entreated to wear that
special dress, — you asked for yours and the
jewels too. I only heard that by accident tonight,
and very much annoyed I was too."

"It isn't true," cried Mrs. Deveron.

"Is it not? Well, I heard two of the
young ladies laughing over it to-night. I
fancy they had an inkling of what had
happened this afternoon, and were probably
making merry over Julia's vain expectation."

'^ And you think it all right ? You are
content that your child should be slighted
and insulted after her hopes had been so
unjustifiably raised ? — that she should be

thrown over for one who has meanly intrigued
to get what she knew was of right
her cousin's."

'stop, Matilda," said Mr. Deveron, in a
very determined voice ; " you may moan
as you like over the mistake into which you
have fallen, and the ridicule with which you
and Julia have chosen to cover yourselves, but
you shall not insult Pansy by saying what is
absolutely untrue of her. Pansy, my dear,
I am heartily sorry you should have heard
all this, but I am sure, amiable girl as you
are, you will do your best to forget it, or, at
all events, if that is impossible, that you
will be silent on the subject. Don't let
what your aunt said in her annoyance pain
you. As I told you, Lord Kelmore has
thought of you, and you only, since your
first meeting, and the 'attentions' of which
Julia talks only existed in her own imagination.
I am heartily glad, my dear child, of
your good fortune, for, though he is so
much older than you, I consider that in

marrying such a man as Lord Kelraore, and
one so devoted to you, you are certain of
happiness. Now, Pansy, answer me one
question : Did you hear Julia ask for the
dress she wore?"

No reply. Pansy could not bear to
make mischief.

Pansy, child, answer me."

She said how much she should like a
dress like it," said Pansy, reluctantly.

Ah ! it was true then ; and, of course,
the jewels too ?"

I don't know ; I heard nothing about
them," said Pansy, infinitely relieved at
being able honestly to say so.

"Now," said Mr. Deveron, addressing his
wife and daughter, '' don't let me hear
another word of any nonsense about Lord
Kelniore's having paid Julia attention. Of
course he has been civil to her, but anything
else has been entirely the work of your
own imaginations. If, as you say, people
congratulated you, it is only owing to the

false position in which Julia had put herself
by asking for what would never have
been offered to her. She ought to be
ashamed of herself, and so ought you,
Matilda, for not having put a stop to it. I
am sure I feel so for you both ! I daresay
Lord Kelmore has been too engrossed to
perceive it, but Mrs. Sambourne and all her
friends must have been amusing themselves
at your expense. Well, it is over, and your
own reflections can't be very pleasant, so I
will say no more. Pansy, Lord Kelmore is
coming down tomorrow at eleven o'clock
to make his first appearance as your accepted
lover ; however, I don't suppose that is
any news to you."

No," said Pansy, quietly ; " he said he
should come."

She felt shocked and bewildered by all
she had heard. Matrimony was in no shape
a frequent topic of thought with her, but, in
the light of a speculation, it was absolutely
unknown ; she had never heard the fashionable

talk of ions partis and advantageous
alliances that takes the bloom of delicacy
and innocence off too many young minds,
nor had she ever been the victim of the
silly jokes about love and lovers with
which many girls are assailed while yet
but children in years, totally incapable
of comprehending the meaning of real
love, and only able to learn to giggle
foolishly at the idea of a "lover," and to
believe that every man who addresses them
courteously must necessarily be one. She
had not yet by any means recovered from her
bewilderment at discovering that Lord Gilmore
wanted to marry her, and that she had
promised to be his wife, and her mind was
almost too full to be capable of quite receiving
the further impression that her
cousin had expected the offer to be made to
her, and was bitterly disappointed that it
had not. Her astonishment had prevented
her understanding the unkind things that
her aunt had said about herself; the whole

day since luncheon-time seemed a troubled
dream from which she must surely awake
to find herself once more the unmoved
Pansy of old.

But when she awoke the next morning
there was still the certainty that something
very remarkable had happened, and, though
she could not at the first recollect what it
was, the remembrance soon came. It was
no dream — it was really she, Penseee de la
•Rochecaillou, who yesterday by the river
had promised to be Lord Helm ore's wife.
His wife ! Pansy repeated the word over
and over to herself. That meant to be
what Bonne Maman had been to grand-papa,
what Mamma had been to Papa, what
Aunt Louise was to Monsieur de Varennes.
Unconsciously, Pansy did not say in her
thoughts, " what Aunt Matilda is to Uncle
George." It seemed to her that what she
had done was a very serious and awful
thing. She had somehow acquired the belief
that the happiness of married people

VOL. II. Y

depended entirely on each other. Was it
possible that a little insignificant child like
herself could ever make a man like Lord
Kelmore happy?

It seemed impossible, and yet — he was
much older, he ought to know better than
she, and he assured her that he asked no
better happiness than to pass the rest of his
life with her 1 It was very strange — she
could not understand it. She got up, found
her prayer-book, and read through the
marriage service very attentively. Her
thoughts were not, as Julia's would have
been, of her wedding-dress, of the number
of her bridesmaids, and of the fantastic costume
they should wear, of the delight of
being a peeress, and of taking a high place
in society; they were of the difficulty and
the awfulness of what she had undertaken
to do. Surely it could not be required of
her to love Lord Kelmore more than
Bonne Maman and Leon? If it were, she
feared that she should never be able to do
her duty.

When she went down to breakfast she
was received with marked coldness by her
aunt and Julia ; they just spoke to her, but
it was in a rough, rude way, and after Mr.
Deveron had left the house they neither
addressed her nor answered her when she
spoke to them. A letter from La Roche-caille
that morning had made Pansy uneasy.
Her grandmother spoke of having
been unwell, and it was so rare for her to
complain that it frightened her granddaughter
much. The old lady wrote expressing
a hope that her granddaughter
might be allowed to come to her a month
earlier than had been originally intended,
at the beginning of October instead of November.
Madame de Varennes was to
return to Paris the last day of September
to make preparations for the marriage of
her niece Marie, and there was therefore no
reason why Pansy's visit should be delayed.

*' Don't ask me — I wash my hands of all
sour concerns," said Mrs. Deveron, coldly,

y2

Ashen her niece asked if there would be any
objection to the change; 'you had better
apply to your uncle ; he seems to approve
of your conduct."

Mr. Deveron looked up angrily, but he
apparently thought nothing would be gained
by remarking on his wife's tone, so hern
merely answered his niece.

I have no objection, Pansy, but you
forget there is some one else now who will
expect to be consulted : I don't know what
Lord Kelmore will say when he hears you
want to run away."

In truth, Lord Kelmore did not at all approve.
He had hoped to persuade Pansy to
consent to an immediate marriage, the end of
September at the latest, and it was a terrible
blow to find that her heart was set on
spending three or four months with her
grandmother. She was such a shy little,
yielding creature that he thought a little
pressure and remonstrance would infallibly
make her give in, but to his surprise, and

also to that of her uncle, she stood firm.

*' I will take you myself to La Rochecail-
lou; we will go on our wedding tour," said
Lord Kelmore, persuasively.

But Pansy shook her head.

"It would not be the same thing at all ;
I should belong to you, and not to Bonne
Maman. You are all that is good and
kind, but I want to go back, and be her
very own child once more. Bonne Maman
is old, and I have been away from her a
year. She would like to have me all to
herself this once."

And so it was settled, much against Lord
Kelmore's wish, though he could not bear
to thwart Pansy, that she should go the
first week in October, and return the middle
of January, and that the wedding should
take place in February, with all due pomp
and circumstance.

Meanwhile, Lord Kelmore was determined
to see as much as possible of his bride,
and was constantly in the Market-place,

until Mrs. Deveron said peevishly that she
was " sick of the sight of him."

Julia's mortification showed itself in such
rude speeches and unkind manners to Pansy
that her father several times spoke very
sharply to her on the subject, though without
any satisfactory results. He was at
length glad to sanction her paying a visit to
a friend in an adjoining county, from which
visit she was not to return till after Pansy's
departure.

END OF THE SECOND VOLU:\ir::.

London : PRINTED BY DUNCAN Macdonald, Blenheim HOUSE.

^mM:

mm

i

w

VA

m

U4^

'^*^Z's^^\^^'-^l

'^^i^

W^m^

l^m^M.T^'M\
