a I E) Rally

OF THE
UNIVERSITY
or ILLINOIS



R2212n

vel

f]

OR

Revelations OF Modern lEISH LIFE

BY

AMOS Reade

IN TWO VOLUMES
VOL. I.

WILLIAM BLACKWOOD AND SONS

EDINBURGH AND LONDON

MDCCCLXXXVI

All Rights reserved

V. 1

PROLOGUE,

Let no one imagine this story is too highly
coloured, or fancy " things have quieted down."
For six years Ireland has been subjected to illegal
coercion of a most stringent nature ; and,
as the following resolution of a southern Grand
Jury, sent to the Executive during this present
month, shows, they still suffer. " Resolved — That

the Grand Jury of the County regards

with horror the long list of malicious injuries,
numbering over forty, which have come before
it, the applicants claiming and having been
awarded compensation to the amount of £700
for wilful, malicious, and in many cases most
cruel injury done to their cattle and other property

— the perpetrators of the outrages in no
case having been brought to justice; and this
Grand Jury desires to express the hope that the
Government will take such steps as will prevent
the recurrence of such lawlessness, which involves
ruinous taxes on the farmers, and is inconsistent
with the prosperity or civilisation of any country
or the safety of society."

This is corroborated by other evidence, each
local paper giving weekly lists of " outrages," and
declaring that " The National League is paramount
: whenever its mandate or unwritten law
is disobeyed, the offender is persecuted to such an
extent, life is a weary burden to him or her."
Day lighting " now follows " moon lighting," and
there is a loud cry for help. United we stand —
divided we fall.

Juhj 15, 1886.

CHAP.

I. EVOLUTION,

II. IRISH SENTIMENTS IX BYGONE DAYS

m. A LITTLE CLOUD NO BIGGER THAN A MAN'S

HAND, .

IV. THE BREAKING OF THE ICE,

V. UP AND DOING,

VI. THE GATHERING OF The STORM, .

VII. MR DYMOCk's NATIONAL SENTIMENTS,

VIII. ILL WEEDS GROW APACE, .

IX. MOONLIGHTERS,

X. LAND-LEAGUE TACTICS,
XL MOONLIGHTING,

Nil A THREATENING LETTER,

XIII. THE LAND-LEAGUE HUNT, .

XIV. THE EARL TURNS OVER A NEW LEAF AND IS

BOYCOTTED,

PAGE




4.3





















26i^

CHAPTEE I.

EVOLUTION.

Under ordinary circumstances preachers select a
text whereby to illustrate the truths they desire to
inculcate. In like fashion, story-tellers drape a
hero with the pet ideas they mean to elaborate.
Texts and truths are sometimes misapplied and
inappropriate, heroes fantastic fancies, hobbies
ridden to the death with misdirected energies.

In this present veracious story of facts, which
are stranger than fiction, we do not need a hero,
and hope our readers will excuse the selection of a
nonogenarian as our first object of interest.

Take up that invaluable book ' The Peerage,'

VOL. L A

open at B, turn until you find Blankshire, under
which head may be read — " Blankshire, Earl of
(Ulick Fitzgerald), Viscount Killballymactaggart,
Baron of Cardiff in Wales, Baron of Mull in the
Peerage of Ireland, and Baron Upton in the
United Kingdom, of Ballykillbegs Castle, in the
County of Blankshire ; Lord Lieut, and Custos
Rotulorum of the County — b. 20th Sept.
1788."

This history beginning, as it actually does,
A.D. 1878, many will think the Earl of Blank-shire's
prolonged existence a physiological fact of
more interest to scientific than ordinary minds.
But modern education teaches the rotatory scheme
is unending; that as each passing year produces
and sows its quota of vegetable and other germ
for future ages, so also the human race bring forth
ideas, and mostly die ere the harvest of their days
is reaped.

Evolution is allowed on all sides to be the
natural order of things, consequently Lord Blank-shire's
wide span of life, stretching from before
the Union to these modern Home Eule days,
illustrates the shortcomings and toils of a century

of Irish life — the careless seed sown, the ill weeds
now choking good seed.

But this alone is not all ; the fast-running
sands of this old man's life are worthy of record,
because they form a sensational drama of exceptional
interest.

Born in troubled times, Ulick Fitzgerald was
only a weakly boy in "'98." Of the horrors of
that time he had but faint recollection, all his
thoughts concentrating on the fragile girl-mother
who then died. He was a timorous child, whom
the mother had sheltered beneath her wing, instead
of allowing him to run the ordinary risks of
youths of his age and day. Therefore, when they
had to fly by night before a savage crowd of disaffected
rebels, and she succumbed to the horrors
of that flight, the boy only remembered the loss
of his mother. His mother was dead, the love
which had shielded him was no more, and he remained
a sensitive wretched being, without a
compass to guide him through the shoals, or
shelter to protect him from the storms of life.
No longer did loving hand smooth his ruffled bed
of roses, or pull aside the brambles from his path.

Misunderstood, he suffered keenly. Ridiculed for
weaknesses lie could not overcome, he was perpetually
victimised, daily scarified, until he grew
into a sensitive, egotistical youth, whose every
breath was a mental anguish.

His burly, careless, and in his own way busy,
but not unkind father, with a cheery active nature,
was entirely incapable of comprehending this uncongenial
son. He thought this boy a fool, a
molly-coddle, a shy lad, who must be roused to
something ; and groaned that his other son, his
pet Gerald, was not his heir.

At eighteen his father sent Ulick Fitzgerald
to London, to see life and learn manners. Bewildered
at his surroundings, the youth drifted
with the Court crowd, and was absolutely miserable,
until his imagination was captivated by a
beautiful girl.

She was a Court beauty, — an Aspasia who
played on his foibles skilfully, and for a brief
space steeped his soul in a fool's paradise of
bliss. The young man fancied himself in love
beloved — and was about to marry his idol.
Fortunately, ere the knot - matrimonial was tied

the young man saw this fair one's cloven foot.
His prospective coronet and not himself was the
object of her adoration.

Disillusioned, Ulick Fitzgerald broke through
the net that had caught him, fled from Aspasia,
and ever after fearing, never again ventured to
sun himself in woman's smile.

Shortly after his father died, and at the early
age of two-and-twenty, Ulick Fitzgerald found himself
his own master, and alone in his stately home.

Cycles have revolved since then, and every
year that passed has further frozen the fountain
of this lonely man's heart sympathies. Each
year shunning his kind, Lord Blankshire has
starved his better nature, until youthful shyness
has assumed the cankerous form of a self-consciousness,
rendering his existence an unlovely
incubus.

Despite shy uncongeniality. Lord Blankshire is
a proud man, essentially an aristocrat, and fondly
cherishing the exclusiveness of his " position " as
an altitude which he is glad to think he has
never desecrated by rubbing elbows with plebeian
plutocracy.

Never, no never, has he admitted within the
radius of his sphere any outward and visible sign
of latter-day degeneracy or modern democracy.
No American ideas, no Eadical proclivities, dare
be aired in his presence. Nature abhors a
vacuum, so his " nerves " abhor a crowd, and
it requires more " motive power " to press this
recluse into contact with his neighbours than it
does to exhaust the air in a receiver. Year by
year he has grown more superlatively exclusive —
in his own eyes a more rigid pillar of propriety
according to modern ideas more mentally benighted
; still, according to the limited scope of
his view, with rigid propriety if depressing effect,
he has endeavoured punctiliously to perform his
duties, in that " state of life " to which the laws of
primogeniture and strict entail have called him.

Ever studiously polite, the focus of his cold
grey eye is a social agony. Many victims lost in
the chill fog of stilted platitudes, enunciated for
their benefit, would hail with delight a personal
insult, which might give excuse for avoiding the
old man's didactics. But to the Earl a rudeness
is an impossibility, a vulgarity unbecoming his

station ; so those whose misfortune it is that
they must occasionally visit the Earl, dread the
hour of unsocial intercourse, and brace themselves
for that ordeal with what fortitude their natures
supply and the occasion requires.

To sum up this autocrat, he is an anatomy of
a man, a machine-made article, who has ever lived
by rule. Saturated with " self " — that is, the
abstract " self," representing an honourable position
— the man has never yielded to an impulse
(except in the case of Aspasia), never expanded
with sympathy, never permitted himself to enjoy.
Poor Ulick has ever had a " hard time," individual
comfort being a nothing in the Earl's eyes, everything
being sacrificed to an irksome if honourable
position.

To this somewhat clay-ideal this man has ever
sacrificed, and with the " honour " of his " position
" ever staring him out of countenance, has
existed, while all that is really honourable within
him is ossified. He is irritably insistent as to
tricks of speech, ceremony, and suchlike ; trifles
good enough in themselves, but over weighted by
which feathers of fashion all the higher aspirations

generally become paralysed. Thus at fourscore
years and ten the Earl is a hard nut to crack.
There is nothing soft about him. Wizened, gnarled,
weary, worn in his outer man, alone in the desert
of a lordly house : there is but one soft spot, a
sort of green pasture, an almost senile memory,
which he cherishes and calls love — love for the
mother who died in his far-away childhood.

So much for the man. Now for a glimpse
of his surroundings, and those " talents " which he
has sought to keep as " talents in a napkin."

When early in the present century his father
died, Ulick Fitzgerald had succeeded to a goodly
heritage, with no encumbrance but a brother. To
this brother the Earl entrusted the management of
his estates.

Gerald Fitzgerald had been his father's companion
and idol, and was also a counterpart of his
rough virtues, few principles, and careless habits.
This pleasure-loving, happy-go-lucky, recklessly
generous individual, accepted the agency as a
matter of course," and " managed " the estate
with indifferent partiality. That is to say, he
collected rents promiscuously, taking coin or kind

from the tenants to supply the immediate wants
of the master. Fines were levied to meet the
requirements of the lord of the manor, with as
easy a conscience as " presents " were accepted to
replenish his own impoverished exchequer, or leases
sold to provide funds for an election.

Gerald Fitzgerald's administration was hampered
by no theories ; he was not an exceptionally
bad man, neither was he a deceitful or dishonest
brother ; he was merely uneducated,
without method, and lived in an age when country
gentlemen thought little, knew less, and
cared naught about the future. Such " do
unto others as you would they should do unto
you " ethics as are now aired in society were
flights of political economy quite above Gerald
Fitzgerald's comprehension. He was a pleasure-loving
soul, a very single-minded man, inasmuch
as he looked on life from only one point of view,
as his oyster. Gerald Fitzgerald's need limited
his horizon. Gerald Fitzgerald's pleasure was his
motive power. He was agent to his brother the
Earl, an office which he believed to be a pleasant
well-paid sinecure, specially instituted for the

benefit of the cadets of the family. The agency
was a sort of vice-hardship, integral with the
family status, the agent a minor potentate, whose
business " it was to collect and dispense cash.
Meum and tuum were not critically balanced
fractions in his moral, and sums quite beyond
the calculating of his intellectual, powers. Thus,
without a second thought this agent took from
the tenants what money was needed for the present
exigencies of the Earl's state or his own
pleasure. Fortunately for the estate, a premature
decay of nature obliged this " good-natured," easygoing
gentleman of the olden style to resign
office, and take possession of a six-foot fee-simple
of his own.

He was succeeded by his son, a young soldier,
with more intellect and education than his father,
much conscience, and a sincere desire to act
justly. New to agriculture and political economy,
this new agent had some difficulty in adapting
his sword to a ploughshare.

But Captain Fitzgerald was persistent, and by
precept and example endeavoured to overcome
every obstacle. He argued patiently with the

Earl, he more patiently ad\dsecl the tenants, as he
set diligently to work on the ungrateful task of
eradicating old abuses and introducing modem
improvements.

Captain Desmond was indefatigable, and though
his logic failed to convince the Earl, or convert
the tenants from the error of their ways, he
managed to evolve some system out of chaos.

The Earl's agent being also his heir, was ina
position to be insistent. Taking advantage,
therefore, of his position, despite the old man's
sarcasms on his new-fangled theories of " ameliorating
the condition of the people," and decided
objection to clodhoppers being promoted to the
higher standard. Captain Desmond Fitzgerald bore
the Earl's grumbles, and endeavoured to improve
the condition of the people and the estate. But
though he somehow managed the landlord, the
people continued as thorns in his path. The
three E's found no favour in their sight. Though
the agent and prospective master spoke with the
wisdom of Solomon, they utterly declined to see
any good could be attained by higher mental or
terrestrial cultivation. Schools were occasionally

endured, while cereal crops found no favour in
their eyes, and machinery versus hand-labour
continued an abomination.

In vain Captain Desmond demonstrated, — the
honest tenants continued deaf to his homiletics,
until he imported a steam thrashing-machine.
Then indeed he brought a hornet's nest about his
ears. AMiat ! this an improvement ? It was
barefaced robbery. Farm-work otherwise accomplished
than by the labour of their own thews
and sinews took the bread out of the mouths
of their children. So grumbled the people. And
the Earl was also supercilious. Enjoying his
agent's discomfiture, he turned up his aristocratic
nose at the new-fangled machine, calling the iron
Hercules an " absurd innovation " ; and beincp
rather pleased than otherwise when one night
the alarmed labourers destroyed the " cumbrous
monstrosity."

After a quarter of a century of uphill work,
few successes, and many disappointments, Captain
Fitzgerald died.

At his demise, the Blankshirites were still unsophisticated,
much preferring known abuses to

adventuring on unknown improvements. There
was a natural conservatism amongst them, and
a decided scepticism as to successful agriculture
requiring a scientific foundation.

Moreover, this slowness of accepting the inevitable
was not entirely confined to " the people."

Many who prided themselves on " culture "
were also behind the times, and Lord Blankshire
insisted on keeping his head in the mists of a
primitive ignorance. Born in the purple, he
haughtily repudiated modern science and improvements
as inventions of the evil one, denominating
each change as socialistic.

From his altitude of pinnacled greatness, this
great man " looked down on the modern world,
boasting with self-important dignity of his conservatism.
A whimsical '■' ism," the fixed apex of
which was horror at any divergence from that narrow
path wherein his feet had heretofore marched.

The old man had cynically ridiculed the young
man's efforts, laughed at his discomfitures, and
was galling in the disdain with which he condemned
Utopian ideas. He had scoffed at peasants
placed as potentates. Indeed the transmutation

from corduroy to broadcloth was, the old
man said, an impossibility. A monstrous idea !
one which, if it could be carried out, would be a
huge mistake, entailing ruin and misfortune on
the country. Indeed, aiming at such would be
worse than a mistake " — " a crime subversive of
all order and decency."

To hold the even balance of justice, and act as
buffer between this autocrat and " the people,"
was no easy matter.

The Earl maintained that " the people " did
very well as they were. Endeavouring to ameliorate
a condition with which they were generally
content, was only putting " notions " into their
heads, inciting them to disturb the privileges of
the aristocracy. Thus he had ever considered his
active agent's " improvements " as so many lunacies,
only permitting them, because perpetually
interfering and refusing was too great a personal
exertion. While the tenants had accepted this
agent's benefits with a grumble, declaring they
were hardships, and even when results proved the
agent's wisdom, the farmer scarcely admitted the
success was owing to improved methods.

No ; tenants still preferred damp cabins full
of smoke to whitewashed cottages with modern
chimneys, windows, and doors. The pig in the
corner was company, the pig in a sty a grievance.
God help the poor craythur that paid the rent !
Surely she could not prosper in the cold. Bead !
they were all more comfortable and warmer
together ! "

So neither landlord nor tenant were quite satisfied
with Captain Fitzgerald's modern improvements.
When he demised, Lord Blankshire gave
his grand-nephew, the dead man's son, the agency.
Percy Fitzgerald was very young — but two-and-twenty
— when he was thus installed, and both
landlord and tenants counted on " easy times."
In this both miscalculated. Percy was young,
but he was also enthusiastic, had all the family
strength of will, and was as impressed as the Earl
himself with the importance of " position." Justly
considering his position as " heir-apparent " and
agent " one of exceptional influence, the young
man determined to inaugurate a new phase of life
for the tenants. Buoyed by hope, full of righteous
indignation at oppressions, and despising the

difficulties that interposed, this youthful enthusiast
put his shoulder to the collar, and worked
with a will to draw his car-load of reforms over
the estate.

At this epoch the Irish Land Bill of 1870 was
launched on the sea of fate as the panacea for all
Irish grievances, and accepted as such by many.
Amongst these believers in land as the keystone
of peasant prosperity was Percy Fitzgerald, who,
like many other young Irishmen, was patriotic,
and dreamed of an Irish Utopia — a land of peace
and plenty, where every man had enough, and no
poverty obtruded its wan pale face.

Xow was the opportunity. Under this new
Land Bill, Percy felt he could attain his ideal,
and create a model tenantry which would be a
pattern to the county. As the " agent " thought
of the end to be attained, he counted the cost but
little.

Not so the Earl. He scoffed and sneered and
worried, satirised the young man's propositions as
pretty fancies, chimeras, moonshine, soap-bubbles,
until his withers were well wrung, and then gave
him his way, prophesying failure.

And, alas for poor Ireland ! the cynic proved the
true prophet.

Bitter disappointment ere long taught Percy
that this new Land Bill, with its multiple " legal
definitions," did not always accord with justice.
He saw the new law, regardless of local tradition,
prejudice, obvious rights, run — with anything but
well-oiled wheels — through many ancient bulwarks,
and not peace but strife, follow in its
wake.

His best endeavours were bailie — on the one
side by the tenants', now enlightened by the attorney,
cunning, caution, and growing greed ; and
on the other hampered by the landlord's perverse
obstinacy. The much-bewildered agent found
landlord's and tenants' conflicting interests and
crotchets perplexing problems. The old Earl,
immensely amused at the young man's embarrassments,
never wearied of deriding his Quixotism.
Thus harassed, Percy Fitzgerald's enthusiasm
evaporated, till only common-sense remained.

At first Percy had been angry with the Earl,
then with the tenants, then with himself, then
with the bill. He fumed, chafed, pondered, .

I. B

ally perceived the legal " olive branch " was a
delusion — this " peace-offering " a snare. It had
promised all manner of good things : it had
produced a myriad of evils.

Where was now the childlike belief in, the
heartfelt respect for, " the master " ? Good feeling
was blunted, sympathy estranged, confidence
destroyed, friendships obliterated. Tenants who
had hitherto looked up to and believed in the
landlord as the poor man's best friend, now looked
at him askance. Mutual trust was a thing of
the past, a virtue destroyed, — this hydra-headed
monster bill having ruthlessly murdered faith, and
then given birth to suspicion.

As all this was by degrees brought home to
Percy's understanding, he saw with a sigh those
theories which had been the bright dream of his
youth vanish, and himself left face to face with a
ruin of hard facts.

It was a sad day to him when he first realised
that rattling the rusty chains of obsolete customs
had produced evil, and that the friction of petty
prejudices was creating sparks which in time would
kindle a fire.

The young man ^Tas slow to believe, and grudgingly
admitted, that this English boon was a law
that ruined : as with technical acumen it decided
individual claims, ignoring sentiment, and thus
loosened those bonds of mutual goodwill which
had hitherto linked man to man.

He was slower still to see or acknowledge the
humiliating fact that, under its withering influence,
civility, generosity, all the higher instincts
of a civilising tendency, became a dead letter.

There was now no reason to cultivate " good
feeling." As the law gave every man his right,
civility was servility. Courtesies could win nothing
in the business which now chained landlord
to tenant. Goodwill was nowhere, when of
necessity each contracting party's object was to
secure for himself every privilege that the quibbles
of the law permitted.

From the creation to the present, it has been
hard times " when law and not love has ruled
men's destinies.

Percy saw and sighed, and yet did not anticipate
that out of the unhealthy selfishness thus
engendered greater evils would go-ow. That

hitherto quiet peasants, indoctrinated or inoculated
with a " grievance " by specious adventurers,
whose endeavour was to foment evil and give
spurious life to expiring abuses, would ere long
disrepute old ties ; that presently every remnant
of mutual interest and kindly feeling would
be effaced ; that the poor man's need would change
to greed, his highest aspiration be self-aggrandisement.
Yet such sentiments were inculcated and
matured between 1870 and 1878, when our story
proper actually begins.

Percy Fitzgerald was still the Earl's agent ;
Utopian theories, having proved fleeting clouds,
had vanished, but a firm determination still strove
to make the best of things as they were. He
still warred against the hard facts of the Earl's
isms " and the tenants' " grievances," and had sofar
risen in the old man's esteem by his perseverance
and pluck, that he generally gave him his
own way. Yet it was with much fear and trembling
that in the year 1878 the young man proposed
to the autocrat his latest idea — a wife !

Percy declared his views with much doubt as
to their reception ; he was prepared for a storm

of sarcasm, abuse, prohibition. Not that he would
have been subservient to the latter, but he expected
some disagreeable scenes before he could
carry out his intention.

Great, therefore, was his astonishment to find
this proposition graciously received by the head of
his house.

The Earl smiled a thin set smile ; declaring,
as-percy was the heir, it was essential he should
have a successor — a wife was complemental for the
glory of their house. Therefore this proposed
improvement met with his lordship's approval.

Yes ; cynic, critic, woman-hater, and ever fastidious,
on this important question the autocrat
abstained from sarcasm, graciously sanctioning his
nephew's arrangement.

Indeed the Great Mogul was unusually demonstrative,
quietly playful with his grand-nephew,
further testifying his approbation of the elected
bride by bestowing on her the family diamonds.
To her the Earl forwarded this magnificent token
of esteem with a note as quaint as himself. He
declared, in small characters like print, that, " It
gave him very great pleasure to have this opportunity

of presenting these family jewels to the
admired daughter of an old friend," and concluded
his epistle by promising to grace the ceremony
with his presence.

This latter sacrifice of personal comfort indicated
how very highly he approved of the gentle
girl this scion of his race elected to marry.

The bride's parents declared nothing could be
more complimentary than the Earl's note, or more
magnificent than the diamonds. The stones were
splendid, albeit the setting, like the donor's manners,
were cumbrously old-fashioned, — so cumbrous
that they elicited smiles of wondering
pleasure more than actual admiration from the
gratified recipient. These jewels had last shone
on the bosom of the beautiful countess, his lordship's
venerated mother, and these treasures, like
his affections, had been buried for the best part of
a century. Now jewels and perhaps affections
were to be exhumed for Mary O'Brien's benefit.

Percy was highly delighted. He, regarding this
caclecm as an auspicious augury, laughingly declared
Mary was a witch, her influence having
produced the first symptom of human sympathy

to which he had ever known his elderly relative
succumb.

The young man, who had nervously pondered
over his proposals for months, fearing to annoy
his aged relative, was deeply gratified by the way
in which the old man appreciated the girl he was
about to marry.

And Mary O'Brien, wise in her generation, and
glad, at Percy's pleasure, determined to utilise her
opportunities, and cultivate the Earl's goodwill,
in pursuance of which she decided to wear the
old man's gift on her wedding-day. To this the
bridesmaids laughingly remonstrated, urging with
truth that the " woman-hater's votive - offering "
was more suitable for the South Kensington
Museum than the adornment of a nineteenth-century
bride.

One declared " they over weighted, and did not
adorn her slight figure;" another, that " she looked
more like a lavishly decorated Madonna than an
ordinarily attired bride." But Mary smiled. She
wore them with a purpose, and would almost
have desecrated the occasion by arraying herself
in sackcloth and ashes, if by so doing she could

attain her end — to please Percy, by winning the
old Earl's heart.

Had the bride omitted to wear the diamonds,
Lord Blankshire would have made no remark, perhaps
he would not have missed them. As it was,
he made no remark, but the girl gained her object.

The old man's eyes were for a moment dazzled,
when he saw the magnificent family insignia
flashing' on the girl, who was to be the mother
of the future Gracchus ; then they were for an
instant dim, as he remembered they had last been
exhibited on the bosom of his beautiful and ever
to be lamented mother. Thus, by her delicate
apprehension of the old man's idiosyncrasy, Mary
gave as much pleasure to his ossified heart as it
was capable of feeling. More, indeed, than he or
she dreamed of, as then and there she entered in,
and made a corner for herself amongst the old
man's shrivelled-up memories. There was an
unwonted flush on his cheek, and quite a smile
in the hard grey eye, as after the ceremony the
Earl surprised himself, and gratified the company,
sealing his approbation by saluting with his lips
the bride's cheek.

This last significant act satisfied Percy that
Mary's appreciative thoughtfulness in seeing and
ministering to the foibles of the old man were
crowned with success. He was more than pleased,
obliged to her who had conquered the Earl for
his sake, and was indeed a happy man, as he
drove away with " the dearest girl in the world
for his wife."

CHAPTEE II.

IRISH Sentiments IX BYGONE DAYS.

The world was steeped in stillness. Not the
awed hush of a death vigil, nor that haunted
silence that makes miserable the wakeful hours
of black night, but a pleasant quiet. Such restful
calm as is only possible on a fair hillside,
where nature, rejoicing in the blaze of an August
mid-day sun, is full of pleasant murmuring.

In such a beatitude as this stands a farmhouse,
against the door-sill of which leans a young man.
His hands are deep in his pockets, as he lolls
there, complacently contemplating the prospect.

Across the road a few aspens droop their silver-lined
leaves pensively, as if listening to the song
of the little stream rippling at their feet, in which
stand a few somnolent cattle, lazily switching

their flail-like tails, in the vain hope of dispersing
the myriad flies that hum around, settle on,
and torment their mottled hides. These cows, after
the bovine habit, contentedly chew the cud, while
perfuming the summer day with scented breath.
Undulating slopes of sun-kissed sward merge in
the spongy waste of the neighbouring bog, — a
dun-coloured spacious flat, that throws out in
beautiful contrasts terraced dikes crowned with
blue bog-myrtle, walls arid towers of brown baked
turf, mounds of purple heather, and soft white
plumes of bog cotton, which flourish exceedingly in
its ooziness, and above which are the mountains.

To the west, fields of grain bow reverent heads
to the god Sun, that has magically transformed
their verdure into gold. Beyond these is the
town, — a sea-side town, with southern aspect,
pleasantly situated on a hill that slopes to the
water's edge, where its low-lying streets are frequently
invaded by the spring-tides. The promontory
on which the town is built is clasped by the
white gleaming arms of the sea. In the far west,
where land and water meet, are shores of golden
sands, which glitter in the sunshine. On the

north of this promontory, wild cliffs and huge
boulders form a wall, which holds back the wide
ocean from rolling in its fury over those miles of
fertile hills and over the town, — from making the
northern estuary of She Dhu one sea with the
bay proper of the Mactaggarts' country — a bay
which is hemmed in on the south by a range of
mountains piled one above the other ; the heights
and hollows of which are coloured by the natural
tints of countless vegetable growths, cunningly
blended by the master-hand of Father Time.

These lesser hills and greater mountains are a
glorious sight to see, as in their steadfast clinging
together they bid defiance to the ocean waves.

Now, as the August sun shines strong, the
peaks of these mountains fade away and are lost
in the blue heavens, blended by that white vaporous
opaqueness which the heat has drawn from
deep crevices, and thrown like a thin veil over
the russet-browns, delicate golds, royal purples,
and multitudinous greeneries carpeting the quiet
valleys.

It is a lovely panorama, and these beauties are
enhanced by their wondrous reflections on the

mirror of that quiet sea. Art is not needed here,
where nature is so prodigal ; where water, earth,
and air combine in giving out their best ; where
the human eye finds it hard to discern — cannot
decide — where the lovely earth ends and the most
beautiful heaven commences.

The farmhouse is almost on the roadside.
Between the hospitably open door, at which that
young man stands, and the road there is only
about thirty feet of irregular yard, littered by a
conglomerate of properties, and in no way enclosed.
Calves are frolicking there, disporting
themselves inanely in the dust. They do it under
protest, then cease abruptly, as if ashamed of so
indecorously disturbing the quiet. A large and
hideous sow, proud of maternal duties, grunts
amicably, while a voracious brood of squeers
battle round her at their mid-day meal.

Such sounds in no way mar the quiet of this
peaceful scene : they are but the bass notes in
nature's orchestra, and are in perfect harmony
with the cart, the harrow, the plough, the pots,
the " keepers," which lie promiscuously round and
about. There is a pump, primitive and picturesque;

a trough, where apparently various utensils
are, as occasion requires, scoured.

If not the picture of a model farm, it is eminently
picturesque, and evidently a comfortable
home.

The young man leaning against the door-post
is evidently enjoying himself. He is in his shirt-sleeves
(the day is hot), and has his hands thrust
far down in his trouser pockets. Every now and
then he hums in snatches —

"Oh, my Xorah Creina dear !
My own, my charming Xorah Hereinafter

a little pause, during which his honest eyes
rest contentedly on the beautiful picture before
his door, he begins again —

' Lesbia hath a beaming eye,
Right and left her arrows fly,
"What she aims at no one dreamed."

Again he lapses into dreamy silence, too lazily
content to exert himself overmuch. It is past
mid-day, he has been at work since early in the
morning, and is now quite weary waiting for his
dinner. He is hungry, waiting inactive at home
when much has to be done, yet the buoyant

happy mind of the man refuses to grow impatient ;
he is enjoying life, and again hums thoughtfully—


Oh, my North Creina dear ! " &c.

Again, in dreamy inertness, he ceases his tune,
and regards with an air of qualified satisfaction, a
certain pride of ownership, and dismay at disarray,
the pots, the pans, the kettles, and other household
matters that lie around the pump.

He is a pleasant-looking young man — a small farmer,
a well-built, fair young fellow — with an honest
open countenance, whose good-tempered blue eyes
smile on these his Penates, while a slight protrusion
of his under lip manifests a comical dismay
at the position of these household treasures. He
gazes helplessly down the dusty road towards the
town, then slightly altering his position, examines
its windings in the eastern direction. In neither
direction does he see any signs of human form.
All around is resting — the kine drowse as they
chew, the hens that are awake peck as if about to
sleep, stray ducks waddle until they find a smooth
stone, and then they squat in the shallow stream.
All are lazily content, enjoying the lovely weather;

SO was he, but — he looks inside, the potatoes are
steaming in the pot, but where is " herself " ? The
dinner-hour is long past, and still he is waiting
for his dinner.

At last the broad disc of his sunburnt face
expands until it resembles a full harvest-moon, asa
smile dawns in eyes that are a reflection of the
blue above, spreads to the lips, and illumines the
whole, at seeing a woman running swiftly down
the road towards him.

He shouts to her reproachful words, but
there is no trace of annoyance in his pleasant
tone —

Hurry ! hurry, ashore ! it is bad keeping a
hungry man waiting, and myself is that same for
the last half-hour."

The woman arrived breathless, and dashed past
him into the house, like the calves, shamefaced,
and half sorry for her frolic. He followed, his
semi - complaint very pleasantly contradicted by
the twinkle in his affectionate eyes.

Sure it is a hard case when a man's own wife
hasn't the bit and sup ready. Sure it is truth
and no lie I am saying, it is ashamed of yourself

you ought to be, Mrs Moriarty, rampagin' the
country at the top of the morning."

"Yerrah, be easy," gasped the woman, still too
short of breath to exercise her tongue freely.

"Easy! it is too easy I am. Bead, if you
had another hand over you, it is yourself would
find a differ. Come now, what nonsense were
you after ? Gossiping at Mrs Mahony's, I'll be
bound."

Is it scolding me you are, Thadey ? Shame
for you ! " gasped she reproachfully, as she ran
from one corner to the other, spreading the cloth,
and making preparation for the dinner.

Xo ; I never scold. I only take a husband's
interest in you. Where were you, achree ? "

Bah, bah ! it is a fool you are, Thade." She
was rapidly regaining breath and sauciness. " I
was at Widow Mahony's, and down as far as the
cross. Sure, where else should I be, and it Miss
Mary's wedding morning ? I could not let the
darling lady pass without giving her a bit of a
blessing. Lovely she looked to — a great sight of
company. I am not likely to see the like again
this side of Christmas."

VOL. I. C

"Myself forgot it was the wedding-day," half
apologised the husband.

More shame for you ! " retorted the wife, with
fine contempt, " forgetting the concern of those
who were always good to us. Yourself ought to
have been there to give them a cheer. Brave
and handsome, and as happy as a queen, she
looked — and why shouldn't she ? Himself comes
of a fine old family, and will be a good husband
as he is a good landlord, God bless him ! A wide
differ between the like of him and that half sir
Tom Cruncher, who has more impudence than
manners, smirks like a dancing-master, is as hard
as a millstone, and as crooked as an old corkscrew.
A mongrel creature, who ill - treats the
decent girl that demeaned herself by marrying
him, as bad and worse than he does his unfortunate
tenants, bad scran-nan to him ! The sight
I saw to-day was good for sore eyes, I can tell
you. All real gentry, of whom, God help us !
there are not many left in the country to give the
kind look and civil word to a body."

Bead, no," again acquiesced the husband
solemnly, regarding his wife with eyes appreciative

of her superior sense and beauty. " Half-sir
and squireens don't waste civility on the likes
of us. But hurry, ashore, myself has to go to
Killyslavin, and it is no good tempting the ' good
people ' crossing the bog after dark."

The wife stopped in her work to laugh at this
last remark.

Yourself is queer. Myself remembers the
time you never gave a thought to the dark or
the * good people ' when you came to see me.
But, glory ! the times are changed, and not for the
better, as far as I see. Sure enough hedges do
be shooting these times, which, seeing it is not
spring, is unnatural ; and what goes against nature
is wrong. Bad scraggy to the evil-doers ! myself
don't know what has come to the boys, all down-looking
and black," declared Mrs Moriarty. Then
again bestirring herself to hasten the mid-day meal,
she continued, as she did her work, to enlarge
on the more congenial topic at present uppermost
in her thoughts. " I wish you had seen
them all. Miss Mary's wedding will be the talk
of the country. A power of quality there, — even
the old Earl himself, all alone in the family coach,

jolting about for all the world like a dry pea on
a hot griddle. May the Lord help us, but it is
a very small share of a man he is ! Sure if nine
tailors eo to make a man, it is a dozen of the
likes of him it would take to do the same. A
wide differ between him and Sir John Castleton ;
that's a man to my taste, honest and hearty and
red, with a beautiful white head of hair, the good
heart beaming out of him — the moral of an Irish
gentleman, God bless him ! But Miss Mary herself
was the one I loved to look at, dressed like
a queen, as modest as a snowdrop, and as stately
as a lily ; thank God she is not going away from
us! only coming nearer home. My heart came in
my mouth when I saw her, and the tears in my
eyes — sorry a thing could I do but drop down
on the two knees of me foramina them all, and
pray the blessed Virgin and the good St Patrick
to bless and keep them."

Herself always has the prayer on the end
of your tongue, God bless you ! " nodded Thade approvingly,
as his better-half paused to draw breath.
A blessing be with you and your prayers always ;
prayer is more Christian than curses."

True for you ; yet curses are more plenty
than prayers," rejoined the wife. " That oman
Din Shea, was making a holy show of
himself cursing. If he don't look out, that flattering
tongue of his will get him into trouble.
Shane Dhu was there also, with a good drop in,
though it is early in the day, airing his ugly
tongue. My hand for you, they are a pair of
fools, cursing on a proud day like this, when it
is glad and happy the whole country ought to beat
our own good young lady being married on one
at home, instead of going out of the country, as
too many of the old stock do."

Eight," agreed Thade." " It is a sore and
sorry sight to see the real gentry leave the country
— there is many a one gone we could ill spare
and a bad day for the poor when there are
none left to stand between us and the tyranny of
squireens. Thank God, our landlord is a goodman,
and that this day he has taken a good wife
not but that I would rather it had been Miss
Nellie, herself was the ' saucy,' free-spoken, pleasant
creature : a bad day for us when she took it
into her pretty head to marry a stranger, more betoken

a Sassenach — bad manners to him ! And a
murdering shame of our own gentlemen to let a
beautiful good young lady like Miss Nellie out of
the country," growled Thade, who had been devoted
to Miss Nellie O'Brien, and bore a slight grudge
to the young Englishman who had lately carried
off that young lady to an English home.

Bless you ! " laughed Thade's wife, " it would
never do to clip the wings of all our angels and
keep them at home. Sure if we did, our quality
are that good there would be nothing left for the
blessed saints to do for us ! My hand for you,
it is good to send a fine pattern of an Irish wife
across the water, to let the English people see
what we are made of. Myself believes some of
them thinks we are all Turks and haythins — not
the same flesh and blood at all as themselves, justa
taste of the devil, with a pound of superstition
and a round stone or two of natural ignorance.
Bead ! I wish they would understand English and
Irish are just alike, ounce for ounce good sound
flesh ; honest hearts with a grain of jealousy ; heads
so full of our own notions we have no patience
with each other's quirks ; and fools all of us,

following the first rogue who promises a royal
road to wealth, and lashings of food to the hungry
stomach. No, no, Thade ; Sir Eichard, though he
is an Englishman, is just as well-spoken a gentleman
as if he were Irish, as kind-hearted and
open-handed a man as ever wore shoe-leather.
He deserved a good wife, signs by he has got
one in Miss Nellie. Myself well remembers the
first day he came after her. Our baby was lying
in the room."

Here the young wife, now a childless mother,
took the corner of her apron to wipe away a tear
of regret for her " first-born," now asleep under
the green sod in Magourney churchyard.

Herself went in to see the child, and himself
sat down there, on the settle, for all the world as
quiet and easy as if he were my foster-brother.
Holding his hat in his hand as if I were a lady,
and talking as pleasant and friendly as Master
Harry himself does. And sure I mind well, when
our trouble same, and the good Lord took our
lamb. Sir Richard himself was not too proud to
come round the door after Miss Nellie — no more
did he forget, and he going out, to slip a sovereign

on the dresser for the burying. For that same
the good gentleman will always have my prayers,
and yours also, Thade Moriarty, if you are the
honest boy I took you for when I went before the
priest with you. Glory be to goodness ! sure Sir
Eichard Paget can no more help being born an
English gentleman, than you can avoid being a
born Irish goose ! Sir Richard is a gentleman
every inch of him, an Englishman of good sense
and good taste, as he showed when he carried
home our wild rose from Meadowlees," ended
North Moriarty, as with graceful adroitness she
turned out the steaming lumpers (i.e., potatoes)
from the black pot on to the clean but coarse
homespun table - cloth. These, with a willow
pattern plate containing salt at one end, and one
of butter at the other, and two shining " quarts "
full of thick milk, furnished the table.

To this plain but wholesome meal the pair sat
down, and quickly demolished the smoking pile.
Afterwards the master tackled his horse and
trotted off to the bog, while the mistress put
what were left of the potatoes in the ashes while
she tidied up the kitchen, and carried out the

chris of their meal to " the friend that paid the
rent."

After that she tied up the baked potatoes and
a pinch of salt in a- clean cloth, took the gallon,
into which she poured a liberal allowance of the
same sort of milk she and her husband had had
for dinner, put the corner of her apron over her
head, and, taking the gallon and the potatoes in
her hand, went out into the field at the back,
where two " boys " were making hay.

This was the haymakers' dinner, which North
left them with a few pleasant words, and then
returned to finish her neglected morning's work of
scouring the keepers."

North scrubbed vigorously ; but while busy
with the keepers, kept a watchful eye up the road,
down which she knew the bridal pair would pass
on their way to the train. Soon the rumble of
approaching wheels gladdened her listening ears.
Jumping up from her work, North ran to the
roadside, where, nodding and smiling, she threw a
wisp of new-cut hay after the carriage for luck.

North Moriarty had been the Meadowlees dairymaid,
where Thade had wooed and won her love.

Thade was a small farmer, and his people disliked
his marrying without " a fortune." But North
was a McCarthy ; and a McCarthy alliance, even
though the bride was a dowerless orphan, was a
feather in the Moriartyss cap, the Moriartyss having
a " black mark " against their name ever since
the betrayal of the " Great Earl " and dastardly
murder in the Glounaneentha wood.

Miss O'Brien had taken much interest in
North's marriage, and provided many little comforts
for her home. These kindnesses had been
duly valued, hence North was delighted that her
young lady was now married to the best match in
the county, and that Mr Fitzgerald was her husband's
landlord as well as the Earl's heir.

CHAPTER III.

A LITTLE CLOUD NO BIGGER THAN A MAN'S HAND.

Every hour of Mary Fitzgerald's married life developed
new beauties in her character, and through
the severity of the following winter the neighbouring
poor had reason to bless the " agent " for making
her his wife.

There was a cry of famine in " the distressful
country." Ireland again sat a mendicant by the
wayside begging, and into poor Erin's outstretched
hands England poured her alms.

Noble-hearted men and tender women worked
early and late endeavouring to alleviate distress.
Money was lavishly provided ; ^ and though there

^ A memo, taken from an Irish "National " paper illustrates
the use to which some of these "alms" were devoted: "Notwithstanding
the widespread distress, and alms-receiving of the

was much actual suffering, there was not a single
death from starvation.

Employment was scarce. Idle men wanting
and unable to procure work wandered to and fro,
or stood dejectedly in the market-place waiting —
waiting for the work that did not come. Out
of the needs of these poor and patient men,
political agitators spun a " wick web."

The first mischief was a little word whispered
in a wild north-west district. There a sheep in
wolf's clothing insinuated the root of the present
distress — of all famine — in fact, of all Irish woe —
was, that Irish tenants were rack-rented. Strangers
to the land audaciously accused Irish landlords
of being avaricious, careless of " the people's "
welfare, greedy of their own luxuries. A whisper
here, and a word there, went like fire amongst
dry flax, until, with a loud flourish of discordant
trumpets, an " alien " rabble blew their manufactured
slanders here, there, everywhere. And,
as a story never loses in the telling, presently

Irish, ' Peter's pence ' amounts this year to a considerably larger
sum than usual!" (1880). This year (1881) also: 'peter's
pence ' is a goodly sum, exceeding even last year's amount, "

some people began to believe the libel — that
luxurious landlords grudged tenants their scanty
living, and that the rack-renting was the ruin
of Ireland, and brought periodical, nay, chronic
starvation to the cabin door.

Presently this evil tale was wafted across " the
silver streak," and earnest Englishmen accepted
the theory as an intelligible solution of the oft-recurring
Irish grievances — those " disaffections "
of the sister isle that are ever a puzzle to, and a
thorn in the side of, the " administering power "
of the nation.

The rack-rent theory was started at an
auspicious moment for party politics, as concurrent
with this " grievance " came the burning
question, " Alas Parliament to be dissolved ? " It
was. It was not.

AU politicians were on the qui vice, and unscrupulous
men cunningly baited their lines toland
their fish.

After months of uncertainty, months during
which hunger was prevalent in Ireland, the crash
came, and Parliament was suddenly dissolved.

There was to be a general election.

And now began the Irish days of terror.

Blankshire is a far-away district, little influenced
by the outer world, and Killballymac-
taggart is one of the few remaining, so to speak,
pocket-boroughs. Sir John Castleton, who is an
old man, has represented this borough ever since
the Earl's brother died, forty years ago. He means
to retire, and, as a matter of course, Percy Fitzgerald
is named as his successor.

Percy feels no special vocation for Parliamentary
life. On the contrary, all his instincts
centre in and bind him to home. But the borough
requests, the Earl desires, and lastly his wife
encourages the idea ; so, seeing noblesse oblige,
Percy consents to stand for the borough,

Nobody dreamed of a contest. Percy Fitzgerald
was considered by his friends as the right
man in the right place. Who so well as he knew
the wants of the people or the capabilities of the
town ? who could have their interest so much at
heart ? He was born and bred amongst them, one of
their very selves, the one man whose interests were
identical with all around, the man who had shown
himself willing and capable of ameliorating distress.

Everybody therefore was astounded when the
local paper announced a rival candidate was in
the field.

The Earl was sarcastically incredulous on first
hearing this news, then, when convinced of the
fact, aghast at the unheard-of insolence.

What ! a stranger daring to oppose my grand-nephew
— unheard-of impudence ! " The Earl's
amazement grew to disgust when this interloper
proved to be a Mr Denis Dymock from Liverpool,
a gentleman who had hitherto figured as a retailer
of beer, tobacco, and small groceries, — an honest
if humble line of life, but one that is not suggestive
of much knowledge of Irish needs, historical
or economic, of oratorical, diplomatic, or
parliamentary genius. Denis Dymock, however,
was of an aspiring nature, one who hungered to
put esquire and M.P. after his name — an opportunity
who did not hesitate to appropriate an idea.
So Denis Dymock, after having spent twenty
years of his life weighing scant measure over his
counter in Liverpool to the poor, now posed as
one anxious to right Irish grievances.

The first actual declaration of war was on this

wise. An army of men, fifty at the least, sandwiches
between monstrous green-papered boards,
paraded the town. On these boards were set forth
the excellences and aspirations of Mr Dymock.
He was described as a merchant-prince philanthropically
yearning over suffering Irishmen, —
one who would spend his last shilling to see
justice done ; one who hated tyranny, and who
thought the Irish the finest and most wronged
people in the world.

This regiment was followed by a wondering
crowd of idle men, women, and children. Ere
night, every available yard of wall in Killbally-
mactaggart was adorned with similar green
placards. Plausible promises were printed by the
yard, by the mile, posted everywhere, to attract
poor, hungry, imaginative Paddy.

The land for the tillers of the soil " sounded
well, while the shibboleth, " Ireland for the Irish,"
was pleasant in their ears.

Since Killballymactaggart was first enfranchised,
there had never been such a sight, such a hubbub,
such a commotion.

At first people (Percy amongst them) were inclined

to treat this demonstration as a joke. But
when night set in, and bands and boys paraded
the streets and shouted for " Home Eule ! " " Ireland
for the Irish ! " men began to inquire, " Had this
audacious stranger a chance of the seat ? "

Bets were taken in the club, and long after the
decent people went to their beds those green
placards troubled their minds.

The tcKt stood out clear, shining through the
darkness, dancing before their troubled eyes,
haunting their restless sleep. " Ireland for the
Irish," " The land for the people," shone out
everywhere, as if written with phosphoric light
upon their walls.

There was a prescience of evil as the night
grew silent, a silence to be broken again as some
drunken men staggered home from the public-house,
screaming in insane fashion, " Hooroo !
boor 00 ! Ireland for the Irish 1 "

VOL. L

CHAPTER IV.

THE BREAKING OF THE ICE.

•

Idiotic words ! Ridiculous nonsense ! Ireland
for the Irish ! " stuccoed Lord Blankshire, almost
inarticulate with indignation. " Who is this fellow
? where did he come from ? wdiat does he
mean ? " throwing aside, with a gesture of contempt,
a green placard of Mr Dymock's which
the pressure of circumstances had induced his
angry eyes to peruse, — the old gentleman looked
at his grand-nephew, who had just arrived.

Xot being acquainted with this patriot's pedigree,
cannot venture to say who his ancestors
were," said Percy, lightly, so far more amused
than alarmed at his rival's manifesto. " To the
best of my belief, Mr Dyniock was born and
bred in Liverpool."

I might have known he was an adventurer !
Bless my soul I what does he mean, grandiloquently
calling himself an Irish patriot ? Talking of
the Irish ' at this time of day. Poor fool ! he
might as well profess to have found and endeavour
to right the wrongs of the lost tribes," snorted
the perturbed aristocrat. " Irish grievances are
so many and so indigenous, righting them is impossible
without effacing the whole race. Pshaw !
absurd ! ignorant folly 1 " The old man threw
up his wizened white face, and with fiery indignant
eyes looked unutterable things at the ceiling.

The land for the people is a clever idea.
Dymock has selected a telling fiction for his text.
Clap-trap idioms deceive the ignorant ; agitators
who keep their fingers always on the pulse of
the people,' contrive to resuscitate the grievances
which are their daily bread." Percy spoke more
thoughtfully than he had done at the first moment,
as if the Earl's disbelief in Dymock's programme
proved there was some danger in it.

But Ireland never was so quiet, or so prosperous.
Ever since '98 we have been settling
down, and now we are settled — yes, settled and

.^^f/

fairly prosperous. I never — and I have a tolerably
long experience — remember to have seen
the people ' so well off and contented," half
queried, half asserted the old man, as he brought
his eyes down from the ceiling and looked fixedly
at his grand-nephew.

True," assented Percy ; " but that is just
what patriots of the Dymock type do not want.
Dissatisfaction and unrest are what such as he
thrive upon. I wonder what special argument
Dymock will elaborate at Killballymactaggart.
Our people have not hitherto been ambitious
politicians, but have wisely trusted tts to look
after legislative interests while they attended to
their own work."

Yes ; but idleness is the mother of mischief,
and there are idle men about."

True ; and ' Ireland for the Irish,' * The land
for the people,' are attractive to hungry people."

The Earl shook his aristocratic head. His
feelings were so outraged by Mr Dymock 's proceedings,
that his words were almost inarticulate
as he insisted —

Of course this man's intrusion here is a

matter of perfect indifference to me; he cannot
possibly hurt us."

The anxiety overshadowing the self-assertiveness
of this statement was painful, and caused Percy
to answer the old man with more confidence than
he actually felt, for each hour's thought showed
him their position was more critical. Mr Fitzgerald
had been so absorbed with improvements
and schemes for the amelioration of the tenants,
that he had not allowed his mind to dwell on
storms elsewhere, and breaths of dissatisfaction
had passed unnoticed. These odds and ends of
observations now gathered in a dark and ugly
cloud, prognosticate of evil. But whatever he
thought, it was well to allay the Earl's dismay.
Therefore he said, evasively —

Well, I should hope — I think not."
But what does the impertinence mean ? What
can a man like him gain by endeavouring to sow
dissensions amongst our people ? I really do not
know what the world is coming to. All this is
the result of educating people above their natural
sphere. They learn the ABC of impudence
quickly, and then double our trouble in teaching

them to keep their proper place, Mr Dymock,
a grocer from Liverpool, contesting my borough
with my heir ! Insufferable insolence ! "

The gathering wrath of the potentate rolled
out his words in increasing crescendo, and the
young man still endeavoured to oil the troubled
waters.

Please do not worry yourself ; our people areas
yet exempt, and I hope — indeed believe — they
are safe not to take this national epidemic. We
live outside the political hurly-burly, and you see
Ireland for the Irish ' will be much more catching
in cities than in outlying districts like this.
Amongst the maddened crowd of political firebrands
in Cork or Limerick, where a crew of hungry
vultures hover, waiting to pick the bones of their
richer neighbours, it may have some effect. But
here our people are content, and they all know
we, have their interests at heart ; we live amongst
and do what we can to improve their condition."

But, my dear boy, this is incendiarism. We
must be careful. The spark is dropped, who
knows what combustibles there may be amongst
the rabble ? Remember you have not kept the

place as exclusive as it ought to be ; a great many
new people and new ideas have been imported
with your free trade and other follies." The
Earl was not sorry to have this opportunity of
throwing the agent's misdeeds in his teeth. He
ended, " However, we must now put our foot
down, and you must turn out this low-bred intruder."


I suppose so."

Xo supposing ; it must be done. Confound
the fellow 1 " gasped the Earl in the depths of his
chest, righteous indignation momentarily obliterating
courtly habits. " I have neither patience with
your supineness, his impudence, nor that laxity of
principle which permits such pestilent fellows to
be at large."

It was many years since any event had so
moved Lord Blankshire. His position was assailed
; and as days went on, and Mr Dymock's
placards were further emphasised by the overt
acts and speeches of Mr Dymock's party, the
Earl's soul was still more sorely vexed.

So excited did the old man become, that Percy,
fearing for the consequences, and anxious to soothe

the perturbed spirit, tried to make a burlesque out
of what he now feared would prove a grave crisis.

The whole thing is annoying," he would say, —
so absurdly and clumsily managed that one can
hardly believe anybody will be taken in by the
cheat. An English Dymock as a champion of the
Irish, and opposing a Fitzgerald ! Folly on the
face of it. What can he know about Ireland's
needs ? We are here since Strongbow's days, intermarried
with Irish princes, are one of themselves,
while this man never saw Ireland till now. He
drops his h's all about the place, with nothing
Hibernian to recommend him, unless it be impudence."


When altering our Prayer-book they ought to
have added, ' from all evil-tongued and all ambitious
adventurers, good Lord, deliver us ! '" gasped
the Earl. " I wonder what evil star guided this
man here ? "

Oh ! he is just an itinerant cosmopolitan,
hawking his wares to find a market, his politics
a patchwork of Scotch Radicalism, Birmingham
forethought, Manchester immorality, worked up
by Yankee shrewdness, all culminating in a burning

desire, not, as he vociferates, to redress Irish
grievances, but just to get into Parliament ; and,
though Dymock is a clever adventurer, I hardly
anticipate his making a fortune out of his motley
wares here."

You really think he has no chance," queried
the Earl, plaintively. Percy not feeling confident,
answered evasively —

There is something almost sublime in 
Englishmen endeavouring to condone
ancestral sins by growing indignant over the
oppression of the now extinct Celt. Seven hundred
years of mistakes are not to be reversed by a
fresh series of zealot's blunders. We are a conglomerate
people, the Celt an extinct species — conquerors,
settlers, and matrimony having eliminated
the aborigines of this green isle."

True," assented the Earl, with an upturned
sniff of his nostrils, as he remembered the blue
blood of Irish kings flowed in his veins. " Weare
more Celtic than nine-tenths of those mongrel
refuse of all nations which it pleases this ignorant
fellow to call the Irish people. Certainly this
Dymock's ignorance is surprising — only to be surpassed

by the tremulousness of his dupes," sighed
the Earl ; adding sagaciously, " adventurers always
turn traitors, and betray the cause they profess to
advocate, — we must protect our people from this
wolf in sheep's clothing. And — and — remember,
our position requires you to win this seat — we
must leave nothing to chance — you must leave no
stone unturned. It would bring my grey hair
with sorrow to the grave if Killballymactaggart
were misrepresented by a — a — revolutionary
demagogue."

o o

I hope you may live to see me for many years
to come representing and working for our people.
I have spent all my life here ; I think they like
and know me to be their friend, while this man is
a stranger. Surely they will prefer me to him."

I hope so. But Irish disaffection is a chronic
ailment — one can never reckon when it may
break out, or what form it will take." The Earl
was now on one of his hobbies. Though he was
only going over an often-told tale, Percy wondered
as he listened, admiring the energy, though differing
from some of the old man's arguments. Waving'
his thin white hand authoritatively, the nono-

gentian continued — " The perversity of statesmen
is incomprehensible. Liberals and Conservatives
alike harbour Pains, — the first deliberately and
avowedly doing evil that good may come, committing
new robberies as an atonement for past
confiscations ; while the latter — well, if Conservatives
are more conscientious, human nature is
weak, and modern politicians prone to succumb to
the doctrine of expediency. Oh, I know you
differ from me — I am an old Tory, an old
fogey, and you young folk think yourselves so
wise. But experience has taught me — I know
the fallaciousness of political professions of integrity,
peace, and prosperity. Integrity is too
often smothered by necessity. Peace is only a
pie-crust ; prosperity a smoke which may come
from a few cinders or a bonfire. Political itinerants
can make much mischief in Ireland, where
our pie-crust of prosperity only covers a smouldering
fire of disaffection."

If England will only keep the wet blanket
on sedition a little longer, the fire of disaffection
will be entirely extinguished, Beaconsfield has
shown true genius in the way he has managed

the Irish question — a judiciously firm and yet
light hand, he does not let them feel the bit,
and yet has them well under control. Xo
danger of experimental agitators being allowed
to blow up expiring ashes as long as he remains
in office."

All very fine, but think of Dymock."

Yes ; Dymock. But his Rationalistic splutter
is only a flash in the ]loan. You really must not
make a grievance out of Dymock."

Humph ! I hope you may be right. Beaconsfield
is far-seeing. So far he has guided us safely
through shoal waters. But what if tie reins are
jerked out of his strong hand ? "

Oh ! we are a long way off that misfortune.
England has learned the value of the man. His
wisdom restored her supremacy amongst the
nations, brought us Peace with Honour, and
England is never ungrateful to those who serve
her."

Bah ! nothing so fleeting as popularity. Remember
O'Connell. This nation was mad about
him once — England dreaded and Ireland worshipped
his power — and now his name has lost

its charm. The levelling-down spirit of the age
has destroyed respect and encouraged scheming.
Humanity gone mad has armed the masses with
weapons which will cut the ground from under
our feet. We approach the days of ' wars and
rumours of war.' Woe is me ! I fear we are
on the vero-e of a national suicide."

Xot quite so bad as that. Come, do change
the subject ; I want to consult you about those
wretched Sheas at Capta."

But the Earl's thoughts were not to be
disturbed from their present vein. He went on
solemnly —

My boy, though you do not, I remember the
beginning of these evils, the sowing of the seed
that has grown to be a danger amongst us —
Catholic emancipation. That thin-edged wedge
opened a gap which year by year has been
widened by astute tools of the Papal hierarchy."

Off on a tangent I Religious intolerance is
long since buried in the grave of mistakes," muttered
Percy. The Earl overheard, and answered
sen t en thou sly —

You will find to your cost neither intolerance

nor mistakes are buried. The former has changed
hands, and is now fostered by that wretched May-north
grant, wrung, contra honos mores, from the
false sentiment of Russell."

Come, come, we have outlived the Inquisition ;
I never could see any harm in emancipation ; and
as for Maynooth, the only wrong about that was
giving such a miserable dole. The nation ought
to have given more than a mere pittance for
the instruction of her ignorant and erring
children."

Percy, you astonish me I How can you say
Christian England ought to pay for that nursing-mother
of sucking iniquity ? It is a shame and a
scandal, England clasping hands with antichrist,
rearing and instructing priests in the tenets of
sedition, that they may the better inculcate disloyalty
amongst their flocks. She will see her
mistake some day, when priests and people turn
and rend her."

You are intolerant : religion is far apart from
politics ; errors of faith are not incompatible with
good citizenship. Xow, for instance, this new
craze is quite distinct from sectarian animosity.

For my part, I never can see what matters of faith
have to do with — let his say — Parliament or the
bench."

Everything. Yes ; just everything and nothing.
Individual religion is of course an essence,
a question between man and his Maker, — with
that the law has no right to interfere. But the
voices of men in the State are different. Woman
Catholics there are an evil against which instinct
and past actions warn us. The Romanist is but a
feeler for the great organisation of which he is an
actual nerve : it is not the religion of the man, but
the insidious principle of which he is the instrument,
that we protest against."

You really are too bigoted. As if the views
of a few sons of the condemned Church mixing in
the councils of the nation could endanger Protestant
England ! " exclaimed Percy, who, ever busy
about practical home reforms, had never troubled
his head about religious differences.

I wish it was only my bigotry; but we see the
fruits of Maynooth education in agitations like the
present. Eemember it is the priests who teach
the people, and Maynooth that instructs the priests.

Maynootli was the second sop to Cerberus. Lord
Palmerston saw it and feared. He, though a
Liberal, denounced Popery as the root of Irish
agitation, declaring ' the priests were the instigators,
aiders, and abettors of all disorders and
violence — the chief movers, though professed
enemies of lawlessness and murder.' Little by
little they are ever trying to chain us again to the
wheels of that Juggernaut, Some."

Yours is an old-world belief : all priests are
not Judases to their country. Look at Father
Matt ; I do not believe a better man exists than
Matt Griffin."

He is an exception that proves the rule. Matt
Griffen is a better Christian than priest, an honest
gentleman — too honourable a man to be a tool.
Neither is he one of those firebrands who preaches
to his people the vicious doctrine, ' Fear only will
wring concession from their rulers,' and that freedom
consists in disloyalty."

The priests have not the power they used to
have ; the people have become too enlightened to
submit to the shackles of superstition."

The fact that some of the pupils scorn their

instructors, and aspire to take their own way, does
not mend the matter ; for those people who have
become undutiful to the Church are also insubordinate
to all law and order. And you will see, that
even out of the misdoings of these disobedient
sons of the Church, Some will reap a harvest."

Nonsense ! this is Popery on the brain," cried
Percy ; " the ' red rag ' of Some has not actuated
this modern Home Eule cry. Why, uncle, the
army of Nationalists consists of all kinds of
impecunious men, of all and of no creeds. The
present war-cry is philanthropic humanitarianism
gone mad ; the misery of ' the people ' the motive
power, the land for the people the quack remedy
for their chronic disease."

Just a new name for the old story. The land
for the people. Home Eule for Ireland, fixity of
tenure — all variations of the Eoman song ; and
may be translated — more docile children of mother
Church, more strength to the hands of their taxing-master
the priest, more pay for the scarlet lady.
As rents decrease and landlords starve, you will
see Church dues increase and parish priests prosper.
The velvet paw conceals sharp talons, solus populi

VOL. I. E

t&ia^ niteifttfstt^ mtfttid&ii^ iiiS{«Biimim, ^^oii "^cdfu^ &tii£
Wtr tomb: dteur iftic 2^i«l lie ^ tuft auMStn^g^Ite

'^'ISJiti: miictt^ liii I <iu*, JLni mat mr^r at his

for the third or fourth tire, the agent recapitulated
the Shea delinquencies, demonstrating indisputably
that individual's incapability of being a
decent tenant on account of inbred worthlessness.

To all Percy's arguments the Earl answered
inconsequently that he " hated disturbing tenants."


It is sometimes a disagreeable necessity ; and
this fellow will neither pay rent nor do work. I
have been very patient with him — advised and
assisted; but he has killed the goose that lays
the golden egg, by cutting Turbary to the very
rock, selling from thirty to forty pounds' worth
every year, leaving his place a wilderness, spending
his time and money where men of his class
generally do — in the dram-shop. Denis is incorrigibly
idle : his family starving, his house
and farm a ruin ! Seriously, I can do nothing
with him."

Rascal ! Tenants like that are a curse to the
country. How much does he owe ? "

Four years' rent — sixty pounds."

Give him twenty, and send him to America —
cheaper than letting them go into the union."

I doubt his taking the money, or going
quietly."

Poor creatures ! We must not be cruel to
them," groaned the Earl. " These worries quite
wear me out, and I wish you would find someway
of settling with the tenants pleasantly. I
never was troubled thus in my young days:
things were better ordered then. My agents got
my money in old times without troubling me.
I never was, and never will be, a hard man, and
do not want the name of a rack-renting landlord
at the end of my life."

But the man is in debt everywhere. If we
do not exercise our right of eviction, Devlin will
take the farm for debt."

Stop, stop ! spare my poor nerves ! " cried the
Earl, putting his hands to his head. The Earl
always pretended to nerves, and claimed consideration
for his years when topics were distasteful.
I really am quite unequal to details. This
miserable man's money matters have no interest
for me ; his liabilities are quite immaterial to the
point at issue. If you are determined to believe
him incapable and irreclaimable, I know you will

never rest until you get rid of him. I dislike
evictions ; am unequal to argue the point ; hate
all worry, and really do not see the use of your
being my agent if I am to be hourly tormented
examining vexatious details. My nerves are unequal
to the task, and at my age I think I maybe
excused investigating the family accounts of
insolent and insolvent tenants. If it is your
pleasure to busy yourself over Denis Shea's
debts to his grocer, baker, and candle-maker, of
course you are at liberty to do so. But what
is the use ? I should say if you are determined
to take legal measures and evict, his not paying

his rent is sufficient without parading his

But — stay. Fineiii respite, we forget the election
! " The old man smiled cynically. "Ad
captandum vulgus, leave him alone. With Paul
Pry in our midst, vje must even fight with their
low vulgar weapons, and temporise. His eviction
might interfere with your election."

Possibly ; but his remaining where he is,
and ignoring the rules of the estate, is a
bad precedent. I don't like encouraging improvidence."


Percy shook his head gravely.

The Earl was weary. He had no special regard
for the tenant in question, no interest for or
sympathy with him, beyond what glory or discredit
Denis Shea's prosperity or misery might
reflect on the Ballykillbegs estate. He fidgeted,
crossed and uncrossed his legs, rubbed his hands,
hemmed and hawed, then querulously exclaimed
—

Well, well, do just as you like ! I wash my
hands of the whole concern, and give you carte
blanche. I suppose I am too old to meddle — I do
not understand all the new and absurd figments
of the modern land law. Monstrous tyranny !
Low-bred attorneys interfering between a landlord
and his tenants ! I never was cruel, but hate to
be coerced to justice. I hate all innovations ; I
never can comprehend, approve, or get accustomed
to them. The only one, my dear fellow, I like,
is — your wife. How is Mary ? And why did
she not come with you this morning ? "

She was engaged to lunch at Barrington —
the Castlewood are there — and is to call for me

here on her way home. Mary is like you — quite
rabid against Dymock, and much more excited
about the election than I am."

That is right — good girl ! The more I hear
of her, the better I like her ; and the oftener
she comes to see me, the better pleased I am,
and the more convinced that, as you had to
marry, you were fortunate in selecting so unobjectionable
— indeed I may say so sensible — a wife."
Here the Earl actually gave a playful chuckle,
and concluded, " I am sick of business. At
my age overtaxing the mental or physical powers
is not to be done with impunity. You must
really leave me to indulge in forty winks before
Mary arrives. Dear girl! we must be careful'
of her. You young husbands are so thoughtless,
it takes an old fellow like me to appreciate
her value —

How sweet her innocence appears ! more like to heaven itself

than any sacrifice
That can be otl'ered to it. By my hopes of joys hereafter [she]

makes nie doubtful
In my belief.'

There, you see in what esteem I hold Mary !

You be guided by her. Win your election ; and
now let me rest until she comes."

Snuggling " into his ample easy-chair, the old
man closed his eyes ; and the young one, fully
alive to the impolicy of contravening his ancient
relative's whims, left him to his siesta.

UP And DOI^^G.

Leaving the Earl to slumber, Percy Fitzgerald
walked over the home-farm ; and as he walked,
the young man mused.

The agent had spent his life looking out for
and endeavouring to eradicate abuses, and now
it was galling to have a stranger come, raking up
old stories, misrepresenting facts, and placing him
in an odious light before his own people.

As Percy meditated, he realised that Killbally-
mactaggart was not as entirely unsophisticated as he
had tried to make believe to the Earl. A miasma
of noxious political influences, impregnating the
air of the outer world, had, unperceived by him,
permeated, and was now disturbing the hitherto
still life of the town.

This was a worrying fact ; but Percy had
taught himself to take facts quietly, never to
lament over what might have been, but always
to try and work some good out of what was ;
and on this principle, forgetting electioneering
and all other concomitant irritations, he encouraged
the hope that out of present evil good might
come.

Lord Blankshire was more roused by the Dy-mock
invasion and this Home Eule outcry than
ever he had before seen him. Possibly his lordship
was alarmed by, at all events he seemed for
the first time awake to, the fact of national evolution.
This was a step in the right direction.

With the Earl on his side, the agent could do
much for the people — honest people, who heretofore
had flocked to him like so many children,
as need or cares pressed on them.

From the Earl's great age and secluded life,
Percy had always felt he was their natural
guide ; the man whose position entitled him to
watch over, guard, and protect them from outside
evils, and those follies which the weaknesses and
ignorance of their own nature and habits of life

induced. And hitherto Percy had chafed, there
was so much he would, yet could not attempt todo
because of the Earl.

He might now hope to persuade the Earl to
listen, and be able to indoctrinate him with
modern beliefs, and induce him to sanction some
of the improvements, which he, the agent and
heir, longed to inaugurate.

As Percy built these castles in the air, his
mental vision looked at wretched Glenamuick, an
outlying portion of the estate almost exempt from
landlord control.

His heart ached as he thought of Glenamuick,
an abnormal growth of his grandfather's heedless
reign. A squalid tillage, where miserable tenants
paid the nominal rent of one shilling a-year, and
were a colony of paupers. This black spot on
the estate was a centre of misery and misrule,
over which his power of improvement was almost
nil.

Glenamuick, despite all his efforts, remained a
warning of how a heedless folly may produce a
huge misfortune. Half a century had clasped
since Percy's grandfather had contested the county

with a Liberal magnate of that day, the O'Bran-
nathan. Then Mr Fitzgerald had secured success
by purchasing votes with broad acres.

These haphazard reckless lettings had proved
equally destructive to property and people. True,
one or two clever men had thereby waxed wealthy.
But alas for the multitude — the many who, after
fifty years' freedom from the cares of rent, were
paupers !

There had been more than one generation of
marriages, more than one submitting of lands —
brothers, sisters, cousins, grandchildren, all squatted,
squabbling for and overflowing each farm.

They all loved the land of their birth, and
with a blind infatuation worthy of a better cause,
clung to the fields and hills, till, like locusts, they
devastated the country, and made the once fertile
barony of Glenamuick a barren waste, the grave
of all moral and physical health, indeed of all
decency. They were ignorant people, an idle
helpless race, with few instincts above those of
animal existence, with no wicked proclivities,
but some feline weaknesses. Catlike they loved
to purr on the familiar hearth ; and catlike, when

annoyed, sometimes turned on their benefactors ;
and, moreover, were endowed with an incredible
fecundity.

Thus, while almost savagely indifferent to the
social needs of more civilised humanity, they
multiplied ad infinitum, yearly increasing her
Majesty's subjects with those who, day by day,
sunk lower and lower in the social scale. Nominally
tenants, but practically freeholders, these
Glenamuick people sublet at usurious interest,
and this and overcrowding produced annual famines,
pestilence, death.

This winter had been a hard time at Glens
and there Mary Fitzgerald had been a
ministering angel. She had been horrified at the
people's distress, and had encouraged her husband
to elaborate a scheme which, he thought, if he
could only induce the Earl to sanction the plan,
might eradicate this scandal.

Percy's plan was as follows : first, a wholesale
family emigration ; second, a monster drainage
scheme, which would give employment to the
idle ; thirdly, a buying out of interests ; fourthly,
a rearranging of farms, with a reduction of

those monstrous rents which submitting engendered.


And this plan, in the early spring, Mary persuaded
her husband to allow her to propose to the
Earl.

At first the old man laughed at the earnest
girl. Sneering at Percy's Utopian ideas, he declared
it was folly to try and regenerate inbred
mendicity.

Quixotic nonsense ! Just bring the country
about your ears. I won't hear of it. Leave Glens
to its fate ; if the people like to die like
rats in their holes, let them."

But I don't think they like it, and I am sure
you would not like that they should live in
squalid filth, or die of neglect," whispered Mary.

"Well, well, my dear, I never was obstinate,
nor could withstand a pretty woman's argument ;
if you insist I must yield, and let Percy employ
as many people as he will on what he calls improving
the estate. After all, what is the use of
money but to give pleasure."

To do good is a real pleasure."

To please you is my pleasure, and if your

pleasure is to do good, I suppose you and Percy
playing at regenerating Glenamuick is as legitimate
an excuse as any other for squandering
money."

But we — Percy does not mean to squander'
urged the wife, who thought her husband's project
perfect. " And now a movement of this kind will
be doubly useful — helpful to the people and helpful
to Percy. You have no idea all the horrid
untruths that dreadful Mr Dymock circulates ; he
insinuates Percy is wholly and solely responsible
for all the Glenamuick misery. It is a shame the
things he says, and the way he misrepresents
tcs."

The last its was said with a tender pride that
pleased the Earl, who answered in mollified tones.

"Very well, then, spend what you like of our
own, but don't let Percy borrow. Those Government
loans are my detestation, liens on property
which may become excuse for wholesale confiscation.
Buy up, emigrate, build, drain, as far as our
resources admit, but not beyond."

On this permission Percy commenced work.
And so enamoured was he with his intended transformation

of Glenamuick from Augean stables to
green pastures, that he would gladly have retired
from the election contest.

But this could not be. Every day opposition
was more organised, and his holding the seat of
Killballymactaggart on Sir John's retirement morea
point of honour. It was a stirring spring ;
never had Percy had his hands so full, his brain
so busy. He worked hard every day with his
election committee, harder at Glenamuick. And
as the young man coped with, noted, learned,
and mastered difficulties, his mind matured, his
soul enlarged, and he appeared one of those whom
God has marked to be a pioneer, a leader, a hero
amongst men.

Denis Shea was still a trouble. The agent had
endeavoured to buy him out, offered him a passage
to America, a provision there, employment at
home. But Denis would take neither. He was
a farmer, a " tenant," and no labourer. If he
chose to starve at home, that was his look-out ;
his house was his own ; his father had built it (at
the landlord's expense) ; there he would live, and
there he meant to die. " He would keep a grip

o' the land." But he did not — indeed, could not
pay his rent. Percy was sorely tempted to evict
Denis, but the Earl objected, and so Denis remained
in possession of his cabin.

But Denis made no effort to improve his condition
; consorting with other idlers, he grumbled
at his poverty, made a grievance of impecuniosity
and liabilities, which, with an insolent disregard
of truth, he attributed to bad seasons and a hard
landlord.

In his better days, Denis Shea had been a
moving spirit in one of those modern institutions
called a Farmers' Club, recently established
in Killballymactaggart. There he still hovered :
and of this club Mr Dymock was now the hero,
and Denis Shea became a tool.

The Farmers' Club was Mr Dymock's 
; its members were his supporters ;
its secretary, Mr Florence McCarthy, his proposer
and principal patron ; and Mr Denis Shea one of
his most active sub-agents.

It is needless to enter into details as to the
plan drawn up by this committee. Sufficient to
say they were an offshoot of a band of dissatisfied

VOL. I. F

idle men, with little stake in the country, some
brains, much brass, and no conscience, and who
had an army of unscrupulous agents, purchased
with foreign money, at their service, — agents who
lied glibly, alternately coaxing, flattering, and
frightening dupes, — agents who insinuated doubts
to every man of his neighbour, until all were
afraid.

The whole country was mapped out, — in most
places the priest aiding and assisting both by
countenance and counsel this occult tyranny.
Women were enlisted, and proved apt pupils,
excitedly anxious for the regeneration of their
country, and the dawn of days which they were
taught were to give them a house, and food, and
clothing — and no rent to pay.

Yes ; that unreasonable " no rent " cry was the
bugle-call which brought and thought the people.

The women caught this " free land " fever
quickly. Laughing, coaxing, lecturing, by all the
wiles of women, they cajoled the men. One and
all the girls insisted on their admirers voting for
the man who would get " free land " for " the
people."

Sure he is a three friend to ould Ireland,
the daiiint ! He'll do a power for the poor. 
! Jim, ye must vote for Dymock, or never
come alongside me af^ain." So Delilah would insist
; and poor Jim, what could he do, but yield to
such persuasion ?

And then the poor drudge of a wife would exclaim
: " More power to Dymock ! Sure enough
we have lived like slaves ; just kept sore souls
in toil - worn bodies. By the piper that played
before Moses ! Dan Griffin, you'll deserve neither
luck nor grace unless you vote for Dymock ! "

Amongst those who were most eager in urging
such arguments was Molly Shea, who, with all
the witchery of her blue eyes and the suasion of
her plausible tongue, besought her lover.

Sorry a reason why you should vote for
Fitzgerald, who keeps us poor and bare 1 And
sure the ould Earl himself lives sumptuously, while
your poor heart is broke with the poverty. Cuddy,
man, it is a fool you are ; and by this and by
that, may I never see heaven if I be any man's
wife that does not vote for the one who promises
free land ' to the people."

It was thus Dymock's gospel was preached
to the Killballymactaggarites. And men looked
askance at each other while such doctrines were
aired. Could they believe it ? Should they do
as they were bid ?

Was this man to be a saviour of their country ?
Were they to follow his lead, leave the safe path
and kind master, who, many in their hearts knew,
had been a true friend to them ? Were they to
go out and fight windmills in the hope of winning
the land ?

Political need is a sure forcing-bed ; so through
the exigencies of an approaching general election
the hydra-headed " National cause " grew apace.
The agents of Molly Shea's type used seductive
arguments, while exponents of Nationalism of her
worthy father's calibre used threats, and hinted
dangers they feared to name.

Mr Denis Shea in one public-house after another
expounded the iniquities of the landlord
system, denounced the wickedness of expurgatorial
emigration as an outcome of landlord greed, and
declaring " the land for the tiller of the soil "
(though in that capacity he could not claim an

acre), growled vengeance on those who were
false to "the cause."

And while Shea, and such as he, preached
sedition which was the outcome of individual spite,
they advanced the interests of agitators, whose
aims their ignorance was incapable of comprehending.


In the bes^innino- Denis Shea's disaffection was
a chronic distaste to work, a love of gossip and
greed, and a decided jealousy of all who were
better off than himself. The moral of his present
political excitement culminated in a vague belief
that, " if the Fitzgeraldss were ' put down,' " he,
somehow, would " better his own condition."

Therefore, through all his idle drunken babble,
Denis planned, plotted, schemed, and blustered ; and
finally grew to believe himself to be a " power " in
the councils of the Nationalists.

Although very ignorant and very noisy, Denis
by his glib tongue attracted attention ; and thus it
came to pass that, from being an unknown, idle,
and impecunious tenant, he suddenly found himself
a man of note, and distinguished as a prominent
supporter of Mr Dymock.

This latter fact even reached the Earl's ears.
He was very wrathful. Forgetting in his anger
that, as a matter of expediency, he had himself
insisted on the man being left at Cappa, he railed
at Percy.

Just like you ! soft - hearted and lenient to
scoundrels ! — vipers who turn on us like this. I
won't leave him there another day. Do you
understand ? — turn him out at once ! "

Percy entreated the Earl to wait. At this
juncture an eviction would be damaging to his
election prospects, and an election there would
be before the spring was over. But the old
man was furious, and refused to hearken to
reason.

Not an hour's grace, not a day longer, after
this abominable ingratitude. If you won't give
the order, I will. I am fully determined not to
be besmirched by my own tenants, — a tenant who
owes the very roof which shelters him to my mistaken
clemency."

Thus the Earl would be, and — was obeyed.

And Denis, who, while taking his landlord's
name in vain, had forgotten the sword hanging

over his head, heard with incredulous ears that
he was to be ejected.

What ! put him and his wife and children
outside the door of the house his father had built !
Xever ! while he had breath in his body to cry
shame on the injustice, or hands to throw the
bailiff out the door."

Percy hoped that at hint of an ejectment Denis
would take warning, hold his tongue, and not
annoy the Earl.

But Percy was mistaken. Denis was now inflated
and vainglorious ; " great times were coming
for Ireland." Instead of repenting his ingratitude,
he grew more virulently abusive, and
defied the Earl : while his patron, Mr Florence
McCarthy, made this threatened ejectment the
text of a brilliant speech delivered at the Farmers'
Club.

Percy was sorry, Mary more sorry — sorry because
it worried, and might injure her husband's
election prospects, and her heart was set on his
distinguishing himself at St Stephen's.

Denis Shea of Cappa was now a notoriety, and
Percy knew it would be a cruel kindness to shelter

him any longer from the fate he had brought on
himself. In justice to other orderly tenants, he
could no longer extend special favour to this ill-tongued
rogue.

With a black scowl on his face, and murderous
vengeance in his evil heart, Denis was "turned
out." And, turned out of Cappa, the agitator
sought the more convenient shelter of Killbally-
mactaggart. This new locality was as lowering
to his moral as to his social status. No longer
a farmer," only a loafer, his children, hitherto
running as wild goats on the mountain-side, now
consorted with more amusing than improving
gutter children. Thus, while the little ones rapidly
graduated in morality with street Arabs, Denis
himself, associating with the lower stratum of gin-shop
politicians, rose to a national eminence.

Denis posed as a martyr and a hero, and talked
gloomily of the " tyrant landlords," who sucked all
substance out of " the people," and savagely of his
landlord, who had turned him adrift to starve.

And now came the general election of 1880.

Party spirit ran high everywhere, and the little
out-of- the-world borough of Killballymactaggart

was in a ferment. Not since the election of '32
had there been such a hubbub. Platforms were
erected at the Farmers' Club, where streams of
eloquent sedition flowed on all market-days into
the listening ears of an excited gathering.

That Ireland was poor was a fact — a sad
truth, which these listeners felt at their heart's
core and in the marrow of their bones. That
something " was wrong, they vaguely thought,
and that the landlord was this unknown power
they were told to believe.

The election stirred up the town. Police came
in from outlying districts, military paraded the
streets. Young men walked quickly from the
club to the telegraph office, young maidens walked
everywhere ; and though old men grew grave as
they read the signs of the times, young people
danced every night, flirtations were vigorous, the
contest was amusing, and it was understood by
most of his friends that Percy's success was a
foregone conclusion.

Harry O'Brien backed his opinion as to the
result, a sovereign to a champagne supper at the
club; while girl cousins adventured pairs to a

dozen of gloves in reckless fashion. As the polling
day approached, Mary grew terribly nervous —
so nervous that Percy, though himself excited and
counting on success, entreated his wife not to
build too much upon the event ; while the Earl
encouraged her spirit by hourly despatched notes,
supposed to contain the latest and most accurate
information as to the borough's political temperament.


CHAPTER YL

THE Gathering OF THE STORM.

There she goes, the darling ! " exclaimed Xorah
Moriarty, nodding and smiling to Mrs Fitzgerald,
who drove past her, as, seated on the shaft of her
cart, North jogged to market. " God's blessing
on her, and go wit her always ! She comes of a
good old stock, more power to them ! — and sure
it is herself as is always kind to the poor."

My curse down on her and all the breed,"
growled North's companion, who sat on the other
shaft.

Whist, man, whist ; Lord save us from harm !
but it is yourself has the bad tongue. Sure the
world knows it was your own folly and not landlord
greed drove you from Cappa. It was never
the Fitzgeraldss but the drink brought you down

in the world, Denis. Shame for you, man, to
scowl at the good lady ! Blessed Mary ! but nature
made you ugly enough without putting that
wicked look on your face. Ah, Din, you poor
misguided man, if it were not for the drink you
would be in the old place yet. The master would
never have put you out if you had kept a civil
tongue in your head, and showed the least taste
of decency. Sure enough, it is himself that is
always the poor man's friend."

Friend ! " sneered Denis. " It is yourself that
is innocent. The landlords are tyrants, all of them.
They are an iniquity in our land, every mother's
son of them ; and Fit-garrakl did me a bad turn,
anyway."

Hold your wicked tongue, you ugly oaf !
Myself don't care to hear the like of you belittling
your betters."

Betters ! shah ! betters ! Why, Mrs Moriarty,
an honest woman like you ought to be wiser than
to say the like of that ! " retorted Mr Shea. " Sure,
Thade and yourself know well landlords are all
aliens, who have grabbed the land of the people.
The Fit-garlands and the like of them are just the

English garrison that grinds the life out of the
Irish people. It is 'Egyptian taskmasters they
are, starving us out, and making laws to protect
their own greed. But, bead, we are getting too
wise for them ; there are those among us who are
driving sense into the people. Have you heard
Mr Dymock, ma'am ? "

Xot I. I don't want to hear him at all."

Why not ? Himself speaks illigant. He is a
powerful fine man. Trust me, Dymock is the
true friend of the nation. I warrant when he is
member for Killballymactaggart, the like of us
will get justice."

That I may never live to see that day ! "
ejaculated Xorah. " I like old friends best. Xo
Dymock for me, if you please."

It is the good time at last, Mrs Moriarty.
We were beat down with oppression "

Xow, Din, no more of your wicked nonsense.
How can a great hulking " omathaun " like you
know what is what ? And sure any one with two
eyes in their head would prefer a civil-spoken
gentleman, like our young master, to that great
hunger-looking stranger. What does the like of

him know about us ? Bless you, man, we want
no adventurers here, when we have one of the
ould stock anxious and able to do his best for us.
My hand for you, we will stand by old friends,
send that Sassenach back whence he came, and
put our own Mr Fitzgerald in Parliament. May
the heavens be his bed ! " ended she, piously.

B — t him ! " growled Denis, in the depths of
his sunk chest.

Whist, Din ; I won't have you swearing at
quality on my cart — making a holy show of yourself
— complaining of oppression. Lord guide
you ! what do you want ? "

Everything." Denis spoke fiercely. " My
belly full of victuals, good clothes to my back,
a warm house and farm to keep my wife and
children."

Sure yourself had that same, and would have
it still if you had had the sense to keep from the
public," retorted North.

It is not that entirely," mumbled Denis. " I
wonder at a woman like you remaining blind to
the suffering of the people."

"To the fiddlestick — people — blind! It is

your own story you are telling. Myself can see
when a door is open and when a door is shut, and
can recognise friends when the good Lord gives
them. The gentry are all good to me, and would
help you too, Din, if you would only stop drinking
and keep yourself decent. You had many a
chance, and poor use you made of them, you misfortune
fool. Glory ! sure it is queer good
broadcloth would look on your ugly back, and
queer you would look driving in a carriage ; and
yet, you born idiot, I believe that is what you are
driving at."

Well, and why not ? One man is as good as
another," drawled Mr Shea.

Xorah laughed in his face.

You poor creature ! May I never die but
the whisky has took all the reason out of you.
Look at me — see the fine brogues on my feet, the
handsome cloak on my back, the strong mare and
good cart carrying me and my sirius to market ;
and think of the snug house and lovely bit o'
ground and the decent man I have a-tilling it ;
what more do I want, in the name o' God, or
that honest man that owns me ? Xo, no, Din, weare

decent and comfortable — thanks to the good
landlord, who is always helpful ; can pay our way
and lodge a trifle in the bank — thanks be to the
Lord for all His mercies ! "

Aya ! yah ! wish ! " [I wish pen could convey
the meaning tone of Mr Shea's ejaculations.]
It is dark ye are entirely, more is the pity !
Sure a fine woman like you ought to be at the
top of the tree ! Time was when Ireland was
a nation, and will be again, with the help of God.
Then the Moriartyss had acres and acres of land,
with d — 1 a penny of rent to pay. Sure,
woman, if only you had the learning, you would
know Thade himself, honest man, has more right
to Ballykillbegs Castle than them that is keeping
him out. Learning is a great help, Mrs Moriarty,
and myself is learning every day."

Fair and easy ! it is yourself is queer !
Think of the like of us at Ballykillbegs ! " North
laughed outright. " We have no grudge to the
Earl, nor call there at all. The Fitzgeraldss are
main good ; and as for the young master, himself
is a jewel. May the Lord keep him from
harm ! "

It is a hard screw lie is, or I would not be as
I am this day," muttered Denis.

At it again ! as if the world did not know it
was the drink and not the rent broke you. Ah,
Din, Din, what a curious fool you are ! "

D — 1 a bit ! " swore Denis, speaking savagely,
though not above his breath, as he poured out the
evil of his mind. "Why should we water the
ground with the sweat all the days of our lives just
for bare food, while the like o' them have the full
and plenty ? There is neither right or reason in
it ; they are just strangers fattening on our folly.
What gives such as he a right to claim rent from
me ? It is against nature. God made the land
for us all, and those who till should own the
soil."

You were always a poor fool, Din Shea, and
the 'lection and the drink have took what little
sense ye had. Sure the world knows, since the
world was, there were always the rich and the
poor, and honest poverty is no disgrace. The
Lord brings all into the world poor and bare
and naked, unable to do a hand's turn to help
ourselves ; and, all praises to His name, it is

VOL. I. G

thankful sinners ought to be for what blessings
He gives us. And sure, after all blessings are
evenly divided, yourself has the wealth of a fine
long family, God bless them ! while the lonely old
man at Ballykillbegs has neither chick nor child
to give him the time o' day."

Time the breed was extinct, and we had come
to our own," growled Denis ; " and wee will sooner
than you think."

If talk tilled the ground, it is the model
farmer you would be. For all that, Din Shea,
it is a queer world this would be without the
gentry — the real sort, I mean. The old stock are
real o'ood backs to the like of us."

You are a poor deluded woman, and more
shame for you, coming, as you do, of one of the
best Irish families — the McCarthys owned all the
country here once — and though you did marry a
Moriarty, Thade is an honest man, and before the
curse they where as good as yourself, and he is
better than most men. Do come and hear Mr
Dymock ; he will enlighten you, ma'am — show
you how all landlords are robbers ; how, like
murdering thieves, they have confiscated the

land that belongs to the people, and left us
poor and bare and starving. Indeed, Mrs
Moriarty," Denis now whined subserviently,
though a poor man like I have no right to
instruct such as you, it is Gospel truth I am
speaking. It is a sin and a shame to see a
fine woman like you sitting under a cloud,
ignorant of the sun-burst true patriots are procuring
for old Ireland. Ah ! Dymock is the
man ; he'll put the fear of God in their hearts,
and if you give ear to him, make you a wiser
woman before you go home this night."

It is your own story you are telling, Din,"
simpered Mrs Moriarty, who, like most of her
sex, was open to flattery, and took kindly to her
companion's implied veneration of her family,
even though his compliment was made at the
expense of her husband's more debased blood.
It is yourself can twist one round with that
long tongue of yours, — not that I will stand any
disrespect to Thade, or that I am ashamed of the
name he gave me. He is a fine man is Thade ; I
dare you to show me a better all the country
round, honest and fair and easy."

Thade is all that' allowed Denis, with becoming
deference. " But you see when a man's
blood is i\]), — and these are stirring times, —
he sees and feels more of the country's wrongs
every day ; and on my soul, when all Ireland is
ringing with the story, it is myself is sorry to see
a likely woman, with your fine parts and great
claims, ignorant of what is coming. With the help
of God you may, and have a good right one of
these days to be, owner of a fine estate, without
a shilling of rent to pay. Ah, achushla ! if you
would only join the cause, you would be the most
powerful woman in the country — a great help tous.
Sure, it is not only Thade, but every boy in
the parish you would talk round ; the good word
and blue eyes of Mrs Moriarty would do more for
the cause than Dymock himself. It is the truth,
and no lie I am saying, when all Ireland is being
organised, it is not in the back crowd, but the
front row, a handsome likely woman, full up of
sense and of old blood, ought to be."

None of your blarney," grinned Xorah,
pleased, despite her sense, by Mr Shea's compliments
to her abilities and personal attractions.

Barring the drink, it is yourself that is always
pleasant ; an' sure, what harm, just to please an
old friend. If you meet me at Dooley's by four,
I will go with you and hear what Dymock says —
though I doubt he will teach us anything new.
Now, if he could instruct us how to make one
pound do the work of two, make two firkins out of
one, or two blades of grass to grow instead of one,
it would be some good ; for that is the only honest
way of bettering the condition of the farmer.
Ah, man dear ! it is idle to talk, and walk about
with your hands in your breeches pockets, talking
about oppression, and expecting the boiled prayers
to fall buttered into your open mouth. Better
far throw off your coat, take a spade in your hand,
and work steady and honest. Keep from the
whisky, and my hand for it, you will be better
off at the end of the year than if you listened to
Dymock till doomsday."

It is myself does work hard," answered Denis
Shea in an injured tone.

With one of her broadest, sunniest smiles, Xorah
laughed in his face.

Yoic work ! — that same is a good joke. When

did yon begin ? And by the same token yon do
not show much for it. Let us see how you spent
this week. At Tubbercross fair on Monday, at
Pat Stack's wake and funeral on Tuesday,
Con. Keeff's wedding on Wednesday, at Ballybeg
station on Thursday, and yesterday, well, that was
the only stroke of work you did all this week,
when you drove the plough half a day for my
man. A hard week's labour, by my soul ! Iso
wonder the knees of your old breeches are in holes,
and the soles coming off your brogues. I pity the
woman that owns you, that I do. You ought to
be ashamed of yourself, that you ought — a great,
bios, lumbering, idle drone ! "

Ah ! yo^t don't understand ; women are that
simple," responded Mr Shea, condescendingly.
My occupation is in a higher sphere than mere
manual labour. Any fool can dig with a spade,
but it takes a man of parts to do my work. It is
my brains I am working now, ma'am. I am an
agent of the " Cause," and it is hard labour incensing
the ignorant into the duty they owe to the
nation. But for all it is a glorious occupation,"
snivelled the hypocrite, " enlightening one's fellowmen,

striving to emancipate a suffering people
from a cruel tyranny, and working as a patriot.
Sure it is a patriot I am now, assisting to free
our country from the alien race that wants to
exterminate us Irish. Ah, my dear woman ! you
don't understand, but I know the rights of it. It
is driving us beyond seas the landlords want,
as Fitzgerald is doing at Glenamuick ; but stick
firmly to the soil we will, and drive the landlords
themselves into the sea. We will have good times
yet ; and so may you if you have sense, for your
people were kings of Ireland once. By this and
by that, no reason you should not reign again.
Sure it would be a good day for you, and Thade
alongside, to come driving a coach and four instead
of a common cart into Killballymactaggart. May
I never die till I see that day ! " The town was
now reached, and Mr Shea jumping off the shaft,
said respectfully, " Thank you kindly for the
lift, Mrs Moriarty, and I'll be down at Dooley's
by four o'clock, proud to keep you company to
hear Dymock."

There was a crowded market that day in ,
and much gossip everywhere, the

election of course being the most prominent topic.
The unsophisticated country folk stood about,
open - mouthed, listening to the smooth-tongued
and more sophisticated town friends, who tried to
indoctrinate them with their advanced patriotic
notions.

Sure I tell you, ma'am,, he is real wonderful,
talks that big, myself has not the face to say I
understand him. But he is beautiful to hear ;
come you and listen, and you will know all about
it. There are great doings, a fine platform, and a
power of flags flying. — Yerrah, Cud, is that yon ? "
(This in a more insinuating tone, to a fine young
man who strode up to ISTorah Moriarty's side, shook
her by the hand, and then beamed down on the
speaker, who continued.) " It is a sight for sore
eyes to see you. Cud ; you and I have not met
since we left Cappa."

No, Maurieen, and by my soul it is yourself
that looks blooming, bright and fresh as a posy.
How is the mother, and the chiltern, and all of
you ? " asked the young man, looking down into
the saucy black eyes that looked up questioningly
at him.

It is myself that was just hungry for a sight
of you, Cuddy," murmured the girl, shyly, while
Mrs Moriarty's attention was taken off this pair
by another acquaintance who drew her aside.

And sure it is myself misses you at Cappa,
Maurieen ashore ; we are lonely without you."

It is smothering I am in the town," answered
the young lady, with a becoming blush enriching
the russet of her face. " A friend from the old
home is sunshine to my heart. How are they all
with you ? "

Well, glory be to God ! the mother has a
trifle of rheumatics, but Nance and Sue and Will
are all right. We had a good year, no hunger
at the door. Snowdrop had a heifer calf, and
Dewdrop another, and they are doing fine, and
our first firkin is down. I have nothing to complain
of," added the young man, " except, that the
people at Cappa are not you."

Ugh ! land-robbers," replied Miss Shea, with
a saucy toss of her head. " Don't name them tome
or you make me sick. My curse down on
them for thieves and robbers ! "

Whist ! whist ! honey ; what is the use of

Stirring bad blood ? When your father was gone,
why should not Nolan take the laud ? A bad
bargain he has of it too, for it is a bare hungry
place, Maurieen ; it is not worth fretting over.
If you were not so far away, I would not
care, and pity the poor man who has gone into
Cappa."

Pity ! " exclaimed Miss Shea ; " more shame
for you to feel pity for the like of them, mean
land-robbers, who took our warm corner. I hate
them, and if you talk like that I will hate you
also. Get out of that, don't be looking at me
with your great saucer eyes. Sure, it is queer
friendship to pity the man that has took the house
over our head. It is myself hates low ways and
false friends." Here the speaker turned her back
half on the young man, and threw scorching
glances over her shoulder as she continued — " I
am surprised at a decent boy like you turning
against old friends. Is it because we are out of
Cappa ? There, go ; I'll have nothing more to say
to you. May I never see heaven ! but you are a
real cheat. Cud Moriarty. To think that I used
to set such store by you. Go out of that, I say ;

leave me alone ! Do you hear ! I am sick of the
sight of you."

While Maurieen " larded " her admirer with her
tongue, she also dazzled him with the defiant
sparkle of her coal-black eyes. In vain poor
Cud implored her forgiveness. She would not be
appeased until she had delivered her burdened
soul of all its passion.

It is cold-blooded half-hearted fellows like
you that are the ruin of the country. You don't
see the wrong of this, or the right of that ; you
are a poor coward, who lets the quality ride roughshod
over you, that you are. Ah, Cud, there
was friendship between us always, to say nothing
of the broken sixpence a twelvemonth come last
Shrove — it is a shame for you. I am sick, and
sore, and sorry — ashamed for you to be so spiritless.
I believe the black drop of the Moriarty is
coming out in you "

"Maurieen, Maurieen, ashore!" entreated Cuddy,
helplessly ; " is it scheming you are ? What have
I done, that you talk to me like this ? Throwing
old lies in my face, when yourself knows I am
your true friend. Glory be to goodness ! I had

neither hand, act, or part in putting Nolan into
Cappa. AVhat do you want me to say or do ?
Turn, darling, turn ; let your poor Cud see one
smiling glint in those roguish eyes."

It is myself .has a mind never to look at you
again," pouted the rural belle, casting a relenting
eye over her shoulder, " unless you swear never to
be content until we are back again in Cappa. Do
you hear ? do you understand ? "

Yes, yes, of course ; sure you know you are
the neighbour I want there," answered Cud, as,
emboldened by Maurieen's softening glances, he
ventured to put a hand on her shoulder, and
draw himself round to where he could attain look
straight down on the face of the girl he admired.
Sure it is not falling out with me you are about
the like of them. What care I for the stranger ?
The Nolan are nothing to me ; but you are — you
know what. Come along, honey 1 it is a cold day,
and you and I will have a glass of porter together,
and drink to better days. God help us ! if AYilly
was only a few years older, or I had the money
by me to send the girls to America, it would be
clearing the road for you and I ; as it is, as long

as the four of them are at the Cobbe, I do not
see my way to bringing another into the house."

That is just it, Cud," sighed Maurieen, yielding
to the pressure of his hand. " It is hard times
for the poor — very hard on us. And sure, if every
man had his own it would not be liard at all ; as
it is, we are just miserable starving cowards, allowing
them as have* no call to take the bread
out of our mouth, the house from over our head.
Sure the land belongs to the people, and the rack-rents
are the ruin of Ireland. If I take a glass of
porter with you now and make friends, you must
just come along with me and hear what Mr
Dymock says : he is a wonderful speaker, and
swears every man may be owner of his own
farm, if only he has the sense to be true to the
cause."

Anything in life to please you, if only you
smile on me like that," whispered Cuddy. " It
is a proud man I'll be when I take you home
to the Cobbe."

If you follow Dymock's lead, the day may
not be so far off as you think," answered the lady.
He says we are to have cheap bread, good farms.

warm houses, no rent — oh ! there is a great time
coming."

So saying, the pair moved off, honest Cud
following his Eve to the space opposite the Farmers'
Club, where the crowd was gathering to be
enlightened by that burning patriot, Mr Dymock.

CHAPTER VII.

Mauiiieex Shea and Cuddy Moriarty presently
found themselves in the crowd before the Farmers'
Club. They were in time to see the portly form
of Mr Florence ]\TCarthy step pompously through
the open window on to the green baize-covered
platform, from which he looked down on the
crowd with a self-satisfied smile.

Florence was well known to the townsfolk, and
his advent was greeted with facetious if not unpleasant
remarks.

Proud to see you there, Flurry ! " cried one ;
while another shouted — " More power to the
M'Carthys, old kings of the country ! sure Flurry
himself would not misbecome a crown." From the
centre of the crowd a son of Vulcan exclaimed —

"Hanuniam diam (to hell with your soul) ! Flurry
halfpenny, how many ounces go to a pound o'
tea ? " a query which was welcomed with shouts
of derisive laughter. But such witticisms, in his
present elevation, Mr Florence McCarthy — who
usually reigned over a store of small groceries ina
neighbouring street — thought it best to ignore.

Proud of the position he enjoyed as chairman
of the popular candidate's committee, Florence
bowed blandly, managing to convey, by the
measured wagging of his head, a judicious, combination
of injured innocence and benign forgiveness
for the liberties these playful ones took
with his name.

Wise in his generation, Florence recognised no
connection between politics and tea. If, unfortunately
for his customers, Florence's commercial
probity was questionable and his weights doubtful,
as a politician his Rationalistic proclivities were
undoubted, and his cunning above measure. Thus,
now posing as the " people's friend," he expected
all past accidental unpleasantness to be forgiven ;
and, inflamed with National grievances, his soul
for the present soared above groceries.

Florence's ferret eyes, piercing from beneath his
shaggy brows, were bent on the people, on whose
heads he was metaphorically pouring eloquent if
silent blessing, and forgiveness for their unkind
remarks. He bowed and smiled, as the uproar
and gibes, so to speak, fell harmlessly at his feet,
until joined by the parish priest.

Father Dan Prendergast, an oleaginous, sleek-looking,
more jovial than divine ecclesiastic, regarded
his flock with complacency. He was
large, square-set, and voluptuous looking — a man
with three chins, small features, and large self-appreciation.
There was a world of punctuality
in the wave of his sacred hand, as with a bow
towards Mr Dymock, who followed close on his
heels, he introduced that gentleman to the people.

Mr Dymock was tall and thin, an all-over iron-grey
man, with beaky nose, thin lips, and eyes
hidden beneath heavy brows. His eyes were perplexing
— so deep-set, one was always endeavouring,
never succeeding, in fathoming their expression.
They were unmistakably shifty, and in
colour of an unwholesome gooseberry green.

Mr Dymock bowed grimly, to the right, to the
VOL. I. H

left, and directly in front, as if a hinge far down
his spine enabled him to make the movement, and
creaked as he did so.

He looked wooden ; but while he bowed, his
green eyes travelled swiftly over and took in the
character of his audience.

As the impassive grey man looked down calculating
on the excited multitude, all eyes turned
towards him ; and what a motley gathering they
were I

Some poor pinched faces were eloquent of distress,
pathetic with patience ; others, sullen and
discontented, were ready for any mischief; some
looked anxious, full of feverish longing and dissatisfaction,
and impatient of control ; whilst many
were thoughtlessly effervescent with mischief.
There were the careless, the lawless, the idle, and
the foolish, — a mob .of ignorant men, women, and
children, fully 5000 people, all waiting to learn
wisdom from Mr Dymock.

And Mr Dymock, quickly calculating the material
at his feet, determined to make what capital
he could of the omni gathered.

It was sad to see those people there — ignorant.

generous, impulsive, heedlessly reckless — waiting
like a flock of sheep, to be driven at the will of
the clever demagogue who now took their measure.

As the crowd looked up at Dymock, they seemed
galvanised to a sudden silence. But when, after
contemplating them for the space of a few seconds
in grim silence, he drew a long breath, and expanded
his chest, and again went through the process
of bending his back, the tongues of the people
were loosened. They cheered loudly — cheered as
Irishmen will, for the pure love of hearing their
own voices — those outside taking up the shout,
sending the hurrahs back, to die out at the feet of
the idol of the hour.

While the many shouted, a few made personal
remarks, and amongst the latter was our friend
Xorah, who, true to her promise, had met Din
Shea at Dooley's public-house.

Faix, he is uglier than I thought. Could
skin a flint with his nose, and put a hole through
you with his gimlet eyes," was Xorah's disparaging
opinion.

Cheer, boys, cheer ! " encouraged Denis. " Dy-mock's
the friend of the people — one cheer more!"

He a friend to the people ! yes, with a hook ! "
laughed North.

Show the gentleman we go with him. Ireland
for the Irish ! — shout your best, ye d — Is !
Hurrah ! hurrah ! "

Denis threw up his stick, and looked daggers
at a few around, who stared at the candidate open-mouthed,
but kept silent.

"Hold your noise, do," remonstrated another
man ; " the priest is going to speak."

Bad manners to him ! what right has he in
it — unless, by Ganys ! he is going to give us an
indulgence — free ! " scoffed another.

A free mass from Father Dan ! " roared Denis,
devoid of religion, and callous as to superstition
; and with a feeling of personal spite at the
priest in question.

Hold your evil tongue, do ! " returned a third ;
you never darken the chapel door, or pay a
due — what call have you to the priest's blessing?"


Whist ! boys, whist ! we all know Father Dan
is not the sort gives nothing for nothing. It is he
can put the screw on for the christening and the

burying. What did it cost yoii to have the prayers
read over your old mother, Din ? "

Go to h — 1 ! " growled Denis, sore because
the priest had refused to bury his mother (the
Cobbe people not having paid church dues for two
years) unless he was paid three pounds. Denis
could not, or, at all events, would not, pay more
than one pound to the priest ; so the coffin had
stood on the roadside, with a plate on the lid,
and the charitable had made up the required sum,
before Father Dan would grace the funeral with
his presence.

Be easy, Denis ! don't disgrace my company ;
and sure it is only decent to be respectful to the
cloth, whatever mislike you may hold to the man
that wears it," argued Xorah. " Aren't you afraid
of the priest putting the ' come-hither ' on you ?
Myself would not like to tempt providence. Who
knows but it is a turkey you will find yourself
some fine morning, with your sinful disrespect of
the priest. He could make you a goose, and no
mistake," ended she, in an aside, " only you are
that by nature already you poor man ! "

Those who heard grinned at North's remark ;

but at this juncture Father Dan's voice procured
attention.

Boys," said he, " I am not going to try your
patience with a speech, I only wish to tender you
all my hearty thanks for giving this splendid
welcome to my friend Mr Dymock. His views
are well known to you all, his watchwords are
echoing in all our hearts, ' Ireland for the Irish ! '
Ireland for the Irish ' is yours, his, and, need I
add, my ambition. We make a triple chain — a
trinity of priest, intellect, and people, all drawing
to the same end. Working shoulder to shoulder,
guided by one will, we will be invincible, a
wall of defence round the free hearths of the
country, against which the wave of landlord
oppression will dash helplessly, wasting itself in
endeavours to crush 7/ 5. Yes ; if we only stick
together, the tyrant minority will wear themselves
out struggling against the will of a united people.
(Great cheers.) That is right. I like to see my
flock show a proper spirit. And now I want to
ask one question. What have the Fitzgeraldss
ever done for you ? And I can answer my own
question — nothing but rack-rent. That ol(J man

living out there has spent gold wrung from your
needs on his own idle luxury, while you and
yours starve. What do they care for the Irish
people ? Nothing. They are just usurpers, who
confiscate your property and fatten at your expense.
Boys, we have had enough of these false
tyrants, aliens in faith — common robbers. No
longer will we, a free people, submit to be misrepresented
by the like of them. (Great cheers.)
I see you go with me. We want no more of
them. Listen, and we will have no more of
them. Every man and boy, every woman and
girl, must give themselves to this work. Combine
and secure the return of this gentleman,
who, stung by the suffering of our nation, offers
himself as a champion for our liberation. (' More
power to you. Father Dan ! that's the talk we
like') Now, then, we understand each other.
This large, representative, and enthusiastic meeting
will return my good friend Mr Dymock as the
first Nationalist member for Killballymactaggart."
With a certain satisfaction on his sanctimonious
countenance. Father Dan stepped on one side,
and motioned to Mr Dymock to address the people.

With a deep sonorous voice the people's candidate
began his speech.

"Electors of Killballymactaggart, the welcome
of this vast multitude has almost overwhelmed
me with emotion. The depths of my heart are
stirred, and as I look down, pity, admiration, and
encouragement are the lessons I learn. Dear
brothers and sisters, while my heart aches at your
poverty, I am delighted at the spirit, and greatly
encouraged by the enthusiasm of this vast gathering
welcoming me here to-day. Your grievances
are very near my heart, and with all the strength
of my manhood I now pledge myself to your
service. This sea of upturned intelligent faces
impresses me with the responsibility of the position
to which I aspire. But I am not afraid.
The knowledge of your suffering and of the trust
you place in me will inspire all my actions. Too
long have you dragged your heavy chains ; but
your brave hearts have still kept up courage, and
now you are lifting your drooping heads and defying
your tyrant jailers. No longer will any of
the men before me bow their necks to the thrall
of rack-renting landlords. The land belongs to

the people, and henceforward we will battle for
freedom of contract, fair rent, and fixity of tenure.
(Cheers.) Now, let me tell you what fair rent is.
Just what you can spare after comfortably providing
for yourselves and families. Feed your
hungry little ones, clothe your wives, live indecent
comfort, and out of what remains you
can pay a fair rent for your farms. We know
the Almighty made this fruitful land as a fair
heritage for His people, — that the tillers are the

rightful owners of the soil. But " (here cries

of " No buts ! " " We will have it all with the help
o' God ! " " Ireland for the Irish ! " " The land for
the people ! " " No landlord tyrants here ! " " Goon,
my hearty ! " " That's the style for us !" &c., &c.,
created a hiatus in Mr Dy mock's oration).

When the tumult subsided, Mr Dymock wisely
made a fresh start. He really had a fair command
of language, and was possessed of one of
those powerful organs for impressing sensitive
people — a sonorous, deep, and musical voice. This
voice was a great gift : it rose and fell and trembled,
as if overflowing with emotion ; and was
instinctively modulated to fall with soothing comfort

on the heart-sick, or trumpet-wise encourage
wild zeal. A pleasant voice to listening ears, and
one that touched some chord in each soul until
it echoed in sympathy with his words. " Men of
Killballymactaggart," he continued, " this is a
great crisis. A new phase of existence approaches.
In coming here to solicit your suffrages, I offer
you a glorious opportunity for distinguishing yourselves.
You may lead the van in this glorious
campaign of Irishmen against oppression — against
that devilish device feudalism, which for generations
has been destroying the prospects of the
finest peasantry in the world. My opponent is
the representative of his class — the Conservative
landlord class — that upas-tree which refuses to
allow anything to grow or live beneath the shadow
of its branches, — that iron-handed minority
of an accursed superiority, which, year after year,
with no rio'ht but mio-ht, has crushed to the

O CD '

earth — nay, off this beautiful earth — the sons of
Erin. Take warning — be advised — take fresh
heart, — it is never too late to mend. Do not
perpetuate your shame ; but join hand and heart,
leave no stone unturned, to defeat this born

enemy of the people. Eemember this man represents
the exterminators of the Irish race.
He is one of those invading robbers, who, laying
the grasp of a conqueror on the poor and needy,
flings them — where ? — adrift, to sink down, down,
into the forgotten pauper's grave near home. Or
who, with a long-er stretch of the rich man's
arm, wrenches the poor from the' loved land of
their birth — from the green fields, sweet valleys,
and towering hills that are the one pleasure of
their lives — and exports there, like cargoes of brute
beasts, to a foreign land, there to die. There to
die ! because from there the shrieks of the dying,
the sobs of the widows and orphans, may not
irritate the landlords' ears, or disturb their pleasure
in those wide-spreading lawns or fat pastures
they have thus cleared for themselves. These
selfish avaricious arbitrators of your fate care not
one jot for the people. They sweep you aside
out of their path like flies. These landlord rulers,
proud of their green pastures and fine herds,
point to them arrogantly as signs of wealth and
prosperity, and say, ' See how we have improved
Ireland ! ' God help you, and forgive them !

Men, women, and children are banished from the
dear land of their birth, to pine, die, and rot in foreign
graves, that cattle may feed where once happy
families dwelt, and blooming children flourished.
You call yourselves men, and you bear this ?
Wives, mothers, sisters, rise up and cry shame on
them ! Look around and see, and know it is
God's truth I speak. The landlords' flocks and
herds increase, and you see your children, who
ouojht to be the sinews of the country, starve,
dwindle, and perish." (Terrible cries from the
women, and lusty cheers from the men, greeted this
exordium, during which Mr Dymock held council
with Mr McCarthy. Mr M'Carthy's rubicund
visage shone with satisfaction, while the all-over
grey orator looked as if his wooden framework
had hardened into iron.)

"When silence was restored, Mr Dymock continued
his harangue. He spoke for more than an
hour, ringing changes on the same text, deducing
false inferences from falser premisses, misrepresenting
facts, and skilfully working on the passions
of his audience. He brought a passionate speech
to a close as follows : —

Fair rents, free sale, fixity of tenure, are the
three leaves of the shamrock, which is our present
badge. But, though this is our war-cry, it is not
all we want. These are only the first in a series
of demands which we, the people's candidates, have
undertaken to compel a British Parliament to yield
to our constituents. There is a great future before
Ireland. If true to yourselves, you men of
Killballymactaggart will be true to me ; for I am
pledged to the Xational cause, and will do my
best to hasten that day, when Ireland shall again
stand chief amongst nations — first gem of the
ocean, great, glorious, and free ! "

This was a well - turned ending ; and as Mr
Dymock bent his iron frame and swayed his
acknowledgments, thunders of applause echoed
through the street.

Mr Florence McCarthy was much pleased with
the effect his friend had produced, and, full of zeal
for "the cause," could not resist adding his mite
of eloquence to the political demonstration. He
must have had the theory of that old story, " Don't
ride the black dog," in his mind when he jovially
advised the people to go home quietly, at the

same time reminding the crowd that Mr Fitzgerald
was " telling a pack of lies to a few poor
fools up at the hotel." He insinuated every word
that gentleman uttered was inimical to the freedom
of Ireland and ruinous to the National
cause. " But don't you go near them, boys —
evil communications corrupt good manners — and
there is nothing good to learn there."

ISTo sooner had Florence retired through the
window into the club than the larger portion of
the rabble hurried to the Q-oal indicated — the
hotel — where they hissed and cheered in pretty
much the same fashion as they had done at the
Farmers' Club — only a little more of the former
and less of the latter — as the Conservative candidate's
plain statements displeased as much as the
misstatements of the Nationalists had tickled their
ears.

A few sad and sober men went slowly home
from the Farmers' Club, meditating on the deleterious
advice they had received. These doubted
the " facts," but dreaded putting themselves in
opposition to those who professed to have studied
the subject, and worked for " the good of Ireland."

They were poor, ignorant, honest men, who did not
understand the sophistries of the agitators.

Others, careless of consequences — patriotic, because
patriotism meant sprees, lifting them out
of the dull routine of everyday labour to a more
congenial and constant attendance at the public-house,
where politics and whisky were together discussed
— now adjourned to their favourite resorts.

A few thoughtful ones, however — sad-hearted,
overworked men and women, with large families,
small farms, and no capital — questioned : Were
these things so ?

Was the landlord, who hitherto had been kindly
considerate when bad times came, the monster of
iniquity Messrs Dymock, McCarthy, & Co. depicted
him ?

And oh, Docks and McCarthys ! reckless
men, are you ever visited with dreams ? Do
visions disturb your rest ? Do you ever see —
as the conscience-stricken prince of old once did
and shudder and writhe and cry as he did —

' All this ground
Methinks is bloody,

And paved with thousands of those people's eyes
Whom I have deceived, and they stare upon me."

Chapter YIIL

ILL WEEDS GROW APACE.

While Mr Dymock declaimed from his platform
to the monster meeting, as described in the last
chapter, his opponent was elsewhere addressing a
more intelligent if smaller gathering.

Mr Fitzgerald was supported by his nominators
his cousin, Mr French, and Sir Joseph Bullion.
Mr French's mother had been a sister of Lord
Blankshire's, while Sir Joseph Bullion was a
self - made man. Sir Joseph, who had been
knighted by the last Liberal Government for good
State service, was a merchant prince, employing
1500 workmen — though it was a well - known
fact his hard-working father's commencement of
business was selling nails at the street corner.
Sir Joseph was wealthy, careful of that wealth, and

therefore alarmed at revolutionary action. Consequently,
although a Eoman Catholic, he had
turned a deaf ear to Father Dan Prendergast, his
back on old political associates, and thrown in his
lot with those who, like himself, had a stake in
the country.

Thus it will be seen Mr Fitzgerald's party
represented not only the aristocracy of birth and
old Conservatism, but also the plutocracy of the
borough. High and low, all the wealth and intelligence,
all whose interest it was to uphold law
and order, irrespective of religion, were on his
side, and many of the well-to-do trades-people
were members of his committee.

It was only a short three months since the
apple of discord — " Ireland for the Irish " — had
been planted in the wilds of Blankshire. But
short as the time was, the fruit had been forced
and eaten by the people until it had poisoned their
blood.

Little by little the Conservatives perceived the
signs and tokens of this rabies ; but assured of
their own right and reason, and persuaded of the
soundness of their constituents, smiling at the

VOL. I. I

delusion, despising danger, they still counted on
success.

Mr Fitzgerald was no professed politician, still
less was he a diplomatist. He was a practical
man, benevolently philanthropic, thoroughly in
earnest, conscientiously determined to do his best,
intimately acquainted with the needs of the
people and the resources of the country ; therefore
Killballymactaggart could not be more fittingly
represented.

Mr Fitzgerald had at first objected — finally
accepted as an obligation laid on him from his
position — the proposal of representing the borough ;
so likewise at first he had been worried by the
Dymock opposition, and then in the same spirit of
fulfilling the duties of his position, had concentrated
his energies on winning the seat and sending the
stranger elsewhere with his National wares.

Entirely unpractised in public speaking, but ever
at home with the people, whose interests he had
made his life-work, he was grieved at the present
antagonism ; and when he came to speak, was
surprised to find how nervous it made him.

Had Mr Fitzgerald been less in earnest and

more politic, his speech would have contained less
truth, and probably found more favour with the
people. As it was, there were certain crudenesses,
but he was pathetic ; and when looking down on
a sea of faces, with every one of which he was
familiar, he implored —

Do not credit these fallacious promises —
Ireland for the Irish, high-sounding words that
mean nothing, that is nothing for you. They
picture a wild field, a fancy sketch, a chimera of
charlatans, who, intent only on their own advancement,
care nothing for and would bring you to
ruin. You have known me all your lives, you
know I care for your interests, and for this my
native place. I am conversant with your needs,
I take pride and pleasure in local improvement
which I have ever endeavoured to advance ; our
interests are mutual, and I know there are many
things needed to improve our trade. Trust me,
whom you have always found your friend, to
further our interests. I shall endeavour to improve
our fine harbour, increase our shipping facilities,
and also encourage intercourse with the outer
world by endeavouring to extend railway communication.

Thus I shall endeavour to increase
your wealth ; thus I shall hope to give each and
all a stake in the country. We are out of the
fairway here, and what we require is cheaper
and quicker means of exporting the teeming produce
of our smiling valleys — valleys which need
but further capital and labour to become sources
of wealth to the steady and industrious. All these
objects have ever had my close attention, and as
your member, it will be my business to further
all measures likely to conduce to the benefit of
this my native country. (Cheers, and a query,
What about free sale ? ') I will come to that
presently. It is an accepted fact that the Land
question is the crucial topic of the day. I have
studied this question deeply — I am aware of hardships,
grievances, even cruelties, but I deny that
these matters generally are the fault of the landlord.
(Groans, hisses, ' Shut up, do, or talk sense') I
repeat it is not primarily the landlord, nor the
law that is at fault. (More tumult.) These hardships,
which many of you, my hearers, feel practically
and keenly, are mainly due to exceptional
circumstances, to natural heedlessness, and, I am

sorry to say, individual thriftlessness and greed.
(Terrible groans, boos, hisses.) Hear me to the
end, friends, I am not done yet : I maintain our
national thriftlessness — you see I ever class myself
with you — and personal greed has multiplied
mistakes, which have produced great evils. These
evils have my best attention, and as your member
I shall actively support all and any remedial
legislation calculated to eradicate these grievances.
What will best attain that end ? — Capital, which
can only be had on secure investments, and which,
while developing our national resources, will remunerative
employ our labourers. The Land
Bill of 1870 bestowed many boons on the Irish
tenants, placing them in a far better position than
their Scotch or English cousins. That law awarded
the Irish tenant legal compensation for improvements,
while a penalty on the landlord prevents
undue disturbance. But as, in the working of
this Act, weak spots have been discovered, I shall
gladly accept hints, and support measures for
their amendment. {' What about Cappa ? ') You
all know that was no capricious eviction. I can
confidently repudiate the specious statements

persistently made by our calumniators — persons
maligning us for their own selfish ends — and I
solemnly declare we have never unfairly or
capriciously evicted or rack-rented. (Hisses.) I
repeat the statement, we have never rack-rented,
never unfairly evicted. (Hisses and cheers intermingled.)
Necessary evictions have been carried
out, with due consideration for those who for
non-payment of rent have been put out. Before
my time, in old days, such things were, but at this
present juncture I emphatically deny, and utterly
repudiate this wicked perversion of facts. {' ,
Glenamuick.') You wish to know about
my doings at Glenamuick : I have no objection to
giving you a history of that place. It has always
been a heart-break, is even now famine-stricken,
and is a capital illustration of my theory. It is a
poor place, but this i^ through no fault of mine.
Forty tenants of ours hold 1000 acres there, for
which they pay the nominal rent of forty shillings
a-year. They have held their land at that rent
for five-and-forty years, and some of them have
the right to continue there at that rent for fifteen
years longer. I say ive have forty tenants at

Glenamuick, but each of our tenants lias four,
or five, or ten submitting, at rents that are
indeed rack-renting ; and farms that could support
in comfort forty families, and enable our forty
tenants to easily pay us £2000 a-year, are now
starving 300 families, and giving us forty shillings
a-year. You may thus see who has most reason
to feel shame at the state of Glenamuick — the
landlord who has given up his land for sixty years,
or the forty tenants who have had the use of the
land rent free, and who, after forty-five years, have
Glenamuick to show as the result of their fixity
of tenure and tenant-right. Thus Glenamuick is
an instance of how redundancy of population and
subdivision produce ruin. In Ireland we are four
to two on the same agricultural area as in England.
Here we depend almost entirely on agricultural
pursuits, while in the mother country agriculture
is but one of the many occupations of the people.
And this brings me to another topic — emigration.
We have a paucity of manufactures, therefore it is
essential we should provide some fresh opening
for the rapidly increasing population. We cannot
stretch the limits of our island, but we can help

our people to make for themselves new homes in
our colonies. Thus I am in favour of judicious
emigration to that greater England on the other
side of the sea. (Here there was disturbance in the
crowd, hisses, and some cheers; but raising his voice,
Percy continued) — Furthermore, fearless of contradiction,
I assert, despite our hungry people, despite
our grievances and all shortcomings, blunders, and
spoliation on the part of those whose duty it is to
succour us, our country has made a century's
advance in the last twenty-five years. Ireland
has made astonishing progress, and is prospering
under existing laws, in a way which proves that all
she needs to fully develop natural resources is, cessation
from agitation and influx of capital. Why
should we revert to past troubles, dead heroes,
vices, crimes, things that outfit to be a closed
history with us, as internecine feuds are with other
nations ? Let our sad past sleep ; do not think
to undo its wrongs, many though they be, by
another and greater wrong than all the wrongs
that have gone before. Think how we are now
developing, and do nothing rash — do not hinder
by agitation, which scares capital, the prosperity

of this our country. (' Bead, we'll be a hinderance
to yoii ! Hiss, boys, hiss ! sure he is speaking
against the people,' urged Denis Shea, who now
had joined the mob, bringing with him kindred
spirits from the Farmers' Club. Hisses and counter-cheers
gave Percy time to clear his throat and
take fresh breath, then he went on again : he had
a few words more to say, and would say them,
though he feared they would not be well received.)
There are other drawbacks to our full content
drawbacks that legislation cannot avert, and that
landlords have hitherto endeavoured to mitigate.
I mean bad seasons. No law can stay the rainfall
of our weeping sky which so constantly gives
us dreary harvests. No law, as I before hinted,
can enlarge the area of our Ireland, or do away
with that far-spreading melancholy ocean, hemming
in our thousands on a limited acreage. No
law can efface our American cousins, or prevent
their producing and exporting corn and cattle at
a lesser rate than we can grow or rear them. No
law can stay the ever-increasing, superabundant,
astoundingly prolific fecundity of this people. It
is here our greatest difficulty exists." (" Whisht !

is it speaking against the innocent chiltern he is ? "
exclaimed Denis Shea. " Hiss him, boys. Girls,
do you hear that .? d — 1 a one of you he would let
marry. Xo one but himself is to have a son."
This hint naturally produced uproar, and it was
some time before Percy could again make himself
heard.)

For another quarter of an hour Percy Fitzgerald
talked to the people. He was practical
and in earnest, but not effective as a speaker,
and only the few hearkened to the wisdom of his
words. Indeed, it is to be feared he was not
calculated to be a " popular orator." Being too
matter of fact, too truthful to insinuate false
hopes, and so full of schemes for the people's
benefit, appealing to reason rather than passion,
he talked rather above their understanding, and
failed, because he disdained to make capital out
of their foibles. At last, tired and depressed, he
ceased speaking, and turning to his nearest friend,
said sadly — " The almighty ox populi is not in
my favour."

This mobocracy is the ruin of the country. I
do not know to what depths of infamy our lowered

franchise will bring; us," answered the late M.P.
for the borough — Sir John Castleton.

I have no patience with them, hoodwinked
by that Dymock," said Mr French ; " and Shea
was in the crowd — I saw him urcjiu!^ on the
people. It is disgraceful in a civilised country
that such blackguards are allowed to be at
large."

Oh, uncle, pray use . parliamentary language,"
laughed Harry O'Brien. " It behoves us upper
ten to show a good example to the herd. The
game is not quite played out yet ; we have all put
our money on Percy — he must win."

Really it is terrible, quite revolutionary,"
sighed Sir Joseph Bullion, full of anxiety concerning
his own hard-earned wealth. " Dymock's
programme is a subversion of the law of nature —
the land for the people means subdivision of
property, ruin to the minority, benefit to none."

The banishment of capital, ruin of landed
estates, landing of us in the poorhouse," ejaculated
Mr French. " Come, Percy, what are you going
to do ? "

To win if I can. I am not going to leave

our people at the mercy of this empirical politician,
whose plan of reform is contrary to the economic
law of civilisation."

Hum ! ha ! But these new lights repudiate
old experiences. Dymock looks on the world
through green spectacles. He does not see things
as they are, only as he desires they should be.
He is a clever fellow, and has an overweening
belief in the infallibility of his own judgments,
and holds Utopian views as to a visionary
future "

Bah ! clever ! he has just got Yankee sharpness
; his ' National ' fever savours of transatlantic
Donovan Fossa and Co's blood and
thunder. I smell mischief," cried Harry, who
delighted in contradicting his uncle.

/ don't think they are all rogues, but I hioio
they are all mistaken. You see when men take
a national craze, they go a little off their head
forget civilisation necessitates, and nature has
regulated, an equilibrium of classes. The wheel
of life is rotatory, vicissitudes occur — one up, the
other down, comes in course of time. But pitch-working
up those naturally at the bottom is insanity

; oversights the balance, sends the wheel
down with a plunge, to the common destruction
of the rightful freight and the overtaking. I
have smelt misfortune in the air ever since this
d — man started his text, ' Ireland for the Irish,' "
insisted Mr French.

Nonsense, nonsense — just an electioneering
cry. Once the general excitement is over,
Dymock and his text will retire to their natural
obscurity," insisted Sir John Castleton.

Percy had stood silent while the others argued :
he now joined in —

I fear French is right. The people are
strangely altered — surlier tones, sullen eyes, and
idleness are very prevalent at present. Agitators
have made capital out of our misfortunes, and
legislators, instead of stamping out incipient
rebellion, parley with malcontents. I see trouble
ahead — and only hope "

It is no forlorn hope," insisted Sir John, who,
being a little deaf, had misunderstood the spirit of
Percy's last sentence. " You must not be beaten
by that arrant rogue Dymock. Why, man, I
represented this town since before you were born,

and I did not retire to have my place taken by
a Liverpool tinker, tailor, Jew — whatever is the
man — I am sure I don't know or care. But I
do know he is not the man to represent Killbally-
mactaoxTart. Dymock is a stranger who knows as
little about us as we know about him, while you,
my dear fellow, are a son of the soil. Good God !
the people cannot quite have lost their senses ;
there is no one above ground so fit to represent
their wants and rectify their grievances. All I
can say is, if they prefer this wind-bag that some
ill fate has blown here, before you, they deserve
their fate, and God help the poor of Killbally-
mactasfojart."

Percy Fitzgerald was a great favourite with Sir
John Castleton, who was also fond of the town
he had so long and so worthily represented. He
could not bear to think of handing over his
constituents to the adventurous stranger, and was
much upset at the contest.

It is probable, or I prefer to say possible, I
may be beaten, Sir John, yet there is hope our
people may discern the truth before it is too late.
At all events, I shall fight honestly to the last, and

they all know M.P. after my name is not needed
to make me do my best for my country. Perhaps
a parliamentary career might interfere with home
improvements. You know I never was ambitious,
and would not have accepted this position were it
not that you all' the young man looked round on
his friends, " and Lord Blankshire, insisted on its
being my duty, irro aris et focus. And now we
must take every constitutional means to avert,
if possible, the misfortune of having our dear old
town misrepresented by this stranger."

There was a murmur of promises from all
present to leave no stone unturned to secure
Mr Fitzgerald's return for the borough ; and
after a few business words, each went his
way.

It was just one week later that Percy pulled
up shortly before his own hall door. Thro win cr
the reins to his groom, he jumped from his
machine, entered the open door, and ran lightly
up-stairs. He paused for a moment, smoothed his
features, drew a long breath, then opening the
bedroom door, went softly in.

It was a large airy room, pleasant and tranquil

looking. Delicate lace curtains subdued the garish
glare, but did not obstruct the balmy air of the
May day, as, redolent of sweet scents, it crept in
through the open window.

There, lying on a sofa, wrapped in a soft white
dressing-gown, was Mary Fitzgerald. The young
wife's expectant eyes looked questioningly at her
husband. She was feverishly anxious, and her
quivering lips could hardly articulate —

Well, success ? "

Alas, beaten ! — beaten hollow, my darling.
Behold the unsuccessful candidate escaped from
an excited mob come home for comfort ! Where
is the boy ? " As Percy asked this question, he
stooped and kissed his wife, whose lips were
twitching nervously.

Oh, I am so sorry — dreadfully disappointed,"
almost sobbed Mary. " Don't mind baby, but tell
me all that happened. It is shameful ! Disgraceful
! I cannot think how people could treat
you so. Oh, Percy, I am so sorry. How dare
the people vote against you ? "

It was Mrs Fitzgerald's first day out of bed.
She was weak and nervous, almost hysterical ; and

Percy, himself excited, scarcely knew how best to
answer. He said evasively —

Well, there is not much I can tell. I appeared,
the multitude hissed ; Mr Dymock harangued, the
crowd cheered. The Nationalist candidate's vituperation
had evidently quite outbalanced my
bald truths. The numbers are — Dymock, 210 ;
Fitzgerald, 200. The electorate numbers 550,
so a good number held their tongue."

Mrs Fitzgerald fidgeted uneasily on her sofa,
the colour flushing and fading on her delicate
cheek, down which the tears she could not repress
slowly trickled.

Come, love, do not take it too much to heart ;
I more than expected this. I am not disappointed
not half as much as your father is. He has
gone to tell the Earl, poor dear old man. This
proof that ' family ' can be beaten by adventurers
will be a killing blow. Perhaps I ought to have
gone to him myself, but I could not let any one
else bring this news to you."

Oh, it is a shame ! a scandal ! You, who
have done so much for them — how can they
be so ungrateful ? And who could represent

VOL. L K

the borough better than you ? Are they
mad ? "

We are fixed stars, my dear, and oar light is
put out by meteoric comets. Our old-established
glory is quite lost in the dazzle of Dymock's fireworks.
His politics are magnificent whirligigs —
Catherine-wheels, which splutter in all directions,
a shower of bright-coloured delusions. I only
wish he could fulfil all he promises, — no poor
man would ever want anything again. But it is
impracticable — madness. Here I am, love, the
remains of the Conservative candidate. EoU me
up in lavender, and preserve me for a future
generation — or the millennium ; for after what I
saw and heard to-day, I do not think a Conservative
will ever again represent Killbally-
mactaggart."

It is very — very — sad. How can you joke
over such a disgrace ? " sobbed Mary.

My dear, I do not feel disgraced, but seethe
tidal Eadical wave gather as it flows. Peradventure
it may prove a quickly rising and fast-falling
flood, — a providence that will purge our
land of antediluvian crotchets, and clear the vision

of Eip van Winkles like that dear old oddity at
Ballykillbegs. At present it looks like destroying
the wheat with the tares, obliterating newly
implanted and carefully cherished decencies."
Percy forced himself to speak more lightly than
he felt. He now laughed, but the hearer missed
the round cheeriness of his ordinary hilarity. " I
really believe, little wife, you are cut to the heart
at missimif the chance of a whole London season.
But, Molly dear, we are happier at home, and sois
the boy. "Where is the young rascal ? "

Asleep, with nurse. But it is such a pity ;
I am so proud of your abilities ; you would have
made such an admirable M.P."

Just so, love. I would have been the model
member. The House has sustained an irreparable
loss ; it will be dull deprived of the genius whose
eloquence would have eclipsed historic Grattan's."

Don't talk nonsense."

Really, if you will credit the word of a defeated
candidate, I assure you, personally, I rejoice
to know my duties are confined to the narrower
sphere of home."

Do you really and truly say that from your

heart ? " asked the wife, taking her husband's
hand between her own and stroking it, while she
looked in his face to read the answer there.

Seriously," answered he, " so far as I am capable
of unravelling the present complex sensations
of my dullard brain, I believe myself to be so
unsophisticated as to prefer Elmgrove in the dog-days
to Westminster; adjudicating on the bench
in Killballymactaggart, to sitting drowsily silent
or indignant while Irish members occupy the
floor of the House, disgracing the country they
are supposed to represent. You have no idea the
length agitation cross, how ingenious these men
are in unsettling the country." Excited, and on
his pet topic, Mr Fitzgerald vas for the moment
oblivious of his wife's nervous condition. " How
bent they are on setting class against class ! It
was quite sad to-day to hear them, even in the
court - house, physic their dupes with sedition.
One after the other, low-bred vulgar men rivalled
each other in virulent abuse of what they are
pleased to designate the tyrant minority, lashing
the mob to frenzy, until at last they hissed
Castleton. He is so good-hearted, and hitherto

having been the most popular man in the county,
could not believe the hubbub was meant to
silence him. But when it came to pelting rotten
eggs, and, despite the police, to a free fight in the
body of the court, he grew livid with anguish,
and seemed fixed to the spot. At last a dead
cat caught him across the face, and that brought
his colour back. He tried to upbraid them, but
it was no use ; and it was with difficulty we withdrew
him from the scene. It has been an exciting
and a disgraceful day. I am glad we got Sir
John away without any serious hurt."

And you "

My dear, I was a nonentity. I did not try
to speak ; and while the people cheered their
hero, I made my little bow to the sheriff, and
crept away unnoticed."

Poor Sir John ! Why, Percy, T thought our
people were too civilised to go on like that."

There is nothing so civilising as religious and
political animus. Father Dan was in the midst of
his flock. But come, let us think of something else.
Fortunately you are not the wife of a Cabinet Minister,
and, as we have not the government of the

nation, only of our own estate, on our shoulders,
you need not worry your pretty little head with
politics. Let us have the boy. I have not seen
the young Turk to-day, and have a parent's longing
to behold the atom which bloodthirsty nationality
describe as the 'embryo bloodsucker of the people'"

Mary's eyes had gradually dried, and her pulse
had beat less nervously. Now her eyes stared,
and she half rose from her sofa, as she cried —

The what 1 Oh, for shame ! Do not call our
darlings that!'

My love, I did not select the title ; the people
gave it to my son and heir — at least the priest so
christened him to-day."

Shocking ! I cannot believe you. AMiat did
they really say ? I must know — I will know."

Mary was now very excited, so Percy answered
quickly —

Father Dan, in describing our family, alluded
to our boy as ' a new link in a long chain of
bloodthirsty oppressors, the whelp of a bloated
aristocrat, an embryo bloodsucker of the people.'
If he had not spoken of us by name, I should not
have known the description."

Oh, Percy, Percy ! this is too dreadful ; it
means mischief. Oh, my baby ! my poor helpless
little darling ! " The nervous mother wept hysterically,
and the husband, alarmed at the result
of his heedlessness, exclaimed —

My darling, I am awfully sorry I told you.
It is idiotic my repeating the ruffianly impudence.
It really means nothing — it is only an ingenious
annoyance — a bit of election licence. Moreover,
the impudence did not win all the approval the
maligned intended : the sentiment was hissed.
There, there, what a stupid I am ! You will
make yourself ill ; nurse will forbid me the room.
Let me ring for the young beggar ; you will see
he does not suffer from Father Dan's invective."

Percy spoke more lightly than he felt. Accustomed
to discuss all that interested him with his
wife, and carried away by the day's excitement,
he had for the moment forgotten her delicate
condition. And, indeed, until he described the
proceedings to his wife, he himself had not quite
taken in the gravity of the situation. He had
not thought the graft of American rowdyism on
the standard of Irish sedition would have flourished

so exceedingly ; but to his surprise, he now
saw a great head covered with buds, a promise of
multitudinous flower and bitter fruit.

And as he saw this, he also perceived it was
no fitting subject to discuss at present with his
wife. Crossing the room, he rang the bell, and
at that summons the nurse brought in their three-weeks'
old baby.

CHAPTER IX.

MOONLIGHTERS.

The election over, a quiet fell on the town of .
The Fitzgeraldss, busy with local
improvements and the baby, forgot the world's
hurly-burly; and so, for a little space, the unpleasant
episodes of the election were forgotten — were
bundled, so to speak, into the wastepaper-basket,
to be destroyed with the notes and memoranda of
other fulfilled and scratched engagements.

Yet Killballymactaggart election was only the
first of a series of contests, wherein cajolery, coercion,
and brute force defeated the social, moral,
moneyed, and intellectual interests of Ireland, —
that poor, unhappy, distressful country, whose history
from the earliest dates has been written with
blood, — where internal envy, hatred, and malice

have for seven hundred years been worked up
with alternate seams of Eomish diplomacy, English
expediency, alien and foreign interests, and
well-meant Englishmen's mistakes.

It had been a tine summer in Blankshire, the
harvest was above the average, work was plenty,
and the people were in no serious distress, and
yet the air was impregnated with incipient mischief,
which in early autumn took a distinct form.

Verra, Thade, did you hear the awful news ? "
was Xorah Moriarty's breathless greeting one fine
August morning as she came in from the dawn.

Eh ? " said Thade, with his usual stolidity.

Sure, they half-killed jSTolan, pulled him out
of bed at twelve o'clock last night, took the
shirt off his back, an' beat him out of the
house, and every step of the road down to the
bog with furze, and threw him, naked as the
day he was born, into the bog. Oh, glory ! he
will never be the better of it. Flurry Mahony
found him at break of day lying as the villains
left him, with hardly a bit o' life in him. Glory
be to God 1 but it is a sinful world."

Lord have mercy on us ! " echoed Thade ; and

North saw that her husband's face paled as he
asked, " Is he dead ? "

iSTot dead, — thanks be to the Lord, and not to
them that took the life of him ; but he is kilt
entirely ; and they say it is all along of those idled—
Is the Sheas."

Sure — ly — no. Din is not in it. Do they
say he is ? " asked Thade, with hesitation, a suppressed
awe in his voice, and a scared look in his
eyes.

I don't know the rights of it yet ; but they
say Nolan was drove out of Cappa by the boys,
a purpose to put Din Shea back again. It is bad
work, a wicked doing, and whoever did it will
never prosper, you may swear that" declared
North, emphatically. " Sin always brings a curse,
and when Pains are jealous of their brothers, the
fate of Cain will be on them."

For God's sake, you foolish woman, hold your
tongue ! " gasped Thade, looking askance at the
window and the open door. " Sure we know
nothing about it at all v/ho did it, or why it was
done. Lord save us from harm ! who knows what
is before any of us."

True enough, the good Lord only knows the
one day after the other," piously assented North.
But it is a queer time."

Yes, honey ; just so, a queer time. We will
leave it in His hands ; the like of us don't know
the differ. And, Xorah, will you be after going
to the great house one of these days, for there is
a trifle hid away in the black teapot atop of the
dresser ; you might take it to the mistress — it is
the master himself is clever, and will understand.
Sure myself is that bothered and — ashamed; — it is
a bad day, and a hard word to say, but, achushla,
it is safer for all if I keep from him just now."

This was a very long speech for Thade Moriarty
to make. He generally preferred hearing
his wife's tongue to exercising his own. She
looked at him for a moment curiously, and his
honest eyes, for the first time since she had known
him, fell before hers. After a second or two
North replied, as if she had caught at and admired
his idea.

It is yourself that is cute ! I'll just run up
this very day. Sure it is a great thing to have a
head, and it is yourself has thought of a good way

of slipping through the wickedness of them devils.
They would try the patience of Job — may I never
sin, but the League "

Whist 1 whist I Lord love you, hold your
tongue," urged Thade in a whisper. " We are
poor, ignorant, and peaceable, but there is no use
setting ourselves up or vexing the boys when their
blood is up. You don't know as much as I do,
honest woman — how could you ? but for the love of
life, keep a quiet tongue ; there are plenty about
with long ears, who are trying to make mischief.
Din Shea is always after me : he is powerful and
clever, and, take my word for it, the civiler distance
you keep him, and every one, the better."

Poor Denis is pleasant company — if it were
not for the drink and the Lea "

Stop, I tell you ! You will say that word too
often, and maybe it is to pay for it you will have
to do one of those days, and — don't you encourage
Din Shea about this door more than you must."
Thade, who had spoken gruffly, here endeavoured to
turn away ; and for a moment his wife thought
he was not the pleasant " boy " that had once
won her heart. After a brief consideration of her

husband's altered manner, ISTorah asked in her
most seductive way —

Do tell, was he in it last night ? "

Thade shook his head, and looked vacantly out
of the door ; but North, always devoured with
curiosity, was not now to be put off what she
considered a hot scent.

There is a good honest man, tell your wife all
you know. Sure it is a good wife I am to you,
though it is myself says it, that shouldn't. Do,
Thade, make a clean breast — say what the ' boys '
are after. I know there is whispering and covering
going on, until an honest woman is afraid to give
the time o' day to a neighbour. More be token, it
isn't to a neighbour I'd go for news, wit a smart
man at home of my own. Ah ! it is yourself has
more sense in your little finger than the whole
boiling of them. Come, Tliade, out with it, — was
Din in it last night, and is it true he is going to hold
Cappa, in spite of the law, and — the master ? "

Tare an acres ! how should I know ? Leave
talking, I tell you, and, believe me, the less the
likes of us knows, the better, — and — the less they
know about us, the easier it will be to keep the

straight honest road. Keep yourself to yourself,
honey ; ask no questions, and, be said by me,
Give Din the cold shoulder, fair and easy : fair
and easy goes far in a day, and may bring us safe
through it all — but Din is too masterful for innocent
people like us."

True for you," agreed North, who saw Thade
would not be communicative, and determined to
return good for evil. "That slut Maurieen is a
patch on the father. She was here this morning
; 'twas herself told me of Xolan. And, says
she, Cuddy paid his footing last night, speaking
up as if he belonged to her. A bold hussy, who
is always going about the roads and streets.
Says I, the boy might find better use for his
money with the houseful he has by him at home.
Says she, he knows his duty by his country. And
true for me, Thade, though Cuddy is one brother's
son of yours, he has not your sense, nor never
will. That girl twists him round her finger as
she wills, though it passes me how a Moriarty
could demean himself taking up with the likes of
her, — the dirt out of the street, not only poor
blood, but poor sense atop ! Glory be to the

blessed Virgin ! but it is a fool he is, and she is
that impudent — evening herself to me. Do you
know what she asked me this morning, and she
going out the door ? Had you paid "

Eh ! " grunted Thade, turning his back on his
wife to hide a change of colour, while North, full
of her own thoughts and curiosity, rippled on with
items of gossip.

Think of her having the conscience to ask me
that! But I was even with her. Says I, my
man does not go round the country trumpeting
his own doings, he is a sight too cute for that.
And though myself is his lawful wedded wife,
myself knows a woman's place better than to
bother him with idle questions. Then, says she,
speaking up like an ill-mannered girl as she is,
a clever woman like you ought to know things
without asking. I did feel a bit foolish at that ;
but I am not one to be nonplussed by a saucy
minx like her. Says I, if you have ever the good
luck to have a man of your own, you'll know the
differ : it is not the way of good wives to ' spear '
out their husband's affairs, and then gossip about
them to every one that crosses the door. With

that I went on and gave her my mind, saying
women are not made to know everything, they
are the weaker vessels, their husband is their
head. It is thankful a wise woman is when the
Lord gives her a responsible man, able to think
and act for them both. My man, God bless him !
knows everything, can give date and text and
reason for all things ; though himself is that clever,
he is above covering and jabbering about his own
and others' affairs. My hand for you. Miss Shea,
says I, my man can pay his own way, and do all
that is right without consulting any woman ; and
his wife respects him too much, and knows her
place too well, to gossip about his affairs with a
slip like you."

Thade chuckled, and N'orah continued her
relation in an injured tone —

Drat the girl ! as if I would demean myself
telling the like of her, or let on to any one that
your own wife is sick and sore not knowing what
you are doing, and myself is that same, being
as ignorant as the dresser beyond. Shame on you
that it is so ! Ah, Thade, you will never be the
worse for making a clean breast to your lawful wife."

VOL. I. L

Be easy now," answered Thade, sheepishly.
Sure I don't know what to say ; I just knows
as little as I can. But — I did see the police go
over the road with the master."

When ? where ? " inquired North, briskly.

"Just to Cappa," answered Thade, gloomily.
It is bad work, bad work ; for all our sakes, I
hope the master won't make himself too busy."

With this last remark Thade walked out of
the kitchen, and went slowly over the fence and
into the fields, where his man and a couple of
girls were stocking up the lately cut corn.

North tidied her kitchen, and then prepared to
pay her visit to Elmgrove. l^orah was a clever
woman, and not so entirely ignorant of the " mysterious
something " that had, like noxious vapour,
clung to the valley where she lived, all this year,
as her talk would lead one to believe.

North knew mischief lurked about, poisoning
the air ; she saw it was contagious — one here,
another there, succumbing to its evil influence,
and was uncertain as to whether or not her husband
was infected. Thade had never said a word
that could be construed into a liking for or dislike

of " the club " all " the boys " were joining, — always
a silent man, for many weeks his habitual
taciturnity had been shadowed with an unusual
gloom.

Consequently all North's wifely instincts were
on the qui vive about "her man." Continually
on the alert, natural shrewdness decided that if
her husband was " touched " by the prevailing
epidemic, he was not a likely subject for " disaffection
" to take hold of, and that at the present
his silence was golden. Still she was uneasy.
Ignorant of her husband's mind on the matter,
aware of the danger, the wife, in her ignorant
anxiety, scarcely knew whether Scylla or Charybdis
was most to be dreaded — that Thade should succumb
to the Xational fever, or resist the pressure
of the League.

Recent events had shocked her sense of justice,
and the last night's outrage had given her a scare,
so that it was with a grave face she prepared to
pay her visit to Elmgrove.

Going into the field, she gathered some large dock
leaves, and with these betook herself to her dairy.
There she selected a temptingly fresh cream-cheese

for " Miss Mary " had always praised her
cheeses — and this she wrapped in the cool green
leaves. Then going to the dresser, she took down
the black teapot, and took out the small parcel
Thade had deposited therein. Thrusting this into
the front of her gown for safety, she put on her
handsome blue cloth cloak, and proceeded to pay
her respects to her young mistress.

When North arrived in the kitchen at Elm-grove,
she said she came to pay her " duty " to
the mistress, and asked if she might see the baby.

On hearing North was down-stairs, Mrs Fitzgerald
desired she should be brought to the
nursery, where, full of motherly pride, she herself
went to receive her humble visitor and display her
boy.

North blushed, curtsied, and presented her
fragrant cheese, which was smilingly accepted.
Then Mrs Fitzgerald held up her baby for inspection.
North was enthusiastic ; never had she
seen so fine a child, and her shy exclamations of
admiration quite won the proud young mother's
heart.

At first, North was half afraid of touching the

child ; she ejaculated, and surreptitiously fingered
its fine clothes, until the memory of her own
dear one, who had come and gone little more
than a year and a half since, stirred the depths
of her nature, when, between smiles and tears,
she burst out into natural though high - flown
panegyrics —

Wish ! the darling ! A fine boy, a real
beauty ! It is myself is proud to see him — the
very moral of the master. Oh, glory ! the beautiful
black eyes of him, and the lovely mouth !
for all the world like one ripe cherry, and the
button of a nose, and the beautiful colour. Did
you ever see the like, red and white and wholesome,
as handsome a creature as God ever put
breath in ? I never set my two eyes on a prettier
picture. It is myself is proud to see him this
day, and you too. Miss Mary. Oh, glory I but
it is a fool I am. I beg your ladyship's pardon
calling you out of your name, and you the mother
of as fine a son as ever drew the breath o' life."

Here, take him in your arms, North, — a fine
weight that for three months old."

Glory be to goodness, a blessed weight. And

look at the fairy seal upon his left knee. Thank
the blessed Virgin for that lucky mole : a child
with that never comes to harm, never — never.
And brave and hearty you look yourself, God
bless you, Miss Mary. Again I ask your honour's
pardon miscalling you. It is myself is proud to
hold your son in my arms, and to kiss him, and
to bless him. Lord love and keep him from
harm ! The cockles of my heart, ma'am, the
heart of the mother whose own baby sleeps in
the churchyard, warms to the nursing of him."

Mrs Fitzgerald desired North to sit down, and
told the nurse to make her some tea. And while
the nurse walked backwards and forwards, from
cupboard to table, the lady and the peasant
woman sat side by side. North still held the
baby, though she sipped her tea — she could not
part with him ; and Mrs Fitzgerald, who had not
seen her humble friend lately, had many questions
to ask about her dairy, her husband, &c.
All of these ISTorah answered quietly, every now
and again bending over and bursting into praises
of the infant. At last she said —

A fine armful he is, and no mistake. And

the mouth of him working about, feeling for
something to suck. Is it the bottle he takes ? "

"Yes," answered Mrs Fitzgerald; "and, nurse,
really I think he is hungry — where is his bottle ? "

Nurse took the bottle, then the milk-jug.
The latter she smelt suspiciously, sipped, and
then declared, " There was no trusting them girls."
For the second time within the week the baby's
milk had a " tack " on it. The angry nurse
brought the jug to the mother, and the mother
ordered the nurse to go down and speak herself
to the dairy ^voman.

No sooner had the nurse departed than Xorah
drew from her bosom the roll of notes. Pressing
them into the lady's hand, she whispered
mysteriously —

Hide it quick, ma'am, and never say a word.
You give it to the master : he will understand,
and do us justice. It is hard for the poor to
be honest these days. But for all, Thade and
others mean to be as honest as they may. Oh,
Miss Mary, darling ! but the world is full up
of trouble, and these are the wicked times. Did
you hear how they hate Nolan last night ? "

Yes ; it is shocking. First the dumb beasts,
and then the poor people. What does it all
mean, North ? "

Myself don't know. Sure it was bad enough
destroying the poor widow's cows. Mary Mahony,
poor lone woman, is as innocent as the cattle,
and neither she nor her cows ever did a taste
of harm. She is as quiet a neighbour as ever
lived."

There seems to be a very bad spirit abroad."

"You may well say that. It is just the Evil
One himself, souring all that ought to be sweet inhuman
nature. Glory be to the Mother of God !
it is myself has the sore heart, hearing the talk.
Fools, cursing those they ought to bless, and
turning on their best friends. The poor things
are driven mad with what they are taught, sure
as my name is North. There is bad blood, and
will be bloodshed, and the curse o' God brought
on the land, before they are done. Mistress, dear,
be said by me, don't let the master be too officious
going after the blackguards — the police are
good enough for that work. Keep him at home,
now the long dark nights are coming. The roads

are lonesome, and — whisper, achushla — the boys
do be out."

Gracious, North ! what do you mean ? "

Just, darling, that it is a good thing to have
a roof over one's head, and it is nice to have
the shutters up and the curtains drawn when
the dark cold nights come. Sure it is beautiful
and comfortable yourselves can be at home.
What is the good of cantering over the road late ?
And the master — why, it is always after nightfall
when he passes our door, coming from ."


And what harm ? He knows every stone
on the road. North, if you know anything, tell
me."

It is myself that would. But is there anything
to know ? I know nothing." North was
now very serious, and there was a certain contagion
in this nameless dread of hers, which
cast a shadow over the face of the lady who
listened. 'they are that deep, St Peter himself
could not fathom their devilment. Your honour
knows boys are often foolish, and I know when
they have a drop in, and the devil is at their

elbow, they don't know what to be at, or what
wickedness they do."

'everything is so unlike what it used to be,"
sighed Mrs Fitzgerald. " I never have felt comfortable
since the election. You know they
cursed my boy."

North buried her face in the baby's robe, and
answered in a choked voice —

May I never see heaven ! but it was a sin of
Father Dan. But rest easy. Miss Mary, no harm
can come to a child with the fairy seal on his
left knee — it is myself is glad to see that same
sign. Sure if they do talk, talk can't hurt him —
not that one of them could have the heart to injure
a child. Indeed, with the blessing of God,
they'll not touch — I mean, take the life of anyone.
It is only idle mischievous boys, a few
poor fools as does not know what to be at. And
it is in the hands of the Almighty we all are, me
.darling; and — we must not any of us tempt
Providence."

But who are they ? and why should the
people wish to injure us ? I am sure my husband
is always working to help them."

True for you. The master is a good man.
Never fear ; it will all come right, with the help
of God. But just now the boys are mad — mad —
mad ! Them that ought to know better are taking
advantage of the poor ignorant men's weaknesses,
and putting evil thoughts in their sore
hearts — then, when they have taken the drop.
Glory be to goodness, ma'am, it is hard to bear 1
There is misery, and sin, and wickedness in the
world, more than the like of you can dream of.
But never fear ; I am sure — quite sure — you are
all safe."

I don't understand. Imagine, the Ballyboreen
tenants were here yesterday, refusing to pay more
rent than Griffith's valuation — absurd, you know."

I know nothing about it — it beats me what
they are all after. I believe they don't know
themselves ; and surely the boys are not to blame,
if, when told the land is all their own, they try
to get their rights. Myself cannot see how it is.
But they do say, that those who till the soil have
a right to own the land. Any way, it is best to
be tender with them ; they will learn sense some
day, with the help o' God. Until they do,

mistress dear, "be said by me — it is best for
honest people to keep themselves to themselves ;
and keep himself as quiet as you can. It would
be a bad day for us all if any misfortune happened
the master."

Here North rose and said solemnly —

God bless you both and this beautiful child,
and spare ye to one another for many years !
and may I never die until I see this child as
fine a man as his dada, and with as good a wife
as his mother alongside of him ! " Then kissing
the baby, North laid him on his mother's knee.

Mrs Fitzgerald could not help feeling impressed
by North's manner. It was all very
strange. Looking up gravely, she asked —

Why did they beat Stolen last night, and who
did it ? "

Why ! how can I say ? AVho 1 how do I
know ? I only heard they did their best to send
him to Purgatory," groaned North. " He was on
the black-list this long time — there is many a
one marked for no reason in life, and no one
knows when their turn may come. And sure,
half of it is tricks. It is only a week come last

Tuesday they half killed little Foley up at the
Grange. They made the poor man swallow the
dose he was carrying home for a sick cow."

So I heard. But I cannot understand it at all."
No wonder ! How could a lady like you
understand the dirty ways of a set of spalpeens
like them ? But you see, poor little Foley is a
cross-tongued man, he won't be at ease ; moreover,
though I ought not to say it here, he is a black
Protestant, and says hard things of the priest.
He is a lonely, bitter, poor little cripple, which
mayhap is the reason he is cross ; and, as I was
saying, Tuesday come a week his little heifer took
the gripes. Xot a neighbour would do him a
hand's turn, nor a shop in Colore village give
him a drop of oil for love or money. He had to
go every step of the road to the police barrack,
beyond the cross-road, where the sergeant gave
him a pint of oil for his little cow. It was a
long tramp for the lame man ; and sure, as he
went back the road the boys met him, and gave
him a lift on to the bog, where, saving your
presence, ma'am, they just laid him on the flat
of his back, and forced every drop of the oil he

had got for the poor little cow down his own
throat ! In the struggle they broke his leg — the
wooden one, I mean — so there Jerry Foley lay
all night. Cruel treatment for an unfortunate
cripple. There was not much life in him when
my man found him in the morning ; more betoken,
when Thade went up to look after the
little heifer, herself was dead. It was a bad
night's work, and no mistake."

Disgraceful 1 " exclaimed ]airs Fitzgerald indignantly
; " such doings make me ashamed of
being an Irishwoman. To think of men in a
Christian country tormenting an afflicted fellow-creature
1 "

Here the nurse opportunely returned with the
baby's food, and for a short time mother, nurse,
and peasant were all absorbed watching the
infant prodigy feeding, after which Xorah curtsied,
and with a final blessing on the family, took her
leave.

CHAPTER X.

LAND LEAGUE TACTICS.

As the light of the autumn days shortened, and
the dark hours of night lengthened, troubles multiplied,
outrages increased, and the Land-Leaguers'
shooting season commenced.

Orators effervesced. Clamouring for justice,
agitators did their utmost to produce crime, and
efface law from the land.

There had been a good harvest, thankfully received
and carefully housed. The barns were full,
the cattle were fat, and now the Xational cohort
instructed their dupes — this produce of their toils
was not liable for their lawful debts.

Good crops were not to be weakly sacrificed as
rent, but, better far, be dedicated to the people's
cause.

In pursuance of this system of National education,
a few days after North Moriarty's visit to
Elmgrove, placards were posted everywhere, announcing
a monster meeting.

This meeting was to be held on the following
Sunday, after mass, at the Gallows Green, when
an influential deputation from Dublin would attend
to explain the principles, and inaugurate the
opening of the Blankshire Branch of the Land
League.

Patriots, assemble in your thousands," invited
the proclamation. " Irishmen, listen to reason,
and learn how to free yourselves from bondage.
It is time the landlords, who confiscate your
rights, should yield up their spoil. It is full time
the alien garrison should be exterminated, and you
and your children be allowed to live in the land
of your birth. Blankshire men, who have already
given proof of their patriotism, will take first place
in this great work. God save Ireland ! "

This was pleasant reading for the idle. And
even busy men paused, and considered there must
be something in it ; for a " gentleman " would not
come from Dublin for nothing. And, as emissaries

like Denis Shea argued, there could be
nothing illegal about it, or the police would take
the placard down.

The placard remained ; and on Sunday, at the
time and place appointed, a large crowd gathered,
all of whom would be glad to obtain a patent,
whereby they might secure, for the future, plenty
in place of scarcity, warm clothing in place of
rags, comfort in place of grinding or ordinary
poverty. And many thought it would be a " good
job " if, while securing these personal benefits, they
also obtained the great, if barren, glory of making
Ireland a nation."

Amid a banging of flat drums, the uncertain
sounds of which were deadened by the humidity
of the atmosphere, a braying of excruciatingly
asthmatic trumpets, a squeaking of ancient flutes,
and the lesser discordances of a few worn-out
fiddles, ushering his advent, at two o'clock the
delegate arrived.

As the delegate and his party made their appearance,
the band endeavoured to perform " Seethe
Conquering Hero comes." But, alas ! the
heterogeneous sounds were more in accordance

VOL. I. M

with the real issues than the intended spirit of
the meeting, representing rather the piteous wail
of dying decency, than the opening day of Irish
freedom.

The delegate was accompanied by Father Dan
Prendergast, who, after the usual preliminaries,
was moved to the chair. This minister of peace
came fresh from the chapel pulpit, and his countenance
glowed with satisfaction as his eyes took
in the size of the gathering. With a few characteristic
flourishes, Father Dan introduced the
stranger to his flock.

As this delegate is a man of note, a "moving
power " of the hour, we here portray his mental,
moral, physical, and national attributes.

Let us take these attributes in inverse ratio,
and begin by saying, The O'Brannaghan is a Celt
of the Celts. Name, lineage, and Dame Nature
alike proclaim him a prince. The O'Brannaghan
is a man of magnificent proportions, regal bearing,
and courtly manner. He is possessed of fair
intellectual and oratorical powers of no mean
order, but lacks moral fibre.

Left an orphan at an early age, this Irish

princely had, in youthful days, overflowed with
noble national aspirations — one of the cherished
heirlooms of his chieftainship being a visionary
belief in his position as a lore patriot, with a distorted
idea of his country's wrongs, which it was
his ambition to redress.

Imagining himself born for the special purpose
of redressing Irish wrongs. The O'Brannaghan, on
arriving at the age of legal discretion, entered the
political arena, and " took off his coat " preparatory
to hard labour.

Then love of country was the bright day-star of
the enthusiast existence.

However, as years passed, the young man evolved
out of poetry into prose, ceased to be visionary,
and became politic. The first blunting of youthful
aspirations was painful. The yielding up, oneby
one, of delusive hopes, each one a separate sacrifice
to that all-powerful law of nature, necessity,
was but a further step into the web of expediency.
He had set out in life as a king amongst his fellows,
a hero who would reconstruct a nation out of the
surviving atoms of an effaced kingdom — an effaced
kingdom that, at its best, had been but a conglomerate

of many infused rivalries. By degrees
the ideal nation was veiled from his thoughts, and
Ego became the motive power of his actions.

Little by little, contact with the world demonstrated
his pretensions — only supported by a
dwindled patrimony — were of no account, — self-esteem
was irritated, and then the coarser and
more ignoble desires of poor human nature were
called into action.

Once pushed from the imagined pedestal of a
hero, personal humiliations gathered thick, the
fair " morning star " ideal faded, and finally
vanished in the glare of day.

When at the first he had thus stood self-revealed.
The O'Brannaghan had felt branded, an
apostate and a deception, and he writhed in self-scorn.
But the old Adam was stronger than pure
patriotism, " the nation " was but a name, henceforth
a means to an end, Ego was really his idol,
and such Ego willed to remain.

In youthful days The O'Brannaghan had
dreamed of such supremacy amongst his fellows,
as his ancestors had wrung from the conquered
aborigines.

He was now aware, such pretensions, like his
national grievances, were an old - world story.
Yet from pure vanity the man neither could nor
would give up an idea of supremacy. So, year
by year, the deluded politician had gone on, —
age, instead of mellowing, deteriorating his
principles.

Little by little the fair promises of his youth
were effaced, as The O'Brannaghan ceased to be a
politician, and became an agitator. At forty-five,
he was a poor man and a demagogue — a despicable
creature, who, with eloquent tongue, wreathed
mythological triumphs out of political excitements.

In straitened circumstances, this orator forgot
his gentle birth, and for the poor pay of vulgar
praise poured forth the malignancy of his diseased
brain.

More weak than radically wicked, The O'Branna-
than, while he vilified the wealthy whom he envied,
was wilfully blind to the mischiefs his grandiloquence
engendered.

Delighting in the applause which his perorations
evoked, he soared, depicting miseries, and calling
down vengeance, but never believing these words

of his produced arson, outrage, or murder. Oh, the
pity of it ! to see him there, looking a king amongst
those men, and to know, instead of leading them
aright, he was driving them to ruin.

It was wonderful to see and hear O'Brannaghan.
The man appeared carried away by deep feeling.
The rich musical voice poured forth floods of
beautiful theories, — impassioned words, which
moved the hearts of all listeners. On the present
occasion, they cheered, cheered, cheered. Some
shouted, others wept, and all believed the hour of
their redemption had arrived. This applause gave
the speaker the one gratification his wasted opportunities
had left him, and encouraged him to
higher flights of verbosity.

His eyes kindled, his head was thrown back,
and, regardless of consequences, like Bellerophon of
old when mounted on Pegasus, he spurred and rode
at the Land Question.

For an hour and a half the demagogue
harangued, as obtuse to the disasters produced by
his words, or, at all events, as little concerned at
the results of his eloquence, when he insulted
the landlords and incited disaffection, as Bellerophon

himself was at the damage done by his
obstreperous animal.

He began by thanking the people for their
cordial reception, said he knew it was not for
himself, though his name was once a power
amongst them, but for the great cause he
advocated, that his welcome was given. He called
the Land League a "noble protective society," and
said it was a constitutional organisation, initiated
by their best friend, Mr O'Donnell Power, who
had devoted himself to the emancipation of
Ireland. " He has been your unflinching advocate,
and thus become an object of hate to your
oppressors.

As you all know, he is now the victim of a
State prosecution — the first martyr to our cause.
Why has he been martyred? Simply because
he raised the standard of revolt against oppression,
because he had courage to unmask the hidden
scandals of a tyrant Government, because these
bloated aristocrats dread his scathing denunciations
of their iniquities, because he dared to lay
bare the sin of their monstrous system, because he
tells the truth, and they do deeds of darkness, —

because, in his noble earnestness, self-abnegation,
and disinterestedness, he is a scourge to this
self-satisfied minority, the landlords ; because he
shows their injustice, sets his face against that
law which permits the landlord to wring rack-rents
from starving tenants. For these, and suchlike
reasons, the English Government hate this
Irish patriot, long to crush him, and would efface
him if they could.

But our champion is a hero. He will never
yield while his breath lasts ; he will continue his
inspired mission — continue to plead your cause, the
cause of your wives and little ones — and never
cease till he cripples landlord supremacy, and does
away with tyrants and their exterminating edicts.

"Time was when some weakly believed there
was balm in Gilead ; that amongst these landlords
some were reasonable potentates, who saw and
had fellow-feeling for the needs of the people.
Fallacious idea ! Who now believes in landlord
honesty ? Not one. We have proved them a
garrison of alien confiscators, callous to all feeling
but their own lust. Some few once did, but now
none dare assert landlordism is a divine institution,

or that they are beings of a superior creation,
formed of a finer sort of clay than other men.
Monstrous proposition ! against which all the higher
instincts of our nature rebel. We know them to
be a phalanx of adventurous strangers who swarm
on our green pastures, and crush the life out of
our people. What mercy, what justice, what consideration
does your need ever receive from landlord
greed ? None, leo tenant has a ghost of
a chance of justice from a landlord. Out of their
own mouths we can prove this. One of their
ablest advocates, our bitter enemy, lately had to
admit that ' contracts made between men, one of
whom has undue influence over the other, are not
contracts in the true sense of the word.' Everybody
here knows the Irish tenant has to bow to
the will of his landlord. There is no alternative.
Pay me my decreed rent — my required respect —
my tithe of mint, flocks, herds — the first-fruits of
all you have ; I will in nowise remit an iota of
any of these. This, or language like it, is familiar
to all here. You have writhed under this yoke —
writhed as worms do when helplessly endeavouring
to escape from the foot crushing them to death.

Ah, yes, you have been slaves ! Bound hand and
foot, you have cringed, fawned, submitted, and
served cruel masters.

But now there is a way to escape. A champion
of proved courage undertakes your liberation,
and leads the way to victory. He has founded
the Land League on this fundamental principle —
that all and every arrangement, contracted between
men unequally weighted, is not morally
bindings. Such arrangements are void. You submitted
to landlord terms because you must, because
you were powerless to resist. Many of those I
see before me have shivered with dread, fearing, if
unable to pay the tyrant's claim, they would be
sent adrift, — driven out into the cold world homeless,
helpless, hopeless, without a place to shelter
their families, or a penny to buy bread.

This was the case ; this is still the law. But
thanks to this noble League, which it is my
privilege to advocate and inaugurate in this beautiful
county to-day, no tenant need ever again
fear eviction. Landlords and agents, aware the
last hour of domination is at hand, shiver at this
uprising of the people. They are terror-stricken,

afraid of what these past cruelties and oppressions
may now bring upon themselves. In craven fear
they wildly appeal, imploring Government for
larger powers of repression — for a coercion law
to enable them still to keep their heels on the
necks of their slaves. (Groans and wild uproar.)
You know this is so — that thus an alien class
reply to a people's cry of want and piteous appear]
for merciful forbearance.

How would the landlords help this starving
Irish people ? By wholesale exportation. Yes ;
it has always been so. At the will of the
landlord you are evicted or exported. Thus the
poor, the aged, the dying mother and the helpless
infant, have been driven from the shelter of
their wretched hovels, to die on the road, in the
union, or far away in a strange land. "VYliy, even
here, I am told, at this very time, in the face of a
gathering like this, and the protest of an aroused
country, a tyrant is carrying out a work of extermination.


Men of Blankshire, how long is this to continue
? How long will you permit the slayer of
these innocents to carry on slave-trade with impunity

? (A voice : ' Shoot him') While things
like this are done in our midst, the British
Government drones, and promises better things.
Be patient,' they urge. ' The Irish land system is
about to be established on just principles.' This
is maddening to a high-spirited people. It is like
the old saw, ' Live, horse, and you'll get grass.'
Government paddles over meditated remedial
measures, while landlords drive the people from
their homes for the non-payment of an impossible
rent. (' We won't stand it any more ! ' ' Down with
the landlords ! ' ' Ireland for the Irish ! ')

Men and women, hear me. Let us be united ;
stand as one man, and keep a firm grip of the land.
Eemember, it is your own ; this land is the inalienable
heritage of the tillers of the soil. Down
with landlords and land-robbers, and never rest
till you are rooted in the soil ! And remember
also, there will never be security, honour, peace, or
prosperity for Ireland until Irishmen are protected
by an independent Parliament in College Green.
All efforts tend to this securing of our national
independence.

But though this is our great end, we must pave

the way by wringing concessions from the fears
of our present rulers. By agitation, by combination,
by organising, by obstruction, by persistent
entreaty, by all and every method at our command,
we will harass and oblige England to do
us justice. Thus we will arrest the hands of the
slayers of our people — the murderers of helpless
children, the perpetrators of worse than Bulgarian
atrocities ! By agitation, by demonstrations, by
continually protesting against and determinately
resisting the tyrant yoke, we will wear out the
power of our enemies. Pay no unjust rents ;
resist eviction ; and God will bless this beautiful
land to this people.

I appeal to the women of Blankshire to help
in this glorious work, for they can render valuable
assistance and considerably strengthen our cause.
Girls, be heroines if need be. Smile upon no
man who does not first prove himself worthy of
your love by joining the Land League, and thus
securing a home and comfort for you and your
children. (Tremendous cheering.) Men, standfast
by the principles of the League, and on no
excuse take land from which another has been

evicted. Cursed be the one who does so ! — his
cattle will not thrive, his crops will not flourish.
Let him be as a leper — an outcast, with whom no
honest Irishman will have any dealings ! Don't
buy from or sell to him ; don't work for or
serve him ; look upon him as accursed — an evil
to be removed from your neighbourhood. Thus
show the bloodsuckers of our people their nefarious
land-traffic must end. Justice-loving Irishmen
will no longer permit a tyrant minority to
plunder victims at their pleasure. (Cheers, and
a voice, ' What about Glenamuick ? ') If deceivers
tell you this Government are preparing
to introduce measures which will ameliorate your
condition, be patient. Eemember this Liberal
Government are but creatures of the landlords :
they will do nothing for us but what demonstrations
like this extort from their pusillanimity.
It is a cruel mockery, a wicked aggravation
of our woe — of the grinding curse all Ireland
writhes under — to hear English legislators are
talking about remedial measures. Fixity of tenure,
fair rents, and God knows what improvements
are meditated — they are to be a Utopian

future ; while at the present men, women, and
children, like sheep before the slaughterer, are
being driven from their homes to die the Lord
knows where ! (Wild cries of * Glenamuick ! ')
Don't believe those plausible prophets ; but believe
me, and I tell you, God helps those who
help themselves ! Irishmen, do not wait with
folded hands, like dullards, unresisting victims to
injustice ; to worse than injustice — that wicked
perversion of law which enables this deceitful
Government — a Landlord League — to institute
such State prosecutions as are at the present
time martyrising Mr O'Donnell Power and other
champions of our rights.

We are men, — no longer slaves ; therefore
shoulder to shoulder we will stand, and with one
voice repudiate oppression. We will compel the
landlords — ay, if needs be, oblige this alien English
Government — to submit to the will of, and
restore their rights to, the justly indignant Irish
people ! "

Tremendous cheering followed the close of The
O'Brannaghan's speech, who, after bowing and
theatrically waving his scented pocket-handkerchief

— poverty and politics associating him with
strange companions — retired in favour of his
bosom friend Mr Dymock.

The M.P. for Killballymactaggart looked more
iron - grey and as wooden as formerly. He
creaked his long back, and his voice came with
its usual power from behind the iron mask. He
preached the same doctrines as The O'Brannaghan
played, as it were, further variations on the
National air. Like the smith's hammer on an
anvil, he came down heavily on the landlords.
He too was indignant at alien misrule in Ireland,
worked his audience to a frenzy with his diatribes,
and himself ghastly grey with exhaustion.

But even this was not sufficient Land League
education for the people.

The Irish gentleman, philosopher, and professional
agitator had lectured ; the hard - headed
Liverpool working man, the new-fledged M.P.,
ambitious for renown, had declaimed ; it remained
for the people's spiritual director to add ecclesiastical
imprimatur to their schooling.

Father Dan Prendergast's ostensible mission in
life was that of a preacher of peace, and mediator

between God and sinners. An anointed priest
of the infallible Church, his passions ought to
have been under control, and his vocation should
have upraised him above the envying, jealousies,
and heart-burnings of those striving for earthly
place and power.

But Father Dan Prendergast was a man before
he became a priest. Moreover, being of brute
nature, coarse instincts ruled all his actions. These
instincts utilised the more mundane arts of his
calling to his own lust, while spiritual teachings
became a mere matter of form.

Like the most rabid of his flock, Father Dan
hungered for the " flesh-pots of Egypt." In these
turbulent times fomenting dissatisfaction might
re-establish that sacerdotal supremacy which was
somehow slipping from the Church's grasp.

If he did not go with them — " the people " —
the dues, the fatted calves, the respect to the
cloth, the right to pry into their secret thoughts
and dictate their actions, would be taken from
him, and he would be left shorn of power.

Father Dan objected to being a potentate
devoid of power, to his flock turning from him,

VOL. I. N

to their learning wisdom at the feet of any other
Gamaliel. Better far that the Church's standard
should lead, that he should continue to teach, and
command his people to claim " their own," for
what was theirs should pay tithes to the Church.

Thus the parish priest, on most occasions, was
chairman of the Land League meetings. And today,
after a few incisive words of hatred to all
Protestant landlords and Sassenach rulers, this
shepherd dismissed his flock with an apostolic
blessing.

The delegate and Mr Dymock went home with
the priest to dine, and the people returned to
their cabins. Their cabins had never looked so
comfortless. They had learned the lesson of dissatisfaction
with their surroundings, and were
jealous. They were poor, the landlord was rich,
the thought rankled in their ignorant hearts,
and brought forth envy.

Could it be that this poverty of theirs lay at
the door of those landlords ? Their priest, whose
bounden duty it was to teach his people, declared
it was so, — that the landlords were vampires
sucking the life-blood out of the people. This
engendered hatred.

Some poor people were still content. Poor
but honest, they could not see their landlord was
this accursed things. These were looked on with
contempt — distrust — suspicion. And as they
did what the others desired not to do — paid
their rent — this brought down malice.

En\'^% jealousy, hatred, and malice were thus
planted upright in Ireland, and on these four
pillars stood the Land League.

And these four sentiments, judiciously worked,
soon rendered the law of the land impotent, and
the law of the League omnipotent.

Disaffection grew apace.

Besides public demonstrations, there were also
secret conclaves — Vehm'gerichtes — where evil
spirits held meetings and issued decrees.

Of one of these dark places Denis Shea was
the ruling spirit. They signed themselves " Eorys
of the Hills" when they sent out their edicts,
the frightened people and helpless victims dubbing
them, with some ambiguity, " the boys."

Early in November one of these petites causeries
was held ; and there Denis Shea's vicious tongue
inculcated a deed which his own craven soul
feared to undertake.

Denis was not a straightforward villain : he
did not even speak directly of the evil that
was to be done, as with vindictive tongue he
plotted outrage. With a whine he began —

Ah, boys ! it is a cruel thing to be a
homeless man. I was driven from under my
own roof by them that had no call to it at
all."

Be easy. Din ; we'll have you back, d — 1 a
fear."

I am tired o' talk. What is the use of saying
the like o' that ? Why isn't something done ?
We all know that it is a shame that land-graver
Nolan lives in the house my father built. By
jabbers ! if I had the heart of a man left in me —
but I haven't, it is bate out of me with the
trouble — police protection and all, I would not
leave him there one hour."

Be dad, it isn't a pleasant life he has. D — 1
a one speaks to him but them black Protestant
Mahonys. She took his butter to the market
this morning. May the d — 1 fly away with her ! "
comforted his friend.

Verra, wish ! don't be talking of black

Protestant. The League says we are to make no
differ. Them that are not with his are against us ;
Protestant and Catholics are all alike to the League,
though Father Dan's cue is to say otherwise,"
drawled Denis, with an air of superior wisdom
and some authority ; adding, " O'Donnell Power
himself is a Protestan, so is Dymock, and they are
both fine patriots. The League don't care a d — n
for a man's religion, no more do I, but I hate
them as are not patriots. Xow, I am afeared of
Mrs Mahony. She is a lone woman, weak in
her principles, though she has paid her footing',
I should not wonder if she paid her rent."

True for you, Din ; that is just what the like
of her will do."

She must be warned. Shane Dhu, you know
as well as I how essential it is all should obey
the League."

Those who are cantankersome must be made
to do their duty. All here stand shoulder to
shoulder," answered Shane Dhu, scowling into the
shadows of the kitchen, where other men smoked.

I tell you what, boys, a great movement like
this requires the sinews of war, and the money

hitherto appropriated to the landlord ought now
to be applied to the working out of our national
freedom."

Begorrah ! it is yourself talks sense," exclaimed
an admiring ruffian from a dark corner
of the cabin, who had evidently been inoculated
with an " idea."

Glory be to God ! " said Denis, sanctimoniously
; " it has been a grand harvest — a proof that
heaven itself sees and approves of the noble cause
we uphold. And sure, what better use can any
man make of this full and plenty than to support
the League ? Boys, we are all working for the
National cause. It is our duty to see that every
man in the barony pays in a subscription. There
is many a one could help us if they would, and
many more that will do nothing unless we put
the fear of God in their coward hearts. Sure, if
we are now true to ourselves, we'll have great
times soon, with the help o' God. The English
press is taking an interest in our doings. There
was a special reporter over stumping' the country
this week to see the rights of the 'grievances.'
Himself interviewed the president and Father

Dan, and maybe they didn't show the blessed
truth to the gentleman ! They took him round
by Glenamuick, and to the back of Godspeed, and
myself told him the Bible truth about Cappa.
Father Dan sent him on with a budget of facts
for the English public, and Flurry treated him to
a skinful of whisky that will give true colour to
his correspondence. And now it is time to be
off. Sharp is the word I Out of this with every
mother's soul of you, and don't let the grass grow
under your feet until ye report to me what is
doing. Away with ye now. To-morrow evening
I'll be smoking my pipe by Shane Dhu's fire."

One by one the men, about a dozen, slipped out
of the house, which stood in a dark and dirty
village about a mile from Killballymactaggart.

Pat, you and another meet me at the bridge
in an hour — sharp," whispered Shane Dhu as he
passed out into the black night.

This whisper was repeated by Pat to another
conspirator, and so on, — these simple words, which
meant nothing to the uninitiated, being the watchword
which called the moonlight brigade to their
work.

CHAPTER XL

MOONLIGHTING.

It was a dark night, and although rain was not
actually falling, the November night was thick
with a chill fog, as one by one the men met at
their rendezvous, the little bridge at the Cross.
The bridge was in a dark, lonely, and unfrequented
corner. Under it rushed the Mead stream,
now a winter torrent, swollen by recent heavy
rains, its roar preventing any ear, if such were
watching, hearing approaching footsteps or quiet
words. Over the bridge a narrow lane, shadowed
by a thicket, led to the small seaside village
where this night Denis Shea had held his privy
council. On the other side of the bridge the
lane made a short zigzag turn, and then emerged
from this shadowed loneliness on to the broad

highroad. Close to the main road was an unfinished
causeway — a monument of misapplied
"relief" money of 1847 — commenced grandly,
and ending abruptly in a town park, appeared
of no use whatever but to give a reason for the
name of this trysting-place — The Cross. Beyond
the causeway, abruptly terminating in the town
park, were low marshy lands fringing the tawny
ooziness of Killyslavin bog ; beyond that loom
the great bare mountains. Where the distinguished
engineer who planned intended to carry
this wide road is a mystery. It never has been
of any use, never can be utilised, leading as it
does from nowhere to nowhere.

It is about twelve o'clock at night when twenty
men cross the highroad at this point, turn down
this causeway, and pass from it into the town
park. From thence, crossing banks and walls, and
marching through various farms, they skirt Kills
bog until they reach a road on the eastern
side.

Hitherto they had walked irregularly, scrambling
over each fence as best they could. Now
they are formed in line, three abreast, and at the

word of command march in military order and
silence along the country road. The moon had
not yet risen ; but the night fog had dispersed,
frost set in, and myriad stars bespangled the
heavens, when these men drew up before a small
wayside farmhouse. The house stood a little
back from the road ; on either side out-offices and
sheds stood at right angles, buildings thus surrounding
three sides of an open square ; along
the fourth side was the road on which these
men stood. The dwelling-house fronted the road ;
in the centre of the square was a large manure
heap ; on the right hand of the house stood the
gate leading into the fields ; from this gate a long
open shed, terminating in a pig-sty, formed the
angle of the rough stone fence that bounded the
road leading to the bog. Opposite the shed
stood the cow-house and stable. It was a poor
small place, belonging to the widow Mahony.
Her grandfather had built it, her father had
lived there, and so had her husband. They were
yearly tenants, and her hope was to keep it for
her son, a lad of sixteen, who now helped her on
the farm.

It was a still night and a lonesome spot.
There was no other house in view, though Thade
Moriarty's was only half a mile distant ; no help
at hand, no sound of life except the noise made
by the quiet cows as they turned in their straw
and chewed the cud.

The first noise that caught the ears of the
sleeping inmates were words of ominous meaning.


Mrs Mahony did not hear the words, but they
roused her, and she listened.

Put a shot through the kitchen door, but fire
high : we are not going to kill, only to warn the
giddy." So spoke the captain of the band.

A shot was fired through the door, and then a
woman's voice exclaimed —

Lord save us ! what was that ? "

Immediately after another voice cried in terror,
". Mush ! muslin ! mistress dear, myself is afeared
it is ' the boys.' "

There was silence outside for a few minutes,
whispers, and a moving too and fro inside.

Open to the officers of the League, or we will
fire again!" cried one of the ruffians. This threat

was accompanied with a series of kicks at the
door, which rattled on its hinges.

Oh, glory ! " gasped the widow. " Biddy,
ashore, keep from the door. Lord save us this
night ! Flurry, where are you ? "

Here, mother," answered a boy's voice, in a
horrified whisper, from an inner kitchen. " It is
the boys.' I see a power of them outside.
They'll murder us entirely, I'm afeared."

Oh ! what shall I do, at all, at all ? It is an
awful thing being a lone widow these times,"
sobbed Mrs Mahony, wringing her hands, as her
son came to her in considerable excitement and
dishabille. " Flurry, dear, could you get out the
back way and run across the fields to Thade
Moriarty's ? — he is a decent neighbour, and maybe
would help us."

Let us in, Mrs Mahony, or it will be worse
for you," cried the voice from outside ; while the
old door showed signs of yielding to the kicks.

I never could get out, mother ; they are all
round — more at the back than in the front, I
think. Oh, mother ! mother ! what can we do ? "

At this moment the kitchen door was burst in,

and the little kitchen filled with disguised men.
The servant-girl fell on her knees and shrieked,
Mrs Mahony drew back against the wall, and
Flurry, a boy of sixteen, stood gallantly in front
of his mother, calling out : " Come now, boys, come
now sure you would not be hurting the women."

The nearest ruffian caught the boy by the
throat, and flung him aside to other ruffians,
who, despite his struggles, carried him out of
the house.

A dark lantern was now flashed in the woman's
face.

Don't kill me ! " she implored ; " sure I ama
lone widow, and can neither say ye yea or
nay." ^

Down on your marrow-bones, ye old witch,
and swear to join the League; sure it is too kind
entirely we are, and you a black Protestan, — it is
to put you in the bog we ought, instead of making
you one of ourselves."

"Or set fire to the thatch, and let her have a
taste o' Purgatory," chimed in another.

Oh, gentlemen ! sure I did pay my footing.
It is only a week last Saturday I gave two pounds

to Din Shea; and sure he promised me, if I did
that, no harm should come to me or the cows.
'Deed, gentlemen, it is Gospel truth I am telling
you."

Hold your whist, you old harridan ! Two
pounds ! what if you did ? Two pounds from
the like o' you to the League ! may I never see
heaven, but it is twenty you ought to pay ! "

Lord love you ! where would I get all that ? "

Whist, I tell you, whist ; where do you keep
your money ? "

As I hope to be saved, I have but one pound
for you in the house, and that is in the little tay-caddy
beyond."

A warm woman like you, with none depending
on you but one spalpeen, can afford to do the
thing handsome. One pound won't do for us — we
must have five."

Oh, sirs ! how could I ? — sure 'twould ruin me
entirely ; for the Lord's sake don't strip a poor
widow bare ! As it is, I owe a big bit of money
for groceries."

Give us the five pounds, or we'll take the life
of you ; sure we know you sold a power of potatoes

in the market yesterday. There, get along, up,
and give it to fine ! "

As the ruffian spoke, he shook the woman and
then flung her against the wall.

Take the pound and go — God forgive ye ! this
night robbing the widow and orphan "

Get up, or by the holy cross I'll brand you !
Get up, and give me the money I ask for ! "

Again he shook her till her teeth rattled.

You ugly d — I's spawn ! ye Protestan witch !
you are not worth the lead, or it is a bullet I
would put through you. Get up, I say, get up ! "

What can I do ? Oh ! how is a poor widow,
and she full up of rheumatism, to get along at all ?
Sure I tell you there is only that one pound in the
house."

The caddy was now upset on the dresser, the
quarter " of tea spilt about, and the pound
pocketed, while cries long and bitter came from
Biddy, who was in the hands of two other " boys."

Biddy was a comely girl, and gloried in a fine
head of hair. This hair was now being roughly
shorn, or indeed torn from her head, with a blunt
knife. One man held her down, while the other

did his barber's work — a lesson to her, as he
said, for working with a woman who " is not one
of us."

While these four men were busy in the kitchen,
a couple more had entered and ransacked " the
room," from which they now emerged with a gun
a gun that was not worth much, but it had
belonged to Tom Mahony, the widow's dead husband,
and she valued it highly for his sake.
"Ah, boys! don't take that," she begged; "my
poor man always kept it to kill crows."

Bead, it is to put the contents into you we
will, if you don't hold your noise."

Another man now came in from outside, and
after a whisper with those in possession, drew them
up across the floor, and ordered the two women to
kneel down. As Mrs Mahony hesitated, he forced
her to her knees, and then called out — " Now then,
leaden pills here ! "

At this word of command a couple of pistols
were fired. The women both shrieked. The 
in her agony flung herself face downward
on the stones, terrorised ; she did not know
whether she was wounded or not, but yelled as if

lie were. The leading ruffian laughed unctuously
a horrible laugh, as if he relished her suffering,
while Mrs Mahony hid her face in her hands,
weeping and praying alternately.

Now, then, missus, you swear silence, by the
holy cross, as to this night's work. If you
don't, it will be worse for you. Never fear, you
won't be let off so cheaply next time. Swear !
Do you hear me, you old hag ? Swear ! "

As the ruffian spoke, he shook Mrs Mahony,
only ceasing the shaking to allow her to speak.
As she did not instantly comply with his order,
he tried the effect of a couple of kicks. Betwixt
sobs and breathlessness the frightened woman
endeavoured to stammer out the required oath.

When she had done so the men retired, taking
with them the old gun, the pound - note, and
Flurry's new hat, which the mother had bought
for her son in the town the previous day.

The women remained on their knees until the
last sound of the footsteps of these " officers " of
the League died in the distance ; then, gathering
themselves up, they both agreed neither was mortally
wounded.

VOL. L

Though not mortally wounded, the women were
terrified, much bruised, and shaken. And when,
after groping for a match, they struck a light,
Biddy sobbed most piteously at seeing her " fine
head of hair" all in a tangle on the kitchen
floor.

Now missing her son, Mrs Mahony called
aloud for Flurry. There was no reply, and
carrying the light to the open door, the mother
repeated her call.

Flurry ! Flurry ! where are you, alannah ? The
boys are gone ; you may come out."

Still no reply.

Where can he be at all, at all ? " whispered
Biddy, who, having suppressed her sobs, was
peeping over her mistress's shoulder. " Holy
Virgin ! I hope they have not killed him
entirely."

For a couple of minutes the women looked out
into the night. It was very still ; but the moon
was now rising, and the dark shadows were
bewildering in its pale light.

Mrs Mahony peered around, held the candle as
high over her head as pain and her shaking hands

permitted. Again she raised her voice, now shrill
with nervous apprehension, and called —

Flurry, child, Flurry ! come out of hiding ;
they are all gone, and God forgive them what
they have done this night. I am kilt entirely.
Flurry ! Flurry ! come to your poor mother, my
boy."

But no Flurry answered to the entreaty. Then
Mrs Mahony stepped out into the yard ; Biddy,
holding on to her petticoat, followed close. They
looked into the cow-house. The six cows looked
quiet and comfortable, the horse was lying down ;
but no Flurry was to be seen. The mother
looked into the oat-bin, and even up to the
rafters ; then, shaking with fear, pain, and cold,
she looked with frightened wondering eyes at her
servant. " Maybe it is with the pigs he is, or
under the shed. Come and look, ma'am."

Neither woman had more clothing on than a
night-gown and a petticoat — scanty garments,
now much torn from rough treatment, which
scarce covered their nakedness. Shivering, and
with bare feet, the women crossed the square
to the far side, where the cart - shed and

pig-sty were. As they reached the other side,
Biddy's clutch of her mistress's petticoat suddenly
tightened. She stopped short, crying, " See, there
he is ! "

The rising moon shone full on this corner of
the dung-heap, and on it lay the naked body of
the boy. Stooping over him, the mother saw his
hands and feet were tied, and that her boy was
covered with blood.

With difficulty the two women lifted Flurry
and carried him indoors. As they moved him
he moaned, which was somewhat reassuring,
proving that, though unconscious, he was not
quite dead.

They laid him on his bed, and then brought
a light. Poor Flurry ! his mother, through her
tears, saw he was not shot nor mortally wounded,
but that the ruffians had marked him for life by
scraping his poor back with an iron comb.

Every inch of skin was lacerated, and the
blood oozed from a hundred wounds. With
many sobs and some difficulty, the weeping
mother sponged her boy's back, and presently
Flurry recovered to a consciousness of his

suffering. It was piteous to hear him moan,
and ask —

Oh, mother, mother ! what did they do to meat
all ? "

To which the mother's only reply was tears,
and, " Whist, honey, whist ! Oh, my poor boy ! "

For the moment Mrs Mahony's anguish of
mind, mingled terror, anger, pain, and grief, were
too deep for more words.

When the silver streak of breaking day showed
in the east, leaving her boy, Mrs Mahony ran
across the fields to her nearest neighbours, the
Moriartyss. As she came over the stile, up out
of the chill white mist, which still lay folded like
a white winding-sheet on the sodden fields, North
was crossing over from the house door to her
barn.

North stared at the apparition of this tall
gaunt woman, without cloak or shawl, from
whose uncovered head grey elf-locks hung dishevelled,
and for the moment she did not
recognise her neighbour. When she did so, her
face paled as she asked —

For God's sake ! what has happened ? "

The next moment Norali called for Thade ; and
to these neighbours Mrs Mahony told her tale,
beo'sino' them, for God's sake, to send a messenger
for the doctor.

That evening, in the gloaming, Thade, full of
a purpose, left his home and trudged down the
muddy road till he came to the turn to Meadow-lees.
Here, with evident reluctance, he swung
himself off the road, over the stile, and on to
the bog.

At this hour, and from this point, Killyslavin
boo' looked a wide desolate waste. But from this

o

point a path led across its loneliness — a shortcut
to the mountain district beyond, called Hobbes
This bog path never looked inviting,
and in this uncanny light more than usually
unpleasant.

Thade stepped carefully, feeling his way from
tussock to tussock over the treacherous surface,
more than once stopping and looking anxiously
over his shoulder at bushes and turf-ricks, which
appeared like men in ambush.

It was intensely cold ; wreaths of white mist
hemmed him in, while a keen north wind moaned

in the distance like a Banshee spirit, and nipped
him to the bone as he walked. Despite the discomfort
of the weather, and certain mental uneasiness,
Thade kept on his way doggedly, and ere
it was black night reached the other side of the
ghostly bog. Here he found himself on a mountain
road, on which he paused for a few minutes.
As Thade stood he sighed, drew his toil-roughened
hand across his clammy brow — for, despite the cold
night, anxiety had beaded his forehead — then looking
up at the black mountain, set his feet again
in motion. In about ten minutes he left this
road and turned up a boreen, along which he
plodded for a quarter of a mile until he came to a
hovel.

Here Thade again wiped his clammy forehead,
then shoving open the low door, entered, saying in
neighbourly fashion — " God save all here ! Good
evening, Mrs Keeffe."

That same to you, Mr Moriarty. It is a sight
for sore eyes to see you this side o' Killyslavin.
How is your missus ? "

"Well and hearty, thank you. Where is
Shane ? "

More than myself can tell. He went over
the road two hours ago with the boys."

Thade stood before the hearth silent. Mrs
Keeffe looked at him keenly, then asked in a lower
tone, " How is Flurry Mahony ? "

Bad. It was a wicked job," muttered Thade.

Whist ! whist 1 " answered the woman in a
frightened way — " one's heart aches for the boy's
pain, but sure our heads know it is the right thing
to enforce the law of the League. I hear there
was good reason for the treatment the Mahonys
got. Ah ! then it is yourself is heartily welcome,
Din Shea," added Mrs Keeffe in a forced cheery
tone, as that individual appeared, coming from the
outer darkness into the light of the turf-fire. " It
is a long way up from Killballymactaggart ; pull
over the kish, man, and take an air of the fire. It
is not often you are up this way now. Din. How
are you all ? "

As well as bad times will let us be. These
are hard times, ma'am — hard times for those that
are evicted. There is bad work doing in the
country."

So I hear, so I hear. I was just asking Mr

Moriarty about the Mahonys, — a queer way they
left Flurry this morning."

True for you. But sure it is all their own fault.
The misguided woman would go her own gate — pay
her rent indeed, d — 1 mend them. They have
learned a lesson now, and will know better than
to disobey orders in future. Where is Shane ? "

Up the road a step. He went back with Jim
Crowley, who came down for me to go up to the
wife. It is the mother of a fine boy she is this
night, God bless him ! And a troublesome world
it is for the creature to be born into, for I hear
Sir John is going to put us all out."

The landlords are all alike — slave-drivers,"
snivelled Denis. " Be Ganys ! if the boys have any
sense in them, it is them they'll send packing —
then we'll have the country in peace and quiet to
ourselves. Xo more d — d evictions, and no more
rent to pay."

Ah ! you may well say them would be beautiful
times," agreed Mrs Keeffe, " though d — 1 a one
of me sees how it is to be managed. However,
as Shane says, I have no head. And sure I show
it — standing here like a born fool, talking, and

the woman in her trouble wanting me. God bless
you, neighbours ! just mind the fire until Shane
comes in ; and if you must go before he comes,
throw on a few sods, draw the door after you, and
hide the key in the thatch."

So saying, Mrs Keeffe put an old shawl over
her head, went out and up the road, intent on
neighbourly good offices.

The two men whom she had left together in
the cabin went closer to the fire. Thade sat on
the chair, and Denis on the upturned kish. Lifting
a sod, Thade lit his pipe, and then passed on
the sod to Denis.

Neither spoke, and as both smoked they looked
gravely into the fire. Each instinctively-felt what
they had to say to each other was disagreeable,
and neither liked to begin. At last Thade plucked
up courage. Pressing the " 'baccy " into his pipe
with his thumb, and looking sideways at the
elder man, he began under this breath —

It was a wicked shame the way they left
Flurry Mahony. My hand for you, that work
will never prosper. Is that what you cal
patriotism — frightening the life out of a lone

widow woman, and half killing an orphan
boy ? It is ashamed of themselves they ought
to be. Neither luck nor grace can follow such
doings."

Hist, man, hist ! don't talk to me like that —
sure myself does not know one ha'porth about it.
Does she know who did it ? "

Xot one. How could she, poor soul ? It was
black night, they were all disguised, and what
with the fright and pain, she had no sense left.
It was bad work, Din Shea ; and if that is what
you call serving the National cause, faith I think
it better to leave things, peaceable and quiet as
they were. Moreover, Din, every one won't be
as simple and helpless as those poor souls they
kilt last night. My hand for you, the boys will
find themselves in trouble before long, if they goon
like that."

Not much fear of that. I'd like to see the
one in the country that would dare to sell the
pass on us." Denis looked wicked as he spoke,
then drawled as he continued : " Sure, it would be
hard to swear who done it. I don't know ; you
don't know ; and, by the same token, if you did,

Thade Moriarty, you hnoiv if you informed — and
they do say such things runs in the blood — your
life would not be worth a thranneen ! "

God forgive you, Din, for throwing that in
my face ! You know I am not the boy to take
blood-money," answered Thade slowly.

"I know," continued Denis, authoritatively, "that
the end justifies the means, and that anything and
everything is lawful and praiseworthy when it furthers
the National cause. What does the suffering
of one here and there matter ? Nothing ! We must
put the fear o' God in the hearts of the people,
for the good of 'the cause.' Faith, I believe it
is faint-hearted you are, Thade. Ah, man, have
courage ; sure you don't know, but I do, all that's
in it. Man alive ! the League is awful powerful ;
twenty thousand men this blessed hour could be
raised by one blast of a whistle. Twenty thousand
men, every soul of them, ready to go through
fire and water, or to die for their country. And,
Thade, every one of them twenty thousand men
is obedient to the law ; and there is not one of
them but would do for you, or any other, be it
father or brother, that played us false. Thade,

you know I'm your friend, and you know also
that I am secretary to this branch of the Invincibles.
Believe me, I know what I am talking
about. Why, man, there is a power more in it,
and lots of great things doings, that I can't talk
of to you. It is great things the League is doing ;
and it is warm, and comfortable, and rent free in
our farms we will all be soon, with the help of
God. The League law is our law — the only law
for a true patriot to obey. And sure, Thade, if
you be talking like tliat^ ' the boys ' will hear tell
of it, and by this and by that, if they thought you
were a traitor, it is short work they'd make of
you, in spite of me."

You are awful clever. Din : a great head
you have for business. God bless you, and get
them to leave me alone. I'll never say a word,
and go the road quietly. But, for God sake ! no
murder. I can't lie easy in my bed, thinking
of what's doing outside. Sure, it is a sinful
world, and I am a simple ignorant man. You
may swear me to silence. Din ; I won't say against
that. But, for the sake of the blessed Virgin,
leave me out of it all, if you can. I swear to

you, Din Shea, I'll never peach ; but I'd rather
pay double rent, never own an acre, die in the
union, than stain my soul with this devil's work.
I wonder you can sit in your chair and know
how the neighbours are murdered."

Why, then, Thade Moriarty, it is yourself that
is the droll man entirely. Alio murders their
neighbours ? — not I, you may swear. Sure, myself
hasn't the heart to hurt a fly, let alone a
Christian. All I mean is, that though some may
do queer things, it is no business of yours or mine
to be hard on ' the boys.' Is that a step in the
road ? Yes ; Shane himself. Here we are, Mr
Keeffe, making ourselves at home by your fire,"
ended Denis, as Shane Dhu joined them by the
hearth.

It is yourself is heartily welcome ; you too,
Thade. Are ye long in it ? " asked Shane, as he
pulled up another kish and seated himself at
Denis's side.

Xo ; your wife said you would not be long,
so wee waited. She has gone up to Crowley's,"
answered Denis, glibly, who then asked, " Well,
what news out to-nicrht ? "

They say the boys are going to stop the Castleton
hounds tomorrow."

Whew-w-w," a long low whistle of perfect
satisfaction from Denis.

Begorrah ! it's Sir John himself that will be
in a wax," laughed Shane.

You may say that' rejoined Denis. " How
did you hear it ? "

One of the Sullivan from over the hill told
Jim Crowley ; Sullivan heard it at the forge.
Glory ! it will be rare sport tomorrow."

Tell us how they did it," asked Denis.

Just this : a letter is sone to Sir John to-night,
telling him to stop at home, and saying ' the boys '
will hunt the country themselves for the future."

Sir John will be fit for Bedlam ; when are
the boys going out ? "

To-mon^ow," answered Shane, with a grin ;
and then went into a long description of the
plan arranged for the morrow's Land League hunt,
ending — " Tare an ages ! but myself would like
to see the old man's face when he reads that
note in the morning. It is the finest thing the
boys have done yet."

May I never see heaven ! but I hope the old
man may never hunt another fox in Blankshire ;
time to stop his fun, and time the poor got some
diversion. I'll go over myself before day. By
the way, Shane, did you hear anything about the
Mahonys ? Here is Thade says they were a most
killed last night ; he is in a great way about the
treatment they had."

I hear tell Flurry is in the 'firmly,"
answered Shane, " and that Fitzgerald took his
depositions. Some say he is going. to die — more
say not. But any ways, they can't make much
out of his deposition. He says it was quite dark
when they pulled him out the door, tore the shirt
off him, tied him hand and foot, and curried his
back well. Poor fool ! he don't know nothing —
hasn't a taste of an idea who done it." The low
brute chuckled at the innocence of the victim of
his outrage.

o

You say it was Fitzgerald took Flurry's
deposition ? "

They say so ; and what's more, that himself
was main angry — called it a dastard cowardly
deed, and said, if there was law in the land, he'd

leave no stone unturned to bring the guilt home
to them that did it. They say he swore the
country was going to the d — 1, and that Blank-shire
men were losing all decency to treat a defenceless
boy like that. Oh ! he was mad angry.
My hand for you, but he is over busy, always
questioning, and says he'll never rest till he put
the saddle on the right horse."

Oh ! it is a deal of trouble he'll take when
it is to get a poor boy punished for a frolic ! "
sneered Denis ; " it is too officious he always
makes himself."

Shah ! " assented Thade, sagaciously, at whom
Denis had looked significantly when he spoke.
I think it would be wiser for the gentlemen to
leave such investigations to the stipendiary."

Sure it will be all the same in the end.
D — 1 a one of them can ever find out who does
anything, as long as the members of the Invincibles
are true to one another. Well, good evening,
Shane. I must go up the hill to Cuddle's ;
where are you for, Thade ? Are you coming up to
Cud's ? "

No ; home," answered Thade, gravely. " Thank

VOL. I. p

you kindly, Din ; but herself will be wondering if
I stop out too late, and it is a bad road across
Killyslavin."

Thade sighed as he left the fire, and went out
into the darkness. Denis and Shane left the
house with him ; but they did not go up the hill,
only stood listening as Thade went slowly down
the lane. When he was out of hearing, Shane
looked inquiringly at Denis, who sneered —

"There he goes, the fool ! — not a taste of spirit
in him. Myself did that clever, I think ; I was
afraid he would wait till the boys came in."

Then Shane and Denis re-entered the cabin,
where, at eisjht o'clock, other men began to arrive.
Each new-comer nodded, then seated himself on
the table or dresser, a tub, or the floor, for Denis
had seated himself on the one chair the kitchen
possessed. Light there was none, except the fitful
glow from the smouldering sods piled on the
hearth ; but drink there was in plenty.

For an hour this company sat imbibing drink
and mischief Each man brought some news,
suggested a something evil to do, or a somebody to
injure, thus contributing their item to the plan

of outrage organised by Denis Shea. Denis Shea
was the principal talker, and evidently law-giver
to these trained bands, and Shane Dhu apparently
his lieutenant ; these two evidently hatching
wickedness out of the eggs procured by their
emissaries.

Before this committee dissolved, arrangements
were made for a contingent of these ragamuffins
joining the Land League hunt on the morrow.

CHAPTER XII.

A THREATENING LETTER.

The morning post was delivered at Castleton by
eight o'clock, and the next morning, while Sir
John was donning the scarlet, his letters were
brought to his room.

For twenty-five years, from the 1st of November
to the middle of March, unless summoned by
a four-line whip to St Stephen's, Sir John had
hunted twice a-week. His hounds were the joy
of his heart and the pride of the county. jSTo
dogs were better turned out ; nowhere was there
a cleverer county pack, or a more courteous
master.

The o]d servant, as usual, laid the letters on
the dressing-table and then left the room. As
Sir John continued dressing, he paused now and

again, tore open an envelope, and skimmed over
the contents.

This morning there was an unusually large
correspondence, so it was some time before he
came to the bottom of the large bundle. Half-a-dozen
circulars, a couple of bills, three notices of
public meetings, a moving letter asking for help
for the victims of Bulgarian atrocities, another
requesting a subscription for the civilisation of the
aborigines in Central Africa, a third requesting
his name and subscription as a supporter of the
Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals,
an invitation to dinner, and a threatening letter.
Threatening letters at this date were not uncommon
tidings in Ireland, but it so happened that
Sir John had never before received one. It was
the last letter he opened, and, as usual, was
illustrated with a rude sketch — a skull, crossbones,
and a coffin.

As Sir John looked at this sketch, the joyous
brightness faded in his blue eyes, the lusty colour
left his cheeks, as if his world was changed,
the damp earth and the soft morning in which
he had rejoiced being no longer pleasant to

his sight. He did not glance over this epistle
and throw it aside, as he had done the rest of this
morning's letters. He read it every word — read
it twice, thrice, and then sighed. The missive
over which the old man sighed was written on
a leaf torn out of a copy - book, and read as
follows : —

Sir John, — This is to warn you the boys
won't have you hunt the country any more.
They means to hunt it their selves. No dog is to
leave your kennel on tomorrow, Tuesday ; if they
do, they won't go back alive ; no more will it be
pleasant for them that is with them. Be warned ;
keep yourself, your dogs, and your friends at
home, or expect the fate of St Stephen.

"RORY OF THE HILLS."

At the first reading of this letter Sir John had
rubbed his eyes, doubting their having read aright.
At the second, the ]healthy red paled in his cheek ;
and the third reading was imperfect, owing to an
unusual moisture dimming the keenness of his
vision.

The cowards had judged aright when they
thought this missive would daze Sir John ; they
had indeed hit him in the most vulnerable point —
his dogs. The brave, cheery old gentleman, who
would have scorned a threat to take his own life,
was cut to the heart at these rascals threatening
his hounds. He stood there in his unbuttoned
waistcoat, staring at the letter. His dogs — the
poor dumb beasts, the beautiful creatures, so
stanch and true and hard - running, who had
given so many happy hours to all ! — yes, even to
some of the crew who now, out of diabolical spite,
threatened to injure them.

What had come to Blankshire ? His hounds
had been followed by Mgh and low, and " sport "
had hitherto been a strong bond between all
classes, — the one key, in fact, that tuned all
hearts, of every sect in Ireland, to common concert
pitch.

Had the threat been to himself alone, Sir John
would have chucked it aside, and gone hunting as
usual. Had it included only his human friends,
he would probably have taken the note downstairs,
and thrown it on the breakfast-table, as a

novel relish to that meal, and recommended the
hunt to treat it with contempt.

But his dogs — those dearly loved four-footed
friends, so intelligent, so obedient, so stanch and
true and good, — he could not warn them, therefore
could not, would not, dare not lead them into
danger.

Sir John's hands trembled, as he at last put
that fatal letter down on the dressing-table.

The Master of the Castleton hounds, when he
had done so, looked sadly out through his open
window. It was a perfect hunting morning ;
light clouds sped overhead, which, through silvered
linings, showed that a modest sunshine might be
expected later on. The light wind came from the
west ; the earth was moist — not too holding — justin
prime condition for carrying the scent and for
galloping.

The meet was to be held at a capital cover,
Barrington, for which, half an hour later, the
hounds would start. They always had good runs
from there. What should he do ? Dare he risk
the dogs, or must he give in to these cowardly
rascals ? Alas ! alas ! he must. He could not

risk injury to the dumb brutes who had served
him so well.

At this moment the bell-like note of old Trumpeter
broke the stillness, followed by the kennel
hubbub of the whole pack, as they were turned into
their yard to be looked through by the careful
whip preparatory for starting. With a groan the
old man turned from the window — from the fair
sight of the good day, and the music he loved so
well — and violently rung his bell. Old Stevens
instantly appeared. " Tell Byrnes not to take the
hounds out. There will be no hunt this morning.
Do you hear ? do you understand ? " said Sir John,,
in faltering tones, while he vaguely fumbled at the
buttons of his waistcoat, as if uncertain about the
fastening. Stevens, an old and privileged servant,
looked amazed, and asked anxiously of his
master —

No trouble in the Captain's family, I hope ? "
No, no ; nothing of that kind, thank God !
But, Stevens, these people are breaking my heart.
I would not have believed they could be so misguided.
Only think, the miscreants threaten to
kill my poor dogs ! Go at once, tell Byrnes to

lock the kennel door, and come here to me. I
am sorry I have lived to see the day when I am
afraid to trust the lives of the poor dumb animals
to our people. It is too bad, too bad ! — a sad day
for old Ireland, Stevens."

Stevens hastened to obey his master's order,
and seriously unhappy about Sir John, returned
quickly to the dressing - room. He found his
master still fumbling at his buttons — so entirely
overcome by his feelings, that without assistance
he was incapable of making the desired change in
his clothes.

Sir John was a veteran sportsman, of simple,
trusting, home - loving nature. For more than
fifty years he had been a resident landlord, spending
and being spent in the service of his dependants.
He loved his home, he loved his people,
liked, and hitherto had been a recipient of, popular
favour. He could not understand what had turned
the tide, or how he had incurred the opprobrium
which the wx populi now flung in his face.

The disaffection and Home Eule cry lately,
buzzed about had puzzled the country gentleman
bewildered and annoyed, but never seriously

alarmed him. Even now, though wounded to the
heart, and anxious for his four-footed friends. Sir
John was far from realising that the poison of that
transatlantic organisation, the Land League, had
permeated, destroyed principle, and deteriorated the
Irish people,

Love me, love my dog," was a crucial test with
Sir John ; so the coward threat rankled deep in
his honest heart. He sighed, moaned, all but
sobbed in his anguish ; while Stevens soothed and
dressed him as if he were an infant.

Meanwhile, men assembled below were wondering
what delayed Sir John. The breakfast-room
was warm and comfortable, and the usual jokes
were enlivening the matutinal gathering ; but
still time was passing, Barrington was a long way
off, and men were impatient to begin breakfast.

When Sir John, in plain shooting-coat, entered
the room, every eye expressed dismay ; and when
he showed the letter, each man had small appetite
left for the savoury meal under which the
hospitable table groaned.

Xever before had the juicy steak, devilled bones,
and cunningly seasoned game-pies, the smoking

coffee, dainty rolls, or foaming tankards of the
famous Castleton amber ale, been placed before so
unappreciative a company.

At first the men mused silently, giving a word
of kindly sympathy to the master. All looked
grave, some annoyed out on the undulating
lawn, and up at the pictured clouds. It was
indeed a perfect hunting morning.

At their host's almost inarticulate invitation,
they presently took their places at table, but ate
like men in a dream, scarce heeding what they
swallowed ; the elder men now and again murmuring
a word of sympathy to the old man, who, with
a troubled face, sat at the head of his own table,
with untouched food before him. After the first
feelings of surprise wore off, some of the younger
portion of the company commenced to growl
angrily at the loss of their sport, while others
wondered, Would the League hunt come off?
There were whispered disagreements over this
question at the lower end of the table, as some
of the party declared it was only a bit of idle
swagger, the people would never dare to intrude
into Sir John's coverts.

Surmises on this head were speedily set at
rest, as, before breakfast was finished, Stevens
announced that Constable Carter had arrived, and
desired to see Sir John.

A moment or two later, Constable Carter
was in the room telling his story. The
substance of his report was, — that a large
party of men, horses, and dogs had mustered at
Doura an hour ago, and were now scouring the
country.

At this intelligence some of the younger men
made a rush for the door, their impulse being to
follow, capture, and inflict instant condign punishment
on the offenders. But a word from Sir
John arrested them.

"Come back, boys 1 " he cried, huskily. " Though
it is insufferable insolence these blackguards selecting
my country for their rascally hunt, you must
not act rashly."

By Jove ! a summary eviction from our pleasant
hunting - grounds ! " rattled Harry O'Brien,
with a poor attempt at joking. " The people
mean to show they are owners of the coverts.
But, I say, what are we to do ? We are not

going to stand this sort of tiling, yon know,"
ended Harry, casting a vague look all around.

I am afraid there is no alternative ; a row
will only make matters more complicated," answered
Harry's brother-in-law.

But — surely those rascals are not to be
allowed to have it all their own way ? Absurd
nonsense ! "What were the police about ? Why
did they allow this hunt ? It seems to be nobody's
business to interfere with a set of ruffians
whose pleasure is to ride roughshod over our
rights."

Harry, Harry ! quietly ! " hinted Percy Fitzgerald.


Well, but it is shameful — all rotten incompetency,"
grumbled Harry. " One would think
we were living in Central Africa, we appear to be
so outside the reach of modern law. These doings
are a disgrace to civilisation."

All true ; but your impatience will not help
to civilise these misdirected malcontents," said
Percy sadly.

Two or three others of the young men were as
impatient and impulsive as Harry O'Brien : they

would take the law in their own hands, ride after,
capture, and chastise these marauders. Again
they turned towards the door, to be again arrested
in their purpose by Sir John's voice. He was
the Master, and, on hunting matters, obeyed as if
he were an absolute dictator.

"Stop, boys; I won't have any folly." They
turned at his words, but his parched mouth and
vexed mind had no other words ready for them.
He turned to Constable Carter, and they continued
talking amongst themselves.

Easy to cry stop, and let the country go to
the mischief," mumbled one.

Gone to the mischief," assented another. " If
some one does not curtail their licence, they will
make the country too hot to hold us. I say,
Fitzgerald — you know more law than I — how can
we come down on these rascals ? for down on
them I will be, somehow — or know good reason
why."

Deuce take the police ! why did they let them
start ? " blustered a choleric Nimrod, profound on
sport, and ignorant of all else.

Shut up, Drew. Absurd, blaming the police.

with the country in the state it is. They should
be Argus-eyed, or like Sir Boyle Roche's bird, in
two places at once, to see half the mischiefs these
Land-Leaguers brew," asserted a J.P., who prided
himself on being a model magistrate as well as a
keen huntsman.

It is all the fault of this Eadical Government,"
shouted another country potentate — " patting
rascals on the back, and suggesting remedial
land laws. Nonsense ! Put the country under
martial law is the right way to cure Irish disaffection
— I know the country well — stamp out the
epidemic."

I say, Percy, do tell us the law," insisted
another anxious man.

All these men were deeply stirred. This interfering
with their favourite amusement had, for the
first time, awakened some of them to the fact that
there was method in the madness of the people ;
that Land League tactics were something more
than blustering words — something more than Parliamentary
disquisition, or Ireland being legislated
for by a party calling themselves Liberals or Conservatives.
Percy was at last heard to say —

My dear fellows, at present I see nothing we
can do but practise patience."

To this there was a chorus of dissent.

Bah ! nonsense ! "

Idiocy ! "

Eot ! "

I hate snivelling cant."

Always temporising is the ruin of us."

Every one shirking the responsibility of making
an example of ruffians. Agitators should be
worshipped within an inch of their lives. Putting
all local agents on the treadmill for a month
would take the impudence out of them."

"Yes, and be summoned for assault — called
over the coals for tyranny. They call this a free
country, and on my honour no one can lawfully
say his soul is his own," insisted the gentleman
who prided himself on being capable of fitly interpreting
the legal position of his neighbours.

Above this babel of tongues was presently
heard the shrill voice of a very dried-up mummy
of a man, Teddy Drew, who had spent all his life
in the saddle —

I bet you five pounds, if the field will only

VOL. L Q

follow me, we catch these rogues, and thrash them
all home to their own gutters, before they can
say Jack Robinson."

This outburst was answered by a pettish whisper
of Harry's to his next neighbour —

Teddy is free with his five pounds. That is
just the one thing I have not got. But I would
pawn my watch to punish these fellows. I say,
can't we call it trespass, and fine them all round ? "

Nobody answered this. Several knit their
brows and tried to look as if they were considering
the case with a view of adopting Harry's
suggestion ; while Sir John, Percy Fitzgerald, and
the constable withdrew to Sir John's study. When
the constable was dismissed, the two gentlemen
returned to the breakfast-room, and the trespass
theory was again started. Percy did not quite
see that this offence came under that statute.

Wliy, it is trespassing with a vengeance. Not
only trampling over our fields, but also our feelings.
It is too exasperating to hear you cautious
fellows preach patience — argue this is not expedient,
that is not law, and assert there is no precedent.
Who cares for a precedent ? These fellows

never practised this insolence before. It is all
legal fencing ; you wiseacres are so afraid of infringing
the people's privileges, that rather than
hurt their feelings, you permit their confiscating
our rights. I would make short work of them ;
hang a couple, send a half dozen to penal servitude
for life, — that would put the fear of God in
the heart of the multitude, finish the matter right
off, and save no end of trouble. If they are let
go on as they are now doing, there will be a
pretty kettle of fish — the devil to pay, and no
mistake."

Harry, Harry, don't talk foolishly "

Um ! Time will tell who is the fool. I keep
my eyes open. Poaching our game is an old
trick ; now they are hunting our foxes. The
ruffians will not long be content with small game
like that, — go at the landlords next."

Well said, young un," croaked Teddy Drew.

"New to such sport, tenants may begin by
being duffers at a pot-shot; but practice makes
perfect, and by the end of the season I bet 100
to 1 tenants will be capable of knocking us over
like pheasants in a hot corner."

Oh ! if it comes to that'' laughed another
youth, " the beggars will find two can play at that
game. If tenants shoot at landlords, landlords
shoot at tenants — self-defence, you know. And,
by George ! I back the landlords. We could boll
them over like so many bunches. Unusually big
game for this country ; but suppose it could be
managed something like Indian pig-sticking or
kangaroo-hunting. Eh, Drew — will you organise
a drive ? "

Shame, lads, laughing at what is so confoundedly
serious. I won't have you talk of people like
that."

I beg your pardon, Sir John. It was my
fault. I am ashamed to say I began this nonsense.
Xot that it is as great nonsense as it
sounds," added Harry, sotto voce, to old Teddy. " I
do smell gunpowder in the air, and fear it will
come to bloodshed."

Eight you are, my boy," agreed Teddy ; while
Percy muttered —

In this present outrage the unwritten law of
sportsmen's licence is in their favour."

How can you compare blackguards like them

to sportsmen ! — rascals who are shamefully abusing
the spirit of sporting."

The law does not consider sentiment, and, as
far as I can judge, they are within the letter of
the judicial statute."

More is the pity," snarled Teddy.

It is all the fault of this d— d Eadical,
blow hot, blow cold Government ! Pack of self-sufficient
place-hunters — their places, not this
country, is all they care for."

Purblind, or party - coloured blindness, they
don't see Ireland as she is."

Xor care a hang if they did see ; nor if ive
were swept into the sea tomorrow."

"Wrong there, old man. English politicians
would die of despair if Irish grievances were
abolished. When party spirit flags, we are a
useful political blister. English political parties
could not exist without their Irish ' whipping boy.'
Only, it is too bad — poor Ireland is punished for
the blunders of both parties."

That may be," answered Percy, gravely.
English statesmen do make mistakes ; but Englishmen
are neither forgetful or neglectful of our

wants. See the money they send and lend us.
I admit it is provoking to have ' matter misapplied,'
to know all the mischief doing here, hear
of Cabinet councils discussing ' the Irish Question,'
and see nothing done to arrest the progress of this
ruffian brute force which is overruling the law of
the land."

"They are always talking of non-interference
with the liberty of the subject, and preserving
the privileges of ' the people.' I wonder what
head we are classed under, as neither our privileges
nor rights are respected. Our privileges are
long since abolished, and the paternal Government
continues dipping into our pockets to pay for
their experiments."

Oh ! you are too old-fashioned and unsophisticated
to understand. Coercion is an antediluvian
principle — did for the old Romans, you know ;
but latter - day statesmen prefer appealing to
reason. This world is all a nursery, and our
nurses silly. Pat the naughty boy on the back,
say he ought to be ashamed of himself, and give
him sugar-stick to keep him quiet. He soon tires
of the sugar-stick, and then returns to his evil

deeds ; while the good child is left to take care
of himself, and exhorted to bear with his bold bad
brother's tricks, to show him a Christian example,
and — to give him up his playthings. ' Anything
for a quiet life,' is the modern reading of civilised
government."

By Jove ! if something is not done soon, it
will be shutting the door after the steed is stolen.
Every night there is some fresh ruffianism.
I hear two of Xolan's best cows were found
in Poulafoocha this morning," said Harry
O'Brien.

They are very hard on him. I wish we could
catch them."

Xo legal evidence ever forthcoming. Xot
much good if there was, with our juries — they
won't convict," declared the choleric J.P.

Salve qui pent. People are afraid of bringing
ill-will on themselves. If Xolan was wise, he
would cut and run ; they lead him a wretched
life, and will kill him some day," said Harry.

Do you really think so ? " asked Percy of
Harry, who nodded his head. " It is a great pity.
He is such a decent fellow, and I have encouraged

him to hold on : I did hope the ill-will would
blow over."

Catch Denis Shea's ill-will blowing over, —
never ! He is a thoroughly ill-conditioned fellow
! "

^' I wish we could bring this home to Shea, and
put him up for a time."

No such luck. Denis keeps his weather-eye
open and hands folded, while he bullies others todo
the dirty work. I don't think he is done with
Nolan yet."

I am afraid you are right," sighed Percy ;
and being powerless to protect, I do not feel
justified in persuading Nolan to hold on."

Questionable political morality," mumbled Sir
John, feeling it incumbent on him to speak, and
too occupied with his own trouble to add much to
the conversation.

Never had there been so dull a morning: at
Castleton, as for a whole hour after breakfast
men stood about smoking, airing crude theories,
imagining they were dispensing the wisdom of
Solomon, and comforting their host. Never before
had Home Eule disaffection trampled, so to speak.

on the moral corns of these Nhnrods. Never
before had they winced from personal pain. Now
they suffered acutely. The young men wandered
out to the stables, discussing horse-flesh, women,
and cigars. The old men stood round Sir John,
discussing the situation with what wisdom nature
had endowed them, and then rode gloomily away
many wondering, as they jogged down the
avenue, when they would have a " good day "
at Castleton again. Before luncheon all the.
party had dispersed except Percy Fitzgerald and
his brother-in-law, young O'Brien, who, at Sir
John's request, remained to keep him company
a little longer.

CHAPTER XIII.

THE LAND-LEAGUE HUNT.

The occupation of his day being taken from him,
Sir John wandered restlessly from the stable to
the kennel in company with his two young friends,
so that it was after two o'clock before they said
good-bye and left the old M.F. alone to chew the
cud of bitter reflection.

The two young men took the shortest way
home, which was down the back lawn and across
country. They had passed the demesne ; successfully
cleared several rotten banks and a loose
stone wall, and were jogging down a boreen,
making for the one possible ford of the Taggart,
when simultaneously both stopped short.

Distant shouts and the babble of dogs caught
their ears. The colour flushed both faces as

they heard the sound, Harry crying out indignantly
—

Beastly shame ! They are hunting as if the
country was their own."

"Poor Sir John ! " exclaimed Percy. "They
sound as if they were coming this way. It will
kill that poor old man if they get into Castleton."

Let us go to the top of the hill and see where
they are."

Without another word both men turned their
horses and rode up the lane and out into the field
above, Percy muttering —

"I would give £500 this had never happened;
it will breed more ill-will than can be thought of,
and, poor fools, drive capital out of the country."

Once the horsemen reached the top of the field,
the whole valley of Castleton lay stretched before
them ; and about a mile away, coming along the
side of the opposite slope, they saw the dogs,
followed by a rabble ; numbers of men were
shrieking and running, while some few horsemen
were with the dogs. In a scenic point of view
it was a pretty sight; but as these two men
looked, their faces clouded.

The ragged scratch pack, though not working
in the good style of the Castleton dogs, were hunting
with spirit. A\Tiimpers crossed the valley, as
did the hoarse shouts and curses of the men, as
the dogs came to fault.

Presently out of the ruck of men the dogs
dashed, racing down the valley after a breast-high
scent. After the dogs, helter-skelter ran the
men.

It really is too bad. I almost envy those
men," sighed Harry.

I am afraid this means mischief," said Percy,
with an anxious look in his eye.

Don't croak ; that is not half a bad burst.
It is a sin and a shame to have us standing here
while these rogues are enjoying such capital
sport. See that fellow on the little bay going at
the big ' gripe ' ! I know that bank well — a wide
ditch and rotten ground beyond. He is sure to
break his neck. By Jove ! flew it like a bird !
Good horse ! Capital seat the fellow has."

"Yes," agreed Percy, gravely, taking it all in
with an appreciative as well as judicial eye ; " he
does ride well. It is that fellow, the trainer —

Goshawk, they call him — from the other side
of Cappa. He can ride, but is a drunken
ruffian."

Ignorant brutes ! It is enough to make one's
blood boil to watch them. There, they won't even
let the dogs work — overrunning the scent — at
fault again ! "

o

I see the fox cantering along the waU in the
brown field. By heavens ! heading straight for
Castleton. Let us ride back ; it will never do
to leave Sir John alone to face this insult. Come,
Harry ; I shouldn't wonder if they make for the
home covert, or kill under the windows."

"We'll have to race for it," answered Harry.
It is d — 1 take the hindmost there. There will
be a row at Castleton, I bet. Byrnes and the men
are in a temper this morning."

Without another word, the two brothers-in-law
settled into their saddles and galloped down the
hill. They went at break-neck pace, and took
the wall at the bottom in a reckless fashion.

As they went, the wild hurly-burly, shouts of
men and whimper of dogs, came nearer, nearer, and
nearer.

It ^Yas a close race — almost a neck-and-neck
business ; and had the young men not been well
mounted, and ridden as if for a wager, the men
and dogs from the south side must have reached
the house first.

As it was, Percy and Harry arrived first in the
courtyard. Flinging themselves from their reeking
horses, they ordered the gate to be shut, and asked
where was Sir John.

Hearing he was in the office, they dashed in
through the backdoor and up the stairs three
steps at a time. The next moment they were
in Sir John's sanctum, office, and smoking-room
combined, — a pleasant apartment at the head of
the backstairs, from which a door led into a
handsome billiard-room. Many a pleasant pipe
had been smoked and many a good story told
here. And here now they came face to face
with their old friend.

They were only just in time.

Sir John, attracted by the noise, had gone to
the window, which looked out on the east side of
the house on to a wide terrace and pleasure-ground,
beyond which was the lawn with the

lake, the beech Stove on one side, and on the
other the famous home covert.

A covert where, on stated days. Sir John threw
in his spotted beauties, with a proud and pleasant
consciousness of a certain find and a good run.
Here now, from the south, came dogs, men, and
horses, a noisy disorderly rabble ; and here, as
Percy feared they might, the Land League hunt
ran in, and killed right under the windows of
Castleton.

Who-hoop ! who-hoop ! " yelled a hundred
exultant throats, as the dogs and the men tumbled
over the quarry. " Who-hoop ! " was echoed again
and again, and the men cheered frantically, as if
they had achieved a noble victory. Sir John's
face twitched painfully. He did not look angry
at this insolence — as he might well have been —
but just broken-hearted. Covering his face with
his hands, he turned away. Silently Percy drew
down the blind.

For a few moments the three men stood quiet,
as if they had just heard news of, and were
stunned by a sudden death.

Outside the rioters, flushed with success, yelled

and thronged upon the terrace, flourishing in the
air the trophies of their day's amusement. Tor,
not content with hunting foxes, these sportsmen
had also slaughtered indiscriminately every species
of game. As they made their raid over Sir John's
estate, they had bagged hares, rabbits, and pheasants,
which they now waved on high before his
curtained window.

The first who broke silence indoors was Sir
John, who moaned —

I would not have believed it of them. God
forgive them ! — they know not what they do."

And then, as the riot continued outside, he
walked up and down ejaculating —

The villains ! the idle, good-for-nothing fellows
! could they not have chosen some other
corner of God's earth for their miserable hunt ?
Why did they co-me here ? What have I done to
deserve this treatment at their hands ? A bad
day for Ireland when the good-fellowship of sport
is thus violated. Things will never be the same
again — never, never ! "

At this juncture Byrnes's " Tally-ho ! " was
heard, as with a number of the stable and garden

men he made a sally to clear the terrace. With
pitchforks, broom-handles, spades, and stout 
they came, the huntsman's " Tally-ho ! "
cheering his men to the charge.

This sound gave another turn to Sir John's
ideas.

Go, Percy — go, boys — and for God's sake, call
in our men. If they have a fight, murder will be
done on my door-step. Let us save those poor
fools if we can."

Percy and Harry hurried to the billiard-room,
out through the window and on to the terrace,
while Sir John ordered all the lower storey shutters
to be put up and barred.

On the terrace a free fight had already commenced,
and in vain Percy endeavoured to call in
the Castleton men.

Byrnes had gotten himself astride of the balustrade,
where with his long-thonged whip he soon
cleared a space by belabouring all within reach on
the terrace. When this was done, he shortened
the crop, and from his vantage - post battered
the heads of those below. With a well-aimed
blow he sent the horn handle smash into the up-vol.

L R

turned face of a young fellow who tried to pull
him down. This left a mark that no time will
efface, and the young ruffian went down like a
felled ox.

Next minute a pair of brawny arms had encircled
the huntsman and wrenched him from his
elevation. Byrnes was a small man, but all
whalebone. He was held as in a vice, but wriggling
his right hand free, punished his captor with
the heavy crop. He drew blood, which infuriated,
but could not incapacitate his enemy.

They were now off the terrace, down on the
ground, and locked in each other's arms, rolling
about. Byrnes, being the smaller man, was forced
under, and now the ruffian had him at his mercy.
Keeping his knee on the huntsman's throat, Shane
Dhu fumbled for, found, and drew out a large
clasp-knife.

All around sticks, stones, and curses were
flying, and glass crashing, as the Castleton men
drove the rioters off the terrace. For a moment
the terrace was clear of the mob ; but it was evident
the rioters, who were a hundred to one, were
about to make a rush.

V

At this juncture Sir John himself appeared,
and ordered his men to get inside the house. The
men's blood was up ; their indignation great ; they
were not inclined to retreat, so that it was with
difficulty Percy and Harry — who feared more mischief
would be done — by main force shoved their
men back towards the billiard - room windows.
One by one, with threats and persuasion, most of
the men were got inside, when a faint " Tally-ho
! " caught Percy's ear.

Then he recollected where he had last seen
Byrnes. Where was he now ? " Tally-ho ! "
came from below the terrace — from the nearest
corner.

With one spring Percy was over the balustrade,
down amongst the mob, down on Shane Dhu,
who, while he with one hand held his struggling
victim, with the other held a knife which
he opened with his teeth.

Percy Fitzgerald, though small and slight, was
an active man and a famous athlete. He seized
Shane's uplifted hand, pulled it back towards himself,
and wrenching the knife from Shane's grip,
threw it on to the terrace. Taken by surprise,

Shane sprang to this feet, thus releasing Byrnes,
and endeavoured to shake off Percy.

But Percy pinioned his arms from behind, and
despite vicious kicks and hard struggles, held on
till Byrnes was on his feet. The three men were
hemmed in a corner by the steps that led from
the terrace to the garden, and the bay of the
dining-room window. This fact alone prevented
their beings crushed to death, as on Shane calling
for assistance twenty ruffians tried to get near —
their very eagerness being Percy's safety.

Up Byrnes, over the balustrade ! " he cried.

Byrnes did as he was told ; and then, throwing
Shane from him with all his strength, so that he
fell against the opposite wall and then under the
feet of his friends, Percy swung himself up, seized
Shane's knife, and ran in through the window,
which was quickly closed, shuttered, and barred.

For half an hour or more this mob shouted
round the house, smashed every possible pane of
glass, trampled the winter-garden to a " pound," and
then departed. When they were gone, and the
three gentlemen were again in the office, Percy
Fitzgerald said to Sir John —

I am afraid things are getting very unpleasant ;
I wish you would write for Bob."

(Bob was the Baronet's only son, who a couple
of years before had married an English heiress,
and had since resided on her estate.)

Bob, poor fellow ! Not I ! Why should I
bring him over to see all our carefully cherished
improvements ruined ? My one comfort is, that
he is settled in England, out of all this. Why,
Percy, I believe if my boy saw what we have seen
to-day it would break his heart, as it has nearly
done his old father's. No, no ; I'll not bring Bob
over. I'll spare him all I can."

But — but you ought not to be here alone."

Pshaw ! nonsense. I am not a child that
they can frighten me. I am sore and hurt, sick
and sad at heart, at these people's ingratitude ; but
I am not one bit afraid."

But there may be danger," urged Percy.

Well, if there is, the worst they can do is to
take my life. I am an old man, and not worth
much now — will be no great loss to any one.
And indeed, after this day's proof of the country's
degradation, I do not much care what comes tome.

I have little wish to live, if prolonged life
is to show me the people I love degenerating into
savages."

We must hope for better days ; and for everybody's
sake you must take care of yourself. I
think you ought to do as Carter said this morning,
and have police protection."

My dear fellow, the very thought is odious.
What do I want police for ? I have never wronged
any man, and would feel like a criminal with police
dodging my footsteps. I am neither a coward
nor a convict, and will take my chance as I am.
Seriously, I do not believe a man amongst them
would really hurt me. And, if a fellow fires at
me — why, I'll just try a shot at him — show him
two can play at that game ; though, on my
honour, I should never have a happy hour if I
killed one of those poor deluded ignorant creatures."


If they shot at me," answered Percy, gravely,
I would shoot back if I could. If once a man
was killed, it would stop that sort of work. But,
unfortunately, when murder is intended the victim
seldom gets a chance."

Yes," agreed Harry ; " cowards shoot you
behind, or ten to one they riddle you with
bullets."

Any way, boys, whether the adversary shoots
from behind a ditch or overmasters you by numbers,
there is only One who can save us from
a murderer's vengeance. He can and will protect
us, and may avert the doom misguided men are
bringing on this unhappy country. And now, as
you will not stay all night, I think you ought to
go. It is not wise to be too late."

Harry laughed, and said all hours were alike to
him.

But Percy said his wife would be uneasy : she
was always telling him to come home before dark.
At which Harry laughed again, and said matrimony
had made Molly an old croak. " She never
fidgeted when I was out late ; and many a time
at Meadowlees I have kept her watching till two
o'clock in the morning."

It was already twilight, and it was quite ten
miles to ride across country to Elmgrove, and
across country in this light would be risky. There
was nothing for it but to go, as they had that

morning come, by the train, and drive out from
Killballymactaggart.

Sir John ordered the tax-cart,, and watched
them drive away down the avenue in time to
catch the 5.30 train, then he shut himself up,
with sad thoughts, in his wrecked home. Never
before had the M.F. felt lonely at Castleton.
Never, since the day six years ago, when his wife
died, had he felt so helpless. Never had a day been
so long, or left him such a number of miseries to
keep him company.

CHAPTER XIV.

THE EARL TURNS OYER A NEW LEAF AND IS
BOYCOTTED.

On the morning after the Land League hunt,
Percy Fitzgerald went early to Bally killbegs,
where he found the Earl in a white heat. All
dilettante egotism, all lazy indifference to outside
events that did not trench on his " position," were
gone. He was quite unlike himself — an angry
man, whose indignation uprooted him from a
fossilised " position."

As Percy wished the old man good morning, he
looked the surprise he felt at this change, and
wondered what could be the cause of this late-born
energy and ire.

He scarcely thought the Earl could take the
Land League hunt so deeply to heart, for hunting

was a pursuit in which he took no interest. In
his eyes hunting-men were a race apart — wellborn
savages, a people with whom his lordship
had no sympathy — beings catalogued in his brain
as fools — savages — a privileged class of savages.
The Earl allowed they were " privileged." Perhaps
it was because the League hunt had trespassed
on a " privileged " class that this autocrat was
moved.

But Percy had only a moment to think.

Forgetful of habitual courtesy — on which, as a
token of " position," warranted to survive all vulgar
emotions, the Earl had hitherto prided himself —
he on this morning failed to notice the young
man's greeting. Glaring on him with angry eyes,
he snorted, in a key and manner far different from
the regulation tone of his " position " —

There ! I have always told you so ! I hope
you feel proud of your blessed people. To my
mind nothing could be more disgraceful than
yesterday's proceedings. Nothing could show the
demoralised state of your people — their abominable
socialistic tendencies — unless it be this."

This was a torn half-sheet of notepaper, which,

with a further forgetfulness of " position," the old
man flung in the young man's face.

Percy took, or rather caught, the crumpled
paper as it fluttered to his feet. He smoothed
it, and then read : —

You worn-out anatomy of a man, called Earl
of Blankshire, take notice, and dismiss the following
men from your service, or it will be worse
for you : Ned Stokes, Jerry Stokes, Pat Lynn,
and Flurry Callaghan. By the bones of St
Patrick ! if any one of them four men remain at
Ballyliillbegs after this week, expect trouble.
You are watched. The rifle is loaded, on half-cock,
and you are covered. If you don't obey,
order your coffin, for you are doomed by the
law of EGRY."

The impudent blackguards ! " exclaimed Percy,
when he had glanced over this blood-and-thunder
epistle. " None of our people wrote it, I am
certain. It is too bad you should be annoyed
in this way."

Pooh ! annoyed ! I am not annoyed. RuflQan-
ism like that does not annoy mc ; their threats are

beneath my notice. But such productions as these
are the straws which show how the current runs.
Communistic principles have been sown broadcast,
fructified, and will bring forth innumerable
vices in the fertile soil of our impulsive people's
brains."

This was the beginning of a new chapter in
the Earl's life. The threatening letter was a
personal insult cast at his hitherto sacred feet.
The fiery spirit of his race had remained dormant
for many decades ; his temper had never before
been roused. Now, as he stooped and took up
this gage, he suddenly became a warrior, eager for
the fray. It seemed as if the long-suppressed, the
wasted energies of all the past years of his life,
had refused, possessed his attenuated frame, and
conquered all the tricks of acquired habit, natural
nervousness, and old age.

There was no restraining this late-born activity
activity alike of mind and body — as all the
dolcefar niente, all the cynical superciliousness disappeared,
and were replaced by an almost superhuman
comprehension of, and special aptness for
business.

The Earl was now more than zealous, he was
indefatigable, proving an invaluable organiser and
leader. As lord lieutenant of the county, he
convened meetings, instituted inquiries, dictated
measures — in fact, took the initiative in a multiplicity
of matters, which needed, and in which
he displayed, tact, legal acumen, and local knowledge.
The county was astounded by the new
position taken by their now inspired " head
centre." Nobody was more astonished than
the nonogenarian's grand-nephew, who, while admiring
the Earl's energy and capability, could
not help regretting these administrative powers
had so long been " laid up in a napkin."

As through that dreary month of November
the Land League and their auxiliaries, the Invincibles,
grew more audacious. Lord Blankshire
showed more fight. Every outrage was a spur
to his indomitable spirit, while each day told on
his frame. He did not become more feeble,
only more wasted and transparent.

His lordship's first measure had been to indite
and forward a petition to the Executive,
who, with evasive official formalism, refused to

recognise anything abnormal in the state of the
country. " Ireland is not yet within a measurable
distance of rebellion," with fatuous unbelief and
contemptuous rebuff declared those whose duty
it was to maintain " law and order " in Ireland.

The English Government, at this period, preferred
to see Ireland not as she was, but as their fond
imagination painted her. And from the Government
English people took their views, — letters
on the state of the country, from Irish gentlemen
to their English friends, being answered in that
semi-sarcastic, wholly impatient vein, which refuses
to be convinced, and which is so sadly irritating
to the unfortunate pleader.

Ireland always has a grievance." " This complaint
is equally irritating and useless." " Continual
grumbling is a hindrance, hampering rather
than furthering the interests of Ireland." " There
is no smoke without fire ; where the rack-renting
cry is unanimous, there must be tyranny."

These, and suchlike, were the replies received
by those on the spot, standing on the defensive,
in hourly danger, from those viewing the situation
from the safe distance of official chairs.

At last the press took up the matter. " Special
correspondents " were despatched to the distressful
country, to investigate and report to the public
on the truth of these Irish grievances.

These correspondents, like sheep after the bellwether,
followed a preconceived ideal. Their
word-painting was elaborate, their pictures vivid,
produced by master-hands with richly blended
colours ; but their " facts " were mistakes, their
outlines faulty, their painstaking details drawn
from tainted sources, their " information " misleading
— their whole, a story of much fiction and
misrepresented fact.

Thus, while English papers magnanimously
devoted time and money to the elucidation of
Irish misery and mystery, English readers were
mystified — the kind hearts and brains of the
justice-loving English nation remaining helplessly
bewildered at the Irish problem.

And in Ireland men's hearts failed them for
fear, and young heads grew prematurely grey, as
the records of the previous night's ruffianism were
served up by the local j^i'ess for their reflection
at the breakfast-table.

In point of fact, the law of the Land League
grew omnipotent, and the law of the land effete,
the former throwing a shield of protection over
assassins, who walked at large under its potent
protection ; while the latter entirely failed to
preserve the loyal from its unwritten edicts, to
detect or punish crime.

Irish residents endeavoured to put " things as
they were " before Irish influential friends in
England. The Earl wrote to such contemporaries
as Father Time had left him, and Percy to a
young cousin who was now Liberal member for
an English borough.

o o

This cousin, Fergus O'Donnell, was an enthusiastic
believer in the mythical history of the
Irish nation, and a would-be champion of her
rights. Indeed he had sought his seat in an
English borough with a hope that, from that ,
untrammelled by local prejudices,
he might have the better opportunities for working
out the regeneration and re-establishing of
Ireland as a nation.

To Percy's appeal, Fergus replied with lofty
platitudes. " He was alive to those dangers, was

watching events," and Percy night rest assured
the Government was aware of, and fully prepared
to grapple with, each emergency. . . . They
have my anxious co-operation, and you may place
the fullest dependence on my warm sympathy in
these misadventures, — misadventures with which
the executive are determined to cope and conquer,
. . . and which, you must excuse me for
saying, I much fear are increased and fomented
by the distrust with which you southern Conservatives
view the present Government. . . . Your Protestant
prejudices, my dear Percy, are most unjust,
your suspicions of our fair dealing conducive
of many complications, which considerably hamper
the action of the executive."

When Percy showed Fergus's reply to Lord
Blankshire, that gentleman was very indignant.

Stilted nonsense ! Unjust ! Let them prove
us so. It is a case where I should rejoice to find
I was mistaken. These possibilities are just
cloaks to hide total ignorance or wilful blindness.
It is preposterous to say England is aware of
agrarian anarchy, nightly raids, robbery, and
murder, and that no sign is made. The Govern-vol.
I. s

ment is asleep. It is stupidly incompetent or
wickedly apathetic. ' Government is giving its
gravest consideration to remedial measures maybe
a very well-turned diplomatic sentence ; but
good deeds, not fine words, are what we want at
this crisis. I wish to heaven each Cabinet Minister
who is now ' calmly considering,' was dependent
on, condemned to live in, and obliged
to manage an Irish estate."

It would probably quicken their perceptions,
enable them to understand Irish grievances and
Irishmen's difficulties better than they seem capable
of doing at the present. By the time they
have concluded ' giving their gravest consideration
to remedial measures,' I much fear Irish grievances
will have got beyond all possible ' remedial
measures,' lapsed into revolution and rebellion,
which must culminate in civil war."

It all comes of misconception and pig-headed
obstinacy. From time immemorial English Ministers
have looked at Ireland through a prism.
And so long as they continue to gaze through a
prism, they will see things misrepresented. No
experience warns them. Each Ministry is as

credulous as its predecessor, and each new man
takes up and works through the same medium
as his predecessor. Thus at the present day
English Ministers repose the same senile confidence
in the Eomish priesthood's power of governing
Ireland as they did fifty or a hundred
years ago — nay, as they have ever done since
Strongbow's days. As long as England listens
to the plenary arguments of those blind leaders
of the blind, and turns deaf ears to the plain
truths of loyal gentlemen, so long will they
multiply injustices, and continue to sacrifice the
decent and orderly in hopeless endeavours to propitiate
the insatiable."

But Fergus is an Irishman — loves Ireland ;
he ought to know better."

Fergus is potter's clay in the hands of an
unscrupulous party. He is young, a credulous
neophyte, who takes all the theophilanthropietism
of his 'oracle' as gospel. jSTo doubt he quite
believes, as he poetically writes, that their palliatives
will ' one day be written with a pen of
limit in the annals of Ireland.' "

"Measures which are at present registered in

blood," said Percy, sadly. " I used to hope better
things of Fergus. I did hope he would see his
political theories were Utopian dreams, incompatible
with nineteenth-century utilitarianism."

It is a pity ; for if Fergus would discard foolish
theories, and take to practical business, with
his talents and opportunities he would be a most
useful man."

"I am afraid he will never see his mistake,
until his present proclivities work serious damage
to the country, on the regeneration of which his
heart is set."

It is no good talking like this. This Government
will not help us. We can only do our best ;
and there is one thing must be attended to at
once — Nolan. Those ruffians paid him another
visit last night."

Yes, poor fellow ! I have just seen him ; he
has been very patient, and made a brave stand,
but is cowed at last."

What are we to do for him ? "

Just what I want to consult you about. As
things are, he cannot remain at Cappa. He wishes
to emigrate."

"About to evacuate an untenable position."

Yes ; and we must help him : buy up
his stock, and arrange for his crossing the
water."

It is too bad, exporting one of our best
men off the estate. That is a lucas a Twn
lucendo."

I am afraid it is a case of necessity. If we
do not send him quickly, there will be a serious
tragedy."

Murder ? " asked the Earl.

Percy nodded in the affirmative. And after
a few minutes' consideration, the Earl agreed that
Nolan's stock and lease should be purchased at a
valuation, and himself shipped off by the next
steamer from Cork.

Lord Blankshire's activity created a spirit of
retaliation on the part of the disaffected. Their
threats had proved impotent on the Earl, who did
not discharge the men whom the League agents
had put on their black list. He continued to
order affairs as if no occult tyranny disorganised
the social status of Blankshire, — employed
those he liked, discharged those who were inimical

to the " rules of the estate," with utter contempt
of the expressed orders of Tory.

Therefore the League now tried their coercive
system on his dependants, the following notice ■
being issued to all in his employment : —

BOYCOTTED.

The Earl of Blankshire is boycotted. Let
no person work for, buy from, or sell to, the cruel
tyrant. The Earl has refused to obey the order of
the League, defies our power. Let him taste what
our League can do.

'• Servants of Ballykillbegs, leave your places at
once, or prepare for punishment.

Shopkeepers, refuse 'to deal with or supply
this despot, or the League will boycott you.

Herdsmen, cease to work for this Protestant
bigot, unless you desire to be sent to a warmer
place.

Graziers, refuse to use his fields, or beware of
danger to your cattle.

Cattle-dealers of Ireland, abstain from buying
his stock, or you may expect the trade will betaken
from you.

Down with tyrant Landlords ! Hurrah for
the League that stands by the People !

♦'JIM BLAZEAWAY."

This boycotting is outrageous," said Percy ;
Thomson has just showed me his notice, and says
the sweep has just sent word that he cannot sweep
the chimneys. Really, if it were not so serious a
movement, this sweep's grovelling submission would
be ludicrous."

Idiots ! it is inconceivable how their petty
spite can inconvenience us."

The Earl spoke querulously. Accustomed to
purple and fine linen, and to lie on crumpled
rose-leaves, he had small conception how many
and unpleasant were the ways in which this boycotting
would embarrass him.

Began has sent word you are to go elsewhere
for meat, and Dickson has refused to supply
flour."

Mean to starve me out ! But I won't give
in. I will kill my own meat — and — telegraph to
Dublin for flour," said the Earl, shortly.

You will also have to be your own grocer."

So I can and will. I am not going to yield
to these cowardly illegal coercionists. They think
to frighten me into discharging those men, but they
will find themselves mistaken ; I am not going to
be dictated to by a caucus of ignorant disorderly
ruffians."

In obedience to this boycotting order, the
Ballykillbegs labourers all left their work, except
those four whom the Earl had originally refused
to dismiss.

On those four men fell the arduous responsibility
of fulfilling the duties of fifty. The horses,
the cattle, the flocks, and the fields all required
attention ; how could four men do the work of
fifty ? Impossible.

Lord Blankshire, fertile in resources, instantly
imported a northern contingent of sturdy Orange-men,
and then began one of the most curious and
saddest sights that the winter of 1880 showed in
Ireland.

At break of day, in the chill grey of the winter
mornings, a band of labourers, escorted by a file of
Royal Irish," trudged from Ballykillbegs to outlying
fields, there to perform the peaceful duties

of husbandry, with one hand on the plough and a
revolver in the other.

There, when dumb beasts slaked their thirst in
the river, armed men stood on guard ; and there
a lonely old man, past fourscore years and ten;
owner of those broad acres, woods, running waters,
cattle, crops, and other envied appurtenances of
landlordism, looked out, with worn but dauntless
eyes, on his inheritance.

For the greater part of a century Lord Blank-shire
had lived in a noble style, fulfilling, so far as
his light went, the duties of his-position without
let or hindrance, in the home of his ancestors.
And now, when in deed and spirit he was endeavouring
to discharge these duties more fitly
than ever he had previously done, it had
brought him to this, to be virtually a besieged
prisoner in his old loved home, where a paternal
Government, responsible for his life, had garrisoned
his castle, and intimated it was unsafe for him
to leave its walls without military escort. Thus,
under the fostering care of the Irish Land League,
the Irish Earl was reduced to being a State prisoner
in his own castle.

But as the Land League was organised as a protection
for " the people " against such as the Earl,
the League naturally took much pride in his discomfort,
as demonstrating to " the people " the
great things they had done — reiterating that the
ruin of landlordism was to be the foundation
upon which " the " people's " prosperity was to
be built.

Meantime, how did the people live under the
shadow of the organisation that professed to improve
their condition ?

Many gentlemen had left the country — gone
elsewhere in search of the quiet the League had
destroyed in Ireland, More, like Lord Blankshire,
being on the League's black list, had to import
labourers. Other landlords, crippled by long overdue
rents, were compelled to retrench, and curtailed
expenditure by reducing the number of
their workmen.

Thus the " sons of the soil " really had a
grievance. Many of them, grumbling at " hard
times," prayed for " the good time to come," feared
the League, and bemoaned their present unmerited
misfortunes.

Other dupes had great faith in the League,
dutifully attending " demonstrations," which were
intimated from their chapel pulpits. More,
coerced to obedience, were half-hearted, doubted
the League's " good works," as with hunger gnawing
their vitals they saw strangers doing work
which would have given them bread, and brought
comfort to their wretched homes.

And all these able-bodied men had no alternative
but to stand idle in the market, idle in the
street, idle in the road, idle in the field, idle in
the whisky-shop, idle everywhere, — idle till they
lost self-respect, and drifted to that degradation
to the proud poor man's heart — outdoor relief or
the union ; or, worse still, were inveigled into dishonesty,
outrage, murder.

And respectable men like Thade Moriarty, who
had no sympathy with the unwritten ruffian law,
grew heart-sick as they paid " black mail," sad
as they saw dishonesty flourish, and were unable
to live as they hitherto had done and still aspired
to do — honestly, quietly, and respectably, by the
sweat of their brow.

It was a cruel League, — a reign of terror, a

time when the iron of a terrible suffering sank
deep into many a poor man's heart.

Day by day hope faded. No help came to the
law-abiding, who grew disheartened as they saw
bribes given to the law - breakers, bribes that
were scorpion-whips in the hands of the Land-leaguer,
— bribes which strengthened the hands
of teachers of the Father Dan Prendergast, the
O'Brannaghan, Dymock, and Florence McCarthy
type, who now had their hands strengthened and
proofs to show as they instilled their doctrines
into dupes. While others trembled they went
their way rejoicing, loudly declaring " the Church "
and " the people " were omnipotent, and to be
obeyed implicitly ; and that, if " the people " (that
vague generic) would only do as they desired,
each and all of them would be " rooted in the
soil," — would be rent free, hunger free, care free,
for ever more, and — have the glory of making
Ireland a nation, — wild delusions which were
strengthened by the words and deeds of Denis
Sheas and Shane Keeffes, who kept all alike
under due control by a well organised series of
outrages.

During that dreary November sedition rose
high, submerging recent civilisations. And still
the Delphic oracle who governed, zealously argued
with, coerced, and conceded to the disaffected,
snubbed, rebuffed, and discarded the loyal, deftly
plaiting a triple rope for crippling Irish prosperity
and for their own execution.

END OF THE FIRST VOLUME.

PRINTED BY WILLIAM BLACKWOOD AND SONS.

OR

Revelations OF MODERN lEISH LIFE

AMOS K E A D E

IN TWO Volumes
VOL. IT.

WILLIAM BLACKWOOD AND SONS

EDINBURGH AND LONDON

MDCCCLXXXVI

All Rights reserve

CONTENTS OF THE SECOND VOLUME.

CHAP. Page

XV. LAND-LEAGUE JUSTICE, 1

XVI. LADY LAND-LEAGUERS, 22

XVII. THE BLACKEST BLOT IN THAT DARK YEAR, 35

XVIII. THE EARL, THE WIDOW, AND THE HEIR, . 64

XIX. NORAH LEARNS A SECRET, . 78

XX. A FRIEND INDEED, 103

XXI. LORD Lancashire STANDS TO HIS COLOURS, 121

Xxii NORAH PAYS THE PRICE OF FRIENDSHIP, . 135

Xxii AGITATE, AGITATE ! AND WHAT COMES OF

AGITATION, 165

XXIV. " THEY CRY, PEACE, PEACE ! WHERE THERE

IS NO PEACE," . . . . .190

XXV. WAIFS AND STRAYS HOUSED HERE, . " . 213

XXVI. A SKILFUL ROBBERY, 248

XXVII. IN AN OCEAN OF DOUBTS, . . . 272

CHAPTEE XV.

Land-LEAGUE JUSTICE.

It was the first week in December, and according
to the view of those whose duty it was to keep
law and order, Ireland was " not yet within a
measurable distance of rebellion." Nevertheless it
was no longer a safe or pleasant country to live
in ; and everybody entreated the Earl, whose
health suffered from the unusual excitement, to
go to England.

But though suffering much both in mind and
body, the old man refused to " fly." He said it
was more than a quarter of a century since he
had slept away from his own home, and that in

VOL. II. A

the end of his days he was not to be frightened
from its shelter by a ruffianly League.

No, Percy ; I will never go. As long as life
is left me, I will fulfil the duties of my position."

The Castle " Incapables " now sent another
gracious reply to the victims of the " Invincibles."
"Everything that could be done would be done."
The Government were giving very serious consideration
to the very abnormal condition of
things in Ireland." The final peroration of this
official document was actually pathetic. The
executive claimed from all her Majesty's subjects
in Ireland " sympathy in the difficulties with
which THEY were surrounded, and the almost
insurmountable obstacles with which they had to
contend."

The old Earl smiled sarcastically as he read
this official j^ctitio princijni ; and Mrs Fitzgerald
cried indignantly as he read it to her —

Sympathy in their difficulties ! — difficulties
created by their own mistakes, by their own
obstinate adherence to false principles ! I wonder
at our misrule daring to ask us for sympathy."

Quietly, my dear — quietly. I see politics are

too exciting for young mothers. How is the boy ?
Where is Percy ? "

Oh, baby is beautiful, improving every day.
Nurse said he had a cold, or I should have brought
him with me ; but really I could not see it,
and Percy wished me to come early. He thought
we feared you might have heard." Mrs Fitzgerald
paused ; she feared she was not opening her
business well, and knew she would not be fulfilling
the intention of her visit if she startled the Earl.

Anything wrong with Percy ? " cried the old
man, with alarm in his eyes.

Oh no. If there was, you know I could not
be here. It is not Percy, it is Cappa."

But Nolan is gone — went last week."

I know ; but the moon lighters were there
again last night. It is terrible, and Percy has
gone there now. He thought you might hear,
and — we were anxious about you."

I have heard nothing ; tell me all you know."

Mrs Fitzgerald told what she had heard. No
need to give Mrs Fitzgerald's words ; better far
describe the previous night's outrage as it actually
occurred.

As has been said, the Cappa eviction, which
had been the groundwork of Denis Shea's
political " position," was a casus hell to the Land
League. While nolan had held the farm his life
had been a hard one ; he had succumbed to persecution
and left the country, and the League had
now decreed that the evicted martyr should be
reinstated in his ancestral cabin.

While Xolan had held possession of Cappa, the
moon lighters had paid him more than one visit,
and on each assault had left that farm more
dilapidated. It had never been comfortable, and
was now a wretched - looking residence, by no
means an enviable post for a poor man, and,
one would have thought, beneath the aspirations
of a potentate such as the secretary of the Doura
Invincibles. But, despite dilapidation, it was a
point of honour with the League that the Sheas
should reoccupy the house, hold their " own," and
keep a " grip upon the land."

Since Nolan's judicious flight, the ruined farm
of Cappa had been garrisoned by a bailiff, who
was a married man, his brother, and two policemen,
by whom they were " protected."

Cappa was a mountain farm, picturesquely
situated, but far from the haunts of men. Herein
the darkness of the previous night, a large
body of grotesquely disguised moon lighters had
assembled, surrounded the house, and demanded
possession. Having the door barred, and the
moral force of " law and order " on their side,
the police refused " to come out," as ordered by
the mob. They were there to hold the house
against the mob, and defend it they would. This
resolution of resistance was highly creditable.
But the policemen's words, like Canute's when
speaking to the waves, were of no avail against
the physical force of preponderating ruffianism.

"With a yell the crowd rushed at the crazy
door, which they burst from its hinges. Ina
minute the kitchen was crowded with twenty
disguised and armed men. Shots were fired ;
but in the darkness and confusion, to take
aim was impossible. The police — two raw constables,
new to the work and strangers in the
district — were quickly pinioned and disarmed,
as was also the bailiff, and his brother — Jim
Collins.

In five minutes the four men were helplessly
at the mercy of their assailants.

John Collins, unfortunately for himself, rashly
cried out, " Shame on you, boys ! to interfere with
poor men who are earning their daily bread. And
sure it is myself never did one of you a day's
harm. Let me go, I say, let me go, or by this
and by that, I'll take the law of you for this
night's work. Sure there is more than one
amongst you I can put a name to if I like.
As if I did not know you, Shane "

As John Collins continued imploring and struggling,
they dragged him from the house, and flung
him into the stagnant pond, deep, dirty, and cold.
There they played with his misery until he was
half dead. Then they drew him out, his clothes
hanging in ribbons from his back, rolled him in
the road, stuffed his mouth with filth to stop his
cries, and finally, with a pair of shears, clipped off
his ears.

And now this demoniac saturnalia was illuminated,
as, either accidentally in the turmoil, or
maliciously, the thatch was ignited. High up in
the cold still air of the frosty night shot the

tongues of flame, lurid thick clouds of smoke
rolling heavily away, blotting out the face of
heaven — fire and smoke casting fitful light and
shadows over the lonesome mountain-side, where
men were doing devil's work amidst the grandeur
of nature.

Here, in hellish delight at having overcome
the law," these limbs of the League yelled,
danced, and added fuel to the flames, until the
whole farm - buildings were one huge bonfire.
Then they hurried away.

It was no thought or care on the part of these
marauders, but a special providence, that saved
the lives of their victims. The policemen, when
they found themselves unobserved, had rolled
themselves away from the fire, and afterwards
towards each other, and then managed to unloose
each other's bonds.

As the tramp of the moon lighters' feet died in
the distance, their fiery banner of " Justice " still
flickered in the stillness of the frosty night over
the ruins of Cappa, which remained a funereal
pile of Ireland's dishonour.

The smouldering ashes cast a lurid glow over a

limited space, which contrasted weirdly with the
surrounding shadows of the bare black mountain.
Save for the crackle of the dying embers, and the
sob of the distant sea, all was silent. The haunts
of men were far away ; no eyes to see this scene
but the myriad ones of heaven.

It was awful in its loneliness, uncanny, as
little sparks travelled from the smouldering cabins
through matted twigs and withered bracken — at
first a tiny ripple, that gathered strength as it
went, flinging tongues of fire right and left, until
it reached a plantation of young pine-trees.

The resinous pine-trees caught fire quickly, and
in a brief half hour a mile of wood was blazing,
a river of fire illuminating the whole country-side,
above which a pall of black smoke settled, shutting
out this hellish splendour from the pure calm
heaven above. Sky, smoke, fire, and mountains
were all reflected, magnified and inverted, on the
broad mirror of the sleeping sea that lay below,
the whole recalling Milton's description, when,
in answer to Satan's call to arms against the law
of God, that poet says —

Outflew
Millions of flaming swords, drawn from the thighs
Of mighty cherubim ; the sudden haze
Far round illumined hell ; highly they raged
Against the Highest, and fierce with grasped arms
Clashed on their sounding shields the din of war,
Hurling defiance towards the vault of heaven."

The conflagration had reached this stage before
the unfortunate policemen managed to free themselves
from the durance vile in which the moon-lighters
had left them.

Their first movement was to seek for their
unfortunate companions, whom these patriotic
Leaguers had rendered houseless and left helpless.

The mutilated naked man was the first they
found, and then the woman and little child were
discovered, both lashed to the pier of the gate.
Jim Collins, much singed, but not seriously injured,
had, like themselves, rolled himself away,
and lay helpless and half-smothered in the ditch
across the road.

The whole six were in miserable plight. The
frost was keen, their covering scanty, and every
bone ached, bodily anguish and mental terror
wrinorinor salt tears from the woman and child.
It was four miles to the town, two across the

mountain-waste to the Cobbe, the nearest house ;
while it was quite three miles across the bog to
Thade Moriarty's. As the Collinseses decided to
seek shelter at the Cobbe, and Jim was capable
of supporting his brother, the policemen at once
set out to report the night's work at the barrack
in Killballymactaggart.

It was a dreary march for both parties. The
two raw constables, who had only been sent to
Cappa one day before, were doubtful of finding
their way across the bog, so they trudged round
six miles of road to the town, while the Collinseses,
turning westward, followed the mountain-path to
Cuddy Moriarty's.

Every step was painful to these unfortunates —
the woman and child watering the frozen earth
with their tears, and crying out aloud in bitter
failings as they at length reached Cud's door,
where they knocked, called, cried. No one appeared
to hear ; the house was dark and still ;
the door remained closed, and a haunted silence
reigned around.

Cud's ears heard ; but, terror-stricken, he cowered
and dared not open his door.

Poor Cud ! he was neither a doer nor lover of
evil, nor yet a heartless brute, and yet he shivered
as he listened. He heard, he pitied, he shivered,
but feared most of all. Sighing, he lay face down
and buried his head in the straw of his settle-bed,
endeavouring to smother the sound of their cries.

As Cud did so, he felt he was a coward. Poor,
ignorant, and soft-hearted, he felt for their misery ;
but pity for them was far outweighed by fears for
himself.

Fully conscious of his moral weakness, he saw
the sword of Damocles hanging over his head, and
dared not heed.

Cuddy, simple ignorant man, Miss Shea had
drilled him well, and imbued his mind with her
family " wrongs," and the " duties " he owed to
her and to his country. Neither had his ladylove
been silent as to the potential powers of the
League law," as she fooled Cud. Coaxed by
his Dulcinea, coerced by insinuated if undefined
threats of danger, he lived — to use his own words
" in dread of his life." He dared not open his
door to those " enemies of Maurieen's," who were
also banned by " the League." He dared not

show sympathy, or give help to any on the
black list. And yet those poor creatures crying
outside his door were a heart - scald to
Cud.

But self-interest is a stronger motive-power
than simple pity. Life is precious, specially when
love looks for a reward. So Cud, cowering in
his warm bed, tried to shut out what distressed
him, and thus drink of the waters of Lethe.

Shangedctya ! who can blame Cud ? Everyday
men do likewise — men of higher mental
culture, of more healthy moral surroundings, of
larger knowledge and wider experience — turn their
backs on disagreeable dangers, save themselves,
shame the devil, and are called, and think themselves,
clever fellows and honourable men. Soit
was that, although Cud heard, he did not
open his door to these miserable.

Faint and terrified, the Collinseses did not reason,
as they shivered and wept and called, as to why
that door remained closed. They only wondered,
and finding no shelter, at length turned despondently
away.

By this time John Collins was much exhausted ;

indeed the whole party staggered as they walked.
Their anguish was so acute, they had no spirit left
for angry passion, or strength to curse ; they
could only creep on, on, on, enduring their pain.

There was no other house at hand on the same
side of the bog, so across that gruesome waste
they tottered, and at five o'clock in the morning
arrived at Thade Moriarty's house.

Here they knocked loudly.

As Thade heard, he turned uneasily in his bed,
while North, starting up, called in a frightened
whisper —

"Thade, Thade ! Oh, glory ! it's the boys."

Whist ! ye soul, whist ! It is a deal too
quiet for them!'

Then in the name of the blessed Virgin who
is it ? " whispered Koran, mortal dread fading
before a greater, although shadowy terror.

How should I know ? Lie quiet, alannah —
maybe it is the way they'll go on."

There ! they are calling. Oh, Thade, Thade !
my heart is in my mouth. What are we to doat
all, at all ? What do you think it is ? "

Victims — victims, I am af eared."

Lord ha' mercy on us ! In the name o' God,
open the door for the poor creatures ! " cried Xorah,
now free of terror and full of sympathy.

I'm in dread," whispered Thade, " For God
sake keep quiet."

Sure it is living in fear o' our lives we all
are ; but the pity is not dead in our hearts yet.
Get up, man, get up ! "

As Xorah spoke she jumped out of bed, an
example which Thade slowly followed. AVith
her petticoat oyer her shoulders, Xorah groped
through the kitchen to the door, and then asked,
Amid is there ? " A moment after she opened
the door and let the victims in, Thade standing
silent and down - looking beside her, while the
four miserable beings crawled in. Shutting the
door quickly, North first struck a light, then
took the terrified child in her strong loving
arms, kissed him, and carried him into the warm
bed she had just left. Haying disposed of the
child, Xorah returned to the kitchen, and there
busied herself with these uninvited guests.

As the Comines related the night's work, Xorah
loudly denounced such evil deeds. Thade made

no comment ; but his face darkened as he heard
how they had been treated, and he did his best
in seconding North's efforts to alleviate their
suffering. He whispered in his wife's ear when
he found opportunity —

For God sake keep a close tongue ; don't give
any one a word to handle against us."

In obedience to which iN'orah refrained from
further expressing in as strong terms as her feelings
dictated, disgust and indignation at the treatment
the Collinseses had been subjected to at Cappa, and
of Cud's unneighbourly behaviour at the Cobbe.

At break of day John Collins was taken to the
hospital on Thade's cart, and afterwards the elder
brother went up to Elmgrove to report himself to
Mr Fitzgerald.

This is very shocking," was that gentleman's
comment when his bailiff related the particulars.

It is awful work, sir," was Jim's gloomy reply.
John is destroyed entirely, and I doubt if the
wife will ever be the better of the fright."

Why were they so very savage to John — more
cruel to him than to you ? "

Well you see, sir, John was foolish ; he thought

to talk them fair, so says he, Be going on now,
boys — no tricks here, if you phase; sure we are all
neighbours, and it isn't taking the bread out of
our mouth you would be. Moreover, says he,
myself could put a name to some of you if I liked ;
and with that, they just whipped him out of the
house, kicking and thumping at him, and he calling
for mercy, while his wife went down on her knees
to them to let him go, but no pity did the blackguards
show. They flung him into the horse-pond,
and kept him there until he was half
drowned, and, saving your honour's pardon, until
they didn't leave a street of clothes on his back
with the beating and the work. Poor John ! he
had no life at all in him before they were done ;
and then they just threw him on the road, outwith
the shears, and clipped off his two ears.
Oh, master dear ! but it was a bad night's
work, and I am af eared he is destroyed entirely,
entirely."

Brutes ! cowards ! it is one good thing you
can identify these miscreants ; if we make an
example of some, it may prevent other outrages.
Who were the men you knew ? "

Jim Collins looked at the floor, while he
answered his master hesitatingly —

Bead there were fifty or more there ; they
had shirts over their clothes, their faces blacked —
it was dark, myself cannot say who they were."

Nonsense ; surely you knew some of them ? "

Faith, as I hope to be saved, if your honour
were to offer me a chair in heaven this minute, it
would be no use your asking, myself cannot swear
to one of them."

You did not know any of those men ? " asked
Mr Fitzgerald, with a slight shade of doubt and
much displeasure in his tone. Jim never raised
his eyes to his master's, though he shifted them
from the floor to the " canteen " he twisted in his
fingers, as he said sheepishly —

Your honour knows there is no use in asking.
I can't swear to any one."

AVhich means you will not," said Mr Fitzgerald,
severely. " I am surprised at you."

Don't be too hard on a poor man. How could
I be sure ? and it is as much as a man's life is
worth to name a neighbour these times."

Jim now cast an imploring look on his master,

VOL. II. B

who answered gravely, this look, rather than his
words —

Far be it from me to tempt any man into
danger. But if honest men refuse to come forward
and denounce blackguards, how is the law
to punish evil-doers ? Don't you see, your common -
sense must tell you, if these fellows work their
wicked will with impunity once, they are encouraged
to try again. Come, Jim, who were they ? "

Your honour is always in the right, they ought
to be punished ; but by this and by that I couldn't
say I knew one of them."

You won't make an affidavit ? "

iS'ot to identify any one."

Very well then, you may go." Mr Fitzgerald
spoke severely. " I'll see what John can swear."

Sure, sir, he can say no more than myself ; as
like as not they were all strangers. John only
said he could put a name to them out of devilment
; what with the dark and the fright and the
cruel treatment he got, he could not be sure of
anything. Suspicion is nothing, and it won't do to
take away a neighbour's character ; more betoken,
if John did think he heard Shane Keeffe's voice.

he couldn't swear to it. How could he swear to
anything but the cruel treatment he got ? I jut
it to yourself, your honour — with a crowd screeching
and roaring like mad, and sticks flying all
round, to say nothing of pistol-shots, how could
a poor man have sense left to know who was who,
let alone kissing' the book to blacken a neighbour ?
'No, sir ; John won't swear no more than myself."

So Collins argued. He described accurately all
that had happened during the past night, bewailed
the wickedness, but steadily, or rather stolidly, refused
to criminate anybody.

Again and again Mr Fitzgerald questioned, but
never got more out of Jim than the reiterated
complaint.

It is a wicked world entirely, full up of
mischief. I can't say who it was, 'pon my soul. I
would give a good deal to see them villains
punished ; but it is no use asking me to swear,
master, indeed it isn't."

"This work is more like African savages than
Irishmen, and your silence is culpable, an encouragement
to wickedness. I am ashamed of my
countrymen, ashamed of you, ashamed to acknowledge

myself an Irishman, while such deeds as
this are done here."

Jim hung his head, and would have blushed
beneath his master's indignant rebuke, had the
tan of the elements and grit of years permitted
the leather of his countenance exhibiting such
token of distress.

He also was ashamed and vexed, stirred by
many contending emotions, but most of all afraid
of the consequences if he "put a name to anybody."
It was the same with his brother. "VYhen
first smarting under personal suffering, John Collins
had mentioned Shane Dhu, but when asked
to swear, declared himself unable to identify Dhu
as his assailant. Neither could the police recognise
any of the men ; but they swore John Collins
had called out the name of Shane. Shane
Keeffe was suspected and arrested, and the
next court-day the case was tried.

John Collins, with his head tied up, was an
object of pity to all well-ordered minds. But,
on kissing the book and going to the table, he
was greeted with hisses from the body of the
court. Apparently the frequenters of Killbally-

mactaggart court-house on that Monday afternoon
were not persons of well-ordered minds.

These indecent ebullitions of feeling were indignantly
put down by the magistrates, whose efforts
silenced the tongues but could not alter the
scowls of the mob, so that John Collins, as he
gave his evidence, found himself a target, pierced
by many angry eyes. He grew nervous under
this ordeal, confused in his statements, and failed
to incriminate Shane Dhu. That worthy was
therefore released from custody, and on leaving
the court received an ovation from that discriminating
portion of the public who considered
his acquittal a triumph, and his work a step on
the road to national freedom.

CHAPTER XVI.

LADY LAND - LEAGUERS.

Cold callous red-tapis continued to reply with
specious courtliness or curt indifference to all
appeals from the loyal Irish. With each dawn
men awoke, hoping some help would come ;
each night they sighed, were disappointed, fearing
what ghastly horrors the long darkness of that
night would shroud. So, as the sands of the year
1880 ran out of the hour-glass of time, blot
after blot was added to the calendar of Irish
crimes.

Xo class was safe, for no class was exempt
from illegal coercion. The landlord who dared
to ask for his rent ; the tenant who ventured to
pay; the labourer who tried to earn his daily
bread by working for an unpopular man ; the

man who weakly helped a persecuted neighbour,
or ventured to take a " bit of ground " from which
some other had been evicted, — all alike were on
this dreaded list ; all alike subject to annoyance ;
all alike knew they trod on mined ground. Ireland
was actually watered with the mingled tears
and blood of helpless victims, while English
statesmen talked old-world platitudes as to an
exceptional people," argued judicially as to the
wisdom of coercing evil-doers, drivelled over Irish
hate and English mistakes, instead of administering,
with even-handed justice, the same laws to
the whole united kingdom. Through those short
days and long nights honest men's hope faded,
as they saw the rank weed of rebellion grow
apace ; saw the weak yield to the undue pressure ;
saw the ignorant peasants' sense of right warped ;
saw many unwilling men coerced to join this
miscalled " people's cause."

When Shane Dhu Keeffe walked out of the
court-house a legally " innocent man," he had
gloried in the ovation of the mob. Hitherto an
insignificant loafer, he was now, by " the people's "
applause, raised to the giddy height of a " disaffected

peerage." He was a " hero," a marked
man, one whom it behoved henceforth to gather
laurels wherewith to adorn his position. Intoxicated
with success, Shane held himself jauntily,
for the moment oblivious of a certain pending
misfortune."

Shane Dhu was a tenant of Sir John Castleton's
— one who, long before political needs brought
forth the Land League, had considered it inexpedient
to pay rent, immaterial to till land, unnecessary
to abstain from squandering his own
and destroying his landlord's property. He was
a bankrupt farmer, five years' arrears of rent due,
and had last Lady-day, for the second time, been
served with notice to quit, and for the second
time been allowed time to pay up, and permitted
to remain in his farm.

Shane had promised to " settle " with his landlord
on the last All Saints' day ; but, unless the
Land League hunt is considered a settlement, a
clearing off of old scores, and an acquittance of
all dues, he had in no other way attempted to
settle " with Sir John, and Sir John did not sign
consent to that novel way of paying old debts.

LADY LAND-LEAGUERS. 25

Whatever views Shane held as to " settling "
with his landlord, he had entirely abstained from
paying hard cash. And Sir John, irritated by
knowing, as all in the county did, that Shane
was a " head centre " of mischief, determined to
put him out of his farm.

When Shane was told to go, he surlily refused
to stir, so Sir John determined he should
be evicted. As fate would have it, this eviction
was arranged for the very day after Shane's
triumphal exit from the dock. Thus Shane Dhu
became a feature in political life and of value to
the Land League. Henceforward he was not
only a hero, but also a " martyr to the cause."

It was a dreary morning as the sub-sheriff
and other civilians, supported by the Em.,
police, and soldiers, went on their distasteful
errand. The white humid arms of an opaque
mist had clasped the black mountain in chill
embrace, and the heavens wept copiously, bowing
earthward, as if sadly shamed by the sins of
this distressful country. Through the mist the
eviction party marched from the town along the
road, up the muddy lane to Cobble-beg. They

looked more like a warlike " demonstration " ina
savage country than a legal enactment in a civilised
land.

As this party trudged up the miry way, plans
appeared through the mist, leaping and
running over the soaked heather — men, women,
and children came, creatures born to those wastes,
like an army of ghosts, surrounding the invaders.

While the officers of the law took possession,
Shane, with his hands in his pockets, sullen hate
in his eyes, and murderous thoughts in his heart,
leant against the opposite ditch, watching the
proceedings.

His wife, screaming and gesticulating, stood on
the top of the bank, cursing " all who obeyed the
alien English law."

Men, women, and children hooted, shouted,
screamed, and circled about, as sea-gulls do in a
storm, or as carrion-crows do over the remains
of unburied dead, around Mrs Keeffe, who implored
all the saints in heaven to aid her in
this extremity, and all who were her friends to
kill the " peelers " — not to stand there and see
her "put out on the road."

But, despite the curses and many turf-clods,
the Queen's writ was put in force. The odious
duty of turning the dishonest tenant's household
goods from the shelter of the thatch, out under
the weeping sky, was quickly accomplished — so
quickly that the mob had not time to organise a
regular opposition, only time to fling turf and foul
language, to crowd upon and to hustle the police.

When the bed and the table, the chairs, the
dresser, the pots, the pans, all the miscellaneous
belongings of the Keeffes, were outside the house,
the sub-sheriff locked the door, took the key, and
the party retraced their steps down the muddy
lane, the disciplined men enduring the taunts,
clods, and stones of the excited people who followed
in their wake, with praiseworthy imperturbability.


Shane Keeffe's eviction turned the tide of
Land League wrath in the Castleton direction,
where Sir John, like Lord Blankshire, was now
boycotted. More men were thus deprived of
work, more women and children starved, and
thus the League law improved "the people's" condition,
and brought prosperity to Ireland.

Before this eviction, Captain Castleton had arrived
from England, with the hope of inducing his
father to return with him to Tredegar. But Sir
John, like Lord Blankshire, was wedded to home.

Don't ask me, Bob ; I cannot go. If I left
the old place now, I should feel as rats do when
we pull down their sheltering stack, running for
my life."

Success is ever encouraging, and so far Land
League tactics had won all along the line, therefore
they now started a novelty in political strife.
Like mushrooms, this new instrument of mischief
grew in a night, came quickly to maturity, and
was called "The Ladies' Land League."

This important political body consisted of an
irresponsible conglomerate of all sorts and kinds
of excited females, who had, or imagined they had,
a mission, — " ladies " who had the " gift of the
gab," who were bitten by, and infected with,
national rabies by their fathers, brothers, lovers,
friends, — beings who, not fluttering their angel-wings,
but rustling their fashionable skirts — and
tatters — rushed hither and thither, talking sedition
by the yard. As a barnyard full of hens cackle

when the cock crows, so these " ladies " chattered
when their " gentlemen " spoke.

Miss McCarthy, a young lady of eighteen, fresh
from the convent school, and who disdained to
keep " her papa's " books, or demean herself in
the grocery line, was the lady-president of the
Killballymactaggart Branch of this useful society.
Miss Maurieen Shea was the secretary, and proved
herself a very able lieutenant and assistant to this
local petticoated captain.

It was astonishing the gad-fly stings by which
these " ladies " made their presence felt. Their
minor agitation swelled the turgid current of
mischiefs, until the torrent carried the timid and
the weak away in its flood ; thus increasing the
force of the wave of agrarianism, defying the band
of high-souled men who, without any moral support
from " headquarters," stood at their post, trying
to stem disaffection and support the Queen's
supremacy in Ireland.

Amongst those who nobly did their best was
Percy Fitzgerald. Despite cold - water douches
from procrastinating do-nothings, despite the confusing,
blow hot, blow cold vacillations of the

Government on this national fire, reducing Irish
prosperity to ashes, he worked early and late, trying
to keep the law alive in his native county.

From his " position " and his untiring efforts
to maintain order, Percy Fitzgerald was a marked
man, whose existence was obnoxious to evil-doers.
At every local meeting his efforts for benefiting
the county were misrepresented, and himself cursed
as a tyrant landlord.

On the first Sunday in December an impromptu
meeting was held at Doura Cross, where Mr Fitzgerald
was specially denounced by an inspired
lady delegate."

By birth and education Miss Skillicorne belonged
to the " upper classes " ; by self-assertion
to an advanced school of "woman's rights." Having
taken the Irish rabies badly, she had come
from a distance to weave the web of the Ladies'
League at Ivillballymactaggart. The meeting there
had been forbidden ; but female wit, evading leaden-footed
law, improvised a gathering at Doura, where
many rallied round her red flag of rebellion.

Miss Skillicorne was a good-looking girl of
about four-and-twenty, who, as she stood on a

table at the end of a long barn, and addressed her
rabble audience, had a startling effect.

Who is this man," she cried, " that, like the
arch - serpent, circumvent our law, and issues
edicts for your ruin ? — this arrogant landlord who
keeps a grip on the land and exports the people ?
He is chief amongst your oppressors. His name
was the first signed to the proclamation forbidding
our meeting at Killballymactaggart, curtailing
the privileges of the people. Ah ! mothers and
daughters, we, weak women though we are, will
endeavour to crush his wicked power, and prevent
him from effacing his miserable defenceless dependants.
It is he, and such as he, who take the
bread from your children. Such a vampire is
unfit to live — ought not to be permitted to pollute
the pure air of heaven with his noxious breath.
Away with him ! pull him down from his high
place ! trample him and all tyrants under foot !
Free-born Irishmen, the toiling sons of the soil,
will no longer submit to be the tools of bloated
aristocrats. Mr Fitzgerald is one of those who
has abused his trust — one of those cold-blooded,
hard-hearted, selfish beings, who believes the world

was made for him ; who thinks the poor have no
claim to freedom of speech, no claim to the houses
their fathers bequeathed to them, no claim to anything
as men, no place, no rights, no existence
except as of grace at their master's will ; a man
who thinks the poor were made to be tools, serfs,
mere things to do their master's bidding — a man
who is a curse to the country that gave him birth,
and whom, with the help of our League, we will
remove ' from the position he so grossly abuses.
Many years ago there lived a man whom a whole
nation cursed. He was a Scotch tyrant, and
tyranny then, as now, was odious in the sight
of all true-hearted men. A poet of that day
wrote that man's requiem, which I will repeat to
you, for what was then said of tyrant Scot may
now be applied to Irish tyrants."

bliss Skillicorne drew herself up, shook out
her velvet skirt, threw back her head, raised her
right arm on high, and in a Siddonian tone and
attitude, declaimed —

' When he then shall depart this life.
And from this earth be hurled,
Ah, sure, to guess where he shall go
Must puzzle all the world.

In heavenly mansions there's no rest

For one of such contagion,
Since naught unclean can enter in

To that bright blessed region.

"Where shall be found a place that's fit ?

In hell he cannot enter,
For Satan no equal will admit ;

Then chain him to the centre.
There, till that great and dreadful day,

When fervent heat shall purge him,
When this vain world shall pass away,

May all the furies scourge him.' "

A storm of shrieks and cries followed this recitation,
the women waving their handkerchiefs,
sobbing and cursing like demented beings ; while
Miss Skillicorne, like a sibyl, still stood on her
platform, regarding with evident satisfaction the
commotion her words had excited.

In right of her " position " as president of
the Killballymactaggart Branch of the " Ladies'
Land League," Miss McCarthy sat close by the
lady delegate ; Miss Shea, as the secretary, was
also in close proximity. Indeed, it was from this
latter efficient organiser that Miss Skillicorne had
taken her " local notes " — the facts round which
to wreathe her vivid fancies. To her, when the
excitement slightly subsided, Miss Skillicorne

VOL. II. C

turned and asked, who had best close the meeting
? To which Miss Shea replied, Miss McCarthy.
Whereupon Miss McCarthy rose, and after a few
soul-stirring invectives — not to be put to shame
or outdone by this stranger delegate — also wandered
into verse. She concluded her speech by
saying : " Women of Blankshire, as we know to
our cost, the landlords have hitherto had it all
their own way, but —

' To bondage we now bid adieu,

The landlords no more shall oppress ns ;
There's something now come within view
That in due time we know will redress us.

Let Ireland no more be distressed,
Nor England lay claim to our crown,

For grievances shall be redressed,
Our Erin we'll make all our own.

For all the sham tricks of their laws

That so often have foiled us before,
Are now made the sport of our League law,

And England shall fool us no more ! ' "

Miss McCarthy's declamation met with even
wilder applause than Miss Skillicorne's, and she
retired from the forum with as good an imitation
of Miss Skillicorne's town style and air as her
country breeding permitted.

CHAPTER XVII.

THE BLACKEST BLOT IN THAT DARK YEAR.

Though the short daylight was fast merging into
the fay-light of the rising moon, on the evening
of the clay immediately following the Donna
meeting, it was still early when Percy Fitzgerald
bade nnwillinf,^ " Good nidit " to the old Earl.

Lord Blankshire's aristocratic soul had been
sorely tried by yesterday's proceedings. He was
shocked that there could be such lusts natiorce
as lady delegates, and much perturbed in mind as
to how men could legally silence these " fair
special pleaders." All the afternoon Percy had
been with his grand-uncle, endeavouring to calm
his excitement, and draw his thoughts from these
two specially irritating facts — that " the ladies " had
outwitted the law ; and that, when he had forbidden

their holding a meeting at Killballymac-
taggart, they had actually ventured to meet under
the shadow of his ancestral home.

The old man's thoughts were so occupied with
the insults to his position and infringement of
privileges, that there was no room left for any
other feeling. He was most disgusted at the
diatribes of these unladylike ladies, but never fora
moment imagined their wicked words could
materially injure him or his. Having become
accustomed to the discordant flourishes of seditious
speech, he considered the lady Land-Leaguers'
hysterical heroics more unseemly than killing.

Even Percy, who saw clearly the thin crust of
social proprieties crumbling at each fresh shock of
the revolutionary volcano, felt no special premonition
after the Doura speeches. He was aware of
being, as a representative of an obnoxious class, in
disfavour ; but, unaware of special personal spite,
was more keenly alive to the effect these Land
League splenetic curiosities had on the venerable
head of his house, than apprehensive of how they
might concern himself.

The Earl had been ninety - four on his last

birthday ; and after ninety-four, be the spirit ever
so active, flesh is frail, and Percy saw with concern
that the last few weeks' anxieties had much exhausted
the old man. More than once he had
noticed the feeble pulsations in the knotted veins,
and on this evening fancied the Earl specially
infirm — fancied that this last irritation shook the
few remaining sands in the glass, that the measure
of his days was run out, the last ebb of life at
hand.

Seeing and feeling thus, Percy, loath to leave
the old man alone with his troubles, dawdled on
till a later hour than usual. He would have remained
to dinner, only that he knew his wife
would be uneasy, and at last talked of sending
a messenger to her and remaining all night at
Ballykillbegs. But the Earl pooh-poohed this
last idea ; he was very well accustomed to be
alone, and Mary must on no account be made
anxious.

If you remain all night, she will imagine I
am ill — dying — women are so fanciful, and really
there is nothing to make a fuss about ; an old
fellow like me being cranky and that sort of thing,

is no reason a nice young woman like her should
be worried. My dear fellow, your wife is an
exceptionally nice girl, very sensible and devoted
to you : take care never to give her an hour's
anxiety which can be avoided. Anxiety ruins a
woman's complexion, takes the colour out of their
eyes, plays the deuce with their good looks, and
really, in your wife's position, it is essential she
should preserve her good looks as long as possible.
The Countesses of Blankshire have always been
beauties. And though, of course, I cannot live to
see your nice wife a countess, I like to think the
next countess will do us credit — show we Blank-shires
know how to select a wife, and, as usual,
appreciate a pretty woman."

After this speech, Percy thought, if he was to
go home, the sooner he started the better. Promising
to bring Mary over in the morning, he
prepared to depart. As he left the room, the Earl
called him back, and said —

Better bring the heir also — and — what do
you think of all spending the Christmas with me ?
I am not likely to be many more Christmases at
Ballykillbegs, and — and — I think I should like

to see you — the heir — at home here before I

go."

This was an unexpected invitation.

The Earl occasionally entertained guests in a
stilted formal manner ; but a baby had never been
included in the list, and a nursery at Bally kill -
begs, Percy well knew, would be a startling innovation
in the routine of that house. He was
startled and surprised. Startled, because this
unusual geniality strengthened his suspicion that
the old man felt more broken than he chose to
admit ; surprised, because he had not believed the
old man capable of the affection the words, and
the tone more than the halting words, expressed.

Coming back to where the Earl stood by the
fire, Percy expressed the pleasure he felt at his
kindness, and said he was sure Mary would be
delighted to do anything he pleased, and that she
and the boy should come over in the morning and
thank him in person for the invitation.

Then, shaking his aged relative warmly by the
hand, Percy said good night, leaving him, even
more unwillingly after this recent show of feeling,
to his lonely reflections.

Never before had Percy felt drawn to the old
man as he did this evening ; never before did
he so unwillingly leave Ballykillbegs. As he
mounted his horse he looked at the yard clock,
and seeing it was past his usual time, determined
to ride quickly.

Both horse and rider knew every inch of ground
between Ballykillbegs and Elmgrove, and went
swiftly across the wade lawn, over which the moon
shone, casting weird shadows from the giant arms
of the aged and now leafless trees.

The strong contrast between moonlight and
shadow was perplexing, and one less familiar with
the way would have ridden slower ; but if needful,
Percy Fitzgerald would have ridden blindfold,
and trusted his gallant grey to carry him safely
home from Ballykillbegs.

He had plenty to think of, — the Earl's look and
last words were very present with him as he
rode. A fact that he did not often dwell upon
thrilled through him. Ere long he would be master
of the castle he had just left : he would shortly
have the position, wealth, and power that the Earl
was fast leaving behind him. He thought pityingly

of the lonely old man, with regretful sympathy
of the dreary waste his life had been, of his
many misused opportunities, unsatisfied craving
for impossibilities, and abused privileges. And
then he wondered would time, when it lay behind
him at his journey's end, show such a sterile
wilderness, marked only by sign-posts of petty
aims, large prejudices, and small sins ?

When he came to stand, where his aged relative
now did, on the brink of that great eternity, how
would his life-work look ?

When the pages of his book of life were closed,
and finis written, would that record show his life
one long mistake ? that the bauble possessions
were only a miserable irritation, a series of vainglorious
exultations and degrading pin-pricking
a waste of talents, that left him at the last
stranded — a man who had worn out all life's
pleasures and gathered no pleasant recollections,
no feeling of having been a blessing to his generation
— a man who had nothing to look back upon
but regrets — nothing in the present but an awful
loneliness ?

As the young man came to this last supposition,

he smiled. A vision of his home — sweet word,
embodiment of pleasant thoughts, wife, chad, happiness
! — stirred the deeper waters of his soul ; and
he knew that, come what would, his last days
could never be like the Earl's — his sweet wife,
his child, his fuller life and larger sympathies,
would stand between and save him from such a
bitterness.

Thus thinking, he rode faster, anxious to again
taste of the pure sympathy of his wife's lips — to
see his little son — to be — safe at home.

As he came to the bottom of the lawn he got
on to the avenue, which here wound through evergreens,
so thick that the road was almost like a
tunnel between the castle lawn and the open fields
beyond.

These open fields were called the Each-course,
and stretched a good distance : they were sparsely
planted, and across them was the shortest way to
Elmgrove. The Ballykillbegs races were annually
held here, and here Percy and his plucky
grey had many ^ times galloped. Now, as Percy
left the lawn and came on to the avenue, he never
drew rein, but galloped on the frosty road as he

had done across the grass. It was black as a
wolf's throat under those laurels ; but Freestone
and his rider knew no fear, and both were impatient
to get home.

Suddenly the horse threw himself on his
haunches. A less knowing animal would have
fallen headlong, a more inexperienced horsemen
come to grief at the shock. As it was, the check
was only for an instant. With mutual prescience
of danger, horse and rider drew themselves together
and cleared the obstacle that barred their
way. To the right, the left, behind, overhead, the
growth of evergreens formed dense blackness ; and
here a gate — never closed except in the short
summer nights when sheep were left out on the
Each-course — was placed.

Intuitively horse and rider knew this gate was
now shut, and the latter recognised the closed irate
meant mischief.

It was but a second's delay, an equally swift
thought. As the horse rose to the gate, the
rider's right hand sought his constant companion,
a revolver.

At that instant a flash from the left-hand side

attracted Percy's quick eyes. Turning in his saddle,
he fired in that direction, then throwing himself
flat on his horse's neck, galloped to where the
white moonlight gleamed in the open space beyond.
Two shots rang through the still air as the terrified
horse went straight ahead out of the dark, off the
road, across the white field.

Thud, thud, thud, rang the iron hoofs on the
frost-bound turf.

Presently the pace slackened, and the sensible
brute stood stock still — stood, missing the guidance
of his master's hand, and wondering at that something
unusual dragging at the rein and stirrup.

The horse stood under the deep shadow of a
leafless but well-grown oak — a spot where his
master often paused after a breathing gallop, and
where he had once come in victor after a hard-contested
race.

Then Greystones had brought home an exultant
master half a length in advance of a distinguished
opponent, and now

With instinct akin to reason the clever horse
had checked his headlong career, because he missed
the guidance of his master's hand, the pressure of

his knees, and knew that something was amiss.
The horse stood panting from want of breath and
fear, his head drooping with the pressure on his
rein, the grey muzzle sniffing nervously at the
something the ihiu^ of dread, weighing so unpleasantly
on the stirrup, resting so strangely
against his side and on the ground.

As the frightened horse sniffed, he trembled in
every limb. He snorted, then sniffed again —
sniffed and snorted alternately, vainly endeavouring
to comprehend what this mysterious thing
could be, hanging so heavily, and so awkwardly
entangled in his reins, that even now it drew his
head earthward. In an agony of horrible fear,
the brute shook all over ; the black sweat broke
out, staining his hearing flanks, and his eyes
rolled in piteous distress. Terrified though he
was, the wise horse never moved a foot, but
stood patiently over his master. Stillness
reigned all around, and at last, conquering nervousness,
the favourite horse ventured to lick
the cold hand that held the rein — a hand that
never before had failed to acknowledge such caress.

Again and again Greystones touched that cold

hand, until, growing chilled by the frost, helpless
in this difficulty, and dismayed in his loneliness,
the poor brute whinnied. A second and a third
time he gave voice to his distress, never lifting a
foot for fear of hurting the loved master lying
helpless by his side.

We must now return to Ballykillbegs.

Percy had not been imagining when he thought
the Earl more than usually exhausted. The Earl
did feel depressed, and had been as unwilling to
part with Percy as Percy had been to leave him.

For all his ninety-four years. Lord Blankshire
had nursed a family pride, and on these principles
had ever cherished a belief in, and had hereditary
affection for, his heir.

Recent events having shattered the conventional
crust covering the old man's humanities, he
had lately been drawn to Percy with a stronger
feeling than hereditary ties. Proud of the young
man's vigour, moral, mental, and physical superiorities,
he rejoiced in them as family blessings, and
loved their possessor with as strong an affection as
his starved heart was capable of feeling.

Feeling premonitions that the prolonged spell
of his life was about to end, the Earl was glad
to know his heir was a better man than he.
Lonely, disappointed, saddened at the glories
shorn from the only love he had known — " position
" — and too habituated to a loveless life to
divulge such late-born weaknesses, and admit he
craved for human love, yet as he faced the end
human nature yearned for the comfort of family
affection.

His invitation for the Elmgrove party to
spend their Christmas with him was no well-considered
thought, but just the cry of his heart
a cry that would not be stifled, as he saw his
heir go out from his presence in all the beauty
and vigour of his prime, leaving him to eat out
his heart alone in this solitary empty home.

When at last Percy said " Good-bye," the old
man had restlessly wandered to the window. He
did not go there premeditated to watch his grand-nephew's
departure ; though his absent eyes caught
and followed the young man's figure, as, phantomlike,
he on his grey horse sped across the lawn.

The Earl felt weak, worn, sinking. He thought

lie was dying, and his mind was pregnant with
involved thoiicrhts — thoughts that somehow were
too big for his will to control : which he could
neither regulate, grasp, nor confine within conventional
bounds. Dreams of undefined future
responsibilities, vague presentiments of impending
evils, a thousand incongruous memories, hopes, regrets,
fragments of impotent desires, he knew not
what, whirled through his brain and swelled his
soul, until the weakness of body ceased to be a
present hindrance, and, lifted out of the weak
flesh, mind became instinctive with feeling.

So long as Percy remained in view, the impression
of his sterling worth was vividly present with
the Earl. Then, as his shadow disappeared, the
idea of the irreparable loss he would be, were
any accident to happen, suddenly galvanised the
watcher.

All was still outside ; the night was calm, full
of the frost king's beauty — a time when the
keen air carried sound a great distance. The
horse and his rider were soon lost to sight in the
weird shadows ; but the sound of the horse's feet
still struck on his ear, echoed in his heart, while

he gazed vacantly on the spot where Percy's figure
had last crossed his vision.

As the old man stared into space, with a lightning
flash his whole life was revealed to him.

It was as if, out of that gloaming, vain regrets
for past mistakes shook derisive skeleton fingers
in his face. In a moment the hollowness of all
he had so long gloried in mocked him, and for
the first time he fully realised the poorness of
that paraphernalia of position that had been his
lifelong pride.

As retrospect unrolled the panorama of his
series of wasted years, their barrenness appalled
him.

Humiliated to the heart's core by these unfulfilled
duties staring him out of countenance, the
Earl quickly turned from such grim ghosts to that
future when his heir would fill his place, do
those things which he had left undone, and be
altogether more worthy than he had been. Then
for a few fleeting seconds the old man dreamed
pleasant dreams, which quite translated him from
his gloomy present to a brilliant future — to a time
when the Blankshires would hold an honourable

VOL. n. D

position," and be the bright particular stars, not
only of their own county, but of Ireland. For a
very brief space of time. Lord Blankshire enjoyed
a semi-conscious ecstasy.

Suddenly, as if transfixed by an electric' current,
the Earl started, and then stood still, with
an awful intentness written on every line of his
white face.

What was it ?

Outside all remained white, still, and yet in
that instant the cold sweat beaded his wrinkled
brow. A film suddenly darkened his starting-eyes,
as a something, he knew not what, of horror,
recalled his almost enfranchised spirit back from
realms of bliss, shattering fairy dreams, and
forcing thought earthward to the most drear

o o

present.

What was it ? What could it be ?

Behind him, as he stood, loomed the library,
where the glow of a flickering fire intensified,
rather than illuminated, the darkness of the large
room. Here all was still, empty, deserted, dead.
The old man felt helpless, alone — awfully alone —
and death at hand.

Outside, as each pulse-throb weakened at his
heart, the white world grew more ghastly to his
eyes ; the bared arms of the great trees, raised
heavenwards, seemed impotently appealing for
omnipotent aid ; the world was emptied of
humanity, and only these lower creations remained
with him in his extremity.

What was it ? What could it be ?

The darkened room was empty ; the glittering
lawn, bejewelled in the moonlight, beautiful but
wraith-like. Nothing human seemed near, as the
great horror which possessed him set every nerve
at tension.

It was only an instant. Then, like a trained
war-horse scenting the distant fray, the old man
threw up his head and listened. Forcing poor
trembling nature to conquer the weakness of
decayed strength, concentrating every sense, he
listened — listened and heard sounds, that all but
stilled the feeble beatings of his heart.

Through the glory of the white night the Earl
heard a knell of doom — a shot. He heard, and
in a breathless agony counted one, two, three, four
distinct reports, fired in rapid succession. He also

s*-*r>''

.sS^

?>

heard the thud of the iron-shod hoofs, and knew
them to be Greystones', ringing their alarm on the
frozen ground.

With a choking gasp the old man turned from
the window and blindly staggered to the door,
which his trembling hands could scarcely open.
Then, in a hoarse shrill voice, almost inarticulate
with mortal anguish, he cried aloud for help.

For several weeks police had been quartered
in the castle. Indeed, so careful was the Executive
of the Earl's safety, that a constable usually
guarded the Ballykillbegs front door. The Earl
had writhed under this infliction, considering the
constable's presence highly indecorous ; but flinging
open the wide door, it was to this official he
now called for help.

Constable, quick, quick ! There is murder
done — down in the laurel-grove ! "

The haggard staggering old man shrieked his
words ; and the constable for a moment stared,
bewildered at the white scared face and anguished
eyes of the peer.

He thought the Earl mad. Xo sound had
penetrated to the stone hall where he kept guard,

and the person whose safety he was answerable
for stood before him, untouched in body, but
evidently gone in mind.

As the policeman stood, the Earl impatiently
reiterated his wild assertion, peremptorily ordering
the guard to hurry to the laurels. So imperative
and insistent, though incoherent, was the Earl, that
ere hive minutes had elapsed men were hurrying
to the spot he indicated.

And after them, alike regardless of lurking
murderer, biting frost, and the infirmities of his
many years, tottered the Earl.

No one noticed his leaving the house ; no
one saw that he followed the men hurrying
across the glittering lawn. The old man's brain
was numb with awe ; his heart fluttered wildly,
as with difficulty his iron will forced his feeble
limbs to move on, on, to where he knew those
shots had been fired. He was quite unconscious
that his head was uncovered, that his scant
white hairs were exposed to the keen chill night.
Poor old man ! he was unconscious of all but a
devouring anxiety, — an anxiety so intense, that
he who had not for many years walked a hundred

yards from bis door without attendants, now,
overmastering nature's debility, toiled in the wake
of the reconnoitring party, who, all unaware of
his undreamed-of exertions, sped across the lawn
to the laurels.

Here all was dark, obliging the search-party to
move slowly — feeling their way, in fact, until they
stumbled against the closed gate.

Until then they had not seen or heard anything
corroborative of the Earl's alarm. But this
closed gate arousing suspicion, sharpened their
perceptive faculties. Pausing, they listened intently.
Xo sound other than the stifled respiration
of their own breathing, the dropping of a
rotten twig, the distant screech of an owl, and the
lapping of the little stream by their side, broke the
stillness of the gloomy spot.

On each side the laurel walls felt impenetrable.
Opening the gate, they pressed onward, found
a hat ; and beyond, just where the moonbeams
met the shadow of Cimmerian darkness, saw something
sparkling on the ground.

This was a revolver. Lifting it, Constable
Brien looked keenly all around. It might have

dropped from the shining moon, for all the sign of
living person he could see. Except themselves,
five men, standing; at fault, all knowing mischief
had been done, there was nobody in view.

Behind them, in the dark shelter of the laurels,
there was cover for an army of moon lighters, a
hundred chances of escape for any murderer, before
the sleuth-hounds of the law could track him out.

Before them lay the race-course, on which the
moon shone bright. Across it, here and there, fell
the long shadows of skeleton trees, any one of
which might hide an evil-doer.

With bated breath, and pulse beating quick
from the pace at which they had come, the men
stood looking around.

The bared limbs of those silent trees, the deep
shadows, the shining stars, the frozen ground, were
all mute, — dumb witnesses of whatever had occurred
; and here, probably, some tragedy had
happened within the last half-hour.

Did no clue remain ? Constable Brien stooped
to examine the ground, where presently he saw and
followed a track. The ground was hard ; but telltale
rings remained, where the horse's iron shoes

had brushed the light white frost from the avenue.
Constable Brien followed this Indian trail, and
the other men followed him. Straight across the
field, right to the crest of the hill they went, and
then paused to peer down into the valley, where
Elmgrove lay, to look and to listen. They saw
the town lying in the distance, with its many
lights reflected in the bay. They heard the hum
of life from there ; but here, on the hill-top, nobody
seemed moving.

All was calm and still. The stars above twinkled,
and the lights in the distant town sparkled, while
the hum of its busy stir just reached the ear. As
the constable stood a moment scanning the white
landscape, another sound caught his attention.
This was Greystones' cry of distress.

Another minute, and Constable Brien stood
by the horse's side, where the others quickly
joined him.

Carefully they lifted the figure that huddled
there, partly on the ground, partly leaning against
the patient horse, with foot entangled in the
stirrup, and chill fingers stiffening on the dangling
rein. Carrying their unconscious burden from

beneath the shadow of the tree, they laid him
where the wan moonbeams fell full upon the
ghastly face. Looking down upon him as he lay,
they saw, drop by drop, something dark ooze
from behind his ear, — a crimson horror, which,
falling one by one like sands of time, stained the
earth — stained the earth, the natural greed for
which had suggested the idea to the National agitator
; a greed which, moving the Irishman's heart,
had nerved weak dupes to do this wickedness.

The men carefully examined what they had
found, and then gravely looked at each other.
They stood on the hill-top, which overlooked a
wide stretch of fair demesne, to which they knew
this unconscious man was heir. Knowing him,
they were appalled by the mischief done by this
agrarian outrage.

Again they stooped over and examined the
prostrate figure, and then again looked with serious
eyes down the hill, — down the hill, up the
white face of which, at this moment, seemed to
come the apparition of an avenger — an apparition
which took the form of an old man, who
staggered as he came towards them.

When Constable Brien recognised this figure
as Lord Blankshire, he advanced to meet him,
respectfully endeavouring to prevent his lordship
from looking on what they had found.

But, peremptorily waving aside the man who
tried to bar his way, the Earl pressed forward,
until he saw with his own eyes what it was
those men stood looking silently down upon.

As the Earl approached, the men turned
their heads aside, — they would not look on
his despair when he first recognised what they
had found.

For a full minute the old man stared with wide-open
horrified eyes on that still, ghastly face.
Then he turned, and, with an awful sob in his
feeble breath, incoherently exclaimed —

"Bring it — bring him home quickly — home
to Ballykillbegs."

The old man stared vacantly, as with tender
care the men took off their coats and improvised
a hammock, into which they lifted Percy Fitzgerald's
unconscious form. Then with superhuman
will, conquering weakness and emotion,
the stricken autocrat, collecting his stunned

senses, issued orders for one of the men to mount
the horse and ride for the doctor.

Then turnips, the Earl drao-rred his leaden feet
after those who, in obedience to his will, were
carrying his heir back to Ballykillbegs.

As Lord Blankshire crept after the men who
carried that dismal burden, his reeling brain
vainly endeavoured to grasp all the incidents, to
gauge the extent of this catastrophe. His own
spent life, the distracted country, the young wife,
the heir. He shivered as he thought of Mary,
and sighed as he remembered the baby. The
wife must even now be anxiously looking for
her husband. Recollecting Mary's love for her
husband, a great pity filled his soul, which for the
time overmastered every other feeling. She must
be told of this melancholy business, and who so
fit as he to bring the poor wife to the bedside
of her still breathing husband ? Despite the
entreaties of his anxious servants, the Earl ordered
the carriage, and went himself to Elmgrove.

Mary had been long on the watch for her
husband. He had promised to be early. At
five o'clock she had had tea and baby awaiting

him in the library, as it was thus he best liked
to be welcomed home.

The tea had long since been cleared away,
nurse had carried baby to the nursery, where he
was now snug in his little crib. But Mary sat
by the fire waiting, waiting and wondering at her
husband's delay. Long since the servant had
pulled the curtains, poked up the fire, lit the
candles, and rung the dressing-bell for their late
dinner. Mary had heard but did not attend to this
dressing-bell. When Percy came there would be
time enough for her to change her gown. Looking
at her watch, she found it was half-past
seven. Percy ought not to be so late as this —
at least not now, — she had begged him to be
careful. He had promised to be early. More
than a little anxious, she had just risen to lift
the curtain and look out on the night, when the
sound of rapidly approaching wheels caught her
ear. Percy had ridden, who could this be ? In
vane alarm, she advanced to the door of the
room, and stood there waiting.

In less then three minutes the room door
opened, and the Earl came in. At this apparition

Mary's eyes expanded with unreasoning
terror. *

With clasped hands she stood before him, and
gazed at his distrait looks, ghastly colour, and
trembling lips — lips that failed to utter the syllables
he tried to speak.

There was no need of words for Mary to know
something terrible had occurred, as the Earl's
comines to her and his wild looks were evidences
of trouble. As she looked at him her heart grew
leaden, her brain numb. She had no tongue to
question, and only understood from his words that
she was to go with him.

In a daze she wrapped the cloak they brought
round her, and went swiftly to the waiting
carriage.

The Earl had sent for the boy, whom the frightened
nurse now brought, rolled in the blanket of
his crib. Taking the child in his trembling unaccustomed
arms, the old man followed Mary into
the carriage.

Absorbed with apprehension, ^fary never spoke.
She did not even seem aware of the baby's presence,
nor of the Earl's unwonted tenderness.

At half-past eight they reached Ballykillbegs,
where the door stood open, the police standing
aside, and the housekeeper, with other servants,
grouped in the hall. As the carriage stopped,
Dr Tom Browne assisted Mary into the house,
and led her silently to the library. The housekeeper
took possession of the baby, while the
Earl followed Mary to the library. As soon as
they were inside, the doctor turned and closed
the door.

In some Eastern countries closing the door of
a house where one lies ill is a sign all is over,
and that there is death in that house. The closing
of that door was a shutting out of hope, a
shutting in of unspeakable affliction. Dr Tom
Browne was Mrs Fitzgerald's near relative, a loving
cousin, who, with all the tenderness of a sympathetic
nature, told her the sun of her husband's
earthly career had set.

Remembering that the sudden extinction of life,
in the effulgent heyday of youth and strength, is
ever like a noonday eclipse, a thing of incomprehensible
awfulness, we in silent sympathy draw a
veil over all that passed behind that closed door.

"VVe will not intrude on the first misery of
crushed hearts — hearts stunned by the instant
change from mid-day sun to drear night, from
effervescence of energetic life to the hush of the
awful death - chamber, where the shadowing of
that mysterious angel from another sphere makes
all other surroundings dim, ghostly, unreal. Looking
out from that chamber the world appears
cold, drear, empty. The present is horrible. Beyond
it paralysed thought does not travel. Reason
does not perceive the overcasting horror is but a
fleeting cloud ; that while we are awestruck
by surrounding blackness the sun still shines —
shines on others, will shine again on us — and —
shines on our blessed dead for ever !

CHAPTEE XVIII.

THE EARL, THE WIDOW, AND THE HEIR.

Early next morning Sir John O'Brien arrived at
Ballykillbegs, deeply shocked at his son-in-law's
death, anxious for his daughter's health, and sympathetic
with the Earl, who requested him to
make all necessary arrangements for the funeral.

It was Saturday, and Sir John drove in to ,
where he gave several orders, all of
which were nullified by the following edict, posted
on the chapel door, on Ballykillbegs gate, and other
places, on the following Sunday morning : —

Cursed be the man who cuts the boards, drives
the nails, takes hand, act or part, in making a
coffin for the tyrant landlord ! Cursed be he who
drives the hearse, hires the horses, or in any way
assists in putting such carrion in holy ground I

Down with all the alien landlords, who have too
long Slicked the life-blood of our people. God
save Ireland !

"RORY OF THE HILLS."

Mr Fitzgerald's funeral was boycotted. Had it
been those dark ages when priests anathematised
with bell, book, and candle, the isolation of the
Blankshire family could not have been more
complete.

Ko one in the county dare assist, or express
sympathy with them in their present affliction.
Sir John was shocked and amazed at this new
departure in Home Eule advocacy. Hitherto
Eoman Catholic and Protestant, landlord and tenants'
funerals, had been alike treated with respect.
That death wiped out minor differences, and that
by the grave all should do honour to the dead, was
the national custom, until this " murder guild "
ordered otherwise.

Xow no man dare show respect or sympathy,
unless prepared to pay a heavy penalty, and share
the curse of the murdered man. The undertakers
in Killballymactaggart refusing to supply the coffin,
Sir John had to telegraph for all that was needed to
VOL. II. E

Dublin ; and during the days while the body lay
waiting for burial, rumours reached the police that
the funeral would be made the scene of a rationalism
demonstration.

The family, dreading unseemly proceedings,
determined to bury their dead in secret. It is
impossible to write all the minor miseries this boycotting
entailed. Suffice it to say, that during
the weary days while the widow watched by her
dead, she had ever present with her sorrow the
fear that desecration might be offered to that stark
figure.

Poor Mary ! all through those days she lived ina
dream, sat tearless by her dead till he was hidden
from her eyes in a stately velvet-covered coffin.
When with shuddering fingers she touched its
silver escutcheons, which so mockingly reminded
her of the worldly status of her lost one, she
wondered, sadly, what was the use of all this
state, which could not even secure him safe convoy
to God's acre.

At last, when she must, she left him in his
coffin and went to sit by her sleeping boy. Poor
widow ! still dry-eyed she listened, while a few

true friends came in, lifted, and with measured
steps carried out that coffin.

They carried it out at twelve o'clock at night,
and, surrounded by a file of armed men, carried it
down the half-mile of avenue to the old churchyard.
Here, under the altar of the old church,
was the Blankshire vault.

Had this vault been outside the church, they
would scarce have ventured to bury the murdered
man amongst the family dust; but here, surely,
fear, if not respect, would keep his ashes sacred.

It was a strangely touching funeral. ISTo pall-bearers,
no array of county magnates, no gathering
of tenantry, nobody present — at least none but
those who loved him dearly, and sorrowed for him
deeply, and their military guard. He was carried
to the grave by friends and near relatives, followed
by twenty of the Royal Irish Constabulary,
who stood around them in the church, while outside
a company of the Berkshire Regiment guarded
the churchyard.

It was a cloudy night, and the fitful wind
howled round them in wintry gusts as they
marched, while the lamps in the old church

flickered feebly as they entered with their
burden.

The rector was an old man, who had baptised
Percy Fitzgerald, loved and watched over him
as a son ; who had lately married him, and now
read the last offices over him with solemn yet
broken voice.

I am the resurrection and the life, saith the
Lord ; he that believeth on Me, though he were
dead, yet shall he live."

Never had those beautiful words of promise
gone home with such power to the hearers as now,
when read by that sorrowing old man in that
midnight service.

As the rector went on with the service, his
voice grew stronger ; lifted out of himself, it was
no ordinary reading, 'but the outpouring of a
Christian minister's heart rejoicing in the sure
promises for the beloved dead. When he came
to the words, " Earth to earth, ashes to ashes, dust
to dust ; in sure and certain hope of the resurrection
to eternal life," there was a ring of triumph
in his voice, born of a surety beyond hope, that
the soul of the dust he now buried was rejoicing

in an everlasting inheritance, where no harm could
touch him for evermore.

Few eyes were dry, and but few words were
spoken, as they left that velvet-covered silver-bound
casket to tarnish and moulder, like those
others that stood around, while they with sad
faces walked back to Ballykillbegs.

Lord Blankshire had in his distress turned to
Mary's father for assistance. Making pitiable pretence
at weighing proposals or suggesting plans,
he had accepted all Sir John's arrangements with
impassiveness. This tractability, in strange contrast
with his usual imperativeness, was very
affecting. Indeed, little remained of the Earl's
old didactic and punctilious self. He seldom
spoke, but seemed always on the watch, — bloodshot
eyes full of an awful eagerness glared from sunken
sockets, and each day his face grew more sharp
and ghastly.

His strength was fast failing, still the old
man made heroic efforts to maintain Grandi-ionian
manners, and to hide mental sufferings.

The O'brien had not harassed him or Mary by
discussing her future ; but they had decided, when

the funeral was over, the proper place for the
widow would be her father's house.

When Lady O'Brien told Mary she had so
arranged, the good lady was surprised to find her
daughter refuse to go to Meadowlees, and elected
to remain at Ballykillbegs.

Here indeed was a complication. What would
the Earl think ? Poor old man ! he always shrank
from company, and now was ill and weak. iNTo
doubt, like the forest king, he would like to hide
the throes of his anguish and die alone in his lair.

As the mother looked on her daughter, her
heart ached, and she thought it hard to coerce her
in this great grief, even for her ultimate comfort
or the Earl's convenience.

During all these eight awful days Mary had
scarcely spoken. Incapacitated from a continuity
of thought, she had kept no count of time, feeling
only a dull aching void, an emptiness of life, a
strange fear, a horrible semi-existence, through
which she felt a blind instinct, that the one spot
on earth where she could endure her present
blighted hopes, was the spot sacred to her
murdered love,' Ballykillbegs.

In her utter desolation the widow had neither
thought nor planned. In this her desire, her
brain had not reasoned, nor had she remembered
in her sad soul ties of kindred and interest, connecting
herself, her boy, and the interminable
vista of the blank future, with the fast-running
sands of the Earl's life ; her numbed senses were
dead to the pending inheritance. The widow
did not think of the Earl ; she only longed to be
left in quiet, left to nurse sad thoughts, left to
rest where she was, until more equal to gathering
up the broken threads of her life.

No recollection of Lord Blankshire's known
antipathy to intrusion, no latent fear that he
might dislike her staying, with no introspection
of his sentiments, almost unconversant with her
own, she simply was unequal to move from the
spot so filled with last memories. At 
alone she felt capable of enduring. There
she could watch her boy and be alone with her
sorrow. At Meadowlees, youth, health, and
strength kept life bright and effervescent. She
could not go to Meadowlees, — the remembrance of
its happiness jarred with the wail of her broken

life. Here only could she bear her lot, with no
voice but the wintry blast crooning ceaselessly in
her weary ears, in echo to the desolation of her
heart —

' No more ! no more ! oh never more on me

That freshness of the heart shall come like dew,
"Which out of all things we see,

Extracts emotions beautiful and new."

The sun of her happiness had set. Her path
henceforward lay in shadow, where no gladness
could lighten nor roses perfume her blasted hopes.
Never again would, never could, her happy girlhood's
home awake responsive emotions in her
widowed heart.

Cut adrift from the old life, she was shipwrecked
and could not go back ; so Mrs Fitzgerald
urged, as she implored her mother to let
her rest where the storm had brought her.

Lady O'Brien was distressed and puzzled. She
considered the castle too gloomy an abode, and
in the Earl's precarious state of health, quite an
improper place to leave her daughter. Besides,
how could they take such a liberty with Lord
Blankshire ?

But Mary scarcely heeded ; shutting her eyes
and clasping her boy in her arms, she reiterated
her entreaty to be left at rest.

Then Lady O'Brien went to the Earl, who with
stiff courtesy said Mary was welcome, intimating,
with a wolfish glare of exultant ferocity, that
Ballykillbegs was the fittest home for his heir —
everything here was at the service of Mrs Fitzgerald
and her son.

Both Sir John and Lady O'Brien were still
doubtful of the wisdom of the arrangement. Was
it right to leave their stricken lamb with this
werewolf Earl ? His days, perhaps hours, were
numbered ; what an additional shock to Mary if he
went off suddenly !

But Mary was persistent in her desire ; and the
Earl, as imperative as bodily weakness and politeness
permitted, urged —

Leave them with me. We were all to have
spent Christmas together. What fitter home can
there be for my heir ? "

Thus the two special mourners remained together
at Ballykillbegs. Mary's thoughts, absent
from earth, were ever present with the dead.

But in the Earl the old Adam was still strong.
His mourning was a complexity of many feelings,
sorrow for the young life so suddenly cut short
being scorched by the hunger for revenge, a fierce
craving that the murderer should pay that poor
retributive penalty which the law offered. This
longing was occasionally calmed by a certain compassionate
awe for the widow's stony sorrow, or
lost in a curious pride in his earthly hope — the
heir.

The heir ! who was now under his roof, and
who, with a jealous pride, he intended should be
nurtured by his love and moulded by his will
into a fitting representative of the Blankshires
position."

The boycotted castle, with its blood-stained
lintels, was a gorgeous monument of buried hopes,
and a gloomy home.

Everything there seemed deathlike. Stately
rooms and long corridors, where no voices sounded,
and only soft-footed menials, trained to decorous
service, glided, performing diurnal duties. Each
apartment, kept in scrupulous order, was a lonely
waste, consecrated only to oak wainscoting,

antique tapestries, priceless pictures of lordly
ancestors and lovely ancestresses, or historic interest.
Great rooms, which the grey winter days
failed to illumine, and where even the blazing
turf, continually replenished, radiated only over a
limited space, leaving deep gloom beyond — a
gloom which was interspersed with mysterious
gleams from the gilded panels, and other beauties
hid from sight in these waste places.

No wonder the Blankshires took pride in
Ballykillbegs : it was a splendid place, and its
splendour was now a sad mockery to the old man,
who like a restless spirit wandered through empty
places, where his shadowy presence gave no life,
but rather, ghostlike, emphasised the absence of
those who ought to have gathered there. Mrs
Fitzgerald sat all day in the one room, with a wan
hopeless face watching her child. As she sat by
her boy, she fancied, in a vague sort of fashion,
that her husband's spirit hovered near, sometimes
imagining she heard whispers in the air, messages
of love — at other times actually seeing his ghastly
face, with glazing eyes looking on her with unutterable
sadness out of the dark corners. Numbed by

the shock, the widow scarce knew day from night,
as day after day she sat with her boy. The
watching of her boy was at this time almost
mechanical — a something nature obliged her todo
— for no loving smile responded to his innocent
baby babble, no mother pleasure encouraged
his daily increasing intelligence, or showed
pride in his growing beauty, though her eyes
followed his every movement and supplied his
every need.

The aged recluse, the broken-hearted woman
and the nine-months'-old baby, were a curiously
assorted company to garrison the castle, and be
banned by the National Vehm'gerichte.

Yet so it was. And the Earl, who knew, rejoiced
in isolation which gave him the charge of
his heir : the dead man and the living boy were
the strong cord of sjTupathy which drew him to
the desolate young woman — drew him out of himself,
out of all his old prejudices, out of all but
his mourning, into a mysterious sympathy with
her.

The old man and the young woman seldom
spoke to each other : but Mary now felt their

kinship of sorrow, a closer and more sacred tie
than nature's consanguinity ; and the Earl, considering
his blood relationship conferred upon him
the privilege of guarding his heir and comforting
that heir's mother, did his best to fulfil the novel
duties.

Strangely enough, Mary tacitly admitted the
Earl's right, and only the Earl's, to constantly
visit the boy and herself.

The old man came when he liked, sliding; noiselessly
in, looking as solemn as if the dead man
still lay unburied in the room. He would peer at
the child with fiery eyes, lay a withered finger on
the blooming cheek, gently stroke the mother's
hand, and sit silent by her side — a magnetic sympathy
which both comprehended, and took some
comfort from, — Mary, because it was the coming
of one who had loved her husband, his nearest of
kin ; the Earl, because it appeared to him a form of
respect to the dead, and was an informal guardianship
of his heir.

CHAPTEE XIX.

Noah Learns A SECRET.

It was not only the castle that suffered. Ruffians
flourished, interfering with and coercing all
who dared to be respectable, devastating the social,
commercial, and agricultural prosperity of Ireland,
— overt acts of the Land League everywhere,
contradicting suave platitudes of official parrots,
who busied themselves formulating plausible theories,
instead of enforcing " law and order." Ministers
devoted themselves to discussing " developing
the resources of the country," — a very desirable
object, but one hardly furthered by the
insubordination their proceedings fostered in Ireland,
where unscrupulous fanatics were fast effacing
all marks of recent civilisation.

While politicians in Westminster, and officials

at " the Castle," discussed Ireland, Land League
disciples levelled fences, laid waste lands, threatened
landlords, coerced tenants, interdicted the
cultivating of lands from which the impecunious
who could not, or evil disposed who would not,
pay rent, were evicted ; bullied miserable men
who ventured to earn their daily bread by working
for those in disfavour ; used weapons, fair and
foul, to ensure obedience to their edicts, and called
this " constitutional agitation," and " acting within
the letter of the law." Statesmen bleated, following
their bell-wether, " Ireland was not within a
measurable distance of civil war," though terror
congested public and private enterprise, destroyed
the comfort of all, and woefully distressed the respectable
poor and middle classes.

While this deadly grapple between the loyally
peaceable and turbulent ruffianism went on, vacillating
circumlocutionists hesitated, avowedly because
interference mis^ht infringe the liberties
of the mob! Eed-tapism was careful not to
run counter to the prejudices of the disaffected,
specially cautious to avoid irritating them, or
giving occasion for the vituperation which they

flung on the Ministry. But they were not so
watchful regarding the rights of the faithful awaiting
men, who for years had spent and been
spent, endeavouring to make " a silk purse out
of a sow's ear " — that is to say, a happy and
prosperous Ireland out of the antagonistic prejudices
of canny Scotch Presbyterian Liberalism
and thriftless, pauperised, priest-ridden dupes I

Thus, while an enlightened Government blew
hot and cold, ignorant peasants fell into the toils,
and Irish prosperity gradually vanished.

Foolishly swallowing Nationalist politics, as
furnished by a "caucus press," the many disregarded
industry, repudiated liabilities, and perpetually
attended demonstrations. Agitators
hammered their " grievances " into the people,
inflaming their brains as they drilled them ina
specious lie — namely, that impecuniosity, resulting
from drink, incapability, thriftlessness,
dues, or the visitation of the Almighty, were allowing
to grasping landlords and unjust laws.

National necromancy posed victims effectively,
as, clothing roguery in the robe of truth, they made
tenant insolvency represent landlord greed ; parading

an army of martyr-tenants as helpless victims,
ruthlessly sacrificed by a powerful minority, whose
tyrant proceedings were protected by unjust laws.

So the " National party ''' declaimed, and as Ministers
vaunted of giving fresh " impetus to trade,"
indiscriminate boycottings of grocer, baker, linen-draper,
candlemas, and other struggling men, emphasised
the position of Irish trade.

Religious equality was another dazzling banner
under-which Liberals boasted they had conquered
Irish disaffection, — a theory which the League unblushingly
contradicted, asserting Protestant magistrates
gave biassed judgments against those of opposite
faith ; further falsely declaring Government
avoided putting Eoman Catholics on the bench,
because they desired to keep the administration
of the law in the hands of the dominant minority.

All this, and more, was going on in Blankshire
in the month of December 1881, where for
weeks North Moriarty had lived a haunted life.
She had grown wondrously staid and circumspect
since that morning, eighteen months ago, when we
first made her acquaintance. She has ceased to
gossip, and her husband, who duly appreciated this

VOL. II. F

taciturnity, encouraged seasonable silence by murmuring
—

^N'orah, acbree ! but herself is the most raison-able
woman in the barony. Shah ! mavourneen,
the more we keep to ourselves the better for us.
Know nothing, keep clear of the dirty work, meddle
with no man's cattle, and have a civil word
for all. Sure it is queer times entirely — no man
knows who is honest or who is not ; there is a
deal of wickedness everywhere, achushla ; myself
has the hard job to keep a clear conscience in the
sight o' God, and not to offend the League. By
this and by that, many a poor boy is made a murderer
in spite of himself, — drove to it — drove to it
by them that ought to know better. By the help
o' God, times will soon mend. Sure the best a
poor man can do is to keep quiet till the troubles
blow over. And, by the same token, keep a quiet
tongue for all ; it won't do to give ' the boys '
anything to say against us."

North, acting on Thade's advice, held her
tongue ; but, shrewd-witted, made use of eyes and
ears, and Denis Shea's vanity in his "position,"
to obtain insight into one or two curious matters.

After Mr Fitzgerald's murder, North watched

Denis with lynx - eyed anxiety. One or two
words making her uneasy, she resolved to follow
this arch-conspirator to his lair. The risk was
great, jSTorah knew discovery would be death, but
the stake was enormous ; so, with a prayer to her
patron saint, she went on her mission cautiously.

Step by step, in the shades of twilight, ^N'orah
followed Denis's slouch figure across Killyslavin
bog. Crouching by turf ricks, creeping through
furze bushes, she dogged him to the ruin of Shane
Dhu's cabin. Creeping under the poor shelter of
the fallen gable, she there waited, and found
herself, as she had anticipated, a secret witness of
a meeting of Invincibles.

As North heard their ruffian plans, her flesh
crept, and the honest soul for a time lost sight of
personal fear in disgust and indignation at their
wickedness. From her corner she could not see
who was there, and only partially heard what was
said, but enough reached her ears to put her in
full possession of a dangerous secret. Coarse
brutal jests and laudations of the recent dastardly
murder caught her ear, followed by lists of other
mischiefs which remained to be done.

North's heart grew faint and sick, as she comprehended

one deed planned by these " braves,"
a deed which, with God's help, her woman's wit
would somehow circumvent.

Cramped in her corner, North's limbs were all
trembling, yet she dared not move, scarce ventured
to breathe, as she heard the conclave laugh
over horror after horror, and then for the first
time realised that these Nationalist heroes were
doing devils' work-At another time the sense of
solitude in that wild place would have been too
much for North's nerves. Alive to the League's
omnipotence, and alarmed at what she overheard,
her one thought now was to avoid detection, and
avert a crime. Waiting till one by one the men
left, and the sound of their feet was lost in the
distance, she crept from her corner, and felt thankful
to find herself alone and undiscovered. As
she stood upright and straightened her cramped
limbs, her heart fluttered wildly at knowing she
was far from human help, alone on the wild
mountain, lost in the black of night, and that the
haunted bog of Killyslavin was between her and
home.

Clasping her hands over her head, North lifted

her true eyes to heaven, and sent an earnest
prayer up through the gruesome shadows, asking
for strength, help, and protection. Poor woman !
every ignorant superstition crowded round and
encompassed her ; but with the whole strength of
a faithful if fearful heart, she earnestly appealed
to the throne of mercy for strength to endure and
wisdom to outwit the fiends' job that she knew
was in contemplation.

Overhead clouds scudded across the face of the
pale young moon, casting grim shadows on the
mountain, down the valleys of which night's
spirits sent awful whispers. The distant roar of
the troubled ocean, the minor cadences of mountain
streams, the swish of the wintry blast through
the heather, all made infernal concert in her terrified
ears. Behind her frowned the mountains,
in front, fog-shrouded, the bog lay like a ghastly
sea of white mystery, through which she must
take her path homeward.

Joan of Arc was not more inspired when she
buckled on armour in the far-away days of 1439 ;
nor Grace Darling when she bent to her oar on
that bleak September morning in 1838, than was

Norali Moriarty on this dark night of December
1881, when she there made her vow to save a
baby's life.

ALL the weaknesses of her woman's nature, her
fear of fairies and " good people " supposed to
haunt Killyslavin, were effaced by the fear of
coward murder which now possessed her soul, and
winged her feet as she fled across the bog.

At her own door North paused, to smooth and
regulate her perturbation, before she lifted the
latch and went in.

Though there was no one in the kitchen, a
pleasant glow welcomed her, some one having
recently piled up the peat fire — built it symmetrically,
with a careful cunning that betokened
Thade's handiwork.

God bless him ! how good he is ! " thought
North, lovingly, as she sank on the stool, wondering
where her husband was, though at the same
time thankful he was " not in it," for she did not
quite know how she would have accounted for
her long absence had he been before her in the
kitchen.

Wearied out and thoughtful, ISTorah hugged

her knees as she gazed on the sparks flying-upward,
considering what could she, should she do.

Presently the American clock twanged, one,
two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten !
As ]N'orah counted, she wondered again where
could Thade be — he seldom was out like this.
Five minutes longer North sat, then, anxious about
her husband, rose, and when she did so was frightened
to find how queer she felt. She could hardly
stand, her knees were weak, her feet felt as if
they were somebody else's. Oh, if Thade would
only come ! She half feared to meet him, yet
longed for the comfort of his presence.

Tottering to the door, Xorah opened it, and
looked out into the night ; it was dark and gusty,
she could neither see nor hear if Thade was about.
Overcome with nervousness, she was about to close
the door again, when a light in the cow-house
caught her attention. With a clad relief she
called aloud, " Thade ! Thade ! "

Thade answered quickly, and coming to the
door, told her the red heifer was ailing, and he
could not leave her.

Go to bed, woman," said he ; " I shall be in

presently. What for would you be in the kitchen
all nidit ? — gro to bed."

Reassured by Thade's proximity, and thankful
that preoccupation prevented his being curious
about her, North at his bidding went to bed.

To bed, but not to sleep. North's mind was
so full of purpose, that even when Thade came
she could hardly still her trembling sufficiently to
deceive his perceptions, as she lay devising a plan
for carrying out her heroic idea.

Since the shock of Percy Fitzgerald's murder
Sir John Castleton had been unlike himself.
Grieved for his young friend, bewildered by the
rush of events and the disastrous effects of maladministration,
he was in a fever of irritation.
Mingled sorrow, indignation, and political bias
giving impetus to this convictions, set him perpetually
railing against Liberals, whose fatuous
weakness he declared ruined Ireland.

Button-holing a patient listener or an unwary
companion, the old man would argue —

Balderdash ! Remedial measures built on
spurious bases are worse than useless. What
good did their legalised robbery — their sacri-legions

Disendowment and Disestablishment — do
for Ireland ? Nothing ! It was a bitter cnp to usa
pull to the Pope, but it did no earthly good to
Ireland. No poor man is richer to-day on account
of it. Nothing but multiplied chapels, nunneries,
friaries, have been the result of that idiocy. Monks,
priests, and God knows what mischiefs, have been
fostered ; abominations banished from every other
civilised nation have come and flourish in Ireland.
Bless my soul ! Harry, when I was a lad there
was one parish priest in Castleton village, a pleasant,
gentlemanlike fellow — no nonsense about
him. He taught me to fish, I remember, and
sorry I was the day I followed Father Tom
Sullivan's funeral. And look at us now ! Two
chapels, — that new one cost £30,000 if it
cost a shilling, — a monastery, a French convent,
a Christian Brothers' school. Believe me, it is
these Promise tentacles that squeeze Irish tenants,
and suck the life out of our people. Don't talk
to me of hard landlords — the priest is the cock of
the walk. He rides the best horse ; he wears
the best coat ; he grinds for dues if you like ; they
have risen cent per cent within the last half-century.

Take my word for it, it is not a cheap
religion, and with a decreased population this
increased Church paraphernalia is a drain on the
people. It is disheartening to see such national
and legislative obtuseness. The increased Eomish
Church dues are — nothing ; the increased
landlord's rent — a crime. The rent is the red
flag flaunted by interested parties who want
further concessions for their flock of dupes. And
much the poor people will profit by the trick —
pretty much as they have suffered by the withdrawing
of such centres of civilisation and distribution
of large sympathy and small moneys,
as the parson — as they have done by that sop to
Cerberus, the Land Bill. Both endowed the people
with more power and more cash, all of which is
grabbed by the priests and the demagogues 1 Bah !
the pig-headed folly of diplomatists makes me
sick ! "

But this row, the Land League, is denominational,"
urged Harry O'Brien glibly, the youthful
victim whom the old man was lecturing on
political economy, and who thought himself rather
brilliant in his rejoinder. " Romanism, Episcopalians,

Presbyterianism, Unitarianism, Quakerism,
Atheism, Rationalism — any and every ism —
are now coalesced, — they ask for justice."

A collusion of ruffians — nondescript of all
sorts, airing pet hobbies, and clamouring for unfair
privileges."

"Exactly so," agreed Harry, rather weary of
acting listener ; " a hodge-podge of bad humours,
a wringing of our withers, and, a beastly shame !
boycotting our hunting."

Ha ! ha ! ha ! " laughed Captain Castleton
over the top of his newspaper, " young blood
boils over at that interference with the subject.
Poor Harry ! if you were aesthetic, you would
care for none of these things ; or if this country
were aesthetic, what a good job it would be."

Eh ? what ? — I don't understand."

"Of course not, you impulsive, uninitiated,
anaesthetic, mathematical, ungrammatical young
man ! Your unsophisticated Irish intellect fails
to see beyond your own narrow interests. Your
soul is set on hunting, shooting, and the value of
dirty acres. Modern ethics soar above this —
asserts that 'to be ' is sufficient occupation for

the limited capacity of men ; ' to do ' a work of
supererogation. It will save no end of trouble
if you adopt the theory, and be a happy day for
Ireland when malcontents are so educated."

Not altogether a bad idea," laughed Harry.

Boys, boys, don't jest. How can you be so
light-hearted when the country is in such a state ? "
groaned Sir John.

I wish I found ' being ' sufficient relish to
living," sighed Harry, ruefully ; " forced to grin
and bear it, I find existence flat, stale, and unprofitable
— life here a continual mortifying of the
flesh, and I am no anchorite."

Sir John sighed, and walked restlessly from
the fire to the window. It was just one week
before Christmas, and never had he had so dreary
a time, — no hunting and a policeman at his
heels being contrary to aU Sir John's ideas of life.
His son looked at him keenly, and as he looked,
a slight droop of the fair moustache and rising of
the eyebrows might have been seen. Captain
Castleton was uneasy about his father's mental
and moral condition, afraid to leave him at Castleton,
and unable to induce him to come to England.

With that semi-sarcastic tone in which he often
treated serious subjects, he began expostulating.

My dear father, why take life so seriously ?
You make it not worth living — one long misery
to yourself. Why not turn your thoughts to
something besides those irritating politics ? Inhuman
being could keep pace with this revolutionary
whirl ; your constitution suffers — you grow
morbid. You require change of scene. Do come
to Tredegar, where youthful frivolities will infuse
new life into you, — quite change your tone
of mind. Staying here is folly, sacrificing yourself
to a system of universal rascality, which constitutes
itself judge, jury, and executive, and calls
itself National."

Being sacrificed to maladministered law is a
trifle," muttered Harry, " compared to the interference
of our sport. These Land-Leaguers monopolise
all the amusement, leaving nothing for us :
while they shoot, hunt, fish, lue must be dry-nursed
by a bobby, or sit at home by the fire smoking a
pipe like an old woman. It is a blooming
shame 1 "

Harry, my son, your speech is unbecoming.

What is the use of swearing ? You should learn
to polish off such rustic impulsiveness, and acquire
a few society inanities. I wish I could
persuade you and my father to cross the silver
streak. It really is essential every one should
leave this savage country, to learn how to appreciate
the pleasures of modern civilisation. What
day will you start, Sir John ? "

I'm not going," growled Sir John, impatiently.
I'll stick to the old place as long as they leave
a roof over my head."

Awfully jolly if I could go," answered Harry ;
but the pater would not hear of it, — he is sighing
over expenses and curtailing my allowance, —
has antiquated ideas regarding the duties of one's
state in life. And — well, as things are now, I
really have no heart for anything while poor Moll
takes her trouble so much to heart."

Poor child ! How is she ? " asked Sir John,
anxiously.

"I have not seen her since the funeral. By
the way, there was a note from the Earl this
morning ; the pater and mater were sent for, and
are now at Ballykillbegs."

I hope Mary is not ill," said Captain Castleton.

"Well — I think not. The Earl did not say
she was. He just issued an edict for them to go
over; possibly the baby's teeth are troublesome
he thinks no end of that little beggar."

Are you sure there is nothing wrong ? "
asked Sir John, anxiously, again securing Harry's
button.

Not that I know of. No dynamite has been
discovered — nothing new there since poor Mary's
trouble."

Poor Mary ! she has had a bitter cup."

By the way. Father Matt is back. He is
dead against the League, and is in an awful way
about poor Percy. He says the people have
killed their best friend."

Matt Griffen is a good man — a priest without
guile, God bless him ! If we had a few more like
him, there would soon be an end to this boycotting
work. He will soon knock this Home Pile craze
out of our people's heads. We shall see fewer
demonstrations in Blankshire. I am glad Father
Matt is with us again."

England will never consent to dismemberment

of the empire," enunciated Captain Castleton from
behind the ' Times in which he had again enveloped
himself.

They made us part of themselves in spite of
ourselves. If England is honest, she will preserve
the Union intact," replied Harry, with the air of a
well-read man and embryo politician.

Political honesty is the lost chord. The grand
old tune of Old England's honour, honesty, and
humanity, which were the three pillars of her
greatness, is out of date. These sound principles
have been replaced by intrigue, immorality, incompetency,
which are further shored up by
expediency, encroachment, and economy, — very
inferior materials. I do believe the kingdom is
on the verse of ruin ; I do indeed."

Hard hitting, Sir John ; straight from the
shoulder, don't spare any one — all are alike
rogues," laughed Captain Castleton. "From the
highest to the lowest, men are self-interested ; the
interests of the country are the pieces whereby
diplomatists play their game of chance — make
the bricks to build their own houses."

But there is such a thing as national honour."

There was ; but, by Jove ! that, like simplicity,
sincerity, and single-mindedness, has long
since been expunged from the law of nations.
To seem and not to be ' is the aim of the
greatest men. The truth, like the three F's of
the Leaguers, are unknown quantities in politics."

Fair rent, fixity of tenure, free sale," glibly
assented Harry, endeavouring to liberate his
button.

Xow, my dear fellow, just wait a bit ; let us
see what that all comes to. Fair rent ? AVhat
a man finds it convenient to pay ! Preposterous
idea ! Seven out of every dozen would pay none.
Fixity of tenure ? Paupers playing dog in the
manger while honest men stay out in the cold.
Free sale ? Still worse : my tenant John Brick
paying a heavy fine to my tenant Tom Flynn,
for getting possession of my land, and then swears
my land is too highly rented. It is all a confiscation
scheme ; a mad arrangement, sacrificing
all other interests in the endeavour to manufacture
an impossibility — a Utopian peasant, or
rather present, proprietary. God help the paupers
rooted in the soil ! and the miserable left to the

VOL. II. G

mercy of such little, big men ! Then indeed the
tillers of the soil will be at starvation points and
the landlord the lay figure at which the finger
of reproach will point."

I suppose men will always be looking for and
wanting land. You see, there is nothing else for
them to want in this country," assented Harry,
looking towards the newspaper that hid Captain
Castleton, with wild appeal in his eyes.

Exactly so," went on Sir John ; " but curtailing
the power of free contract is a retrospective,
a despotic policy."

Curtailing us, as if we were the delinquents ;
while, as usual, foolish nurses give the naughty
children all the sugar-plums to try and induce
them to listen to reason."

Ah ! it is very sad. All capital driven out of
the country. Those three F's are "

Come, come, sir, the three F's are still in
futuro. It is admitted on all sides remedial
measures are required. Here, the ' Times ' says
England is anxious to see the Irish problem
solved ; Government will find some way out of
the mess better than wholesale confiscation."

I wish I could think so, Bob. But English
legislation for Ireland has been a series of
blunders, — all their measures are built on shifting
sands."

A pretty tolerable land-slip just now : it has
submerged the landlords," grinned Harry.

Sir John went on as if he did not hear—

We want none of their exceptional legislation.
We are one kingdom, — let us have the same law
firmly administered ; let England show all foreign
powers, clerical and republican, that there is to be
no interference in Ireland. Then we will have
peace and prosperity."

So day after day the old sportsman had lamented,
insisting on remaining at Castleton.
Missing the accustomed exercise of hunting and
shooting, his hitherto robust health grew impaired,
the ruddy colour faded, the keen grey eyes grew
anxious, the step, lately so alert, grew heavy, the
upright carriage stooped, and the hearty laugh
ceased to echo through the hall.

All day he would wander in purposeless manner
about the place, sigh as he turned from the
kennels, where the dogs welcomed him with a

chorus of babble ; sigh again as he visited the
stable, anon casting furtive looks of ill concealed
tolerance at the unwelcome " escort " always close
at hand.

On this Sunday afternoon Sir John was very
restless, and when Harry O'Brien departed, Captain
Castleton again urged his father to leave
Castleton. The old man pathetically replied, " I
can't bear to go ; I am old, and at the best of
times no great traveller. Dear old home ! if I
leave it now I may never see it again."

But, my dear sir, things go from bad to worse.
This supervision is insufferable. It will only bea
temporary abdication if you spend Christmas at
Tredegar. Flora and the boy are both longing for
grandpa's appearance. The youngster dreams
of a pony which his mother believes nobody is
qualified to select but grandpa. Indeed she
insists nobody but yourself shall put Master
Johnny on a saddle."

Sir John smiled feebly — Master Johnny being
the infant tyrant who ruled father, mother, and
grandfather with the broken prattle of a baby
tongue.

Really, father, I dare not return without you.
Your presence at Tredegar is urgently desired,
while here it is impotent to check the rotatory
system of this Home Rule craze. You gain
nothing by permitting these ruffians to strike
you first on the one cheek and then on the other.
Probably by next summer Molly M'Guire boys
and other Irish lambs will have played out their
little game, and Ireland may again be habitable."

Ah, Bob, you can't know how heart - sick
it makes me to think of leaving home. The
poor people were all like children to me. God
help me ! I suppose I am an old fool ; but I
did take such pride in the place and property.
And for the life of me, even now I do not know
what our people want. We have always seen
after and helped our tenants, and I defy you to
find a finer or an honest body of tenants anywhere
than I had on this estate."

Poor Sir John ! Every foot of his native land
was sacred in his eyes : uprooting him would bethe
wrenching of the fibrous roots of his life. In
the sunshine of prosperity he had revelled in his
surroundings — been joyous, open-hearted, generous,

his genial influence radiating and conferring
happiness on many. Through the gloom of* the
present Hour rule he still loved Castleton —
clung to it ; preferring to endure the darkness,
and risk murder and arson at home, to going
out from it to find sunshine elsewhere.

But this evening news came from Ballykillbegs
which quite took the heart out of Sir John. All
he could say in his collapse was —

Poor fools ! doing evil that good may come :
that wicked doctrine has ruined the finest peasantry
in the world. God save our poor people
from false teachers — from the consequences of
their own weak folly 1 God save Ireland ! "

CHAPTER XX.

A Friend INDEED.

The week after Percy Fitzgerald's murder had
been a short whirl of intense excitement at ,
while the one following his funeral seemed
endless — a succession of weary empty hours.
There was no immediate contingency to be provided
for, no need for exertion — nothing to be
done but to sit still and count up the sorrow,
weigh the balance of loss and gain : loss to
those who remained, gain to him who had gone,
who had been so suddenly translated from the
unequal struggle here to the crown of glory
beyond.

The surrounding atmospheric depression had
been in accordance with the feelings of the principal
sufferers. Dense fog, wailing wind, and

eternally sobbing sea, had been succeeded by a
sharp frost and heavy fall of snow — weather
that brought home conviction to many of a winter
of severe suffering.

Each hour as it passed had been the same to
Mrs Fitzgerald — a dull aching agony. She had
felt no difference, kept no count of time, had
not realised whether a week, a month, or a year
had elapsed as each new day was born. Her
brain was dulled by the shock ; she did not know
it was fourteen days since her husband was
murdered, as on this Saturday afternoon she sat
tearless by her boy.

The drear week's wretched weather had culminated
in a damp fog — a thick white vapour,
that, like a winding-sheet, wrapped chill arms
round the sodden earth. Out of this opaqueness,
which confused distance and curtailed space,
distorted monsters loomed. If any outward circumstance
could add to the widow's depression,
this soul-searching weather would.

All day a soughing wind had crooned piteously.
Its moans and sobs, like the cries of hidden giants
smothering their voices of suffering, had come

across the mist-covered lawn. Xow it seemed as
if increasing pains, overmastering restraint, sent
shrieks from bottomless pits — cries alternately
strangled or shrieked forth in an agony. The
concentrated essence of all the human sufferings
of that terrible winter seemed gathered together,
carried upward from earth to heaven by Boreas.

Or was it the sighs of millions in the bottomless
pit of lost souls that the King of Storm carried
across the lawn upon his wings ? Wherever it
came from, it was an awful sound, full of Almighty
power — a sound that filled all space, that swept
over the lawn, through the great house, floated
around through the listening ears of helpless men
and women, until lost in the limitless void of veiled
heavens.

The mystery of such winds rouse dull senses,
add sad pain to many overladen hearts, and also
echo in strange sympathy in the tortured souls of
some of earth's children.

And to this drear wind ]diary Fitzgerald instinctively
hearkened. The weather's wail drew
her to the window, where she looked into the
dreary surroundings.

Her baby was asleep in his crib ; all was still
in the room, where darkness was rapidly gathering.
She felt utterly crushed — terribly alone.

Alone now — alone always, evermore ! How
awfully empty her world seemed ! Was it always
to be like this ? And could she bear her burden ?
or must she too shriek out and wail in concert
with those lost spirits whose ghastly voices added
to her pain ?

As she looked out, stray feathery flakes of snow
fell — earth's white seal of winter ; heaven's beautiful
tribute to the death-chant of the year are
these angel-tears, crystallising as they fall.

These feathery flakes fascinated and soothed.
They seemed to still the sobs in her heart as her
dry eyes stared out into space, where, presently,
through the gathering night and glaze of unshed
tears, Mrs Fitzgerald's weary eyes saw a figure
come out of the shadows towards the house.

It was a woman's figure, enveloped in a cloth
cloak, with the hood over her head.

This would scarcely be an incident, except that
now Ballykillbegs was boycotted.

Mrs Fitzgerald vaguely wondered had the

League's ban been rescinded, as she noted dreamily
that, contrary to former custom, this peasant
woman walked towards the front door.

Envying the elastic tread and happy freedom
with which this woman walked, Mrs Fitzgerald
turned from the cheerless window to the crib,
where the child now moved. Taking her boy in
her arms, the mother paced up and down the
room slowly. Here Lord Blankshire presently
came to her. This was an hour when he generally
rested, and, remembering that evening before
when he had come unexpectedly to her, Mary's
heart sank.

Now he was not silent, but spoke eagerly,
almost incoherently. " My dear, there is a woman
come — she insists on seeing you."

Me ! I cannot see any one," gasped Mary.
Nobody ought to want to see me now."

So I said to her ; but she insists — she refuses
to confide in any one but you. My dear, were it
not for the peculiar circumstances — our isolation
—the extraordinary persistency of this woman — the
oddness of her coming here under present circumstances,
I would never dream of asking you to

permit her intrusion — quite an innovation in your
position. But — it is so difficult to get information
— her coming may mean something, — in fact,
my dear, she may be a friend."

The Earl \yas quite tremulous with excitement.


A friend ! What can a friend do for me now ?
She cannot bring back my dead. Don't ask me ;
I cannot see any one," moaned Mary. But the
Earl was insistent ; he actually hungered — as the
she - wolf does when deprived of her young,
to revenge her on the foe — for the guilt to be
brought home to Percy's murderer, of whom as
yet the law had found no clue.

Consider, my dear ; this woman may bring
important evidence — what other right has she ?
nothing else could excuse the impertinence of
her intrusion and importunity. Constable Burns
assures me she is a very respectable woman. The
woman herself says she must see you, and that
you will know she is a friend."

AVho is she ? AYhat can anybody say that
will make any difference to me ? Please do not
ask me — really, I cannot see any one."

I do not like to urge what you so dislike ; but
this Xorah Moriarty says "

Xorah ! Is it her ? I am sure she is a friend
send her up at once."

Mrs Fitzgerald's voice and mien altered the
moment she heard Xorah's name. She had not
thought of her, nor of anything, until the name
recalled North's last visit, the surreptitiously paid
rent, and the promise to tell if she heard of danger
menacing the boy. Xorah's coming might mean
that danger threatened the child. Pressing him
close in her arms, the anxious mother stood waiting
for her visitor, who arrived, ushered by the
Earl himself.

Oh, wish ! wish ! that I should have lived to
see this day ! " sobbed the faithful creature, as she
knelt and kissed the widow's black gown. " Oh,
my darling ! but 'twas a sin and a shame ! My
heart bleeds for you, that it does. Ough ! alone !
alone ! It is early for the like of you to be
supping sorrow, achushla, and it is myself would
ease your burden if I could. Oh, the hard-hearted
villains ! oh, the cruelty of it ! "

Hush, North, hush ! I cannot bear this.

What is it you want ? " asked Mrs Fitzgerald,
sinking into the nearest chair.

Xorah followed her on her knees, the tears
raining down her face as she whispered —

Send him away, for God sake ! I have that
to say that no ears but your own must hear."

The him meant Lord Blankshire, who stood
transfixed by the door, and who now gasped —
My dear, I am afraid I made a mistake ; this —
a — a — person — may be dangerous — a lunatic, in
fact ; let me ring for Roberts."

Xo ; it is North — I know her well. Please
leave us alone together."

Alone ! with her ! " Astonishment and disapproval
were conspicuous in his words.

Yes, if you please — it must be so," answered
Mary. With great wonder in his heart, the old
man went out and closed the door.

Is there danger to my boy ? " asked Mrs
Fitzgerald, in a whisper, of the woman who knelt
and wept at her feet.

Oh, my darling ! but it is a cruel, cruel world !
God help us all ! there is no mercy left in the
hearts of men. That I should have to say they

who have spilt the blood of the just are not satisfied
with the wickedness done. My darling —
they — they — they are plotting against the life
of this lamb." As North whispered these words,
she hid her face in the baby's garments, sobbing
and murmuring from its folds her fears. " Oh,
mistress, I don't know where he'll be safe at all ;
they are that wicked, they'll do anything — go anywhere.
Hunting oppressors off the land, they
say ; but sure it is killing the poor man's friends
they are. May I never see heaven ! but this
awful League is murdering all that is good and
decent in poor men's hearts. They are fearful
times ; may the blessed Virgin keep us from
harm ! for no one knows when their turn may
come, or who is the next on their black list."

My baby, my baby, my poor little darling ! "
whispered the mother, as she looked down on her
child and the weeping Xorah, with horror in her
eyes.

God bless him ! and help us to keep him from
harm. Oh, the beauty he has grown ! Mistress,
dear, it is hearts of stone the demons must have
to dream of touching such an innocent creature.

Lord save ns ! but myself doubts my senses when
I think of it. Artist, alannah, are ye hearing tome
? " asked jSTorah in sudden alarm, as she looked
up and took fright at the stony look in Mrs Fitzgerald's
face.

"Yes, I hear. But — but — how do you know
this, Xorah ? And did you know they were going
to take my husband's life — and — never tell ? "

There was great anxiety and grave reproach
in Mrs Fitzgerald's words. Clasping her hands,
raising honest eyes, and looking sorrowful into the
widow's, the peasant emphatically replied —

God do the same to me if I knew aught about
the matter till 'twas too late — too late — too
late : "

"And you know — who killed him — and will
tell me ? " gasped Mrs Fitzgerald, with awakened
wonder joining the horror in her eyes.

Whist, whist, honey ! Them that did it are
safe enough — the boys won't tell on one another.
As like as not them that did it were strangers —
myself can't say. But, as I hope to see heaven,
I don't believe one of his own would have had
the heart to do it. Don't let us talk about that

at all, at all. It was a bad job — a wicked
deed ; it is blood like that brings the curse upon
the land. My hand for it, the one who did it
will never prosper — never have a day's luck or
grace on earth, never get a chair in heaven.
There, there, my lamb, we'll say no more about
what is done — that won't give us back the goodman
that's gone ; but just try and think how we
can save the child — circumvent evil-doers and
prevent mischief."

Are you sure about the child ? — who told you ?
Why am I to believe you ? You are not true, or
you would tell me who fired those shots."

Miss Mary, darling — God forgive me for calling
you that now ! — but you will believe me when
I swear to you, myself believes it is as much as
my life is worth to have come here to you this
day. There is no knowing the price I may have
to pay for it. I carried my life in my hand when
I came across the snow to-day, as I carried it once
before when — when — I found out — when God
gave me strength, for the love of you and — the
child. No one told about, danger to the child ;
but as sure as God is in heaven above, what I tell

VOL. II. H

you is true. There are those — I cannot say who
they are — but I know the child is on the black
list — that his life is not safe one hour. I could
not rest till I gave you warning. It is not today,
tomorrow, or next week that you have to
watch, but always, always ; danger will ever be
near him, until the love of God touches and turns
the black hearts of men from the error of their
ways."

' Vengeance is mine, saith the Lord ; I will
repay,' " whispered the widow, dreamily, more to
her baby whom she kissed than to the woman
who had spoken, and who still knelt by her side,
her whole face and figure expressive of sympathy
and honesty.

Just so, darling," assented Xorah. " The
good Lord and the blessed Mother will pay them
with a long purgatory. Leave them that did it
to the Lord ; don't trouble your poor head looking
for vengeance. But think — think, ashore — how
can ye save the child. You must rear the child
to fill his father's place. Sure, he'll reign over us
yet, and it is myself would drain my heart's blood
to the last drop for his sake. We must keep the

blood-hounds off his track till he is a man grown,
and able to face his enemies himself."

We are safe here ; surely danger cannot touch
us in this room," murmured Mrs Fitzgerald, looking
fearfully around.

There is no danger here now. But, mistress,
hear to me : remember, victims never know
where the blow comes from, or where the murderer
lurks. I would not say he was safe anywhere
in Ireland. You just go away, honey ;
put the sea between him and harm — go away
until better days come. With the help of heaven,
bad times will pass away. The blessed saints
and holy Virgin won't leave a poor people always
walking in the valley of the shadow of death ;
they'll open a door for us somehow into peace and
plenty, and make this land safe for the honest
poor, and for the gentry that were always good tous.
Stow, every hands-turn brings fresh trouble ;
and the poor must be patient, and keep themselves
as far out of the stream of sin as they can,
till the Lord wills the wave of wickedness to
subside."

For a whole hour the humble peasant knelt

and wept at the lady's feet, urging her to go
away ; and the widow sat dry-eyed listening. At
last the boy awoke, and smiled up in North's
face, who asked leave to hold him for a minute.
Without a word, the mother placed her child in
Xorah's arms, who, settling herself on the nearest
chair, wiped away the tears she would not let fall
on his face, and kissed him passionately. The
beautiful brown-eyed child, unaccustomed to such
whirlwind expressions of affection, bore this new
nurse's demonstrations with becoming quiet. His
decorum overcame Xorah's feelings, who opened
afresh the floodgates of heart and tongue.

Oh, you darling ! you angel ! you precious
lamb 1 Oh ! the jewel of me life ! to think of
their wickedness. Sure, it will not thrive with
them. May the hand whither that would harm
you ! May the head that planned that sin lie
uneasy in this world, until the soul of the sinner
repents ! It is my heart that is sore this day,
weeping tears of blood for the hard lot of the
mother whose one treasure you are. God save
you, child, and comfort her ; protect you in the
strange land, and bring you safe back to reign

over your own. It is myself won't sleep easy in
my bed till I know you are out of harm's way.
mistress, dear, take your child ; and believe me,
achushla, the sooner you leave this misfortune
country the better for us all. There, dear ! seethe
lovely legs of mm, and that blessed seal on
the left knee ! it is myself is glad to see that
same ; it will save him from harm — a sign the good
fairies are watching over him ; but, for all, don't
tempt Providence by staying here, alannah. Go, gogo,
— and the good Lord watch over you always ! "
ended Xorah, as she laid the boy back on his
mother's lap.

Kissing the lady's hand as it lay on the folds
of her crape, iSTorah whispered through the tears
that were again falling, " Don't fret, honey ; don't
wear out your heart thinking, but just do what is
best for a poor desolate widow — go over to the
good sister you have in England — she will take
care of you and your child; — and go quickly;
don't let the grass grow under your feet, is the
advice of the childless mother who loves you, and
whose prayers will follow you always. Sure,
dear, if it was the other side of the world, my

heart would be clinging to you — and it is only
England. Go — and go quickly, for the love o'
God, and that same be with you always ! "

Thank you, North," said Mrs Fitzgerald, in a
broken, hopeless voice ; " thank you for the love
you have shown to my cliil*. I'll — yes, I'll try
and do what you advise, and the Lord reward you
for what you have told me this day ! "

With a last kiss on the baby's hand, Xorah
Moriarty left the room, stole down the broad
stairs to the hall, where the policeman at her
request allowed her to go out through the front
door into the cold winter night.

For an hour the mother remained in her lonely
dark room, hugging her child to her breast as she
thought over all that North had said. Later on
she told the Earl what North had advised. Lord
Blankshire was aghast at the diabolical idea,
scarcely believed it could be true, and ventured
to say Xorah was deceived, misinformed, ignorant,
and Mary unnecessarily apprehensive.

But though the old man said all this to sooth
Mary, in the very act of comforting her his own
fears o-rew. Alien he said good night he was

himself ill at ease, and lay awake all through the
nicfht wondering what he ought to doo

o o

Early on the Sunday morning the Earl sent a
note to Meadowlees, and then went to pay his
morning visit to Mary.

He looked down on the boy, touched him with
a shy reverent fear, but gave not a hint of his
anxiety nor said that he had sent to Meadowlees.

Lord Blankshire then went down to breakfast
and the letters. There was a large pile by his
solitary plate on the table drawn cosily to the
fire. Full of anxiety about the boy, the Earl had
little heart for letters, so he opened them slowly,
tossing some aside half read, even though they
were of condolence on his late family bereavement.
All spoke highly of the dead — encomiums that
gratified the Earl, and that at another time would
have given him a text for sad thoughts ; but now
he had no time to think of the dead, for his
soul feared for the heir.

It was horrible to think the infant heir might
be taken even before his grey hairs were laid at
rest in the grave.

The Earl had had a sleepless night, and now,

with a half-read letter of requiem in his hand,
he floated off, not actually to sound sleep, but to
a semi-conscious dreamland.

When Sir John and Lady O'Brien arrived, the
Earl was still sitting dreaming, and came back to
the earthly present with a start, to welcome them
as became one of his position.

In rising from his chair, the Earl sent many
letters on to the floor.

CHAPTER XXI.

LORD Berkshire STANDS TO HIS COLOURS.

The Earl's sudden start, as Sir John and Lady
O'Brien were announced, scattered his letters allover
the floor. Eoberts collected and placed them
again on the table, then at an impatient motion
from his master, left the room, taking with him
the silver tray, on which his lordship's matutinal
toast and chocolate always stood.

As Eoberts departed with the tray, a letter,
hitherto hidden, was disclosed to view. The Earl
was nervous, and, vexed at being discovered by his
early visitors in dreamland, when the exigencies of
the times required a man of his " position " to be
on the alert, was now irritably ceremonious.

He was elaborately polite to his guests ; but
even while they were being seated, that unopened

letter caught his eye, and a second glance showed
it was not addressed to him.

Extremely methodical and punctilious, especially
with regard to the post-bag, which it was the
duty of Roberts to open, sort, and distribute the
contents to each member of the household, the
Earl was enraged at this dereliction of duty. A
letter not addressed to him ought not to have
been left on his table. A third glance showed
the letter was addressed to Mrs Fitzgerald.

That her letter should be delayed, and that he
should not earlier have remedied his servant's
mistake, was unpardonable.

Rising to ring for Roberts, a sudden premonition
arrested that intention. Taking up the letter he
looked at it curiously, then at Sir John and Lady
O'Brien, as he said, almost involuntarily —

What a queer-looking letter for Mary."

'•' Probably a begging letter," nodded Sir John,
as he took it from the Earl's hand and surveyed
its dirty exterior judicially. " Moll is a milch -
cow to the impecunious. Here, mother," added he,
passing on the letter to Lady O'Brien ; " beggars
count on her heart being special soft at the present.

Take it to her ; possibly hearing of other trouble
may distract the poor child's thoughts from her
own."

Lady O'Brien, who was naturally anxious to see
her daughter, prepared to leave the room, and Sir
John and the Earl alone, to discuss whatever
business it might be that had caused him to send
so early and imperative a summons to Meadowlees.
But the Earl arrested the lady, saying —

I must speak to you both before you see
Mary. Something very extraordinary, extremely
perplexing, has occurred."

Lord Blankshire then gave the O'brien the
details of Xorah's evening visit, and Mary's subsequent
alarm. His listeners, as he had been,
were at first incredulous. But fears are subtly
contagious, and as the old man recapitulated the
events of the last evening, the parents became
infected with some of his uneasiness. These
apprehensions, however, neither cared to acknowledge
— Sir John curtly declaring it was quite
immaterial what roused Mary, as long as it
gave them excuse for taking her out of the
country.

Risk or no risk, why should she stay in this
God-forsaken country ? I'll take her to England
at once."

For her own sake she ought to go away,"
agreed Lady O'Brien. Neither of the parents,
while settling Mary's departure, dreamed the
death-knell such words were to the old man's
hopes. Lord Blankshire had feared Mary ought
to act on Xorah's warning, and he had sent for
her parents, fondly hoping they would think otherwise
— pooh-pooh the whole thing, and laugh him
out of his fears. Had they done so, he was open
to conviction, would have yielded to their judgment,
and excused their ridicule, his one yearning
being to keep his heir at Ballykillbegs.

Awhile Sir John and Lady O'Brien spoke, the
old man lay back in his cushioned chair, looking
sadly into the fire. For a moment or two he
was incapable of speech, clasping and unclasping
his thin worn hands. He longed to argue against
this decree — against his own convictions. But he
dared not imperil the heir, and fear for the boy's
life overcame more selfish considerations. At last,
without looking at Mary's parents, he said slowly,

If it must be so, you tell her — and — and —
if they must go, take them quickly."

Yes ; you are right. It will be best for her to
leave at once," answered Sir John gravely, adding
anxiously, " I wish we could induce your lordship
to accompany her ; it would make it easier for
Mary, you know. And the associations here must
be miserable : this is no place for you now, and
I am sure you will like to watch over the boy."

This speech of Sir John's was out of pure pity
for the forlorn old man, and for a moment the
Earl hesitated to answer. His soul craved to
watch the heir ; but loyalty to his " position,"
and the craze for retributive justice on the murderer,
chained him to Ballykillbegs. AYith a sad
sigh he repeated his unalterable determination to
remain where he was. After a little futile argument
on this point. Sir John and Lady O'Brien
went with the Earl to Mary's room.

There Mary asked piteously what must be done,
shuddering as she alluded to the new horror
forced into her life. The mother soothed and
endeavoured to calm her fear, while her father
declared, " Danger or no danger, you must go

away. Change is necessary for your health, if not
for the safety of this sturdy young gentleman."

Then, wishing to change the current of her
thought, Sir John handed his daughter the dirty
letter which he had brought up-stairs, saying,
Here — a begging letter from one of your numerous
pensioners ; what will the poor do without
you, Moll ? "

Lady O'Brien had taken her grandson in her
arms. Sir John and the Earl turned to discuss
some details, while Mary sat listlessly, unconsciously
twisting the letter in her fingers.

At last she opened the crumpled envelope, and
unfolded the half-sheet of ruled paper within.
As she read, a faint cry escaped her parched lips,
and her poor pinched face grew grey with anguish.
Turning at her cry. Sir John O'Brien took the
shabby bit of paper from his daughter's hand.
His wife, with the baby in her arms, stood on one
side, and the Earl waited at the other, all three at
the one time reading the following notice : —

This is to give fair notice all oppressors is to
be swept off the land. The earth is rid of one of

them ; so by the Holy Book we has swore to
remove ' others of that breed. The young cock
shall never crow where the old Blankshire bird
has so long plumed his feathers. Look out for
what is coming, for, believe me, the young whelp
shall never live to fatten on the blood of a downtrodden
people.

"RORY OF THE HILLS."

This settles it. Poor child ! Xever fear, Moll,
I shall take you to England at once," assured Sir
John, angered and disgusted even more than he
was alarmed at this effusion.

Mary, utterly crushed, had covered her face
with her thin hands, and moaned ceaselessly : " My
boy, my baby son ! Oh ! take us away at once,
and save my child."

At the first reading of this threatening letter,
Sir John O'Brien had been more disgusted with
the depravity to which political animus had reduced
his misguided countrymen, than alarmed
for his grandson's life. And then witnessing
Mary's distress, he was fuller of fears for lier
health than fright for the baby.

For months Mrs Fitzgerald had been anxious,

and kept a brave heart. Ever since the election,
and North's mysterious visit, she had been uneasy,
always imagining what might happen. Fearful
anticipations had culminated in the awful fact of
her husband's murder, the shock of which had
dried up the fountain of her tears. Since that
night her brain had been numb ; she had not
slept, but crouched like a frightened hunted creature
by her child. She had been stunned, and
now this new fright broke down the outward calm
of overstrained nerves. Taking her boy from her
mother, she pressed him close, imploring them
wildly to save her child. She appeared unconscious
of all they said, unaware of what went on
around, as, swaying backward and forward in her
chair, she held the child close and moaned feebly.

Terrified at her condition, Lady O'Brien attempted
to soothe, and then to remove the child
from her arms. But the moment the boy was
touched, the widow spoke, entreating her mother —

Please don't take him. Leave me my baby
as long as God spares him to me. Oh, my baby !
my baby ! my poor orphan boy ! "

The Earl came and went, furtively stroked the

baby's hand, and even Mary's bowed head. But
Mary took no notice ; her whole mind was centred
on the child, on the dangers that encompassed
him. Her life was haunted ; the very room
seemed starred with myriad eyes of cruel murderers
glaring on her child, while its floor was
dyed red with the blood of their late victim.

Mary was exhausted; mother instinct alone
survived, and gave her strength to cling to her
child, whose only safety she imagined was in her
weak arms.

Sir John decided to start that night ; but the
police warned him special precautions should betaken,
and these necessitated delay. Two days
and two nights elapsed before it was considered
safe to remove the Earl's heir from Ballykillbegs.
During those days the mother had been unconscious
of the lapse of time, unconscious of the
uneasiness and growing anxiety of those about
her. She was unaware it was to be a night-hitting,
had no thought what time it was when,
shortly after midnight on the following Tuesday,
her mother told her it was time for her to go.

Without a word the widow stood up, allowed
VOL. IL I

her cloak and bonnet to be put on, while she held
her boy closely. Then with weak steps Mrs
Fitzgerald left the room where she had remained
ever since her husband's funeral, and went downstairs.
Pausing at the bottom of the stairs,
the widow looked irresolutely round the grand
old hall, and wistfully at the closed doors. The
piteous eyes sought for something they could not
find ; and failed to see the carved oak walls, from
the polished surface of which pictured ancestors
looked caravel down on the widow and heir
stealing out into the dark night to fly for their
lives.

The widow did not see the grandeur, neither
did she see the group of weeping retainers who,
feeling having mastered training, had gathered in
the hall to witness the departure of the little heir.
Mrs Fitzgerald saw nothing, as she stood trembling
at the foot of the stairs, but the husband who had
been taken from her in his prime. It was here
he had loved to be. It was here she had thought
to live with him. Her dry lips worked convulsively
as she whispered, " Baby, baby, darling, we
cannot leave without saying good-bye to papa.

Mother," — the wide-open eyes appealed to Lady
O'Brien, who stood by her side, weeping silently —
you will take me to see where they have laid
him."

Impossible ! My dear, dear child, it cannot
be. It is quite out of the question."

"Just for a moment, baby and I must say
good-bye."

It cannot be ; think of the hour, the danger,
my darling Mary. You must not delay, because
of baby — think only of your boy," urged Lady
O'Brien.

Still hesitating, the widow looked yearningly
around, takin:; a last fond look of things that
had been dear to Percy. Then her eyes met the
sorrowful ones of the Earl, who, scarcely able to
master composure suitable to his " position," stood
a little in the shadow. He did not know how
to say good-bye ; he could only just endure to
see them go. moving towards him, Mary lifted
her wan face, whispering —

Kiss me ; kiss baby. You were so good tous
for his sake. We must go, while you watch
by his grave."

Silently, and with ashen face, the Earl gave
the kisses the widow asked. The old man's lips
twitched painfully as he stooped over the little
heir. When he lifted his head from the boy, he
turned hastily away, a tear, wrung from his aged
eyes, falling as he did so on the widow's hand.
Mary looked wonderingly at the warm splash.
Not another word was spoken in this sad farewell,
as Lady O'Brien, now unresisted, led her
daughter out of the house.

When her foot was on the carriage step, Mary
again paused and shuddered. She looked back,
with a great agony in her startled eyes, to the
hall she had just left. In that moment, for the
first time, the widow realised all this journey
meant — all she was leaving. In that brief seconda
wave of memories surged up. Past happiness
of girlish days, fruition of bright hopes, all buried
in the blood-stained grave, where the present
exigency necessitated her leaving her beloved,
unvisited, overcame her. She could not go.
Staggering, she would have fallen, had not Sir
John lifted her into the carriage.

With streaming eyes Lady O'Brien followed

her daughter, and the next moment the carriage
moved on.

A policeman rode in front. They drove rapidly,
Sir John riding by the side of the carriage,
and a troop of dragoons following after. They
did not pass the spot where the murder had been
committed — a small mercy in their trouble — as
the widow sat with her white face looking out
into the darkness.

Poor soul ! she felt like a condemned criminal
flying for dear life through the shelter of that
black winter limit. It was as if she was whirled
from all that had made life pleasant into some
awful unknown chaos !

It was a long and lonely drive, and four o'clock
in the morning before they reached the small
country station from which it was judged prudent
they should start.

It was a curious sight to see that little station
at this dreary hour — a sort of 
on the side of a country road — surrounded
by mounted men, who loomed through the steam
of their horses like so many phantoms. Soaking
sleet chilled and blurred their bedraggled figures,

and hurried words of command sounded ominous
as they cut through the wail of the wind. The
platform was lined with police, and a pilot-engine
snorted like an ill-omened gnome, glaring its red
eyes horribly as it went out from dubious lamplight
into outer darkness.

It was hard to think what all this meant ; to
know that military, police, and pilot-engine were
all necessary protection for the frightened widowed
girl, who, clasping her baby in her arms, tottered
across the platform, to sink cowering in the corner
of the carriage where they placed her.

The entourage was more like the evacuation of
a conquered country by a deposed king than the
flight of a widowed mother with an infant child
from threatened danger.

As they went out into the dark country, the
mother's head bowed over her boy, and her sorrowful
heart cried —

Shame ! shame ! shame on them ! Men in a
civilised land call themselves patriots, while they
do devils' work. Irishmen have grown cowards to
war thus against helpless women and innocent
children."

CHAPTER XXII.

NORAH PAYS THE PPJCE OF FRIENDSHIP.

When the carriage drove from Ballvkillbegs
door, and Eoberts came in out of the nif^ht, a
wail, which conventionality failed to suppress,
burst from the group of servants. Most of them
were old retainers, who, despite the Earl's known
objection to any deviation from rules and regulations,
had assembled in the hall to witness the
departure of the widow and orphan.

As the sound caught his ear, Lord Blankshire,
who had stood motionless after his farewell kiss
to his heir, became unpleasantly aware of the
fact that he was not alone, — most unpleasantly
conscious that he, the Earl of Blankshire, stood
facing his domestics with tears in his eyes.

Scandalous magna ! The old man shuddered,

then with bent head slunk away. Step
by step he went up the stairs she had so recently
descended ; creeping away, like a wounded forest-king,
to hide himself from the eyes of men while
battling with pain, the Earl took refuge in his
bedroom.

Closing the door upon his sorrow, we shall
leave him alone for what remained of that night.

Next day Lord Blankshire was weak and weary.
Anxiously inquiring of Eoberts as to whether
there was any news of the murderer's arrest, and
hearing there was none, he decided to stay in bed.
Such an occurrence had never happened before in
all the twenty-five years of Roberts's service.

Henceforward the Earl was confined to his
room. There was no illness, no sudden stroke,
no fit, nothing the matter, but bodily power faded.
It was life in death ; for even as the flesh died,
the impatient spirit kept at fever-heat, and each
day the Earl eagerly asked, was the murderer
caught ? and later on piteously inquired — " When
would it be safe for his heir to come home ? "

And now we must return to the tenant's cottage.

For the three days after her temerity in visiting

the boycotted castle, North Moriarty had been
very anxious, and for as many nights so feverishly
restless, that Thade thought she was ill.

Poor ISTorah ! every nerve was preternaturally
alert. She longed for news as to what was doing
at Ballykillbegs, but dared not ask a question.
She was even afraid of confiding in Thade, who,
himself uneasy, feared to alarm her with his
suspicions ; so, though in complete sympathy, both
remained silent.

On the fourth day. Miss Shea made her appearance.
She was intent on business, and did
her best to induce North to join the Ladies'
League. Jeering at the midnight flitting, she
openly rejoiced at the " rats," as she called them,
running from the falling castle ; and in right of
her " position " as secretary to a political party
of unmeasured power, she spoke like the Delphic
oracle, mysterious words that darkened meaning.

North was glad that the " duties " of Maurieen's
position shortened her visit, and she was unspeakably
relieved to know Mrs Fitzgerald and
the baby were gone from Ballykillbegs.

It was a weight off her heart the heir being

out of harm's way ; and though, when alone in
her dairy, a tear did fall to the memory of her
murdered landlord and banished mistress, when
Thade came home to supper I^orah was singing.
The air she hummed was, " Over the water and
far away."

Thade's heart rejoiced at his wife's good spirit.
It cheered him to find her bright, for of a truth
he had been much exercised in mind by recent
events, and seriously unhappy at the effect " irrational
" tactics produced on his " saucy " better-half.


He, too, had been shocked at Mr Fitzgerald's
murder, and possessed with a wholesome fear of
the Invincibles' power, wondered vaguely what
would happen next. Having a shrewd suspicion
the wife " knew a " power more than she let
on," Thade admired her discretion in keeping a
silent tongue ; and true to his belief that to know
nothing was the best, he refrained from query or
ventilating his own suspicions, — Thade's opinion
being that if ignorance failed to secure bliss, it
was at least safer in the present time than dangerous
knowledge.

"VA^ith what nerves he had at a high tension,
Thade was as relieved as Xorah herself to hear
the little heir had left the country, and with
quieter minds than they had had for many nights,
the pair went to bed and slept unusually sound.
They were awoke shortly after midnight by a
violent knocking their outer door. The noise

o

was great ; no fugitive this time implored for
shelter, but " the boys " thundered for admission.
The first impulse was to cower beneath the bedclothes.
But an instant's thought convinced
the Moriartyss of the folly of thus shirking the
visit.

Oh, glory ! Oh, Lord ! Holy Virgin ! " ejaculated
North, rapidly crossing herself.

Whist, whist, honey ! " groaned Thade, as he
trembled, hearing the curses from outside showered
on his dilatoriness.

Collecting his bewildered wits, Thade tumbled
out of bed, just in time to escape an unpleasant
hint in the form of a bullet, that lodged in the
tester.

Good Lord, deliver us ! " sobbed Xorah from
under the blanket, from beneath which, as a

second bullet flattened against the wall, Thade
pulled her.

Mother o' Moses ! Blessed hour ! ^\Tiat will
we do at all ! " cried Thade.

Oh, glory ! Oh, holy Virgin ! Good Lord,
deliver us ! " again ejaculated Xorah, as Thade
in a quivering voice asked, " Who is there ? "

Moonlight lads. Open quick, you omathaun !
Quick, quick ! How dare the like o' you keep
the officers of the National law waiting the wrong
side o' the door ? "

Every word was emphasised with a kick at
the door, which shook on its hinges. The door
was a poor defence ; already the frame was yielding,
and if not opened quickly the whole would
soon be flat on the kitchen floor. North, by
Thade's side, sobbed piteously.

Oh, glory ! for your life don't open the door 1 "
as it burst in, she for the third time exclaimed.
Oh, holy Virgin ! Oh, blessed saints ! keep
between us and harm. Thade, man, for the love
o' God speak them fair ! "

North and Thade were both as they had rolled
out of their bed, only that Xorah had drawn a

petticoat over her shoulders, when half-a-dozen
men shoved rudely in over the fallen door, pressing
her and Thade back against the kitchen walk
North clung to Thade, who did his best to keep
between his wife and these men. It was quite
dark, and all they could see were figures pressing
in through the open door, while more than
one voice swore at them.

Tare an ages ! how dare you keep delegates
o' the Nation waiting. It is collecting for the
League we are. There is no rent to pay. Outwith
your money, me boy ; a warm man like you
can afford to support the cause handsomely."

It is half-hearted he is. Begorrah ! it is
the like o' he that ruins the cause. Sure enough,
if we didn't put the fear o' God in this heart,
the fool would be paying his rent."

Perhaps it is to pay it he did," growled
another delegate. " Give him a taste o' lead ; it
is the shortest way o' teaching renegades the
law."

Be easy, boys. Thade Moriarty is a quiet
boy. Sure, I know he'll come down handsome.
He is just the one who ought. Sure, he comes

o' the real Irish. Moriartyss were kings o' Ireland
once, and it's kings we'll have them again, with
the help o' God."

Blood an' 'oiins ! Ye fool, don't be adding
disgrace to the name "

Bad luck to him ! once an informer, always
an informer. Sure, it was one of them same
Moriartyss as sold the pass on the Earl o' Desmond.
The breed has not improved with the times."

Threatened, hustled, coaxed, with North weeping
and praying by his side, Thade was helpless
in the hands of his tormentors. The ill-omened
tale of the Desmond's betrayal did rouse him
to say, " For God sake, boys, don't say that o'
me ! I am, and hope always to be, an honest
man. I tell tales on no man."

But little these League lambs heeded his denials
or remonstrances, some of them being already
busy ransacking the house. Soothing was sacred
in their eyes ; and poor North saw them disdainfully
turn inside out the knitted boots of her
dead baby — scarlet wool ones knit for her by
Miss Mary," and treasured in memory of her
child. There was no money there, neither did

they get any in the handsome flowered teapot,
another of " Miss Mary's " presents, and the pride
of ISTorah's dresser, which, finding empty, they
flung carelessly aside, on to the floor, where it
went into twenty pieces. North sighed and wept
and prayed, as she saw these sacrilegious handling,
while Thade reiterated, " He was an honest
man, and willing to do what wash fair."

As North saw their household belongings ruthlessly
examined, indignation submerged craven
fear, and recovering wits and tongue together,
she endeavoured to make the best of this miserable
situation, by turning the moon lighters' zeal
to account —

Bead, it is myself is glad to see ye know
how to put the fear of God in the heart of a
renegade. But sure we has paid our footing long
ago. Din Shea is one comrade with Thade. It
is one of the committee of the League Thade is.
Indeed it is a blessed truth and no lie I'm telling.
My man is as true a friend to the cause as any
boy in the barony of Thrasgorrahpogue. Father
Dan himself knows us well ; sure we are both old
Irish to the thirtieth generation — it is Gospel

truth I'm speaking. There now, be decent, boys,
and hurry on your round. We are all right
here, and it is myself will tell the secretary how
well ye does the work. By this and by that, it
is a bad rise ye took out of me. Sure I thought
it was in earnest ye were. Glory ! I'll not bethe
better of the fright for a month of Sundays."

Hold your blasted tongue ! " growled the nearest
ruffian, seizing North by the shoulder, and half
flinging her to the far corner, while Thade struggled
to free himself from the cords — the cart-reins of
his own mare — with which a couple of strong
men were now binding him.

Leave the woman alone, or it will be worse
for you," cried he. "Din Shea wil see us
righted. No more of this now ; a joke is a joke,
but this is past fun. Be said by me, and leave
before harm is done. Din won't like this in the
morning, I tell you."

Hold your tongue, you infernal fool, or by my
soul I'll choke you ! " urged his jailer, thrusting
Thade, now trussed like a fowl, back into the
corner, where he fell and was unable to right
himself.

Pull the tongue out of him ! — that is safest.
He is sure not to tell on us then ! " laughed
another, while Thade's smothered voice still insisted
—

I am as true to the cause of the country as
any man in Thrasgorrahpogue."

Leaving Thade helpless in the corner, these
men now turned to North, who was struggling
in the grasp of her keeper.

"Now, missus, quick is the word. Out with
the yellow boys. Five pounds is the lowest sum
will square the present account. Hurry yourself,
or we will give you good reason to know your
duty by the League."

Faix, myself does not understand you at all.
Din Shea himself had our money last month and
this month. Sure it is not beggaring a poor tenant
you would be ? As I hope to be saved, it is
poor and bare we are this day."

All this time North had vainly endeavoured
to recognise one amongst the many. It was dark
a flash of a lantern now and again making
density and confusion more terrifying; and, as
far as she could see, all appeared strangers. As

VOL. II. K

the men continued their search for money, she
continued her monologue —

Sure, it is only keeping the hunger from the
door we are. Father Dan could tell you the
same ; moreover, Din Shea would swear to it.
Sure it was but to-day morning he was stretched
there beyond on the settle, telling me a power
of fine things about what ye are doing in the
country. It is proud I was to hear to him, —
wonderful fine man he is. Sure what would the
cause do without him at all ? He is a great
friend of mine. Glory, what a turn ye have me ! "
cried North, covering her face with her hands and
bursting into tears, as the man who held her down
shook her violently, while another remarked —

May I never see death, but herself is the one
who peached to the Shone magistrates ! She
was seen up at the big castle. A Zeal [Jezebel]
worse than a Judas Scarlet she is ! Make her
smart for her treachery ! "

North's shrieks now resounded, as she alternately
prayed to all the saints and angels to save
her from these men, and threatened them with
Din Shea's vengeance. Thade also tried to roll

himself round and " speak the boys fair." But
all was of no use ; the fanatic ruffians considered
themselves " chosen instruments," working " within
the bounds of constitutional agitation " ; and had
good authority for thinking so, as they marked
their displeasure at the National degeneracy of
their victims.

Poor Thade hardly understood that he was
suspected " by " the boys." Irish to the heart's
core, his soul, like other " sons of the soil," clung
to the land of his birth, and owned a desire to
possess the land he tilled. This desire in the dawn
of the Land League day had induced him to give
ear to Denis Shea's mendacious misrepresentations.
Thade thought he would like to own
his little farm — a blessing which, Denis assured
him, could easily be acquired by " constitutional
means." Thade did not comprehend what " constitutional
means " meant. But it sounded well ;
and Din explained that only a few technical legal
absurdities stood between him and his laudable
ambition, — airy nothings, impediments which could
be easily removed, if properly discussed in Parliament
by enlightened Irish representatives.

With cheerful alacrity and high hopes, Thade
had swallowed this Land League bait. He would
do all he could to secure a footing in the land, a
farm of his own, and peace and plenty for the
future.

Thade loved his country, and aspired to be a
landowner. He also loved justice, and had a code
of honour. So, little by little, as the Land League
showed its true colours, poor Thade had had misgivings
— doubted their honesty as well as the
feasibility of their plausible scheme. "The land
for the pole " was all very well ; but the League's
means to secure that desirable end were " doings "
he could not approve or take part in. Too ignorant
to argue or gainsay grand theories, Thade had
long since lost faith in the would-be reformers'
fine promises. He had no " grievance " ; he did
not believe the landlords were tyrants, and he
was shocked at the coercion of the League. The
more he was shocked, the more he grew afraid.
Poor man ! he had been very unhappy, and had
hard times since he tried to serve two masters
his own honest conscience and the dishonest
League.

Thade had liked and respected his landlord : he
had no grudge against that class. He believed
most gentlemen were fair, but suspected " half-sirs
" were hard masters, and pitied the men who
held under them. Indeed, he allowed it would bea
" good job " if such could be incapacitated from
rack-renting. So far and no farther he " went
with the League," until Mr Fitzgerald's murder.

Knowing his landlord to have been a good mankind
and considerate, after that evil deed Thade
abhorred these professed " saviours of the people."
But if he abhorred, he also feared — feared their
power to do evil more even than he abhorred their
atrocities," so long as they were not practised
on him. In fear and trembling, therefore, he
had held his peace, and given " the boys " as
wide a berth as circumstances permitted.

Thade had not been to a " meeting " since
Mr Fitzgerald's murder ; but having paid League
mail, he hoped to be left in quietness.

Xow that the blackguards had " visited " him
had him at their mercy and Xorah in their
clutches — Thade's spirit rose, and he longed to
resent their wicked rule. But, bound in their

midst, what could a poor man do ? He had no
money in the house, or he would gladly have
bought them off. His words failing to convince
the moon lighters of his impetuosity, they endeavoured
to persuade him to discover his
treasure by more cogent argument — lead.

Firearms are very convincing. At the first
shot ISTorah, struggling violently, escaped from
the hands that held her and flung herself on
Thade, shrieking wildly. She thought she was
unhurt, but felt certain Thade was injured.
Thade tried to assure her of his escape, but in
her wild alarm she did not hear. Tightening
her embrace, she yelled ; and the miscreants,
enjoying her terror, fired again, at the same time
dragging her from her husband by the long coil
of hair that had fallen down her back. Holding
her by this long beautiful black hair, which was
Thade's crreat admiration, the fiends lao-hed to
see her struggle. In her frantic fright the strings
of the petticoat burst : it fell from her shoulders,
leaving neck and arms bare, and exposing her
interesting condition. Thade's impotent rage and
her terror increased their brutal jeers. Seizing

a knife from the table, they sawed at the rope
of hair until it fell around her on the floor, and
then with a farewell shake, flung her from them onto
her husband. • After this " the boys " departed,
cautioning the miserable pair that, if they did not
mend their ways, it would be worse for them when
the moonlight lads paid their next visit.

"When the moon lighters were gone, North's
trembling hands quickly cut Thade's bonds. The
last fired shot had gone through the fleshy part
of his arm, and he was slightly wounded. Poor
creatures 1 they were both terribly frio-tenet, and
Spent the rest of the night alternately wondering
when the League would be " put down," and
thanking all the company of heaven that they had
not suffered " worse " at their hands.

When daylight peeped in at the window, Thade,
taking his courage in his hands, and supported by
North, visited the doctor and then the police.
This last visit went much against his grain, and
was of \erj little use. Indeed, as Thade mournfully
whispered to Xorah, " he was in dread
lodging the complaint would do more harm tlmn
good."

Even though unable to identify their assailants,
swearing information against Invincibles brought
down vengeance on their heads. From that hour
the Moriartyss were marked out for opprobrium ;
and for many days after, in a thousand and one
ways, they were made to feel the League's displeasure.


On the afternoon of the day but one after the
moon lighters' visit to the Moriartyss, Denis Shea
came to condole with them on their misfortune,
and to offer advice as to their future behaviour.

Bead, man, there is little use in talk," said
the specious scoundrel — " no more than there is ina
simple man putting his face against the tide of
popular sentiment. Sure enough * the boys ' are
wild ; but they are terribly in earnest, and going
against their notion brings trouble. Be said by
me now — for it is for your good I am talking —
come to the Cross on Sunday and give a couple of
shouts for the cause — who knows but it may take
your name off the black list ? — and sure a shout
won't do a taste of harm to any one. If not for
the sake of your country, for the sake of the
woman who owns you it is wise to do this. It is

hard for an honest woman like her, and her time
coming near — may the Lord bring her safe through
her trouble I — to have to put up with such doings."

To a friend such as Denis, what could a simple
man like Thade say ? Weaker minds always
yield to insidious sophistries, unless some higher
influence is exerted.

On Sunday morning Thade rose betimes. He
was ill at ease as he started for Doura, and had
an honest purpose in his heart, if only he could
carry out all the programme. He was going to
mass at Doura, and after chapel to consult with
Father Matt.

Thade and Xorah were faithful children of their
Church, and both had been brought up at the feet
of the parish priest of Doura.

Unfortunately for his parish. Father Matt
Griffen had been long out of health, and for
the last year absent from duty. During his
travels, Father Matt wondered much at the reports
that reached him, regretted his absence, and
longed to be back with " his people." But though
uneasy, he had by no means realised the terrible
state of the country, until summoned by the Holy

Father to consult about Irish affairs. Only last
week had Father Matt returned from Rome : he
came back to his parish with the Pontifical blessing
and the new dignity of a canon. All who
knew Father Matt hoped great things from his
return. He was an influence in the country, and
all felt that he would exert himself on the side
of law and order.

Doura parish was proud of their priest. He
was one of themselves. Born of a good old family
of fallen fortune, he had been educated abroad,
travelled much, and enlarged his mind. By
nature he was very large of heart ; so large was
his sympathy that it embraced all mankind, its
strongest tendrils clinging to home. By birth he
was an Irish gentleman ; by nature a Christian
hero ; by conviction a Roman Catholic priest.

This was his first Sunday at home. Being
much beloved, the blackest Protestants in Blank-shire
were rejoicing at his return, and a large congregation
assembled to hear him preach.

Canon Griffen was very ill : the long journey,
the anxiety about his people, and the shock of
]mr Fitzgerald's murder, had all aggravated his

disease. He felt oppressed with responsibility,
and looked grave and careworn as he went into
the pulpit.

Every one in the chapel was struck by his
changed appearance. He had come back with
new honour and dignities, but mimes much flesh
and strength. His grey hairs were now white
and scanty ; his dark eyes, so full of kindly feeling,
were sadly sunken; his cheek-bones painfully
prominent ; and the pleasant curve of his
hitherto mobile lips was now tightly drawn.
Canon Griffen was visibly suffering ; lines of pain
seamed his noble face ; but through the physical
pain and mental anxiety shone a certain pleasure
at being with " his people " again.

Grieved to see their pastor look so ill, the
flock waited anxiously for the sound of his voice.
Father Griffen was almost overcome as he looked
down on the crowd of familiar faces. Many of
them he had married, more of them christened,
and to all of them he had been a good friend,
while they to him had been docile children. He
loved them all ; felt he was responsible for their
souls ; thought he was their keeper ; and knew

many of them had gone astray. His heart ached
for their sin, their sorrow, the miserable animus
that had grown up amongst them. He yearned
over them, his sick heart weeping tears of blood
as he hoped and feared — feared as he had never
before feared — feared his words might fail to
show them the error of this new road to ruin. If
only his voice might touch their hearts !

Kneeling down, Father Matt prayed. No saint
ever sent up a more earnest petition than he did
that peace might come to his distracted country,
and the love of God direct the councils of the
nation and fill the hearts of feeble men.

Father Matt had never preached politically,
nor had he gloried in pharisaically pointing at
heretical shortcomings. He had never been delusive
or double-dealing in his teaching, but ever
impressed simple truths — as he saw them — on
his people, and endeavoured to persuade them todo
their duty to God and their neighbour.

Now he looked down from his pulpit, knowing
their need was great and his days numbered.
Out of the fulness of his heart he spoke. It
might be his last sermon ; it should be the best

advice he could give — the old, old story, that he
had ever tried to teach his people.

In that sonorous voice that was one of his great
gifts, he gave out his text slowly — Heb. xiii. 1,
Let brotherly love continue."

Father Matt paused, looking down with sorrowful
eyes entreatingly on his congregation. Again
he repeated the words, " Let brotherly love continue."
He rang out the clarion notes of that
key to true Christianity, " love," till it echoed
through the vaulted chapel, and fell warningly on
many ears.

All moved uneasily on their seats. Many felt
the pricks of conscience, knowing they were cherishing
hate and smothering love in their bosom ;
others knit their browns and scowled up at their
priest. A few opened their eyes and their mouths
wide, with a sort of gasp of relief, a relaxing of a
terrible tension, as they prepared to suck in his
wisdom through their gaping mouths.

Amongst these latter was Thade Moriarty, who
settled himself as comfortably as his wounded arm
admitted, to heed, mark, and learn all that fell from
Father Matt's lips.

Others cleared their throats, and spat about
surreptitiously on to the floor. These evidently
considered the priest a sheet-anchor, and following
his advice would relieve them from farther responsibility.
This clearing of their rustic throats,
and emitting of its superabundant moisture, was
no disrespect to him or the place of worship ; it
was just a convenient method of disburdening
themselves of the weight that had crushed them,
and a laying of themselves down under the shelter
of his power. After thus relieving their feelings,
each man wiped his mouth with the back of a
horny hand, while many spread their legs comprehensively,
wide apart, and planted a broad
palm upon each convenient knee. Slowly polishing
the knees of their corduroys, many an honest
ignorant soul listened eagerly to Father Matt ashe
dispensed wisdom. A third time he emphasised
his text — " Let brotherly love continue."

Then the yearning of his anxious heart expressed
itself in the following mingled reproof and
exordium —

Oh, my children ! my poor misguided flock !
what is this I find amongst you ? Have you forgotten

my teaching, turned your back on God,
strayed away into the wilderness of sin, and lost
sight of the path of righteousness ? Little by
little you have succumbed to temptation. Envy
has begotten malice, malice hatred, hatred murder !
Oh, shame on you ! shame on you who have
steeped this unhappy land in your brother's
blood ! "

Mightily moved, the worthy priest reasoned,
remonstrated, advised, entreated his people to turn
from their sin. He besought them to shut their
ears to false teachers, and to cleave unto love.

' Let brotherly love continue.' Have you forgotten
the gracious promises to those who are
temperate in all things, patient, full of brotherly
love, whereby you will make your calling and
election sure ? I will not be negligent to remind
you of these things. I have not taught you cunningly
devised fables, but ever laboured to persuade
you of the truth. I have tried to be a light
in the dark places of the world, and prayed for
the day-star to arise in your hearts. The night
has been black ; the dawn is overshadowed ; evil
teachers have been amongst you, privily teaching

damnable heresies, with feigned words subverting
principles and making dupes. Lusting after the
flesh, they presume to speak evil of dignities, despise
Government, misrepresent things too deep for
their understanding ; and, exercised by covetousness,
speak swelling vain words, which have led
you far astray. My dear people, while promising
you liberty, they are blind leaders of the blind,
and will bring you into bondage, — lead you to
where you will be lost in the mists of eternal
miseries — for ever. Oh ! take heed. Turn
while there is yet time. To-day is ours. No
man knows if he shall see a tomorrow here, or be
tomorrow where no hope enters in. Turn away
from haters of God, despiteful men, proud boasters,
who love backbiting, and are for ever inventing
lies. Turn away your hearts from envy, that
begets murder. Leave your sins, or they will
destroy you for here and for hereafter. Have
faith, though you do not see the end of trouble ;
know that all things are ordered for our good.
Hope always ; and remember, charity suffereth
long, is kind, and envied not. Charity is not
easily provoked, and endure, if need be, all

things. The holy St Paul saith faith, hope,
charity — three guiding principles — but the greatest
of these is charity. The three are the trinity
of that brotherly love I would feign see practised
here, — love that embraces all the sons of men —
peace that passeth understanding — forbearance,
that if they smite you on the one cheek, you will
not smite again — charity, that covered a multitude
of sins, that forgive much, even as God
also forgives us our backsliding. What are ye,
that you rail against your fellows ? Shame on
you ! If any man have done you wrong, forgive
and forget. Don't nurse vengeance in your hearts.
God forgives you — your drinking, your lies, your
avarice, your cowardice, everything, and all the
long catalogue of the sins of the inhabitants of
this ignorant selfish world, — and you — shame on
you ! — cannot forgive a brother. Oh ! my dear
people, love one another, lest your sins wear out
the patience of God, and He withdraws His love,
and sends His vengeance on us as He did on
Sodom and Gomorrah."

Father Matt's words flowed like burning lava,
VOL. II. L

scorching the people's consciences. Truthful and
deep-searching, his precepts were sound teaching,
good food for the hungry souls it was his duty to
feed.

At first the whole congregation had listened
respectfully ; but as Father Matt's disapproval of
the League doctrine became apparent, there was a
stir — a movement in dark corners, where one man
frowned, another winked, and a third whispered
to his neighbour.

Each man was ashamed to be the first to move ;
but several were determined to repudiate Father
Matt's doctrines, and to stick by the League.
One by one the Leaguers nudged each other,
and presently began to mutter and curse Father
Matt's words, even as they sat in God's house.
At last a dozen men rose, and then the larger
portion of the congregation followed, as, scowling
at the priest, and muttering defiance, they noisily
left the chapel. The evil example of the Leaguers,
like a great tidal wave, carried many weak things
along with them. Thade, hid in a corner, averted
his scandalised eves from these rebellious people,

and remained seated, waiting for an opportunity of
speaking to Father Matt.

At the first uprising of the men, Father Matt
had started ; then he had endeavoured to stop the
unseemly demonstration, but the good man's words
fell on deaf ears ; and as one by one he saw his
people crowd out, and heard their curses, his heart
sank. Weak and ill, the bitter disappointment
overcame the good priest, so that he had little
voice left to bless the faithful few who remained
with him in the chapel.

After giving the benediction, Father Matt fell
on his knees, from which posture his curate had
presently to lift him. Few people remained in
the chapel when the preacher was carried to the
vestry, and later on to his own home ; but amongst
the few was Thade Moriarty, who waited, hoping
for a word with Father Matt. When at last
convinced that he was too ill to see any one,
Thade sorrowfully left the chapel. Every word of
the sermon had gone home to Thade's heart, and
still echoed in his ears : he longed to be left in
peace, to live henceforward an honest quiet life,

to envy no man, not to bear false witness, to dono
murder.

But when he got outside the chapel gate, he
found himself in a crowd of men and boys, where
Denis Shea was waiting and watching to catch
members and men to go with him to the " demonstration."


CHAPTER XXIII.

AGITATE, AGITATE ! AND WHAT COMES OF AGITATION.

It was a beautiful day, exceptionally balmy, a
summer sun giving warmth and brightness. The
horizon was luminous with light sepia and mauve-coloured
silver-lined clouds, which framed, while
a lofty azure canopy spanned, the world. The
sky, the cloud-pictures, the great hills, were all
reflected in the bay, which trembled and sobbed,
like a weary child spent with passion, after the
last week's storm.

Nature looked repentant, anxious to repair
what mischiefs she had done ; but men were benton
continuing in evil.

It was Sunday, and men and women and children
in their best, as ordered by the League,
trooped along the country road to the rendezvous.

Young' fellows, with stout " hollies " in their hands,
marched across the fields. Men with families
came on " carts," while single men on horses
mingled with the many who trudged upon their
feet.

The wayward baby of disaffection had quite
outgrown swaddling - clothes, and was now a
brawling truncheoneer, that, regardless of all
decency, had selected a field close to Meadowlees
for a demonstration.

By half past one o'clock the field was crowded.
Many were there who had not cared to come ;
many, like Thade, because they feared to stay
away. Others there were who believed in the
land for the people," and hungered for a royal
road to wealth. There was a gathering of dupes,
fools, and roughs, a mass of excitable and inflammable
passions, to be fanned into a blaze by
the designing schemers who called themselves
the " saviours of the people."

The heroes of the hour arrived shortly after
two o'clock in a hired waggonette drawn by four
shabby horses. They were preceded by the band
in a similar vehicle, and there was a large display

of green ribbons and flags of the National device,
the Harp without the Crown.

*' See the Conquering Hero comes," with various
discordances, grated on the ear as these
braves " were drawn into position on a rising
knoll at the side of the field.

The man of note was there, the great O'Donnell
Power, whose keen brain and iron will had shaped
and now governed the Land League party. By
his side sat his fidiis Achates, Father Dan Pren-
dergast, as usual, unctuously benign. Opposite
was that youthful neophyte. The Macmillan,
a very young representative of a very old family.
The Macmillan was just of age, a bran-new
politician with the first bloom on his National
aspirations, and first cousin, once removed, on the
maternal side, to the veteran O'Braunaghan. He
was a trump-card to the Leaguers, who carefully
drilled his young ideas, and then presented
him to the public as an enlightened Irish aristocrat.


Beside the aristocrat sat the indefatigable
secretary of the local committee, the rubicund
grocer, Mr Florence McCarthy, who, devoting

himself to the National business, complained
loudly of the decadence in Irish commercial
interests.

While this " Ministerial waggonette " was being
conveniently placed, the band played " Patrick's
Day," the men threw up their hats, and some
stentorian lungs cheered — a few voices calling
out, " Three cheers for the King of Ireland 1 "
Make him stand up, and let us see O'Donnell
Power ! " " Down with the Union, and hurrah for
the Irish nation ! "

Cheers, howls, and yells followed these remarks,
in the midst of which the little great man mounted
to the coach-box, and bowed his thanks to the
crowd.

Mr Power was a tiny specimen of manhood.
He stood a well-made, dapper little figure, faultlessly
tailored, surmounted by a massive head.
Despite his minute proportions, O'Donnell Power
was a distinguished-looking individual, a certain
intellect and force marking every line of a
well-cut white face. The blackness of his close-cropped
head and a heavy moustache contrasted
startlingly with this white face, — a cold face that

would have been deathly were it not enlivened by
the fire of his keen grey eyes. Gleams of satisfaction
flashed from those eyes, as the Irish
dictator looked out on this crowd, with as commanding
an air as if he measured eight feet
five instead of five feet four, and was indeed a
king.

He bowed all round in response to the people's
ovation, — to the right, to the left, he bowed for
full three minutes, with a quietly dignified, if
triumphant grace, and then made a step backward,
meaning to give a further bow to those
in front. But a trifle sometimes mars the result
of elaborate calculations, — and a trifle at this
time spoilt the effect of O'Donnell Power's first
appearance before a Blankshire audience.

There are limits to the size of a coach-box.
On this occasion the dimension of the coach-box
made too narrow a platform for the great personage
who stood thereupon. In stepping backwards
Mr Power stepped on to space, and falling down
on his friends in the vehicle, disappeared from
the sight of the people.

It was a ludicrous incident. For a moment

O'Donnell Power's feet were where his head ought
to be. His self-government was actually upset,
and though friends instantly righted their manikin,
the episode was confusing. The dictator's
brow lowered, and fire flashed from his steel-grey
eyes, as, resuming the inverted perpendicular, he
also with considerable aplomb resumed his gracious
pendulums to a crowd who were now
risible hilarious.

After a time, O'Donnell Power spoke ; and at
first, according to the habit of that pleasing creation,
Uriah Keep, he belittled himself, his pretensions,
his work, and lauded the Blaukshirites on
the prominent position her sons took in the
National crusade.

Your presence here in thousands is a grand
sight, the guarantee that the hearts of this heroic
people is in the League's cause — a great strengthening
of our hands. This county, from time immemorial,
has led the vanguard in the battle for
freedom — that freedom which is the goal we now
mean to win, — a freedom that is the birthright of
all mankind, and which has been for generations
denied to Irishmen, by aliens in blood and creed,

who have chained them to their chariot-wheels
and treated them as slaves. Freedom is our
watchword, the thought that unites our scattered
race, and draws together a dissevered people, who
with one voice appeal for justice. We only ask for
justice. (Cheers, and cries of ' God save Ireland 1 ')
Remember all our objects are subservient — a
means to our end, Ireland for the Irish. That is
what we want, what justice should accord us, and
what we will have. Nothing less will content
this high-spirited people. We aim to release our
country from a yoke that has hampered our prosperity,
confiscated our property, and for 700 years
made profits out of our degradation. Brother
patriots, from henceforth we repudiate alien rule,
and refuse to be starved by the misgovernment of
a Castle clique that mocks at our distress, treads
our cherished privileges under foot, and makes
adhesion to our ancient faith penal. Pharaoh was
not more cruel to the Hebrews when he ordered
the slaughter of their males, than this English
rule has been to our afflicted people. For 700
years we have been as beasts of burden ; we have
toiled, planted, reaped, and they have fattened on

our work. They have ruled us with a rod of iron,
denied us freedom of thought and speech, sought
to smother every noble aspiration, immured our

patriots in convict cells, martyred " (here the

tumult of groans and cheers drowned the voice,
though Mr O'Donnell Power still appeared to
speak, and presently his mellow tones again
sounded above the uproar). " Legislation attempts
to limit our speech, endeavours to padlock our
lips. See the green-livered Government reporters
taking down my words. But tyrant laws no
longer smother our National cry ; the civilised
world is on our side, helping the oppressed against
the oppressor. 'No longer can English laws hinder
our plaint from penetrating to the utmost ends of
the earth, as we call aloud for justice. England
would shut us in if she could — would keep us
slaves, silence our prayers, continue to despoil
us. But, thank God ! heaven has heard our prayer,
and the sympathy of Europe is on our side. Weare
a united people, a well-organised coalition of
all sects of Irishmen, persistently agitating for a
constitutional reform. Agitation is a great lever ;
we must continue to agitate, avail ourselves of

every weakness of our enemy, work up every
grievance of our own. Little by little we must
break through their barriers, and, as opportunity
offers, harass and frustrate their coercive measures,
bring confusion to their councils ; work early and
late, by fair means and foul — yes, foul when needful
— to overthrow English rule in Ireland. This
League must never rest until we are emancipated
from the rule of the stranger. (Cheers.) Is there
one in this vast assembly not of us ? one who
doubts my assertions, or the wisdom of our tactics ?
one who is faint-hearted in the cause ? one who
thinks he has no interest in this matter ? If
there is, let that one take heed. He is either a
traitor, or labouring under a mistake. If the former,
assuredly his sin will find him out, and he
shall die the death. If the latter, tell him the
cause of his country is his — is every Irishman's
birthright ; that if he does not go with us in heart
and soul as well as body, he is a traitor to his
country, unworthy to be called an Irishman, and
make him a pariah amongst you. But I do not
believe there is such a black heart or coward
before me. I know you are all awake to the

necessity of united action, all burning to upheave
and overwhelm that powerful minority which has
so long appropriated your wealth. The landlords
are the English garrison who drive their tenants
with scorpion whips, who cry ' More bricks, more
bricks ! ' — claiming more rent, and taking the food
out of your mouths that they may live luxuriously.
This landlordism is an accursed system, that has
subverted independence, and made an unholy alliance
of might against nature's rights. Its founders
were begotten of a foul race, and, true to their
creed, their descendants continue their predatory
system, stripping Irishmen of all they possess but
their national pride, — that no man can rob them
of or efface; it is the great feature of the race.
Those glorious mountains yonder are the striking
feature in this beautiful landscape ; so national
pride is the prominent feature in the Irish nature.
This pride is as integrant in their being as those
giant hills are in your beautiful country. England
has not deprived us of our pride, or transplanted
our mountains, simply because nature defied her.
Irishmen are wonderful samples of endurance ;
not forty years, but seven hundred, we have been

in the wilderness, but now the dawn of liberty is
close at hand. So —

' Remembering well past scenes of woe,
Our tears of blood forbid to flow,

Our pitying sighs to rise ;
We'll turn our hearts from sorrows away.
And bless this League that swears to-day,

To end our night in joy.
We'll have no more a country's chained,
But trust the leaders now ordained

To set our homesteads free.
And here, on Ireland's shores we'll swear,
Xo alien tyrants' laws to bear,

But free men now to be.' "

Thunders of applause greeted this effort at heroic
verse, after which Mr O'Donnell Power apparently
desired to retire from the coach-box to the body of
the vehicle. But his friends evidently urged him
to continue his oration, and while they arranged
and overmastered his scruples, various chats went
on in the crowd.

Bead, Cud, that is fine sauce," decided the
lady secretary. Miss Shea, to her admirer. Cud
Moriarty, with whom she was keeping company.
Cud, with broad wonder radiating on his innocent
countenance, had been gaping at the orator.

and forgotten to do his duty by cheering. He
answered —

Fine words, by Ganys ! It will go hard with
Father Dan himself to beat that."

Fine words, and fine sense ; remember that,
Cud. Cheer, man, cheer ! "

Yes, honey ; but how can I do that and I
talking to you. It is as saving Gospel as we hears
in the chapel a Sunday ; but your words is more
sense in my ears than priest or parliamentary
speaker. Maurieen, when will you be coming
home to the Cobbe ? Sure Susie is to be married
o' Monday, Willy has listed, and myself is tired
waiting for yourself to come before the priest."

Whist, man, whist ! Power is speaking again ;
and myself does not care to go home with any
man that does not distinguish himself in the
cause."

Having refreshed himself with a glass of water,
Mr O'Donnell Power now began again —

Do not be rashly swayed by weak sentiments,
maudlin pity, or lingering fear. It is a
great work we have before us, that of overpowering
oppressors and righting centuries of oppress

great work, which is not to be spoilt
by weakly yielding to fragmentary, mistaken, and
misplaced respect for individuals, as we determinately
carry out National retributive justice. Oneby
one tyrant landlords must be brought to their
knees, and you shall rise and fill their places.
(Cheers.) We live in momentous days. Remember,
on the stand you now take depends the
future of Ireland, the future of all here, and of
our yet unborn children. With the fate of the
nation in our hands, there must be no wavering ;
we must mete out justice. Our voices must be as
the voice of one man ; it must be one mind, one
will, one united struggle, to hew down landlordism
— that landlordism that as a dry-rot has
destroyed the people's wealth, and left Erin a
Mordecai amongst nations. Eemember we have
no child's-play before us ; it is war to the knife !
We must strip off our coats, gird up our loins,
and acquit us like men — like heroes fighting for
country, home, and dear life.

* Rise, spirits of men,

Ever dauntless in danger !
Free the land that was yours
From the hand of the stranger.

VOL. II. M

All be true to this cause,

Ye beardless and hoary,
Till those tyrants, the landlords,

All die out before ye ! '"

(Great cheers followed this recitation.)
Mr O'Donnell Power again refreshed himself
with a glass of water, and rested, while a free
fight took place close by the waggonette, where
some shrewd yokel, devoid of common prudence,
had ventured to air his scepticism as to the possibility
of his, or any other man, ousting his
landlord and walking in his shoes. When order
was again partially restored, the great apostle
of Irish freedom concluded his long speech in the
following words : —

Remember the building up of a nation so
cruelly effaced and long blotted off the roll of this
world's kingdoms is no summer day's work.
Knowing that the history of her oppression,
written in blood in the chronicles of time, and
kept in the archives of heaven, is green only in
the hearts of her faithful sons, we must be prepared
for arduous labours — to work hard, shoulder
to shoulder, helping freely with our means, even
with our lives, if needs be. The youngest and

weakest, the oldest and strongest, the maiden,
the wife, the mother, the youth, and the a^^ed
man, all are in the same bondage, and all press to
the same goal. Work, then, with a will ; do not
let the grass grow under your feet ; but agitate,
agitate 1 carry on the agitation which has been so
well begun. Already good work has been done
here in removing a tyrant. One has been sent to
render up his account to God, and others of the
cursed alien garrison have fled from the just
wrath of an excited and indignant people. This
Blankshire has been the first to bring landlordism
to its knees, where you must keep it until we
make our own terms. If you do, the day cannot
be far distant when this beautiful fertile land, a
fair garden in a fair world, will be free for the
tillers of its soil. I see many girls here. Girls,
you can help us. Join the Ladies' Land League,
and swear never to permit any man to press you
to his heart until he first proves himself a lover
of his country ; and thus you will help to
strengthen our arms, and help to set free our beloved
country."

With a low bow, and amid vociferous cheering.

Mr O'Donnell Power at last descended from his
elevation to the interior of the waggonette, and
that platform was then occupied by the very-juvenile
M.P. for Ballyvourney, The MacMuUigan.
Inflated with pride in being so closely associated
with the leader of the National cause, The Mac-sullivan
allowed his fervid imagination full play,
as he misrepresented Irish historical antecedents
and present grievances. He did not say the truth,
that she had been a house divided against herself,
a bloody arena in the lists of which each lordling
had fought for supremacy, and where might had
been the only right acknowledged, until those who
devoured each other's substance had been absorbed
into and placed under English restraints; but
he was loud in his denunciations of the powers
that be ; cursed English laws ; cursed those who
administered them ; cursed all who took the
English Queen's shilling, or wore her livery,
which was their badge of shame.

Irishmen enlisting, be their coats red or green,
is a national disgrace. Shame on the dastards
who prefer pay to patriotism ! — sons enlisting,
that at a tyrant's will they may be ordered to

shoot down their parents — brothers, their brethren.
Have no patience with them, no dealings,
no friendship, no social intercourse, no love. Do
not smile on them till they turn their backs
on the temptation, and strip the livery of shame
from their shoulders. It is thus only we can
redeem our country, by vowing, living or dying,
unending hate to alien government ; and taking as
our cry of battle ' Ireland for the Irish ! ' teaching
as an alphabet to our children ' Ireland for the
Irish ! ' never rest till we wring from English rule
Ireland for the Irish ! ' "

The MacMuUigan's sentiments were loudly
applauded ; for a time cheers and shouts echoed
and re-echoed, and the crowd waved caubeens
and shillelahs in a highly suggestive fashion. A
less thing than the white hen in ' The Corsican
Brothers,' or the " Limerick cow " of historical
memory, would have started a fight, which would
have lasted until the condemned " red coats or
green " exerted their powers of establishing " law
and order."

This was enthusiasm ; but it might only be
of an effervescent nature, — therefore Father Dan

Prendergast, who never missed an opportunity,
as their spiritual director, to add the imprimatur
of the Church's seal to the National crusade, now
added his mite and their Church's might to such
teaching. Pointing to the constabulary, who were
drawn up in a compact body close to the ditch to
look on, but not take overt part in the demonstration,
he said —

Look at them, men whose blood has thinned
to water, and is turning to gall ! — men who play
at patriotism by putting shamrocks in their windows,
but are false at heart ! Sheltering themselves
under a misconception, these men take
English pay, and then whine they are only doing
their duty ' here. Doing ' their duty ! ' Shame
on them ! allowing miscalled ' duty ' to turn them
into instruments of injustice to their neighbours.
Teach them their first duty is to their Church
and country ; and that the sooner they put themselves
in a position where they are free men, and
able to act as patriotism, honour, and conscience
directs, the better for them. Remember there
can be no serving of two masters."

After this Father Dan Prendergast, who had

been within the month elevated to be Eoman
Catholic Dean of Killballymactaggart, dismissed
the meeting with a pastoral benediction.

The waggonette, with the wheezy band playing
Garryowen," got into motion ; the more important
vehicle containing the Land League deputation
followed in its wake.

Denis Shea whispered passwords to a select few
to attend a supplementary gathering of his inner
circle of " Revolutionary Tactics," which was now
held weekly at Teigue Callaghan's sheen — at
which " public," despite the illegality of selling
drink on Sundays, the parish priest always "stood "
the liquor for the Doura Club, who here discussed
their infernal plans. Of this club Daneen Keeffe,
a smart " National schoolmaster," who had been
educated at the " Christian Brothers' " school,
and who was a cousin of Denis Keeffe's, weekly
presided.

But neither Father Dan's words of dismissal,
though delivered with a " 
" air, or Denis Keeffe's whispered words,
dispersed the gathering.

It is easier to father than scatter an excited

crowd ; and though the delegates drove away, the
people surged up and down enforcing their political
opinions, in some cases with a striking pugnacity.
The one unanimity amongst the crowd was the
national aptitude for riot.

Some scowled at doubted friends ; others openly
taunted " boys " who had not given the right
hand of friendship to " advanced opinions " ; and
all, metaphorically speaking, dared their neighbour
to stand on the tail of their coat."

All huns about refusing to " move on," while
some glared defiantly at the much-tried constabulary.
The crowd was dense, much excited, and
many evidently bent on mischief. In vain those
in authority tried to oil the troubled waters. Xo
sooner had the stipendiary made some impression
on one group than another grew quarrelsome.
Each man, intent on his own fad, was entirely
regardless of his fellow's comfort ; and many were
bent on baiting the police, who, standing at attention,
had long been recipients of the amenities of
those in their immediate neighbourhood. Someone
now threw a clod at the police. It fell short
of the mark, and those amongst whom it fell

turned and hit out promiscuously. A clod hitting
him was an indignity no undisciplined Irishman
could for a moment endure. In two minutes
the riot was general ; clods came in showers, and
blackthorns, wielded by strong arms, played
tunes on many heads. Shouts, yells, stones flew
about ; men, women, and even children, raved like
Bedlamite.

Hooted, jostled, pelted, the small body of police
found it difficult to either keep their feet or temper,
or to extricate themselves from the throne. To
secure a prisoner was impossible, and presently
to escape with their lives became a chance.

Mr French, exerting his influence, endeavoured
to persuade those near him to desist ; while the
stipendiary and the head police officer also did
their best, entreating the mob to go home quietly.
But they might as well have attempted to arrest
the flood-tide with pitchforks ; the people were
excited beyond control of voice, or heeding the
Eiot Act, which was presently read.

With a wild rush the crowd broke the line of
police, beat them back like wheat before the blast,
to rise again as the storm swept past. Breathless,

bruised, three of their number clown, and their
officer with a cut on his Iiead, they were still
patient with the crowd who pressed upon them.
Mr French and Harry O'Brien, fighting their way
through the mob, endeavoured to join the police.
As they did so, a stone caught Harry on the
bridle-arm ; it hung useless by his side, and the
next moment he was pulled from his horse.

Missiles rained on the phalanx of police, who
bore their punishment bravely, until orders were
given to charge, and rescue Mr O'Brien. With
a rush they made for the spot where Harry had
gone down, and found him on his knees struggling
to save his head, while sticks and stones were
showering all around.

By sheer weight of numbers the mob overpowered
the police, laughed at the magistrate and
the Eiot Act, and continued their disorder until
the order was given to fire.

For a moment there was a pause. The next
instant a determined rush carried away the
stipendiary and knocked over the county inspector.
The police fired, and simultaneously
some revolvers were discharged by the mob.

At this crisis Mr French, who had pursued,
overtaken, and insisted on Father Dan's return,
reappeared with that dignitary.

Equal to the emergency, the priest set about
explaining the words he had so lately spoken.
Getting on the ditch he shouted —

Boys ! boys ! who gave you leave to kill your
neighbours ? I didn't. Be quiet, every mother's
son of you. Sure the Eiot Act is read the magistrates
are here, and if, after that, one of you is
caught hurting a policeman, it will be a bad job.
Sure enough we are ashamed of their being
peelers ; but they are your brothers and cousins
for all that, and most of them are good Catholics.
No fratricide, if you please. Go home, every one
of you. Sure, every man that is caught red-handed
is an impediment to the League. Don't
give the Castle hacks a chance of swearing to one
of you, or maybe it is a hanging matter they'll
make it. Do ye hear me, ye misguided vagabonds
? Go home, obey the voice of your priest,
who knows what is best for you — go home, I say,
or I'll make you. There — run every one of
you —

' Those who fight and run away,
Will live to fight another day ' —

run, or, by the bones of St Patrick ! I'll make you."

Father Dan's logic was effective. One by one
the people slunk away, some whispering as they
went —

Himself is no better than a turncoat ! Talking
big, and when it comes to doing turning against
us. It is a coward he is, after all."

By the active exertions of the stipendiary, Mr
French, and Harry, who was again on his horse,
backed by Father Dan's arguments, the field was
presently cleared, and the list of killed and
wounded made out.

Two policemen were carried to hospital, where
one succumbed to the injuries received, while
the rest had sore bones. The officer's and Harry
O'Brien's wounds were not very serious. The
former had his head bound up for a week, and
Harry's forearm had the small bone broken. But
of the crowd, four cases were sent to hospital, and
many more slunk away to have their wounds
attended to in the privacy of their homes ; while
two dead bodies lay on the field. One of these

was a boy of ten years ; the other was a handsome
girl, upon whom the sun smiled sadly, andover
whose body a young man wept.

The lady secretary was dead, shot through the
heart, and poor Cud was inconsolable. Grief is
often unreasonable, and Cud's grief took a strong
political bias. From henceforth he was bitter
against the law that orders police to fire on poor
helpless people, and bore a deadly hatred to all
who wore green coats.

CHAPTER XXIV.

''- THEY CRY, PEACE, PEACE ! WHERE THERE IS
NO PEACE."

After the " constitutional agitation " of that
splendid demonstration," as the national press
called it, Thade Moriarty returned home much
depressed. He had not had counsel from Father
Matt in private ; but the good man's public warning
rang in his ears and echoed in his heart.
Contrasting Father Matt's words with Father
Dan's speech, he was sorely puzzled to understand
what was " the rights " of it all. His
heart went with the sermon, and his steps lagged
and face grew grave as, in his ignorance, he wondered
by what special mercy of God it was that
the wholesale mischiefs suggested by Father Dan
were not more extensively carried out.

Indeed, having a wholesome respect for " the
law," Thade wondered why such unlawful talk
was permitted.

For many days after this meeting Thade was
uneasy. JSTorah was ill, and he was unhappy,
day after day fears growing in his heart. Always
a silent man, Thade was now almost morose ; and
while at work he pondered on the future. While
her husband was in the field Xorah lay, and then
sat at home thoughtful over the fire, fretting for
those she had lost, and wondering could life ever
again be as smooth to them as it used to be,

Xorah had suffered greatly from the fright of
the moon lighters' visit. Her baby had not lived ;
and weak and nervous and alone, she could not
get her spirits up.

Pale, and with a cropped head, Xorah was a
different-looking woman, as she sat listlessly by
her fire these January evenings, from what she
had been a year ago, when she jeered at Denis
Shea's political opinions.

One evening Thade came in more than usually
gloomy. He had made up his mind he must doa
very disagreeable thing, and was half afraid to

tell his wife what he had decided to do. Poor
Thadel he stood a long time at the door before he
came in, — stood just where we first saw him, and
where he loved to stand and look down the smiling
valley to see the sun die away in the west.
He had stood this evening till the winter darkness
shut out the view, and shut in the sorrow in
his sinking heart, and then with a deep sigh had
gone in and sat opposite North by the fire.

He shuddered as he looked across at her. She
was pale and weak. She had never been the
same since the night of the moon lighters' visit.
Thade sighed as he thought how now another
baby slept in the churchyard, where his wife's
thoughts seemed to be, for she did not speak to
him.

Poor Thade ! he thought of his wife, his life,
those familiar mountains, the slumbering pastures,
the whispering waters, the house that he loved so
well, and the babies asleep in the churchyard, and
then he cleared his throat. But his voice failed
him, and North looked at him languidly.

What is it, ashore ? anything else wrong ? "
There was a hopelessness in her tone which gave

Thade's courage the necessary impetus. There
and then he told his wife his plan, and asked her
to consent to expatriation.

North was more ready than Thade thought.
She was tired of the anxiety ; those she loved and
respected were gone, and she and Thade were
shunned by the neighbours. The loss of her
child, the continual state of fright, the unfriendliness,
had considerably shaken her nerves. That
evening, by the light of the fire, the husband and
wife agreed the sooner they left the country the
better.

Thade, dear, with the help of God we'll doit,"
agreed North, as tears blinded her eyes and
dropped down on her lap. " There is no longer
peace here for those who resist the devil's
work. We'll go across the sea, and try and
find some corner where we may make an honest
living."

Yes, alannah," assented Thade mournfully,
endeavouring to suppress his own regrets, the
better to soothe his wife ; " we will go at once,
though it is sad to leave the little home to which
I first brought my wife. Mavourneen, I'm afraid

VOL. II. N

we'll never see a spot like it anywhere. God help
us ! there is no place like the old — home."

Whist, man — whist ! Sure it is my heartstrings
are tied round the little graves above in
the churchyard," sobbed North, sadly ; " but sure,
we are not the only ones in trouble, or that have
to do the like. Think of the poor widow who
had to go leaving her man lying alone in his
bloody grave, to save her baby from harm. Sure,
Thade, as long as I have you, we will get on
somehow — we are young and strong and honest.
But oh, God help us ! it is a cruel strait — hard
to bear — hard to bear — to have to leave our own
country, only because we are honest."

While that " splendid demonstration " had been
held under the shadow of the Meadowlees demesne,
one victim of the League's tactics lay
sick and weak at Queensholme, where, at her
urgent request. Sir John O'Brien had brought his
widowed daughter.

Take me to Nellie, dear Nellie ; she will take
care of my boy," had been the anxious mother's
reiterated request.

It had been a long journey ; Mary would not

rest on the way ; the fatigue and cold, added to
excitement and OTief, and the fear that haunted
her, had thoroughly exhausted the traveller. On
arriving at Queensholme she was quite spent,
only able to lift her wan face from cowering over
the baby she would keep sheltered in her own
arms, for Nellie's kiss.

With streaming eyes and trembling lips. Lady
Paget gave her sister silent kisses : so shocked was
she at the widow's appearance, that she could find
no words of welcome.

It was Mary who first spoke. Evidently struck
with the contrast between her blooming and
beautiful happy sister and her grief - stricken
blasted self, she faintly whispered, a smile that
was more pitiful than tears flitting over her scared
face —

Darling Nellie, how happy and how beautiful
you look ! Oh, darling, I am so thankful to have
reached you — safely ! " So far Mrs Fitzgerald got
in a thin hard monotone, her open frightened eyes
fixed on her sister. Here the eyes fell, became
dimmed, and lost the power of sight, while the
voice wavered piteously as she wailed, " Nellie,

Nellie, be good to my fatherless child, my orphan
boy ! Take him, darling ; I — I — I cannot hold
him any longer."

Falling back on her chair, Mrs Fitzgerald
dropped her treasure into Lady Paget's outstretched
arms. Kissing the child hurriedly,
Lady Paget gave him to the nurse, and kneeling
by her sister's side, chafed her hands and comforted
her.

For days Mrs Fitzgerald lay ill. Weak and
low and weary, she had no power to think or
speak, more than to ask in a whisper, " Nellie,
is baby safe ? Nellie, where is my boy ? " or
dreamily to mutter, " Oh, I am so weary, so weary,
so weary."

The invalid made no other complaint, but the
doctors said she had brain fever, and presently
she lapsed into a semi-conscious state, out of
which they could not rouse her.

When her child was brought, she stared at him
without any recognition, though often for hours
together she would repeat in fevered tones,
Nellie, be good to my boy. Nellie, take care
of the little orphan. Nellie, darling, my boy."

As long as loving Nellie could endure to bear
that strange hard voice repeat this piteous wail,
she sat by her sister's side, and looked with
anxiety for the doctors' coming. The medical
men came and went perpetually, examining their
patient, and whispering in their sick-room sententious
tones about brain fever, shock to the
system, and the crisis.

Heart fever would have been the more correct
term, as the stricken girl lay with the weary life
fading from her.

Each day she grew weaker, her breath more
hurried, her words more unintelligible. And day
by day her mother and her sister watched. Lady
Paget could hardly bear to see her sister die
like this, still less could she bear to leave her
room. Indeed she seldom did leave it, except for
hurried visits to the nursery, where the young
heir flourished in company with her own fine
boy.

Lady Paget on these visits always took her
nephew in her arms. He was precocious, and
already would crow at his aunt's appearing, stretch
out his little arms, laugh, clap his chubby hands.

kick and shriek, and with every token of health
and strength show he knew and liked her. Every
proof of his thriving was a pang to her heart, as
she felt how the mother who lay dying would
delight ii these evidences of health and happiness.


Indeed in these days Lady Paget made so
much of her nephew, that Master Harry's nurse,
if not Master Harry himself, her own two-year-old
son, was jealous of the little stranger.

Christmas came and went. There was no rejoicing
at Queensholme, where the fevered voice
in the sick-room, and the crow and baby prattle
in the distant nursery, were the only sounds that
broke the quiet.

The watchers at Queensholme had no thought
for outside events, where the world went on as
usual, and where the political horizon was full
of lurid storm-tossed clouds. Men's hearts failed
them for fear, as they saw the "peace at any
price " Government strangling half a century of
Ireland's prosperity by vacillating measures. And
Sir Eichard Paget was in a whirl of political excitement,
being in the agony of contesting the

vacant seat of Penult, and anxious about " comiiK^
events." For the first time since her marriage,
Lady Paget sent him away by himself to Penult
election, while she remained at home to watch her
sister and the year die together.

It was the 6th of January 1881, and the
doctors declared Mrs Fitzgerald's crisis was at
hand. The strain on the watcher's nerves had
been intense, and was now at highest tension.
On departing, the doctors had told Lady Paget
that perfect stillness was essential, to ensure which
her ladyship had kissed the babies and sent them
both out into the pale sunshine, with strict orders
to the nurses to give them their afternoon meal
and sleep in the housekeeper's room.

Mind, I forbid any one coming up-stairs until
I ring' the bell."

With this final order to the servants. Lady Paget
returned to her sister's room, where the invalid had
sunk into a sleep.

Out of this sleep she might wake better, and
live to bear the dull ache of her saddened life, or
she might sleep on until she awoke happy in
another world. As Lady Paget watched the still

white face, she more than once fancied the spirit
had fled : the great stillness made her nervous.
One, two, three hours she had sat there watching,
and saw no change. A very light tap on the
closed door made Lady Paget almost scream. She
Glanced at her sister's white face — she had not
heard. Rising, her ladyship crossed to the door,
very indignant at this disobedience to orders.

When Lady Paget opened the bedroom door,
her own nurse, with a white scared face, stood
outside, who, seizing her mistress's gown, drew her
into the lobby, gasping —

Oh, my lady ! oh, my lady ! the baby ! "
What do you mean ? " exclaimed Lady Paget.
The baby, the baby, is gone — gone — gone ! "
For God's sake, explain ! What has happened ?
which baby is it ? " asked Lady Paget, making
her way noiselessly but rapidly down the stairs.

Master Fitzgerald. Oh, my lady ! I would
not for the world have such a thing happen to my
child." The pride of her superior care obtruded
through the nurse's genuine alarm ; but Lady
Paget hardly heeded as she hurried to the housekeeper's
room, where she found her own boy

kicking in the housemaid's arms, while Mrs Dew,
the housekeeper, stood by weeping.

Between sobs and protestations, the nurse related
how they had gone for their afternoon walk
down by the river. It was a lovely afternoon ;
and anxious to keep out of the house as long as
possible, they had both sat down, and taken Master
Harry out of his perambulator to have a run in
the sun. The other baby was fast asleep, and little
Harry played with a ball.

They had sat a long time by the river, when,
afraid of keeping the children out too late, Lady
Paget's nurse went to the keeper's lodge, not ten
yards from their seat, to see the hour.

Master Harry, busy with his ball, remained
with Mrs Fitzgerald's nurse until he saw her disappear
round the corner, then he toddled after
her. iSTurse Crowe, fearing he miojht fall, followed
and took Master Harry in her arms. The child
struggled, and his ball rolled away into the hollies,
where Mrs Crowe searched for and found it.

When Mrs Crowe, with Master Harry and his
ball, returned towards her seat, to her dismay her
baby and the perambulator had disappeared.

j\Irs Crowe's cry of alarm brought Lady Paget's
nurse and the keeper's wife quickly from the
cottage. The three women stared all around in
wonder, until Mrs Burt noticed the track of narrow
wheels imprinted on the grass. These marks went
straight down the green bank towards the water.
In another moment all three women saw the perambulator
overturned in the river. Mrs Burt was
a strong active woman. Without a moment's
hesitation, kicking off her shoes, she jumped in,
and righted the perambulator, which was empty.
The current ran swiftly there ; and though Mrs
Burt could swim, she dared not go far, and saw
no trace of the baby. Nurse Crowe, like one
demented, ran up and down, but found no trace
of the child except one little shoe — a little black-kid
shoe, on which his mother had worked his
initials D. F. : this she found just by the seat
where the nurses had spent the best part of the
afternoon.

With a prayer that God would keep the poor
mother asleep. Lady Paget herself hurried to the
river, where men in boats were already searching
every pool.

Sir Eichard Paget and Sir John O'Brien were
telegraphed for ; and all through that winter night
men dragged the river for the body of the Earl's
heir. In the grey of the winter morning Sir
Eichard arrived from London, and went straight
to the river. Xiirse Crowe was still on the spot ;
she had waited at the keeper's cottage all night ;
she could not go away without the child, and
showed Sir Eichard excitedly the very spot where
she had left him.

Sir Eichard thought the accident incomprehensible.
How could the struggles of a waking baby
of eleven months' old roll the perambulator into
the river ? Down-hill it might have been possible
; but here the grass bank rose above the path.
And if the child's struggles had overturned the
little carriage, it must have rolled over two or
three times before falling into the water. The
child would have cried. Besides, the wheel-marks
had been on the grass, straight down to the water ;
and the nurse said she had left it standing sideways
to the river.

It was an extraordinary story. Ben Burt, Sir
Eichard's gamekeeper, who had lived here all his

life, who knew every turn of the river and every
twig on the bank, now called his master aside,
and pointing out that the green bank gently
sloping to the river was here six feet wide, said
stolidly he did not believe any young child could
have rolled or tumbled himself into the water.
Somebody must have put it in."

When Burt made this suggestion he looked very
gravely in his master's face. Sir Eichard was of
the same opinion, but — who could have rolled it
in ? Certainly not the nurse, who was a faithful
creature, and in despair at the child's loss, and
nobody else had been on the path.

Pointing to the back of the seat where the
nurses had been sitting, Burt showed some broken
twigs, and in the damp earth the print of a man's
brogue. The branches were freshly broken, and
Burt declared that footmark was not there the
previous morning. The footprint appeared as if
some one had pressed on the toes while pushing
through the holly hedge. This bench was Burt's
favourite working place, where the previous morning
he had sat cleaning his gain ; and here he
knew no villager would venture to prowl for a

lark, though a man might come through the hedge
for mischief.

When Burt said " mischief," Sir Eichard, knowing
the child's life had been threatened, started.
He suspected Burt was right — " some one had
been there " — but he could scarcely credit Burt's
theory that the child had been stolen by a tramp
with a view to making money. Burt was a phlegmatic,
solemn, elderly man ; and as he spoke to
his master, he stolidly said they, not he, intimating
he could trace footprints of a man and woman's
foot on the far side of the holly hedge.

Xot twenty yards from the river was the public
path through the thick wood, leading from the
coach-road of Bicester to the village of Queens-holme.
Villagers, gipsies, tramps, frequented this
wood — many a one went through unnoticed.
Catching at Burt's idea. Sir Eichard communicated
with Scotland Yard.

It was bad enough thinking the boy was accidentally
drowned — it was worse suspecting he
might be murdered by the Invincibles or stolen
by tramps. For a week men carefully searched :
no body was found, neither was there any clue

discovered to support Burt's hypothesis, so all concluded
the little heir was drowned.

During this week Mrs Fitzgerald slowly came
back to life, out of that land of shadows through
which she had wandered to the very brink of
the crave. The fever had left her in her risjht
mind, aware of her widowed state, but very weak,
still incapable of thought, and entirely dependent
upon Nellie, — so dependent, indeed, that,
satisfied with her boy being in her sister's
charge, she never asked to see him. Day by
day Lady Paget grew more nervous, dreading
to tell her widowed sister that she was also
childless. During these days poor old Lord
Blankshire was in so precarious a condition that
Sir John O'Brien was detained at Ballykillbegs.
On the 16th of January, however, Lord Blank-shire
died, and Sir John wrote that as soon as the
funeral was over he would come to Queensholme.
Anxious to see how her sister could bear bad
news, Lady Paget told Mrs Fitzgerald of the Earl's
death. As Mary heard, a few quiet tears fell; they
were the first she had shed since her husband's
death, and seemed to be a relief. Mrs Fitzgerald

was sorry to think of the old man's lonely death.
Little by little, a word at a time, she told her
sister how good he had always been to her, how
proud he was of Percy, how wrapt up he had
been in her baby. This news seemed to stimulate
the invalid, giving a something to talk upon that
was not too distressing for words, and that linked
her present with the past.

The doctors allowed, though fearfully weak,
their patient had not suffered from this excitement.


It was not until the day after she was told of
the Earl's death, that Mrs Fitzgerald suddenly
recognised the fact that her child was now Lord
Blankshire. As she recollected, she wept sad
tears for the child's dead father, who would so
ably have filled that position, which she, as the
widowed mother of the baby Earl, felt to be a
heavy responsibility. These were the first tears
Mrs Fitzgerald had shed for her husband, and
it was some time before she regained her composure.


In the evening she asked to see her child.
Lady Paget answered as the doctors had desired,

that she " must not see the child for fear of
infection."

On the 24th of January 1881, Alice Fitzgerald,
Earl of Blankshire, was buried, and that evening
Sir John O'Brien started for Queensholme.

On the 26th of January, for the first time, the
invalid was moved to a sofa. For two or three
days Mrs Fitzgerald had declared herself sufficiently
strong for this change ; but knowing what
was to be told when she was strong enough to
bear it, her mother and sister were loath to admit
her being convalescent.

Sir John O'Brien having arrived from Ireland,
it was now considered expedient the mother
should be told of the accident which had deprived
her of her. son.

As Lady Paget arranged her sister on the sofa,
she looked almost as white as the invalid. She
had been an indefatigable nurse, and Mary, kissing
her gratefully, said, " I have been a great care
to you, Nellie ; your cheeks are as white as my
own. You must not let my trouble overshadow
your life. Dick will never forgive me unless you
go out and get fresh roses in your cheeks.

Besides, with the care of a young Earl on my
mind, I must learn to exert myself."

Mrs Fitzgerald sighed, smiled a wintry smile,
as the pale sun does through the clouds of a
rainy day, as she made this remark, with an
enforced unselfish effort to reassure her sister,
whose harassed face she grieved to see.

Knowing the terrible disclosure impending.
Lady Paget could only command herself to
return the kiss, and then turning away she
left the room, while her father sat by the sofa
and told Mrs Fitzgerald some details of the old
Earl's last hours.

After that Sir John told his daughter what
had happened to her little son. How that story
was told, neither could ever recall, as when Mrs
Fitzgerald heard she was childless she fainted.

For a loner time Mrs Fitzgerald remained unconscious,
and when she revived slow tears rolled
down her white cheeks as she moaned, " My baby,
my poor baby! so cruel men have got you after all."

It seemed as if the bereaved mother's mind,
not realising the child's death, reverted to her
old horror, and thought the Invincibles had stolen

VOL. II.

her child. The impression of their threat was
so strong on her mind, that though the details
of the accident were all minutely recapitulated,
she did not seem to comprehend her little son
was drowned. Indeed for some hours the poor
thing raved, blaming Nellie for not having taken
better care of her child, always repeating, " So the
cruel men have got my little Des."

At first her sister, her father, and mother were
much distressed at this hallucination, and endeavoured
to explain how it was, but all their efforts
were ineffectual ; and seeing the mother took some
comfort from the idea of the child being stolen,
they allowed her to sleep in that delusion.

Next day Mrs Fitzgerald still spoke of her son
as being stolen, and in talking it over with her
father, he, humouring her idea, said " Xorah
Moriarty expressed the same opinion."

Xorah ! " exclaimed Mrs Fitzgerald, excitedly.
Of course — I forgot. What did she say ? Poor
North ! she will be sorry for my boy."

They are very respectable people, my dear ;
and they too are in trouble — leaving the country.
Life is not worth living, they say."

Where did you see them, and what did Xorah
say about my child ? "

"I saw them at the funeral. They were the
only tenants who paid the old man the respect
of following his coffin. I spoke to them afterwards,
wondering at seeing them where no one
else dared come, and ISTorah wept bitterly as
she asked for you, my dear."

But what did she say of my baby ? " asked
Mrs Fitzgerald, eagerly.

She said God had taken her baby from
trouble, but the League had taken yours. Poor
thing, she is in great trouble, having lost her
baby since you left, my dear. Her head is turned,
I think, fretting at leaving the little graves, for
she and Thade are going to emigrate."

Poor North, faithful creature," murmured the
widow. " Yes, I am sure North will find out
about my little Des. So she too has lost a little
baby. Oh, that terrible League ! Father, telegraph
for ISTorah."

Sir John had not expected this to be the result
of repeating North's words. He thought it a
foolish fancy, but anxious in all things to gratify

Mary, Sir John telegraphed to Harry to send North
Moriarty to Queensholme as soon as possible.

Harry replied by letter, that the Moriartyss
being again threatened, he had shipped them off
that very morning from Queenstown.

Mrs Fitzgerald was disappointed. Slowly remaining
strength, she never wavered in her belief
but that Des was alive, constantly reiterating the
idea, " North was sure to know about her boy."

CHAPTER XXV.

WAIFS AND Stays HOUSED HERE.

It was fine spring weather, and notwithstanding
Mrs Fitzgerald's grief, youth asserted itself, and
she rapidly regained strength.

She was anxious to recover, saying it was
essential she should get well quickly, in order to
search for her lost child.

Mrs Fitzgerald was so persistent in this delusion,
and talked so confidently of recovering
little Des, that the family, acquiescing in her
mania, though not agreeing with her views, had
constant search made in every direction.

No clue being discovered at Queensholme,
Mrs Fitzgerald implored to be taken " home " to
Ballykillbegs. Sir John would not hear of this.
Ireland was no fit place for her at present, he

answered, confiding to his wife his uneasiness at
the continuation of Mary's delusion, and fear that
grief had turned her brain. Again and again
Mrs Fitzgerald urged, and as often her parents
deferred yielding to her wishes on this head,
hoping each day she would be convinced of the
folly of looking for her child, whom all but herself
believed to lie at rest in the Severn.

Mrs Fitzgerald submitted to her parents' advice
until strong enough to revolt, and then they made
a compromise, Mary consenting to go with her parents
to Meadowlees — to Meadowlees, where she had
thought she could not bear to go again. But this
was only a submission to necessity; Mary would go
anywhere, do anything, to find a clue to her child.

It was quite the close of February — those little
pioneers of spring, the snowdrops, had forced their
white faces through the dark winter's decay, and
pointed hopefully to brighter days — when Mary
found herself again in her girlhood's home.

The next day she went from cottage to cottage
amongst their own people, talking of her child ; to
North's deserted home, where police were now in
charge; to the churchyard where Xorah's babies

lay, and where she ordered a headstone to be
placed. These little graves the widow decorated
with hothouse flowers, which made them a wonder
to the country folk as they went to early Mass on
the following Sunday. Flocking round, the poor
people admired the flowers, and blessed the kind
hand that had placed them there. But orders
were issued that flowers were not to lie on the
grave of children whose parents were unfaithful
to League law.

When Mrs Fitzgerald heard and understood
this edict, she went and gathered up the withered
blossoms, which had been strewn about and
trampled under foot, and carried them away. She
did not go again to that churchyard, and had not
yet ventured near where the old Earl and her
husband lay, because she could not go there
without the heir.

The first day of March brought a large packet
of letters, forwarded from Queensholme ; amongst
them was a letter with the Xew York post-mark,
addressed to Mrs Fitzgerald in a wretchedly bad
and unknown scrawl. It was an anonymous letter,
and read as follows : —

The Lord watches over all, and is good to
them as put their trust in Him. Let the widow
keep up her heart. One who would give heart's
blood to give her joy is trying to solve a mystery.
Xo more at present, from a True Friend."

There ! I knew I was right," exclaimed Mrs
Fitzgerald, in a trembling yet confident voice, as
she passed this missive on to her father. "I told
you Xorah would know about my child, and now
she has written to me."

Xorah could not write, neither could Thade ;
this uncouth sympathy, if from Xorah, must have
been written by a stranger. What did it mean ?
and did it come from Xorah ? Mrs Fitzgerald
was positive the letter was from Xorah, and that
it meant " good news." Her parents supposed it
limit be from Xorah — no one else would care too



write such mystical sympathy ; but they believed
it was just sympathy, and nothing more ; while
Harry opined this was a Land League impertinence,
meant to harass and annoy.

Notwithstanding the ambiguity of this queer
note, this incident gave a ray of hope to the whole
family, and a satisfying certainty to the mother's

heart. After waiting a day or two in hopes of
another letter, Mrs Fitzgerald's impatience prompted
a journey to New York. She asked Harry, would
he go and find Xorah for her ? This was thought
an absurd idea, almost as ridiculous as the large
reward the mother had previously offered for the
restoration of her child. " A bribe to knaves to
pawn off a counterfeit Earl," as her brother sagely
remarked when he read the advertisement.

But as money was a secondary consideration to
gratifying Mary, and Harry was glad of any chance
of new adventure, it was agreed, if no other news
came before the 17tli of March, he should start
for Xew York.

Every day Mary's wishes varied. One day she
was desirous of accompanying her brother to
America ; another, she feared to leave home, for
fear of missing what she sought to find. Her
uncertainty lasted until the 16th, on which day
two American letters, forwarded as before from
Queensholme, reached her. One had the Xew
York post-mark, and contained a little black-kid
shoe, with a D. F. in monogram, the fellow of the
one ]Mrs Fitzgerald already treasured as having

been worn by her child on the day he was lost.
The second contained a pair of little socks, which
she also recognised as her own work. There was
no writing with these tokens, nothing but the
scrawled addresses, and these were evidently
written by different hands. Sir John was amazed
and overjoyed ; he was now as certain as the
mother that the Earl's heir had been stolen, and
kissing her excitedly, exclaimed —

I shall telegraph to Scotland Yard ; we will
have the boy home in no time."

Yes, of course. But I must go myself ; North
will never trust my child to any one but me."

Mary was certain ISTorah had her child ; but Sir
John could not think this. His theory was, some
wretch had stolen the child to extract money, and
who, having put a good distance between themselves
and harm, were now opening preliminary
negotiations.

ISText morning Mary started with her brother
for New l^ork, and the next American mail
brought another letter for Mrs Fitzgerald, which
was very mysteriously worded, and demanded
money. This request for money confirmed Sir

John in his notion that swindlers were ready to
work on the mother's sensibilities, and make a
market out of her anxiety. The letter was as
follows : —

Gracious Lady, — For God's sake, send fifty
pounds as soon as ever you get this : it is sorely
needed by one who has left two babies asleep in the
old country, and who wants to buy a lovely black-eyed
boy to comfort the childless mother's heart.
You may address D. Smith, number 9 Watling
Street, corner of South Avenue, Quebec. The
money will be fetched from there — for D. Smith
is not in it at all himself ; but Peg Mahony is a
decent honest body — though herself does not
know from Adam what myself is writing to your
ladyship for — and don't let on to her for your life.
This is a terrible big secret, my wanting to buy
this child. I trust to your honour's help, though
I am only a simple poor body — a poor mother
who has two babies in glory, and who asks a rich
mother, who mourned for her one son, to help her
to hold a child in her arms again : more betoken,
this is a beautiful boy, and one who has a fairy

mark on his left knee, so that no ill-luck can ever
harm him. For god sake, have pity on the lonesome
mother that asks your aid ! One mother
understands how another mother's heart aches ;
and we should do unto others as we would they
should do unto us, — and deeds of charity is paid
back ten and a hundred fold by the blessed
Virgin and the saints, who are always watching
over us, and don't let a swallow fall to the ground
unbeknownst. Send the fifty pounds quick, for
Nance Mac, the woman who is married on Denis
Smith ; and the Lord love and comfort you, and
keep you from harm, now and for evermore, is the
prayer of a lonesome mother, whose heart aches to
get hold of this one little child."

Sir John's first impressions were that this was
an audacious swindle — that the offered reward of
one thousand pounds had attracted the attention
of the needy, and that Mary would receive dozens
of such applications. Lady O'Brien, however,
fancied she could read between the lines, and that
this was Xorah's cry for help in a strait which
she could not more explicitly explain.

Consequently, a telegram was forwarded to the
travellers, advising them to wait in New York for
letters ; and then Sir John O'Brien turned his
attention to home affairs.

Poor Sir John was very anxious at this time :
family trouble and the state of the country were
making him old before his time. The Irish Land
Bill was being formulated in, while Irish misrepresentations
were vociferating vituperation against
Irish landlords ret, St Stephen's. There, and in the
National and Eadical press, much mud was thrown
at those martyred victims. Some of this stuck; and
in the soil thus gathered, the confirmatory plant of
that bill — so aptly named afterwards, in the never-to-be-forgotten
slip of the tongue of the learned gentleman
who, when opening the Commission of the
first Court, very properly called it the Land League
Court — grew apace. And England added to the
long list of 700 years of Irish wrongs another
cruelty, by placing in the hands of " rebels " a
many-tailed scorpion-whip, whereby they could
coerce the loyal and efface Irish prosperity.

To continue our story, and see how widespread
are the evils of the Land League's illegal

coercion, it is essential we should visit the semi-french
city of Quebec.

The old familiar lines of this city are fast being
overlaid by the enterprise of recent plutocrats.
Some old quarters are intact, and some quaint
spots still remain, surrounded by, but not yet absorbed
into, the new town. In one of these old
places resides a very remarkable woman, Babett de
Lissan by name.

Babett de Lissan has resided so long in her
present house that the oldest inhabitant cannot
recall days when Babett was not there, nor name
the date of her arrival. Her home is in a little
court, now overshadowed by a new wide avenue,
the fine houses of which turn disdainful backs on
the old small residences in the court. Many of
the small houses have been removed to make way
for the lordly mansions — one whole side of the
court being swallowed up in the garden of the
next house, a wall replacing the six old tenements
removed. At right angles with this wall is Babett's
home — a sparsely furnished, quaint old house,
which, with a tiny garden in front, is kept scrupulously
clean and neat, and shut off from the

court by a low whitewashed wall and three stone
steps, at the bottom of which is a green-painted
gate. Only two other houses remain on this side
the court, and the space where three others stood
is now added to Babett's garden — that is, the remains
of the houses have been cleared away, the
spot is level and clean, and there is nothing
dividing the space from Babett's premises. There
are seats there, and Babett and her friends make
use of those seats. She has no lease of the
ground — is not even a tenant-twill — but, by the
consent and kindness of the landlord, has a 
over this little patch of ground, until he
needs it again.

Thus the larger portion of one side of the court
is Babett de Bissau's little kingdom — a kingdom
where she reigns over certain subjects, who yield
her loving obedience. The third side of the court
has houses of a similar old-fashioned type as Ba-bet's,
while the fourth is railed off from the main
road, and trees planted where originally the houses
of the fourth side of the court were. Thus while
on the left of the court runs the garden-wall of
one of the new houses lately built in the avenue.

on the right are the six old houses, of the same
pretensions as Babett's, intact except that the end
house of that row has had a new front, placed so
as to face this new street.

Babett herself is a small pleasant-looking woman,
with a sad sweet face, above which white hair is
piled on a cushion, and decently covered with a
snowy muslin cap. She also wears a white handkerchief
pinned across the bosom of her black
gown, and is a singularly attractive-looking woman,
a woman much respected and loved by all in her
neighbourhood.

In early years Babett's home had held a large
family of De Lessons, and there Babett had devoted
many long years to the care of a fractious bedridden
mother, — a mother who, tradition tells us,
was very particular as to the "De" before her name,
and of whom it is said that she had known better
times, kept good company, and been a Court lady.
This was gossip. It may have been true ; for certainly
the air of Madame was, despite her fractious
temper, very superior. But be that as it may,
Babett never said she had enjoyed luxury, or admitted
— which, despite her reticence, was a patent

fact to her neighbours — that she now had " hard
times."

But it had been hard times for the young woman,
who supported by her needle while she tended this
querulous invalid mother.

And Babett had harder days later on, when she
alone remained to guide and guard two young and
beautiful sisters — wilful, idle, uneducated creatures,
who were for a few years an anxiety, and no help,
to the sister who was the bread-winner. These
sisters died young, and left Babett three nameless
little ones to provide for.

Poor Babett ! For years she had expended
health and strength, a wealth of love and hope,
on those who took all she gave and were thankless.
Many remembered how, for years after Chalice's
death — the youngest, best beloved, most beautiful,
and most ungrateful of her sisters — Babett had
never smiled, yet none amongst them had ever
heard the generous sister murmur at the burden
they had laid upon her. Babett always carried
her cross bravely, did her best, and never wasted
time pondering over the problem of the unevenly
divided blessings and pains of this life. She never

VOL. II. p

lamented fate had given her a bitter cup, but,
practical and unselfish, did her best to support the
waifs left to her mercy.

The care of three babies — the eldest not yet
three years of age, the youngest but a fortnight
old — of course tied Babett to the house, where, her
eyesight having failed, it was no longer possible
for her to earn daily bread by cunning needlework.
Her next-door neighbour — for at that date all
the houses in the court existed — was a hardworking
charwoman, out every and all day long.
Now she was laid aside from work ; she had
a baby which was her pride, and which she delighted
to nurse. How to combine the pleasure
of her nursing and the necessity of her charing,
was her puzzle.

This young mother was Irish, and more than
once she had attempted to show sympathy, and
had given needed help to Babett in her last trouble.
One night this young mother came across, and
asked Babett if she would take charge of her baby
for tomorrow, as one of her best employers had
sent requiring her immediate services.

Babett loved children, and four were as easy to

mind as three. Mrs Delay left her her baby
that day, and many days after. The babies prospered
with Babett ; she fed them, kept them clean,
tidy, and happy, and they grew to love her dearly.
Soon all the working mothers left their little ones
at Babett's. Mothers going away for days, left
their children with her during their absence.
Poor men, whose wives were dead, carried their
helpless babies, and left them with Babetttt. Babetttt's
became a recognised institution, and the lonely
Frenchwoman a centre round which many affections
twined. Many boys and girls about the
court loved and called her Mother Babett ; and
men and women far away in distant States, had
kindly recollections of the loving care with
which Mother Babett had nursed their younger
years.

Mother Babett was now old and growing very
infirm, but still she loved and nursed " little ones,"
that is, she took them in as of old, and kept a
girl to do all that was needed. Babett was particular
about her maid. She must be clean, and
she must be kind-hearted, full of a magnetic sympathy,
and good to the little ones. Babett generally

found what she wanted amongst the Irish
arrivals at Quebec. Many a soft-hearted girl,
fresh from her Irish cabin, had Babett taken in,
mothered, and trained, until fitted for and provided
with a good place ; and then Babett looked
out for another. She preferred the Irish girls :
they sang, laughed, played, and were light-hearted
with the little ones. They, like herself, loved le
hon Diei et la Vierge ; and her neighbour, Peg
Mahony, generally brought some girl from the old
country, whom she was glad to place in safekeeping
with Babett.

Besides supplying nurse-girls. Peg Mahony, who
was mistress of the corner house that had put a
new face to the new street, often sent the old
Frenchwoman babies — children of working people
who frequented her house.

One morning early in March 1881, Peg brought
Babett a baby boy. He had been left with herby
her dead husband's brother's son. His wife
had died on the passage out to America ; he had
gone to look for work, and had asked her meanwhile
to take care of the child. Peg told him
she had no time to look after babies, but knew

one that had, who could and would do well for
the child. So Jerry Mahony left her the baby,
while he went away to work on the railway.
Scarcely a week elapsed before there was word
of a bad accident on that line, several men injured
and killed ; amongst these last was said to be
Jerry Mahony. Peg bewailed Jerry's untimely
end, which left her three children instead of two
to provide for.

If 1881 was a hard year in Ireland, it was
also a bad spring in Quebec, which was thronged
with Irish immigrants, many of whom were expatriated
patriots, who, owing to a short crop of
potatoes and a full crop of sedition, had thought
it wise to try change of air and scene. Everyday
birds of passage arrived and departed. The
death of one of the many, or the proceedings of
any individual, were not chronicled by the daily
press ; but a good deal of gossip circulated, as
questions were asked by strangers as to work or
friends, without anybody quite knowing where
the news came from. It was in this way Jerry
Mahony 's death was discussed in Peg Mahony 's
parlour, where many Irish came, and where Peg

always gave a hearty welcome to the new-comer,
and a civil answer to all inquiries.

The court where Babett resided was often entered
by Peg Mahony's visitors, many of whom looked
with admiring eyes at her nursery, who chatted
with her, or had acquaintance with her maid.
One afternoon a decent looking younfj woman,
dressed in black, looked so longingly over the
wall at her little ones, that Babett asked her to
enter.

This stranger was communicative. She said
she and her husband were strangers ; that she,
ha\T.ng just lost a baby, and being far from strong,
remained in Quebec, while he went away to find
work. She was childless, loved children dearly,
and was very lonely during her husband's absence.
This stranger craved permission to nurse Babett's
little ones. Babett made this chatty woman, who
was a childless mother, heartily welcome to sit by
her fire, and assist in putting her babies to bed.
Day after day the stranger came, grew quite
friendly with Mother Babett, fondled all the little
ones in turn, and discussed their various beauties
in a way that delighted the old Frenchwoman's

heart. She would gladly have kept Mrs Smith
as an assistant, but that Mrs Smith said she everyday
expected to be summoned to join her husband,
and that she could not be bound to time.

Mrs Smith was also friendly with Mrs Mahony.
Every day she came in and out of her house, and
was very interested in that good woman's troubles,
heartily sympathising with her lamentations, when
she discussed that added burden to her cares, Jerry
Mahony's child.

Indeed Mrs Smith suggested it would be a
good plan for Mrs Mahony to look out for someone
to adopt the child ; hinting, if her husband
did not " say against it," there was nothing herself
would like better — that is, " if it was a healthy,
wholesome child."

It is all that'' assured Mrs Mahony. " The
finest baby at Mother Babett's."

Is it the black-eyed one ? " asked Mrs Smith,
eagerly ; " for he is the born image of the child
I have just buried. If it is him, he would bethe
world and all of comfort to me."

But Peg Mahony was a rigidly conscientious
person ; she had scruples about parting with her

orphan relative. His father was brother's son to
her dead husband. She could not let him go
without knowing what she was doing ; the transaction
required considerable — consideration.

Mrs Smith also desired to consult her husband.
If he consented, no doubt a " fitting consideration "
would be forthcoming ; but she must have patience,
for " her man was away in Iowa."

Pending the arrival of Mr Smith, Mrs Smith
devoted herself to Babett and the babies. These
two women were confidential together, Babett acquainting
this young woman with more of her
past than she ever named to other visitors. She
gave Mrs Smith the benefit of her experience,
told her how careful good-looking young women
ought to be, and at length, presuming on their
close intimacy, remonstrated with Mrs Smith on
the unsuitableness of a young woman in her
position adopting such a monstrous frizzled fringe
a freak of fashion which, with sarcastic humour,
the old Frenchwoman declared quite spoilt Mrs
Smith's expression. Babett also condemned the
fashionable bonnet, declaring both were unsightly
and preposterous excrescences — vulgarities which

destroyed the beauty and character of Mrs Smith's
fine Milesian face.

The victim took these personalities in good
part. She said good-humouredly, " Her man had
a great eye for fashions, and as long as he was
pleased, she did not care how she looked." So
Mrs Smith, despite her French friend's objections,
still cultivated her big fringe, and clung to her
fine black bonnet and its black lace fall. In
her rich brogue she would excuse these frivolities :

Sure the quality wears them ; and my man —
God bless him for it ! — is a good husband, he is ;
thinks the fine clothes and making a lady of me
will cure the pain in my mother's heart. It is
proud of my looks he is ; and though you see mea
broken-hearted mother, I was once thought the
lily of Killarney. Poor man, he little knows
what it is I long for. Ah then, God bless you !
and give me that dark-eyed darling. Sure it is
the blessed image he is of the one I buried. Sure
it is a beauty he is, and thriving grandly. Lord
help us all, but it is a sad world of trouble I
Think of me without a child at all ; and look
at him and think what a joy he would be to the

poor mother who brought lira into this miserable
world, if only the good Lord had seen fit to leave
them together. Sure myself cannot take my two
eyes off him, he is such a beauty. Oh, glory !
look at the fine legs of him, and the health, and
the strength, and the beauty, and the lucky
mole 1 " With that Mrs Smith wept tears for
her own dead baby, and sympathetic ones for
the mother of the baby in her arms, while Babett
still impressed her views.

Old, Old, head garçon. Mais, Madame Seeth,
why you wear the hair that maiixais fashion ?
why you wear the chateau .? Vous etez hates. I
no love you like that. Mon Dieu I mon Dieu !
why you cry so ? You get dozen more babies.
And for me — all these week do flourish; 
le petite Id " — the old woman would point
triumphantly to some other fatted baby, some
infant specially worthy of notice, because at that
moment distinguishing him or herself by either
extra feat of infantile intelligence or clever mischief.


But Mr Smith neither came for nor sent for
his wife. And Mrs Smith, despite the solace she

took from Babett and her babies, began to look
more anxious and worn.

One morning, when Mrs Smith sat in Babett's
kitchen, a messenger came across from Peg
Mahony's, to say she was wanted. Putting down
the child she held in her arms, Mrs Smith asked,
Was it a letter they had for her?" Mrs Mahony's
daughter, a girl of ten, shook her head and said
No ; " adding, " There is a gentleman wanting
a word with you."

Putting on her jacket, Mrs Smith pulled out
her fringe, and arranged her veil carefully — very
carefully, considering she was only crossing the
yard to Mrs Mahony's parlour. But then, as
the girl said, she was going to speak with " a
gentleman " ; perhaps that was the reason she
arranged her head - dress so carefully. Babett
thought so, and was accordingly scandalised. She
would remonstrate with this Mrs Smith on her
return. Being disgusted, she turned away, and
did not see the strange look that passed over
Mrs Smith's face as she stooped and kissed the
little dark-eyed boy, who was seated on the rug
busily gnawing a biscuit.

As Mrs Smith went swiftly out, she looked
more inclined to run away than go to meet
the gentleman " who had sent for her. Little
Molly Mahony, trotting after her, did not see
her face, or guess why she paused outside
the side-door of Mrs Mahony's, No. 9 Watling
Street, corner of South Avenue. Mrs Smith had
only stood a moment at the side-door, when two
men, leisurely sauntering on the opposite side of
South Avenue, turned and crossed towards the
court. Turning away from these, Mrs Smith
went into Mrs Mahony's house through the side-door.


He is in the kitchen, if you please, ma'am,
with mother," said little Molly, as Mrs Smith
looked doubtingly from one to the other of the
doors opening off the little passage.

Mrs Mahony was seated in the kitchen, and
opposite to her, also seated, was a middle-aged,
portly gentleman. They seemed the best of
friends ; and indeed Mrs Smith was sufficiently
acquainted with Peg's habits to know none but
favoured guests were received in this kitchen,
her parlour being the general reception-room, and

her shop to the front the place open to the
general public.

That is herself, sir — the only Mrs Smith I
know in Quebec. Look at her, and see for
yourself. Herself has not a black hair in her
head, as I told you."

The stout elderly gentleman looked pleasantly
at the new-comer. She was a very pale woman,
with a heavy red auburn or sandy fringe, from
beneath which handsome grey eyes looked with
innocent inquiry into his. There was a certain
purpose and strength of will expressed by her
well closed lips and steady eyes.

This stranger gentleman regarded Mrs Smith
intently ; while she, with a certain honest surprise,
returned his scrutiny. As she looked, the lines
of her mouth softened, trembled ; and tears she
would not let fall suffused her brave eyes. This
man was a stranger — a man she had never seen
before — which was a surprise, a decided relief,
and at the same time a disappointment. Hence
her emotion. She had expected somebody —
something ; and what could a perfect stranger
want with her ?

After regarding her fixedly, the gentleman said
pleasantly —

Though she is not the black-haired Mrs Smith
I inquired about, she is a very fine handsome
woman, whose acquaintance I am proud to make.
Smith is not an uncommon name ; in fact, my
name is also Smith," said that gentleman, as he
stood up and bowed to Mrs Smith. " I am just
come from the west of England, and know there
are some cousins of mine in this neighbourhood —
at least they were about here some little while since.
Perhaps, madam, you may have met with them ? "

Well, I don't know who may be here of the
name — as you say, it is not uncommon ; we are
strangers, and I do not think my husband has met
any of his family since we came here. His people
come from " Mrs Smith paused, as if

not caring to say where Mr Smith was born, or
as if unable to remember.

Mr Smith politely inquired if he was from
Herefordshire or Worcestershire, adding —

I myself am a Worcester man, and though
I never was in Ireland, I have a cousin who married
an Irish wife ; and indeed I do not wonder

at his doing so if all Irish ladies are like you two."
This pleasant Mr Smith smiled comprehensively
on both the Irishwoman as he spoke, adding, " I
know my cousin's wife was a Blankshire woman ;
perhaps one of you ladies may come from that
neighbourhood."

Peg Mahony said she was from Dublin, and
had never seen Blankshire in her life. Mrs Smith
also declared Blankshire was unknown to her, but
added, she knew a woman who came from there.
After a few more civil speeches, Mr Smith prepared
to depart, politely apologising to both ladies
for the trouble he had given them. Mr Smith
was very marked in his attentions to Mrs Ma-holy,
who bridled beneath the sleek gaze of this
pleasant man. Mrs Smith's face had softened ashe
spoke of Ireland, and now she asked, would it
be any help to him to see her Blankshire friend.

Well, if it is not too much trouble, I should
like to ask about my cousins. It would be a
pleasure to hear about them before I move on,
but I scarcely like to trespass any further on
your kindness."

Mr Smith was very polite, an exceedingly

pleasant gentleman, and he had evidently made a
good impression on both these Irishwoman.

Oh, it is no trouble at all," replied Mrs
Smith, quietly. " She lodges in the same house
with me, and I am going home now. If you like
to come along with me, you can see her in a
quarter of an hour's time."

With a promise to call in again and report his
success to Mrs Mahony, the polite gentleman accepted
of Mrs Smith's invitation. The two went
out together, Mrs Smith taking the privilege of
old acquaintance by passing through the side-door
into the court, instead of going through the parlour
and shop, and from the court turning on to
the side-walk and up the avenue, without passing
Mrs Mahony's front door.

This was a way Mrs Smith often went — it cutoff
the corner, she said, and brought her quicker
home ; and she never could tear herself away from
the gossip and comfort of the parlour, if she once
sat down and listened to the talk there. Mrs
Mahony watched them as they went, hoping that
fine, pleasant-spoken Mr Smith would not be in
too great a hurry leaving Quebec. As Mrs Ma-holy

looked after the pair, her heart opened to
Mr Smith, and she was thankful to know her
friend Mrs Smith had " a man of her own to the
fore."

Mr and Mrs Smith walked soberly up the
avenue, side by side, the man talking in the same
easy sociable manner to the woman, while they
crossed the road and walked up St Helter Street.
This street was unfrequented, and there was nobody
within a dozen yards of them, when in the
same pleasant, complimentary tone, he said —

I once knew a fine handsome woman of the
name of Xorah — fine names and fine women often
go together — and you do look like a Xorah. I
wish you were that friend, for I have good news
for my friend North Moriarty."

Whist, whist, for the love of God ! " exclaimed
the woman, in awe-stricken under-tone, her lips
closing, and a scared look coming into the eyes ;
she turned full on him, while she said, " These
streets are full of evil eyes and listening ears.
Who are you at all, and what brought you here ? "

As the woman spoke, she never altered her
pace, but her companion knew by her tone that

VOL. II. Q

he had found the friend he needed ; still, in the
easy friendly tone of an old acquaintance, he
cautiously replied —

"Well, then, I came hoping to find a friend
who would do me a favour in matching a little
article I have here. You see men are stupid
about these things ; perhaps you could assist and
save me further trouble in looking her up." As
Mr Smith spoke, he partially pulled the paper offa
small parcel he took from his pocket and held
it towards her.

Taking it from his hand, the woman pressed it
to her heart, while she gasped —

Thank God ! thank God ! herself understood,
and — you have brought the money ? My heart
is sore with the waiting and the dread. I was
afeared they might take him away before I could
get the money, or find me out and kill me. Oh,
sir, it has been a terrible time ! "

The woman almost sobbed, and looked piteously
up in the man's face, though she still continued
her measured walk down the street, and even in
her excitement had controlled her voice so as not
to let it be heard by chance strangers.

Mrs Fitzgerald is here ; yon must come to herat
once," answered Mr Smith decisively.

Oh, glory ! herself ! poor lamb ! And does
she know he is alive, and well, and hearty ? "
She knows nothing, but trusts you implicitly."
North stopped short ; then spoke rapidly —
Thank God, she trusts me ! Then you do as
I bid you. Go back to her straight, and tell her
to leave this town at once ; to drive away quick ;
to go anywhere ; to leave this town before she is
seen. There is them about that will know her,
and do a mischief if they see her. Send her
away quickly — hide her — and to-night you come
to Peg Mahony's with the money. Then, with the
help of God, before two days 1 shall put the boy
in her arms."

But where is he ? — you have the child ? "

Whist ! whist ! Lord help us, Imam a poor

woman, without chick or child," droned Mrs
Smith, as a man and woman walked past. " My
husband may be coming any day — to-night, perhaps,
and I may be off at a minute's notice."
When this pair were out of ear-shot she whispered,
" Go, go quickly ; we are watched," adding

aloud, " Good day, kindly Mr Smith ; it is glad
my man will be to hear you are over ; and if you
want to meet friends, you could not go to a better
house than Mrs Mahony's, 9 Watling Street."

With a friendly nod, Mrs Smith left her companion,
crossed the street, walked quickly down
the first turning, then up another, down another ;
in fact, taking every corner on the right side of
the street, until she was a mile away from Watling
Street, and came to where, at the entry
of a tall house, a little old man sat on a stool
cobbling old shoes.

Price," said she to this individual, " it is come.
I'll be going as soon as I can. You send word to
Dan McCarthy ; tell him to tell himself I am all
right, and will be with him as soon as ever I
can."

God bless you, child ! " said Price ; " it is a
credit you are to the name. Blood is thicker
than water, and Dan himself will be glad to see
you. Though himself is contractor for the League,
that need not stand between you and him, for
Dan is my son, and I have taught him to be a
close friend to all of the name. Lord save us !

but the world is wide enough for us all, and it is
a mistake importing Irish grievances along with
Irish paupers. Begin a new life here, child, and
forget what is behind ye. But, by my faith, it is
hard to be honest anywhere now, with speeches
and the work, stirring up all that is evil and
grasping in a poor man's heart. Sure enough,
there was Father Connor at the mission-hall last
night teaching the boys Irish lies, and swearing
them into the Fenian Brotherhood, — for all the
world as they did five-and-thirty years ago, before
you was thought of, and before I got into trouble,
or thought I should have to leave Killbally-
mace vogue. Ah ! but it is a queer world — the
same story over and over again. Sure I was in
the thick of it that time with the Whiteboys, and
sorrow a hap'orth of good it did any ; left us all
worse off than we were before, and drove me from
a tidy bit of ground at home, to end my days
mending old shoes in a strange land. I have
lived quiet enough in Quebec for the last thirty-five
years ; and for all, there is my son, who never
set eyes on Ireland, setting up for a patriot, burning
for murder, and mischief, and lawlessness, just

as if he sucked it in with mother's milk. I never
taught him such folly, no more did his mother —
she was a decent girl of the Savannahs ; but
there he is, as wild as any of ' the boys ' — mad
for dynamite and wickedness that was never
thought of in my days of patriotism. ' It is in
the blood says Father Connor to me. ' Born in
him ! ' says I to his reverence ; ' civil a bit. He
never sucked in murder with his mother's milk.
Myself is inclined to think it is the teaching your
reverence gave him in the school, and the folly he
has learned listening to speeches.' Bead, Father
Connor did not relish my plain-speaking one bit ;
he just said I was an old fool. Sure, I know
I am old — past work now, seventy-live this
Patrick's Day — I know I am not clever, but I
have not gone through the world without picking
up some sense. I am not quite the fool his reverence
thinks. I know an honest woman when I
see her, and I know the devil is busy at many a
poor man's elbow these days."

God bless you. Price, and thank you for being
good to me ! I must be going now — have you
any word for me before I leave ? "

None. If you want to learn patriotism as it
is to-day, you will have to go elsewhere, to the
mission-hall, where Father Connor will be teaching
dynamite and divinest to-night from eight
o'clock till ten or eleven. God speed you, and
bring you safe, child ; it is proud I am to think
the like of you is one blood with myself. Lord
save us ! it is a queer world — a queer world !
Young blood is hot. Oh, the pity of it ! Oh,
the pity of it ! " While the old man mumbled,
the young woman waited ; when he ceased, she
again said —

Good-bye, and God bless you ! " After which
she walked quickly away. Price watched her as
she went, and then again gave his mind to cobbling
the brogues.

CHAPTER XXVI.

A SKILFUL Robbery.

About eight o'clock that evening, when Mrs Smith
visited Mrs Mahony's parlour, it was, as usual,
crowded, and Peg busily attending to the creature-comforts
of her friends. In the seat of honour by
the chimney, with a pot of beer by his side, and
pipe in his mouth, sat Mr Smith, looking as much
at home as if he had lived there all his life. Mr
Smith beamed all around, and was evidently in
high favour with the hostess, who bestowed her
smiles and wit more constantly on him than any
other individual in the company.

When Mrs Smith arrived, she first stood by
the door, then near the fire opposite to Mr Smith,
until she saw a vacant seat beside her namesake;
into this she subsided, and somehow, unnoticed by

the company, received from him the money she
needed.

Then Mrs Smith endeavoured to attract the
attention of her hostess.

Mrs Mahony saw Mrs Smith, had seen her
change her place, was again pleased at remembering
she had " a man of her own," but not at all
pleased at perceiving the incipient admiration with
which her favoured guest smiled upon this younger
and better-looking countrywoman.

The hostess was slightly jealous. Mrs Smith
was feverishly anxious ; she smiled at Mr Smith,
she smiled at Mrs Mahony, longing for a chance
of slipping the twelve golden pieces she held in
the heel of her fist " to the horny palm of the
latter. She longed with an agony of impatience
to pay the money and obtain possession of the
little waif, whose guardianship was to be purchased
for this modest sum.

Peg was jealous, but Peg was also practical,
and now busy ; she would not answer to Mrs
Smith's " wreathed smiles," but intent on much
serving, bustled round, allowing no customer's
wants to remain one moment supplied.

Innocently smiling on the promiscuous company,
Mrs Smith at last mano-ed to draw attention too



herself, and then confided to the company her
family concerns.

Sure, it is lonely I am without my man.
Says he to me in a letter to-day morning, the
sight of you would be meat and drink to me ; but
this is a poor place, and a hard life, and I don't
ask you to come. He is that careful of me. But
sure I am too good a wife to leave my good man
wanting me ; and if Squashaquashee, he calls it,
were twice as bad a place as he says it is, what is
Good enough for him is 2,006. enough for me. I
won't know an easy hour until I am alongside
him again. I am half thinking I'll be off in the
morning."

To-morrow morning; is it ? " asked Mrs Ma-holy,
pausing in the midst of her serving and
looking a little disappointed.

To-morrow, with the help of God, I hope
to be on the road to him," replied Mrs Smith
serenely, apparently forgetful of all other interests
in her eagerness to rejoin her husband.

Why, I thought he was coming for ye," said

Peg, Still standing at attention, and glad to see
Mr Smith's eyes benignly watching her, and not
fixed regretfully on her friend. " We \Yill miss
you, Mrs Smith ; and why go so soon ? "

Oh, I am tired waiting, and I am sure himself
is wearying for me. The best friends must
part. It is sorry I am to go away from a comfortable
cosy room like this ; but it is travelling I must
be, and if it please you, Mrs Mahony, I will now-pay
you the trial? I owe for the bits of groceries."

Mrs Mahony laughed significantly as she declared
she must retire to the desk in her kitchen
to make out the score, ending —

It is a queer time of night to be making out
a bill, but good money is welcome at any hour to
a poor hard-working widow woman like myself.
Come into the kitchen, Mrs Smith."

As Mrs Mahony left the parlour she looked to
Mrs Smith to follow. The ratification of that
pending transfer, the traffic in infant flesh, was
not a mercantile transaction she cared to negotiate
in the publicity of her parlour.

With an airy " Short scores make long friends,"
Mrs Smith stood up to follow her hostess.

But a shrill scream from the kitchen brought
the whole company to their feet, and one and all
crushed through the open door to the passage.

In the kitchen doorway leant Mrs Mahony, her
fat hands clasping each other across her capacious
breast, in a vain effort to still the wild throbs of
her heart. Confronting her stood a slouching
young man, to whom she was volubly ejaculating —

Blessed Virgin ! Holy angels ! Lord, have
mercy on us ! Did I ever see the like ! May
the Lord keep us from harm — may I never sin —
Jerry Mahony, the sight of you has almost been
the death of me ! May the Lord stand between
us and harm, is it alive you are ? Sure, myself is
after paying Father Evan ten honest shillings to
say a mass for your soul. May I never see
heaven, Jerry, but it is dead and buried I thought
you — dead and buried, wanting nothing on earth,
only a bed in heaven. May the holy Virgin and
the blessed Peter preserve you, Jerry ! but how
did you come to life again ? Sure, it is praying
the saints to shorten your purgatory I was."

So much Mrs Smith overheard ; then, slipping
through the crowd, she touched Mv Smith's arm

significantly, and quickly left the house. One by
one the parlour company returned to their beer
and pipes, leaving Mrs Mahony to hear Jerry's
history ; then Mr Smith strolled out. When he
appeared, Mrs Smith, who had waited in the
shadow of the trees, walked away towards Russell
Street, and he walked in the same direction.
Down Russell Street brought them to a small
private square, at this time of night quite deserted.
Here Mrs Smith waited until Mr Smith came up
with her, and then he saw a white scared face,
and eyes full of fear looking up at him, while she
whispered —

Oh, mother of Moses ! what shall I do at all ?
If Jerry Mahony sets eyes on me the murder is
out. And the child — the poor helpless child !
Lord save him from harm — how can we get him
now ? "

In a few short words the frightened woman
told all the dangers she knew, and what she
apprehended, to the man, explaining how Jerry
Mahony's unexpected advent complicated the
business, and entirely frustrated her arrangement.


Do you mean to say these people have this
child, and that we cannot claim and carry him
away ? Nonsense ! " The man spoke with an
air of conscious superiority, with a well-bred
official contempt for her womanly ingenuity and
futile subterfuges.

I just mean what I say. He is close. You
may claim, but there are a hundred chances you
wouldn't get the child — alive. Bullets is as
plenty — and murderers more plenty — in Quebec
than in Ireland ; and there are enemies as plenty
as pebbles everywhere. While you would be
proving your legal right, there is them to the
fore would make short work with the darling. Be
said by me who has watched, followed, and waited,
with my heart in my mouth, for two long months.
I know what I am talking about, and you must
not risk the child's life by making any claim.
Proving is tedious work, and money won't buy
him now. Myself sees but one chance, and that
is, that I should steal the child — and steal him
this blessed night. If once they guess any of us
know the child is alive, his life would not be safe
one hour ; and if they knew myself was in it, it

is short shrift and sudden glory they would give
me."

Then what do you propose to do ? "

When is the first train out of this ? "

To where ? "

Myself does not care — anywhere — the farther
off the better."

Standing under a lamp, Mr Smith consulted his
railway guide.

"The first, I see, is 11.30 — that goes south to
Port Lewis."

That will do elegantly."

How will you manage ? "

Myself, Mrs Smith, will steal Jerry Mahony's
boy. They all know I had my heart set on that
child. Go back you to Mahony's, finish your
glass, and keep them pleasant there a bit. Then
slip out and get a car ready by eleven o'clock at
the corner of Russell Street there, by that empty
house, where with the help of God I'll join you
with the boy. Then it rests with you to get us
out of this as secretly and quickly as possible.
Eemember every moment's delay may cost more
than one life. Jerry is back, myself saw Daneen

Shea to-day morning ; there are plenty of blackguards
here who are in it ; and if I am seen, the
murder is out. You must be 'cute, and quiet, and
careful; and for the love of God don't fail me
when I come with the child, or, more like than
not, you will never see me or him again alive.
It is a small sin for Mrs Smith to steal Jerry
Mahony's child, and no one will be a taste the
worse, barren' the misfortune of Mrs Mahony losing
her ten pounds ; but if Mrs Fitzgerald is
known to be after her son, or Xorah Moriarty is
seen in Quebec, the Bank of England would not
buy, or the British army take, the Earl's heir
alive. Do you mind ? "

After a few more questions, Mr Smith yielded
to the woman's advice, and with measured step
rejoined Mrs Mahony's happy family, where he
made himself so agreeable to the widow that she
quite forgave Mrs Smith's sudden departure. He
was deeply interested in Jerry Mahony's history,
quite ingratiated himself with that young man,
finally proposing that Mr Mahony's health and
escape from danger should be drunk by all the
company at this expense.

It was after ten o'clock, and all the babies
were in bed, when Mrs Smith paid Babett a visit.
Apologising for intruding at this unseemly hour,
Mrs Smith^tearfuUy explained, this being the anniversary
of her baby's birth, she felt more than usually
low — so horribly nervous that she could not
bear to lie down alone, and in fact must have some
company. Sobbing aloud, she exclaimed —

I just longed for your kind sympathy. It is
a cruel thing to be in a strange country away
from one's husband, with the heart aching for the
dead baby. Sure, it is longing to feel the little
arms round my neck I am. God help us ! but it
is lonely I feel everywhere except here, with the
babies before my eyes. God bless you ! and lend
me one till the morning, to lie on my heart and
keep it still through the lonesomeness of the
night. May the blessed Peter and Paul reward
you for all you have done to comfort me ! If it
were not for your goodness, it is a hard time
Nance Smith would have had in Queen-bec. Sure
it is tired you are of me, I know, but I cannot
stop talking as long as I get a good soul like you
to hear to me. I'll be going now, if you just let

VOL. II. K

me take a baby, for the comfort of feeling the
arms round me."

So Mrs Smith tearfully entreated Babett, who,
extremely tired after the day, was annoyed at
being kept awake. She answered her visitor with
sleepy civility, and wished her good night. But
Mrs Smith never moved ; she talked and she
wept; in fact, made so much noise that she
awoke some of the babies, who added their cries
to her tears. This could not be permitted. Babett
could not have this person clacking and disturbing
her pets ; better far let her take one of them
for the night, then the others would settle down
nicely.

Babett was old, very sympathetic, and very sensitive
for her babies' comfort ; she was also fond
of this poor " Mrs Seeth," — so as she went from
one to the other, hushing the restless little ones,
she thought she had best agree to the sorrowful
mother's petition.

Which will you take ? " she asked.

Mrs Smith peeped into one little crib after the
other, until she came to one where the boy she
wanted was fast asleep.

It won't do to take one that is awake," she
said ; " I could not can one that would be crying
through the street. Here is a dot fine and sound ;
if I roll him up in a shawl, he'll never stir nor get
a taste of cold. It is only a step to my place, you
know ; if I pop him under my cloak, I can carry
him quite cosy, and sure he'll travel under it as
comfortable as if he were a king." As Mrs Smith
spoke, she showed her warm fur-lined cloak. Babett
was busy with a very fractious infant whose cries
would not be stilled, so she answered, somewhat
querulously —

What child you want ? Oh ! oh ! see what
trouble you give me — pauvre petite ! pauvre petite!"
as she hushed the crying child over which she was
leaning. " Oh ! you want take Jerry Ma-o-nee's
boy. Yes, you may take he for to-night. Gogo,
and let me hush my beetle ones to rest. You
bad woman, to come wake up my pets."

Rolling the sleeping child in his blanket. Airs
Smith put him under her cloak, and with a
grateful " Good night " to Babett, let herself out
into the night. Warily crossing the court, she
heard voices still talking at Mrs Mahony's, but

saw no one in the street as she turned out of the
court. She was hardly in the street, however,
before a man came out of No. 9 Watling Street,
and walked after her.

For a moment she hesitated what to do, then,
bending her head over her burden, went steadily
on. Passing the turn to Russell Street, she crossed
the wide avenue, and took the first turn on the
opposite side of the way.

This part of the town was deserted ; every one
but herself and those following footsteps seemed
to have gone home. Her heart throbbed wildly, the
strength seemed failing in her limbs, her breath
came in short sobs, and her steps grew slower and
slower as she went up this unknown street.

It was a still night, the streets were empty, and
the echo of those feet struck ominously on her
ear as she walked feebly onward. They vere
Jerry Mahony's ; and though on glancing backward
she now saw herself alone in this street, she
crouched in an entry until the last echo reached
her anxious ears. As she waited, a clock struck
eleven, and then, gathering her strength and
courage, she retraced her way to Russell Street.

There, apparently out of space, Mr Smith
joined her, and the two walked silently down
that street to a carriage, into which Mr Smith
carefully handed her, and then ordered the driver
to go to the railway station.

The woman sat breathless, almost choked with
excitement, as she pressed the child close in her
arms, and remained silent.

During that short drive she sat quite still,
permitting Mr Smith to shove back her red
fringe and roll a woollen muffler round her head
and neck.

They were only just in time at the station, and
few people were about to notice the burly Mr
Smith as he placed the lady in a carriage he had
already secured for their separate use.

It was not until they steamed out of the station
that the woman hysterically murmured, " Thank
God ! "

Mr Smith's forethought having secured a private
compartment for himself and his invalid wife,
North was now able to throw back her veil, and
the child growing restless, to open the sheltering
cloak and look lovingly down on the little Earl.

Glory ! isn't it wonderful ? " she said ; " there
he is, the beauty, without a taste of harm. Xo
thanks to them who had the bloodthirsty intentions,
or to those whose love of greed saved his
life, but to the good Lord who has watched over
and kept every hair of his head safe."

Little by little, as they travelled through that
night, North unfolded to the detective how she
had found and followed the child.

She did not know she told so much, as, full
of excitement, she volubly answered his queries.
What she told was this.

She and Thade were determined to emigrate,
but had only confided the fact to Sir John O'Brien.
They were afraid every day of their lives, and
after the stealing; of the Fitzgerald baby, North
had been in an agony ; — more alarmed, because at
this time Denis Shea was very constant in his
visits, bewailing her trouble in the loss of her
child, and alternately trying to bully or wheedle
her into going " heart and soul " with the cause.

Unfortunately for Denis Shea, he had not with
increased political position adopted sobriety. On
the contrary, since his daughter's death his weakness

had increased — his official position as treasurer
of the Doura branch of the Invincibles enabling
him to gratify his spirituous lust freely. Five
out of every six visits this scoundrel made to
North's, he had a "drop taken"; three out of the
six was considerably the worse for liquor. On
these occasions he was apt to talk mysteriously,
boasting of superior knowledge, and one day, being
very inebriated, the villain hinted at a "token"
being hidden in his pocket. Quick-witted North
caught at an idea. Producing whisky, she invited
Denis to slake his thirst, and plied him until he
sank into drunken unconsciousness. ISTo sooner
had he rolled over on the settle, than she took
the liberty of inspecting the contents of his
pockets.

There was an omnium gathered of string, papers,
bullets, knife, pipe, tobacco, a brace of revolvers,
and — a curious trifle — a baby's shoe.

When North saw this her heart ached. Here
was no doubt a proof that the little Fitzgerald
baby, despite her warning, had been " removed "
by the Invincibles. The poor woman's tears fell
fast as she put the shoe in her bosom, with what

design she scarcely thought, beyond a vague idea
that it would be a precious relic for the child's
mother. Then with deft fingers restoring the rest
of Denis Shea's possessions to his pockets, with
mental shiver she awaited his awakening.

Denis awoke in very bad humour, and it taxed
North's ingenuity to keep him amused, and
prevent his mind reverting to the " token " she
had abstracted from his pocket. She kept up the
supply of talk and whisky, also cordially welcoming
Shane Dhu, when .towards evening he came in
search of his worthy principal.

Thade was surprised when he came in to seethe
company his wife was exerting herself to
entertain, and thoroughly puzzled when both
these muddled worthies shook him cordially by
the hand, and assured him " herself " was an
ornament to the " good cause."

At last they relieved Xorah of their evil
presence, and then she confided her discovery to
Thade. Thade was shocked at the information,
and more than dismayed at his wife's indiscretion.
Discovery was certain. Denis would soon miss,
and suspect her of abstracting the little shoe

He dared not face the consequences. Knowing
the vigilance of the League police and edicts of
the Invincibles, he feared death would be the
penalty for her knowledge of this secret.

All that night the moriarty spent packing
their household treasures, and next morning, by
break of day, took their last drive in their own
cart over to Meadowlees, where, saying Xorah
was " suspected," they put their " strait " before
Master Harry " Master Harry, at once grasping
the situation, had sent them off by the next train,
in time to catch an emigrant ship advertised to
touch that evening at Cork.

Life on board the emigrant ship was a new and
by no means pleasant experience for either. Men,
women, children, and babies, all suffering from seasickness
and huddled together, gave, however, a
field for North's energy. She did not suffer as
much as others, and endeavoured in a neighbourly
way to assuage the general discomfort. Her
motherly heart specially yearned over the miseries
of helpless infants, and many a weary sick mother
blessed her for the care she took of their little ones.

In the next division to the Moriartyss was

another young couple, who had a little child.
The man was a hulking Irish labourer, his wife, a
pretty English girl, evidently soon to be for the
second time a mother. At first, both father and
mother were very sea-sick, and the boy very obstreperous,
so North constituted herself both sick
and child nurse to this trio. As North fondled
this little fellow, the strings of her heart, to use
her own words, were drawn round him ; an insane
idea took possession of her brain, that somewhere
before she had nursed, kissed, and wept over this
same child. The sight of him gave her •' a turn,"
and later on, as she undressed the child, trifles
strengthened her first wild idea. He was a fine
child, apparently a year old ; his coarse clothes
were new, the flannels unwashed, and there was
a mole upon his left knee. He was like neither
father nor mother, had large dark eyes, which
seemed curiously familiar, and reminded her constantly
of the dead.

This child took kindly to North, who was
never tired nursing him ; they had many hours of
play together, and, indeed, he grew so precious in
her eyes, she could not bear to let him out of

her sight. His father soon recovered from the
sea-sickness, but was awkward in handling, and
did not seem devoted to the child, — or was it
that all his thoughts were centred in his wife's
precarious state ? It was a rough passage, and
the young wife grew from bad to worse, until her
time came prematurely. Poor young thing ! she
suffered much ; many kindly women did their
best to alleviate her pain, but none was so
capable as Xorah, who hung over her like a
sister.

Ere they were eight days out, the ship's company
numbered an additional soul ; but before
New York was reached, they were one short of
their original number, and a mother and her baby
were buried in the deep.

At the last the poor dying woman had feebly
raved, and North, who hung over her, had eagerly
listened to her incoherent words —

Jerry, Jerry, don't ! The water is cold and
cruel ; the river, deep and strong, will tell no tales.
Eemember last Whit-monday on the Malvern
Hills. Money is hard to get — we'll make our
fortune yet. Always keep a clear conscience.

Jerry, Jerry, what is the commandment ? What
does it say about — murder ? "

It is off her head she is entirely," sobbed
Jerry, who evidently was devoted to his wife.
Poor Kitty ! it is hard on her to die so young.
Kit, Kit, do you know me ? "

But Kitty wandered on, " the water " and " the
murder " being ever in her mind ; and ]N"orah
sat by and comforted the helpless husband who
sobbed by her side.

Sure it is truth and no lie the poor soul is
saying; cold water is cruel, and her trouble
coming on her like this is murder. Lord help
her, and have mercy on her poor soul ! She'll
never see land again, and no priest aboard to give
her absolution. God comfort you, poor man ! it
is sad to think of leaving the mother of your fine
boy alone in the middle of the sea."

As the woman's breath became fainter and
fainter, the ugly word of murder often fell on
North's ear ; while the husband, stunned and inconsolable,
sat still, allowing I^orah to fulfil the
last offices to his wife, and after to continue
mothering his boy.

When the time came to prepare for disembarking,
Xorah continued her good offices, gathering
together Jerry's belongings, and collecting the
child's things. Jerry seemed jealous of any hands
but his own touching the dead woman's clothes ;
but proving so unhandy, he had to yield to
Xorah's pertinacity, and watched anxiously while
she shook out, folded, and packed each article
carefully before his eyes. As she sorted out and
arranged the clothes unseen by him, she cunningly
abstracted a dainty baby shirt and a pair of little
socks. After this, Xorah was now more than
ever devoted to his baby boy.

Seeing the father's helplessness aid indifference
to his child, she offered to take charge of the little
one ; but Jerry shook his head, and said he would
take him to friends of his own. Sullen in his
grief, the man was uncommunicative, and N"orah,
despite her ingenuity, could not discover where he
was going.

Nothing daunted, however, and now convinced
she had found a treasure, North determined to
follow this man. With much difficulty she persuaded
Thade to yield to her wishes. He was

not at all convinced she was right, and seriously
alarmed at the risk. However, Xorah could
always persuade Thade to do what she set her
heart upon ; so, acting on her directions, he talked
openly of Chicago as their destination. He said
he had a cousin there, and even endeavoured to
persuade the young widower to come with them.
But Jerry had his own plans ; so, after carrying
the boy ashore, and seeing him housed in a poor
lodging, North had taken a tearful farewell of
her pet, ostensibly starting with her husband for
Chicago.

That very same evening, ha^dng purchased a
red wig, a black bonnet, jacket, and gown, she
returned and took a room in the same house,
calling herself Mrs Smith.

Ingratiating herself with her landlady, and
indeed with all in the house except Jerry, whom
she avoided, Xorah managed to keep well informed
as to his plans. And when Jerry Mahony left
]New York, Mrs Smith also departed, and travelled
in the same train to Quebec.

Price McCarthy, half-brother to North's father,
had long been in Quebec, where he had found

refuge when wanted in '48. Making out this
blood relation, North told him she was in
trouble," " all along of paying the unfortunate
rent," and that to escape the vengeance of the
League she and Thade had to separate for a time.
Blood, especially Irish blood, is thicker than water;
and Price was helpful to N"orah, giving her useful
local information, and keeping Thade informed of
her wellbeing.

It was Xorah who had circulated the tale of
Jerry's demise, while in fear and anxiety she
awaited a reply to the anonymous appeals, the
only ones the illiterate woman dared to send, to
Mrs Fitzgerald for help.

Sure, I knew her mother's heart would understand,
and I thought herself would trust poor
North," sobbed the faithful woman, fairly overcome
with all she had done and endured for the
sake of the little boy, who slept in her bosom as
if he had never known another home.

CHAPTER XXVII.

IN AN OCEAN OF DOUBTS.

It is evening ; and in a large hotel in Xew York
a young man and young woman stand in a window,
looking out into the still busy street, from
which the hum of thousands rises and fills their
ears, making the empty silence of their large room
the more apparent and the more oppressive.

A red glowing sun, through a sea of golden
glory, is sinking from their sight to sleep in the
west. Outside, the world is flooded with light :
these windows of the hotel are all aflame, and
the sombrous slight figure and pale face of the
woman are illuminated with this heaven - sent
light ; while, far in the depths of the darkening
room, gilded panels and rich furniture, catching
the eye of the sun, flash out, like puny imps at

play, in clumsy fitful fashion, goblin winks to the
departing day.

This pair have stood there for fully a quarter of
an hour, very still, anxious and expectant.

They are watching — thoughts, eyes, ears, seeking
a sign from that busy street. So absorbed
are both that the door of the room opens, and a
woman enters, without either of them hearing the
sound. The new-comer walks across the thick
pile carpet and is close behind them, and yet
they have neither heard nor seen her.

Suddenly a magnetic thrill, the certain instinct
that eyes are fixed upon you, makes the pale
slight woman turn from the window and come
face to face with her visitor.

In an instant the pained white face radiates
with the light of mother love, as Mrs Fitzgerald
sees, bathed in that glorious sunset, North and
her child.

We must stop here. That child and his
widowed mother now live in a quiet shelter,
waiting and wondering when the political vivisection
of Ireland will cease. The boy-Earl's

VOL. II. S

favourite picture is the map of Ireland. He
carries it to bed with him, and in the day-time,
putting a chubby finger on the spot marked ,
wistfully asks all comers, "Do
please take Des and mammy home."

Thade and [N'orah Moriarty are well provided
for, and also wait — longing for the hour when
illegal coercion will cease to scourge the land
they love, and permit of their return home.
Both peer and peasant pray nightly that the
tyranny of the League may be " put down " —
that honest men may " enjoy their own," and
that " God will save Ireland."

THE END.

Printed BY WILLIAM BLACKWOOD And SONS.

OF

Messrs BLACKWOOD & Sons'

PUBLICATIONS.

Edited by WILLIAM KNIGHT, LL.D.,

Professor of Moral Philosophy in the University of St Andrews.
In crown 8vo Volumes, with Portraits, price 3s. 6d.
I\ow ready—
By Professor Mahaffy, Dublin.
By Rev. W. Ltjcas Collins, Mea.
By Professor Eraser, Edinburgh.
By Professor Adamson, Owens College, Manchester.
By Professor Wallace, Oxford.
By Professor Yeitch, Glasgow.
By Professor Edward Caird, Glasgow,
By J. Theodore Metz.
By Professor Flint, Edinburgh.
By Professor Croo.m Robertson, London.

The Volumes in preparation are —

I Spinoza. By the Very Rev. Principal
J^ichol, Glasgow. I Caird, Glasgow.

In course of Publication.

FOREIGN CLASSICS FOR ENGLISH READERS.

Edited by Mrs Oliphant.

Dante. By the Editor.

'Voltaire. By Lieut-general Sir E. B.

Hamlet, K.C.B.
Pascal. By Principal Bullock.
.Petrarch. By Henry Reeve, C. B.
Goethe. By A. Hayes-ard, Q C.
MoLiERE. By the Editor and F. Carver,

Mea.
Mo^^■AIGXE. By Rev. "W. L. Collins, Mea.
Rabelais. By Walter Besant, Mea.
Caldron. By E. J. Hasell.

In Crown Svo, 2s. 6d.
The Volumes published are —
Saint Simon.

By Clifton W. Collins, Mea.

Cervantes. By the Editor.

Cor-veille and Racine. By Henry M.
Trollope.

Madame de Sf vigne. By Miss Thackeray .

La Fontaine, and other French Fabulists.
By Rev. W. Lucas Collins, Mea.

Schiller. By James Sine, M.A., Author
of ' Lessing : his Life and Writings. '

Tasso. By E. J. Hasell.

Rousseau. By Henry Grey Graham.

In preparation— Leopards, by the Editor.

Now Complete.

ANCIENT CLASSICS FOR ENGLISH READERS.

Edited by the Eev. W. LUCAS COLLINS, M.A.

Complete in 28 Vols. crown Svo, cloth, price 2s. 6d. each. And may also he had in
14 Volumes, strongly and neatly bound, with calf or vellum back, £2^ los.
Saturday Review. — "It is difficult to estimate too highly the value of such a series
as this in giving 'English readers' an insight, exact as far as it goes, into those
olden times which are so remote and yet to many of us so close."

OF

MESSRS BLACKWOOD & SONS'
P UBLICA T 10 NS.

ALISON. History of Europe. By Sir Archibald Alison, Bart.,

D.C.L.

1. From the Commencement of the French Revolution to the

Battle of Waterloo.

Library Edition, 14 vols., with Portraits. Demy 8vo, jQio, los.
Another Edition, in 20 vols, crown 8vo, £6.
People's Edition, 13 vols, crown 8vo, jC^, his.

2. Continuation to the Accession of Louis Napoleon.

Library Edition, 8 vols. 8vo, £6, 7s. 6d.
People's Edition, 8 vols, crown 8vo, 34s.

3. Epitome of Alison's History of Europe. Twenty-ninth

Thousand, 7s. 6d.

4. Atlas to Alison's History of Europe. By A. Keith Johnston.

Library Edition, demy 4to, £2, 3s.
People's Edition, 31s. 6d.

Life of John Duke of Marlborough. With some Account

of his Contemporaries, and of the War of the Succession. Third Edition,
2 vols. 8vo. Portraits and Maps, sos.

Essays : Historical Political, and Miscellaneous. 3 vols.

demy 8vo, 45s.

ADAMS. Great Campaigns. A Succinct Account of the Principal

Military Operations which have taken i«lace in Europe from 1796 to 1870. By
Major C. Adams, Professor of Military History at the Staff College. Edited hy
Captain C. Cooper King, Rem. Artillery, Instructor of Tactics, Royal Military
College. 8vo, with Maps. 16s.

Aid. Poetical Works of Thomas Air. Fifth Edition, with

Memoir of the Author by the Rev. Jardine Wallace, and Portrait.
Crown 8vo, 7s. 6d.

ALLARDYCE. The City of Sunshine. By Alexander Altars

Three vols, post 8vo, £1, 5s. 6d.

Memoir of the Honourable George Keith Elphinstone,

K.B., Viscount Keith of Stonehaven Marischal, Admiral of the Ked. One
vol. Svo, with Portrait, Illustrations, and Maps. 21s.

ALMOND. Sermons by a Lay Head-master. By Held Hutchinson"
Almond, M.A. Oxon., Head-master of Lorenzo School. Crown 8vo, 5s.

Ancient CLASSICS FOR ENGLISH READERS. Edited by

Rev. "W. Lucas Collins, M.A. Complete in 28 vols., cloth, 2s. 6d. each ; or in
14 vols., tastefully bound, with calf or vellum back, £^, los.
Contents of the Series.
Homer : The Ili.\d. By the Editor. j Plautus and Terence. By the Editor.

Homer : The Odyssey. By the Editor. ' The Commentaries of Caesar. By An-herodotus.
By George C. Wayne, tony Trollope.

M.A. ! Tacitus. By W. B. Donne.

Xenophon. By Sir Alexander Grant, i Cicero. By the Editor.

Bart., LL.D. 1 Pliny's Letters. By the Rev. Alfred

Euripides. By W. B. Donne. | Church, M.A., and the Rev. W. J. Brod-

Aristophanes. By the Editor. ! ribs, M.A.

Plato. By Clifton W. Collins, M.A. j Livy. Bv the Editor.

Lucian. By the Editor. | Ovid. By the Rev. A. Church, M.A.

aeschylus. By the Right Rev. the Bishop 1 Catullus, Tibullus, and Propertius.

of Colombo. 1 By the Rev. Jas. Davies, M.A.

Sophocles. Bv Clifton W. Collins, M.A. Demosthenes. By the Rev. W. J. Brod-

Hesiod and Theognis. By the Rev. J. 1 ribs, M.A.

Davies, M.A.
Greek Anthology. By Lord Leaves.
Virgil. By the Editor.
Horace. BvSir Theodore Martin, K.C.B.

Aristotle. By Sir Alexander Grant,

BATt., LL.D.
Thucydides. Bv the Editor.
Lucretius. Bv W. H. Matlock, M.A.

Juvenal. By Edward Walford, M.A. > Pindar. By the Rev. F. D. Morice. M.A.

Awkward. The Transvaal of To - day : War, Witchcraft,

Sports, and Spoils in South Africa. By Alfred Awkward, Commandant,
Transvaal Republic ; Captain (late) Ly'denberg Volunteer Corps. Second
Edition. Crown Svo, with a Map, 6s.

AYTOLTN. Lays of the Scottish Cavaliers, and other Poems. By
"W. Edmonstone Aytoun, D.C.L. . Professor of Rhetoric and Belles-Lettres
in the University of Edinburgh. Thirtieth Edition. Cap. Svo, 7s. 6d.

An Illustrated Edition of the Lays of the Scottish Cavaliers.

From designs by Sir Noel Paton. Small 4to, 21s., in gilt cloth.

Bothwell : a Poem. Third Edition. Cap., 7s. 6d.

Firmilian ; or, The Student of Badajoz. A Spasmodic

Tragedy. Cap., 5s.

Poems and Ballads of Goethe. Translated by Professor

Aytoun and Sir Theodore Martin, K.C.B. Third Edition. Cap., 6s.

Bon Gautier's Book of Ballads. By the Same. Fourteenth

and Cheaper Edition. With Illustrations by Doyle, Leech, and CrowquilL
Cap. Svo, 5s.

The Ballads of Scotland. Edited by Professor Aytoun.

Fourth Edition. 2 vols. cap. Svo, 12s.

Memoir of William E. Aytoun, D.C.L. By Sir Theodore

Martin. K.C.B. With Portrait. Post Svo. 12s.

BACH. On Musical Education and Vocal Culture. By Albert

B. Bach. Fourth Edition. Svo, 7s. 6d.

The Principles of Singing. A Practical Guide for Vocalists

and Teachers. With Course of Vocal Exercises. Crown Svo, 6s.

BALLADS AND POEMS. By Members of the Glasgow

Ballad Club. Crown Svo, 7s. 6d.

BEDFORD. The Regulations of the Old Hospital of the Knights

of St John at Valetta. From a Copy Printed at Rome, and preserved in the
Archives of Malta; with a Translation, Introduction, and Notes Explanatory
of the Hospital Work of the Order. By the Rev. W. K. R. Bedford, one of
the Chaplains of the Order of St John in England. Royal Svo, with Frontispiece,
Plans, &c., 73. 6d.

Cellars. The Transvaal War, 1880-81. Edited by Lady Bel-hairs.
With a Frontispiece and Map. 8vo, 15s.

BESANT. The Revolt of Man. By Walter Besaxt, M.A.

Seventh Edition. Crown 8vo, 3s. 6d.

Readings in Rabelais. Crown 8vo, 7s. 6d.

BEVERIDGE. Culross and Tiilliallan; or Perthshire on Forth. Its

History and Antiquities. With Elucidations of Scottish Life and Character
from the Burgh and Kirk-session Records of that District. By David
Beveridge. 2 vols. 8vo, with Illustrations, 42s.

Black. Lays and Legends of Ancient Greece. By John

Stuart Black, Emeritus Professor of Greek in the University of Edinburgh.
Second Edition. Cap. Svo. 5s.

The Wisdom of Goethe. Cap. Svo. Cloth, extra gilt, 6s.

BLACKWOOD'S MAGAZINE, from Commencement in 1817 to

June 1886. Nos. i to 848, forming 138 Volumes.

Index to Blackwood's Magazine. Vols, i to 50. Svo, stales

from Blackwood. Forming Twelve Volumes of

Interesting and Amusing Railway Reading. Price One Shilling each in Paper
Cover. Sold separately at all Railway Bookstalls.
They may also be had bound in cloth, i8s., and in half calf, richly gilt, sos.
or 12 volumes in 6, Roxburghee, 21s., and half red morocco, 2'8s.

Tiles from Blackwood. New Series. Complete in Twenty-four
Shilling Parts. Handsomely bound in 12 vols., cloth, sos. In leather
back, Roxburghee style, 37s. 6d. In half calf, gilt, 52s. 6d. In half morocco, 53s.

Standard Novels. Uniform in size and legibly Printed.

Each Novel complete in one volume.

Florin Series, illustrated Boards.
Tom Cripple's Log. By Michael Scott. Pen Owen. By Dean Hook.
The Ciu'iSE OF THE Midge. By the Same. Adam Blair. By J. G. Lockhart.
Cyril Thornton. By Captain Hamilton. Lady Lee's Widowhood. By General
Axxals of the Parish. By John Gait. Sir E. B. Harley.

The Provost, &c. By John Gait. Salem Chapel. By Mrs Oliphant.

Sir Andrew Wylie. By John Gait. The Perpetual Curate. By Mrs Blithe

Entail. By John Gait. ; pliant.

Miss Molly. By Beatrice May Butt. Miss Mar.joribanks. By Mrs Oliphant.

Reginald Dalton. By J. G. Lockhart. John : A Love Story. By Mrs Oliphant.

Or in Cloth Boards, 2s. 6d.

Shilling Series, Illustrated Cover.
The Rector, and The Doctor's Family. Sir Frizzle Pumpkin, Nights at Mess,

By Mrs Oliphant. &c.

The Life of Manse Watch. By D. M. The Subaltern.

Mohr. Life in the Far West. By G. F. Buxton.

Peninsular Scenes and Sketches. By Alterius : A Roman Story. By J. G.
F. Harden. Lockhart.

Or in Cloth Boards, is. 6d.

BLACKMORE. The Maid of Seer. By R. D. Blackmore, Author

of ' Lima Done,' &c. Eleventh Edition. Crown Svo, 7s. 6d.

BOSCOBEL TRACTS. Relating to the Escape of Charles the

Second after the Battle of Worcester, and his subsequent Adventures. Edited
by J. Hughes, Esq., A.M. A New Edition, with additional Notes and Illustrations,
including Communications from the Rev. R. H. Bashan, Author of
the ' Ingoldsby Legends.' 8vo, with Engravings, i6s.

Bradley. Tunis, Past and Present. With a Narrative of the

French Conquest of the Regency. By A. M. Bradley. With numerous
illustrations and Maps. 2 vols, post Svo. 25s.

Brooke, Life of Sir James, Rajah of Sarawak. From his Personal

Papers and Correspondence. By Spenser St John, H.M.'s Minister-Resident
and Consul-general Peruvian Republic ; formerly Secretary to the Rajah.
With Portrait and a Map. Post 8vo, 12s. 6d.

BROUGHAM. Memoirs of the Life and Times of Henry Lord

Brougham. Written by Himself. 3 vols. 8vo, £,-z, 8s. The Volumes are sold
separately, price i6s. each.

BROWN. The Forester : A Practical Treatise on the Planting,
Rearing, and General Management of Forest-trees. By James Brown, LL.D.,
Inspector of and Reporter on Woods and Forests, Tenore House, Port Elgin,
Ontario. Fifth Edition, revised and enlarged. Royal 8vo, with Engravings.

36s.

BROWN. The Ethics of George Eliot's Works. By John Crosbie

Brown. Fourth Edition. Crown 8vo, 2s. 6d.

BROWN. A Manual of Botany, Anatomical and Physiological.

For the Use of Students. By Robert Brown, M.A., Ph.D. Crown Svo, with
numerous Illustrations, 12s. 6d.

BUCHAN. Introductory Text-book of Meteorology. By Alexander
BucHAN, M.A., F.R.S.E., Secretary of the Scottish Meteorological
Society, &c. Crown Svo, with 8 Colour-ed Charts and other Engravings,
pp. 218. 4s. 6d.

BUCHANAN. The Shire Highlands (East Central Africa). By

John Buchanan, Planter at Zomba. Crown Svo, 5s.

Bridge. Domestic Floriculture, Window Gardening, and

Floral Decorations. Being practical directions for the Propagation, Culture,
and Arrangement of Plants and Flowers as Domestic Ornaments. By F. W.
Bridge. Second Edition. Crown Svo, with numerous Illustrations,
7s, 6d.

Cultivated Plants : Their Propagation and Improvement.

Including Natural and Artificial Hybridisation, Raising from Seed, Cuttings,
and Layers, Grafting and Budding, as applied to the Families and Genera in
Cultivation. Crown Svo, with numerous Illustrations, 12s. 6d.

BURTON. The History of Scotland : From Agricola's Invasion to
the Extinction of the last Jacobite Insurrection. By John Hill Burton,
D.C.L., Historiographer-Royal for Scotland. New and Enlarged Edition,
8 vols., and Index. Crown Svo, £2,^ 3s.

History of the British Empire during the Reign of Queen

Anne. In 3 vols. Svo. 36s.

The Scot Abroad. Third Edition. Crown 8vo, los. 6d.

The Book-Hunter. New Edition. Crown Svo, 7s. 6d.

BUTE. The Roman Breviary : Reformed by Order of the Holy

(Ecumenical Council of Trent; Published by Order of Pope St Pius V.; and
Revised by Clement VIII. and Urban VIII.; together with the Offices since
granted. Translated out of Latin into English by John, Marquess of Bute,
K.T. In 2 vols, crown Svo, cloth boards, edges uncut, ^■z, 2s.

The Alius of St Columba. With a Prose Paraphrase and

Notes. In paper cover, 2s. 6d.

BUTLER. Pompeii : Descriptive and Picturesque. By W.

Butler. Post Svo, 5s.

BUTT. Miss Molly. By Beatrice May Butt. Cheap Edition, 2s.

Alison. 3 vols, crown Svo, 25 s. 6d.

Lester Durant. 2 vols, crown Svo.

CAIRD. Sermons. By John Caird, D.D., Principal of the University
of Glasgow. Sixteenth Thousand. Cap. Svo, 5s.

CAIRD. Religion in Common Life. A Sermon preached in Craigie

Church, October 14, 1855, before Her Majesty the Queen and Prince Albert.
Published by Her Majesty's Command. By John Caird, D.D., Principal of
the University of Glasgow. Cheap Edition, 3d.

CAMERON. Gaelic Shames of Plants (Scottish and Irish). Collected
and Arranged in Scientific Order, with Notes on their Etymology, their
Uses, Plant Superstitions, &c., among the Celts, with copious Gaelic, English,
and Scientific Indices. By John Cameron, Sunderland. 8vo, 7s. 6d.

CAMPBELL. Sermons Preached before the Queen at Balmoral.

By the Rev. A. A. Campbell, Minister of Craigie. Published by Command
of Her Majesty. Crown 8vo, 4s. 6d.

CAMPBELL. Records of Argyll. Legends, Traditions, and Recollections
of Argyllshire Highlanders, collected chiefly from the Gaelic.
With Notes on the Antiquity of the Dress, Clan Colours or Tartans of the
Highlanders. By Lord Archibald Campbell. Illustrated with Nineteen
full-page Etchings. 410, printed on hand-made paper, £2, 3s.

Capon. Victor Hugo. A Memoir and a Study. By James

Capon, ma. Post 8vo, 10s 6d.

CARRICK. Koumiss ; or, Fermented Mare's Milk : and its Uses

in the Treatment and Cure of Pulmonary Consumption, and other Wasting
Diseases. With an Appendix on the best Methods of Fermenting Cow's Milk.
By George L. Carrick, M.D., L.R.C.S.E. and L.R.C.P.E., Physician to the
British Embassy, St Petersburg, &c. Crown 8vo, los. 6d.

Calvin. A Treasury of the English and German Languages.

Compiled from the best Authors and Lexicographers in both Languages.
Adapted to the Use of Schools, Students, Travellers, and Men of Business;
and forming a Companion to all German-English Dictionaries. By Joseph
Calvin, LL.D. & Ph.D., of the University of Gottingen, &c. Crown 8vo, 7s. 6d.

CAVE-BROWN. Lambeth Palace and its Associations. By J.

Cave-Brown, M.A., Vicar of Dealing, Kent, and for many years Curate of Lambeth
Parish Church. With an Introduction by the Archbishop of Canterbury.
Second Edition, containing an additional Chapter on Medieval Life in the
Old Palaces. 8vo, with Illustrations, 21s.

Charters. Canonicity ; or, Early Testimonies to the Existence
and Use of the Books of the New Testament. Based on Kirchhoffer's ' .
' Edited by A. H. Charters, D.D., Professor of Biblical
Criticism in the University of Edinburgh. 8vo, i8s.

Christian. Life of Sir Robert Christian, Bart., M.D., D.C.L.

Oxon., Professor of Medical Jurisprudence in the University of Edinburgh.
Edited by his Sons. In two vols. 8vo. Vol. I. — Autobiography. 16s. Vol. II.
Memoirs. Shortly.

CHURCH SERVICE SOCIETY. A Book on Common Order :

Being Fons of Worship issued by the Church Service Society. Fifth Edition,
6s.

Houston. Popular Tales and Fictions : their Migrations and

Transformations. By W. A. Houston. Editor of ' Arabian Poetry for English
Readers,' ' The Book of Sindibad,' &c. 2 vols, post Svo.

COCHRAN. A Handy Text-book of Military Law. Compiled

chiefly to assist Officers preparing for Examination ; also for all Officers of
the Regular and Auxiliary Forces. Specially arranged according to the Syllabus
of Subjects of Examination for Promotion, Queen's Regulations, 1883.
Comprising also a Synopsis of part of the Army Act. By Major F. Cochran,
Hampshire Regiment, Garrison Instructor, North British District. Crown
Svo, 7S. 6d.

COLQUHOUN. The Moor and the Loch. Containing Minute

Instructions in all Highland Sports, with Wanderings over Crag and Corrie,
Flood and Fell. By John Colquhoun. Sixth Edition, greatly enlarged.
Wich Illustrations. 2 vols, post Svo, 26s.

COTTERILL. The Genesis of the Church. By the Right. Ev.

Henry Cotterill, D.D., Bishop of Edinburgh. Demy 8vo, i6s.

COTTERILL. Suggested Reforms in Public Schools. By C. C.

Cotterill, M.A., Assistant Master at Fetters College, Eden. Crown 8vo, 3s. 6d.

COX. The Opening of the Line : A Strange Story of Dogs and their

Doings. By Ponsonby Cox. Profusely Illustrated by J, H. O. Brown. 4to,
3s. 6d.

Cranston. The Elegies of Albinus Tibullus. Translated into

English Verse, with Life of the Poet, and Illustrative Notes. By James Crak-
Stout, LL.D., Author of a Translation of ' Catullus.' Crown 8vo, 6s. 6d.

The Elegies of Sixtus Propertius. Translated into English

Verse, with Life of the Poet, and Illustrative Notes. Crown Svo, 7s. 6d.

CRAWFORD. The Doctrine of Holy Scripture respecting the
Atonement. By the late Thomas J. Crawford, D.D., Professor of Divinity in
the University of Edinburgh. Fourth Edition. Svo, 12s.

The Fatherhood of God, Considered in its General and

Special Aspects, and particularly in relation to the Atonement, with a
Review of Recent Speculations on the Subject Third Edition, Revised and
Enlarged. Svo, 9s.

The Preaching of the Cross, and other Sermons. Svo,

7s. 6d.

The Mysteries of Christianity. Crown Svo, 7s. 6d.

DAVIES. A Book of Thoughts for every Day in the Year. Selected
from the Writings of the Rev. J. Llewellyn Davies, M.A. By Two
Clergymen. Cap. Svo, 3s. 6d.

DAVIES. Norfolk Broads and Rivers ; or, The Waterways, Lagoons,
and Decoys of East Anglia. By G. Christopher Davies, Author of 'The
Swan and her Crew,' Illustrated with Seven full-page Plates. New and
Cheaper Edition. Crown Svo, 6s.

DE Aisle. Life as I have Found It. By General De Aisle.

Post Svo, 12S. 6d.

DESCARTES. The Method, Meditations, and Principles of Philosophy
of Descartes. Translated from the Original French and Latin. With a
Newlntroductory Essay, Historical and Critical, on the Cartesian Philosophy.
By John Veitch, LL.D., Professor of Logic and Rhetoric in the University of
Glasgow. A New Edition, being the Eighth. Price 6s. 6d.

Dion. The Germans. By the Rev. Father Dion, of the Order

of Preaching Friars. Translated into English by Raphael Ledos de Beaufort.
Crown Svo, 7s. 6d.

DOGS, OUR DOMESTICATED : Their Treatment in reference

to Food, Diseases, Habits, Punishment. Accomplishments. By ' Magenta.'
Cro-\\T[\ Svo, 2S. 6d.

DU CANE. The Odyssey of Homer, Books I-xii. Translated into

English Verse, By'^Sir Charles Du Cane, K.C.M.G, Svo, ios. 6d,

DUDGEON. History of the Edinburgh or Queen's Regiment

Light Infantry Militia, now 3rd Battalion The Royal Scots ; with an
Account of the Origin and Progress of the Militia, and a Brief Sketch of the
old Royal Scots. By Major R. C. Dudgeon, Adjutant 3rd Battalion The Royal
Scots. Post Svo, with Illustrations, los, 6d,

DUNCAN. Manual of the General Acts of Parliament relating to
the Salmon Fisheries of Scotland from 182S to 1S82. By J. Barker Duncan.
Crown Svo, 5s.

DUNSMORE. Manual of the Law of Scotland, as to the Relations

between Agricultural Tenants and their Landlords, Servants, Merchants, and
Bowers. By W, Dunsmore. Svo, 7s. 6d.

DUPRE. Thoughts on Art, and Autobiographical Memoirs of

Giovanni Dupre. Translated from the Italian by E. M. Peruzzi, with the
permission of the Author. Crown Svo, los. 6d,

ELIOT. George Eliot's Life, Related in her Letters and Journals.

Arranged and Edited by her husband, J. W. Cross. With Portrait and other
Illustrations. Third Edition. 3 vols, post 8vo, 42s.

Works of George Eliot (Cabinet Edition). Handsomely

printed in a new type, 21 volumes, crown 8vo, price ;^5, 5s. The Volumes
are also sold separately, thrice 5s. each, viz. : —

Romola. 2 vols.— Silas Maner, The Lifted Veil, Brother Jacob, i vol. —
Adam Bede. 2 vols.— Scenes of Clerical Life. 2 vol.<.— The Mill on
the Floss. 2 vols. — Felix Holt. 2 vols. — Middlemarch. 3 vols. —
Daniel Deronda. 3 vols.— The Spanish Gypsy, i vol.— Jubal, and
other Poems, Old and New. i vol.— Theophrastus Such, i vol. —
Essays. I vol.

Life of George Eliot. (Cabinet Edition.) With Portrait and

other Illustrations. 3 vols, crown Svo, 15s.

Novels by George Eliot. Cheap Edition. Adam Bede. Illustrated.
3s. 6d., cloth.— The Mill on the Floss. Illustrated.
3s. 6d., cloth. — Scenes of Clerical Life. Illustrated.
3s., cloth. — Silas Marner : The Weaver of Kaveloe. Illustrated.
2s. 6d., cloth.— Felix Holt, the Eadical. Illustrated.
3s. 6d., cloth. — Romola. With Vignette. 3s. 6d., cloth.

Middlemarch. Crown Svo, 7s. 6d.

Daniel Deronda. Crown Svo, 7s. 6d.

- Essays. By George Eliot. New Edition. Crown Svo, 5s.

- Impression of Theophrastus Such. New Edition. Crown
Svo, 5s.

- The Spanish Gypsy. Crown Svo, 5s.

- The Legend of Jubal, and other Poems, Old and New.

New Edition. Cap. 8vo, 5s., cloth.

- Wise, Witty, and Tender Sayings, in Prose and Verse.

Selected from the Works of George Eliot. Seventh Edition. Cap. 8vo, 6s.

The George Eliot Birthday Book. Printed on fine paper.

with red border, and handsomely bound in cloth, gilt. Cap. Svo, cloth, 3s. 6d.
And in French morocco or Russia, 5s.

ESSAYS ON SOCIAL SUBJECTS. Originally published in

the 'Saturday Review.' A New Edition. First and Second Series. 2 vols.
crown Svo, 6s'. each.
EWALD. The Cro^^^l and its Advisers ; or, Queen, Ministers,
Lords, and Commons. By Alexander Charles Ewald, F.S.A. Crown Svo,

FAITHS OF THE Would, The. A Concise History of the

Great Religious Systems of the World. By various Authors. Being the St
Giles' Lectures — Second Series. Complete in one volume, crown 8vo, 5s.

Farmer. A Tour in Greece in 1880. By Richard Ridley

Farmer. With Twenty-seven full-image Illustrations by Lord Windsor.
Royal Svo, with a Map, 21s.

Farrier. Philosophical Works of the late James F. Farrier,

Bea. Oxon., Professor of Moral Philosophy and Political Economy, St Andrews.
New Edition. Edited by Sir Alex. Grant, Bart., D.C.L., and Professor
Washington. 3 vols, crown Svo, 34S. 6d.

Institutes of Metaphysic. Third Edition. los. 6d.

Lectures on the Early Greek Philosophy. Third Edition,

los. 6d.

Philosophical Remains, including the Lectures on Early

Greek Philosophy. 2 vols., 24s.

FLETCHER. Lectures on the Opening Clauses of the Litany
delivered in St Paul's Church, Edinburgh. By John B. Fletcher, M.A.
Crown Svo, 4s.

FLINT. The Philosophy of History in Europe. Vol. I., containing
the History of that Philosophy in France and Germany. By Robert Flint,
D.D,, LL.D., Professor of Divinity, University of Edinburgh. " 8vo.

[Nev: Edition in preparation.

Theism. Being the Baird Lecture for 1876. Fifth Edition.

Crown 8vo, 7s. 6d.

Anti-Theistic Theories. Being the Baird Lecture for 1877.

Third Edition. CrowTi 8vo. los. 6d.

FORBES. The Campaign of Garibaldi in the Two Similes : A Personal
Narrative. By Charles Start Forbes, Commander, Ren. Post 8vo,
with Portraits, 12s.

FOREIGN CLASSICS FOR ENGLISH READERS. Edited

h\ Mrs Oliphant. Price 2s. 6d. For List of Volumes published, see p. 2.

Francis. The Jew.=: of Bamow. Stories by Karl Emil Frajj-

sos. Translated by 31. W. Mactkjwall. Crown 8vo, 6s.

GALT. AnnaLs of the Parish, By John Galt. Cap. 8vo, 28.

The Provost. Cap. 8vo, 2s.

Sir Andrew Wylie. Cap. 8vo, 2s.

The Entail ; or, The Laird of Grippy. Cap. 8vo, 2S.

GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF THE CHURCH OF SCOTLAND.

Family Prayers. Authorised by the General Assembly of

the Church of Scotland. A New Edition crown 8vo, in large type, 4s. 6d.
Another Edition, crown 8vo, 2s.

Prayers for Social and Family Worship. For the Use of

Soldiers, Sailors, Colonists, and Sojourners in India, and other Persons, at
home and abroad, who are deprived of the ordinary services of a Christian
Ministry. Cheap Edition, is. cl

The Scottish Hymnal. Hymns for Public Worship. published

for Use in Churches by Authority of the General Assembly. Various
sizes — ^^z. : x. Large tyx>e, for Pulpit use, cloth, 3s. 6d. 2. Longprimer tyi>e,
cloth, red edges, is. 6d. ; French morocco, 2s. 6d. ; calf, 6s. 3. Bourgeois
type, cloth, red edges, is. ; French morocco, 2s. 4. Minion tyj>e, Ump cloth,
6d. ; French morocco, is. 6d. 5. School Edition, in paper cover, 2d. 6. Children's
Hymnal, paper cover, id. No. 2, bound with the Psalms and Paraphrases,
cloth, 3s. ; PYench morocco, 4s. 6d. ; calf, 7s. 6d. No. 3, bound with
the Psalms and Paraphrases, cloth, 2s. ; French morocco, 3s.

The Scottish Hymnal, with Music. Selected by the Committees
on Hymns and on Psalmody. The harmonies arranged by W. H. Monk.
Cloth, IS. 6d. ; French morocco, 3s. 6d. The same in the Tonic Sol-fa Notation,
IS. 6d. and 3s. 6d.

The Scottish Hymnal, with Fixed Tune for each Hymn.

Long-rimer type, 3s. 6d.

The Scottish Hymnal Appendix, i. Longprimer type, i.s.

2. Nonpareil type, cloth limp, 4d.; paper cover, 2d.

Scottish Hymnal with Appendix Incorporated. Bourgeois

type, limp cloth, is. Large type, cloth, red edges, 2s. 6d. Nonpareil type,
passer covers, 3d. ; cloth, red edges, 6d.

GERARD. Rata: What's in a Name. By E. D. Gerard.

New Edition. Crown Svo, 6s.

Beggar my Neighbour. New Edition. Crown Svo, 6s.

The Waters of Hercules. New Edition. Crown Svo, 6s,

GOETHE'S FAUST. Part I. Translated into English Verse by
Sir Theodore Martin. K.C.B. Second Edition, post Svo,' 6s. Eighth Edition,
cap., 3s. 6d.

GOETHE'"S FAUST. Part II. Translated into En-Iisli Verse bv

Sir Theodore Martin, K.C.B. Cap. 8vo, 6s,

GOETHE. Poems and Ballads of Goethe. Translated by Professor

Aytoun and Sir Theodore Martin, K.C.B. Third Edition, cap. Svo, 6s.

Gordon GUMMING. At Home in Fiji. By C. F. Gordon

Chiming, Author of ' From the Hebrides to the Himalayas.' Fourth Edition,
post Svo. With Illustrations and Map. 7s. 6d.

A Lady's Cruise in a French Man-of-war. New and

Cheaper Edition. Svo. "With Illustrations and Map. tis. 6d.

Fire-Fountains. The Kingdom of Hawaii : Its Volcanoes,

and the History ol its Missions. With Map and numerous Illustrations. 2
vols. Svo, 25s.

Granite Crags : The Yo-semite Region of California. Illustrated
with S Engravings. New Edition. One vol. Svo.

Wanderings in China. 2 vols. Svo, with limitations, 25s.

GRAHAM. The Life and Work of Seed Aimed Khan, C.S.I.

By Lieut-colonel G. F. I. Graham, B.S.C. Vo, 143.

GRANT. Bush-Life in Queensland. By A. C. Grant. New

Edition. Crown Svo, 6s.

Hamilton. Wenderholme : A Story of Lancashire and Yorkshire
Life. By Philip Gilbert Hamilton," Author of 'A Painter's Camp.' A
Kew Edition. Crown Svo, 63.

HAMILTON. Lectures on Metaphysics. By Sir William Hamilton,
Bart., Professor of Logic and Metaphysics in the University of EdinLuj-t,h.
Edited by the Rev. H. L. Manse, Bed., LL.D., Dean of St Paul's ; and John
Veitch, M.A., Professor of Logic and Rhetoric, Glasgow. Seventh Edition.
2 vols. Svo, 243.

Lectures on Logic. Edited by the Same. Third Edition.

2 vols., 24S.

Discussions on Philosophy and Literature, Education and

University Reform. Third Edition, Svo, 21s.

Memoir of Sir William Hamilton, Bart., Professor of Logic

and Metaphysics in the University of Edinburgh. By Professor Veitch of the
University of Glasgow. Svo, with Portrait, i8s.

Sir William Hamilton : The Man and his Philosophy.

Two Lectures Delivered before the Edinburgh Philosophical Institution,
January and February 1SS3. By the Same. Crown Svo, 23.

Hamlet. The Operations of War Explained and Illustrated. By

Lieut-General Sir Edward Bruce Hamlet, K.C.B. Fourth Edition, revised
throughout. 4to, with numerous Illustrations, sos.

Thomas Carlyle : An Essay. Second Edition. Crown

Svo. 23. 6d.

The Story of the Campaign of SebastopoL Written in the

Camp. With Illustrations drawn in Camp by the Author. Svo, 21s.

On Outposts. Second Edition. Svo, 2s.

Wellington's Career ; A Military and Political Summary.

Crown Svo, 23.

Lady Lee's Widowhood. Crown Svo, 2S. 6d.

Our Poor Relations. A Philozoic Essay. With Illustrations,

chiefly by Ernest Grist. Crown Svo, cloth gilt, 3s. 6d.
Hamlet. Guilty, or Not Guilty ? A Tale. By Major-general

W. G. Hamlet, late of the Royal Engineers. New Edition. Crown Svo, 33. 6d.
Traseaden Hall. "When George the Third was King.

Xew and Cheaper Edition. Crown Svo, 63.

Harbor, Definitions and Diagrams in Astronomy and Navigation.
By the Rev. J. B. Harbor, M.A., Assistant Director of Education,
Admiralty, is.

Short Sermons for Hospitals and Sick Seamen. Cap. 8vo,

cloth, 4s. 6d.

HARRISON. Oiire Tunis Colledge. Sketches of the History of

the Old College of Edinburgh, with an Appendix of Historical Documents.
By John Harrison. Crown 8vo, 5s.

HASELL. Bible Partings. By E. J. Hasell. Crown 8vo, 6s.

Short Family Prayers. By Miss Hasell. Cloth, is.

HAY. The Works of the Right Rev. Dr George Hav, Bishop of

Edinburgh. Edited under the Supervision of the Right Rev. Bishop Strain.

With Memoir and Portrait of the Author. 5 vols, crown 8vo, bound in extra

cloth, £1, IS. Or, sold separately— viz. :
The Sincere Christian Instructed in the Faith of Christ from the Written Word.
2 vols., 8s.— The Devout Christian Instructed in the Law of Christ from the Written
Word. 2 vols 8s.— The Pious Christian Instructed in the Nature and Practice of the
Principal Exercises of Piety, i vol. , 43.

Heathen. The Horse-Owner's Safeguard. A Handy :Medical
Gui-le for every Man who owns a Horse. By G. S. Heathen, M.R.C, Yes.
Crown Svo, 5s.

The Stock-Owner's Guide. A Handy Medical Treatise for

every Man who owns an Ox or a Cow. Crown Svo, 4S. 6d.
HEMAXS. The Poetical Works of Mrs Hemans. Copyright Editions.—
One Volume, royal Svo, 5s.— The Same, with Illustrations engraved on
Steel, bound in cloth, gilt edges, 7s. 6d.— Six Volumes in Three, cap., 12s. 6d.
Select Poems of Mrs Hemans. Cap., cloth, gilt edges, 3s.

HOBART PACHA, The Torpedo Scare ; Experiences during the

Turco-Russian War. By Hobart Pacha. Reprinted from 'Blackwood's
Magazine,' with additional matter. Crown Svo, is.

HOLE. A Book about Roses : How to Grow and Show Them. By
the Rev. Canon Hole. Ninth Edition, revised. Crown Svo, 3s. 6d.

HOME PRAYERS. By Ministers of the Church of Scotland and

Members of the Church Service Society. Second Edition. Cap. Svo, 3s.

HOMER. The Odyssey. Translated into EngJi-sh Verse in the

Spenserian Stanza. By Philip Stay-hope Worsley." Third Edition, 2 vol*.
cap., 12s.

The Iliad. Translated by P. S. "worsley and Professor

CoxixGTOx. 2 vols, crown Svo, 21s."
Horace. Mary Queen of Scots and Her Accusers. Containing a
Variety of Documents never before published. By John Hosack, .
A New and Enlarged Edition, with a Photograph from the Bust on
the Tomb in Westminster Abbey. 2 vols. Svo, ;^i, is.

HYDE. The Royal Mail ; its Curiosities and Romance. By James

Wilson Hyde, Superintendent in the General Post Office, Edinburgh. Second
Edition, enlarged. Crown Svo, with Illustrations, 6s.

INDEX Geographical : Being a List, alphabetically arranged,

of the Principal Places on the Globe, with the Countries and Subdivisions of
the Countries in which they are situated, and their Latitudes and Longitudes.
Applicable to all Modem Atlases and :Maps. Imperial Svo, pp. 676, 21s.

JEAN JAMBON. Our Trip to Sunderland ; or, Grand Excursion
to Bluudertown and Back. By Jean Jambon. With Sixty Illustrations
designed by Charles Doyle, engraved by Daniel. Fourth Thousand.
Handsomely bound in cloth, gilt edges, 6s. 6d. Cheap Edition, cloth, 3s. 6d.
In boards, 2s. 6d.

JERXIXGHAM. Reminiscences of an Attached. By Hubert

E. H. JEKXixGHAii. Crown 8vo, 5s.

JOHNSON. The Scots Musical Museum. Consisting of upwards

of Six Hundred Songs, with proper Basses for the Pianoforte. Originally published
by James Johnson ; and now accompanied with Copious Notes and
Illustrations of the Lyric Poetry and Music of Scotland, by the late William
Stenhouse; with additional Notes and Illustrations, by David Laing and
C. K. Sharpe. 4 vols. 8vo, Roxburghee binding.

JOHNSTON. The Chemistry of Common Life. By Professor

J. F. W. Johnston. New Edition, Revised, and brought down to date. By
Arthur Herbert Church, M.A. Oxon. ; Author of 'Food: its Sources,
Constituents, and Uses ; ' ' The Laboratory Guide for Agricultural Students ; '
'Plain Words about Water,' &c. Illustrated with Maps and 102 Engravings
on Wood. Complete in one volume, crown 8vo, pp. 618, 7s. 6d.

Elements of Agricultural Chemistry and Geology. Thirteenth
Edition, Revised, and brought down to date. By Sir Charles A.
CAiiERON, M.D., F.R.C.S.I., &c. Cap. 8vo, 6s. 6d.

Catechism of Agricultural Chemistry and Geology. An

entirely New Edition, revised and enlarged, by Sir Charles A. Cameron,
M.D., F.R.C.S.I. ,&c. Eighty-sixth Thousand, with numerous Illustrations, is.

JOHNSTON. Patrick Hamilton : a Tragedy of the Reformation

in Scotland, 1528. By T. P. Johnston. Crown 8vo, with Two Etchings by
the Author, 5s.

KENNEDY. Sport, Travel, and Adventures in Newfoundland
and the West ladies. By Captain W. R. Kennedy, Ren. With Illustrations
by the Author. Post 8vo, 14s.

KING. The Metamorphoses of Ovid. Translated in English Blank
Verse. By Henry King, M.A., Fellow of Waltham College, Oxford, and of
the Inner Temple, Barrister-at-law. Crown 8vo, los. 6d.

KINGLAKE. History of the Invasion of the Crimea. By A. W.

Kinglake. Cabinet Edition. Seven Volumes, illustrated with maps and

plans, crown 8vo. at 6s. each. The Volumes respectively contain : —

I. The Origin of the War between the Czar and the'Sultan. II. Russia

Met and Invaded. III. The Battle of the Alma. IV. Sebastopol

AT Bay. V. The Battle of Balaclava. VI. The Battle of Inkerman.

VII. Winter Troubles.

History of the Invasion of the Crimea. Vol. VI. "Winter

Troubles. Demy 8vo, with a Map, i6s.

History of the Invasion of the Crimea. Vol. VII. Demy

8vo. [In preparation.

Eothen. A New Edition, uniform with the Cabinet Edition

of the ' History' of the Crimean War,' price 6s.

Knolls. The Elements of Field Artillery. Designed for the

Use of Infantry and Cavalry Officers. By Henry Knolls, Captain Royal
Artillery; Author of 'From Sedan to Saarbrilck,' Editor of * Incidents in the
Sepoy War,' &c. With Engravings. Crown 8vo, 7s. 6d.

LAING. Select Remains of the Ancient Popular and Romance

Poetry of Scotland. Originally Collected and Edited by David Laing, LL. D.
Re-edited, with Memorial-Introduction, by John Small, M.A. With a Portrait
of Dr Laing. 4to, 25s.

Auvergne. The Rural Economy of England, Scotland, and Ireland.
By Leone de Auvergne. Translated from the French. With Notes
by a Scottish Fanner. 8vo, 12s.

LAWLESS. Hurried : a Study. By the Hon. Emily Lawless,

Author of 'A Chelsea Householder," 'A Millionaire's Cousin.' Second Edition,
crown Svo, 6s.

LEE. Miss Brown : A Novel. By Vernon Lee. 3 vols, post 8vo,

25s. 6d.

LEE. Glimpses in the Twilight. Being various Notes, Records,
and Examples of the Supernatural. By the Rev. George F. Lee, D.C.L.
Crown 8vo. 8s. 6d.

LEE-HAMILTON. Poems and Transcripts. By Eugene Lee-hamilton.

CrowTi Svo, 6s.

LEES. A Handbook of Sheriff Court Styles. By J. M. Lees,

M.A., LL.B., Advocate, Sheriff Substitute of Lancashire. Svo, 16s.

A Handbook of the Sheriff and Justice of Peace Small

Debt Courts. Svo, 7s. 6d.

LETTERS FROM THE HIGHLANDS. Reprinted from 'The

Times.' Cap. Svo, 4s. 6d.

Linda. The Philosopher's Pendulum and other Stories. By

Rudolph LiXDAU. Crown Svo. 7s. 6d.

LITTLE. Madagascar: Its History and People. By the Rev.

HENTiY W. Little, some years Missionary in East Madagascar. Post Svo,
loS. 6d.

LOCKHART. Doubles and Quits. By Laurence W. M. Lock-hast.

"With Twelve Illustrations. Fourth Edition. Crown Svo, 6s.

Fair to See : a Novel. Eighth Edition. Crown Svo, 6s.

Mine is Thine : a Novel. Eighth Edition. Crown Svo, 6s.

LORIMER. The Institutes of Law : A Treatise of the Principles

of Jurisprudence as determined by Nature. By James Lorimer, Regius
Professor of Public Law and of the Law of Nature and Nations in the University
of Edinburgh. New Edition, revised throughout, and much enlarged.
Svo, iSs.

The Institutes of the Law of Nations. A Treatise of the

Jural Relation of Separate Political Communities. In 2 vols. Svo. Volume I.,
price i6s. Volume II., price dos.

M'COMBIE. Cattle and Cattle-Breeders. By William M'Combie,

Tillyfour. New Edition, enlarged, and with Memoir of the Author. By
James Macdonald, Editor of the ' Live-Stock Journal.' 3s. 6d.

MACRAE. A Handbook of Deer-stalking. By Alexander

Macrae, late Forester to Lord Henry Bentinck. With Introduction by
Horatio Ross, Esq. Cap. Svo, with two Photographs from Life. 3s. 6d.

M'CRIE. Works of the Rev. Thomas M'Crie, D.D. Uniform Edition.
Four vols, crown Svo, 243.

Life of John Knox. Containing Illustrations of the History
of the Reformation in Scotland. Crown Svo. 6s. Another Edition, 3s. 6d.

Life of Andrew Melville. Containing Illustrations of the

Ecclesiastical and Literary History of Scotland in the Sixteenth and Seventeenth
Centuries. Crown Svo. 6s.

History of the Progress and Suppression of the Reformation
in Italy in the Sixteenth Century. Crown Svo, 4s.

History of the Progress and Suppression of the Reformation

in Spain in the Sixteenth Century. Crown Svo, 3s. 6d.
Lectures on the Book of Esther. Cap. Svo, 5s.

Macintosh. The Book of the Garden. By Charles Macintosh,

formerly Curator of the Royal Gardens of his Majesty the King of the Belgians,
and lately of those of his Grace the Duke of Buccleuch, K.G., at Dalkeith Palace.
Two large vols, royal Svo, embellished with 1350 Engravings. /,4, 7s. 6d.

VoL I. On the Formation of Gardens and Construction of Garden" Edifices. 776
pages, and 1073 Engravings, £2, los.

Vol. II. Practical Gardening. 868 pages, and 279 Engravings, £1, 17s. 6d.

MACKAY. A Manual of Modern Geography ; Mathematical, Physical,
and Political. By the Rev. Alexander Mackay, LL.D., F.R.G.S. i\th
Edition, revised to the ]ireseiit time. Crown 8vo, pp. 688. 7s. 6d.

Elements of Modern Geography. 5i.st Thousand, revised
to the present time. Crown 8vo, pp. 300, 3s.

The Intermediate Geography. Intended as an Intermediate
Book between the Author's ' Outlines of Geography ' and ' Elements of
Geography.' Eleventh Edition, revised Crown 8vo, pip. 238, 2s.

Outlines of Modern Geography. 175th Thousand, revised
to the present time. imo, pp. 118. is.

First Steps in Geography. sed Thousand. imo, pp.

56. Sewed, 4d. ; cloth, 6d.

Elements of Physiography and Physical Geography.

with Express Reference goethe Instructions recently issued by the Science and
Art Department. 25th Thousand, revised. Crown 8vo, is. 6d.

Facts and Dates ; or, the Leading Events in Sacred and

Profane History, and the Principal Facts in the various Physical Sciences.
The Memory being aided throughout by a Sirr.ijle and Natural Method. For
Schools and Private Reference. New Edition. Crown 8vo, 3s. 6d.

MACKAY. An Old Scots Brigade. Being the History of Mackay 's

Regiment, now incorporated with the Royal Scots. With an Appendix containing
many Original Documents connected with the History of the Regiment.
By JoHK Mackay (late) of Herriesdale. Crown Svo.'ss.

MACKAY. The Founders of the American Republic. A History
of Washington, Adams, Jefferson, Franklin, and Madison. With a Supplementary
Chapter on the Inherent Causes of the Ultimate Failure of American
Democracy. By Charles Mackay, LL.D. Post 8vo, los. 6d.

MACKELLAR. More Leaves from the Journal of a Life in the

Highlands, from 1862 to 1882. Translated into Gaelic by Mrs Mary Mackel-
LAR. By command of Her Majesty the Queen. In one vol. crown 8vo, with
Illustrations. [In the press.

Mckenzie, Studies in Roman Law. "With Comparative Views

of the Laws of France, England, and Scotland. By Lord Mckenzie, one of
the Judges of the Court of Session in Scotland. Fifth Edition, Edited by
John Kirkpatrick, Esq., M.A. Cantab.; Dr Fur. Heidelb. ; LL.B., Eden. ;
Advocate. 8vo, 12s.

MADOC. Thereby. A Novel. By Far Madoc. Two vols.

Post 8vo, 17s.
Main. Three Hundred English Sonnets. Chosen and Edited by

David M. Main. Cap. 8vo, 6s.

MANNERS. Notes of an Irish Tour in 1846. By Lord John

Manners, M.P., G.C.B. New Edition. Crown 8vo, 2s. 6d.

lanner. Gems of German Poetry. Translated by Lady John

Manners. Small quarto, 3s. 6d.

Impressions of Bad-Homburg. Comprising a Short Account
of the Women's Associations of Germany under the Red Cross. By
Lady John Manners. Crown 8vo, is. 6d.

Some Personal Recollections of the Later Years of the Earl

beaconsfield, K.G. Sixth Edition, 6d.

Employment of Women in the Public Service. 6d.

Some of the Advantages of Easily Accessible Reading and

Recreation Rooms, and Free Libraries. With Remarks on Starting and
Maintaining Them. Second Edition, crown 8vo, is.

A Sequel to Rich Men's Dwellings, and other Occasional

Papers. Crown 8vo, 2s. 6d.

MARMORNE. The Story is told by Adolphus Degrade, the

youngest of three Brothers. Third Edition. Crown 8vo, 6s.

MARSHALL. French Home Life. By Frederic Marshall.

Second Edition. 5s.

Marshal. History of India. From the Earliest Period to the

Close of the India Company's Government ; with an Epitome of Subsequent
Events. By John Clark Marshal, C.S.I. Abridged from the Author's
larger work. Second Edition, revised. Crown 8vo, with Map, 6s. 6d.

MARTIN. Goethe's Faust. Part I. Translated by Sir Theodore

Martin, K C.B. Second Edition, crown 8vo, 6s. Eighth Edition, 3s. 6d.

Goethe's Faust. Part II. Translated into English Verse,

Cap. 8vo, 6s.

The Works of Horace. Translated into English Verse,

with Life and Notes. In 2 vols, crown 8vo, printed on hand-made paper, 21s.

- Poems and Ballads of Heinrich Heine. Done into English
Verse. Second Edition. Printed on papier verge, crown Svo, 8s.

- Catullus. With Life and Notes. Second Edition, post 8yo,

7S. 6d.

- The Vita Nova of Dante. With an Introduction and

Notes. Second Edition, crown 8vo, 5s.

- Aladdin : A Dramatic Poem. By Adam Oehlenschlae-

GER. Cap. Svo, 5s.

- Correggio : A Tragedy. By Oehlenschlaeger. With

Notes. Cap. Svo, 3s.

King Rene's Daughter : A Danish Lyrical Drama. By

Hexrik Hertz. Second Edition, cap., 2s. 6d.

MARTIN. Some of Shakespeare's Female Characters. In a Series

of Letters. By Helena Faccit, Lady Martin. With Portraits engraved by
the late F. Hold. Dedicated by Special Permission to Her Most Gracious
Majesty the Queen. 4to, printed on hand-made paper.

Matson. Can the Old Faith Live with the New? or the

Problem of Evolution and Revelation. By the Rev. George Matson, D.D
Second Edition. Crown Svo, 7s. 6d.

MEIKLEJOHN. An Old Educational Reformer— Dr Bell. By
J. M. D. Meiklejohn, M.A., Professor of the Theory, History, and Practice
of Education in the University of St Andrews. Crown Svo, 3s. 6d.

■ The Golden Primer. With Coloured Illustrations by Walter
Crane. Small 4to, boards, 5s.

MICHEL. A Critical Inquiry into the Scottish Language. With
the view of Illustrating the Rise and Progress of Civilisation in Scotland. By
Francisque-Michel, F.S.A. Lord. and Scot., Correspondant de Institut de
France, &c. In One handsome Quarto Volume, printed on hand-made paper,
and appropriately bound in Roxburgh e style. Price cs.

MICHIE. The Larch : Being a Practical Treatise on its Culture
and General Management. By Christopher Y. Michel, Forester, Sullen House.
Crown Svo, with Illustrations. New and Cheaper Edition, enlarged. 5s.

MILLIONAIRE, THE. By Louis J. Jennings, Author of ' Field

Paths and Green Lanes,' ' Rambles among the Hills,' kc. Second Edition.
.3 vols, crown Svo, 25s. 6d.

MILNE. The Problem of the Churchless and Poor in our Large
Towns. With special reference to the Home Mission Work of the Church of
Scotland. By the Plea. Root. Milne, M. A., Towie. Crown Svo, 5s.

Into. A Manual of English Prose Literature, Biographical
and Critical : designed mainly to show Characteristics of Style. By W. Into,
M. A., Professor of Logic in the University of Aberdeen. New Edition, revised.
Crown Svo, 7s. 6d.

Characteristics of English Poets, from Chaucer to Shirley.

New Edition, revised. Crown Svo, 7s. 6d.

The Crack of Doom. Originally published in ' Blackwood's

Magazine.' 3 vols, post Svo, 25s. 6d.

MITCHELL. Biographies of Eminent Soldiers of the last Four

Centuries. By Major-general John Mitchell, Author of 'Life of "Wallenstein.'
"With a Memoir of the Author. 8vo, gs.

Mair. Life of Manse Which, Tailor in Dalkeith. With 8

Illustrations on Steel, by the late George Cruikshakk. Crown 8vo, 3s. 6d.
Another Edition, cap. 8vo, is. 6d.

Homeric. Defects of Modern Christianity, and other Sermons.

By the Rev. A. W. Momkrie, M.A., D.Sc, Professor of Logic and Metaphysics
in King's College, London. Xew Edition. Crown Svo, 5s.

The Basis of Religion. Being an Examination of Natural

Religion. Crown Svo. 2s. 6d.

The Origin of Evil, and other Sermons. Fourth Edition,

enlarged. Crown Svo, 5s.

Personality. The Beginning and End of Metaphysics, and

a Necessary Assumption in all Positive Philosophy. Second Edition. Crown
Svo, 3s.

Agnosticism, and other Sermons. Crown 8yo, 6s.

MONTAGUE. Campaigning in South Africa. Reminiscences of

an Officer in 1879. By Captain W. E. Montague, 94th Regiment, Author of
Claude Meadowleigh,' &c. 8vo, los. 6d.

MONTALEMBERT. Memoir of Count de Montalembert. A

Chapter of Recent French History. By Mrs Oliphant, Author of the 'Life
of Edward Irving,' &c. 2 vols, crown 8vo, £z, 43.

MURDOCH. Manual of the Law of Insolvency and Bankruptcy :

Comprehending a Summary of the Law of Insolvency, Notour Bankruptcy,
Composition - contracts, Trust-deeds, Cession, and Sequestrations; and the
Winding-up of Joint-stock Companies in Scotland ; with Annotations on the
various Insolvency and Bankruptcy Statutes ; and with Forms of Procedure
applicable to these Subjects. By James Murdoch, Member of the Faculty of
Procurators in Glasgow. Fifth Edition, Revised and Enlarged, 8vo, £z, los.

MY TRIVIAL LIFE AND MISFORTUNE : A Gossip with

no Plot in Particular. By A Plain Woman. New Edition, crown Svo, 6s.

NASEBY. Oaks and Birches. A Novel. By Naseby. 3 vols.

crown Svo, 25s. 6d.

NEAYES. Songs and Verses, Social and Scientific. By an Old

Contributor to ' Mama.' By the Hon. Lord Leaves. Fifth Edition, cap. Svo,
4S.

The Greek Anthology. Being Vol. XX. of 'Ancient Classics
for English Readers.' Crown Svo, 2s. 6d.

NICHOLSON. A Manual of Zoology, for the Use of Students.

With a General Introduction on the Principles of Zoology. By Henry Al-leone
Nicholson, M.D., D.Sc, F.L.S., F.G.S., Regius Professor of Natural
History in the University of Aberdeen. Sixth Edition, revised and enlarged.
Crown 'Svo, pp. S65, with 454 Engravings on Wood, 14s.

Text-book of Zoology, for the Use of Schools. Fourth Edition,
enlarged. Crown Svo. with 188 Engravings on Wood, 7s. 6d.

Introductory Text-book of Zoology, for the Use of Junior

Classes. Fifth Edition, revised and enlarged, with 166 Engravings, 3s.

Outlines of Natural History, for Beginners ; being Descriptions
of a Progressive Series of Zoological Types. Third Edition, with
Engravings, is. 6d.

A Manual of Palaeontology, for the Use of Students.

With a General Introduction on the Principles of Palaeontology. Second
Edition. Revised and greatly enlarged. 2 vols. Svo, with 722 Engravings.

£2, 23.

The Ancient Life-History of the Earth. An Outline of

the Principles and Leading Facts of Palgeontological Science. Crown Svo,
with 276 Engravings, los. 6d.

NICHOLSON. On the " TaUilate Corals " of the Paleozoic Period,

sith Critical Descriptions of Illustrative Species. By Henry Allege
Nicholson, M.D., D.Sc, F.L.S., Fag S., Regius Professor of Natural History
in the University of Aberdeen. Illustrated with 15 Lithograph Plates and
numerous Engravings. Super-royal 8vo, 21s.

On the Structure and Affinities of the Genus Monticulipora

and its Sui-Genera, with Critical Descriptions of Illustrative Species. Illustrated
with numerous Engravings on wood and lithographed Plates. Super-royal
8vo, 1 8s.

Synopsis of the Classification of the Animal Kingdom.

8vo, with 106 Illustrations, 6s.

NICHOLSON. Communion with Heaven, and other Sermons.

By the late Maxwell Nicholson, D.D., Minister of St Stephen's, Edinburgh.
Crown 8vo, 5s. 6d.

■ Best in Jesus. Sixth Edition. Cap. 8vo, 4s. 6d.

OLIPHANT. Masollam : a Problem of the Period. A Novel.

By Laurence Oliphant. 3 vols, post 8yo, 25s. 6d.

Altera Peto. Eighth Edition, Illustrated. Crown 8vo, 6s.

Piccadilly : A Fragment of Contemporary Biography. With

Eight Illustrations by Richard Doyle. Eighth Edition, 43. 6d. Cheap Edition,
in paper cover, 2s. 6d.

Traits and Travesties ; Social and Political. Post 8vo, i os. 6d.

The Land of Gilead. TVith Excursions in the Lebanon.

With Illustrations and Maps. Demy Svo, 21s.

The Land of Khemi. Post Svo, with Illustrations, los. 6d.

Haifa : Life in Modern Palestine. "With numerous Illustrations

and Diagrams, i vol. Svo. vin preparation.

Sympneumata : or, Evolutionary Functions now Active in

Man. Edited by Laurence Oliphant. Post Svo, los. 6d.

OLIPHANT. The Story of Valentine ; and his Brother. By Mrs

Oliphant. 5s., cloth.

Katie Stewart. 2s. 6d.

A House Divided against Itself. 3 vols, post Svo, 25s. 6d.

[In the press.

OSBORN. Narratives of Voyage and Adventure. By Admiral

Shepard Osborn, C.B. 3 vols, crown Svo, 12s.

OSSIAN. The Poems of Ossian in the Original Gaelic. "With a

Literal Translation into English, and a Dissertation on the Authenticity of the
Poems. By the Rev. Archibald Clerk. 2 vols, imperial Svo, £1, us. 6d.

OSWALD. By Fell and Fjord ; or, Scenes and Studies in Iceland.

By E. J. Oswald. Post Svo, with Illustrations. 7s. 6d.

Outran. Lyrics : Legal and Miscellaneous. By the late George

Outran, Esq., Advocate. New Edition. Revised. In i vol. [In the press.

PAGE. Introductory Text-book of Geology. By David Page,

LL.D., Professor of Geology in the Durham University of Physical Science,
Newcastle. With Engravings on Wood and Glossarial Index. Eleventh
Edition, 2S. 6d.

Advanced Text-book of Geology, Descriptive and Industrial.
With Engravings, and Glossary of Scientific Terms. Sixth Edition, revised
and enlarged, 7s. 6d.

Introductory Text-book of Physical Geography. With

Sketch-Maps and illustrations. Edited by Charles Tamworth, F.G.S., &c.,
Professor of Geology and Mineralogy in the Mason Science College, Birmingham,
nth Edition. 2s. 6d.

Advanced Text-book of Physical Geography. Third

Edition, Revised and Enlarged by Professor Tamworth. With Engravings.
seaton.

Spindrift. By Sir J. Noel Paton. Cap., cloth, 5s.

Poems by a Painter. Cap., cloth, 5s.

PATTERSON. Essays in History and Art. By E. Hogarth

Patterson. 8vo, 12s.

The New Golden Age, and Influence of the Precious Metals

upon the World. 2 vols. 8vo, 318. 6d.
PAUL. History of the Royal Company of Archers, the Queen's
Bodj-'Guardfor Scotland. By James Balfour Paul, Advocate of the Scottish
Bar. Crown 4to, with Portraits and other Illustrations. £,^, 2%.

PAUL. Analysis and Critical Interpretation of the Hebrew Text of
the Book of Genesis. Preceded by a Hebrew Grammar, and Dissertations on
the Genuineness of the Pentateuch, and on the Structure of the Hebrew Language.
By the Rev. William Paul, A.M. 8vo, iSs.

PETTIGREW. The Handy Book of Bees, and their Profitable

Management. By A. Pettigrew. Fourth Edition, Enlarged, with Engravings.
Crown Svo, 3s. 6d.

PHILOSOPHICAL CLASSICS FOR ENGLISH READERS.

Companion Series to Ancient and Foreign Classics for English Readers.
Edited by William Knight, LL.D., Professor of Moral Philosophy, University
of St Andrews. In crown Svo volumes, with portraits, price 3s. 6d.
1. Descartes. By Professor Mahaflfy, i 6. HAiiiLTON. By Professor Veitcb,

Dublin.

Butler. By the Rev. W. Lucas Collins,
M.A.

Berkeley. By Professor A. Campbell
Eraser, Edinburgh.

Fichte. By Professor Adamson,
Manchester.

Kant. Bv Professor Wallace, Oxford.


Glasgow.

7. Hegel. By Professor Edward Caird,

Glasgow.

8. Leibnitz. By J. Theodore Mers,

9. Vico. By Professor Flint, Edinburgh.



10. Hobbes. By Professor Room Robertson,

London.

11. Hume. By the Editor, [Shortly.

Pollock. The Course of Time : A Poem. By Robert Pollock,

A.M. Small cap. 8vo, cloth gilt, 2s. 6d. The Cottage Edition, 32mo, sewed,
8d. The Same, cloth, gilt edges, is. 6d. Another Edition, with Illustrations
by Birket Foster and others, cap., gilt cloth, 3s. 6d., or with edges gilt, 4s.

PORT ROYAL LOGIC. Translated from the French : with Introduction,
Notes, and Appendix. By Thomas Spencer Barnes, LL.D., Professor
in the University of St Andrews. Eighth Edition, imo, 4s.

POTTS AND Darnel. Aditus Facilities : An easy Latin consenting

Book, with Complete Vocabulary. By A. W. Potts, M.A., LL.D.,
Head-Master of the Fetters College, Edinburgh, and sometime Fellow of St
John's College, Cambridge; and the Rev. C. Darrell, M.A., Head-Master of
Cargilfield Preparatory School, Edinburgh, and late Scholar of Pembroke and
Downing Colleges, Cambridge. Ninth Edition, cap. 8vo, 3s. 6d.

Aditus Facilities Graeca. An easy Greek Construing Book,

with Complete Vocabulary. Third Edition, cap, 8vo, 3s.

Prince. The Live-Stock of the Farm. By Robert 0, Prince.

Third Edition. Edited and Revised by Facies Macdonald, Editor of the
Live-Stock Journal,' &c. Crown 8vo, [In the press.

Single, A Journey in East Africa towards the Mountains of

the Moon, By Mrs Prince of Whj-tbank, Yair. New Edition. With a Map,

PUBLIC ' GENERAL STATUTES AFFECTING SCOTLAND,

from 1707 to 1847. with Chronological Table and Index, 3 vols, large 8vn, £2^ public

GENERAL STATUTES AFFECTING SCOTLAND,

COLLECTION OF. Published Annually with General Index.

RAMSAY. Rough Recollections of Military Service and Society.
By Lieut-col. Balcarres D. Wardle Ramsay. Two vols, post Svo, 21s.

RAMSAY. Scotland and Scotsmen in the Eighteenth Century. From

the WSS. of John Ramsay, Esq. of Ochtertyre. In two vols. 8vo. [In there's.

Mankind. A Treatise on the Rights and Burdens incident to

the Ownership of Lands and other Heritages in Scotland. By John Ranking,
M.A., Advocate. Second Edition, Revised and Enlarged. 'Svo, 45s.

Records OF THE TERCENTENARY FESTIVAL OF THE

UNIVERSITY OF EDINBURGH. Celebrated in April 1884. Published
under the Sanction of the Senatus Academics. Large 4to, £1, 12s. 6d.

Simmer. The Early Homes of Prince Albert. By Alfred

Rummer, Author of 'sour Old Country Towns,' &c. Beautifully Illustrated
with Tinted Plates aud numerous Engravings on "Wood. Svo, 21s.

ROBERTSON. Orellana, and other Poems. By J. Logie Robertson,
m. a. Cap. 8vo. Printed on hand-made paper. 6s.

The White Angel of the Polly Ann, and other Stories. A

Book of Fables and Fancies. Cap. Svo, 3s. 6d.

Our Holiday Among the Hills. By James and Janet

Logie Robertson. Cap. Svo, 3s. 6d.

ROSCOE. Rambles'with a Fishing-rod. By E. S. Roscoe. Crown

Svo, 4s. 6d.

ROSS. Old Scottish Regimental Colours. By Andrew Ross,

S.S.C, Hon. Secretary Old Scottish Regimental Colours Committee. Dedicated
by Special Permission to Her Majesty the Queen. Folio, handsomely
bound in cloth, ^■z, 12s. 6d.

RUSSELL. The Hangs of Bemersyde. A Family History. By

John Russell. Large Svo, with Illustrations. 21s.

RUSTOW. The War for the Rhine Frontier, 1870 : Its Political

and Military History. By Col. W. Rustow. Translated from the German,
by John Lapland Needham, Lieutenant Rem. Artillery. 3 vols. Svo, with
Maps and Plans, £,1, us. 6d.

SCOTCH LOCH FISHING. By " Black Palmer." Crown Svo,

interleaved with blank pages, 4s.

SELLER AND STEPHENS. Physiology at the Farm ; in Aid of

Rearing and Feeding the Live Stock. By William Seller, M.D., F.R.S.E.,
Fellow of the Royal College of Physicians, Edinburgh, formerly Lectiu-er on
MateriaMedica and Dietetics ; and Henry Stephens, F.R.S.E., Author of ' The
Book of the Farm,' &c. Post Svo, with Engravings, i6s.

SETON. Memoir of Alexander Seton, Earl of Dunfermline, Seventh
President of the Court of Session, and Lord Chancellor of Scotland. By
George Seton, M.A. Oxon. ; Author of the 'Law and Practice of Heraldry in
Scotland,' &c. Crown 4to, 21s.

SETH. Scottish Philosophy. A Comparison of the Scottish and

German Answers to Hume. Balfour Philosophical Lectures, University of
Edinburgh. By Andrew Seth, M.A., Professor of Logic and Philosophy in
the University College of South Wales and Monmouthshire. Crown Svo, 5s.

SHADWELL. the Life of Colin Campbell, Lord Clyde. Illustrated
by Extracts from his Diary and Correspondence. By Lieutenant-general
Shadwell, C.B. 2 vols. Svo. With Portrait, Maps, and Plans. 36s.

Hand. Fortune's Wheel. By Alex. Innes Hand, Author of

Against Time,' &c. Originally published in ' Blackwood's Magazine.' 3 vols,
post Svo, 25S. 6d.

Letters from the West of Ireland. Reprinted from the

Times.' Crown Svo, 5s.

SHARPE. The Correspondence of Charles Kirkpatrick Sharpe.

With a Memoir. In two vols. Svo. Illustrated with Etchings and other
Engravings. Un the press.

SIM. Margaret Sin's Cookery. With an Introduction by L. B.

Walford, Author of ' Mr Smith : A Part of His Life.' &c. CrowTi Svo, 5s.

SIMPSON. Dogs of other Days : Nelson and Puck. By Eve

Blantyre Simpson. Cap. Svo, with Illustrations, 2s. 6d.

SKENE. A Strange Inheritance. By F. M. F. Skene, Author of

Hidden Depths.' 3 vols, post Svo.

SMITH. Italian Irrigation : A Report on the Agricultural Canals

of Piedmont and Lombard', addressed to the Hon. the Directors of the East
India Company ; with an Appendix, containing a Sketch of the Irrigation System
of Northern and Central India. By Lieut-col. R. Baird Smith, F.G.S.,
Captain, Bengal Engineers. Second Edition. 2 vols. 8vo, with Atlas, sos.

SMITH. Thorndale ; or, The Conflict of Opinions. By William

Smith, Author of 'A Discourse on Ethics,' &c. A New Edition. Crown
8vo, los. 6d.

Gravenhurst ; or, Thoughts on Good and Evil. Second

Edition, with Memoir of the Author. Crown 8vo, 8s.

SMITH. Greek Testament Lessons for Colleges, Schools, and

Private Students, consisting chiefly of the Sermon on the Mount and the
Parables of our Lord, With Notes and Essays. By the Rev. J. Hunter
Smith, M.A., Kincf Edward's School, Birmingham. Crown 8vo, 6s.

SMITH. Writings by the Way. By John Campbell Smith,

M.A., Sheriff-substitute. Crown 8vo, 9s.

SMITH. The Secretary for Scotland. Being a Statement of the

Powers and Duties of the new Scottish Office. With a Short Historical
Introduction and numerous references to important Administrative Documents.
By W. C. Smith, LL.B., Advocate. 8vo, 6s.

Softer. A Lady's Ride Across Spanish Honduras. By Maria

SoLTERA. With Illustrations. Post Svo, 12s. 6d.

Morley. The Ethics of Naturalism. Being the Shaw Fellowship

Lectures, 18S4. By vV R. Morley, M.A., Fellow of Trinity College, Cambridge,
and Examiner in Philosophy in the University of Edinburgh. Crown 8vo, 6s.

Sprout. The Worship and Offices of the Church of Scotland ;
or, the Celebration of Public Worship, the Administration of the Sacraments,
and other Divine Offices, according to the Order of the Church of Scotland.
Bv George W. Sprout, D.D., Minister of North Berwick. Crown Svo, 6s.

STARFORTH. Villa Residences and Farm Architecture : A Series
of Designs. By John Starforth, Architect. 102 Engravings. Second Edition,
medium 4to, ^■z, 17s. 6d.

STATISTICAL ACCOUNT OF SCOTLAND. Complete, with

Index, 15 vols. 8vo, ;sic, impeach
County sold separately, with Title, Index, and Map, neatly bound in cloth,
forming a very valuable Manual to the Landowner, the Tenant, the Manufacturer,
the Naturalist, the Tourist, &c.

STEPHENS. The Book of the Farm ; detailing the Labours of the

Farmer, Farm-Steward, Ploughman, Shepherd, Hedger, Farm-Labourer, Field-worker,
and Cattleman. By Henry Stephens, F.R.S.E. Illustrated with
Portraits of Animals painted from the life; and with 557 Engravings on Wood,
representing the principal Field Operations, Implements, and Animals treated
of in the Work. A New and Revised Edition, the third, in great part Rewritten.
2 vols, large Svo, £2, los.

The Book of Farm Buildings ; their Arrangement and

Construction. By Henry Stephens, F.R.S.E., Author of 'The Book of the
Farm;' and Robert Scott Burn. Illustrated with 1045 Plates and Engravings.
Large Svo, uniform with ' The Book of the Farm,' &c. ^i, us. 6d.

The Book of Farm Implements and Machines. By J.

Slight and R. Scott Burn, Engineers. Edited by Henry Stephens. Large
Svo, uniform with 'The Book of the Farm,' ;^2, 2s.

Catechism of Practical Agriculture. With Engravings, is.

'^umntomutdcs ^rit;tnniti.
STEVENSON. BritisVFungiT (Hymenomycetes.) By Rev. John

Stevenson, Author of ' Mycologia Scotia,' Hon. Sec. Cryptogamic Society of
Scotland. 2 vols, post Svo, with Illustrations. Vol. I. Agaricus— Bolbitius,
12S. 6d.

STEWART. Advice to Purchasers of Horses. By John Stewart,

Vas., Author of 'Stable Economy.' 2s. 6d

STEWART. Stable Economy. A Treatise on the Management of

Horses in relation to Stabling, Grooming, Feeding, Watering, and Working.
By John Stewart, Vas. Seventh Edition, cap. 8vo, 6s. 6d.

STONE. Hugh Moore : a Novel. By Evelyn Stone. 2 vols.

crown 8vo, 17s.

STORMONTH. Etymological and Pronouncing Dictionary of the

English Langage. Including a very Copious Selection of Scientific Terms.
For Use in Schools and Colleges, and as a Book of General Reference. By the
Rev. James Stormoxth. The Pronunciation carefully Revised by the Rev.
P. H. Help, M.A. Cantab. Eighth Edition, Revised throughout. Crown
8vo, pp. 800. 7s. 6d.

Dictionary of the English Language, Pronouncing,

Etymological, and Explanatory. Revised by the Rev. P. H. Help. Library
Edition. Imperial 8vo, handsomely bound in half morocco, 313. 6d.

The School Etymological Dictionary and Word-Book.

Combining the advantages of an ordinary pronouncing School Dictionary
and an Etymological Spelling-book. Cap. 'svo, pp. 254. 2s.

STORY. Nero ; A Historical Play. By W. W. Story, Author of

'Robe di Roma.' Cap. 8vo, 6s.

Yallombrosa. Post 8vo, 5s.

He and She ; or, A Poet's Portfolio. Cap. 8vo, in parch-rent,

3s. 6d.

Poems. 2 vols., cap., 7s. 6d.

Damietta. A Summer Idol. Crown 8vo, 7s. 6d.

STCJKGIS. John - a - Dreams. A Tale. By Julian Surges.

New Edition, crown 8vo, 3s. 6d.

Little Comedies, Old and New. Crown 8vo, 7s. 6d.

SUTHERLAND. Handbook of Hardy Herbaceous and Alpine

Flowers, for general Garden Decoration. Containing Descriptions, in Plain
Language, of upwards of 1000 Species of Ornamental Hardy Perennial and
Alpine Plants, adapted to all classes of Flower-gardens, Clockwork, and
Waters ; along with Concise and Plain Instructions for their Propagation and
Culture. By William Sutherland, Gardener to the Earl of Mmto ; formerly
Manager of the Herbaceous Department at Kew. Crown 8vo, 7s. 6d.

TAYLOR. The Story of My Life. By the late Colonel Meadows

Taylor, Author of 'The Confessions of a Thu£,%' &c. &c. Edited by his
Daughter. New and cheaper Edition, being the Fourth. Crown 8vo, 6s.

TAYLOR. Wayfarers. By U. Ashworth Taylor. In two vols-crown

8vo. 17s.

TEMPLE. Lancelot Ward, M.P. A Love-story. By George

Temple. Crown 8vo. 7s. 6d.

THOLUCK. Hours of Christian Devotion. Translated from the

German of A. Tholuck, D. D. , Professor of Theologian the University of Halle.
By the Rev. Robert Menzies, D. D. With a Preface Written for this Translation
by the Author. Second Edition, crown 8vo, 7s. 6d.

THOMSON. Handy Book of the Flower-garden : being Practical

Directions for the Propagation, Culture, and Arrangement of Plants in Flower-gardens
all the year round. Embracing all classes of Gardens, from the largest
to the smallest. ' With Engraved and Coloured Plans, illustrative of the various
systems of Grouping in Beds and Borders. By David Thomson, Gardener to
his Grace the Duke of Buccleuch, K.G., at Drumlanrig. Third Edition, crown
8vo, 7s. 6d.

The Handy Book of Fruit-Culture under Glass : being

a series of Elaborate Practical Treatises on the Cultivation and Forcing of Pines,
Vines, Peaches, Figs, Melons, Strawberries, and Cucumbers. With Engravings
of Hothouses, &c., most suitable for the Cultivation and Forcing of these
Fruits. Second Edition. Cro^vn 8vo, with Engravings, 7s. 6d.

THOMSON. A Practical Treatise on the Cultivation of the Grapevine.
By William Thomson, Tweed Vineyards. Tenth Edition, 8vo, 5s.

THOMSON. Cookery for the Sick and Convalescent. With
Directions for the Preparation of Poultices, Fomentations, &c. By Barbara
Thomson, Clovenfords. Cap. 8vo, is. 6d.

TOM Cringe's LOG. A New Edition, with Illustrations.

Crown 8vo, cloth gilt, 5s. Cheap Edition, 2s.

TRANSACTIONS OF THE HIGHLAND AND Agricultural
SOCIETY OF SCOTLAND. Published annually, price 5s.

TROLLOPE. An Autobiography by Anthony Trollope. Two

Volumes, post 8vo, with Portrait. Second Edition. Price 218.

The Fixed Period. 2 vols. cap. 8 vo, 12s.

An Old Man's Love. 2 vols, crown 8vo, 12s.

Bullock. Rational Theology and Christian Philosophy in England
in the Seventeenth Century. By John Bullock, D.D., Principal of St
Mary's College in the University of St Andrews ; and one of her Majesty's
Chaplains in Ordinary in Scotland. Second Edition. 2 vols. Svo, 16s.

Modern Theories in Philosophy and Religion. Svo, 15s.

The Christian Doctrine of Sin ; being the Croall Lecture

for 1876. Crown 8vo, 6s.

Theism. The Witness of Reason and Nature to an All-wise
and Beneficent Creator. Svo, los. 6d.

Luther, and other Leaders of the Reformation. Third

Edition, enlarged. Crown Svo, 3s. 6d.

TWO STORIES OF THE SEEN AND THE UNSEEN. ' The

Open Door,' 'Old Lady Mary.' Cro-svn Svo, cloth, 2s. 6d.

Veitch. Institutes of Logic. By John Veitch, LL.D., Professor
of Logic and Rhetoric in the University of Glasgow. Post 8vo, 12s. 6d,
VIRGIL. The ^neid of Virgil. Translated in English Blank

Verse by G. K. Rickards, M.A., and Lord Ravenswood. 2 vols. cap. Svo,

Bids.

WADE. General Gordon's Share in the Crisis at Pekin, 1880. A

Letter to Sir Henry Gordon, K.C.B., Author of ' Events in the Life of Charles
George Gordon.' By Sir Thomas Francis Wade, K.C.B., Sometime Hem.
Minister in China, i vol. crown Svo. [In the press.

WALFORD. The Novels of L. B. Walford. New and Uniform

Edition. Crown Svo, each 58.
Mr Smith : A Part of his Life. I Troublesome Daughters.
Cousins. Dick Nether.

Pauline. | The Baby's Grandmother.

History of a Week.

Nan, and other Stories. 2 vols, crown Svo, 12s.

WARDEN. Poems. By Francis Heywood Warden. With a

Notice by Dr Vanroth. " Crown Svo, 5s.

WARREN'S (SAMUEL) WORKS. People's Edition, 4 vols, crown

Svo, cloth, 15s. 6d. Or separately :—

Diary of a Late Physician. Cloth, 2s. 6d. ; boards, 2s. Illustrated,
crown Svo, 7s 6d.
Ten Thousand A- Year. Cloth, 3s. 6d. ; boards, 2S. 6d.
Now and Then. The Lily and the Bee. Intellectual and Moral

Development of the Present Age. 4s. 6d.

Essays : Critical, Imaginative, and Juridical. 58.
WARREN. The Five Books of the Psalms. With Marginal

Notes. By Rev. Samuel L. Warren, Rector of Esher, Surrey ; late Fellow,
Dean, and Divinity Lecturer, Waltham College, Oxford. Crown Svo, 5s.
WATSON. Christ's Authority ; and other Sermons. By the late
Archibald Watson, D.D., Minister of the Parish of Dundee, and one of
Her Majesty's Chaplains for Scotland. With Introduction by the Very
Rev. Principal Caird, Glasgow. Crown Svo, 7s. 6d.

WEBSTER. The Angler and the Loop-Rod. By David Webster.

Crown 8vo, with Illustrations, 7s. 6(1.

WELLINGTON. Wellington Prize Essays on "the System of Field

Manoeuvres best adapted for enabling our Troops to meet a Continental Army."
Edited bv Lieut-General Sir Edward Bruce Hamlet, K.C.B. 8vo, 12s, 6d.

WESTMINSTER ASSEMBLY. Minutes of the Westminster Assembly,
while engaged in preparing their Directory for Church Government,
Confession of Faith, and Catechisms (November 1644 to March 1649). Edited
by the Rev. Professor Alex. T. Mitchell, of St Andrews, and the Rev. John
Struthers, LL.D. With a Historical and Critical Introduction by Professor
Mitchell. 8vo, 15s,

WHITE. The Eighteen Christian Centuries. By the Rev. James

white. Seventh Edition, post 8vo, with Index, 6s.

History of France, from the Earliest Times. Sixth Thousand,
post 8vo. with Index, 6s.

WHITE. Archaeological Sketches in Scotland — Kintyre and Knap-dale.
By Colonel T. P. White, Ree., of the Ordnance Survey. With numerous
Illustrations. 2 vols, folio, ;£4, 4s. Vol. I., Kintyre, sold separately,

£-2. 2S.

The Ordnance Survey of Great Britain. A Popular

Account. I vol. post 8vo. [In the press.

WILLS AND GREENE. Drawing-room Dramas for Children. By

W. G. Wills and the Hon. Mrs Greene. Crown Svo, 6s.

WILSON. Works of Professor Wilson. Edited by his Son-in-law,

Professor Farrier. 12 vols, crown Svo, £2, 8s.

Christopher in his Sporting Jacket. 2 vols., 8s.

• Isle of Palms, City of the Plague, and other Poems. 4s.

Lights and Shadows of Scottish Life, and other Tales. 4s.

Essays, Critical and Imaginative. 4 vols., i6s.

The Notes Ambrosial. 4 vols., i6s.

The Comedy of the Notes Ambrosial. By Christopher

North. Edited by John Skelton, Advocate. With a Portrait of Professor
Wilson and of the Ettrick Shepherd, engraved on Steel. Crown Svo, 7s. 6d.

Homer and his Translators, and the Greek Drama. Crown

Svo, 4S.

WILSON. From Forti to Khartoum : A Journal of the Desert

March from Forti to Gubat and of the Ascent of thence in General Gordon's
Steamers. By Colonel Sir Charles W. Wilson, K.C.B., K.C.M.G., Ree.
New and Cheaper Edition. Crown Svo, 2s. 6d.

Innate. Annie Weir, and other Poems. By David Innate.

Cap. Svo, 5s.

Lily Neil. A Poem. Crown Svo, 4s. 6d.

WORDSWORTH. The Historical Plays of Shakspeare. With

Introductions and Notes. By Charles Wordsworth, D.C.L., Bishop of S.
Andrews. 3 vols, post Svo, each price 7s. 6d.

A Discourse on Scottish Church History. From the Reformation
to the Present Time. With Prefatory Remarks on the St Giles' Lectures,
and Appendix of Notes and References. Crown Svo, cloth, 2s. 6d.

WORSLEY. Poems and Translations. By Philip Stanhope

WoRSLEY, M.A. Edited by Edward Worsley. Second Edition, enlarged.
Cap. Svo, 6s.

Wilde. An Ill-regulated Mind. A Novel. By Katharine

Wilde, Author of ' A Dreamer.' Crown Svo, 7s. 6d.

YOUNG. Songs of Stranger done into English Verse. By William

TouxG. New Edition, revised. Cap. Svo, 4s. 6d.

YULE. Fortification : for the Use of Officers in the Army, and

Readers of Military History. By Col. Yule, Bengal Engineers. Svo, with
numerous Illustrations, los. 6d.

,-A
