W. H. SMITH & SON'S
SUBSCRIPTION LIBRARY,

186, STRAND, LONDON,
AND AT THE RAILWAY BOOKSTALLS

HOVELS mn UtMd U and received from Subscribers in SETS only.

FOR SUBSCRIBERS C(BT*II4IN<^TH|IR ^jboKS ^o)| AJ COUNTRY BOOKSTALL
„ ^^,„ ,, , ; ^-^ • \^ i ^ g / I 6 Months. laMontha.

For ONE Voluhlft ftt.a timer l-*^ ^ao 12 O - 1 1 O

(N»vtU in mort than-Ofu K»/w»w< Strict WUffjih/H Otis class 0/ Subscription. )

For TWO Volumes „ - - - O 17 6 - 1 11 6

(Nevil in mart then Tm» Volumes art notavaUabUftr this dots 0/SubscHftiom.)

For THREE „ „ - - - 180-220

For FOUR „ „ - - . 180-2 10

For SIX „ „ . 1 IB 0.380

jp ^^^ TWELVE „ „-800-8S0q|

P T^ . -4 ^

OF Thun

Diversity

or ILLINOIS

R43|s

V. \

Jl "gooch.

EY

MES. J. H. Liddell,

Author OF " THE SENIOR Partner, " George Leith, 01 FEN COURT, ' ETC.

IX Three VOLUMES.
VOL. I.

London:

RICHARD Bentley SOX,NEW BURLINGTON STREET.

^abiis^trs in ^rbinarg to ser JJlaj^stg Ibe Quccit.

1SS4.

fA^^^

C3

Coin





C4

>
o

A

f

lo
^r. nnb gars. Colin Campbell SStgllb,

walden, Chidcliurst,)

git remembrance of bags gone bge.

CHAP. Page

I. — Ax Off Day ix the Park 1

II. — Sir Geoffrey Chelstox 30

III. — Gayre, Deloxe, Eyles, axd Gayre . . 64

IV. — Mr. Gayre's Brother-ix-Law . 88

v. — A Possible Samaritan 117

VI. — Eliza Gubbins 138

ML— ^ViLL He Propose ? 167

VIII. — Father, Daughter, Uncle . . . 197

IX.— Susan '2m

X. — Mr. Sudlow is Advised for His Good . 248

XI. — " Should Auld Acquaintance be Forgot " . 267

XII.— High Festival 233

CHAPTEE I.

AN OFF DAY IN THE PARK.

Own in the country the meadows
gP were yellow with buttercups, the
hawthorns were in full blossom ; in the
Hertfordshire woods, sweet-scented white
and purple violets literally carpeted the
turf; beside the meandering streams of
Surrey wild flowers were spreading and
blooming ; but still the spring had been
late and ungenial, the accustomed easterly
winds had held a longer carnival than usual,
vegetation, on the whole, was backward ; and
as a natural consequence, Hyde Park, which
seems specially sensitive to the influence of

Vol i. 2

weather, could not, in the May of 1874, be
considered looking its very best, as is sometimes
the case in that "merrier" month sacred
to catarrh, rheumatism, and bronchitis.

The winter of 1873-74 was what is
generally called " singularly mild." It was
singularly disagreeable, at all events : snow
and frost held aloof, and bitter blasts and
raw unwholesome mists and damps prevailed
instead. That season will in one district of
London be ever held memorable for a most
dense and awful three days' fog, during
which period a darkness like unto that of
Egypt spread its pall over the whole of the
East end.

On New Years' night 1874, indeed, it
seemed as though the English climate had
determined to turn over a fresh and satisfactory
leaf. Such a fine evening was surely
never known before on any 1st of January;
so magnificent a moon rarely, even in August,
has shone on fields where the grain was ripe

for the reaper's sickle ; but, like too many
good resolutions made that day, the promise
of amendment led to no lasting improvement,
and winter dragged itself into
the lap of spring; and the spring itself was
late and dreary ; and in the May of that year
Hyde Park was not looking its best.

Hyde Park is a place which appears to
greatest advantage when seen in full dress,
when the trees are full of leaf and the flowers
in full bloom, and the Drive full of carriages
and the Eow full of riders, and the whole
scene one of incessant motion, and constant
change, and shimmering colour, and varying
effects.

At some periods and under certain conditions
it looks more mournful than a desolate
heath or a wide expanse of lonely moorland.
There is a sky under which its aspect
is depressing in the extreme. Even in the
season " there are times when the very

genius of desolation seems to be brooding

2—2

over the grass, and the trees, and the mud-coloured
Eow, and the Drive whence the last
carriage has departed.

It is then, plodding his lonely way homeward,
the whole show over, with the sun
setting behind him, and night coming on
apace, the pedestrian who is not rich or
fashionable or prosperous feels a fine despair
oppressing him, and is inclined, as a
comforting exercise, to recite aloud six verses
taken from the ninth chapter of Ecclesiastes.

Judging from the face of a lady who was
walking her horse along the Eow, she had
compassed this state of mind little more
than an hour after noon on that specially
dull May day in the prosperous year of grace
eighteen hundred and seventy-four, when
my story opens. Tittlebat Titmouse himself
could not have looked more dissatisfied.
Her expression was gloomy as the aspect of
the heavens, which seemed to betoken rain ;
and her listless dejected attitude accentuated

the desolation of the Park, which was almost
empty.

A Drawing-room had drawn nearly all
the rank and fashion in town off to St.
James's ; and the few who at an earlier
period of the day graced the Eow were
now gone home for luncheon, leaving but
one solitary rose to bloom, almost unseen,
in a desert peopled apparently only by nurse-maids,
children of tender years, and Life-guardsmen.


And this was not a rose that liked to
blush unseen. Solitudes were not places
she would have affected of her own freewill.
She preferred to be amongst her kind,
more especially when that kind included a
considerable number of male admirers. A
quiet life would certainly not have been
her choice, and yet for the twenty years
she had lived in this world a quiet life
chanced to be her portion.

She was a very singular-looking girl to

be riding in the Park, apparently a total
stranger. She seemed unknown, even by
sight, to those who, had, earlier in the day
passed and repassed her, and who now were
gone away. Not a woman had spoken a
word to her, not a man raised his hat.
She had walked and cantered her horse
round and round the Eow, evincing a curious
tendency to " hug " the railings, instead of
venturing out ii;to the middle of the ride.
A gray-haired groom attended upon her,
keeping closer to his mistress than is the
usual habit of grooms ; and the discontent
which clouded her face assumed on his the
proportions of absolute ill-humour.

Yet, if beauty count for anything, she
was a lady most grooms would have felt
proud to follow!

As has been said, the Park was singularly
empty. There were not any equipages
worth noticing ; the few equestrians had
gone away, either because they feared rain

or were hungry; the usual loungers were
elsewhere ; but still the young lady rode
up and down, and round and round, with
the dull steady persistence of a person on
the treadmill.

That she was not enjoying herself in the
least might have been patent almost to a
superficial observer ; the groom, who was
enjoying himself even less, knew wherefore,
and wondered why she did not end the
ordeal and go home.

Ko fairer face was seen in the row that
season. One man, leaning upon the railings,
decided no fairer face ever could have been
seen anywhere. It was quite new to him.
He had not beheld it before, and, while he
stood watching her as she passed, he marvelled
more and more who she could be,
what she was, and whence she came. He
was a man of thirty, with closely-cut light-brown
hair, and rather starved moustache.
He had the look of a man about town ;

and, while evidently captivated by the girl's
appearance, he eyed her with a critical investigating
glance, which spoke more for
the coolness of his head than the warmth
of his heart.

He seemed to have no appointment to
keep, or anything particular to do, for he
waited on and on, watching lady and groom
with a puzzled expression that certainly did
not betray the full extent of the admiration
he felt.

To him, over the grass, there came, with
a quiet but not stealthy step, a man much
his senior, who, saying, " Well, Sudlow, as
usual, admiring rank and beauty," took up
a position beside the person he so addressed.

"I do not know much about the rank,"
answered Mr. Sudlow, " but the beauty is
undeniable ; " and he fastened a bolder gaze
than he had previously ventured upon the
girl, who was passing at the moment.

She saw this and coloured, and yet there

was a look in her eyes — a downcast, indefinable
look — which told she did not feel
wholly offended.

The new-comer followed her progress
thoughtfully.

She can't ride a bit," he remarked.

Mr. Sudlow made no answer, but he
turned his head and stared hard and inquiringly
at the speaker, who, though no
question had been asked, replied, "I should
say not," and then they both remained silent
till after she passed again, which she did
this time at the side of the Eow furthest
from where they stood.

"She is very beautiful," said Mr. Sudlow.

"No doubt, to those who admire that
sort of thing."

What sort of thing ? " asked the younger
man.

If you can't see for yourself, it would
be useless to try to explain," answered his
friend, in a tone which had something annoying

in its very calmness ; " but the girl
is good-looking — beautiful if you like."

I wonder who she is ? Did you never
see her before ? "

The other shook his head.

Never ; and it would not grieve me if
I never saw her again. What have we
here ? " he added, as two persons, riding
very fast indeed, came at a hard trot
down the road leading across the Serpentine.
" You'll get yourselves into trouble,
my friends, if you don't mind what you are
about," he added.

But apparently the pair knew very well
what they were about, for, reining in their
horses, they walked as quietly down the
Eow as if they had been riding lambs
instead of powerful hunters, that looked
ridiculously out of place in Hyde Park, and
carrying such light weights.

There was a lovely flavour of the country
about the new-comers. One, a lady, was

mounted on the heavier of the animals — a
roan with black legs, a grand chest and
splendid action, well up to fifteen stone.

For a moment Mr. Sudlow's acquaintance
wondered why she rode the roan instead
of the magnificent bay, upon which he fastened
an appreciative gaze, but his wonder
was not of long continuance. Just as the
horses were passing the spot where they
stood, the bay took umbrage at the sight
of a stone roller which lay at the side of
the Eow. If it had been a wild beast he
could not have made more fuss about the
matter ; he shied almost across to the opposite
. railings ; he got up on his hind legs,
and reared as if he meant to fall right over
on his back ; then he put down his forelegs
and kicked, till Mr. Sudlow felt sure
his rider's last hour was come; after that he
tried to get his head and bolt ; and when
he was balked of this intention he seemed
for a minute to lift all his four feet off .the

ground at once, and dance upon nothing
in the air.

Meanwhile the gentleman sat the horse
as if he had been part of him, and his
companion looked on without evincing the
slightest discomposure or anxiety.

By Jove ! " said the elder of the spectators
under his breath, with an admiration
which was as involuntary as it was genuine.

People shouldn't bring such brutes into
the Park," observed Mr. Sudlow, who had
turned quite white, and who would, indeed,
have speedily placed himself beyond all risk
of danger had not his dread of ridicule
been greater even than his cowardice.

Then the centaur patted his horse on the
neck as if he had done something praiseworthy,
and the bay and the roan proceeded
peacefully on their way side by side.

At the same moment, the girl who had
been for so long a time exercising herself
on the Hyde Park treadmill, and who was

just then retracing her way from Albert
Gate, shrank past the pair, putting all the
width of the ride between them.

No words could adequately describe the
agony of terror into which the scene had
thrown her. She had been coming on to
meet the new-comers when the horse shied,
and during his varied performances she sat
with her eyes fastened on the rider, frightened
almost to death, afraid to turn back,
afraid the creature would rush madly upon
her, afraid her own steed might next take
alarm, suffering a thousand agonies in the
space of about a minute, and for once in
her life utterly unmindful of who might be
looking at her, or how she looked. She
had never even cast a glance at the roan,
all her attention being concentrated on the
bay, which she regarded in the light of a
four-footed demon ; nor, indeed, did the
lady on the roan particularly regard her :
but as they passed the groom a sudden

light seemed to dawn upon her mind, and
she looked back.

Why, that must be Lavender ! " she
exclaimed; "and, yes — certainly — that is
Margaret Chelston ; " and without more ado
she wheeled her horse round, and, riding
after the girl, said as she got close up to
her, 'who would have thought of our
meeting here, Margaret ? "

That settles the matter," remarked Mr.
Sudlow's companion to that gentleman ; and
Mr. Sudlow somewhat shakily answered,
Yes." Evidently there had been a doubt
of some sort in the minds of both men
which was now laid at rest.

I wonder who she can be, Gayre ? " said
Mr. Sudlow. " Are you sure j^ou have
never seen her before?"

Quite sure ; and yet, oddly enough, her
face seems familiar to me. Oh, look ! this
is very funny."

It was rather funny. The girl on the

hunter had put up a warning hand to keep
lier companion at a discreet distance, and
then, placing the object of Mr. Sudlow's
admiration in safety between herself and
the railings, proceeded with her conversation,
whilst the man who was thus debarred
from the delights of feminine society philosophically
fell back on Lavender, to the
manifest discomfort of a groom who " knew
his place" and "had been accustomed to
what was fitting,"

"It is long since I beheld so lovely a
woman," observed Mr. Sudlow.

"I never did," answered Mr. Garret

is a pity you so seldom speak
seriously."

I fail to see the particular application
of your remark."

"Why, it is not ten minutes since you
said she might be very well for those who
liked that sort of thing ; now you declare
she is lovely."

"0, I was talking of the other one.'

"Pooh!" exclaimed Mr. Sudlow.

"There is no accounting for tastes,"
remarked Mr. Gayre.

So it seems," was the curt reply.

You need not be angry with me because
I have not fallen in love with your
beauty," said the elder man. " She is a
very nice thing in girls, indeed. I should
say she is not long from the country; but
she will soon know her way about town.
I daresay, Sudlow, you may meet her at
some party or other before you are much
older."

"Do you really think it likely?"

"I do, indeed. I should not mind buying
that horse," he added, following the
bay with the eyes of a person who understood
horse-flesh.

What a curious seat the fellow has ! "
observed Mr. Sudlow, trying to emulate his
friend's critical manner.

"Do you know the reason?" asked Mr.
Gayre, cruelly throwing him at once.
"No; do you?" retorted Mr. Sudlow.
Of course ; he has been accustomed to
ride buck-jumpers."

"And what the deuce are buck-jumpers?"
It is a pity your grandfather is not
alive to tell you," observed Mr. Gayre;
which was an extremely unkind cut, had
Mr. Sudlow clearly understood the full
meaning of his friend's remark.

"What are you going to do with yourself
this evening ?" asked Mr. Gayre after
a pause, which Mr. Sudlow had devoted to
the consideration of that conundrum concerning
his grandfather.

I do not know — nothing."
"Come and dine with me, then."
The fashion of Mr. Sudlow's face instantly
underwent a change. It lighted up
with pleasure and surprise, and he answered
heartily,

Vol. i. 3

"I shall only be too glad. How very
kind you are to me ! I can't imagine why
you should be so kind."

Neither can I," was the answer. " You
do not amuse and you do not instruct me.
I have no daughter I want you to marry,
and I have enough money of my own without
trying to rob you of any of yours.
Farewell, then, till eight. If in the meantime
you discover why I am civil to you,
tell me."

Left thus to follow his own devices, Mr.
Sudlow, after a moment's hesitation, turned
and walked after the lady who had attracted
his admiration.

"I knew it," said Mr. Gayre, glancing
back ; and then, with a cynical smile curling
his lip, he pursued his way, which
happened to be Citj^ward. He was accounted
a great man in the City ; he was
a great man anywhere, indeed, if money
and greatness can be considered synonymous

terms. If a stranger had asked
any one of the many persons who touched
hats to him, and waved hands at him, and
made point of stopping to says " How d'ye
do ? how are you ? "was if their own
existence depended upon hearing that the
state of his health was satisfactory — who
he was, the answer would have been,

That, sir, is mr. Gayre, the banker —
Gayre, Delone, Eyles, and Gayre, Lombard
Street."

Utterly ignorant of the wealth and
wisdom they had passed by unheeded, the
two young ladies rode slowly on, talking
as they went.

"Who in the world, Susan, is that
person you are with ? "

It was Miss Chelston who asked this

question the moment the '* person " thus

spoken of was relegated to the improving

society of Mr. Lavender.

He is my cousin," answered Susan.

3—2

"0, indeed! which of them?"

"Mrs. Arbery's son. He has just come
back from Australia."

Did he bring his steed with him ? "

"No," said Susan, laughing; "that pretty-creature
and this," stroking the roan as she
spoke, " belong to a neighbour, who lets
us exercise them."

Does he wish them exercised in the
Eow ? " asked Miss Chelston ; " because if
he does, I will never venture into it again."

No, it is too far for us," was the
reply ; " but we should not do any harm
to any one if we did come. Are you as
timid about riding as you used to be ? "

The beauty shrugged her shoulders.

"I hate it," she answered.

Why do you ride, then ? " was the
natural question.

"Why do we do a hundred and fifty
things every day of our lives we would
rather not do ? " she retorted. " Susan,

pray keep your horse a little further off.
He has not a nice expression of face at
all. He looks as if he would bite. I can't
think what could induce you to mount
such a monster."

"He is tall," agreed the other indifferently;
"but a hand or two does not much
signify."

"And where have you been living since
your uncle's death ? " said Miss Chelston,
giving two young men who met them at
the moment a full view of her face turned
towards her companion, and her eyes raised
with a bewitching expression of interest and
sympathy. " You dear old thing, it was
hard for you to have to leave the Hall."

It was not so hard for me to have
to leave the Hall as for you to have to
leave the Pleasaunce, Maggie," answered
the other, with straightforward frankness
and good sense. "I knew the day must
come when it would be necessary for me

to go; but you— 0, I felt so sorry for
you!"

"Yes; but, after all, I don't think things
are much worse with us than ever . they
were. Indeed, I think on the whole they
are better. As for you, it is simply
dreadful— to be brought up . as you were
and then left without a sixpence. I call
it disgraceful of your uncle."

Don't say anything against uncle, please,
to me," said Susan, involuntarily tightening
her rein, and so causing the roan to spring
forward, which movement elicited a little
scream from Miss Chelston ; " and I am
not left without sixpence' she added. "I
have two thousand pounds saved from the
wreck of my father's fortune. If uncle
had known sooner that great India house
was going to fail, he would have arranged
to leave me something ; but as it was "

I know," interrupted Miss Chelston ; "he
always: intended you to marry his son."

"Who came home with a wife and two
children," added Susan. " Dear uncle —
dear, kind uncle I "

"That is all very well," said bliss
Chelston ; " but he might have left you
some practical proof of his kindness. Even
my father, who, as you know, is not
remarkable for the interest he takes in the
troubles of any one excepting himself, says
it is a shame for you to be left out in the
cold — a very, very shame ; " and Miss
Chelston nodded her pretty head to italicise
the naughty words she would not utter in
their native force and integrity.

How is your father P " asked Susan ;
then, without waiting for a reply, she
added, " the first ride I ever had in my
life was on his old horse. Wild Indian. Do
you remember Wild Indians It was
my fourth birthday, and he took me all
across the park and up the long beech
avenue."

And he has told me often enough since
you were not frightened, and that you
ought to have been his daughter instead
of me. I wish with all my heart you had
been."

They did not speak for a minute ; each
apparently was busy with her own thoughts ;
then Susan, looking at her old friend, said
suddenly, and as if the fact had only just
struck her,

"You are prettier than ever, Maggie."

"Do you think so?" answered Miss
Chelston.

"Yes, I always thought you were the
most beautiful creature in the world ; but
you are more beautiful now than you
used to be. It is London, I suppose, and
dress."

"Dress improves every one," said the
young lady, as a sort of general statement
which she immediately applied to a particular
case by asking.

"What could induce you to come out
in that hat and habit?"

"What is the matter with them?"
asked the other.

"Matter! Why, they must be ten years
old!"

I daresay they are, or more ; they are
not mine. I tore my own habit to rags
almost in Ireland."

Have you been staying in Ireland ? "

"Yes, with the Dudley. By the way,
I wrote to you from their place, but I
suppose you never got my letter. The
girls hunted, and of course I went with
them."

"Of course you did. Does Mrs. Arbery
hunt ? "

Good gracious, no ! Why, she must
be nearly sixty."

I didn't know. I only thought that
might be her habit. Seriously, Susan, you
must buy yourself something fit to wear."

"It is not .worth while. . I shall not
have the chance of riding even borrowed
horses long."

Dear me ! what will you do ? "

"Do without." ■

"And you so fond of galloping about
the country." ;

"A niaii may be very fond of champagne,
and still find himself able to exist without
it. Will Arbery says where he is, out in
the Bush they drink nothing but tea."

"Will Arbery is this latest cousin, I
suppose ; any tenderness there ? "
"Not the slightest. He has come home
for a wife, I may tell you, and that intended
wife's name is not Susan Drummond."

"Most unfortunate Susan! whose cousins
won't marry her, and who, for all her
knowledge of horseman — or rather, horsemanship
— has not, I see, yet learnt to
hold her reins properly."

"Yes, is not it stupid of me? I have

tried to break myself of that old trick ;
lout, do you know, I do not feel as if I
had the slightest power over my horse
when I take them the other way. . Where
are you living now, Maggie?"

We have only a friend's house for a
short time," was the reply. " When we are
settled you must come and spend a long
day."

'M shall be delighted," answered Miss
Drummond. " You kno^v Mrs. Arbery's
address, don't you ? "

Yes ; Enfield, is it not P "

"Enfield Highways" corrected the other.

'^ Good heavens ! have you ridden all
that distance to-day P "

It is not so very far," laughed Miss
Drummond.

"And don't you want to get back before
night ? "

There are many hours before night,"
answered Susan. " Still we ought to be

making our way home. Just let me
introduce Will to you. Sultan is perfectly
quiet, I assure you."

sewell, I don't know; however, if I am
killed my death will He at your door.
Your cousin won't come very near me,
wil he?"

The introduction was effected without
any mishap, Sultan comporting himself
during the ceremony as if he had never
stood on his hind legs or lifted his hind
heels in his life. Then adieux were exchanged,
and Miss Drummond and her
cousin, having announced their intention
of returning home vit Camden-road, turned
their horses' heads towards Stanhope Gate,
and were soon out of sight.

With a sigh of relief Miss Chelston
pursued her way to the Marble Arch,
thinking pensively as she rode slowly along
that it was a pity Susan Drummond had
not the slightest idea of making herself fit

to appear in decent society, and wishing
she felt as Httle afraid of horses as that
young lady.

Who do you think the girl is we saw
in the Park to-day?" Mr. Sudlow asked
Mr. Gayre the same evening, as they sat
tete-astute over their wine.

Which of them ? " returned the
banker.

"0, the one with the dark hair, and
the dark-blue eyes, and the long lashes,
and the damask-rose complexion."

Yes, go on ; who is she ? "

Miss Chelston, the only daughter of
Sir Geoffrey Chelston, of the Pleasaunce,
near Chelston."

Of Sir Geoffrey Chelston ! " repeated
Mr. Gayre, setting down his claret. "God
bless me ! "

Why, do you know him ? "

"I used to know him," was the unexpected
reply. " He married my sister''

SIR GEOFFREY Shelton.

IHEEE have been, since the institution

of that order, all sorts of baronets —
even good. To the latter class, however, Miss
Chelston's father certainly did not belong.
He said himself he " was a good deal better
than some, and not nearly so bad as
most ; " but, then, no one who was fortunate
enough to be acquainted with Sir
Geoffrey attached much weight to any of
his statements. Had this estimate of
himseK been true — which it was not — the
moral condition of the rest of the world
must have been, indeed, regarded as
lamentable in the extreme ; for Sir Geoffrey
had, since his boyhood, been in the habit

of doing those things which he ought not
to have done : whilst those ' things which
he outfit to have done he did not.

Geoffrey is not a name which suggests a
taste for the Turf, a fondness for the society
of jockeys, blackness, and gamblers ;
an almost inconceivable amount of ignorance,
except on the subject of "sport," horses,
games of chance and skill — an abundance
of that disreputable lore which a man who
has always been knocking about the world's
least desirable haunts cannot fail to accumulate
; to say nothing concerning a distaste,
which almost amounted to hatred, for the
pursuits, trammels, and traditions of a decent
and orderly life.

There was no shame about the man, and
there was no hope whatever of repentance
unless it might be a poor makeshift deathbed
repentance, with a wasted life stretching
behind, and an unknown eternity yawning
in front. So long as a " chance remained

for him" — a chance, that is, of returning
to the mud in which he loved to wallow —
remorse was not likely to fasten its tooth
upon him. His doings, his sayings, his sins,
his shortcomings, were enough, in very truth,
to have caused the scholarly ancestor from
whom he inherited his name to rise from
the grave, sold by this degenerate descendant
to strangers, and return to see the
ruin wrought by one man — one solitary
man.

There had been spendthrifts aforetime
amongst the Chelstons, but no spendthrift
like unto this. There had been sinners —
wicked, godless, graceless sinners ; but either
they died young, or, taking thought to
their ways betimes, reformed and settled
down ere age came upon them. There had
been misers who grudged themselves food
and the poor a farthing ; but it was left
for Sir Geoffrey to spend freely on his own
pleasures, and rob both rich and poor of

that which of right belonged to them. His
inherited title — won by a certain Ralph
Chelston on a battle-field, where the fate of
the day was changed by a mere handful
of gallant soldiers — he dragged like a worthless
garment through the mire of the
kennels ; while his name, one of the oldest
in the kingdom, had become a mock and a
byword amongst the vilest of women and
the worst of men.

He was not born to poverty like many
another, who, with equally little satisfaction
to himself or any other human being, has
travelled the road to ruin. It was not
necessity which first made him acquainted
with strange bedfellows. No impulsive generosity,
no desire to serve a friend, no*
boyish prodigality in the way of giving
great entertainments, or wild desire to
scatter gifts around, brought him into early
contact with the Jews. If he had desired
a father's help and counsel, he could, till

Vol. i. 4

he was nearly twenty-six, have obtained
both from a parent wise as loving. So far
as man could tell there was not an excuse
for the bad mad race on which he entered.
Some said he " cast back " to a certain
Elizabeth Godwin, who was raised by a
former baronet from the condition of a
fisherman's daughter to the rank of Lady
Chelston ; but those best learned in the
family lore shook their heads when they
heard this theory ; for Elizabeth, possessing
for her dower as much sense as beauty,
had proved the saviour both of her husband
and his fortunes. When she married
him he was, with other gay gallants of his
time, running a muck ; but she took her
husband well in hand, and brought him out
of the ordeal safe, though not unscathed.
She wore her honours with a splendid meekness,
winning respect rather than compelling
it. She had, as one, who knew her well,
chronicled, a " smile for the rich and a

tear for the poor ;" in all ways an exceptional
woman, who once, it was recorded,
saved a child's life at the peril of her own.
Except as regards mere brute courage, Sir
Geoffrey did not own a trait in common
with his brave and beautiful ancestress, but
he had one good quality — physically he was
no coward.

People marvelled a man of such ancient
lineage should play the pranks he did.

Why, don't you know," said a farmer
once in the village tap-room, " ' the older
the seed, the worse the crop.' "

Sir Geoffrey was an awful crop for any
house to have to gather home within its
records. With him the race seemed destined
to die out. Slightly varying the
words of James V. of Scotland, it might
have been said of the wealth of the Chel-
stone that it had " come with a lassie" and
that the name "would go with a lassie."
The king who conferred the baronetage on

4—2

Ealph the soldier added the hand of an
heiress, who was nothing loth to wed the
handsome hero. Since that time heiresses
had come and gone, adding their fortunes
to the Chelston coffers ; but now the coffers
were all empty, and Sir Geoffrey owned
no lands, or houses, or money, or son, or
anything save one fair daughter and a
pile of debts that never could be paid.

Well might men wonder where the
money had gone. There was nothing
whatever to show for it. Sir Ealph had
bought the estate, adding to his own
small patrimony many a broad acre and
goodly manor ; Sir Charles built the great
rambling house, and laid out the quaint
gardens, and planned the terraces from
the west front to the river Ciel ; Sir
Bruce built the stables and kennels, and
then, when he tired of dogs and horses,
purchased the pictures and statues which
made the Pleasaunce a show place. Then

there was the Sir Ealph who entertained
royalty; and Sir Geoffrey, who spent his
life in collecting blackwater and rare editions,
and who wrote a book full of
useless learning, of which he printed but
one hundred copies ; and then came the
saintly Sir Francis, who, after a youth of
sin, devoted his old age and his money
to ecclesiastical purposes, rearing and endowing
one of the loveliest churches in
the whole of England ; then there was
another Sir Charles, who performed great
deeds at sea, and died an admiral ; and
a Sir James, who was a great politician,
and rose to be a foremost man in the
councils of the nation ; and then there
came Sir Cecil, with the scholarly tastes
of his progenitor, Sir Geoffrey, which he
entirely failed to bequeath to the son he
named after that "lover of the best
thoughts of older minds."

Never, surely, was there such a man

for getting fortunes and wasting them as
Sir Geoffrey the second. Before lie was
seven-and-twenty he came into possession
of the Pleasaunce, a large sum in ready
money, pictures, plate, horses, carriages,
everything necessary to the establishment
of a gentleman of rank and position.
When he was thirty his mother, who
had been an heiress, died, and he got
her money. Two years later he married
Miss Gayre, dowered with a fortune of
thirty thousand pounds, which was so
settled, the lawyers declared, that a coach-and-four
could not be driven through it.
When matters came to be investigated,
however, it was found that if a coach-and-four
had not scattered her fortune.
Sir Geoffrey had burrowed a way into
the money. Four years afterwards his
grandmother left him a satisfactory sum
in ready cash, and this legacy was soon
after followed by one from his only uncle.

But all these legacies were mere drops in
the ocean ; Sir Geoffrey went through them
at a hand-gallop ; and when he finally sank
in a very rough sea of well-nigh unlimited
liability, there was not a thing left to show
for the money that had sifted through his
hands but piles on piles of writs, and
lawyers' letters in sufficient quantity to
have papered the walls of the new " thieves '
kitchen " hard upon Temple Bar.

Everything saleable was sold ; everything
go able was gone — books, pictures, statues,
horses, lands, furniture, stock, timber. If
he had been able to dispose of his title,
that would have followed in wake of his
other possessions. In less than thirty years
from the time of his father's death he had
not a rood of his own ground left, not
even the family burying-place ; not a roof
to cover his head belonging to himself ;
not a chair to sit down on, or a table
to dine at ; not even old Chelston Pleasaunce

— with its moss-covered avenue, and
its rusty gates, and its park, kept latterly
like a meadow, and its garden, where the
roses were trailing across the paths — to go
down to, when London life grew for him
very hot indeed.

To say that in any one respect, whether
personally or mentally, Sir Geoffrey even
faintly resembled a gentleman, would be to
libel a class not accustomed to flattering
similes.

Of course when people heard he was a
baronet, and had run through hundreds of
thousands of pounds, they declared there
was " something about him," that " blood
would tell," and all the rest of it; but
meeting him casually " knocking about," it
never occurred to any human being to
suspect he was other than some disreputable
horsey individual who frequented racecourses
and stables, who affected very tight trousers,
who was a proficient in bad language, who

wore his white hat a good deal on one side,
who walked with his legs wider apart than
is the custom of those who have not spent
best part of their waking hours on horseback,
and to whom no respectable landlady
in her senses would have let her first floor,
even if furnished with the best references
and offered a month's payment in advance.

It had happened to Sir Geoffrey in his
comparatively palmy days to be taken for
what he looked like ; and as he never afterwards
hesitated to tell the story himself,
there can be no harm in repeating it here.

One day wanting something in a hurry,
he called at the shop of a saddler with
whom he had never before had any dealings,
was shown what he required, and marvellous
to relate, laid down a sovereign in payment.


The price of the article was one pound
precisely, but the shopkeeper handed him
back two shillings.

'what's this for?" he asked.

0, we always allow ten per cent, to
grooms' was the answer.

Do you ? " said Sir Geoffrey, coolly
pocketing the two shillings. " I think I'll
patronise you again."

Which, indeed, he did to some purpose ;
for when the final settlement of his bad
debts came about, it so happened he
owed that particular tradesman something
like four hundred pounds.

It is delightful to think of the charming
manner in which favoured persons can incur
debts they know they will never be able to
discharge, and how easy it is for any man
with a handle to his name to cozen the
British tradesman.

You and I, my friend, with the limited
income, might wait a long time for a loaf
of bread unless the Bet. were well assured
the wherewithal to pay for it would be duly
and truly forthcoming. But a baronet, ora

knight, though he may not have a lucky
penny to bless himself with, need not, even
at this present incredulous period of the
world's history, want any manner of earthly
thing that is good.

As regards Sir Geoffrey Chelston, he was
one of those men out of whom no created
being seems able to make money. He had
no steward or lawyer or agent, or mistress
or boon companion, who waxed fat while
he grew lean. He was not systematically
robbed or persistently cheated. His tenants
were harassed, his solicitors worried, his
friends victimised, his servants' wages left
unpaid, and, as has been said, at the end
of it all there was nothing to show for the
princely estate mortgaged, for the fortunes
gone, for the pictures and the books and
the jewelry and the timber, any more than
might have been the case had the whole
been swallowed up bodily on one disastrous
night in the Goodwin Sands.

Nay more, misled by the Baronet's easy
indifference, by his gross ignorance of
matters with which most men are conversant,
by his " devil-may-care " manner, by a certain
fatalist warp of mind which had descended
to him not from the fair Elizabeth, and by
the impossibility of conceiving that it was
absolutely necessary such wide estates and
such an old title should "go down into the
pit," many hopeful persons had tried whether
"something could not be done."

Joyfully Sir Geoffrey surrendered the helm
to each in succession : the credulity of any
fresh fool concerning the future, meant ready
money to him in the present. That it also
meant loss to the fool did not affect the
Baronet in the least.

They speculated for a rise," he was wont
to say laughingly, " and the stock fell — that
was all."

The stock did fall indeed ; there is no
quotation known on 'Change that could

adequately represent the fall in the Clielston
stock as it appeared eventually to those who
had felt quite sure they would be able to
make a crowd thiner out of it.

If I had not to write this book about
quite other people than Sir Geoffrey Chelston
and his dupes, or rather the dupes of their
own imagination and self-confidence, who,
setting out to shear, came home shorn, an
instructive history might be compiled for the
benefit of solicitors, bankers, money-lenders,
and others, who were each and all represented
on the bankruptcy schedule when the
Baronet went airily into Portugal Street with
a rose in his buttonhole and a straw in his
mouth to pass his examination. Liabilities
scarcely to be recorded in figures : assets
available for the benefit of the unsecured
creditors — nil.

Take one pleasing instance as an illustration
— but a poor illustration, it must be
confessed, because it is sketched from a

landscape over which the evening shadows
were drawing rapidly down.

A smart young lawyer, who thought all
the wisdom of his predecessors folly, bought
a practice in the market-town of Chelston,
near the Pleasaunce. There he heard a
great deal about Sir Geoffrey, his debts, his
recklessness, his rent-roll, his mortgaged
acres, his embarrassments, his one daughter,
till he got nearly beside himself with the
magnitude and originality of the design he
had conceived.

He possessed a few thousands ; he believed
he could reckon on a few thousands more
from his relations. He knew a man who
was enormously rich and the father of an
extremely plain daughter ; the " oracle "
might be worked, he considered ; so without
more to-do he set 'himself to work it.

Sir Geoffrey was not difficult of approach
bless you, not he ! The young lawyer did
not experience much trouble in boarding

the good old ship Chelston, in enticing the
Baronet into his pretty Httle parlour, in
introducing that worthy to his 'blue-eyed
wife, in walking down the street to the
Golden Stag, where Sir Geoffrey put up ;
the talk between them being all the while
as " pleasant and familiar as talk could
be."

After a short acquaintance, he began
dexterously to feel his way.

"Your affairs have been mismanaged, Sir
Geoffrey, I am afraid," he suggested.

"They have, damnably," agreed Sir Geoffrey,
with agreeable frankness ; but he did
not say by whom.

It seems to me that all they require is
a Httle systematic arrangement," observed
the adventurous young man.

"That's all they ever wanted," answered
Sir Geoffrey with another oath.

"If a person were to devote time and
energy to the matter, they could soon be

put in train," observed the lawyer tentatively.


"They might," replied the Baronet; but
it is only justice to add his tone was
dubious.

There was nothing more said then. They
went, of course, into the Golden Stag,
where Sir Geoffrey asked his new friend
what he "would take;" and the wine
which the landlord produced having been
duly added to an already long score, the
nominal owner of Chelston Pleasaunce goton
his horse, and rode back to that place,
leaving the lawyer well satisfied with the
progress he had made.

Not a fortnight elapsed before he was
installed as Sir Geoffrey's legal adviser, of
whom that gentleman had already about
a hundred. He was told just as much as
the Baronet chose to tell him ; he paid
out a couple of small but very pressing
executions ; he wrote to several persons



who had issued writs ; and he began to
find his affable cent in " pocket money."

That was Sir Geoffrey's lively way of
putting the obligation, and you may be
sure the young lawyer laughed loud and
long at the pleasantry.

The Baronet wanted so much pocket-money,
however — or, as he put the matter,
he had such a confoundedly big hole in
his pocket " — that ere long his accommodating
friend thought it might be better
to expedite affairs a little ; so one day
he went across to the Pleasaunce, where
he found Sir Geoffrey seated in the library,
the portrait of his scholarly ancestor surveying,
from its frame above the mantelpiece,
long lines of well-nigh empty bookshelves
; a small dog lying on the table,
and a large one stretched on the hearth-rug
; brandy and soda-water on a tray
beside him ; and a number of unopened
letters littering the blotting pad.

Vol. i 5

All duns," said the Baronet, sweeping
them carelessly on one side. "Well, and
what has blown you over? Some good
wind, I am sure : for I was just wondering
where I should get enough money to
carry me to town."

The lawyer took a seat, and commenced,
with diplomatic caution, to unfold his plan.

"You'd like to be rid of all this annoyance,
Sir Geoffrey?"

It was thus he opened his first parallel.

Indeed, I should well like to be rid
of it," answered the Baronet ; " and if anyway

out of the mess has occurred

to you, I shall be only too glad to discuss
it when I return from London."

He had gone through too many interviews
of the same sort not to have learnt
his best wisdom lay in deferring the final
hour of explanation. Explanation, bitter
experience had taught him, meant a sudden
stop in the supplies.

When do you suppose you will be
back ? " asked the lawyer.

0, in a few days ; a week at farthest,"
said Sir Geoffrey ; " and I want to start
this afternoon, if I can anyhow raise
funds."

"I have not much money with me,"
observed the lawyer.

I can take your house on my way
to the station," suggested his client.

Before I leave I should like just to
ask you one question," ventured the other.

Ask away," said the Baronet, graciously.

Should you have any objection to resettle
the estate ? "

Sir Geoffrey stared at him.

How the deuce could I do that," he
asked, " when it's as good as out of my
hands altogether ? "

'' But if it were back in your hands ? "

"That's quite another matter. I'd do

anything in reason, I'm sure, to get out

5—2

Universal m win

of this blank blanked continual hot water.
I can't see, however, where the good of
resettling would be now. As you know,
or as, perhaps, you don't know, there is
not a male left to come into the title
after me ; and there was no remainder to
females in the patent."

The Baronet took great credit to himself
in that he never, in his later years,
told his legal advisers a syllable he could
not swear to. He did not count silence
any falsehood. So long as they asked no
questions he held is tongue; when they
put a thing to him plainly, time had
proved it was better to answer without
equivocation. Then if they liked to go on
deceiving themselves — which they generally
did like — it was their own fault, not
his.

For which reason he told this latest
adviser a fact " any fool," to quote Sir
Geoffrey, " could find out for himself from

the Need Book in a minute." There was
no heir to the title.

I am aware of that ; 0, I am quite
aware of that'' answered the other.

All I want is everything to be fair
and above board," said the Baronet, with
a genial frankness. " I don't know how
you mean to help me ; but I take it for
granted you have some project maturing
in your head, and all I can assure you
is, you won't find me stop the way if you
are able to find an outlet. Only don't
ask me to listen to any details now ; for
it is of vital importance that I should get
into town by the afternoon express."

Sir Geofirey was detained so long in
town by reason of what he called a
stroke of luck," that his new friend
deemed it prudent to follow and "put
matters in train."

He found the Baronet, who had won
something considerable on the Turf, in the

highest spirits. His talk was of a certain
outsider who had come in first; and it
proved somewhat difficult to get him to
listen to all the other had to say.

Divested of verbiage, the lawyer's proposition
was this :

He knew a gentleman who had made
his money in trade — " never mind what
trade," he said, hesitatingly.

"That does not matter in the least,"
observed Sir Geofirey, in a truly liberal
spirit.

If there were one thing this man adored
beyond all other things, it was rank. He
would, in a way of speaking," declared the
lawyer, " part with all he possessed for a
title."

"Well, that's odd too," commented the
Baronet. " I'd sell my title and " — but I need
not particularise the other adjunct Sir Geoffrey
offered to throw in as a mere make weight —
"for a few thousands, cash down."

He has a daughter," went on the lawyer.
She is not handsome, certainly. I suppose,
however, you would not allow that to influence
you much."

I always did prefer a pretty woman to a
plain one ; but what has she to do with all
this ? Her good or bad looks can't signify tome."


I thought you would take a sensible view
of the matter," observed the other. " Stow, I
believe — indeed, I know — a marriage might
be arranged which would at once relieve you
from your more pressing embarrassments, and
induce my millionaire — "

Stop a minute," said the Baronet. " Do
you mean a marriage with me''

I could not mean one with anybody else,"
was the reply. "You see no objection, I hope?"

"There is only one objection; but I am
afraid it is insurmountable, unless you are
able to find a way out of the difficulty. We
can't get rid of Lady Chelston."

"What Lady Chelston?"

My wife."

But you have not got a wife."

"Haven't I?"

She died fourteen years ago."

"Did she?"

"You — you haven't married again, Sir
Geoffrey, have you ? "

No, faith ! One wife at a time is enough
for any man."

But you were left a widower fourteen
years ago, when you came back from abroad
with your little girl, dressed in deep mourning
; and you said then, ' Poor Maggie has
lost her mamma.' "

So she had. When we were on the Continent
my wife and I parted for ever. My
daughter and I were in mourning, I remember
; but it wasn't for Lady Chelston."

And do you mean to tell me Lady Shelton
is still alive ? "

And likely to live, so far as I know."

"And has there never been anything to
enable you to get a divorce ? "

My good fellow, do not ask such ridiculous
questions."

"And you are tied hand and foot matrimonially
as well as pecuniarily ? "

"Your statement of the position is painfully
accurate."

And how am I to get back the money I
have advanced you?"

If you advanced it in the expectation of
being repaid on my marriage with your friend,
who is, as you say, not handsome, I really
have not an idea."

But I can't lose my money because you
happen to have a wife living when everybody
thought she was dead."

If you like to take your chance of hanging,
you can get rid of her."

Then the lawyer broke out. Sir Geoffrey
himself could scarcely have indulged in worse
language, in more futile and frantic profanity.

He would expose the Baronet. England
should ring with an account of the transaction.
He had been swindled ; he had been
robbed ; he had been dealt with most treacherously
; his pocket had been picked by a
person who called himself a gentleman, but
who was in reality no better than a common
thief and swindler.

"He goes on in this way because I won't
commit bigamy," said Sir Geoffrey, addressing
the imaginary jury the lawyer had summoned
to sit in judgment on so heinous a criminal.

"But surely in common honesty you will
pay me ? " said this irate creditor.

Pay you ! how in the world am I to do
that?"

Why, you have won a lot of money, you
say."

"0, but I want that for myself; besides,
there is very little left. You talk about being
deluded and disappointed. You have not
been half so grossly deluded as I have been.

What is your disappointment compared to
mine? I made sure you had hatched some
scheme for cheating the Jews and giving me
my own again, and now the whole thing
resolves itself into an impossible marriage.
Gad, if I had been free I'd have got a rich
wife for myself long ago ! You may be
very sure I never should have employed a
lawyer to look one out for me."

Perhaps this matter hastened the end a
Httle ; but, under any circumstances,' that end
could not have been long deferred. There was
a rush down to the Pleasaunce, a race as to
which creditor should get his man into possession
first ; but they all got there too late. Sir
Geoffrey had " taken the wind out of their
sails " by begging a Jew to whom he owed a
large sum of money to petition the court, and
the court sent down a messenger, who was
comfortably installed at the Pleasaunce when
the representatives of the two chosen tribes of
Israel, and various so-called Christians, who

may have been, and very probably were, descended
from the other ten sons of Jacob, put
in an appearance there, only to be immediately
turned out again.

There was wailing and gnashing of teeth
amongst bailiffs and sheriff's officers, and lawyers
and creditors ; but the Baronet remained
nobly serene.

"It was bound to come," he explained to
the friends who offered him their condolences.
"I don't really know that I can be much
worse off than I was ;" and seeing the resigned,
not to say cheerful, manner in which Sir
Geoffrey bore his misfortunes, people came to
the conclusion there was something in the
background, that he had prepared a featherbed
to fall on, satisfied of which good management
on the part of the Baronet, society refrained
from giving him as cold a shoulder as
it might have done had that amiable abstraction
believed he was an honest man.

I shall have to take a house in London,"

he remarked, not because at the mordent he
had the slightest intention of doing anything
of the sort, but merely for the reason that he
thought the statement sounded well ; " a furnished
house, till I can pull myself together a
little."

Then spake young Aloreby, who had
been causing the large fortune left by his
papa, a great colliery proprietor, deceased, to
disappear like dust before the wind, till his
mother, the widow Moreby, who, though sometimes
doubtful in her English, had a thorough
knowledge of business, came to town, and,
assuming the conduct of affairs, as she had a
right to do, being not merely executrix, but
part-owner of all the coal-pits whereout old
Moreby had extracted his money, announced
her intention of taking him abroad away
from " all his vicious companions ;" spake
this youth, who had not been blest with Sir
Geoffrey's friendship for more than a few
months, and said.

My crib in the Eegent's Park would be the
very thing for you, Chelston ;" and then there
ensued a little chaff and various allusions to
Mrs. Moreby and another very different sort
of lady who had exercised the mind of the
worthy widow in no slight degree, which need
not be more particularly chronicled here ;
and Sir Geoffrey made himself very agreeable
while these themes were in progress, and
any one might have imagined the last thing
he had in his thoughts was of the house in
question, or of taking in young Moreby.

But somehow he just stepped into the
"crib" as it stood — fully furnished — and,
when he was fairly in residence, said quite
calmly to his youthful friend,

"I do not know how to thank you sufficiently
for lending me your house. It
shall be taken good care of, 1 promise
you."

Now young Moreby had never dreamt
of lending Sir Geoffrey anything without



being paid for it ; but he found the
Baronet's understanding so dense on the
subject, he was forced to yield the point
with such grace as was possible under
the circumstances.

% J,"

GAYRE, DELONE, Eyes, AND GAYRE.

she Spirit of Improvement, taking a
K walk about the middle of the year
1857 down Lombard Street one day, bethought
itself that the banking-house leased by
Gayre and Co. from the gentleman whose
fleshly tenement was temporarily occupied
by the meddlesome sprite referred to, ought
to be rebuilt.

Nothing less to the taste of the old
firm could readily have been suggested.
Ancient ways seemed good in their sight ;
spick and span new edifices savoured, according
to their ideas, of shoddy com
panics, limited liability, tricks of trade,

bankruptcy, and various other matters hateful
to honest men.

More, to rebuild would cost much money,
and Gayre and Co. did not like parting
with even a Httle money, unless, like
bread on the waters, it was sure to come
back to them after many days with interest
from date added. Rebuilding would
inconvenience them, and that was even a
more serious consideration than the pecuniary
outlay ; rebuilding was unprofitably
laying down gold at some ridiculous rate
per foot on the property of another man ;
and the fuss and bustle, the hoarding, the
scaffolding, the masons and labourers, the
mess and lime and confusion, and utter
demoralisation of the integrity of their dear
old dirty den, would prove annoying, not
to say intolerable, to their clients, who
were mostly slow-going people of title and
old-fashioned City merchants, whose fathers

and grandfathers had trusted their money
Vol. i. e

to Gayres' keeping, and never found cause
to repent of the confidence reposed.

If a bank, and all a bank's customers,
dislike change, cleanliness, and convenience,
it is evident that without great external
pressure things are likely to remain in
their original condition till the crack of
doom ; but when this pressure did come
in the shape of an expiring lease, and a
ground landlord who would not be diverted
from his purpose even by the offer of
money, old Mr. Gayre, who was then
alive, and Mr. Edwin Gayre, his son, set
their wits together to try how little they
could do in the way of making their
bank look like any other bank of recent
date as possible.

It is only fair to say they succeeded in
their endeavour. Even to the present
hour Gayres' is a model of what a 
ought not to be. An old building
at the back, which chanced to be

their own freehold, was left untouched,
and in a portion of that edifice the Gayre
of to-day gives audience to the few persons
who ever ask to see him, and transacts
the little business it is necessary for him
to attend to. Gayres' have not gone on
with the times ; but they feel no desire
to do anything of the kind.

Banks have come and banks have gone,
but Gayres' still holds on the even tenor
of its respectable way. Though the main
part of the bank abutting on Lombard
Street was, as has been stated, brand-new
less than twenty-five years ago, it has
managed somehow to acquire during that
period quite a look of antiquity. For one .
thing, it was built on the old lines, and
kept rigidly free from any improvements of
structure or originality of design. It is as
square as the shape of the ground would
permit ; it has steps up to the door, ap-»

parents with the intention of checking

6—2

the ardour of any stranger who might
feel disposed to rush in and open an account
; the exterior is utterly destitute of
ornament, and the inside as plain as Dissenting
chapels used to be. It is badly
lighted and not ventilated at all. The
way to the strong room is encompassed
by as many traps and perils as those
which beset Christian on his road from
the City of Destruction to the better land ;
and there is a dark step down into Mr.
Gayre's own especial sanctum which has
nearly ended the earthly career of more
than one intending client.

Any one who by some rare piece of
good fortune gets a cheque to present
across Gayres' counter feels as the narrow
half-door swings behind him that he has
stepped out of Lombard Street and the
modern days of hansom cabs, railways,
and electric light, into the seventeenth
century, and he half expects when he steps

out again to see the old signs which denoted
the goldsmiths' whereabouts in the
days when Mr. Francis Child, the first
regular banker, married Martha, only-daughter
of Robert Blanchard, citizen, and
Heed with his wife, business, and twelve
children in Fleet Street, where, to quote
Pennant, " the shop still continues in a
state of the highest respectability."

The Gayres were goldsmiths also about
the same period, and had been notable
people in the City even before the time
when their relation. Sir John Gayre, was
Lord Mayor of London. Xo mushroom
house this, eager to extend its credit by
means of cut stone and ornamented pilasters,
or to flaunt its wares in the face
of the public through plate-glass windows,
or reflect the faces of dupes in French
polished mahogany counters and brass
knobs and rails. It was quite enough
satisfaction for any man to know himself

m the books of the firm, without looking
upon his own distorted likeness in shining
furniture and glittering lacquer.

Gayres were by no means anxious to
open accounts " on the usual terms ; " indeed,
their terms, according to modern
ideas, were most unusual. They did not
even care for the " best bills ; " upon the
whole they preferred that bills of all sorts
and descriptions should be negotiated elsewhere,
and he would have been a rash
man who had ventured to ask Gayres'
manager to discount even the finest mercantile
paper.

Conservative in their ideas of trade,
though, following civic traditions, perhaps
somewhat independent and radical in politics,
Garret' notion of banking was eminently
primitive. According to the traditions
of their house a banker was a man
of substance and repute, who took care of
money for his customers. Gayres professed

to do little more than this. Like their
predecessors the Lombards, they could,
though rarely, be induced to accommodate
a well-known customer ; but the whole
transaction was fenced about with such
forms and ceremonies, prefaced by such
details, and requiring such an expenditure
of time, legal advice, and thought, that
the business " was, as a rule, transferred
to some house accustomed to more rough-and-ready
methods of procedure.

Time, to ]messrs. Gayre, Delone, Eyles,
and Gayre, might have represented eternity,
to judge from the deliberation of their movements.
To take, say, one hundred pounds
in five notes over their old Spanish mahogany
counter occupied more time than the
cashing of ten thousand might at Glen's.

But then Gayres' looked down on Glen's,
as it did on Child's. Gayres represented
itself as being more respectable than any
other banking-house in London.

Nell Wynne banked there, did she ? "
said a Gayre, long and long anterior to
the date at which this story opens ; " and
Child are proud of the fact, are they? I
wouldn't have let the hussy set foot
across our threshold."

Which remark may give the key to
Gayres' policy. Respectable, decorous, sound ;
if you had wound Gayres up at any
minute in the twenty-four hours, enough
would have been forthcoming to satisfy
everybody and leave a balance.

Yes, even in the year 1874, when the
Gayre in whose veins flowed the blood of
all the Gayres since 1647, to say nothing of
many previous generations, laid down his
claret, and astonished his guest by declaring
his sister had married Sir Geoffrey
Chelston.

As has been said, banks had come and
banks had gone, and, it may be added
banks were going; but Gates' knew no

anxiety as regarded its financial position.
The heads of the firm had not appropriated
their customers' title-deeds — a favourite form
of latter-day banking dishonesty; the security
on which their good money lay at
interest they had never found need to
mortgage. All their business lives for a
couple of centuries, at least, they had been
quiet, honest, orderly people, living well
within their income, owing no man more
than they could conveniently pay, eschewing
speculation, holding aloof from the railway
and other manias, that beggared and
crippled so many large houses in the years
preceding the great show in Hyde Park.

And yet Gayres' was not what it had
once been. It could not have counted
down guineas with some of the great banks,
as it might formerly. The principals had
not gone on with the world ; and so the
world, which latterly has got into the habit
of travelling very fast indeed, made no

scruple about leaving Gayres' behind.
Some even of their titled customers, find-nor
the old bank allowed them no interest
on balances, were contracting a nasty habit
of transferring two or three thousand pounds
at a time to the London and Westminster,
or National Provincial, or any other great
bank which had the knack of being more
considerate. They kept their accounts
still at the " old shop," which once hung
out a tortoise for its sign ; but even
country squires and Tory noblemen were
learning a few things their ancestors chanced
to be ignorant of, and seemed as anxious
and greedy to make a " tenner " as a lad
to toss for tarts.

City wags occasionally suggested it
would be the most fitting of all fitting
things if Gayres' were to hunt up the old
tortoise out of their cellars, and hang it in
the sun. Scoffers declared " Gayres' was
the slowest coach going in the city." They

wondered why, if Gavres' would not amalgamate
with a bank that •' had some life
in it," Gayres did not shut up. and cut the
City altogether ?

"And there is only this one fellow left,
and he not married," was the remark
generally made. "Why, he must be as
rich as a Jew ; " which did not happen to
be the case. Mr. Gayre was well off, very
well off, but he could not be called a
millionaire for all that.

Nicholas Gayre came of a stock more
famous for saving money than making it.
To pitch thousands about, to see gold flung
recklessly into this venture and that, would
have seemed criminal in the eyes of men
who esteemed riches a possession to be
desired, more especially when accompanied
by a good name. Thus, if they had lost
little or nothing, they had not made
fortunes in a day, like their neighbours up
and down the street. They took few

measures to extend their connection ; and
so it occasionally happened that, as the
heads of a family died off, the younger
branches carried their accounts elsewhere.

Banking, in a word, had changed its
character, and as Gayres' refused to veer
round at the bidding of the banking world
the old house came gradually to be pushed
up into a quiet business corner, like a
dowager at a ball, " whose dancing days
are over."

But it was while Jeremy Gayre and his
son Joshua — whose name figured at the
tail-end of the firm — were the actual heads
of a house in which Delone and Eyles had
long ceased to be anything save sleeping
partners, that a blow was dealt, sufficient
to have destroyed a business built on any
other foundation than the rock of honesty.

First, Delone elected to be paid out, and
then Eyles. For long previously they had
both been drawing the full share of the profits,

and when the opportunity occurred they
gladly said, paraphrasing the words of the
Prodigal Son, " Give us the portion that
falleth to us." Unlike the prodigal, however,
they did not waste their money in
riotous living ; they bought estates, and
went into mining and other speculations,
and added to their store, and married
heiresses, and took up their position among
the first in the land, while Gayres' was
left with a decreasing business and a reduced
capital. Well was it for the bank
that the then principal in the firm had always
lived, not merely well within his income,
but so as to save largely out of it.
Jeremy Gayre was, indeed, one to have satisfied
the author of Banks and Banking, who
thus drew, in pen and ink, a type of a
class now well-nigh extinct :

He " {i.e. a banker of the old school)
bore little resemblance to his modern
successor. He was a man of serious manners.

plain apparel, the steadiest conduct, and a
rigid observer of formalities. As you
looked in this face you could read, in intelligible
characters, that the ruling maxim
of his life, the one to which he turned all
his thoughts and by which he shaped all
his actions, was, that he who could be
trusted with the money of other men
should look as if he deserved the trust,
and be an ostensible pattern to society of
probity, exactness, frugality, and decorum.
He lived, if not the whole of the year, at
least the greater part of the year, at his
banking-house ; was punctual to the hours
of business, and always to be found at his
desk. The fashionable society at the
West-end of the town and the amusements
of high life he never dreamed of enjoying."


Times, even during the noon-day of Mr.
Jeremy Gayre's existence, had changed sofar
that few merchants in a lame wav of

business resided on their City premises.
The upper portions of their houses couple
utilised much more profitably, it had
been found, than as mere dwellings ; and
Mr. Gayre, who understood the full import
of that old Scotch saw which tells how
"many a pickle make a mickle," when
he married let off part of the Lombard
Street establishment, moved " west of
Temple Bar," and took up his abode in
one of the old roomy houses in Norfolk
Street, Strand.

There was no Embankment then, or
thought of one. At high tide the water
came lapping up to the railings at the
bottom of the street ; and, save at the
Strand end, there was no exit. Cabs and
vans did not go tearing and rattling over
the pavement, as is the case now ; and
the dwelling Mr. Gayre bought was as
quiet as though it had been situated in
some retired City court.

When in good course of time Joshua
Gayre, the son, took unto himself a wife,
he set up housekeeping in Brunswick
Square, where four sons and one daughter
were born and bred. Of these four sons,
Jeremy, the eldest, died before he came of
age. Edwin in due time went into the
bank, in which, while still young he was
associated as partner. John elected to take
orders ; and, in compliance with the bent
of the youngest son's inclinations, a commission
was bought for Nicholas in a
cavalry regiment.

The three were all good men and true.
They sowed no crops of wild oats for their
father and themselves to reap. Edwin
took kindly to banking, John to the
Church, Nicholas to the army. The latter
rose rapidly in the service ; he went
through the Crimean campaign; and his
regiment, crowned with distinction, had
just returned to England, when the Indian

Mutiny caused it to be again ordered off
to the East.

Five years elapsed before young Gayre,
who had fought his way to the rank of
colonel, saw his native country once more ;
then he came back in obedience to a
summons from his father.

Great trouble had fallen upon the head
of the now elderly banker. Edwin was
dead, and Margaret had left her husband.
Mr. Gayre did not see how the Lombard
Street business was to be carried on without
help, necessitated by the state of his
own broken health.

Should he take a partner, or amalgamate
with some other firm ; or would nicholas
leave the army, and fill the place left
vacant by the death of his elder brother?
Xicholas took a week to consider, and then,
to his father's infinite joy, signified his
willingness to devote himself to commerce.

With a clear head and a stout heart he

Vol. i. 7

set to work to master the mysteries and
intricacies of banking ; and if Gayres' had
been a different establishment, one in which
the energies of an active man might have
found full scope, there can be little question
he would in the commercial world have
risen to eminence.

But without changing entirely the lines
on which the business had hitherto been
conducted, he soon saw it would be vain
to attempt to make the old bank a monetary
power in the City. It might preserve its
character for unspotted respectability, and
for a honos time be made still to return a
fair income ; but no great financial future
could be hoped for a house which had
voluntarily dropped behind in the commercial
race, and wilfully shut its eyes to
the great changes for good or for evil
being permanently wrought by steam,
electricity, luxury, limited liability, the
destruction of old landmarks, the extravagance

of the Upper Ten, and, in the lower

stratum of society, the determination of

Jack to be as good as his master.

All this did not trouble Mr. Nicholas

Gayre to any very great extent ; and yet

it would be idle to deny that it was a

disappointed man who, leaning over the

railings in Hj^de Park on that May day

when Mr. Arbery's bay mare indulged in

such wild antics, saw Susan Drummond

for the first time. When he unbuckled

his sword and took up the pen, when he

exchanged the saddle for a seat in his

father's office, there can be no question he

relinquished a great deal ; but till he tried

the experiment he fancied he should be

able to find sufficient excitement in the

heart of the City to compensate him, in

part at least, for the career in which,

when he abandoned it, he had so rapidly

been rising to distinction.

By degrees he learnt he and his people

7-2

were not made of the stuff out of which,
at this time of the world's history, celebrated
financiers are fashioned. The game was
to be played, but not by him. Great
things were possible, but not to Nicholas
Gayre ; aud so, feeling he was out of the
running, he stepped quietly aside and
watched the mercantile game, where, as a
rule, the stakes were power or poverty,
wealth or bankruptcy, a baronetcy or
outlawry, with a certain cynical pleasure
he might not have derived from the contemplation
of greater things.

Never, perhaps, in the history of the
City of London was there a better time
for observing the humours of commercial
speculation than the years immediately
following his introduction to business
life.

The wild speculation, the reckless private
expenditure, the sudden madness of all
classes ; the swamping of little men, the

absorption of small concerns into large,
the wholesale annexation of many Naboth's
vineyards in order that the great houses
might have even " larger gardens of
herbs; the pulling down and the rearing
up ; the pomp, the pride, the extravagance ;
the belief that the tide of apparent prosperity,
then running so strong, would never
turn — these things, and many more of the
same kind, were for a time — only a short
time, though — stopped by the collapse of

In one minute, as it seemed, the Corner
House tottered and crashed in ; and fora
while banks kept failing, firms stopping,
old-established businesses tottering. Throughout
the whole of England — from orphans
who were left penniless, from widows
stripped of their incomes, from country
rectory and hall and cottage — arose an
exceeding bitter cry of "mourning and
desolation and woe '*

See the end of these men, Nicholas,"
said old Mr. Gayre to his son. The prosperity
of many a mushroom concern had
tried the banker's faith — indeed, it is not
too much to say there were times when he
felt he " had washed his hands in innocency
in vain ; " but now, as he looked at the
commercial ruin hastened by the collapse
of the Corner House, he shook his head
gravely. " ' I have seen the wicked in great
power,' he quoted, ' and spreading himself
like a green bay-tree. Yet he passed away,
and, lo, he was not : yea, I sought him,
but he could not be found.' We have
great cause for thankfulness," added Mr.
Gayre, after a moment's pauses and truly
such was the case.

Weighed in the balance of that terrible
panic, Gayres' was not found wanting.
Every security was safe in the strong-room
; the bank needed no help — nays it
found itself able to give assistance ; through

the ordeal it passed in quiet triumph ; and
yet, eight years later, Mr. Nicholas Gayre
could not be regarded as a perfectly contented
man.

His being a nature which coveted success,
it was scarcely to be expected he should
feel satisfied with having merely compassed
safety. " And yet," as himself remarked,
safety is a very good thing when it means
the possession of a comfortable income."

i ay

^pALKING leisurely towards that
JyMg "crib" hard by the Eegent's Park
which Sir Geoffrey Chelston had appropriated
as coolly as the cuckoo does the
hedge-sparrow's nest, Mr. Gayre employed
his niind in dissecting the motives which
were taking him to North Bank. Love
for his brother-in-law could certainly not
be reckoned amongst them. In every
capacity of life — as man, as gentleman,
as baronet, as husband, father, friend,
relative — Sir Geoffrey was distasteful to
him. Only for one thing had Mr. Gayre
ever felt grateful to the well-born sinner.
Sir Geoffrey's life had been so openly shameful

that it was vain for him ever to think
of suing for a divorce. Lady Chelston was
Lady Chelston still — living abroad in the
strictest retirement on a pension duly paid
to her every half-year by the solicitors of
Messrs. Gayre and Co. The scandal, now
an old story, was confined to the knowledge
of a very few persons ; it had never
been a nine days' wonder or a case for the
courts. Sir Geoffrey held his tongue about
the woman who had made such a wreck
of her life, and society did not trouble itself
to ask whether the disreputable Baronet
were married or a widower. It knew in
either state he was not fit to associate with.
Voluntarily he had placed himself outside
the pale as well of intimacy as curiosity,
and no one thought of being inquisitive concerning
him. To the Gayres the Chelston
connection had ever been a source of loss,
annoyance, and disgrace, and it was not
love for his brother-in-law that could be

one of the reasons now drawing Mr. Garret
the unaccustomed pastures of the Eegent's
Park.

Given to sarcastic analysis of the motives
of others, no one could accuse Mr. Gayre
of undue lenity towards his own. It was
not as a censor he regarded the foibles of
his fellows ; on the contrary, his great failing
happened to be that he looked on life
unconsciously, perhaps — as a bystander
at a game. He knew all the moves and
tricks and subterfuges, and he watched the
play with a cynical interest which even
extended to the working of his own
heart.

Surprised perhaps at finding a Human
weakness in that great citadel, he would
trace its birth and career with a curious and
intelligent attention. As some persons have
a mania for the study of bodily disease,
his craze was to watch the manifestation
of mental sin and folly. Making due

allowance for original temperament, it might
be said his nature had grown up malformed
by reason of two accidents in early life.
There was good m him and there was bad,
and he would have assured any questioner
solemnly there was neither bad nor good,
that he was an utter negative ; that he had
no pleasure except in watching a woman
spin a web, and then invite some fly who
thought himself very clever to walk across
and see what a beautiful web it was, or,
greater ecstacy still, noting the process by
which one big thief was robbed by a bigger.
Finding so little to do in Lombard Street he
had turned his attention to these matters ;
and having at length decided to go to North
Bank, it was most unlikely he would arrive
there till he had ascertained why he had
decided to call.

Given," he thought, " ten parts, there
is one to form some slight conjecture how
my precious brother-in-law, without a penny

of visible income, without property, celia
racer, or friends, manages to shuffle along.
Shall we say one for that, or is it too
much ? We'll say one. Two — because I
really can look no longer at my sister's
child making such an exhibition of herself,
and feel constrained to stretch out a
hand which may save her or — may not.
Then there is Sudlow worrying me to death
to introduce him. We'll put a half for that
three and a half out of ten ; how much
is that per cent, in City phrase ? Never
mind ; it leaves six and a half for the girl
with the brown eyes, and the wonderful
hair, and the pure complexion ; that is a
large proportion. Nicholas, my friend, you
had better mind what you are at. It's a
case, I'm afraid, of either kill or cure ;
you'll either find the first half-dozen words
you hear her speak disenchant you totally,
or else — you've met your fate. But I haven't
met her yet," he added more cheerfully —

only seen her once with the breadth of
the Eow between us — and for that matter,
I may never meet her anywhere, or see
her again."

Having arrived at which conclusion, he
turned down North Bank, and sought the
residence of his kinsman.

Everyone acquainted with North Bank
knows exactly the sort of house, secluded
inside high walls, which obtains on the
preferable or canal side of the way ; the
mysterious postern-gate that, being opened,
discloses three yards of gravelled path, a
few evergreens, some trellis-work, and a
peep of greensward and water beyond ;
houses small, it may be, but capable of
being in their style made anything — which,
indeed, they often are — save respectable.

Mr. Gayre smiled grimly as he recognised
the type of dwelling, and asked the irreproachable
Lavender, who, in striped waistcoat,
without his coat, and in what he

modestly called his " small clothes," answered
the bell,

"Is Sir Geoffrey in?"

Lavender did not know in the least who
the new-comer might be ; but he looked
at the erect carriage, the trim cut-away
coat, not half an inch too wide, not a
quarter of an inch two small ; at the
cropped head, the military moustache, the
quiet tie, the trousers and waistcoat ensuite,
the command in the cold gray eye,
and decided,

Here at last is somebody decent come
to see master."

"Well, sir," he answered, shocked at
his deshabille and the consciousness there
was no one to do the honours, " Sir
Geoffrey is in, but he's not up. He did
not come home till late last night, and
he has not yet rung his bell."

Which was, indeed, within the letter of
truth ; for Sir Geoffrey had not come

home till so late last night that the water-carts
were abroad before he made his
appearance, and when he did come was
so drunk Lavender had no expectation of
hearing his bell till late in the afternoon.

"I ought to have taken that first check,"
said Mr. Gayre to himself in the days to
come ; but he did not, and went on, '' Is
Miss Chelston at home ? "

Yes, sir," answered Lavender ; " but — "

"If you take in my card, she will seeme,"
said Mr. Gayre ; " I am her uncle."

"I knew it," affirmed Lavender, subsequently
; " I knew it was somebody decent
come to the house at last."

"If you'll walk in, sir, please," he observed
to Mr. Gayre; and that gentleman
was consequently shown into the morning-room
of young Mr. Moreby's lady-love —
that lady-love whose doings, and more
especially whose spending, had so distracted
the soul of Mrs. Moreby, widow.

"Humph!" reflected Mr. Gayre, looking
round the apartment, which was about
eleven feet by seven ; "a fool and his
money are soon parted."

If you will be pleased to walk this
way, sir," repeated Lavender, who, having
seized the opportunity of donning a coat,
now felt himself quite a master of the
ceremonies ; then, flinging wide the 
door, he announced " Mr. Gayre."

There was something so ludicrous about
the whole business that Mr. Gayre could
have laughed in his sleeve, had he not
felt it was bad form on his niece's part
to wait till he had crossed the small hall
and entered the charming apartment overlooking
the canal ere coming to make his
acquaintance.

"She is not a duchess," he thought ;
and, considering where I find her, she
might be a little more natural. however
— "

And so at last I see my niece," he
said aloud ; and then Lavender discreetly-closed
the door, and Mr. Gayre found
himseK alone with a most lovely young
woman, who, in the shyest manner, gave
him her hand and timidly held up her
face, so that he could kiss her if he
liked.

Which he did, though with no very
great good-will ; and yet there were ten
thousand young men in London, to say
the least of it, who would have availed
themselves of such a chance with effusion.


Well, well, thus runs the world away,
and it is only natural that it should.

And so at last I see my niece," Mr.
Gayre repeated, which, for so usually
ready an individual, seemed a needless
waste of words. " Let me look at you
in the light ; " and, framing her cheeks
between his hands, he drew her towards

Vol. i. 8

one of the windows. " If you are only
as good as you are pretty," he said,
releasing her.

"0, I • don't think, uncle, I am so very
bad," she answered, with delightful confusion.


How far are you off your copy-book
days?" asked Mr. Gayre.

What a funny question ! Nine or ten,
I suppose."

"Then you remember self-praise is no
recommendation."

0, how dreadful, uncle ! I did not
mean to praise myself. no ! I'm very,
very sure of that, because — "

What is your name, my dear ? " he
interrupted.

Marguerite," she answered.

And your mother was called Margaret.
Well, perhaps better so."

They talked together in the house fora
while ; then they walked out on the

sharply sloping lawn for a time longer,
she with a dainty parasol over her wealth
of dark-brown hair, he bare-headed. Then
they returned to the drawing-room, and
after she had drawn the blinds half-down
they exhausted, as it seemed to Mr. Gayre,
all topics of ordinary interest, and he was
just racking his brain to think what he
should say to her next, when the door
opened and Sir Geoffrey Chelston — clean,
clothed, and in his right mind, and on
his very, very best behaviour — entered the
apartment.

"I take this very kind of you, Gayre,"
he said — " deucedly kind indeed," he added-and
soothed and cheered by these amenities,
Mr. Gate resumed his seat.

By dint of long endeavours to keep

his hat on three hairs, Sir Geoffrey had

contracted a habit of shaking his head,

which caused many persons when first

introduced to imagine (erroneously) he was

8—2

afflicted with palsy or some other disease,
which had somewhat impaired both his
bodily and mental powers.

Under this impression they were wont
to challenge him to play billiards and
other games, to take his bets, and all
that sort of thing, and come signally to
grief.

If subsequently they departed cursing
him, surely Sir Geoffrey was not to blame.
It was only a habit ; but some men's
habits are useful, and his proved eminently
so.

"This is your first introduction to your
niece, isn't it ? " observed Sir Geoffrey,
after a few interesting remarks had been
made about the weather and the locality.

Well, and what do you think of her ?"
he went on, with a knowing twitch of
his head, when his brother-in-law had signified
acquiescence with the previous proposition.
"She's not so bad, is she?"

I have already taken the liberty of
remarking to her that if she is only as
good as she is pretty — "

Ay, that's the thing," interrupted Sir
Geoffrey ; as though he himself were such
a paragon of virtue, the mere idea of
naughtiness proved repugnant to his moral
sense ; " that's what I used to say to
her and Susan, ' Beauty's only skin deep,'
Handsome is as handsome does.' Haven't
I told you so a hundred times over,
Peggy, when you were going to fly at
Susan and scratch the ten commandments
over her face because I said she was
prettier than you ? "

I feel no doubt you have," answered
Peggy, with a tender smile, which was
somewhat belied by a look in her eyes
that made Mr. Gayre fancy in her heart
she desired nothing better at that moment
than to grave some lines on Sir Geoffrey's
sallow cheek.

"Who was Susan?" asked the banker.
I always thought you had never but
the one daughter."

That's right enough — no more I had.
Who was Susan ? why, the merriest Httle
lass in the whole world, and fond of me,
too — far fonder than my own child ever
was. Lord ! it seems no longer ago than
yesterday when she used to come running
across the lawn, aud say to me, with
both her little arms round my knees,
"Dive me a wide, papa Geoff ; didn't
she, Peg?"

"I have no doubt she did," Peg replied,
with another smile.

"Doubt!" repeated Sir Geoffrey; "why,
you know she did, just as well as you
know what a nice passion you used to get
into when anybody said she had a better
complexion than you."

I was only a child, papa," reminded
Miss Chelston.

"Ay, only a child," agreed the Baronet,
with another indescribable twitch ; " and
now you're a young woman, there's no
need for you to be jealous of anybody,
though I say it. And that brings us back
to what your uncle remarked, that he
hoped you were as good as you were
pretty."

Well, you are a strange pair," considered
Mr. Gayre, contemplating parent
and child with admiration.

And this Miss Susan," he suggested —
is she not pretty now ? "

yes, she is," said Sir Geoffrey, *' but
she's not as handsome as my girl there.
Those very fair children somehow don't
look so well at twenty as at six. I can't
tell why. Susan's good, though, that
she is."

Having dealt his daughter which backhanded
compliment, and leaving both his
hearers to take whatever meaning they

pleased out of it, the Baronet proposed an
adjournment to the next apartment.

'you must have a glass of claret, Hereafter
your walk." he declared, with the
hospitable warmth of a man who gets his
claret for nothing. Mr. Gayre did not want
the wine, but he accepted the proffered
civility, as he wished to speak to his
brother-in-law alone.

"Xow look here," exclaimed Sir Geoffrey,
piloting the way to the dining-room, " take
some champagne, do — claret's an un-english,
ungenial sort of tipple, except when one
can't get anything else. I have some first-rate
champagne, as you'll say when you
taste it, and I'm going to have some myself.
Champagne and soda-water is the
best " pick up " I know, and, to tell
you the truth, I feel I need a pick up
of some sort. We did keep the ball
moving last night. I'd have been right
enough if I'd never gone to bed ; but now

my head seems spinning round and round,
like a coach-wheel. You'll have champagne?
That's right, with just a dash of
brandy in it. I always advise the brandy;
champagne's cold without, and, some people
find, absolutely unwholesome too."

Mr. Gayre said he would venture upon
the champagne minus the brandy ; and this
point being amicably settled, Sir Geoffrey,
to show he was not recommending what
he feared to practise, followed up the first
prescription he ordered for himself with
that he advised for his brother-in-law ;
after which proceeding, regarded by Mr.
Ga^re with curiosity, not to say awe, the
Baronet stated he felt much better — "fit
for anything, in fact."

"You've dropped into a nice place here,"
said the banker, as he and Sir Geofirey
sauntered down the garden. "You might
be a hundred miles in the country."

Yes, it's quiet enough in all conscience,"

was the reply ; " fact is, it's too quiet and
out-of-the-way for me. Still, we can't have
everything ; and the little cottage costs me
nothing. Moreby — capital young fellow —
lent it to me."

So I heard," remarked Mr. Gayre ; and
he might have added he had also heard
how Mr. Moreby came to lend it.

His mother took him abroad all in a
hurry, and not an hour too soon," explained
the new occupier, in the tone of a man
who is paid for denouncing vice at the
rate of about a guinea a word. " He was
going a pace! Why, just look how this
house is furnished ! I only wish I had the
money it must have cost him."

Eeally, to hear Sir Geoffrey talk, anyone
might have imagined he had never
possessed a spare sixpence or been given a
solitary chance in Iiis life.

"It was too good an opportunity to let
sHp," he went on, finding his brother-in-law

made no comment on the desire last expressed,
" for I had not a roof to put
my head under. Don't think that would
have troubled me though ; I can live anywhere
and on anything. I'd as soon sleep
on the floor as not ; and nobody ever
heard me object to gin when I could not
get Aliquot ; " and having, in the contemplation
of his own self-denial, almost
dropped his hat. Sir Geoffrey shook it on
again with the conscious rectitude of a
person earning two pounds per week by
hard labour, and contriving to save fifteen
shillings out of it.

"But it was my daughter," he said, after
a slight pause. " I couldn't let the girl
remain without a shelter, however willing
I might be to make shift myself."

"It was a difficult position, certainly,"
observed Mr. Gayre, feeling this concession
could not compromise him.

Difficult ! I believe you ! Give you

my word, I could not sleep o' nights
wondering what on earth I was to do with
her ; " a statement which, as Sir Geoffrey
very rarely slept of nights, usually soundly
reposing by day, meant less than it might
otherwise have done.

You called her Marguerite, she tells me."

Faith, that I did not, or anybody else,
so far as I know, except herself. Her
right name is Margaret, of course, but she
thinks Marguerite fits her better, somehow;
and if it pleases her, I am sure it may
please me."

Has she many friends in London ? "
asked Mr. Gayre.

Many ! — not a soul ; I don't know what
to do with her, or how to set about
getting her acquaintances. Time slips away;
and I can't tell how long I shall be able
to keep this house. It's confoundedly
awkward altogether, for something ought
to be doing."

You want to get her married, I suppose
? "

If I can," answered Sir Geoffrey, breaking
off a bay-leaf and eating it with great
apparent relish.

"You'll not compass your object, I'm
afraid, by sending her out in the Park."

Have you seen her there, then ? " said
Sir Geoffrey, reddening under his brother-in-law's
steady gaze.

Yes ; that is how I knew you were
in town. You had better let her abandon
equestrian exercise. In the first place, she
can't ride."

JSFo, indeed, she can't," groaned Sir
Geoffrey ; " if she could she'd have been
worth a fortune, in a way of speaking.
But she'll never be of any use to me —
not the least in the world ; she hasn't
a notion of making herself useful. Why,
with her appearance — "

You will have to be careful what you

are about," interposed Mr. Gayre, with
decision. "You must get some lady of
position to introduce her."

"I don't know who that lady is to be,
then," retorted Sir Geoffrey. " If you can
find her, I shall feel mightily obliged to
you. It's all very easy to talk, but I can
tell you it's not so easy to do. Why,
there's my own second cousin on the
mother's side. Lady Digley. When I was
a boy the old people thought it would bea
fine thing to make up a match between
us ; and she was brought down to
the Pleasaunce on view. But I couldn't
stand her nose — too much of the Coriolanus,
Eoman-senator-business, about that
nose. However, as I was saying, I wrote
to her, telling her my daughter was in
London, and mentioning the girl's good
looks, and so on, and in plain words
asking would she take her up."

Well ? " inquired Mr. Gayre.

"The old hag sent an answer by return.
Lady Digley presented her compliments, and
the rest of it, and Lady Digley regretted to
say circumstances over which she had no
control compelled her to decline the honour
of making the acquaintance of Miss Chelston.
Damn her ! " added Sir Geofirey, with great
fervour, referring to Lady Digley, and not to
his own daughter.

Mr. Gayre made no remark for a few
minutes, but stood looking thoughtfully down
upon the canal.

The situation undoubtedly was awkward ;
and it did not seem as if any fresh revelation
was likely to improve its aspect.

"Why did you bring her to town at
all at present ? " he asked, after a pause,
during which Sir Geoffrey, looking as much
unlike a dove as possible, plucked another
leaf.

Why ? " repeated that gentleman ; "because
I had no other place to leave her. It

seems to me, Gayre, you don't at all understand
how I am situated."

"I think I do," was the reply; "but had
you no friends near your old place with
whom the girl could have stayed for a
while ? "

Deuce a friend," answered Sir Geoffrey.
"Believe me, my dear fellow, when a man
has got to the bottom of the hill, those
who were civil to him at the top find it
convenient to forget the fact of his existence."


But your daughter," urged Mr. Gayre ;
young people form acquaintances for themselves,
and, as a rule, the young are not
mercenary. Was there no single door held
wide to welcome my niece ? "

"Not one."

"But think — for example, that Susan you
were speaking of just now, did she hang
back ? "

Susan Drummond ? No, she did not

hang back ; but she had nothing in her
power. You see, about the time that things
got to the worst with us her uncle died, and
she had to clear out. She wrote me as nice
a letter as you could wish to read. She was
always fond of me, poor Susan! I know
she thought a deal of me," added the Baronet
almost sentimentally.

Mr. Gayre looked askance at Sir Geoffrey,
and wondered what in the world any girl or
woman could see personally or mentally to
admire in the disreputable jockey and battered
roue.

"There is no accounting for the caprices
of the sex," he decided, and reverted to the
original question.

It will save us both a great deal of time
if I am quite plain with you," he said, almost
smiling as he spoke in Sir Geoffrey's slowly-lengthening
face. " I don't mean you to
dip deeper into my pocket than you have
done ; but as regards my niece, I should

Vol. i. 9

like her, at all events, to have a chance of
making something better of life than an utter
failure. For this reason I will see whether,
amongst my own connection, I cannot find
some one to chaperone her ; you must do
your part, however. Keep her in the background
till she can come to the front properly.
Could you not, meantime, get some
lady to reside in the house, as governess or
companion, eh ? "

Well, I'm afraid not," answered Sir Geoffrey.
" We've tried that sort of thing before,
and though I am sure I was always most
courteous and careful, still, ' once give a dog
a bad name,' you know ; the respectable ones
wouldn't stop, and — "

Mr. Gayre laughed outright. "We
need scarcely pursue the other side of the
question," he said, a decision which, on
the whole, proved rather a relief to the
Baronet.

"If your daughter had even some young

friend stopping with her for a time," suggested
Mr. Gayre. " Where is that Miss
Drummond ? wouldn't she come ? "

I daresay she would ; she spent more
than half her time at Ch els ton Pleasaunce.
Yes, she'd come fast enough ; but then, you
see, I don't know where she is."

"But your daughter does, no doubt."
Sir Geoffrey shook his head dubiously.
I don't think so," he said.

"Ask her," advised Mr. Gayre ; " there
she is."

And, indeed, there Miss Chelston was,
framed within an open window, to which
her father at once advanced.

Where is Susan Drummond now, do you
know ? " he asked ; and Mr. Gayre, standing
a step or two behind, watched her face as
she answered,

Susan Drummond, papa. I haven't an
idea. She was in Ireland, staying with some

people who live near Killarney."

9—2

"But you've an address where you can
write to her ? "

Miss Chelston lifted her beautiful eyes and
looked at her father, as she answered, in the
accents of utter truthfulness, "She did tell
me where an aunt lived who would always
forward on any letters ; but I have mislaid
the direction, and quite forget what it was."

After that ! " thought Mr. Gayre ; and his
meditations as he strolled through Eegent's
Park homeward, were of a more unpleasant
character than those with which he had
amused himself a couple of hours previously.

A POSSIBLE SAMARITAN.

^T is one thing to ask friends to " take
up " a girl, and quite another to get
to do it.

This was Mr. Gayre's experience, at all
events. He went very heartily into the business,
in the first instance full of faith and
hope, and later on with a species of desperation.


Margaret's child ! " repeated his brother,
now a great dignitary of the Church, with
a town house in Onslow square, Rector
of Little Fishermen, Canon of Worcester
Cathedral, Chaplain to the Queen, and
Heaven only knows what besides — 'margaret's
child ! Ask Matilda to invite her to

this house and introduce her to our friends !
My dear Nicholas, the thing is an utter impossibility.
I would not for any consideration
prefer such a petition to my wife."

Why not ? " demanded Mr. Gayre.

"It is a matter into which I really must
decline entering. Your own usually excellent
sense should tell you it is out of the
question persons in our position could fora
moment entertain the idea of bringing forward
the child of our unfortunate sister,
and the daughter of that most disreputable
reprobate Sir Geoffrey Chelston. Our dear
Fanny and sweet Julia are not aware even
of the existence ot such a cousin. And you
say she is in London ; what a dreadful misfortune
! "

Every one was in the same story ; the words
might be different, but the sense proved the
same. Sir Geoffrey rich might have managed
to slip his daughter through a camel's eye
into the social heaven presided over by Mrs.

Grundy ; but Sir Geoffrey without an acre of
land, with no balance at his banker's, Having
on his wits, regarded by gentlemen of his
own order as a very leper, had not a
chance.

"I reckoned without mine host," said Mr.
Gayre to the Baronet Bagot. "It is not to
be done."

I told you so at the beginning,"
answered Sir Geoffrey, who, if he had
learned nothing else from experience, could
not help knowing the sort of reception any
creature belonging to him was likely to meet
with from the fashionable world. " You
meant it all kindly, Gayre, I know ; but there
is no use in trying to kick against the pricks.
You had better stop in your own comfortable
home, and not trouble about us 
folks up here. If Margaret and I
cannot swim together — and it seems we can
neither of us do that — we must sink; and
the Baronet, as he concluded, regarded his

brother-in-law furtively out of the corner of
one knowing eye, for he was wondering what
on earth this latest benefactor meant to do,
if not for him, for his daughter.

Confound him ! " considered Sir Geoffrey,
why does he not adopt her ? If he took
her to Wimpole Street, and got some dashing
widow to patronise her, and hinted he meant
to give her a handsome dot he might pick
and choose a husband for her. Ah, if I
had only in my power what he has in his,
I'd soon bring the old dowagers who have
sons about me, begging and praying for my
daughter's company! But he's only a duffer,
that's what he is, spite of his military
achievements and the old bank at his
back. Lord, how lucky some men are ! "
and Sir Geoffrey, with his hat more on one
side of his head than ever, wended his
virtuous way to pluck the latest pigeon
good fortune had made him acquainted
with.

'' K Gayre were in my shoes he'd starve,
that's what Gayre would do," he decided ;
and he walked along thinking what a clever
fellow Sir Geoffrey Chelston was, and what
a fool Nicholas Gayre. "Still, I should like
to know his notion about Peggy, because he
has some notion, I'll swear."

Sir Geoffrey would have been very wronging
swearing anything of the kind. Mr.
Gayre had no fixed notion whatever concerning
the divine Marguerite. He wanted
her to marry well ; but he failed exactly to
see how, weighted as she was, she could
marry at all.

I should say," was the result of Mr.
Gayre's mental reflections, " That she is as
awkward a girl to get ' settled ' as ever I
saw in my life. India would be the place
for her ; and yet I don't know. She might
get a husband on the voyage out, most
likely ; but then it is not every husband
that would suit her. If she could have been

properly brought out in London — but I see
that is not to be thought of."

There was one way this might have been
accomplished — one way which would have
suited Sir Geoffrey and his niece extremely
well ; but it is only justice to that excellent
sense Canon Gayre, in his suave voice and
best pastoral manner, declared Nicholas
possessed, to say the idea of adopting his
niece had never once crossed the banker's
mind.

Even had he taken to her, which indeed
was not the case, he would have thought
a long time ere installing himself as a
parent to another man's child, and that man
Geoffrey Chelston. About Nicholas Gayre
there was nothing much stronger than his
strong common sense — that sense which
induced him, when he went down to war
amongst the City Philistines, to drop the
title of Colonel, and sink into simple Mr.
Gave.

I've seen," he said, " vans going about
the City with ' Dr. Hercules Smith, blood-manure
manufacturer,' and ' Sir Reginald
Jones & Co., patent stench-trap makers,'
painted upon them. Thank you, nothing of
that sort for me. I have no fancy to figure
as Colonel Gayre, banker, like the fellow
in the Volunteers who puts on his busi-
ness-card, ' Major Robinson, waste-paper
dealer.' '

Upon the whole, excessive virtue has a
great deal to answer for. Its action, as regarded
Margaret Chelston, had certainly the
effect of making Mr. Gayre wonder whether,
after all, there might not be some merit
in vice.

'' I need no man to remind me " — thus
ran his thoughts — "what a black, disreputable,
sinful old sheep Chelston is ; but hang
it ! surely if John's religion has any reality,
that ought to make him more anxious to
help the girl. She is not answerable for

her father's faults ; and after all, she is
Margaret's child."

During the course of the stormy correspondence
which ensued on the Marguerite
question between the Canon and his brother,
the banker made some unpleasant remarks,
which the Eev. John took as personal
injuries, concerning the priest and the
Levite who past by on the other side, and
left to a Samaritan their proper work of
tending the man who had fallen among
thieves.

Nicholas, being at the time not merely
very angry, and greatly disappointed, but
possessed by a gibing devil, which at times
rent," and caused him to foam at the
mouth," ransacked the New and Old Testament
for texts concerning the pride and
worldliness of priests and Levite, to hurl
at his brother's head. The Canon simply
ducked," and declined the contest ; he
would not argue, he said, with a man in so

unfit " a state of mind. He promised to
remember him in prayer. He alluded to St.
Paul's oft-quoted statement concerning evil
communications corrupting good manners,
and mildly hinted he feared communication
with that evil thing Sir Geofirey Chelston
was corrupting the small amount of morality
Nicholas had brought with him out of the
army.

In good truth, John Gayre was as furious
as a Christian and a canon of Worcester
might be. In orders he had done remarkably
well ; yet, since the death of his eldest
brother, he had often felt that, but for
orders, he might have done much better.
Further, he never really loved Nicholas ; and
Nicholas, on his part, had not fraternised
with " canoness " Gayre and the mnior
canonesses Gayre as he ought to have done.
When dear Julia published a song for the
benefit of the Lambeth Shoe and Stocking
Society, Nicholas suggested, first, it was

brought out less to benefit bare-footed
Lambeth than as a bid for a future primacy ;
and then offered to buy up the edition and
sell it for waste paper, on condition she
forswore musical composition ever after ;
whilst he criticised so mercilessly some
angelic " hymns written by our sweet
Fanny, that the Canon's favourite child,
feeling all moderate Church views vanity,
and meeting with a sympathetic " priest,"
was for some time in danger of going over
to the Naturalists, which would indeed have
proved a most grievous slap in the face
for that party from whose hands Canon
Gayre hoped some day to receive a mitre.

Altogether, a great division seemed imminent
in the Gayre camp one morning, in
the fine June following that late May when
Mr. Sudlow, leaning over the rails in Hyde
Park, admired rank and beauty as, embodied
in Miss Chelston, it rode timidly along the
Eow.

Mr. Gayre, banker, walking Cityward, had
left an extremely nasty letter behind him in
Wimpole Street, emanating from Mr. Gayre,
Canon. It went into money matters, always
a fatal and terrible subject to select for
family correspondence. It expressed quite
plainly, grievances which had never before
been more than hinted at. It referred to
one topic, regarding which Nicholas desired
forgetfulness ; and it said a man who
voluntarily permitted himself to become
entangled for a second time with Sir Geoffrey
Chelston could only be considered a fit candidate
for the nearest lunatic asylum.

Moderate," proceeded Canon Areas
you must be too well aware, my means
are, in comparison with what I expected,
and had a right to expect, they would prove,
I should not have hesitated joining you in
settling a small annuity on the daughter of
our unfortunate and erring sister ; but to be
exposed to your insolence because I refuse

to disgrace my cloth by taking, as a mate
of my house and the associate of my wife
and daughters, the child of a blacken and
a woman who forgot what was due to her
name and her sex, is more almost than I
can bear. Happily, however, I am not vindictive,
and I shall earnestly pray you may
never hereafter find some of the texts of
that Scripture you now so painfully wrest,
applicable to yourself. — Faithfully your
sorrowing brother."

There was so much " excellent sense," common
sense, worldly sense, plain useful sense,
in this epistle, that it stung Nicholas to the
quick. So far as money matters went, he felt
himself blameless. He knew, if no one else
did, his father had made a fair will, and left
John as much or more in hard cash as the
business would stand. He remembered the
annuity paid to his sister came out of his
own pocket ; he was aware that, had he
not given up a profession to which he was

devoted, Join's large income Avould have
been considerably smaller ; he understood
perfectly what his brother wanted was a
share in the bank, if not for himself, at least
for one son-in-law, or perhaps two sons-in-law.
It was not as regarding £ s. d. the
letter irritated, though it hurt ; no arrow
the Canon shot really found its mark, save
that which criticised the prudence of his
conduct regarding Margaret No. 2.

He was well aware he had acted on an
impulse he was powerless to control, and
Mr. Nicholas Gayre did not like to act on
impulse.

Canon Gayre himself could not have looked
with more disfavour on such a freak than
the banker of Lombard Street.

However," thought that gentleman, " I
have gone in for my niece, and I shall try if
I cannot ' see her through.' The materials
are not promising; nevertheless, I thmk
something may be done. The world is not

Vol 3. 10

bounded by my own social horizon, and it is
inhabited by a good many other people
besides Canon John and Lady Digley — only,
who is going to play the part of good Samaritan
? "

A pertinent question, truly. Mr. Gayre
had gone the round of his own friends, and
met with " No," for answer in every tone
and every form of words a negative could
be uttered. It was clearly of no use expecting
help from Sir Geoffrey ; and so far
the young lady herself appeared either
unable or unwilling to mention the name of
any person with whom she could take up
her abode, or who might be induced to
enter the gates of North Bank as an honoured
guest.

Still," considered Mr. Gayre, " the
thing is to be done, and I must do it, if only
to take the canoness ' down a peg ;' " inspirited
by which idea, the banker mended
his pace, and, walking briskly Cityward,

reached Lombard Street just as the clock
of St. Mary Woolnoth chimed half-past
eleven.

On the top step of the three which at
Gayres' afforded departing customers that
number of chances for breaking a Hmb the
banker beheld an apparition which filled
him with ire. It took the bodily form of
Lavender, but behind it Mr. Gayre knew
stood the prompting figure of Sir Geoffrey.
Now, he had told that worthy in plain and
unmistakable language he must not ask him
for money or appear at the bank. "Here
is the first breach of our convention," he
muttered, acknowledging with but scant
courtesy Lavender's pleased and respectful
greeting, and receiving the letter written by
the Baronet's own hand in a somewhat ungracious
manner.

"I took it to Wimpole Street, sir," explained
the man, "but you had just left;

and as Sir Geoffrey he wanted an answer

10—2

very particular, I got on a bus, and came
here as fast as I could."

"Don't stand there," answered Mr. Gayre
testily. " I can't attend to you for a few
minutes — wait inside till I am at leisure."
And having thus successfully snubbed poor
Lavender, and permitted the bank porter,
and consequently every clerk in the establishment,
to see there was " something up
with the governor," he walked into his own
room, still holding Sir Geoffrey's envelope
unopened in his hand.

There was a pile of letters awaiting his
attention, and to these — laying aside the
Baronet's epistle, as though some serpent
might be expected to crawl out of it — he
first addressed himseK.

Almost at the bottom of the heap he
came upon a tinted envelope, with an imposing
crest wrought in silver for seal. The
banker smiled as he drew out the enclosure,
and read :

'' Brunswick Square, Wednesday,
"Dear !Mr. Gayre, — As usual, I am in
trouble, and also as usual I ask you to advise
and help me.

My poor little Ida is still ailing, and
Dr. Tenby says I must get her out of town.
He does not want her to go far away, as it
will be necessary for him to see her frequently.
He recommends me to take a
house in the country, and yet near London —
for, sweet darling, she is so delicate, she requires
every possible home comfort. There
is a place to let near Chislehurst (furnished)
which, from the description I have
received of it, would, I think, suit her
exactly; but, alas, I am chained to the sofa
with a sprained ankle. There is no hope
of my being able to walk for weeks ; and
the agent writes that the house is sure
to be snapped up immediately. What
am I to do? Have you any elderly
and reliable clerk who could go down

and bring back a faithful report of "The
Warren ? "

Of course, whatever expenses might be
incurred I should' be only two happy to
pay. I am always encroaching on your
kindness ; but I know you ^vill forgive me.
Is not the weather lovely now? It does
seem so dreadful to be pent indoors, with
the sun shining and the birds singing. —
Yours very sincerely,

Eliza Gubbins's."

"Eliza Jubbins will be the Good Samaritan,"
said Mr. Gayre aloud in triumph. "I
wonder how I could be so stupid as never
even to think of her ; " and seizing a pen,
he wrote back :

'" Dear Mrs. Gubbins, — I will go to Chislehurst
for you with much pleasure. Tell
me to whom I must apply for an order.
When I call with a full report I shall hope
to find you and Ida much better. — Yours
faithfully, Nicholas Gayer.

XoTT to see what Chelston wants. I
wish he had not selected this particular
time for beginning to worry me ; " and,
seizing the Baronet's epistle, he tore it
open with the air of a man determined toto
face the worst.

And behold, after all, there was nothing
so very terrible — only a crossed cheque,
with a good signature attached, which Sir
Geoffrey wanted his brother-in-law to cash.

For I have no banking account," he
explained ; " and if I took it to any of
the tradespeople I should perhaps be expected
to leave most part of the change
behind me."

Mr. Gayre pressed his bell.

Spicer," he said, " send in the person
who has been waiting for me, and tell
Hartley I want him."

Doubtful, perhaps, of the reception he
might meet with. Lavender hung beside
the door till the banker, with all his usual

affable frankness when addressing those
inferior to himself restored, bade him come
forward ; and while Hartley was absent
getting fifteen ten-pound notes, the precise
form Sir Geoffrey had requested the change
might take, asked how Miss Chelston was,
and remarked on the fineness of the weather,
and altogether relieved and satisfied the

man.

0, by-the-bye," said Mr. Gayre at last,
do you remember one day when you
were in the Eow seeing a gentleman's
horse shy at a stone roller ? It was a
hunter — bay, with black legs."

Yes, sir, well ; he was riding with Miss
Drummond. I don't know if you noticed
her horse — a very handsome animal too."

"It was the bay took my fancy," answered
Mr. Gayre. " Do you happen to
know the rider's name ? "

No, sir, I never saw him before ; but
he was a free-spoken sort of gentleman,

not long back from the Colonies, as he
gave me to understand, and, if I remember
right, he said he and Miss Susan had ridden
across from a place I think he called Enfield
Highway. I don't know if I am quite right
in the name."

There is an Enfield Highway," remarked
Mr. Gayre ; and then he put up the notes
in an envelope, which he handed to Lavender,
smiling to think hour far matters seemed
to have advanced in the course of a single
morning.

I'll see, my dear niece," he decided,
whether I cannot ascertain Miss Drummond's
address, which you say you have
forgotten."

ELIZA Gubbins.

jHEN Colonel Gayre decided to exchange
his sword for a pen, he
took up his residence in Brunswick Square
with old Mr. Gayre, who had long determined
not to remove from that central
and convenient locality till the time came
for him to be carried to the Gayre vault
in Highgate Cemetery.

The house was situated on the north, or
quietest, side of the square. Into fault
could be found with the number or size
of the rooms, the healthfulness of the situation,
or the general air of comfort pervading
the whole dwelling. Nevertheless, Mrs.
John Gayre and her husband both professed

themselves surprised at their father electing
to stop in a house where he had known
so much trouble. His wife and son both
died in it ; and there, also, he faced that
bitter sorrow concerning his daughter.

John urged the old man to make his
home with them, or, at least, to move
further westward, and " away from all the
sad memories which clustered around Brunswick
square ; '' but his parent asked in return,
"Where could I go that it would be
possible for me to forget ni}^ dead ? "

Those were the days ere it had become
a fixed belief of the Enohsh nation that
happiness and health are to be compassed
by eternal change of residence ; but yet
John Gayre felt it very unreasonable for
any one to refuse the delights of constant
clerical companionship and those intellectual
pleasures only to be found in the more
fashionable parts of London. He and his
wife became more exercised in their minds

than ever as to whether the sole-surviving
member of the Gayres meant to take a
certain "designing" manager into partnership.
Long previously Mrs. John had settled
future banking arrangements entirely
to her own satisfaction. Her brother was
to put in a certain amount of money ; and
then his son would marry dear Julia or
Fanny, and so " preserve " Gayres for the
family. John had been " pushed forward "
in the Church in a truly "miraculous manner,"
but his wife wished him to be pushed
forward a great deal more.

A most worldly and ambitious woman,
she was constantly trying to manage an old
gentleman who erred, perhaps, on the side
of fancying that all his life he had contrived
to manage exceedingly well for himself.
Mr. Gayre, however, utterly declined
to be managed. He got very tired, he
said, of general society, and, resisting all
attempts to induce him to change his abode.

he " shut himself up," to quote Mrs. John
Gayre's own words, "to question the justice
of the Almighty." But in this statement
she was quite wrong. Mr. Gayre was a
much truer Christian than his daughter-in-law
had ever been. He had lost, but he
did not sorrow as one who has no hope ;
disgrace had touched him, but he went
among his fellow-men and transacted his
business notwithstanding. As for other
matters, he still maintained his custom of
giving four formal dinner-parties each year ;
and if the guests who accepted his invitations
seemed to Mrs. John " dreadful people,"
they suited the banker a vast deal better
than the folks he met when seduced to an
at home " in Onslow-square.

They might not know much of Court
or the " dear Queen," or dukes and duchesses,
but some of them were acquainted
with Baring and Rothschild ; and if they
could not talk about the latest pieces of

fashionable scandal, they were aware how
stocks stood, and shook their heads mournfully
over Jones's huge failure, and told
how Smith had netted fifty thousand
at one transaction. Further, at his dinner-table
he delighted to see the clergyman
from the church situate in Eegent Square,
just at the back of his own house, and
any officer or civilian to whom Nicholas
asked him to show a little attention.

There was plenty to eat in Brunswick
Square, and of the best quality, Mr. Gayre's
spreads differing in this respect from the
Onslow Square parties, where, as once was
said, a fellow never got anything except
water ices and iced water."

Mrs. John Gayre had, indeed, reduced
gentility to a science. Her " social gatherings
" finally became so eminently genteel, no
one who could help it went to them twice.
Mr. Gayre had reason when he objected to
drive all that distance and stand "in a

crowd" with nobody he knew near him,
and get nothing in the way of food save a
morsel of sandwich and a wine-glassful of
claret-cup. ^Vhat he enjoyed, and what
really kept him in Brunswick Square, was
the companionship of a few old friends,
who liked their rubber and a bit of supper
to follow, and something hot and comfortable
in the way of punch as a genial
good-night ; all Hghts out by half-past
eleven, and the whole household warmly
asleep before twelve. Insomnia was not a
thing Mr. Gayre knew much about, and
he did not want to know about it.

The modern manner of living," he was
wont to declare, "brings all sorts of evil
in its train ;" a sentiment his friends in
Bedford and Russell Squares and Gower
and Guildford Streets were quite willing to
echo so long as old-fashioned customs presented
so pleasant an aspect as they did in
the hospitable banker's house.

Amongst the friends who for many a
long year after Mrs. Gayre's death had
helped to soothe the widower's loneliness by
taking a hand at a rubber was a certain
Mr. Jubbins, who, though not old in comparison
with most of the worthies wont to
assemble in the comfortable drawing-room,
was certainly by no means youthful. His
father had been a well-to-do oil-merchant
in a very large way of business ; and Mr.
Samuel Jubbins, devoting his attention to
the same line of money-making, contrived,
through some process, either chanced upon
by himself or devised by another person,
literally to turn oil into gold. Give him
the dirtiest, thickest-looking stuff imaginable,
and it came forth from his warehouse
clear and beautiful, a tiling to be admired,
an article to be paid for.

This wonderful process seemed also to
have produced a similar effect on Mr. Gubbins.
All the oil of his nature was good

and pleasant and genial. No better, or
honest, or kinder man ever cut for deal.
He was good to the poor swarming in the
courts off Gray's Inn Lane, and other neighbourhoods
adjacent to his house ; and he
bore the tyranny and the tantrums of an
elderly maiden sister, whose bitter tongue
was the terror of Bloomsbury, with a
patience which should have secured him
canonisation.

Amongst his many friends was a solicitor,
who lived in great style at a corner house in
Bedford Square, having offices in Bedford
Eow. This solicitor owned one child, a
daughter ; and Mr. Jubbins had dandled
this young lady when she was a baby, and
won her childish heart with presents of
fruit and cakes and confectionery. Her
name was Eliza Higgs ; and it may safely
be said, as a girl, no greater hoyden ever
existed.

When they were all little folks together,

Vol. i. u

she and the smaller Gayres were close
friends ; and on wet days they were wont
to play at battledore and shuttlecock in
the wide hall of the Bedford Square house,
and drive imaginary coaches and tandems
up and down stairs, to the distraction of
their elders.

Eliza Higgs was the youngest and worst
of the trio. She had a hard, well~filled-out,
good-natured, lively face ; wonderful brown
hair ; as stout and straight a pair of legs
as ever gladdened a parent's heart ; activity
which seemed simply inexhaustible ; and a
capacity for getting into mischief which
could only be regarded as miraculous.
She was in love with Nicholas Gayre, and
used to kiss him in a manner the boy resented
with many shoves and angry remonstrances
; but, on the whole, he liked Eliza
very much indeed, and preferred her companionship,
when any deed of daring was in
question, to that of his more timid sister.

When Nicholas Gayre returned home for
good he found the bouncing Eliza, Mrs.
Jubbins, and the mother of several tallow-faced
and delicate children. Mr. Higgs'
affairs had arrived at such a state of entanglement
that he tried to hang himself.
Being cut down just in time, Mr. Jubbins
stepped forward to the rescue, and proved
the splendid fellow everybody had always
thought him. He took the Higgs helm,
arranged with Higgs' creditors, found money
for the Higgs establishment ; and finally,
one Sunday morning, when he was escorting
Eliza back from St. Pancreas church, asked
her if she would marry him.

Had Miss Jubbins known she had kept

her brother single till he was fifty years

old, only in order that he might propose

for her god-daughter, she must have risen

from her grave ; but she did not know or

hear Miss Higgs' murmured "Yes."

The young lady had been warned by

11—2

her mamma that a proposal was imminent,
and told on no account to indulge in any
little affectations or pretences.

Our position is too serious, my dear, to
be trifled with," said the astute lady ; and
accordingly Eliza — who could not forget the
shock her papa had given them all, or the
mere thread which stood between her and
beggary, or, to do her justice, Mr. Jubbins'
kindness — gave her lover to understand she
would marry him with great pleasure.

When the happy man reached Bedford
Square, he had one of those kisses Nicholas
Gayre once received with such disfavour.

God bless you, dear," he said ; and
went away because he wanted to be alone
with his bliss.

That same afternoon, Mrs. Higgs, who
was an eminently practical person, with no
tendency to let the grass grow under her
feet, called on Mr. Gayre, and had a
long chat with that gentleman.

I left Lisa crying," she said, with a
cheerful countenance, after she had told
her good news, "and you'd never guess why."

"Perhaps," suggested the banker — who
thought the whole arrangement most sensible
and proper, and ' evincing a right feeling
' — " because he is nearly thirty years
older than herself."

dear, no," answered Mrs. Higgs ;
she does not mind that at all."

Had she any other lover ? "

"Not that she cared for."

"Was she fond of any one who was not
fond of her ? "

"Good gracious! what ar thinking of?
Certainly not, Mr. Gayre."

Then, as I have exhausted all my
guesses, will you tell me why your daughter
was crying when you left her ? "

Because her name would be Jubbins.
Higgs,' she said, ' was bad enough, but
only to think of Jubbins ! ' "

"Ah, those novels, those novels!" exclaimed
Mr. Gayre ; and then with a glad
heart, he offered Mrs. Higgs a glass of
wine, for the banker was a very kindly
man, and sincerely lamented the misfortunes
of his friends, when they did not
ask him for any money to tide them over
their troubles; and he thought reverses ina
certain rank of life were most lamentable,
and that if any one member of a
family could help the remainder to regain
their former position, it was the duty of
that individual to make even a great
sacrifice in order to avert the social scandal
of wealth being reduced to poverty.

In the matter of Eliza Higgs, as wife,
mother, and widow, she behaved precisely
With that admirable feeling and excellent
sense Mr. Gayre expected. She could
scarcely have been human, and failed to
prove grateful to the man who thought
her perfection, and deemed nothing in the

world money could purchase, or love think
of, too good for his young and handsome
wife.

Xo happier couple could have been found
in the whole of Bloomsbury, where Mrs.
Jubbins was pointed out as an example
to refractory misses, and a rebuke to
skittish matrons.

She learnt to play whist almost as well
as her husband, and Mr. Gayre often
crossed the square in order to play a
rubber, and spend a quiet evening in the
Jubbins house, which was ordered on the
same lines as found favour on the north
side.

Mr. Jubbins, making money a vast deal
more rapidly than Mr. Gayre, spent buta
small proportion of his income, and invested
the rest in good undertakings. He
looked up to the banker as his superior
in age, rank, and wealth, and Mr. Gayre
liked to be so looked up to; therefore the

intercourse between the two houses grew
closer and closer.

Things were in this state when Nicholas
Gayre commenced, under his father's tutelage,
to learn the knowledge and mystery
of banking ; and though he never associated
freely with, or took kindly to, the
Bloom bury connection, it was impossible
for him to avoid seeing a great deal of it.

"Where could you find kinder or more
excellent people ? " asked the old man, who
saw, or fancied he saw, a sign of the
cloven foot — the West-end mania — in his
son.

"All your friends, sir," answered Mr.
Gayre, jun., " do, indeed, appear to be
most kind and excellent persons." (sat
the same time," he added mentally, " it
is quite possible to see too much of
them")

He made no mention, however, of this
feeling to his father. Long habits of military

discipline, and sincere affection and
profound respect for a parent who had
always acted kindly and liberally towards
him, tied the ex-officer's tongue concerning
questions far more vexed and important than
the choice of acquaintances or the selection
of guests.

He did not abandon his own circle, but
he concealed the weary impatience he felt
of the Bloomsbury dinner-parties and social
evenings. The Israelites never could have
loathed the wholesome manna and the too
plentiful quails to the same extent that
Nicholas Gayre learned to hate whist and
port-wine and whitebait and lark-pudding
and City talk ; but in a most difficult position
he behaved himself remarkably welland
though his father's friends never, perhaps,
felt themselves quite at ease when he
was of the company, they liked to speak
about young Gayre, who, in spite of his
having " been at Balaclava, you know, and

all through the Mutiny, had given up this
profession and his brilliant prospects to please
his father, and was settling down in Lombard
Street as if he had been sitting behind a
desk all his life, like one of our own sons, sir."
Years had come and years had gone,
since the days when Nicholas and his sister
and Eliza Higgs romped through the large
house in Bedford Square ; but the first thing
Colonel Gayre thought of, when he saw Mrs.
Jubbins in the bosom of her family, was
concerning those sounding smacks she had
been in the habit of bestowing so lovingly
and lavishly upon him. He had forgotten
all about them and her, till his father piloted
him across Brunswick Square, and took him
up into the great drawing-room, the windows
of which almost faced those of Mr. Gayre's
own house, and said proudly, " I have
brought an old friend to see you, Mrs.
Jubbins. I do not suppose you remember
my son Nicholas."

Did she not, poor soul ? Had not a wandering
thought gone forth to him across the
seas even on her wedding-day? — though
Heaven knows there was not a taint of disloyalty
in her thought to the best husband
that ever lived.

I am so glad you have come back to us,
Colonel Gayre," was her greeting.

Then it all returned to him — the battledore
and shuttlecock, the mad galloping up
and down stairs, the surreptitious descents
to the kitchen, the visits to the housekeeper's
room, the kisses, the quarrels, the jam, the
scolding, the delights snatched with a fearful
joy and terror from under the very eyes
of Higgs pere. The change was so complete
and so absurd, Colonel Gayre felt the corners
of his mouth twitching under the shelter of
that friendly moustache, which had so often
protected his character for gravity ; but he
managed to say what he ought to have said,
and say it well. And then mr. Jubbins

appeared, and the visit passed off pleasantly ;
and the Jubbins' children, who were supposed
by a Bloomsbury fiction, to inherit the beauty
of their mother and the virtues of their
father, were introduced, and politics, as well
as more material fare, were discussed ; and
the head of the house hoped Colonel Gayre
would never feel a stranger in it.

Then once again the years went by, and
during the course of them Mr. Jubbins
waxed richer and richer, and Mrs. Jubbins
comelier, and the Gay res got a little poorer ;
and everything seemed going on in the same
monotonous groove much as usual, when
one day in the spring of 1865, Mr. Jubbins,
returning home from the City somewhat
earlier than usual, complained of having
caught a cold and not feeling very well.

Ever after he never felt very well, and
it was during the long and painful illness
which supervened, and eventually carried
him where there is no more pain and

no more sorrow (and Mr. Nicholas Gayre
hoped no more whist), that Mrs. Jubbins
won her golden spurs as a wife.

Nursing him she lost flesh and colour,
but never cheerfulness. To the last she
took a smile with her into the sick-room ;
and when Mr. Jubbins died, it was with
his poor wasted hand clasped tight in hers.

The best woman in the world ! " said
old Mr. Gayre enthusiastically, an opinion
his son did not feel inclined to controvert.

He considered Mrs. Jubbins' conduct towards
her husband unexceptionable ; and
if she failed to interest her old playfellow,
it was rather because of some deficiency
on his part than any shortcoming on hers.

After the death there ensued more thana
nine days' wonder. With the exception
of a very small sum secured to the children
and a few legacies of no great amount,
everything was left unconditionally to the
widow.

"Literally everything," said Mr. Gayre
senior, who was executor.

She'll have the whole City of London
asking her in marriage," thought Mr.
Nicholas ; but he did not say so.

He knew nothing vexed his father to
such an extent as any reflections on the
City ; therefore, if the Lord Mayor and
Aldermen and every member of the Corporation
had come courting to Brunswick
Square, he would have refrained his tongue
from comment.

But, as a matter of fact, nobody did anything
of the sort. Mrs. Jubbins afforded
the many admirers she no doubt possessed
small chance of declaring their sentiments.

For a year she lived in the strictest seclusion,
having Mrs. Higgs, now also a
widow, resident with her, seeing no one
except a few old and intimate friends, and
mourning most deeply and unaffectedly for
the husband whose loss, as she told Mr.

Gape, she felt more deeply day by
day.

This was all as it should be ; yet at the
end of a twelvemonth, mr. Gayre decided
there is a limit even to mourning and propriety,
and that it would be a serious loss
to the world if such a woman took her
grief to nurse for ever.

It is time she began to wean it," thought
the banker. This was after the great crash
of 1866, and his attention had been
directed even more than usual to the solid
advantages conferred by a large income.
She's the very wife for Nicholas, if he
can only be brought to think so. What
is there against the match ? Nothing.
What is there in favour of it ? Everything."
And indeed so many golden reasons
seemed to point to the Jubbins-Gayre
alliance as a most desirable one for both
parties that the banker decided some step
ought to be taken, unless Nicholas meant

to permit such a prize to slip through his
careless fingers.

So entirely at length did this idea take
possession of his mind that he determined
to broach the subject to " my son
Nicholas."

It was one Saturday morning, and senior
and junior were alone in the private room
at Gayres', when the old man, without any
leading up to the question, asked,

Do you never think of getting married,
Nicholas ? "

Well, no, sir," answered Nicholas ; " at
least, for a long time past I have not.
Once in a life, surely, is enough for a man
to make a fool of himself ; " which remark
had reference to a wild romantic passion
of the speaker's youth which had come to
a disastrous conclusion.

Ah, you must forget all that," said Mr.
Gayre. " I am sure you would be a great
deal happier married. All men should

marry, more particularly men who, like yourself,
have an old name to transmit, and an
old business to bequeath. I know nothing
which would give me such pleasure as to
see you united to a good wife. You have
been such a dutiful son, Nicholas, you deserve
to meet with a woman who could
give you more love even than your old
father has done."

There was a touch of deep feeling in
Mr. Gayre's voice as he spoke ; and as
Nicholas did not know very well what to
answer, he only said,

'thank you, sir."

And there is a woman," proceeded the
banker, "who, I am sure, would make you
happy, and I think would take you if you
asked her."

Indeed ! " exclaimed his son.

"Yes, Eliza Jubbins." The plunge was
made, and Mr. Gayre felt he could go on.
A most suitable match in every respect,

Vol. i. 12

Nicholas. She is a few years younger
than yourself. She is still a very handsome
woman ; you know how she acquitted
herself as a wife. You remember
what a daughter she was. She has —
but there, I won't mix money matters
up with the business. If she had not a
penny a year, she would still be a
treasure in herself. We know all about her
since the day she was born. No after-clap
can come in that quarter ; and I believe —
I do believe — she always felt a great regard
for you."

It would be idle to state that so astute
a man as Nicholas had not known for sometime
previously whither his father's desires
were drifting. Nevertheless, this plain intimation
of what Gayres expected from
him in the way of a fresh sacrifice came
with the force of a blow.

Marry Eliza Jubbins ! — become stepfather
to the young Jubbinses ! — son-in-law to clever,

manoeuvring Mrs. Higgs ! Settle down for
the term of his natural life among the
Bloomsbury connection — go voluntarily into
the penal servitude of eating, drinking,
sleeping, thinking, visiting, with a class he
knew he could never really care for, seemed
to this man too dreadful a doom to hear
mentioned by another.

Nevertheless, he did not say " No." Long
experience of his father had taught him
the wisest policy in all family games was
to play not trumps, but the most insignificant
and inoffensive card he could find in
his hand.

One of those he threw out now.

It is early days to talk of anything
of that sort," he objected. " She has not
been a widow much more than a year,
and her tears are not dry yet."

Dry them yourself, my boy, then," recommended
Mr. Gayre, with a chuckle of
delight at finding Nicholas took his sug-

12-2

gestion so coolly. " There is no time for
winning a woman equal to that while her
eyes are still wet. Besides, I feel sure
she has a fondness for you. I am old, but
I can see ; bless you, I have not lived all
these years with my eyes shut."

That I am certain you have not, sir,"
replied Nicholas, in a tone in which respect
and a pleasant flattery were dexterously
blended. "Yet I must confess it
seems to me premature to discuss such a
matter."

Not in the least — not in the least.
Jubbins has been dead over a twelvemonth."
said the banker, practically " going into
figures."

"Still — to say nothing of my own objections
— I do not think Mrs. Jubbins would
feel grateful if she knew we were already
disposing of her in marriage."

There may be something in what you
remark," agreed Mr. Gayre. " Spite of

her excellent sense, Eliza was always a little
given to sentimentality. We'll speak no
more about the affair, then, for the present ;
only, Nicholas, you will promise me to
think about it."

Yes, I will do that, on the condition
that no word is dropped to Mrs. Jubbins.
I must feel myself quite free ; for, to be
quite plain, I do not believe I shall ever
marry."

"That is simply nonsense, my son.
You owe something to your family. You
are almost the last of the Gayres. John
has no sons ; we have not even a distant
relation of our own name. If you do not
marry, and have children, who is to carry
on the business ? "

Mr. Nicholas made no reply to a question
his father evidently considered crushing"
; but he thought two things — one, that
the future might safely be left to look
after its own affairs ; and another, that if

SUSAN Drummond.

things went on in Lombard Street as they
were going, at the end of another thirty
years they would be no business called
Gayres' to carry on.

WILL HE PROPOSE?

'T was to the house in Brunswick
Square, which had for years been
tenanted by the Jubbins', that Mr. Gayre
repaired on the afternoon following his
visit to .Chislehurst. Opinion in Bloomsbury
was divided as to whether the banker
had proposed to the widow and been
rejected, or was still making up his mind
to put the momentous question.

Concerning the first alternative, Mrs.
Jubbins could have enlightened her friends ;
but with regard to the second it was impossible
for her to say, even mentally,
aught save "I hope and I fear." There
were days when she hoped, and there were

days when she feared ; yet as months and
years gilded away, she grew very sick with
hope deferred." She believed the man,
the only man she had ever truly loved with
the one love of a woman's heart, would
some day ask her to be his wife ; nevertheless,
she did not quite understand him;
surely that wound, which had changed the
frank, brilliant, charming youth into a still
more interesting, if less comprehensible,
man, ought to have been healed long
ago ?

Mrs. Jubbins had some reason for believing
he meant to marry her. Old Mr. Gayre,
keeping to the letter of his promise, if not
to the spirit, confided to Mrs. Higgs that
my son Nicholas was thinking seriously
of her daughter, and he, Mr. Gayre, should
feel glad if the young man proposed, and
Mrs. Jubbins accepted him." To Mrs.
Higgs, the idea of her daughter wedding
into the Gayres seemed a thing almost too

good to realise, and in her exultation at
the suggestion she forgot to maintain that
reserve Mr. Gayre had stipulated on. So
Eliza was given to understand Nicholas
had intimated he meant to " think of her : "
and Nicholas, like his father, fulfilling the
mere letter of his promise, did for a whole
year think of his old playfellow with an
ever-increasing dislike towards the connection.
He did not want directly to cross
his parent's wishes, but he felt to make
Eliza Jubbins his wife would be to settle
his own future in an utterly distasteful
manner.

He liked the lady well enough — but
liking is not love — and though he knew
her money would be of use, both to
himself and the bank, those thousands,
made out of oil, repelled rather than attracted
him. Then there were the juvenile
Jubbins — commonplace in mind and features,
spoiled, delicate, antagonistic, to his perhaps

over-fastidious taste. Though the
Bloomsbury world, or that other world quite
away from Bloomsbury, with which he
still kept up a friendly intercourse, did
not suspect the fact, he had long outlived
the old attachment Mrs. Higgs and her
daughter often talked about with bated
breath.

He was single, not from any actual
objection to the married state, or fancy
for one especial fair, but simply because
no woman calculated greatly to delight so
stern and cynical a judge of the sex had
crossed his path. Possibly he was looking
for perfection. If so, he had certainly as
yet not found it. Upon the other hand,
seeing that mediocrity and common-place
virtues are often supposed to form a very
good embodiment of a higher ideal, it
seemed really hard he could not please his
father and delight Mrs. Higgs, and return
Mrs. Jubbins' attachment and reward her

constancy ; but all this appeared to Mr.
Gayre impossible. The more he thought
the matter over, the longer he contemplated
himself hedged in by City notions, surrounded
by a mere moneyed cheque, tied
to the apron-strings of Bloomsbury gentility
— travelling life's road in company
with the men he had to meet in business,
and acting the part of a model stepfather
to the Jubbins' brood — the more truly he
felt that, putting all question of romance,
or love, or the glamour which does encircle
some women, totally aside, such a marriage
was, for him, out of the question.

At the end of a year from the time his
father first broached the subject he was
still " thinking the matter over ; " after
which period all necessity for him to think
about it ceased — his father died.

For six months after that event, Mr.
Nicholas Gayre, a wanderer here and there,
debated what he should do with his life ;

then all in a hurry he made up his mind ;
sold the lease of the Brunswick Square
house, took another in Upper Wimpole
Street, removed the furniture, books, plate,
and china left to him under his father's
will, and, with the help of three old servants,
soon found himself much more at
home than had ever been the case since
he left the army and took to banking.

It was about this time Mrs. Jubbins'
hopes revived. During the period when,
according to his father's desire, he had
been thinking of the widow as his future
wife, Mr. Nicholas Gayre's manners became
quite unconsciously cold and distant to
the constant Eliza. Now no longer bound
by his father's old-world notions ; free from
the Bloomsbury servitude, wherein he had
duly fulfilled his term ; free to think and
talk of other things besides money, and
stocks, and investments, and commercial
imprudence, and mercantile success ; free.

further, to marry whom he chose, or no
one at all, Mr. Gayre grew quite amiable,
and fell easily back into the familiar, though
not close, intimacy which had marked his
intercourse with the Jubbins family after
his return from soldiering.

As a matter of course, the good-looking
Eliza took it for granted he would step
into his father's place as adviser-inches
concerning the Jubbins property.

The title-deeds, the scrip of all sorts,
the • shares, the trade secrets, were under
lock and key in Gayres' strong-room. At
Gayres' Mrs. Jubbins continued the account
her husband formerly kept there. Had he
felt curious about the matter, Mr. Nicholas
Gayre might have ascertained almost to a
penny what she spent, and how she spent
it. There was nothing which pleased the
lady so much as getting into a muddle,
and being compelled to ask Mr. Gayre to
help her out of it.

She made mountains of mole-hills in order
to write notes to him, and, herself a most
excellent manager and capital Avoman of
business, tried to pass for one of the most
incompetent of her sex. Mrs. Higgs died,
and then, of course, Mrs. Jubbins needed
advice more than ever. Two of her young
people, spite of money and doctors and
care, and everything which could be thought
of to restore them to health, drooped and
died. All these events retarded Mr. Gayre's
proposal, no doubt ; still, there were times
when Mrs. Jubbins doubted whether he
ever meant to propose. Had she known
as much of the world as Nicholas, she
would have understood friendliness is the
worst possible symptom where a man's
heart is concerned. Mr. Gayre had as
much intention of proposing for one of
the princesses as for the widow. Preposterous
as the idea seemed in his father's
life-time, it seemed trebly preposterous now.

He did not exactly know what lie expected,
though indeed he guessed ; but he had
long before made up his own mind that,
so far as he was concerned, Mrs. Jubbins
should remain sirs. Jubbins till the end
of the chapter.

A longer interval than usual had elapsed
without his seeing her, when he turned his
steps in the direction of Brunswick Square.
As he approached the familiar door Mr.
Grayre surveyed Mrs. Jubbins' residence with
an amount of interest and curiosity he had
never before experienced, and he certainly
felt a sensation of pleasure at the sight of
windows clear as whiting and chamois and
that other commodity, better than either,
vulgarly called "elbow-grease," could make
them, enamelled boxes filled with flowers
on the sills, curtains white as the driven
snow and of the best quality money could
buy, spotless steps, polished knocker, and
all those little et-ceteras which point to

money, good servants, and a capable
mistress.

"It is not Onslow Square, certainly,"
thought Mr. Gayre, " but we will see what
we can do with it."

Now, this is really kind of you ! "
exclaimed Mrs. Jubbins — a handsome and
well-preserved woman on the right side of
forty — stretching out a white plump hand
in greeting. "You see, I am still unable to
move," she added, with a laugh which
showed an exceedingly good set of teeth,
pointing as she spoke to a stool over which
a couvre-pieds was thrown, in the modeste
manner possible. "Why, it is quite an age
since you have been here !"

"Yes, indeed," he answered, in his suave
decisive manner — " almost three months.
I fear you have been suffering much
anxiety. Why did you not send for me
sooner ? "

Well," she began to explain — " well — "

Then, after a pause, " I know you must
have so many engagements."

None," he answered, '• believe me, that
could ever keep me absent if you said
you needed my poor services."

Mrs. Jubbins had been a bold child, but
she was not a forward woman. Quite the
contrary. Supposing she could have won
Mr. Gayre by saying, " Will you marry
me ?" he must have remained union forever,
and for this reason she did not take
advantage of his pretty speech, but merely
inclined her sleek head in acknowledgment,
as she asked,

"Have you been able to go to Chislehurst?"


"Yes," he said. "And The Warren is a
most lovely place."

Which you would advise me to take ?"

If you really wish to go out of town
for the summer, certainly."

Tell me all about it, please ;" and the

Vol. i. 13

Jubbins relict leaned back on the sofa,
crossed her hands, and closed her eyes.

She was worth — heavens, ladies, how
much was she not worth ? — and could
consequently, even in the concentrated
presence of Gayre, Delone, Eyles, and Co.,
lean back, cross her hands, and close her
eyes to any extent she liked.

Mr. Gayre looked at her not without approval
— looked at her comely face, her
broad capable forehead, her straight well-defined
brows, her wealth of hair — not
combed over frizettes, a fashion then still
much in favour, but taken straight off her
face to the back of a shapely, if somewhat
large head, and there wound round and
round in great plaits almost too thick and
long even for the eye of faith.

Such hair — such splendid hair — as Mrs.
Jubbins possessed, quite of her own and
altogether without purchase, belongs to
few women.

Mr. Gayre knew it to be perfectly
natural. He had been well acquainted
with it in his youth, and in his experienced
middle age he could have detected a single
false lock ; but there was nothing false
about Mrs. Jubbins. All she had was as
genuine as her money, as the Spanish
mahogany furniture which had belonged to
her husband's grandfather.

The Warren," proceeded Mr. Gayre, " is
simply charming. A cottage in a wood ;
but such a cottage, and such a wood!
Lord Flint, it seems, bought about twenty
acres covered with trees, cleared a space
on the top of the hill, and built a summer
residence for his bride. Shortly afterwards
he succeeded to the earldom ; but still
spent some portion of each year at the
cottage, laying money out freely on the
house and grounds. He died last summer ;
and as the widow does not now like the
place — whether she liked it when her

13-2

husband was living, I cannot say — she
wants to let it ; so there the house, fully
furnished, stands empty for you to walk
into, if you like."

At the mention of a lord, Mrs. Jubbins,
who dearly loved nobility, old or new,
opened her eyes and assumed an upright
attitude.

A place of that sort would be too
grand and fine for me," she objected, in the
tone of one who wished to be contradicted.

"It is not at all grand," answered Mr.
Gayre, " and the furniture is not fine. I
daresay it cost a considerable sum of
money ; but really everything looks as
simple and homely as possible." And then
he went on to talk of the gardens, and
grounds, and terraces, and woods, finishing
by remarking, " Though quite close to
London, one might be a hundred miles
away from town, the air is so pure and
the silence so utter."

For a few moments Mrs. Jubbins made
no reply. Then she said, with a delighted
little laugh,

Only fancy me having in the house of
a real lord — not a lord mayor, but a
peer !"

It is a very nice house for any one
to live in," observed ]mr. Gayre, wondering,
if she rented the residence, how often in
the course of a month she would mention
Lord Font, and the Earl of Merioneth,
and her ladyship the Countess.

"Who would believe it!" exclaimed sirs.
Jubbins. "And yet, do you know, I think
I must have been dreaming of something
of this sort. I have had the strangest
thoughts lately. Whether it is this lovely
weather following the long dreary winter,
or being kept a prisoner by my ankle, or
what, I am sure I cannot tell ; but often
of late I have found myself wondering
whether I was doing right in staying so

much at home, and spending so little
money, and making no new acquaintances,
and continuing the same round from year's
end to year's end, as though Brunswick
Square were the world, and no other place
on the face of the earth existed except
Bloomsbury."

Mr. Gayre smiled, and hazarded the remark
that neither of them ought to
speak against Bloomsbury.

"No, that is quite true," agreed the
lady ; " but yet, you see, you have gone
west, and everybody else seems going
west, or buying places out of town,
except myself. The Browns have taken
a house in Dorchester Terrace, the Jones
have gone to Bournemouth."

"And the Eobinsons no doubt will follow
suit," suggested Mr. Gayre, forgetful
that Mrs. Jubbins' circle of friends did
include a family of that name.

"Yes, Mr. Robinson is building himself

quite a mansion down at ,
and they expect to be able to
move in August. I tell her she won't
like it — that there is no place on the
Thames to equal London ; but they all
seem eager to go ; after a time there will
be nobody left in Bloomsbury but me ; "
and Mrs, Jubbins sighed plaintively.

"You will not be left if you take the
Warren," said Mr. Gayre.

"I can't stay at The Warren for ever,"
she answered ; "I shall have to come back
here some day, unless — "

"Unless what?" asked Mr. Gayre.

Unless I sell the lease of this house,
and remove altogether. I really think 1
ought to make some change. The children
are growing up, and ought to be in a
neighbourhood where they could form
pleasant acquaintances. Bloomsbury is all
well enough for elderly persons ; and the
tradespeople are very good ; I don't think

you could get better meat anywhere than
Grist supplies ; and though Ida is not
strong, I fancy that is only natural
delicacy, and has nothing to do with the
air. But still—"

If I were you," interrupted Mr. Gayre,
who always waxed impatient under details
that had seemed both instructive and
agreeable to his father, " I should take
this Chislehurst place for a year ; at the
end of that time you could decide
whether it would be best to return here,
or remain on there, or buy a house at
the West End. What lovely flowers ! How
they transform this dear old room ! It
looks quite gay and bright — ."

They make a dreadful litter," remarked
Mrs. Jubbins, who was a very Martha in
household details, though to hear her talk
at times any one might have supposed
Mrs. Hemans took a healthy and lively
view of life in comparison with the

buxom Eliza — " but they certainly do light
up a house. The day before I sprained
my ankle I went over to Dorchester Terrace,
and, dear me, I thought what a
difference between the West End and
Bloomsbury ! When I came back our
square seemed quite dingy ; so I told
Hopkins to arrange with some nurseryman
to keep me supplied with plants. At first
it did seem a dreadful waste of money,
and I could not help wondering what
your poor father would have said to such
extravagance ; but there, the world goes
on, and one can't stand still and be left
all behind, can one ? "

Gracious Heavens ! " considered Mr.
Gayre, " if I had married her I should
have been compelled to listen to this
sort of thing all the days of my life ; "
then he said aloud, " Talking of my father,
I want you to grant me a favour ; will
you?^'

Certainly ; need you ask ? What is
it ? " And then Mrs. Jubbins paused abruptly,
as the notion occurred to her
that perhaps the long-deferred hour was
at last on the point of striking.

But Mr. Gayre's next words dispelled
the illusion.

You remember Margaret ? "

Hot and swift the tell-tale blood rushed
up into Mrs. Jubbins' face, and as she
said, " Yes, is she in London ? " a duller,
but not less painful, colour mantled Mr.
Gayre's brow.

"I do not suppose Margaret will ever
come to London," he answered ; " but her
daughter is here, and I should consider
it a great kindness if you would pay the
girl a little attention. You l^now — or possibly
you do not know — what a miserable,
hopeless, irreclaimable sinner the father is.
His own relations have cut him adrift :
mine will have nothing to do with him ;

consequently, through no fault of her own,
my niece is, by both sides of the house, .
left out in the cold. I should like her
to be intimate with a good sensible woman
such as you are ; but perhaps I am 
too much."

"Too much! I shall be enchanted todo
anything in my power for Margaret's
daughter. Is she like her mother, poor
dear Margaret ? "

"My sister was pretty," answered Mr.
Gayre, with a feeling of deep gratitude
swelling in his heart for the friendly
warmth of Mrs. Jubbins' manner. " My
niece is beautiful. Her face does not
seem so sweet to me as Margaret's ; but
most persons would admire it far more.
She is, in fact, so beautiful, so lovely,
and placed in such a painful and exceptional
position, that I shall not know
a moment's peace till she is suitably
married."

Dear, dear ! " exclaimed Mrs. Jubbins ;
I would go to her this moment if it
were not for this tiresome ankle. Could
she not come to me, though, Mr. Gayre?
I am such an old friend of your family,
she might dispense with ceremony, and let
us make acquaintance at once. If she
spent a few days here, for instance, and
then supposing I were to take Lady Merits
house, that would make a little
change for her."

You are the kindest person in the
world," said Mr. Gayre, with conviction.

No, indeed I am not ; only think,
you know, if it were one of my own
daughters. I am sure I quite long to seethe
dear girl. Wliat a thing for poor
Margaret to be parted from her only
chid ! "

"My niece believes her mother is dead,
and there seems to me no necessity to
enlighten her."

Ah ! that makes it all the worse.
When I remember — when I look back,
and recall her lovely face framed in those
sunny curls — "

"Looking back is worse than useless,"
interrupted Mr. Gayre, speaking hoarsely.
We cannot undo the past ; the best
plan is to act as prudently as possible in
the present. That is why I ask your
help — why I want you to look a little
after the child of my unhappy sister."

"And that I will," declared Mrs. Gubbins,
heartily, " It will be like having a
daughter given to me in the place of
my darling Clara ; a daughter to think
and plan for and love. How I long to
see her ! When do you think she can
come here ? Will you bring her? — or
shall I send a fly and Hopkins? You
know he really is a most superior and
respectable person."

This time Mr. Gayre forgot to smile

at Mrs. Jubbins' singular way of putting
things.

I will arrange the visit with my niece,"
he said, " and give you due notice when
you may expect to see us. I am a bad
hand at returning thanks; but I feel your
kindness more than I can express."

It is nothing," she answered vehemently,
nothing at all ; it is I who am obliged. All
my life I have been receiving favours from
your family, and doing nothing in return.
You have made me so very happy. I wonder
if you would mind my consulting you concerning
another little matter I could not
avoid thinking about while tied to this
sofa?"

"I am all attention," Mr. Gayre declared.
What is this matter ? Are you thinking of
setting up a carriage ? "

"Well, you must be a wizard!" exclaimed
Mrs. Jubbins. " Do you know, often lately
I have been wondering whether my poor

husband and your dear father would think
a single brougham and a very plain livery
too great an extravagance. You see things
have changed so much during the course
of the last few years. There was a time
when all one's friends lived close at hand;
but now one must have a fly to pay visits ;
and really a carriage and coachman of one's
own would not cost so very much more."

"My dear Mrs. Jubbins," said Mr. Gayre,
"you talk as if you had to economise upon
five hundred a year instead of being obliged
to starve on fifteen thousand."

Yes," she answered ; " but there are the
children, and I do so want to be a faithful
steward, Mr. Gayre, and justify the trust reposed
in me. Yet there are two sides to the
question, I am sure. Our fathers moved with
their times, and, as a mother, I ought to move
with mine ; and that brings me to what I
wished to say — not about the carriage, it can
wait ; but — '.'

Yes ? " said Mr. Gayre, interrogatively.
"You must promise not to laugh at

me."

I am very sure I shall not laugh at what
you say."

"Well, then I have been thinking most
seriously whether, if I take a house out of
town — and the doctor says I must — it would
not be a good opportunity for changing my

name."

/ leg your pardon ! "

No italics could indicate the astonishment
expressed in Mr. Gayre's tone.

Are you thinking of marrying again ? "
he went on — severely, as the widow imagined,
but really in a mere maze of bewilderment.

"No — no," she said, hurriedly. "It is
not likely I shall ever marry again -I am
certain I never shall ; but I cannot blind
myself to the fact that the name of Jubbins
is in many ways a bar socially. Put it to
yourself, Mr. Gayre — Jubbins ! Awful ! All

the years I have borne it have never reconciled
me to the name. Higgs was not beautiful,
but Jubbins is worse."

' A rose by any other name would smell
as sweet,' " quoted Mr. Gayre, resolutely refraining
even from smiling.

"Not if it was called Jubbins," answered
the lady almost tearfully.

Yes, it would," persisted the banker ;
but whether or no, there are for the present,
at all events, good and sufficient reasons
why your late husband's known and honest
name should be preserved. As you are
aware, the formulae for making those wonderful
oils lie at our bank. When your sons
come of age they will want to make use of
them. The name is associated with the product.
It is of pecuniary value. The De
Yere Oil, for example, would not command
any market. I have always admired many
traits in your character, but none more than
your excellent feeling. Give that fair play

Vol. i. 14

now. Just think what the name you bear
has done for you."

I know — I know."

And do consider that, although you have
an undoubted right at any moment to change
your own name by marriage, you really have
no right to change the name of jour children."


Mr. Gayre, how good and clever you
are ! How clear you make everything ! "

"And speaking for myself," added the
banker, warming to the subject, " I can only
say that, though I liked ]\Iiss Higgs much,
I like Mrs. Jubbins more."

You are kind ! " exclaimed the widow,
while the colour once more fluttered in her
face, and, spite of her declaration that she
would never marry again, she began to consider
such an event not quite impossible.
What, must you go ? Well, you have given
me a great deal of your valuable time, and I
am very grateful to you."

She could not rise on account of that
troublesome ankle, and, as Mr. Gay re held
her hand while he spoke some words of
thanks, he was obliged to stoop a little, and
unconsciously perhaps — fell into an almost
tender attitude.

Mrs. Jubbins' heart beat so fast and so
loud, she felt afraid he would hear it. The
long-expected declaration must surely be
hovering on his lips !

That was a supreme moment. Never
before had he retained her hand so long ;
on the contrary, he had ever previously held
it as short a time as possible. Never had he
before regarded her with a look of such admiration;
never had his lone been so low,
or his words so earnest, or —

Just then a tremendous double knock — prolonged,
ear-splitting, infuriating — resounded
through the house. Was ever knock before
so unexpected and so loud ? Mrs. Jubbins
gave a start, which almost threw her oH" the

14—2

sofa. Mr. Gayre dropped her hand as if he
had been shot.

And, after all, it was no one coming up ;
only Mrs. Robinson's card, and kind inquiries
after dear Mrs. Jubbins' ankle. Mr. Gayre
saw that card lying on a salver as he passed
out, excellently contented with his afternoon's
work, but, upon the whole, not quite so well
satisfied with himself.

FATHER, DAUGHTER, Uncle.

your Father at home, Margaret ? "
It was Mr. Gayre who asked this
question. He had gone straight from Brunswick
Square to North Bank, debating that
matter of his own conduct all the way.

When he left the City he fully intended
to have " a few words " with his niece ; but
he did not feel his own hands quite clean
enough at the minute to cast stones at her,
and accordingly would have deferred the
operation till a more convenient season but
for the action taken by the young lady
herself.

Yes ; papa has not gone out yet," she
said, in answer to his inquiry. " I will tell

him you are here ;" and she left the room,
but, changing her mind, returned almost immediately,
and, closing the door, observed,
with a confusion which for once was not
feigned,

I want to say something to you, uncle."

Say on then, my niece," he returned.

But she hesitated, looking at him piteously
for help, till at last he felt compelled to ask,

"Well, what is it?"

Can't you guess ? "

Whether I can or not, I decline to do
anything of the sort. Come, say what you
have got to say, and let us be done with
the matter."

"It is — about — Susan Drummond."

"Yes; what about her?"

For one moment Miss Chelston doubted
whether he remembered, and lamented her
own folly in not letting a sleeping dog lie ;
but the next she felt sure he could not
have forgotten, and said.

"You must have thought it so odd that
I did not tell papa I had seen her."

Did I ? Xo, I do not think I did. 1
'yonder now why you told him such an
untruth ; but I presume you had some
reason, good or bad, for not wishing him
to know."

"I was wrong," she confessed, in a tone
of the deepest humility ; " but indeed I
acted from the very best motives."

It would be interesting to know what
those motives were ; but I suppose you
won't tell me."

yes, indeed — indeed I will ; I have
been longing to tell you. Susan and I are
the oldest and dearest of friends — I may
say ■ she is the only friend I have ni all
the wide world. I understand her perfectly :
and the reason I did not want papa to suspect
she was in London — "

Out with it," advised Mr. Gayre.

"Well, you see, at the time I thought

things would be different here. Papa told
me we should have a great deal of company,
and that I would be asked out to
parties and — and — all that sort of thing;
and I knew, since her uncle's death, poor
dear Susan could not afford to dress — as —
as people have to dress if they go into
society ; and I thought asking her to come
to us would only vex and place her in a
false position."

"Anything else?" suggested Mr. Gayre.

Yes ; but you must not be vexed with
me. I do hate riding, and I was sure papa
would be wanting me to go out with Susan;
and I dare not — 0, I dare not ! That
horse you so much admired almost frightened
me to death."

"You are quite sure you have nothing
more to tell me ? " said Mr. Gayre, as she
came to a full stop.

Quite sure — quite sure, indeed."

Mr. Gayre looked her over with an

amused smile. She did not lift her eyes to
his, but stood With them cast penitently
downwards, waiting for any comments he
might have to make.

I think," he began at last, " there is
some truth in what you have just been
saying, but I fancy there is not much.
Now let me give you a little advice. Don't
try to hoodwink me. In the first place,
it is a mere waste of time ; and in the
second, you will find it to your advantage
to work with, instead of against, me. All
I desire is your good. You are placed
in a most difficult and exceptional position,
and you have not so many friends you
can afford to quarrel with any of them,
more especially a girl like Miss Drummond."


"Quarrel, uncle! I wouldn't quarrel with
Susan for all the world ; but how could
I know living in London would turn out
so different from what I expected — so

miserable ? " ended Miss Chelston, with a
gasping sob.

"You expected, perhaps, to be presented
at Court?" hinted Mr. Gayre, with
bitter irony.

"I did not think it was at all impossible,"
she answered.

"And what do you think now?" he
asked.

That I have been very silly ; and 0,
it's all such a dreadful disappointment ! "
and, covering her face with her hands,
she left the room fairly in tears.

"It is hard on the girl," thought Mr.
Gayre, " and why should I have expected
straightforwardness from her ? The father
does not know the meaning of the word ;
the mother was a poor weak timid fool ;
and I — well, my friend, I don't consider
you have much reason to be proud of
yourself."

So you have sent Peggy off crying,"

said the Baronet cheerfully, opening the
door at this juncture; "I am very glad
of it. Hope you gave her a good scolding.
As I told her yesterday — for I had
an appointment after I got back from
Enfield the other day, and was not home
till long after she had gone to bed — as
I told her, there is nothing in the world
I detest like a falsehood. Let a man ora
woman only speak the truth, and I
do not much care how bad he or she
may be in other respects, though no one
who does speak the truth can be very
bad."

"I think we may let the affair rest
now," remarked Mr. Gayre. "More particularly
as Miss Drummond ought never
to know Margaret's silence was other
than a piece of carelessness. It will bea
great matter for your daughter to have
so nice a friend staying with her. Have
you settled when she is to come ? "

Yes. Peg wrote her as pretty a note
yesterday as you'd wish to read. 0, she
was humble enough, 1 can tell you. It's
not often I do come the stern parent
business, but I did speak out. I said,
If you think because Susan has only
got a poor couple of thousand pounds
she is not as welcome to my house as
though she had millions, you are very
much mistaken, that's all. I'm sorely afraid,
Peggy," I went on, " you're an arrant
little snob ; and you don't inherit that
failing from me any more than your want
of candour. No one can say I ever held
myself aloof from any man because he
was not rich or well-born. What's the
use of being well-born if one can't shake
hands with a beggar ? No, that girl of
mine wants taking down. She does think
so confoundedly much of herself."

It seems to me she has been taken
down a great deal," observed Mr. Gayre.

She evidently came to London expecting
to carry all before her ; and, spite of
your agreeable manners and large circle
of desirable acquaintances, she finds herself
alone in a great city, without a soul
to speak to. However," added Mr. Gayre
hurriedly, to prevent his brother-in-law
once again taking up his parable, " I
have at last succeeded in getting her one
invitation, which I hope will lead to more.
As we can't induce rank to notice her,
I determined to try money. Mrs. Jubbins
of Brunswick Square, a lady I have known
all my life, will be delighted to do anything
and everything she can for Margaret."

Come, that's encouraging," exclaimed
the Baronet, "though Jubbins does not
exactly seem a name one would find in
Burke, and Brunswick Square is a little
—eh?"

If you mean that it is not Belgravia,.
you are right ! but as no duchess has

rushed forward to chaperone your daughter,
it may be prudent to try and make the
best of rich respectability."

Why, my dear fellow, how you talk !
Any one, to hear the way you go on,
might imagine I was particular ! Thank
God, I am no such thing ! I do not
worship rank or money. And so your
friends are very rich. What is the husband?"


I don't know what he may be at
present ; he is dead ; he was a most excellent
person when living."

Widow ! Bless me, why don't you
make up to her, Gayre ? "

"Well, there are several reasons. One,
however, may seem sufficient. She says
she is not going to marry again."

Pooh ! " commented Sir Geoffrey, with
an airy incredulity.

At all events, she has let seven years
pass without making a second choice."

The right man has not asked her,"
remarked the Baronet, with decision ; and
he shook his head with such emphasis
that Mr. Gayre knew he was thinking if
his wife " gave him a chance," and the
fortune proved sufficient, he himself woukl
attempt Mrs. Jubbins' conversion, and with
brilliant success.

She is a truly admirable woman in
every relation of life," said Mr. Gayre.

"I am thankful to hear it — most
thankful," answered Sir Geoffrey, solemnly.
What a fortunate fellow you are, Gayre,
not to be saddled with the responsibility
of a daughter! I declare the future of
mine is getting to be a nightmare to me.
What on earth would become of poor
Peggy if I died?"

It is extremely difficult to say,"
observed Mr. Gayre, too wise to be
entrapped into any promise by his simple
brother-in-law.

And we must all die," pursued the
Baronet, tentatively.

So it is said ; but there is no rule
without an exception, and you may prove
that exception."

Sir Geoffrey digested this remark, and,
deciding he would not make much out of
Mr. Gayre on such a tack, said, in a frank
sort of manner, as if the idea had only just
occurred to him,

"I really don't know that I should object
to a City man as a husband for my girl if
he could insure her a proper establishment."

It is extremely good and wise of you
to say so."

You see I can give her no fortune."

And, as a rule, money expects money
nowadays."

"Upon the other hand," proceeded Sir
Geoffrey, " she is my daughter."

So she is ; that is a great advantage,"
said Mr. Gayre.

For a moment it occurred to the Baronet
that his brother-in-law was openly gibing at
him ; but looking sharply up, he could see
no hint of laughter in the calm, cold face.

"And a title must always carry a certain
weight," he ventured.

"But your daughter has no title, and as
for yours — knights and baronets have in
the City become somewhat of drugs in the
market. What can Margaret, without a
penny of dowry, do for any man ? You
have no property left for him to talk
about. Your daughter has no social standing
; she possesses the manners of a gentlewoman,
I admit, and is extremely good-looking.
Nevertheless — "

For Heaven's sake, Gayre, don't make
me more wretched than I am ! It was my
misfortune, not my fault, I did not marry
into my own rank of life, in which case
my relations must have seen to the girl.
But as matters stand — "

Vol. i. 15

I think, Sir Geoffrey, I will wish you
good afternoon,' " interposed Mr. Ga3n:-e,
rising in hot wrath, and striding across the
small room to the door, with the almost
forgotten military gait.

But ere he reached it, Sir Geoffrey caught
him.

My dear, dear Gayre — " he began : and
then, as his dear Gayre wrenched himself
from his detaining grasp, and reached the
hall, the Baronet, once again seizing his
sleeve, went on, " You have misunderstood
me, quite."

Mr. Gayre, however, was not so easily toto
be appeased. Standing in the middle of
the gravelled path, sheltered from the
vulgar gaze by that high wall already
mentioned, he delivered his parable. He
rehearsed the righteous doings of the
Gayres, and the sins of Sir Geoffrey.

Good God ! " he cried, and certainly,
as a rule, Mr. Gayre was no profane

swearer, " if my father had Hkecl he could
have given you seven years' penal servitude
over that matter of my sister's settlement.
But he refrained ; and yet now you
talk as if you had made a mesalliance by
entering a family able to trace a longer
pedigree than your own."

Through a little pantry-window, almost
screened from the sight of visitors by a
goodly arbor vice. Lavender watched the
progress of this wordy war, saw Mr. Gayre's
impatient and angry movement, and his
master's deprecating gestures, and the
humble and almost cringing servility of
his manner.

Sir Geoffrey's gone and done it now,"
he considered. " Ah ! I knew it was too
good to last. He'll be off in a minute
more, and I suppose we'll never set eyes
on him here again."

And indeed departure seemed imminent.
Mr. Gayre had his hand on the lock of

15—2

the gate, and, spite of Sir Geoffrey's efforts
to detain him, was evidently bent on
making his way into the road ; but just
as he had turned the handle, and was on
the eve of leaving Mr. Moreby's borrowed
villa for ever, Margaret, her eyes still a
little red, but her dress as usual perfect —
Margaret, with one rose in her hair and
another in her girdle, looking fair and
fresh, and pathetically humble, came round
the end of the house, and exclaiming, "
uncle ! you won't go without a cup of tea,"
changed her own destiny as well as that
of others.

"You can't refuse A^?%" remarked Sir
Geoffrey sotto voce. " Upon my soul and
honour, you took quite a wrong meaning
out of what I said ; and hang it, whatever
I may be, she's your sister's child."

Have you two been quarrelling ? " asked
Miss Chelston, in quick alarm. "Don't do
that, don't — just, too, when I had made up

my mind to be so good and nice and
sweet to you both and everybody. Uncle,
you mustn't mind papa. Eeally he was
quite unpleasant to me yesterday. Papa,
uncle, is in a bad humour : he scolded me
half-an-hour ago till I had to go upstairs
and have a good cry by myseK. Xow
come in to tea, both of you," she finished,
with a pretty, imperious, and yet caressing
air which became her wonderfully, and
caused Mr. Gayre to consider, " After all,
something may be made of her."

Come," she repeated, taking Mr. Gayre's
arm and leading him towards the house ;
and you may follow us, you bad man,"
she went on, addressing her father, who,
for answer, put his fingers within the bit
of black velvet she wore round her neck
and gave it a twist.

Father and daughter did not exactly pull
together, yet still, upon the whole, they
understood each other pretty well.

Though the tea was lukewarm and extremely
bad Mr. Gayre swallowed one cup,
exactly as he would have with some wild
Indian smoked a pipe of peace. Sir Geoffrey
refrained from partaking of the beverage
offered for delectation, remarking his " liver
wouldn't stand it," which, considering v\'hat
he forced his liver to stand, seemed on the
part of that organ an extraordinary act of
rebellion ; but he was brood enough to £^o
into the dining-room, and prepare a brew
for himself that did not err on the side of
weakness. This he drank a good deal faster
than Mr. Gayre did his tea, while he drank
communicating the good news of Mrs.
Jubbins' invitation to his daughter, telling
that young person she could never sufficiently
prove her gratitude to the best of
uncles, and, during the course of the conversation
which ensued, artlessly inducing
his brother-in-law to state many acts in
connection with the state of the Jubbins'

finances he had not thought of imparting
previously.

By Jove, what a chance ! " considered
the Baronet ; and then he proceeded to
think, "if her ladyship would only be kind
enough to quit a world she never really
adorned, I'd have a try for that quarter
of a million — buried in the earth, as one
may say — and I'd get it, or else know the
reason why."

Which only proves that even baronets
may be liable to error. Sir Geoffrey
thoroughly understood the weakness of
human nature, but most certainly he failed
to estimate its strength.

SUSAlf.

Seated in his library — a room which,
^^^ in a bachelor's establishment, ever
seems the pleasantness and most comfortable
in the house — ^Mr. Gayre, on the evening of
that same day when he fought Sir Geoffrey
on his own ground, and felt perhaps,
ashamed conscious of having led Mrs.
Jubbins astray, or at least allowed her to
stray, permitted his own soul the luxury of
a day dream. During the course of his
life he had not indulged in many ; and now
and then a doubt would intrude as to
whether anything could come of this vision,
or if it would end like the others in grief and
humiliation and disappointment. But in that

quiet twilight hour doubt seemed exorcised.
After all, why should happiness not be his?
If in some things he had failed, in others
he had succeeded ; in no respect could hebe
accounted an unfortunate man. The
stars in their courses had not fought against
him as they did against Sisera. ''I ought
to have no quarrel with Fate," he thought,
for Fate has done a great deal for me ;
and, perhaps," he went on, contemplating
his air-castle with an eye of faith, '* she has
been keeping the great blessing of a good
pure wife for the last."

Dreams, fair dreams ! Were they only,
after all, to be dreams? Was his day to
end in darkness, illumined by the golden
beams of a mutual love? Was life to hold
nothing for him of the beauty and the
glamour which only a woman can shed over
it ? " Ah, no ! " he murmured ; and through
the gloom it seemed to him that a figure,
clad all in white, came gliding to his side ;

that a delicate hand lay clasped m his ; that
a pair of tender brown eyes looked wistfully
in his face ; that a soft touch smoothed
the coming wrinkles from his brow ; and that
at last, tremblingly, he clasped to his heart
the wife he had Awaited through the long
lonely years to meet.

Already he felt as if he must have
known her always. They were strangers
no more. He heard her speak, and her voice
sounded familiar to him. She smiled, and
the waters of his soul reflected back the
pleasant sunshine.

Had they, in some former and happier
state of existence, wandered side by side
through flower-decked meads and winding
leafy lanes, it could not have seemed more
natural to him than it did to find himself
pacing the never before trodden fields of
Enfield Highway, in which the mowers were
busy with their scythes, filling the air with
the delicious perfume of recently-cut grass.

Her little tricks of manner and speech and
look and movement struck bim with no
sense of novelty.

I must have been acquainted with Susan
Drummond the whole of my life," he
decided ; " that is to say, for a good many
years before she was born." Her very name
sounded to him accustomed; homelike seemed
its simple melody. Susan — Susan — Susan —
Susan Drummond, with her fair honest face ;
with her hair, which was neither brown nor
yellow nor red, but a marvellous mixture
of all three ; with her exquisite complexion
and sweet tender mouth — he recalled them
all ; and yet each individual and to be particularised
beauty faded into nothingness
beside the intangible and indefinable charm
which had its source no man could tell
where.

Had she been smitten with smallpox, or
lost a limb, or become suddenly old, Susan
would have been Susan still. There are

women who retain, whether in youth orage,
some subtle and inexplicable essence of
womanliness as far beyond analysis as the
scent of a rose. Whatever the fashion of
the earthly tabernacle her soul inhabits,
nevertheless from the windows of even the
poorest habitation some passer-by catches the
glimpse of a countenance never for ever to
be forgotten.

Mr. Gayre at all events felt he could
not, while life lasted, forget riding along the
Green Lanes and through Southgate, and
thence, ^^ many devious roads, into Enfield
Highway.

Are you quite sure where you're going,
Gayre ? " asked his interesting brother-in-law
Sir Geofirey, whom he had seduced into
setting off on a wild-goose chase after a
fellow who owned a wonderful hunter on
the London side of Waltham.

JS'o, indeed, I am not," answered Mr.
Gayre despondently ; " but I mean to inquire

about my man at each " public " we
pass."

Which performance, greatly to the
Baronet's satisfaction, was gone through
duly and truly with negative success, till
the pair reached a certain hotel, noted in
the old days, that still did a roaring trade
by reason of excursionists to the Eye House
and Broxbourne Gardens.

"Does I know a german as owns a
'ransome bay 'unter? Why, in course I
does — Squire Temperley, of Temperley
Manor. But, Lord love you, sir, it ain't of
no manner of use riding on to see 'im ! 'E's
been away — let's see — a matter of three week
with the gout, which do nip him up sore."

Mr. Gayre mused. It was not his fashion
to rush into dialogue.

What sort of looking man is your
Squire ? " he asked at length, while he
slipped half-a-crown into his informant's
hand.

Well, sir, 'e's not unlike yourself in
build and fissure, only 'easier and a trifle
more advanced in years " — Mr. Gayre
winced ; " a very pleasant german, and
most out-and-out rider ; didn't mind taking in
'and any 'loss — got the most splendid 'unter
to be seen in all these parts — a regular
wild one ; no person can, to say, really ride
'im but 'himself and young Mr. Arbery."

"Young Mr. Arbery? Who is he? Not
Squire Temperley's son, of course ? "

^^^o^^ sir ; Mr. Arbery is the son of Mrs.
Arbery, Granston 'Ouse, just above 'ere.
'E's just back from the Australis, and we
'haven't seen yet the 'horse could throw 'im."

Having with a commendable pride finished
which statement, the ostler, whose manners
happened to be of a more free-and-easy
description than obtained in Lombard Street,
was good enough to " throw his eye over
Mr. Ga}Te's steed," and remark " she was
a tidy sort of beast, who I essay can go."

"Well," asked Sir Geoffrey, coming out
of the bar, where he had been taking something
" just for the good of the house,"
"have you dropped on your friend's track

yet?"

Yes, I think so," answered 'Mr. Gayre ;
and having received some further information
on the exact position of Granston House,
the pair departed, only walking their horses
up the Great North Eoad, but nevertheless
eliciting an observation from the ostler that
he hoped he might be blanked if those
gents didn't know something about riding."

On they went past the church and into
the older part of the village, which even so
late as 1874 was little more than a mere
straggling street. They had got into the
region of a few unpretentious shops, when
Mr. Gayre started so suddenly that his
mare sprang forward with a bound which
elicited a profane inquiry from Sir Geoffrey
as to "what the ailed the brute."

His brother-in-law did not answer. Apparently
he was devoting his whole attention

to " the brute," but in reality his eyes

were following two persons who chanced
to be sauntering slowly along the footpath ;
one was a lady wearing a white straw hat
and pique dress of the same colour, both
trimmed with black ribbon ; the other the
young fellow he had seen in the Park.

He had found his quarry, and yet, though
Repassed the pair so close that he could
almost have laid his hand on Mr. Arbery's
shoulder, he did not pull up and accost him.

Shyness was a fault from which, as a
rule, the banker might be considered perfectly
free ; but at that moment he felt it
impossible even to turn his head in the
direction of the very persons he had come
to seek.

Not so Sir Geoffrey. That woman must
indeed have been old at whom he would
have failed (to use his own expression) to



take a squint ; and, following his usual
practice, he proceeded to honour with a
hard stare a girl whom he had already decided
possessed " a deuced good pair of
ankles ; " then,

Lord bless my soul I " he exclaimed, ina
tone loud enough for all the village to
hear, "if it isn't Susan Drummond ! " and
Mr. Gayre, at last looking back, beheld Sir
Geoffrey standing in the middle of the road,
with his horse's bridle slipped over his arm,
shaking both Miss Drummond's hands, and
expressing his delight and wonderment at
meeting her in such an out-of-the-way place
so volubly that he was well-nigh unintelligible.


Gayre, Gayre," he cried, " stop a minute
this is Susan ; Susan Drummond, you
know. By Jove, who'd have thought of
coming across her here ? Susan, this is
my brother-in-law ; gad ! I never was so
surprised in all the days of my life ! What

Vol. 1. 16

in the world are you doing in Enfield Highway
? "

Watching her, Mr. Gayre saw a shadow
of disappointment creeping over her face,
lit up the instant before with a delighted
smile of pleasure.

Did not Maggie tell you I was here ? "
she asked.

How should she know ? " demanded the
Baronet.

\^^' Why, I saw her one day in Hyde Park,
about a month ago ; didn't she tell you ? "
repeated the girl.

Not a word ; if she had you may be
very sure I'd have been down here before
now. I — " and Sir Geoffrey was about to
plunge into the whole story of Peggy's
statement that she did not know even the
address of her old friend, when a look from
Gayre arrested the words on his tongue.

You know what a careless forgetful
baggage it is," he said, with great presence

of mind, " and how much fonder she always
was of telling things to other people than
her own father ; however, now I've found
you, I won't lose sight of you again ; you
must come over and see Peg, and have all
out with her. Come and pay us a long
visit."

But Susan made no answer except, " You
are very kind, but you always were kind
to me. Sir Geoffrey."

"Papa Geoff," amended the Baronet.
Where are you stopping ? Who are you
with? What are you doing? I am amazed.
Who'd have thought of seeing you here ? "

"There is nothing remarkable in seeing
me here," she answered, " but it is astonishing
to see you. I should just as soon
have expected to see Chelston Church spire
coming up Enfield Highway as you. What
can have brought you to this part of the
world?"

"My brother-in-law wanted to find some

16-2

fellow about a hunter — ''' Sir Geoffrey was
beginning, when Mr. Gayre interposed.

"This is the very gentleman I wanted to
see, I think," he said, looking towards Mr.
Arbery, who had stepped into the background.
" As I did not know your name,"
he went on, speaking to Miss Drummond's
companion, " we have had a great deal of
trouble in finding out who you were and
where you Heed."

Well, it's all right now, isn't it ? " exclaimed
Sir Geoffrey. " Susan, my dear, I
am so glad we came ; you can't think how
pleased I am to see you again."

"This is my cousin, Mr. Arbery," she
said, acknowledging the Baronet's hearty
words with a smile which chased the
shadows from her face ; and then, with a
pretty grace, she introduced him to Mr.
Gayre, which ceremony duly performed,
they all walked on together to Grand ton
House, where the young man said his

mother would be delighted to see them.
It is more than doubtful whether Mrs.
Arbery was anything of the kind ; nevertheless,
she received the unexpected visitors
with a good grace, and asked them to stop
and take early diner.

We always dine early," explained Will
Arbery, " but you can call it luncheon ; "
and then, while Sir Geoffrey was making
himseK agreeable to Mrs. Arbery, Avhom
he afterwards spoke of as " shaky — deucedly
shaky," and Susan left the room, probably
to add a few touches to the appointments
of the dinner-table, Mr. Arbery and Mr.
Gayre talked, not merely about Mr. Temperley's
hunter, but other equine matters.

At the meal to which they all subsequently
sat down the conversation was general. It
turned a good deal on Australia, and Mr.
Arbery, who found much to say, and said
it well, interested Mr. Gayre considerably
within account of life on a great sheep-run.

He had three brothers settled in Australia,
and one sister — all married. " So when I
get back," he added, " there will be five
of us out there, old married folks. If we
could only induce my mother to come too,
we should be as happy as possible."

Mr. Gayre looked at Miss Drummond,
who smiled amusedly in reply, while Mrs.
Arbery said, "I shall never cross the sea,"
in a tone which told the banker this was a
sore subject in the family.

But 'pon my soul," exclaimed Sir Geoffrey,
" it seems to me a splendid idea. Why
can't we all go ? What do you say, Susan —
will you pack up and let us leave England
together?"

Ko," she answered ; " like my aunt, I
never mean to take so long a voyage."

"I have asked her already, and she refused
me," declared her cousin.

That is very true. Will," she said ;
"but perhaps, if you had implored me to

share the sheep-run instead of helping to
catch wild horses, my answer might have
been different."

At which they all laughed — Mrs. Arbery
a little sadly, Mr. Gayre with a sense of
relief. Sir Geoffrey delighted to find his
old favourite " as saucy as ever," and Will
Arbery after the fashion of a person who
felt himself fairly hit.

Xo, Susie, it wouldn't," he said, looking
at her with fond, but merely cousinly,
affection. *' You are far too much of a
bloated aristocrat ' for Australia ; you like
purple and fine linen, and servants, and
regular meals, and nice furniture, and "

I like civilization, if that is what you
mean," she summed up. "I think a sheep-run
in Cumberland or Wales, or even
Ireland, might be all very well ; but I
confess I should not care for it a thousand
miles from a post-office."

Hearing which declaration Mrs. Arbery

sighed deeply, and Mr. Gayre drew his
own conclusions. He understood there sat
the wife Mrs. Arbery would have liked
for her son, and he could not exactly
understand why " cousin William " had
elected to go further afield, till a few
weeks afterwards, when Susan was good
enough to enlighten him.

I don't fancy," she said, slyly, one day,
men usually fall in love with a woman
because their mothers think the particular
she ' will make a good daughter-in-law."


After dinner they went out on the lawn,
which was perched high over the road,
and where the whole "Way" might have
watched them promenading had it chosen ;
then they wound round the house to a
pretty trim flower garden, laid out in the
Dutch style, and from thence Susan, and
Mr. Gayre, and Sir Geoffrey, and young
Arbery strolled down the pleasant meadows,

in which the grass was being cut and the
hay being made.

A stream bordered by pollards meandered
at one side of the fields ; large Aylesbury
ducks were disporting themselves in the
water ; afar off, beyond the level marshes,
rose the rising ground, near Sandstone
and Chingford ; there was a great silence
in the air, and it seemed to Mr. Gayre as
if suddenly he had left some old life of unrest
behind, and entered a land where
trouble could not enter.

Even Sir Geoffrey assumed quite a different
aspect sauntering through those Elysian
Fields with his hat off, discoursing learnedly
with young Arbery about country affairs, or
turning to speak to Susan as she and Mr.
Gayre lagged behind.

You wouldn't like to jump that stream
now, would you, Susie ? " he asked, as they
came to a standstill at one particular bend
of the river.

No," she laughed. " I do not feel so
young as I did once, and besides, this is
wider than the Shell even at the Pleasaunce."

I am not so sure of that," said the
Baronet, surveying the sluggish water dubiously.
"Well, perhaps you are right. Lord,
Lord ! shall I ever forget that day when I
was out in the Long Meadow looking at
Lady Mary — do you remember that chestnut
filly, Sue? — the prettiest thing, the
very prettiest! — seeing you come tearing
down the green walk, With Lai Hilderton
behind you, racing like two mad things ! I
shouted out to you to mind the river ; but
you just gathered your skirts about you
and took it like a deer. Gad, I never saw
a patch upon it before or since ! And,
afterwards, you stood mocking Lai, he on
one side, and you on t'other."

He did not follow, then ? " suggested
Mr. Gayre.

If he had, he'd have pitched right in

the middle of the water. Lai was no
jumper."

"Ah, but couldn't he pant, Sir Geoffrey?"
said Susan, with just the faintest mockery
of an Irish accent as she uttered a completely
Irish sentence.

•' Yes, certainly he was clever with his
pencil," agreed Sir Geoffrey.

"And who was this Mr. HildertonP"
asked LIr. Gayre, feeling really he could
contain himself no longer.

0, an old neighbour," answered Susan
carelessly. "He was intended for the Church,
but preferred art and went to Eome to
study. For the credit of Chelston, we hope
he will be a great man yet. About three
years ago he was good enough to comedown
to see us aborigines, and caused
quite a sensation in a velvet suit and a
red tie."

"And all the ladies fell in love with
him, I suppose ? " said Mr. Gayre bitterly.

I think a great many did," agreed Miss
Drummond. " He really is very handsome."

What a strange girl ! — one who spoke
of men and life and wooing and marrying
as if she were seventy years of age ; who
addressed the representative of Gayre, Delone,
Gayre and Co. as though she had frisked and
frolicked about Chelston Pleasaunce with
him ! How frightfully easy were her manners
! — well, perhaps not so easy as indifferent
; and 3'et — and yet who was the
only woman that since that crazy fancy of
his youth, had ever seemed winsome to him.

Already he loved her distractedly ; already
he felt, on the slightest provocation, madly
jealous. The first six words she spoke had
not disenchanted him — quite the contrary.
She was different from the girl he expected
—stronger — a woman better worth loving
and winning — a woman such as, in all his
previous experience, he had never before
met, and —

"I think, Gayre, we must be seeing now
about getting back to town," said Sir
Geoffrey, who, fond though he might be
and was of Susan, fek the pastoral business,
enlivened by champagne and the hope of
a dupe, wonderfully slow.

To this proposal Mr. Gayre at once
assented. He felt that, whatever his own
wishes might be, he and the Baronet could
not stay at Granston House for ever ; and
accordingly, declining young Arbery's
hospitable suggestion that they should stop
and have tea, and ride home in the cool
of the evening, it was finally settled their
horses were to be saddled and taken to the
back gate, where Susan undertook to pilot
the visitors in ten minutes.

The back gate is really the carriage-gate
here," she explained ; " only we have no
carriage, and nothing in the stable, excepta
cow and a donkey."

Killing that ten minutes — a process

which Sir Geoffrey thought occupied about
ten hours — they paused beside a Marshal
Noel which ran over the drawing-room window.


Give me a rose, Susie," said the Baronet ;
and then, as she complied, added ; " Give
Gayre one, too. Now," he went on, " you
must fasten it in my coat, in memory of old
times. What jolly little buttonholes you
used to make up for me at Chelston ! Only
look at Gayre — see what a mess he is making
of the performance. Better let Susie take
your rose in hand "

Now, the fact was that Mr. Gayre had
never in all his life worn a flower in his
coat. Affecting a severe simplicity, he
eschewed jewelry, perfumes, buttonholes,
and every vanity of latter-day male life ;
but not knowing what on earth to do with
the rose Susan had given him, feeling he
could not go about dangling it in his
hand, he was, when Sir Geoffrey spoke,

vainly attempting to coax it to stay in his
left-hand lapel.

Will you really take pity upon me ? "
he asked ; and the blood came up into his
face as he put this question.

0, certainly ! " said Susan ; and while
fastening the stem, she looked up at him,
blushing too, but with a merry light in her
brown eyes.

Gad," exclaimed Sir Geoffrey, complacently
surveying his decoration, " they'll
think along the road we've been to Brox-
bourne Gardens ! " a remark which induced
such an expression of disgust on Mr. Gayre's
countenance that Susan laughed outright,
and explained the correct form of bouquet
generally borne home in triumph from that
place of gay resort.

Wliat people will imagine, Sir Geoffrey,
is that you must be a great rose fancier,
and are returning from Paul's at Waltham,"
she said ; which suggestion of his 

being mistaken for a florist so tickled
Mr. Gayre's fancy that, his good-humour
quite restored, he joined in Miss Drummond's
merriment.

You are a bad, bad girl ! " declared
the Baronet, pinching her cheek. " Come
now, before we leave, you must tell
me what day I am to drive over for
you."

Then instantly Susan's manner changed.
She didn't know ; she was afraid she could
not go ; perhaps Margaret might be able
to arrange to run down by train and spend
a day with her ; excuses Sir Geoffrey cut
short by saying decidedly,

Now look here, my girl, no use our
beating about the bush ; you're huffed,
that's what you are, but you needn't be.
Peggy will be only too glad if you'll come
and stop with us — not for a night or two,
remember, but on a long visit. She's just
as lonely a girl as you will find in London,

and she has not a friend on earth she likes
as she does you. Of course, you know,
we are down in the world a bit, but
you cannot be the Susan I know if that
makes any difference."

I was sure the poverty touch would
fetch her," he remarked afterwards to Mr.
Gayre ; and it did " fetch " Miss Drummond
so far as to induce her to say
she would try to go and see Maggie," if
that young lady would write and name an
hour when she should be likely to find
her at home.

"I think I did that pretty well,"

remarked the Baronet, as he and his

brother-in-law rode straight down the wide

Highway to Edmonton, cheered by Mr.

Arbery's parting assurance that whichever

road they took back they would fancy

the longest. " I think I did that pretty

well, considering: we had nothing? but water

at dinner. How people can drink water.
Vol. 1 17

as if they were beasts of the field, beats
me altogether."

If you were on the march, and
couldn't get any, you might change your
opinion."

I might," said Sir Geoffrey, in a tone
which implied he did not think such a
change very likely.

However," he went on, " I am going
to stop here for a minute to ' bait ;' "
and suiting the action to the word he rode
up to the door of the inn, where he had
previously partaken of spirituous refreshment,
leaving Mr. Gayre to walk slowly
on and admire the prospect of flat country
which alone met his eye, look where he
would.

"I feel another man now," declared the
Baronet, when he overtook his brother-in-law.
" Well you haven't told me yet what
you think of Susan."

She seems a very nice girl," answered

Mr. Gayre, coldly as it seemed to Susan's
enthusiastic admirer.

Nice ! I believe you. There's not a
dark corner about her. I've known her —
how long haven't I known her? — the
dearest little woman ! I used to think it was
a pity I could not harness her and Peggy
when they were children ; such a pair
they'd have made — Susie in blue shoes,
and my young one in red ; blue and red
sashes, blue and red necklaces to match ;
and later on, while Peg was posturing
before a looking-glass — if you believe me,
from six years of age she was always
putting flowers in her hair and smiling at
her own reflection — Susie would be out in
the paddocks with me, or sitting in the
dining-room while I told her stories."

Stories ! " repeated Mr. Gayre in amazement,
wondering what sort of fairy-tales
the Baronet's repertory contained.

"Yes, stories," said Sir Geoffrey, defiantly.

17—2

I don't mean, of course, nursery-tales
or foolish stuff such as most children are
crammed with ; but good sensible stories
about duels, and races, and shooting, and
spins across country — things likely to improve
her mind. Lord, how she used to
drink them in ! holding her breath almost
till we got to the end of a run, and
clutching the arms of her chair with both
hands, and well-nigh gasping as I told her
about flying over hedges and taking bullfinches,
and all the rest of it. She'd never
have been what she is if it hadn't been
for me. One evening I made a great mistake.
I don't know how I happened to
get upon Dick Darrell, who was the hardest
rider and the wildest devil I ever did
come across. He was going to be married
and settle down, and the young woman
was stopping at Darrell Court with the
father. Dick thought he'd have a burst
with the hounds ; and if you believe me,

when I came to where at the last fence
he went clean over his horse's head and
broke his neck, Susan fell to crying to
such an extent my housekeeper wouldn't
let her go back to the Hall that night.
Ay, it seemed a hard thing to take Darrell
home stiff; such screaming and weeping
and wailing I never heard — the old man
childless and the bride a widow, as one
may say."

What became of the bride, as you
call her ? " asked Mr. Gayre, with some
interest.

0, she stayed to comfort the Squire ;
and comforted him to such purpose that
they made up a match between them."

I thought as much," remarked his
brother-in-law sardonically. "Where's your
rose, Chelston ? "

Faith, I don't know," answered the
Baronet, glancing at his coat, and for the
first time noticing the flower had disappeared.

" I must have knocked the head
off as I was mounting this fidgety beast."

Mr. Gayre smiled, but said nothing.
On the whole he was not perhaps displeased
that Sir Geoffrey had lost his Marshal
Mel, as he had already lost the whole of
his other possessions.

Seated in the twilight then, it was of
Susan Drummond and Enfield Highway and
fields of emerald green, and a blue sky
just flecked here and there with snow-white
clouds, and the air filled with the fragrance
of new-mown hay, that Mr. Gayre thought,
as he dreamed his day-dream, and built fancy
castles with towering pinnacles that glittered
in the sun. Why should he not win and
wear her? Why should he not marry and
be happy? Why should she not come
stealing to him through the gloom, and
fill his empty heart, and change his lonely
life into one of utter content?

She was young, very young, no doubt ;

and he was old — yet not so old, after all.
She was poor, and he was rich enough to
drive her all he fancied she could desire.

o

Women had figuratively torn caps about
him ; why should he despair of awakening
an interest in Susan Drummond? She had
no lover — he felt sure of that ; quite sure
the depths of her nature had never yet
been stirred.

The twilight deepened ; it grew so dark
he could not see the objects surrounding
him ; and yet he dreamt on, till suddenly
the door opened, and an old servant, who
had been with him " through the wars,"
said,

"Mr. Sudlow, Colonel, wishes to know
if he can see you."

"Yes," answered the "Colonel," coming
back to earth and its realities. "Ask him
to walk in ; and brincr Hcrhts and coffee."

DC

MR. Ludlow IS ADVISED FOR HIS GOOD.

gl^pIGHTS and Mr. Sudlow appeared
IjbSk together — the former in tall silver
candlesticks, massive, and of an antique
pattern ; the latter in all the splendour of
evening dress. As they shook hands Mr.
Gayre surveyed his visitor.

Going to some scene of gay festivity ?"
he inquired.

Mr. Sudlow coloured a little.

No, nowhere very particular," he
answered. " I just looked in on — on my
way. 1 thought you would not mind. I
have called so often lately and always
found you out."

Yes, it has been unfortunate," remarked

the banker, ; but he did not proceed to
indulge in expressions of regret, or tender
any explanation of— or apology for — his
absence. He only asked Mr. Sudlow if he
would take some coffee, and while he
sipped his own stood leaning against the
mantelpiece, looking thoughtfully down on
the flowers that filled the wide hearth.

For a few moments the younger man
did not speak ; then he said, as if in a
sort of desperation,

"Mr. Gayre, when are you going to
introduce me to your brother-in-law?"

Mr. Gayre, thus directly appealed to,
laughed, took another lump of sugar and
stirred his coffee, before he answered,

1 am sure I cannot tell ; fact is, the
more 1 see of the worthy Baronet the less
I consider his acquaintance a blessing to
be desired."

But you promised me," expostulated
Mr. Sudlow ; " you did — you know you did ! "

Did I ? Well, perhaps so ; only circumstances
alter cases, and with the fresh
understanding I have recently gained of
Sir Geoffrey's character, I should certainly
advise any one able to keep him at
arm's length to do so."

"But it is not Sir Geoffrey I want to
know — it is his daughter."

"My dear fellow, don't excite yourself;
of course, I understand it is the daughter.
But you can't make her acquaintance
without at the same time mains that of
the father, and, as a friend, I say have
nothing whatever to do with Sir Geoffrey
Chelston. You think you can take care of
yourself, I know," went on Mr. Gayre ;
that the owner of Meridian Square will
be more than a match for the Baronet,
without an acre of land or a house of his
own. On your own head, then, be it.
You shall become acquainted with a
gentleman who, to quote those words of

Mr. Pickwick which so deceived the widow
Bar dell, will teach you more tricks in a
week than you would ever learn in a year."

And when ?" asked Mr. Sudlow, suggestively.


Only to consider the impatience of
youth !" exclaimed Mr. Gayre. " Perhaps
you imagined I Avould take you to call
this minute," he added, with cruel irony ;
"but I won't hurry you along the road to
destruction. One of these afternoons we
will search out Sir Geoffrey, about the time
he arises from slumber and before he goes
forth to seek whom he may devour. But
one word of caution, Sudlow," went on
Mr. Gayre, with a short bitter laugh ;
don't let him choose you a horse."

You may be very sure I won't "
returned Mr. Sudlow, with energy.

I am aware you think you play
billiards pretty well^still, were I in your
place, I would not pit my skill against the

Baronet's. Further, do not lend him any
money ; do not let him persuade you to
put your name to paper; be very wary of
all games both of chance and skill ; refrain
from laying or taking odds — "

"Anything else?" asked Mr. Sudlow a
little sulkily.

Well, no, except that you would do
well to have nothing whatever to do with
Sir Geoffrey Chelston."

You must permit me to be the best
judge of that."

"All right, so you shall; only I should
be very sorry to see Meridian Square, and
all the other elegant and convenient, if less
profitable, properties you possess, converted
into ducks and drakes ; and that is a
conjuring trick the Baronet will perform
with incredible rapidity unless you are very
careful."

•' I believe he has bit you'' said Mr.
Sudlow, with a certain triumph.

"You are mistaken in that belief,"
answered Mr. Gayre, the coldness which
lead characterised his manner during the
interview deepening into displeasure. " In
which direction are you going, Sudlow ? I
will walk part of the way with you. I
want a stroll and a cigar."

In some places and with some people
Mr. Sudlow was often bold, not to say
arrogant ; but the banker exercised a deterrent
influence over him, which he felt
perhaps rather than understood.

With almost any other man he might
have prolonged the conversation, and indulged
in further argument ; but since his
youth he had looked up to and feared Mr.
Gayre. Habit accordingly proved stronger
than indiscretion, and muttering something
about the Strand, and looking in at one of
the theatres, he took the hint so plainly
given, and rose to go.

They passed together into the quiet street.

and under the peaceful stars sauntered
slowly along, speaking no word for some
little time, each busy with his own
thoughts, whatever those thoughts might
be.

It was Mr. Sudlow who broke the
silence, and his first remark proved he had
been considering how to give Mr. Gayre a
rap over the knuckles.

I was surprised to meet Miss Chelston
the other day."

"In the Park?"

No, I have not seen her there for a
long time. At Baker Street Station."

"Romantic," commented Mr. Gayre, who,
had he spoken frankly, would have said he
felt a great deal more surprised than Mr.
Sudlow.

"A railway-station is as good a place to
meet a lady as any other in these days,"
retorted the younger man.

"It may be, you ought to know."

She was going to Kew."
You mean my niece, I suppose ?"
Yes ; and we travelled down in the
same compartment."
"Indeed!"

She went to one of the old houses on
the Green."

"Once more referring to Miss Chelston?"

Of course ; I did not know it was

necessary to go on repeating a woman's

name in conversation, like ' my lord ' in

an official letter."

! " and Mr. Gay re walked on, smoking
steadily, and refused utterly to ask a single
question, though Mr. Sudlow waited and
longed for him to do so.

"True love will excuse many things,"
began the banker at last ; " still, as neither
Sir Geoffrey nor his daughter is aware you
fell in love with my niece the first day you
saw her riding remarkably badly in the
Park, I really do not think I should ever

mention that you followed Miss Chelston
in the manner you seem to have done. The
Baronet might think you had been — spying.



How do you know I was not going to
the Green too, on my own business ? "

I do not know, of course ; I only suppose.
And under any circumstances I
should not advise you to mention the
matter — I really should not."

"I only mentioned it now to show
youth

show me what?" asked Mr. Areas
the other paused and hesitated ; " to
show you could form my niece's acquaintance
without my help. Make no mistake
on that point, my friend — you might get
to know a milliner's apprentice by travelling
in the same compartment with her to Kew
on Whit-monday, but not that of a girl ina
higher rank of life."

"You are always so hard upon me,"

complained Mr. Sudlow. "You generally
take a wrong construction out of what I say."

Then learn to express yourself in such
a way that misconstruction is impossible,"
returned Mr. Gayre, sternly. " At all
events, understand clearly that though Sir
Geoffrey Chelston is an unprincipled roue
his daughter has never caught even a
glimpse of Bohemia, and I mean to take
very good care she never shall. Fortunately
she has not the slightest inclination in that
direction ; I believe a girl never lived more
capable of understanding and resenting the
impertinence of modern puppyhood than
my niece."

Do you suppose I was going to offer her
any impertinence ? "

"How can I tell? All I know is you
had better not."

"Mr. Gayre, on my honour — "

Your honour ! Well, well, let that pass ;
proceed."

Vol. i. 18

"I wish you would not so constantly
catch me up — you make me forget what
I intended to say."

That is a pity, for you were, if I mistake
not, about to remark you admired the
calm dignity of Miss Chelston's manners,
when answering the observations made to
her by a gentleman ' who travelled in the
same compartment all the way to Kew,*
as much as her beauty. Come, Sudlow,
confess my niece snubbed you effectually."

"She did not do anything of the sort."

Do you expect me to believe she talked
to you?"

"No, no! 0, no! She did not talk, but
she was quite polite. Said ' no,' and ' yes,'
and ' thank you,' and that."

Evidently regarding you as an outer
barbarian all the time," suggested Mr.
Gayre, with relish. " Yes, I know her style.
Frankly,' he added, 'for your sake I am
very sorry this has happened ; why can't

or won't you remember all girls are not
barmaid, and that the fascinating manner
and brilliant conversation which prove so
effective across a marble-topped counter
are really worse than useless with young
ladies who have been discreetly brought up? "

You are always preaching to me,"
observed Mr. Sudlow.

And with so little result I think I
shall leave off preaching altogether."

You are offended, and I declare nothing
in the world was further from my intention
than to annoy you."

We had better let the subject drop."

"But you will introduce me to your
niece ? "

"I shall have to reconsider that matter.
Second thoughts are often best."

"But, Mr. Gayre, indeed, I meant no
harm. Pray do not speak to me in that
tone. You know I would not voluntarily
vex you for the world."

1?— 2

Mr. Gayre burst out laughing. It was
the best thing possible for him to do under
the circumstances.

Three quarrels in one day ! " he exclaimed.
"It would be wise, I think, to
get me home and send for a doctor. Nevertheless,
Sudlow, it was truth that I told
just now. You must mind your p's and q's
when I introduce you to Sir Geoffrey
Chelston."

"I'll take good heed to every letter in
the alphabet, if that is all," exclaimed Mr.
Sudlow, relieved. Yet as he walked away,
after parting from Mr. Gayre, who seemed
disposed to carry out the programme he
had indicated, so far as hiding him back
to Wimpole Street was concerned, he
muttered under his breath, "0, if I only
once could get the chance of giving you
change in your own coin, I'd make your
ears tingle ! I wonder what has come to
you lately ! You always were given to

gibing, but since the Baronet appeared
on the scene you have grown unbearable."


Once rid of his companion, Mr. Gayre
only retraced the way for a short distance
towards Wimpole Street. Instead he turned
in the direction of Manchester Square,
and walking evidently for the sake of
walking, and not because he desired to
reach any definite goal, occupied himself
in reflections upon the occurrences of the
afternoon, devoting a considerable amount
of attention to that statement of Mr.
Sudlow's concerning Miss Margaret's visit
to Kew.

"I wonder who it is she knows at
Kew?" he thought. "Shall I try to get
her married ? " or, following the Canon's
sensible advice, settle a small annuity on
her and wash my hands of the whole
business ? Heavens ! what dirty water I
always seem to be dabbling in now! There

was a time when I would not have soiled
the tip of my finger With it. Alas ! and
alas ! Nicholas Gayre, Love has, I fear,
played you a scurvy trick once more.
You had better don cap and bells at once,
for you are a far greater fool than Sudlow,
and all for the sake of a woman concerning
whom you know next to nothing. I
wonder if she will be able to sweeten this
March — extract any healing out of such a
Bethesda ? "

For, indeed, when Mr. Gayre exhausted
the subject (and his mind was so constituted
he could not help exhausting any subject
which concerned himself, whether agreeable
or the reverse) he found he had since that
memorable day in May, when the horse
Mr. Arbery was riding shied at a steam-roller,
been travelling across a wilderness,
in which the few springs were very bitter
and the pools brackish, and playing an
extremely risky game. What he said was

quite true. There had been a time when
he would not have meddled in Sir Geoffrey's
concerns for any consideration. You cannot
touch pitch and not be defiled was a
truth the Gayres never cared to forget, and
Nicholas Gayre could not disguise from
himself the fact that his brother-in-law
could in no moral sense be regarded as
clean. The more he saw of him the more
hopelessly disreputable did the man appear.
Washing an Ethiop white would have been
a possible task in comparison with taking
even a part of the stain out of the Baronet's
nature.

In the days gone by, when Sir Geoffrey
kept his account in Lombard Street, on the
first occasion of his drawing below the large
amount which Gayres expected to be kept
as a balance, a letter was despatched to Shelton
Pleasaunce, directing his attention to
the fact, and begging that the mistake might
be rectified ; but, finding the same " mistake

" repeated, Mr. Gayre, Senior, requested
that the account might be closed.

This was the beginning of a coolness which
lasted up to the time when Mr. Nicholas
Grayre sought out his relative in North Banka
coolness which Sir Geoffrey's own conduct
intensified into total estrangement. The
banker thought of all this as he walked along
the London streets under the quiet stars, and
a feeling not unlike shame oppressed him ashe
considered how utterly at variance his own
conduct had of late been with the traditions
of his house.

And all because of a woman's face," he
decided. " Well, I can't draw back now.
I went into the Chelston pest-house with my
eyes open, and whatever happens I have only
myself to thank. Sir Geoffrey is not any
better than I expected to find him ; and my
niece is not much worse than I expected to
find her. She is false ; but she is not fast,
thank Heaven. I wonder who it is she knows

at Kew ? She ought not to be running about
London by herself; but I do not see that I
can interfere in the matter." And having,
just as he reached his own door, arrived at
this sensible conclusion, Mr. Gayre put his
key in the lock, and passed into the library,
where he saw a letter lying on the table.

It is from Sir Geoffrey, Colonel," said his
servant ; "a messenger brought it up from
the club. He did not know whether any
answer was required ; so I told him you were
out, and that I had no idea when you would
be back, but if a reply was expected I could
take it myself."

Mr. Gayre made no comment. He only
lifted the note with the usual dread and
repugnance with which he always approached
the Baronet's communications, and, tearing
open the envelope, read :

Dear Gayer, — Peggy is certainly turning
over a new leaf. What do you think she
proposed this evening ? Why, that we should

both run down to Enfield early tomorrow
and look up Susan. I can't tell you how
pleased I am. I have promised to be a good
boy and get home betimes to-night, so as to
be in condition for the journey.

'yours, G. C."

Now what is the English of this move ? "
marvelled Mr. Gayre. But he need not have
exercised his mind over this question. For
once Miss Chelston was playing a perfectly
straightforward game. " Circumstances ater
cases," and she felt as anxious for Miss Drummond's
company as she had once been desirous
of avoiding it.

^^^hk^^^

-^^f^t^

SHOULD AULD ACQUAINTANCE BE FORGOT ? "

peace reigned in Mr. Moreby's villa.
The summer glory lay golden without,
sunshine dwelt within. Susan had come,
and the house seemed transformed. The
rooms were the same, the furniture was the
same, and yet everything looked different ;
the place had that charm of home it never
possessed before. Susan was there — with her
bright cheerful face, her pleasant laugh, her
useful hands, her constant thoughtfulness,
her unselfish heart, her tireless consideration
for others. Mistaken ! Ko, Mr. Gap-e understood
here at last was a woman sound to
the core ; a woman a man would be safe in
loving, and who herself could love till the

last hour of her life. Already he felt as if
he had known her for years — as if there
had never been a time when he and Susan
Drummond were total strangers.

They sat at tea in the charming room overlooking
the lawn ; sun-blinds excluded the
glare of light and heat, the windows were
filled with flowers. Sir Geofirey lay almost
at full length in an easy-chair ; his daughter
was looking her best, and trying to seem
demurely unconscious of Mr. Sudlow's admiring
glances.

Miss Drummond presided over the tea
equipage, and Mr. Gayre was taking her
part against the apparently good-natured
accusation of extravagance which Miss Shelton
was bringing against her.

But Susan needed no champion, she was
perfectly well able to defend herself.

If one is to have tea at all one may as
well have it good, and I am very sure the
extra cost cannot be a shilling a week. 1

excessively dislike tea that has been
brewed.' "

"So do I, Susan," exclaimed Sir Geoffrey,
who had been coaxed into accepting a cup
of the refreshing beverage, and was considering
how to escape drinking it. " I'd just
as soon take a dose of senna."

Your tea is certainly extremely nice,"
capped Mr. Gayre.

We are all teetotallers at Enfield, you
see," went on Susan, in calm explanation —
"my cousin from choice, my aunt on principle,
and I and the servants from necessity."

Susan, how can you say such things ! "
expostulated Miss Chelston, shocked.

Have I said something very dreadful ? "
asked Miss Drummond of the company generally.


No, faith," cried Sir Geoffrey ; " after the
wine your uncle used to have at the Hall
you must find water an awful cross to bear."

Happily the water is very good at Enfield.

But what I meant to say was, that as we have
no other extravagance we surely are justified
in making good tea."

You shall make it as you like here,
Susan. That lazy little minx always leaves
it to the servants, and nice stuff* they turnout
;" and the Baronet set down his cup and
took a little stroll to the window, and peeped
under the sun-blind and remarked he thought
a breath of air was stirring, and then asked
Susan when they were to have a long ride
together. "I'll find you a mount," he added.

I think there is one of my horses Miss
Drummond would like," remarked Mr. Gayre.

0, you don't want to ride, do you, dear?"
suggested Miss Chelston softly.

Yes, I do, very much indeed. But I must
first ore a habit ; I won't bring; eternal disgrace
upon you, Maggie, by wearing that
old thing I had on when we met in the Park."

It was a horror," said Miss Chelston.

Ah, well, it won't offend your eyes

again. I mean to have one of the latest
fashion, short and narrow, so that if I
am thrown I shan't have a chance of
helping myself."

Order it from my tailor, Susan," advised
Sir Geoffrey ; " he never expects to
be paid under six years."

You had better have it from mine,
Miss Drummond," said Mr. Sudlow ; " he
is a very good man, and allows fifteen percent,
for cash with order."

What a pull you rich fellows have
over us poor devils !" groaned Sir Geoffrey;
we are forced to pay through the nose
for everything."

"Thank you, Mr. Sudlow, for your suggestion,"
answered Susan ; " but I am
having the habit ' built,' as my cousin
phrases it, by the ' local practitioner.' "

Good gracious, Susan, you might just
as well put your money in the fire ! "'
said Miss Chelston.

Wait till you see this great work of
art," advised Susan. " I ventured to pay
the old man a compliment about the fit,
which he received with lofty indifference,
merely saying, " Yes, I think we are pretty
good sculptors ! ' "

Mr. Gayre laughed. Miss Chelston looked
disgusted, and Sir Geoffrey declared, "By
Jove, that wasn't bad ! "

"What is the colour of the thing?"
asked Miss Chelston.

The colour of the uniform of the Irish
Constabulary," said Miss Drummond, " invisible
green. I am not going to enter
into competition with you, though I do
think that precise shade of blue in your
habit divine."

And so becoming," added Mr. Sudlow,
as a general sort of statement which he
made particular by a look at Miss
Chelston.

And so becoming, as you truly remark,"

observed Miss Drummond, lauo-hinof,
to some persons y

At this juncture Sir Geoffrey bethought
him that the room was unbearably hot,
and that he would take a turn round the
garden to " stretch his legs a bit."

It was some time before he appeared
sauntering over the lawn, for it had been
necessary for him to pause in the diningroom
and refresh exhausted nature from a
convenient decanter.

Shortly Mr. Gayre joined him among
the flowers, and then learned his brother-in-law
was deuce idly sorry, but he had an
appointment he could not possibly miss.

Don't let me drive you away, Gayre,
though," he said. " Make yourself as much
at home as you can ; and look here you
bring your friend up some evening to
dinner. The girls make luncheon, dinner
when I am out ; but name your day, and
I daresay we can manage something fit to

Vol. i. 19

eat. Susan and Mrs. Lavender shall go
into committee."

Are you going to instal Miss Drummond
as housekeeper?" asked Mr. Careless

you, she has installed herself.
Peggy will do nothing but dress. There
never was such a girl for finery. She'll
have to marry somebody rich, for she'd
very soon bring a poor man to the workhouse.
Has it struck you that Sudlow's
mightily taken with her ? "

He seems to admire her very much."

Well, then, clearly understand, if he
means business I won't stand in the way.
Anybody with half an eye can see there's
not a bit of breed about him, but you say
he's well ofi*; nobody without money need
think of Peggy. It would be a great relief
to me to have her well settled ; so now
you know my views, and, as far as I am
concerned, your friend can propose as soon
as he likes."

But, good Heavens, he was only introduced
to her the other day ! "

I know that ; but ' happy's the wooing
that's not long of doing ; ' and between
you and me, the sooner we can get her off
our hands the better. A great deal of running
could be done in a short time ; and
the days slip away when you are living ina
borrowed house and have to trust to
your wits for money. I thought I would
just give you a hint of what is in my mind."

Most kind of you, I'm sure."

Well, my idea is a man can't be too
straightforward, and I may tell you the
sooner Peggy is married the better I shall
be pleased."

Surely you don't want, though, to
throw her at the head of the first person
who seems to admire her ? Don't be in
such a hurry ; give the girl a chance.
She may meet plenty of men more desirable
in every way than Mr. Sudlow."

19-2

She may," agreed Sir Geoffrey, " and
also she may not ; besides Gayre, a ' bird
in the hand,' you remember ; and don't
you make any mistake about sentiment,
and all that sort of thing, as regards
Peggy. She is as cold as a stone. She
cares for nothing on earth but herself.
K she had been different she might have
done well for both of us."

Then you had some plan in your
head when you brought her to London,"
thought Mr. Gayre, " which she has
baulked."

And she's not a bit clever," pursued
Sir Geoffrey, anxious, apparently, thoroughly
to convince Mr. Gayre of the
desirability of closing with the first eligible
offer. " All that can be said in
her favour is she's pretty, and she knows
how to dress herself."

Two very good points about a woman,"
commented Mr. Farewells

well, I only tell you for your
guidance."

But, Sir Geoffrey, she is not my
daughter ; if you want to get married
you had better set to work for yourself,
had you not ? "

I ! What can I do, a poor fellow
out at elbows with Fortune, who has had
the devil's own luck in life ? Besides, it
is not from my side of the house she
gets her selfishness and want of brains.
If I had thought more of myself and less
of other people I should not have been
placed as I am. I have been too considerate,
too honest, Gayre — that is about
the state of the case. Ah, if I had to
begin life over again, I would act very
differently!"

I wouldn't vex myself about your own
perfections, "were I you."

No ; it's of no use crying over spilt
milk. But, to come back to what we

were saying, you keep that matter in mind,
and remember if your friend likes to propose
I shall make no objection. Some
men would want to know a lot about
family and all the rest of it, but, thank
Heaven, I have no prejudices. Everybody
must have a befifinninof, and all I shall
require to be satisfied about is, can he
pay her milliner's bills and keep her as a
girl with such a face ought to be kept ?
All, talk of the — here she comes ! Well,
Peggy, how are you going to amuse your
uncle ? for I must be off. I am so sorry
Mr. Sudlow — confoundedly sorry ; but Gayre
has promised to bring you up to dinner
some day very soon. You'll come, quite
in a friendly way, won't you ? We are
very plain people, but sincere. I never
ask any man to the house I don't want
to see."

In which statement there was so much
truth Mr. Gayre felt that even mentally he

could not controvert it, while Mr. Sudlow,
almost trembling with pleasure, said he
would be only too delighted to accept the
invitation.

That's all right, then," said the Baronet
heartily. " Xow I really can't stop another
minute. "You'll excuse me, I'm sure, Mr.
Sudlow. Till our next merry meeting,
Gayre. Farewell, Peggy. You'll see the
last of me, I know, Susan ; " and he
turned back a pleased face to his 
as Miss Drummond slipped her
hand through his arm and went with
him into the house.

Something in that action seemed to
touch Mr. Gayre to the heart. He had
heard ere then of guardian angels, but
never previously did it fall to his lot to
see a pure and lovely woman taking charge
of such a sinner as Sir Geoffrey Chelston.

We must also be thinking about
going," he said ; but Miss Chelston pleaded

SO prettily for a longer visit that the
gentlemen consented to remain tiU nearer
dinner-time, and finally it was arranged
they should all go out for a turn in
Eegent's Park.

0, delightful ! " exclaimed Susan, when
the question was referred to her. " I do
think this part of the park so exquisite."

Half-an-hour later they were all strolling
along together — Susan in a black silk
dress, Margaret in a brown, which became
her as well as the blue cloth habit had
done. Eegent's Park was looking its very
best ; the ornamental water shimmered
and glittered under the beams of the
evening sun. The leaves of the trees
were fresh and cool, and free from dust ;
the birds were singing in the mimic plantations
; there was a great peace in the
hour and the scene, which seemed to lay a
soothing hand on the hearts of two, at all
events, who looked wistfully at the landscape.

"It is very, very pretty," said Susan
to Mr. Gayre ; and, looking in her face,
he agreed with her ; it was, indeed, very,
very pretty.

"Are Kew Gardens well worth seeing,"
asked Susan, after a minute's pause.

Yes ; I like the wild part best, however,
where one gets away from the excursionists."


Maggie and I are going down to Kew
tomorrow ; perhaps we might be able to
see the gardens."

They are open every day," said Mr.
Garret

was not that I meant ; we intended
to visit two dear old ladies that we used
to know at Chelston. They are the sisters-in-law
of the former Eector. They used
to live with and keep house for him.
Such charming ladies! You can't think
how lovely they were ; the pink in their
cheeks was so delicate, and their eyes so

clear and blue, and they dressed so
plainly, yet so spotlessly, if you know
what I mean ; and the poor loved them
so much, and with reason. Well, the
Eector died. But I am afraid I tire you,
Mr. Gayre."

Tire ! Your story enchants me."
The Eector died, and then it seemed
such a terrible thing for them to go
into lodgings and live on their poor little
income. I am sure I lay awake at nights
crying about them, for they were such
darlings. And then, in a minute, like
something in a fairy-tale, a distant relation
died, and left them a house on Kew
Green for their lives. They took their
lovely china and Indian curiosities up
there. I helped them pack. And a niece,
a widow, lives with them ; and they put
their incomes together ; and it really is a
delightful . ending to what might have
been a sad tale. They have a nephew,

an artist. I think you heard Sir Geoffrey
mention him."

Is he the son of the widow," asked
Mr. Gayre.

Xo ; his mother died loner and Iodo-

ago.

And is he still in Eome, or has he
returned to England ?"

I have not heard anything about him fora
long time. I shall know all tomorrow."

At last," thought Mr. Gayre, " I have
met a woman in whom is no ' shadow of
turning.' She is as transparent as glass.
She is frankness and truth itself." And he
felt mightily relieved ; for, after all, there
seemed no wrong in his niece's trip to Kew.

Save that she ought not to have gone
alone. But then, if she never went out except
with a chaperon, she might stop at
home for the term of her natural life."

Altogether it was an anomalous position.
Mr. Gayre, when he considered the matter

dispassionately, found it extremely difficult
to define the rank to which his niece belonged.


How fond, Miss Drummond," he said,
you seem to be of every thing and person
connected with Chelston !"

If you only could imagine," she answered,
" how happy I was there, you would
not wonder at my loving even the vagabond
curs running about the roads."

Chelston, she went on to tell him, was
the loveliest place in all the wide world.
Had he ever been there ? Yes, once. Did
he remember this, that, and the other about
the Pleasaunce, the yew hedges, the fish-ponds,
the cherry orchard, the great mulberry-trees,
the vineries, the billiard-room, the library?

At one time I used almost to live at the
Pleasaunce," she explained. " Sir Geofirey
was good to me ;" and then in a few words
she told how, when but two years of age,
her father died out in India, and her mother

drooped and pined, and was buried in Shelton
churchyard six months afterwards.

I never knew what it was, though,
really to miss my parents," she said.
Everybody was so kind. I do not think
any child could have been more petted and
spoiled than I. My dear uncle would not
even let me go to school to be taught, as
poor old nurse used to lament, to be like
other young ladies ; and I am very sure
Maggie is right in saying I did not learn
much from the governesses, who were supposed
to teach useful knowledge. Dreadful,
was it not ? "

And Miss Drummond, remembering many
pleasant speeches Miss Chelston had made
to her in Mr. Gayre's presence, turned a
mischievous laughing face to that gentleman,
who, though he only smiled in answer,
thought if his companion were to be
regarded as an example of total ignorance,
education might be dispensed with.

"I used to hear so much about you,"
Susan went on, " I feel as if I had known
you all my life. And then — papa was an
officer too."

"I wish I were an officer now," answered
Mr. Gayre heartily, " only that in such case
I might not have had the pleasure of making
your acquaintance. Should you like
to go back to Chelston, Miss Drummond ? "

I think not," she said, with a sad
dreamy look in her wonderful eyes. "You
see we cannot take up the past again just
as it was. It is like reading a book a
second time, or hearing a song, or seeing a
sunset. It is never the same twice. My
past was very beautiful, but it is ended.
You can't put last year's leaves on the
trees, and we — we can't stay children and
girls for ever. Pretty nearly all the people
I loved are dead or gone. No, I should
not care for Chelston without my kind old
uncle, and Sir Geoffrey, and all the other

friends I was so fond of." And for a
moment Susan turned aside, while Mr.
Gayre, who had his memories of loss, if not
of love, walked on in silence too.

Just then, while Mr. Sudlow and his
companion were gravely discoursing concerning
the latest on dit — the Queen and
Royal Family, the picture of the year,
and the play which was considered most
amusing, or the book attracting the greatest
attention — Mr. Gayre saw a gentleman
striding along the path, who, with eyes
bent on the ground and hat pulled over
his brow, passed beautiful Miss Chelston
without a look, and would have served
Miss Drummond in like manner had that
young lady not arrested his attention with
a cry.

"Lai!" she said, "Lai!" and then they
grasped hands, both hands.

0, I am so glad ! " she went on, " I
am so glad ! "

"Where in all the wide world, Susan,
did you spring from ? " he asked, his face
radiant with pleasure. " It is like the
good old long ago, meeting you again."

"I am stopping with the Chelstons,"
she answered. " Mr. Gayre, would you
mind telling Margaret this is Mr. Hilderton ? "

Sweetly and decorously, without any
undue haste or excitement, came back
the fair Marguerite. She did not call the
young gentleman "Lai." She did not greet
him with effusion ; she only said, " How
very odd! We intended to go to Kew
tomorrow."

Susan's friendship, however, was of quite
another kind. No cause to complain of
the warmth of her greeting. She insisted
on knowing " Where he was," " What he was
doing," "How he was doing." While Miss
Chelston seemed to be considering how
she could most gracefully efface herself,
Miss Drummond asked fifty questions.

"I have a studio in Camden Town,
Susan," said the young man, " and your
face is in a picture there. Come and see
it— do."

Certainly I will," she answered. " Not
tomorrow, but the day after. Is it not
wonderful to have met you ? "

I don't know," he answered ; " I live
not very far away." And then, raising
his hat to the rest of the party, and
shaking hands with Susan, he was gone.

"How could you," asked Miss Chelston,
chiding — "how could you think, dear,
of saying we would go to Mr. Hilderton's
studio? The thing is utterly impossible."

Sir Geoffrey's daughter tarried behind
Mr. Sudlow to make this remark, and
her friend retorted,

I never said you would go ; but /
shall."

Now, Susan darling ! "

Now, Marguerite ! "

Vol. i. 20

And the two women stood tall and
lovely and defiant in the evening light.

If you would accept of my escort,
Miss Drummond," said Mr. Gayre, softly.

0, how very, very good you are ! "
exclaimed Susan, turning towards him with
that charming smile which seemed her
greatest possession ; " I should be so glad
if you would go with me. Not because
I mind what Margaret says in the least.
She knows, nobody better, that Lai and
I have been good brother and sister always,
and shall be the same, I hope,
till the end of our days. But if you
went with me, you might see some picture
you admired, and then you could
talk of it to your friends, and, perhaps,
somebody might buy it. Lai is very, very
clever ; but — "

"Is that the Lai who did not jump
the river at Chelston?" asked Mr. Gayre.

Miss Chelston had, apparently in stately

disgust of her friend's frivolity and impropriety,
resumed her walk with Mr.
Sudlow.

Yes. Poor Lai ! I am afraid he will
never jump any river anywhere," said
Miss Drummond, sadly. "Don't you know
that sort of man ? But, of course, you
must be acquainted with all sorts of men.
There are people who can write books,
and paint pictures, and compose music ;
and yet not sell a book, or a picture,
or a song. I am afraid Lai won't do
much good so far as making money is
concerned, and yet he has such genius.
He did a crayon likeness of uncle, which
was, indeed, his living see. Poor, poor
Lai ! Isn't he handsome ? "

With a light heart Mr. Gayre agreed
the young man was uncommonly handsome.


"I do not think it is well for men to

be so very good-looking," observed Miss

20-2

Drummond. " I know his beauty has
been Lai Hinder ton's ruin. His aunts denied
him nothing, and the women about
Chelston, young and old, thought he was
a nonsuch. Poor Lai! I have often felt
sorry for him. You will look at his pictures,
won't you, Mr. Gayre?"

If she only could have realised the fact
she had but to speak a little longer in
similar terms to insure the purchase of Mr.
Hilderton's whole collection!

HIGH FESTIVAL.

ly^AYS swept by. Since Mr. Gayre left
^I^P the army, days had never sped along
so quickly. All his scruples vere gone,
his painful self-examinations ended. He
almost lived at North Bank ; he walked and
drove and rode with his niece and her
friend. Save for an uneasiness he could
not explain, an occasional doubt which
would intrude, he was perfectly, utterly
happy and content.

For some reasons best known to himself
most probably because he wished at once
to begin operations upon the widow's heart
Sir Geoffrey decided to accompany " his

girls " to Brunswick Square when the
luncheon " came off."

"I think it would be only a fitting mark
of respect to your kind friend," he observed
to Mr. Gayre ; who merely said
"Very well," and having duly apprised
Mrs. Jubbins of the pleasure in store for
her, announced that he would defer his
own visit till some future occasion.

According to the Baronet's account everything
went off delightfully. He knew he
had made himself most agreeable. Mrs.
Jubbins' acquaintance with that class of
nobleman " (brought prominently before
the public by the Tichborne trial) was
of the slightest. Indeed, she had never
before known but one " Sir " intimately, and
he was only a red-faced, snub-nosed, loud-talking
gentleman in the tallow trade, who
had been knighted upon the occasion of
some royal expedition to the City. In comparison
with him Sir Geoffrey's manners

when on good behaviour must have seemed
princely. Truly, as the widow told Mr.
Gayre afterwards, his brother-in-law was
most affable," " and I am quite taken with
your dear niece," went on Mrs. Jubbins.
She is a most lovely girl, and so sweet
and winning ; but I can't say I care for her
friend. What do you suppose she asked
my maid ? "

I really cannot conjecture. Was it
something very dreadful ? "

"Very impertinent, at any rate," declared
Mrs. Jubbins ; " she asked her if my hair
was all my own''

Miss Drummond," said Mr. Gayre, when
he next went to North Bank, " may I
inquire what induced you to put such a
singular question to Mrs. Jubbins' maid as
you did about that lady's hair ? "

It was not Susan, it was I," interposed
Miss Chelston. " I did not mean any rudeness,
though it seems Lies. Jubbins is very

angry with me. So she has been complaining
to you, has she ? "

Yes, but she said it was your friend.
Miss Drummond, what are you laughing at? "

I can tell you," said Miss Chelston,
as Susan murmured " Nothing." " She is
wondering if Mrs. Jubbins let down her
back hair to prove to you it was ' all
real, every bit of it ; ' for that is what
she did the other day, when expressing
her righteous indignation to Susan."

My acquaintance with that back hair
is of too long a date for practical assurance
to be necessary," answered Mr. Gayre,
joining in Susan's mirth, which was now
uncontrollable.

Her hair is as coarse as a horse's
mane," put in Miss Chelston, spitefully.

no, Maggie. It is not as fine as
yours, but it is magnificent hair, for all
that," said Susan.

"I do wish you would call me Marguerite

! " exclaimed that young lady. " I
haTe told you over and over again I detest
hearing Maggie, Maggie, Maggie, from
morning to night ! "

I'll call you Griselda, if you like,"
said her friend slyly.

What I cannot conceive," remarked
Mr. Gayre, " is how Mrs. Jubbins came to
imagine you were Miss Drummond, and
Miss Drummond you."

It was all papa's fault," answered Miss
Chelston. " You know the ridiculous way
he talks about Susan being his own girl
and his favourite child, and his two
daughters, and all that sort of thing ;
and poor Mrs. Jubbins, whom I really do
not consider the cleverest or most brilliant
person I ever met, got utterly bewildered.
Besides, Susan set herself to be so very
agreeable that I know I must have seemed
a most reserved and unpleasant young
person by comparison ; and, of course, Mrs.

Jubbins imagined Mr. Gayre's niece could
not be other than delightful. She still
believes Susan to be me. For some reason,
when Susan called the other day to inquire
concerning the health of Mrs. Jubbins'
ankle, she did not think it necessary to
explain the mistake."

I thought it would be wiser to give
her time to forget that little matter of
the hair," observed Miss Drummond.

You had better try to make your
peace, my dear Marguerite," suggested Mr.
Gayre, a little ironically. "I know no
kinder or better woman than ]airs. Gubbins
; and it will grieve me very much if
she and you do not get on well together."

"If I can make her credit I am really
your niece she will forgive me readily,"
said Miss Chelston, in a tone which told
Mr. Gayre she understood the widow's feelings
towards her uncle, and did not approve
of them.

Indeed, the whole question had been very
freely commented upon by Sir Geoffrey and
before Miss Drummond.

I shouldn't wonder," declared the
Baronet, "if they make a match of it yet.
I think she'll bag her bird, after all. He's
a strange fellow, but I daresay he'll settle
down in the traces one of these days. I
am sure he might have her for the asking,
and I don't think it would be a bad thing
for him, eh, Susan ? "

It does not strike me as very suitable,"
answered Susan.

She's not exactly his sort, but she'd
make him comfortable, I'll be bound.
With such a lot of money any woman
must be considered suitable ; besides, Mrs.
Jubbins is not bad-looking, and she's a
good soul, I feel satisfied."

Is not Mr. Gayre rich enough ? " asked
Susan. "I should have thought it was not
necessary for him to marry Money."

Bless you, my girl, nobody is rich
enough. Gayre must have plenty ; but I
daresay he could do with more, and it
would be an actual sin to let such a
fortune slip out of the family."

Susan did not say anything further, but
she thought a great deal ; and she often
afterwards looked earnestly at Mrs. Gubbins,
wondering whether Mr. Gayre would
ever marry that lady, and supposing he
did how his notions and those of his wife
could be made to work harmoniously together.
She liked Mr. Gayre immensely ;
but somehow she felt she did not like him
quite so well since the Baronet broached
that idea of marrying the widow for the
sake of her money.

And yet he was so kind and considerate.
It was he who made her visit utterly
delightful. Margaret and she had their
little tiffs and misunderstandings. Sir Geoffrey
— well, Sir Geoffrey did not seem to

her quite the Sir Geoffrey of old. " We
go on," as she observed so truly to Mr.
Gayre ; and oftentimes we find old friends
do not suit us if they have not gone on
our way.

Much as faces change — age, sadden, alter
-^they do not change half so much as
souls. This is what makes it so hard to
take up a friendship again after a long
separation. We may get accustomed to
gray hair that had kept its sunny brown
in our loving memory — to wrinkles — to
dim eyes — to the bowed head and the
faltering step ; but what we never grow
reconciled to are the moral changes wrought
by time, the faults which have become
intensified, the latent weakness we never
suspected, the falsehood where we would
have pledged our lives there existed only
truth, the frivolity and the selfishness
where we never dreamed to find other than
high aims and noble aspirations.

To the young the process of disillusion
seems terrible, and Susan found that to be
forced to see her friends' faults was very
bitter indeed.

Nevertheless, spite of Sir Geoffrey's
eternal Jeremiads on the subject of money,
and his daughter's jealousy, irritability, and
lack of ordinary straightforwardness, Susan
did enjoy stopping at North Bank. It was
such a delightful change from the deathly
quietness and dull monotony of Enfield
Highway, from her aunt's lamentations,
and the conventionality, not to say stupidity,
of her cousin's intended wife.

Constant variety was the rule at Sir
Geoffrey's : except when Margaret and she
were alone together, Miss Drummond never
felt dull.

"I daresay I should tire of the Hfe after
a time," thought Susan ; " but a little of it
is delightful."

Flower-shows, concerts, exhibitions — Mr.

Gayre took the girls to everything that
was going on. Sometimes Mr. Sudlow was
of the party, but the banker never seemed
particularly desirous of his company. He
was waiting to see whether some better
chance might not open for this niece. The
closer he came in contact with that gentleman
the less he liked him, " and yet he
is good enough for her," was his deliberate
conclusion.

Happiness, in those bright sunshiny days,
made Mr. Gayre almost amiable. Dimly it
occurred to him that if he married Susan
he could then give Margaret the opportunity
of meeting men of a different class and
stamp altogether. He had quite made up
his mind to ask Susan to be his wife; but
he did not want to be precipitate. He
wished to woo her almost imperceptibly, to
make himself necessary to her before he
spoke of love, and win her heart, if slowly,
surely, and run no risk of even a temporary

rejection. He could not do without her.
She was the woman he had been waiting for
through the years — sweet, tender, spirited,
truthful. Life seemed very beautiful to him
then — well worth living, indeed.

Properly speaking, Miss Drummond's sojourn
at North Bank was rather a succession
of short visits than one continuous stay.
Every alternate week she returned to En-field,
remaining there from Friday till Monday
— sometimes for a longer period ; besides
this, she and Miss Chelston went to stop a
little time with their old friends at Kew ;
and when Mrs. Jubbins took up her abode
at Chislehurst she often had both girls staying
there.

The widow was in a state of the highest
excitement concerning a great party she
meant to give. The Jones had celebrated
the change to their new house with a ball ;
the Browns had got up a picnic really on
a scale of unprecedented magnificence;

whilst it was known the Eobinsons intended
to ask all the world and his wife to a tremendous
entertainment, when their new
mansion " at Walton was ready for occupation.


So I really must do something," declared
Mrs. Jubbins to Mr. Gayre ; "it would bea
sin and a shame to have such a house
as this and not ask one's friends to it."

"Better give a garden-party," suggested
the banker ; " and then the young people
can have a dance in the evening."

So said, so done ; the invitations were
written and posted. Every one Mrs. Gubbins
had ever known was asked, and a
great number she never had known.

Sir Geoffrey begged her to give him
some blank cards, and promised to secure
the presence "of a few young fellows well
connected, and so forth."

The Jones, Browns, and Eobinsons, and

many other rich families — all of the same
Vol. i. 21

walk in life — had each two or three intimate
friends who wanted, of all things, to
make dear Mrs. Jubbins' acquaintance.

Mrs. Jubbins even asked Canon and
Mrs. Gayre and the Misses Gayre, and received
by return of post an emphatic refusal.
The widow was unwise enough to
mention that she expected Sir Geoffrey
Chelston and his beautiful daughter to be
of the company.

What a set your brother has got
amongst!" said Mrs. Gayre to her husband.
"I should not be at all surprised to hear
any day he had married that Jubbins woman."
"Neither should I," groaned the Canon.
"There is one comfort, however, she is
enormously rich''

O, I don't believe in those City fortunes,"
retorted Mrs. Gayre : " look at your father !"
My dear !" exclaimed the clergyman, less
in a tone of endearment than of mild remonstrance.


The garden-party, to which Mrs. Jubbins
had bidden a crowd of people, and with which
she intended to inaugurate a new epoch,
wherein "she should enjoy her money, and
have some good of her life," promised indeed
to be a unique affair. Where expense is no
object it is comparatively easy to compass
success ; and on this occasion, if never on
another, the widow announced her intention
of not troubling her head about sixpences
a resolution which met with unqualified
approval from Sir Geoffrey.

In for a penny, in for a pound," he said,
in his off-hand, agreeable way ; and then he
asked Mrs. Jubbins how she " stood " for
wine, and offered to take all trouble concerning
her cellar off her hands, by having
anything she wanted sent down by his own
wine-merchant, "who supplies an excellent
article," finished the Baronet, " and is a
deuced nice sort of fellow."

"Affable," however, though the Baronet

21—2

might be, friendly as well, and indeed on
occasions homely in his discourse, Mrs. Gubbins
was not to be enticed into taking her
custom away from the houses that had won
the favour of Mr. Jubbins deceased, and
Mr. Jubbins' father before him. She would
as soon have changed her church ; sooner
indeed, because in her heart of hearts she
inclined to a moderate ritual, while the Gubbins
had always pinned their simple faith
to black gowns, bad music, high pews, and
the plainest of plain services.

At every turn Sir Geoffrey's proffered suggestions
met with a thankful but decided
rejection.

For the commissariat department, concerning
which the lady's ideas were of the
most liberal description, Mrs. Jubbins felt
that she and her butler and her cook, and
the City purveyors, would prove equal to
the occasion.

I am not afraid of being unable to feed

my friends," she said to Sir Geofirey ; " only,
how am I to amuse them?"

"Let them amuse themselves," answered
Sir Geoffrey. " Gad, if they can't do that
they had better stop away."

He had laid out his own scheme of entertainment,
and also given a private hint
to Miss Chelston it would be wise for her
to make " some running with that Sudlow
fellow." "Remember the crooked stick, my
girl," he advised, " and while we are in
comparatively smooth water try to get a
bit ahead. You mind what I say to you.
If you don't, the time won't be long coming
you'll repent having neglected my advice."

Plants by the van-load, muslin by 'the
acre, relays of musicians, luncheon and supper
from a firm of confectioners well known
to City folks, waiters whose dignity would
not have disgraced a Mansion House dinner :
The Warren looking charming in its setting
of green trees, guests alighting as fast as

the carriages could set down, a hum of
voices, dresses of every possible fashion and
colour, ladies young and old, winsome and
passee, girls and matrons, gentlemen in
every variety of male costume, people who
had respected Mr. Jubbins, and people who
respected Mr. Higgs' daughter ; the combined
odours of all the flowers on earth,
as it seemed, mingling with the sound of
rattling china and jingling glass ; everywhere
a Babel of tongues : guests sauntering
solitary over the gardens, wondering
how they were to get through the next
few hours ; groups chattering on the lawns ;
sunshine streaming on the grass through a
tracery of leaves and branches ; rabbits
scudding away into the plantations ; windows
open to the ground ; light curtains
swaying gently in the summer air ; white
pigeons with pink feet and wondering eyes
looking down on the company from the
roof; millionaires exchanging words of

wisdom about " stocks," and " Turks," and
Brazils," on the terrace which once " his
lordship " had no doubt often paced ; Mrs.
Jubbins nervous, triumphant, handsome ; her
'children in a seventh heaven of delight ; Sir
Geoffrey Chelston in a perfectly new white
hat and pale-blue necktie, talking to everybody
his discerning glance told him might
be made worth the trouble ; Margaret radiantly
beautiful, in a dress which suited her
hopes and expectations ; Susan more simply
attired in accordance with her certainties ;
Mr. Arbery escorting a young lady whose
ultimate destination was Australia ; Mr. Lai
Hilderton looking handsome, forlorn, and discontented
; a sprinkling of clergymen ; a few.
unmistakable West Enters ; this was what
Mr. Gayre saw when he walked up from
Chislehurst Station to The Warren on that
glorious afternoon in August.

The number of persons who declared it
was " a perfect day " could only have been

equalled by those who talked about Lord
Flint and the Earl of Merioneth and the
widowed dowager. Though all dead or
absent, the " noble family " seemed to pervade
the whole place.

The rooms were inspected, their appointments
criticised, the style of architecture
examined in detail. Opinions differed as to
the convenience of the residence as a family
mansion ; but every one agreed it was just
the place for a party. Such a number of
rooms, and all on the ground-floor !

"It is like wandering through the courts
in the Crystal Palace," said one young lady.

As fine a billiard-room as I'd ever wish
to see I " exclaimed Sir Geoffrey.

Never could have believed any man out
of Bedlam would build such a place; it is
offering a premium to burglars," grumbled
an old alderman.

"Dear me, I should not care to sit in
these great drawing-rooms by myself ! " cried

a portly dowager, who, next minute, confided
to all whore it might concern, " I am such a
poor timid creature, though — a mere bundle
of nerves."

"Just fancy lying awake at night and
listening to the wind howling through the
trees I I would as soon hive in the middle
of an American forest," ventured a lackadaisical
miss to her neighbour, with a shudder.

I like it," answered the neighbour, who
happened to be Susan Drummond.

You don't mean to say you live here ? "
in a tone of mingled awe and horror.

"No, but I stay here sometimes."

And where do you sleep ? Surely not
in one of those dreadful rooms with only a
pane of glass between you and robbers ! "

I am not afraid. For twenty years I
resided in a much more lonely house than
this."

Eeally ! I wonder how any one can doit
; I could not ! I should die ! "

Come into the garden, do," entreated a
voice at Susan's elbow ; and, turning, she
saw Lionel Hilderton.

Crossing the spacious hall, they walked together
to the gardens, which were curiously-planned
on sloping terraces, rustic steps,
formed of logs laid lengthwise, leading from
level to level.

What a rambling sort of place this is ! "
remarked the young man irritably, as he
regarded the evidences of wealth which met
his eye at every turn; "and these huge
gatherings are a complete mistake. I don't
know a soul here."

You know m^," said Susan, mildly.

Yes, you of course ; but then everybody
wants you ; and what a set of people they
are ! ''

Some of them seem very nice, I think,"
dissented his companion.

0, you find good in every one ; but they
are a lot of dreadful snobs, you may depend.

Of course I have not a word to say against
your friend Mrs. Jubbins, though she has
about as much appreciation of art as that
cow ;" and Mr. Hilderton pointed down to
the plantations, where a milky mother was
seeking food under difficulties calculated to
try her patience. " She — Mrs. Jubbins I
mean, not the cow — asked me the other day
what I would charge to paint her a picture
exactly a yard long. I found out she wanted
it to put in a frame she had by her not
worth twopence. Of course I said I could
not paint to measure. If these sort of
people do not know better they ought to
be taught."

I think I should have taken the order,"
said Susan.

I would not, then. If I have no respect
for myself I have for my art. To please you
I consented to paint her prosaic self and
hideous children, but I feel I can't stand
any more of that sort of thing."

You know I did all for the best."
Of course I understand that ; and I am
most grateful to you ; but you cannot think
how trying it is. You remember that picture
of ' Esther ' for which your friend, Mr. Gayre
said he would try to find a purchaser ? Well,
he sent a dealer — actually a dealer, a man
with dirty hands and diamond ring, and
heavy gold chain and thick nose, a Jew of
the worst type — who had the impudence to
criticise my work. He was good enough to
say ' Esther ' herself was not so bad, and
he was willing to buy that painting, though
the perspective was defective and the minor
figures unfinished. I told him he must take
'Mordecai' as well — that I could not part
the pair. He declared he would rather be
without ' Mordecai ' if I gave him the picture ;
but at last, finding me firm, offered eighteen
shillings extra!"

"Poor Lai! What did you do?"

Do ! I ordered him to leave the studio,

and next day had a note, saying I could
send a line ' to his place ' if I thought better
of the matter."

So you failed to sell ' Esther ' after all?"

I was forced to take his terms. I had
not a sovereign left."

They went a little further without speaking
a word ; then Mr. Hilderton took up his
parable again.

"And to see all these people absolutely
wallowing in wealth! It is utterly heartbreaking!
Don't you think so, Susan? —
now, honestly, don't you ? "

Well, no," she answered. " If they can
derive happiness from money and you from
art, surely it is better they should have
their money and you your art."

But I can't be happy without money.
I want ever so much. I'd like to be as
rich as Rothschild, if I could."

"In that case would it not be wise to
accept as many commissions as you can

get, even if the people who give them are
not particularly interesting? Were I you
I should try to paint Mrs. Jubbins and her
children as well as possible, and then she
might get you more orders. To be quite plain,
Lai, as you are in such want of bread-and-butter,
you ought not to quarrel with it."

What answer the artist might have made
to this extremely wise speech will never
now be known, for at that moment their
iete-d-tete was interrupted.

0, here are the truants ! " exclaimed
Miss Chelston, gaily : she and Mr. Sudlow
coming from an opposite direction, met
Susan and Mr. Hilderton somewhat unexpectedly.
"We could not think where you
had gone ; Mrs. Jubbins has been sending
in all directions after you. Aren't you
tired of walking about? You missed some
exquisite singing ; dancing will commence
presently — you had better come in and get
cool."

I am not at all too warm," answered
Miss Drummond ; " but I won't miss the
dancing as well as the singing."

And remember I am to have the first
waltz," said Mr. Hilderton.

"You shall have it, though you did not
ask me before," she laughed.

And then they all bent their steps in
the direction of the house, Mr. Hilderton
drawing his companion a little back in
order to ask,

Who on earth is that man, Sudlow ? "

"Haven't an idea," replied Miss Drummond,
in the same low tone ; " some one
Mr. Gayre knows."

He is rich, too, I suppose ? "

"I fancy so, but I don't know."

"He has eyes for nobody but your friend
Miss Chelston."

Your friend, too, or at least she used
to be."

"Ah, she is like every one else in this

vile place. She cares for nothing but
money."

"I am sure you wrong her," said Susan.

"It does not much matter whether I door
not. I am only a struggling artist. You
see she scarcely speaks to me."

It is her quiet manner ; she does not
mean to be unkind."

As they stood near one of the windows
watching the quartette slowly ascending from
terrace to terrace, Mrs. Jubbins was saying
at that very moment to Mr. Gayre, "Judge
for course'; I feel positive my idea is correct."

I should not have thought it ; but
ladies no doubt understand all these matters
better than we do," answered the banker,
courteously.

"And it seems such a pity, for she is so
good and charming, and he is so poor and
so impracticable."

We must try if we can't do something
for him."

"Yes, you are always thinking how you
can serve others." This was quite a stock
phrase of Mrs. Jubbins, and one which Mr.
Gayre had long ceased to deprecate. "But
I really can't see how he is to be helped ; "
and then the widow went on to relate the
painting by measure " episode, and also
another painful experience she had undergone
in her efforts to "bring the young
man forward."

Dear old Deputy Pettell came down to
call on me the other day, and you know
what a judge he is of pictures; he has bought
thousands of pounds' worth one time and
another. Well, I had got Mr. Hilderton to
take my darling Ida as a shepherdess with
a crook and sheep — such a pretty idea —
and there was the portrait m the smaller
drawing-room, and Mrs. Robinson and her
nephew Captain Flurry and Mr. Hilderton
in the other. Of course the painting instantly
arrested Mr. Deputy. ' What have

Vol. i. 22

we here ? ' he asked ; and he put on his
spectacles, and I was just going to remark
I hoped to introduce the artist, who fortunately
was at The Warren, when he said,
My dear Mrs. Jubbins, where did you
get this awful daub from ? It is one of
your girls, isn't it? I suppose that long
stick she is balancing over her shoulder is
meant for a crook ; but those things can't
be sheep — they have not even the remotest
resemblance to that animal.' "

What happened then ? " asked Mr.
Gayre, as the widow paused in her impetuous
narrative.

From the next room," answered Mrs.
Jubbins, " there came this, quite loud and
distinct : ' The man only knows a sheep hy
its head and trotters I ' I declare, Mr. Gayre,
I thought I should have dropped ; and I
felt so angry with Mrs. Robinson for laughing
outright — you are aware the Eobinsons
never liked the Petrels. But don't mention

the matter before Miss Drummond,"
added Mrs. Jubbins, hurriedly, as that young
lady, leaving her friends, turned to enter
by the window. " I wouldn't have her
vexed for the world ! "

Time — relentless time — flew by. The
afternoon had gone, the evening was going,
the time for the last train coming. Everywhere,
as it seemed, there was dancing —
in the dining-room, the larger drawing-room,
the library, so miscalled from the fact of a
few volumes of forgotten magazines being
there imprisoned within glass cases, locked
and bolted as though each book were valuable
as some old Elzevir.

The musicians were placed in the wide
corridor which divided the private part of
the house into two portions ; and in the
various rooms set apart for their use light
feet twinkled in the mazes of the dance,
and light hearts grew lighter and bright
eyes brighter as the old, old story, which

22-2

will never stale till the heavens are rolled
up as a scroll, was told in words or implied
in glances more eloquent than any form of
mortal speech.

"There never was such a party." At
last everyone seemed agreed on that point
the many who approved of the affair, and
the few who did not. As a "social gathering
" it proved a supreme success. No
stand-aloofism ; no proud looks and uplifted
noses ; no " How the deuce did you come
here, sir ? " sort of expression. The City
did not seem antagonistic to the West, or
the West supercilious to the City ; while
the latest fashion in suburbs did not disdain
to ask a few kindly questions concerning
dear old Bloomsbury."

There a High Church clergyman was exchanging
confidences with a wealthy Dissenter,
who had given Heaven only knows
how much to the destitute and heathen.
Young Graceless was dancing-with Miss

Reuben, who was reported to have a
fortune of a hundred and fifty thousand.
Beamish, the author of Fashion and Fancy ^
brought to Chislehurst by Mr. Hilderton,
was showing some tricks in the card-room,
to the great mental disturbance of a few
old stagers, who looked upon levity in the
midst of a game of whist as a sort of act
of bankruptcy ; while Sir Geoffrey Chelston
having button-holed Mr. Jabez Falls, the
great match manufacturer, who was then
running a tremendous opposition to Bryant
& May, had just concluded a deal with
him for a pair of carriage-horses, subject
to inspection and a vet's approval.

The price may seem stiff," remarked
the Baronet (at the same time confidentially
recommending Mr. Falls to try some sparkling
hock ; " the very best I ever tasted ;
and I thought I knew every vintage worth
talking about " ) ; " but there is not such
another pair or match in London — three

parts thoroughbred ; action perfect, temper
ditto ; except that the mare has a star on
her forehead and the horse hasn't, might be
twin brother and sister. Now I tell you,"
and the Baronet dropped his voice confidentially,
"how they come to be in the
market. Bless you, I know all the ins
and outs of these things ; " and as he
made this perfectly true assertion. Sir
Geoffrey poured his new friend out a
fresh beaker of Ills. Jubbins' wonderful
hock. " Graceless — that young fellow coming
along now to get an ice for the pretty ghi
he has been waltzing with — who is she, did
you say? — had, owing to a little misadventure
— young fellows will be young fellows,
but you can't make old dowagers understand
that — got into the black books of his great
aunt the Dowager Countess of Property.
Well, he knew her ladyship's one weakness
was horseflesh ; so as a sort of propitiatory
offering, he got over from Ireland two of

the sweetest things ever put into harness.
They were just a bit wild at first, as all
Irish horses are ; they need coaxing and
humouring, like the Irish women, and then
they'll go through fire and water and to
death for you, if need be. He and I
trained them : took them here and there,
first wide of London, then nearer and
nearer, and into the Park, till they were at
last well-nigh perfect ; then what d'ye think
happened P "

I can't imagine ; perhaps one on 'em
fell lame," said the match-maker, lapsing
into a once-accustomed vernacular.

Lord, no," said Sir Geofirey ; " but the
Dowager died. When Graceless went down
to the funeral, he found his name not in
the will. That was last week. There are
the horses eating their heads off; and to
come to what I said, ]Mr. Falls, if they
don't do their twelve miles, half country and
half over the stones, in less than forty

minutes, why, I'll eat them, and that's all
about it."

The hall was set about with great banks
of flowers. Sitting, half hidden by ferns,
palms, begonias, and a hundred sweet-scented
flowers, that certainly were that
night not on deserts wasting their perfumes,
Mr. Gayre at length espied Miss Drummond,
whom he had for some time past been seeking.
She was nestling behind a great oleander,
with a scarlet shawl wrapped around
her shoulders, her hands idly crossed in her
lap, and her head resting against the wall.
Her whole attitude was one of listless weariness
; and it seemed so strange to see Susan
Drummond, of all people in the world, sitting
apart idle and silent, that Mr. Gayre was
about to approach and ask if she felt ill,
when Mr. Hilderton, hastily brushing past,
exclaimed,

Come, Susan, this is our dance."

I think not," she said ; " but, in any

case, I mean to dance no more tonight."


The translation of which is, you don't
mean to dance with me."

I intended you to understand my words

literally."

♦/

K I were Mr. Sudlow your answer
might be different."

As you are not Mr. Sudlow, and as he
will certainly not ask me, there is no use
speculating about my possible answer."

K you will not dance, then, come and
have an ice."

No, thank you. Like a dear good Lai,
do leave me in peace. I want to be quiet
for a few minutes. I really am very tired."

"The next time I ask you to do anything
for me — " began the young man.

"I'll do it if I can possibly ; but not tonight."


"That is all very fine. I am going,
Susan."

It delights me to hear it."

Perhaps some day you will feel sorry
for this."

I do not imagine I shall ; but you had
better leave me now to try to get up
strength to bear the regret you prophesy is
in store."

"Susan, I never thought I should almost
hate you."

Neither do you hate me seriously,
Lai ; you will regret your words tomorrow."


Is Miss Drummond not well ? " asked
Mr. Gay re at this juncture, calmly and
innocently, as though he had just come
on the scene.

I am only tired, Mr. Gayre," Susan
answered for herself; while, without deigning
an answer of any sort, Mr. Hilderton,
an ugly scowl disfiguring his handsome face,
turned away abruptly, and strode out of
the hall.

I fear greatly you are ill," persisted
the banker anxiously.

"No, indeed ; but I do feel very very
tired. I have been standing, talking,
or dancing all day, and am beginning to
think with Mr. Hilderton, these continuous
parties are mistakes. One has too much
for one's money," she added, with a laugh.

•^You are about the only person here
who thinks so, I imagine," said Mr. Gayre.
Let me get you a little wine. Sir Geoffrey
has been chanting the praises of some
hock, as though he had a cellar-full to
dispose of. Will you try its virtues? "

Not even on Sir Geoffrey's recommendation,"
she answered. " I think I will try
instead the efficacy of night air. Anything
to be quiet for a short time ; anywhere to
get away from the sound of those eternal
waltzes and mad galops."

May I — will you allow me to accompany
you ? " and the banker's courteous

manner formed a marked contrast to the
rude familiarity which had characterised
Mr. Hilderton's speech.

I should be very glad ; but I do not like
taking you away from your friends."

I have not many friends here," he
answered ; " and if I had — " But he stopped
in time, and drawing her hand within his arm
in the paternal manner he affected, led her
out on to the drive.

The terrace is crowded," he explained ;
which way shall we go ? "

Down towards the Hollow, please," said
Susan ; and accordingly, winding round the
end of the house, they struck into a narrow
tortuous path which led to the plantations.

How pretty it is ! " remarked Susan, looking
up at the lighted windows, from which
the music floated out into the peaceful night,
and sank tenderly down into the heart,
softened as music and bells always should
be by distance.

Yes, not a bad sort of ' Love in a
cottage ' place."

Too large for that," she answered.

What a bad character to give Love !
Do you think he could not fill all those
great rooms ? "

He might ; but still The Warren does
not fulfil one's ideal — at least my ideal —
of Love in a cottage : three small sittings
if Love were inclined to be extravagant,
a tiny tile-paved kitchen with
latticed casement, a thatched roof, m the
eaves of which martins and swallows make
their nests — it is said martins will never
build where man and wife disagree — a
trellis-work porch covered all over with
honeysuckle and jasmine — roses, crimson,
white and pink, peeping in at the windows.
No, The Warren is too stately a cottage
for ordinary lovers. The very place, of
course, for folk of high degree, but not
£or common mortals. Do you know, I

have often wondered how a lord makes
love."

Very much like anybody else, I should
think," answered Mr. Gayre.

But Susan shook her head in dissent.

I should say not, though of course I
am no judge ; for I never knew but one
lord, and he was a dreadful old man.
People said he beat his wife, and certainly
she looked miserable ; and I knew— for I
saw it — that he kept a book in which
every household item was entered. You
would hardly believe that the diary ran
something in this fashion :

' At luncheon to-day : Mr. Gayre, Mrs.
Jubbins, Sir Geoffrey Chelston, Miss Chelston.
Miss Drummond. Game-pie, cutlets,
blancmange, stewed fruit : nothing sent
down.' "

You cannot mean that ! " exclaimed Mr.
Gayre in amazement.

"Indeed I do. The book had been

handed to the housekeeper to convict her
of some sin regarding three sponge-cakes,
I think, and she showed it to me. I
looked at a page or two, and saw my own
name with this comment : ' Miss Drummond
was helped twice to cold heed! ! and I
remember also : ' Mem. — Never to ask
young Hilderton again ; he drank three
glasses of old madeira'' And poor Lai
really did not know what he was drinking."

"By the bye, I wanted to speak to you
about Mr. Hilderton," began Mr. Gayre.
"I could not avoid hearing what he said
to you in the hall just now."

Yes ! " said Susan, surprised ; and she
waited for the next words her companion
should utter.

END OF VOL. I.

HI I 111 11 n'

OF ILUNOIS-UBBI^N^.,

Billy

Tig 051972849

M^

^^'^^

OF THE

UN Diversity

Of ILLINOIS

R43fs

BY

MES. J. H. Liddell,

AUTHOR OF "THE SENIOR Partner," "GEORGE GEITII, OK 1 EN COUItT," ETC.

IX THREE VOLUMES.
VOL. II.

LONDON :
RICHARD Beetle Y & SOX, NEW BURLINGTON STREET.

.^ttblisbcrs in (^rbmarjr to ||cr ^ajtstg tfje Quit.
1884.

J * -

CONTENTS.

CHAP. PAGE

I. — Sir Geoffrey's Opinions . . . . 1

U. — Ox THE Away Home 35

III.— Sir Geoffrey's Tactics . . . . . 56

lY.— Landed 83

V. — Between Wind axd Vater 108

YI. — The Blackness of Night 149

ATI. — Sir Geoffrey's Idea 182

Viii.— The Trial 202

IX. — "Events Arrange Themselves" . . . 237

X. — The AYido^'er ^QQ

XL — A Dog ix the Manger . . : . . 293

CHAPTEE I.

SIR GEOrrREY's OPINIONS.

gIgPPAEEXTLY ]mr. Gayre found his
^p||3ii| subject less easy than it seemed
at first mention, for, instead of proceeding
to say what he had to say, he
repeated his former statement in a different
form.

Behave me, I played eavesdropper quite
unintentionally. It was impossible for me
to help hearing your conversation."

No," answered Susan, varying her monosyllable,
but not its sense. " It does not
matter in the least," she went on, imagining
Mr. Gayre intended to convey some sort

Vol. ii. 23

of apology. " Lai spoke loud enough for
all the world to hear."

The banker laughed. "That is quite
true," he said. " Of course, Miss Drummond,
it would be both impertinent and
intrusive were I to make any remark on
Mr. Hinder ton's words. All I want to say
is— "

"Don't say anything hard about poor
Lai," she interrupted. " He is trying at
times ; but so few people understand him."

"I think I do."

No, indeed, you cannot. Even to-night,
for instance — " and then Lai's champion
paused suddenly.

Even to-night, for instance ? " repeated
Mr. Gayre, with quiet suggestiveness.

I dislike half sentences, and yet I
cannot finish mine," said Susan. "I may
tell you this much, however," she added,
that the day's festivities have tried his not
particularly equable temper a good deal.

After all, if you think over the position,
it cannot be pleasant for a poor man who
does possess genius to mix amongst people
incapable of recognising genius till it is
successful ! "

You bring me to the very point I
wanted to reach," replied the banker. "I
wish to help Mr. Hilderton to make the
genius he undoubtedly possesses profitable ;
but I scarcely know how to set about the
matter. He is a little ' difficult.' "

Not a little— very," amended Susan.
"So difficult, that I really sometimes fail
to see how even his best friends are to
put him in the straight road for fortune."

I am quite willing to try, if you assist
me with a few hints. Knowing the
interest — the great interest — you take in
Mr. Hilderton's future it would give me
the sincerest pleasure to aid him by any
means in my power."

I certainly like Lai," answered Susan

23-2

slowly, struck by something in her companion's
tone — something implied which she
instinctively felt she ought to show him
she understood — " very much indeed ; both
for his own sake, and on account of old
times ; but — "

I suppose one cannot expect a young
lady to say more," Mr. Gayre observed,
almost as if by way of inquiry.

I hope, Mr. Gayre, you do not imagine
for a moment — *'

"What, Miss Drummond?"

That I care for Mr. Hilderton excepting:
as a friend? A dear friend, of course ;
but one who could never by any possibility
be more to me." Susan was a little angry,
and spoke with a plain decision no man
could really have misinterpreted.

Mr. Gayre did not, at all events, though
it suited his purpose to ask.

And why should I not imagine he
might some day be more to you ? "

Because," she answered, " I thought you
knew me better."

Just for a moment there came a wild
temptation over him to say he did, to cast
his arms around her and strain her to his
heart, and then and there, under the silent
stars, with lights gleaming through the
open windows above, and music floating
down to where they stood, tell the tale of
how love in middle age had come to him,
and made life all beautiful and good and
sweet, since a certain May day, when for the
first time he saw, in Hyde Park, Susan
Drummond's fair dear face calmly watching
the antics of Squire Temperley's hunter.

But he was prudent ; he did know her
so well that he felt sure, if the faintest
consciousness of liking him over-much had
entered her mind, those charming lips would
never have spoken the words which filled
his heart with such delight. He would
wait ; he would not frighten, even by a

gesture, this innocent, fearless, winsome
bird, which seemed inclined to flutter
towards him and settle on his hand.

"To be quite candid," he answered, and
in his voice there was no trace of the
strong constraint he put on his speech, " I
thought I did know you better. It was aa
idea which would never have entered my
own mind ; but Mrs. Jubbins felt so sure,
so satisfied — "

Dear, kind Mrs. Jubbins," murmured
Susan. " She has indeed been good to
Lai."

Then there is really nothing in the
affair ? "

Nothing whatever ; nothing on either
side," she said eagerly, yet with pretty
confusion. " Still, none the less, Mr. Gayre,
you will help him, won't you ? "

None the less ! If she could only have
read his soul she would have understood
all the more — a thousand times the more.

I will do my best, my very best for
him," answered the banker earnestly ; " but
you must help me, Miss Drummond. You
will teach me how to sive him hints and
avoid offence."

Not a very easy task," she declared ;
but I will try to teach you the geography
of that very strange country, Lionel Hinders
mind ; that is to say, so far as I
may," she added, with an unintentional
significance. " And now you must not say
r am like a child who does not know what
it wants if I ask you to take me in again.
I feel as much too cold as I did too warm
ten minutes ago. The night air out here
is chilly."

Wrap your shawl closer around you,"
said Mr. Gayre anxiously. " I am afraid
you are not well. You have been over-exciting
yourself."

Perhaps I have a little," she agreed ;
but that is nothing, and I feel so much

happier, so very much happier, since we
talked about Lai. I do not know how to
thank you enough ; I do not indeed."

Mr. Gayre could have told her ; but once
again he refrained. Who would wilhngiy,
even for reality, break the soft spell of
such a dream as the man then revelled
in?

And so," to change the subject, he
said, looking up at The Warren, " you
think Love would not be a suitable tenant:
for Lady Merioneth's cottage ? "

"Well, you see," explained Susan, leaning
a little on his arm as they ascended the
slope, her head bent somewhat back, her
eyes scanning the long terrace and the
brilliantly-lighted windows, " the poets, sofar
as I can remember, have never yet
represented Love as a Millionaire."

What do you think of Mr. Sudlow as
combining both characters ?"

I may be wrong," she answered, " but

I fancy he feels his position as a rich man
too much to act the part of Cupid very
naturally."

And yet he is deeply smitten with my
niece."

So I see," Susan agreed ; and they
proceeded a dozen steps. or more in silence.

They were slowly ascending towards the
house. Mingling with the tones of the
music they could hear the voices of those
guests who were pacing to and fro, or
standing upon the terrace. Xow there
came to them the curious, muffled, yet
continuous noise produced by a hundred
light feet skimming over polished floors — a
moment more and they were able to
catch glimpses of the dancers themselves.
Soon it would be all over, that brief time
spent in paradise, which Mr. Gayre knew
he should never, while life lasted, forget.
Involuntarily, almost, he slackened his
already tardy steps, and said,

Do not walk so fast, Miss Drummond.
You are tired."

'' Fast !" she repeated ; " slow, rather, even
for a snail ;" at the same time, however,
following his example, while she turned a
thoughtful dreamy face towards the gleaming
lights and the laughing groups, and
the flitting figures as they appeared and
disappeared within the rooms.

If you could choose your lot in life,"
asked the banker, breaking in upon her
reverie, " what would it be ?"

You ask a very strange question," said
Susan, turning towards him a glance
eloquent in its wistful astonishment.

Do I ? And yet one I should imagine
easily answered. We all have, or have
had, I suppose, our dreams of what we
should Hke life to prove. K some enchanter
put it into your power to-night to
select your path, where would you have
it lie ? Across the hill-top or winding

among lowly valleys? Should you select
to be rich and great, or humble and out
of the battle? Perhaps, like Ager, of
whom we are told so very little, you
would pray for a happy mean ? "

"I don't think I should," she replied.

What would you ask for, then ? " he
persisted. " Wealth, power, love, genius ? "

She shook her head.

"Is it that you will not tell me, or
that, never having thought the question
out previously, you are unable to decide ? "

"I never have thought about the matter
before," she said. " Still, I fancy I know
what I should most wish to be able to do."

"And that is?"

You must not laugh, Mr. Gayre, if I
tell you — I could not bear you to laugh."

On my honour, I won't laugh, no
matter how extraordinary your desire may
seem."

"I should wish, then — "

Yes, Miss Drummond ? " for she stopped
and hesitated.

To be able to make the best of whatever
lot was appointed for me. If I were
wise I know I should not ask for riches,
or competence, or happiness, or talent, or
renown ; but simply that I might have
strength and wisdom given me to be, not
merely content in the state of life assigned
but to make a 'good thing of it,' as Sir
Geoffrey would say." And for a moment,
in the starlight, Mr. Gayre could see a
smile wreathe Susan's lips and chase away
the grave shadows that had seemed to
change the whole expression of her tender
lovely face.

For a moment the banker was startled
actually startled. He had long felt the
girl's daily life and practice to be a lay
sermon ; but he was scarcely prepared for
such a confession of faith as that involved
in the words she uttered. Just at first

he did not understand, even dimly, what
she meant, and days and weeks and
months, and even years, were destined to
pass before the man thoroughly comprehended
youth in its ignorance may
conceive a simple and sublime ideal that
shall yet, with tears and struggles, with
sorrow and pain, eventually impress something
like the image of Divinity upon
broken and contrite hearts, or souls worn,
weary, and buffeted by the billows of
temptation, by the agony of remorse !

Had he only known it, he was standing
then under the starlight side by side with
his better angel. Yet the world and the
things of the world left him without other
answer to her words than the question,

"Are you a fatalist. Miss Drummond?
Do you believe we cannot even rough-hew
the marble of our lives ? "

I believe," she answered, " that as we
cannot forecast the events of the next

twenty-four hours, as we are unable to tellin
the morning what may occur before
night, ' free will ' resolves itself into whether
we shall be good or bad children in our
school and playtime. Fact is, Mr. Garlanded
Susan, with a gaiety which had a
touch of underlying sadness, "I have been
enjoying life too much lately, and so I
want to prepare myself to bear the dark
days bravely when they come — as come
they must."

You add the Spirit of Prophecy to the
Voice of the Preacher, Miss Drummond."

Thank you for listening to the words of
both so gravely," answered Susan ; and as
she spoke she would have taken her hand
from his arm, and turned to enter the
house by a glass door opening on a corridor
which split the cottage in twain, and gave
egress to all the reception and some of the
principal bed rooms, had not Mr. Gayre
detained her

Indeed, indeed," he said, " I meant no
sarcasm. I feel there is truth underlying
your words, though I confess I do not
exactly comprehend them. Why should
you, in your sunny youth, talk so wisely
concerning dark days ? Why should you
from whom all true men would keep
even the knowledge of sin and trouble,
imagine it could ever prove necessary for
you to ' make the best of your lot in
life ? ' "

Because I have known sorrow, and am
certain I shall know more ; besides, Mr.
Gayre, even if such a thing were possible,
I should not like to live a perfectly prosperous
and easy life. One ought to see
both sides."

True daughter of Eve, you want to
pluck of the tree of the knowledge of good
and evil ! I really cannot recollect ever
having heard you take so despondent a
view of life before. Is it Mr. Hilderton's

poverty, or Mr. Sudlow's plenty, or this gay
and festive scene, which causes you to
regard existence as so utterly gloomy an
affair ? "

She did not answer for a moment.
Somehow, as he paused and listened, he
felt rather than heard she was catching a
sobbing breath; then just as it seemed he
could contain himself no longer, as if he
must pour forth the full torrent he had so
long restrained, she said, with a little touch
of her usual vivacity,

"There are some people, you know, Mr.
Gayre, in whom the spectacle of a crowd
induces a far greater melancholy than the
sight of a single corpse. Especially if the
corpse has had anything to bequeath. Well,
in a different way that is my case to-night.
I suppose it is only because I am so tired
that I project myself (that is a good word)
to a time when not merely in those now
brilliantly lighted rooms there won't be a

single guest, but when I myself, Susan
Drummond, shall feel

Like one who treads alone
Some banquet-hall deserted."

Forgive me, mr. Gayre ; ah, I did not
mean to make you gloomy too. I am
going to Mrs. Jubbins ; I want to ask hera
favour." And with a smile she left him
at the porch, and crossing the wide hall
made her way to the inner drawing-room,
from which a few days previously had
proceeded the speech that struck Deputy
Pettell dumb. Following close upon her
Mr. Gayre saw the girl glide behind the
easy-chairs and lounges where dowagers sat
fanning themselves, and exchanging weighty
confidences concerning household matters,
and the perfections of their children, till
she reached Mrs. Jubbins, standing near
one of the windows talking to Mr. Brown,
who felt even his great mansion at 
shrink into insignificance beside

Vol. ii. 24

Lady Merioneth's "little box," into which,
by a mere freak of Fortune, the widow had
walked as " coolly and unconcernedly as if
she were as intimately acquainted with
noblemen's houses as with the old place in
Brunswick Square." For a minute Susan
stood quietly waiting, her face white as her
dress, and a far-off yearning expression in
those soft tender brown eyes the banker
had never seen before. Then suddenly
Mrs. Jubbins turning became aware of her
presence. Whatever Susan's request, it was
evidently granted with pleasure. The hostess
touched the fair cheek with her fan, lingeringly,
lovingly. Mr. Gayre could have
blessed the buxom Eliza for that graceful
caress. Then as Miss Drummond, threading
her way back as dexterously as she had
come, passed through the archway into the
long drawing-room, where dancing, was in
progress, Mrs. Jubbins made some remark
to the Walton-on-Thames Croesus the banker

knew had kindly reference to his niece's
friend.

Still standing by the door, he saw Susan's
white dress flitting down the corridor. It
went on and on, past the hall, past the
dining and morning and billiard rooms, past
the library and the state bed-chambers ;
finally disappearing down a passage at right
angles with the main gallery. Through the
music, through the tip-tapping of the dancers*
feet, through the buzz of conversation, and
the clatter of plates, and popping of corks
in the supper-room, he heard the closing
of a distant door, and Susan Drummond did
not again that night bless his sight.

What could have gone wrong ? What
was the matter with her? He waited and
waited for her re-appearance, but waited
in vain. All the guests who wished to catch
the last train had gone. Weary chaperons
were casting stern and reproachful glances
at girls who persisted in just one dance

24—2

more, one more still ; even Mrs. Jubbins'
prosperous face began to show signs of
wear and tear. Amongst the musicians a
man fell out occasionally to rest. The
hours had told on the waiters, some of
whom looked limp as to their cravats, and
dishevelled about the head. Still the young-people
went on dancing fresh and gay, as
though the party were just beginning ; but
Susan came not, and Mr. Gayre's anxiety
and curiosity concerning what had become
of her grew all the more intense, because
he did not wish to ask any questions concerning
the missing guest.

With discontented and cynical eyes he
was looking at his niece as she floated to
the melody of a ravishing waltz round one
of the ball-rooms, pioneered by that captivating
sinner Graceless, when one of the
old Bloomsbury set, a contemporary of
Mr. Jubbins, who had scores of times
religiously played out rubber after rubber

of whist in Brunswick Square, accosted
him.

Xot dancing, Gayre ? " began this
individual, who was the human embodiment
of snow in harvest ; " leaving it for the
juniors? You're right — no fool like an old
one, you know! Well, and what do you
think of all this P Tidings were different in
my day, and in yours too, for that matter,
It is enough to make Jubbins turn in his
grave. If your wise father had been alive
we'd have seen nothing of this sort. He'd
have read madam a lecture. There are
people here whose names would not bethought
much of across a bill-stamp, eh ?
You've come to look after your niece, I
suppose I Handsome girl I doesn't take
after your side of the house, at any rate.
It is astonishing though, how hard it is to
get men to marry beauties. They fight shy
of them when it comes to that, and I am
sure I don't wonder at it.

Have you had any supper ? I give sou
my solemn word I could not get a mouthful
fit for any Christian man to eat till a
quarter of an hour ago, when I seized the
butler and made him bring me a cut of
cold beef out of the larder, and a pint of
draught ale. I know their draught ale of
old. Jubbins always dealt with Flowers,
and she keeps up the charter.

I shall be glad to be at home and in
my bed, and I daresay you wil, too. It is
hard upon you, just when you must be
beginning to feel you want rest and quiet,
having that girl on your hands. However,
Mrs. Jubbins will perhaps help you to get
her off. She played her own cards so
remarkably well, I daresay she can put
your niece up to a thing or two.

And so it was you looked out this fine
place for the widow, eh ? You know the
sex ! Give women their way about finery,
and fashion, and folly, and you may lead

them where you like by the nose. You're
a sly dog, Gayre! Not a bad sort of peg
this to hang up your hat on for life, though
the money that pays the rent was made
out of dirty oil. You're a sly dog!"

Having emphasised which pleasant utterance
with an evil chuckle and a dig in the
ribs, the old friend of the family took
himself off, leaving Mr. Gayre speechless
with indignation.

You look as if you had lost a shilling,
and not found even sixpence," said Sir
Geoffrey, at this juncture taking up a
position beside his brother-in-law. The
Baronet was just beginning really to enjoy
the evening. He had drunk himself
sober, if such an apparent paradox is intelligible.
It was a way Sir Geoffrey had,
or rather, as he frequently explained, a
way his constitution had. At the first
start, when he began his libations — if
that, indeed, could be said ever to begin

wliicli was only suspended by sleep — strong
liquors did apparently produce an effect
faintly simulating intoxication ; but as
time went on, these evidences of a weak
brain disappeared totally.

Fact is," said Sir Geoffrey, " drink
steadies me." He spoke of it as a seafaring
person might of ballast. He did
not roll when he had his due complement
aboard, and he was extremely ingenious in
accounting for the extraordinary phenomenon,
that the more champagne, or
brandy, or " whatever was going " he
swallowed, the soberer he became.

It is like this, you know," he declared :
'• every family, I take it, must, in the
course of a few generations, drink a certain
amount ; I daresay statistics could get at
the amount. Well, then, don't you see, if
three or four of the lot fail to take their
fair share, there must at last come some
poor devil of a scapegoat like myself, who

has to drink for the lot. I call it hard,
deuced hard ! I am sure, even on the
score of expense, I'd like to live on tea
and lemonade ; but Lord ! when you've a
constitution like mine to deal with, what
are you to do ? " A question so abstruse
and so impossible to answer, that nobody
tried to grapple with the difficulty presented
by the singular nature of Sir Geoffrey's internal
arrangements.

In a state then of steadiness and comprehension
a teetotaller might have envied,
Sir Geoffrey, seeing Mr. Gayre part company
with the Bloomsbury friend, sauntered
across and made that remark anent the
banker's shilling and sixpence expression
of face.

Desirous, no doubt, of emulating the
little busy bee. Sir Geoffrey lounged about
the rooms, affably entering into conversation
with utter strangers, and, indeed, helping
to do the honours for Mrs. Jubbins, ashe

might had Lady Chelston gone to a
better world, and the widow and himself
been engaged. Now and then, in this
chance ride across country, he met with a
crushing retort or a nasty fall ; and from
experience, he knew pretty well what
the crusty, white-haired, and red-nosed old
party had been saying to Gayre.' "

Deuced mixed lot this," he observed,
with a solemn shake of his knowing head.
I thought I'd seen a thing or two during
the course of a life which has not been
wholly spent in the quiet country ; but
hang me if I ever could have imagined
such a set out as this ! "

It must, indeed, seem a change to you
to find yourself among so many solvent
and respectable people," retorted Mr. Gayre,
who was glad to vent his irritation on anyone.


That's right, pass the blow round, my
lad ! It does not hurt me," said the

Baronet. "Solvent?" he went on, looking
about him, " no doubt of that ; but respectable
? hem — m — m ! I notice some folks
here who, unless I am greatly out in my
reckoning, have sailed uncommonly close
to the wind. But then their haul was ten
thousands, or hundreds of thousands, which
makes all the difference, Gayre, all the
difference."

The whole thing is a confounded bore,"
remarked his brother-in-law, who did not
feel inclined at that moment to take up
the cudgels for trade morality.

Peggy's having the fun of the fair,"
observed that young lady's parent. " I
don't think she has sat out one dance,
and I have seen her send away would-be
partners by the dozen. Lord, what a sly
jade it is! How does she do it? Just a
modest downcast look, and an uplifted
appealing look, or the slightest turn of the
shoulders, or an indolent movement of her

fan, and she has all the men about her.
I have been watching her, and wondering.
It is extraordinary. That sort of thing
would not attract me ; but it seems to
suit other people. It is not my style."

"Xo, I don't think it is," agreed Mr.
Gayre, who knew too well the type of
frisky and frolicsome young lady the
Baronet delighted in.

"But she's a splendid girl," proceeded
Sir Geoffrey; "just look at her now.
Faith, in that dress — I wonder how much
the bill for it will tot up to? — she resembles
nothing except some rare tropical
bird. Gad ! what a splendid colour she
has to-night, just like the inner leaves of
a damask rose ! And her feet — there is
not a woman in the room has such a foot
and ankle ; all the Chelstons had good
feet. Poor Margaret had pretty feet too,
though a trifle low in the instep. Seriously
now, Gayre, don't you think it's a thousand

pities Peggy should be thrown away
on mere wealth? She'd make a capital
countess, and even as a duchess she would
only be the right thing in the right
place."

"Well, if you know any stray earl or
duke in want of a wife, you might
mention the matter to him," suggested
Mr. Gayre.

"I declare the more I see of Peggy
the less I feel I can bear the notion of
her being wasted on such a fellow as
Sudlow. Why, he's a perfect cad, and a
stick in addition. He can't skate, and he
can't ride, and he can't dance, and he
can't shoot ; what the deuce can he do ? "

"Take care of his money," answered the
banker ; " and all I hope is he may give
her a chance of helping him to take care
of it also."

"Well, I suppose we must make the
best of a bad business," said Sir Geoffrey,

with religious resignation ; "I am sure I
try to do so. I gave her a hint or two
before we came here ; I told her she
must not neglect her opportunities. The
worst of her is she's such a flirt, always
was, always will be ; I don't mean in any
dangerous way — bless you, no ! She'll
take good care to get into no harm ; I
could trust Peg anywhere, trust her as I
could myself ; " which, indeed, was saying
so little for the charming Peggy's
discretion, that Mr. Gayre had to turn
away his face and hide a smile. "I wish
she'd some female relations up in all that
sort of thing," proceeded Sir Geoffrey, with
an easy wave of his hand, indicating that
he meant the art of securing eligible
husbands, "just to give her a chance;
she wants training. Heavens ! well schooled,
she might marry whom she pleased. It's
no use thinking of what's past ; but if
her poor mother — "

At which juncture the Baronet stopped
and sighed, and shook his head and
sighed again.

Out of the fulness of your own abundant
experience," suggested Mr. Ayres
don't you think you might advise your
daughter for her good — tell her how to
set about the great sport of hunting
men?"

No, my dear fellow," answered the
Baronet, who, if he imagined his brother-in-law
was sneering at him, took care not
to seem cognisant of the fact. " In the
first place, to be truly successful, it should
be pursued as a business, not a sport ; and
in the next, only a woman can really teach
a woman how to deal with the other sex.
If a man, now — yourself, for instance — stood
in want of a few tips, couldn't I give
them? and wouldn't I, with pleasure? But,
bless my soul, your running is all straight
enough. Here are you, and there's the

widow ; you've only to say ' Come,' and
she'll come fast enough, and why the
deuce you don't say it baffles me."
I must request. Sir Geoffrey — "
"0 yes, I know all about that; but requests
don't alter cases, and though you
may insist on people shutting their mouths,
you can't compel them to close their eyes.
Well, she's as pleasant and hospitable a
• woman as I'd ever desire to meet, and I
will say she, or somebody for her, has a
judgment in the matter of wine I wish
were universal. You'll weed out a lot of
these people, no doubt," and he nodded
towards the room where what he called
the "old fogies" were "playing at company."
"Poor soul, she knows no better; but you'll
teach her, Gay re — you'll teach her; and —
she'll make an apt pupil ; " having delivered
which last opinion, the Baronet was turning
away, probably to quite assure his
mind as to whether Mrs. Jubbins' brandy

was as good as her hock, when, inspired
by a fresh idea, he paused to ask,

"By-the-bye, where's Susan? I haven't
seen the little baggage for ages. She
looked a bit bleached, I thought, a while
ago ; wonder where she's got to ? There's
Lai Hilderton, face, as usual, black asa
thunder-cloud. No doubt he knows.
Hilderton — Lai — come here, can't you !
Where's Susan?"

"Haven't seen her for an hour or more."

Where the deuce can she be ? " remarked
Sir Geoffrey. " How are you
going to get back to your ' digging '
to-night, Lai?"

Irish tandem," was the curt reply.

Come and have something, then, to
give your horses spirit for the journey,"
said the Baronet, taking the young man's
reluctant arm, and leading him tenderly
towards the supper-room.

Where was Susan? where could she be?

Vol. ii. 25

Miss Clielston did not know ; for, pausing
with Mr. Graceless close to where Mr.
Gayre stood, she propounded the very-question
to her uncle he was longing to
hear answered by some one.

She is not going back to town to-nights,"
said Mrs. Jubbins, appearing at the moment
Margaret was prettily expressing her
wonder and astonishment. " She is tired ;
she has been doing too much, and I've
sent her to bed."

For a second Miss Chelston looked at
the speaker with incredulous surprise; then,
seeing the hostess was not jesting, she
pressed her fan against her chin, puckered
her forehead, raised her eyebrows, murmured,
" I am so sorry," and next moment
the maize dress, with its splashes of colour,
was whirling amongst the dancers, a dream
of beauty and delight.

ON THE WAY HOME.

poor Susan! poor, dear, kind, tiresome
Susan!" lamented Miss Shelton.
"These are the sort of things she
always would do. Almost kill herself to
please people* who scarcely considered it
worth their while to say thank you ; always
ready to wear herself out for anybody."

I call the whole proceeding extremely
silly, to say the least of it," observed
Mr. Sudlow.

Do you ? " said Mr. Gayre.

"Yes, I do," retorted Mr. Sudlow, ina
tone intended to convince young Graceless
he was out of the banker's leading-strings
at last.

25—2

"And what," said Mr. Gayre, "should
you call the proceeding, if you said the
most of it ? "

"That's a question I decline to answer,"
answered the gentleman tersely styled " the
cad " by Sir Geoffrey ; hearing which
valiant reply, Mr. Graceless burst out laughing.


They were all driving back to London
together — Miss Chelston, Messieurs Sudlow,
Graceless, and Gayre — with Sir Geoffrey
on the box ; three of the 'party in extremely
bad temper, and one not too
well pleased at finding himself booked as
inside passenger for a fourteen miles'
journey, unable to smoke, and thrown on
the companionship of two men and a
girl, with none of whom he had an idea
in common.

As for Miss Chelston, she felt most truly
it was the day after the fair. Such triumph
as she had compassed was over, and her

triumph could not, in such an assemblage,
be considered great. Amid better surroundings,
her beauty, her figure, her grace, her
manner, her voice, must have placed her on
a high rung of the social ladder ; but upon
the City magnates she was thrown away.
The old men regarded her merely as a good-looking
girl without a fortune, who ,no
doubt, knew more about spending money
than saving it ; while their sons felt somewhat
shy of a Baronet's daughter whose
ways and looks and tones seemed different
from the ways, looks, and tones of belles
renowned in civic circles. She was the right
thing among the wrong set of people. She
had striven her best to please ; she had
smiled on the sons of prospective Lord
Mayors ; she had, in her quiet undemonstrative
way, flirted with wealthy young stockbrokers
and rising junior partners in great
City houses ; she had borne herself meekly
towards large and portly mammas, and

refrained from looking amazed at the
doings of Cockney heiresses ; and yet,
when the sum of the day and evening
was told, she felt her talents had not
returned her even fair interest. If Mrs.
Jubbins' party represented the best her
uncle could do for her socially, bad indeed
was the best. She had only really felt
herself in a proper element while dancing
with one or other of the "fellows" Sir
Geoffrey offered as his graceful contribution
to the Chislehurst festivities ; and as she
knew too well what they were, and what
they had, and that each of them Alas
looking out for a flat, or an heiress, or
both, on his own account, it goes without
saying that even in the delicious curves
of that final waltz with Mr. Graceless
she was perfectly well aware nothing could
over come of such an acquaintance, save,
perhaps, if hereafter she got into a safe
and unexceptionable clique, a little regret

at ever having known so polished and
presentable a blacken.

With the result of the day's proceedings
Mr. Gayre felt, if possible, more dissatisfied
than his niece. He had arrived at the conclusion
that he did not understand Susan
in the least ; that she would require more
careful management than he anticipated ;
that below her sweet amiability and charming
frankness there lay a depth of character
and a power of will, both of which it
might be necessary to gauge and to conciliate.
Time was when he thought he
knew her thoroughly ; day by day it was
dawning upon him he really knew her less.
The old qualities which had so captivated
him on first acquaintance remained unchanged,
but fresh and unexpected qualities
were, in addition, constantly appearing.
She was like a garden which a man first
values for the sake of a few simple and
homely flowers almost gone out of fashion.

and behold, as the days go by, other plants
thrust their tender leaves above ground,
and he is kept in a constant state of uncertainty
as to the manner of blossom
which shall next appear.

As an acquaintance, even as a friend, perhaps
she had drawn nearer to him ; but asa
lover, no. Mr. Ga}Te was too sensible a
man, far too well learned in the lore of a
world which contains both men and women,
to blind himself to facts. Before he knew
Susan Drummond he would have laid it
down as a general proposition that all
women were enigmas. Since he had known
Susan he would have done battle on the
point that he was acquainted with one
woman who wore her heart on her sleeve ;
but now — now — now — Mr. Gayre could not
exactly tell what to think. Leaning back
in his corner, he felt sorely tempted to
speedily put his fortune to the test, and
maybe," he considered, " lose it all."

sweet Susan, sleeping that night among
the Chislehurst woods, dreaming your maiden
dreams in the house where noble lovers had
kissed and been blessed, had wept and been
parted till eternity, how was it possible for
you to imagine a middle-aged man's heart
was being rent because he failed to read
aright your simple sincerity?

He felt wild to know his hands held no
prize the girl seemed to account of value.
Wealth, rank, jewels, pleasure, idleness — the
five curses and snares of womanhood — she
held, apparently, of no worth whatever.
What did her youth long for, his middle age
could give? Xowhe was beginning to understand
her better, he saw Susan was prepared
to sit down to the feast of life with a purpose
of abstinence for which he could find no
possible reason. She loved riding, dancing,
society, travelling. Even to the simplest
excursion she brought a zest and a sunshine
he had never seen equalled. Yet he fully

understood she expected at some not
remote day to resign all chance of such
pleasures, and live quietly at Enfield with
her aunt.

I mean to grapple with the mysteries of
farming next year," she said to Mr. Gayre one
day. " I don't think I could serve my
country better than in trying to solve the
problem of how to make land pay. Aunt
cannot. I see where she goes wrong ; but
that is quite another matter from seeing how
I am to go right."

I will come over and help you," offered
Sir Geoffrey. " I know all about farming.
If my tenants would only have followed my
advice I need never have left Chelston. Now
they have got another landlord they wish, I'll
be bound, they had considered me a little
more. Do you remember, Susan, the talks
your uncle and I used to have about cropping
and how he broke up the ten-acre lot, and
sowed flax entirely on mv advice ? "

Very well indeed," answered Susan, demurely.
She had good reason for remembering
the circumstance, since, owing to dry
soil and the utter impossibility of irrigation,
the result proved a dead failure.

I'll only make one stipulation," proceeded
the irrepressible Baronet — " that you
lay in a cask of beer. I ask nothing more
expensive. Hang it, there never was a
man with simpler tastes! But water! and
New Ever water, too ! Hugh ! " and Sir
Geoffrey drew down the corners of his
mouth — he could not turn up his nose,
because it was aquiline — and pulled a grimace
expressive of the most intense disgust.

I must talk to my aunt about the
ale," said Susan.

Come, you don't mean to say, my girl,
you are going to turn yourself out to grass
like Nebuchadnezzar, and drink nothing
stronger than water, as if you were a cow

or a dog ? Why, even a horse knows
better. Gad ! I Wouldn't keep a brute that
refused honest liquor."

Susan and Mr. Gayre simultaneously
broke into a peal of laughter.

I am growing rather in love with
teetotahsm," said the former. " It is cheap
and healthful."

The cheapness I admit, but the health
I deny," retorted the Baronet. "I only
know one fellow who denies his blood
natural nourishment, and he's covered with
as many boils and blains as Job ; only
Job got cured, and he never will. Serve
him rio'ht, too."

Once, when opportunity offered, Mr.
Gayre hazarded an inquiry to Sir Geoffrey
concerning the why and the wherefore of
Miss Drummond's conviction that she would
have to content herself with a humdrum
existence and very modest surroundings,
and though the answer he received seemed

to him scarcely satisfactory, it was at least
plausible.

'• Susan's a confoundedly sensible sort of
a girl," said the Baronet. " Always was.
Bless you, I used to call her little old
woman when she wasn't more than eight
hands hio-h. She ought to have been a
big heiress, a fine haul for some lucky
young fellow, but the house in which her
father left his money went smash, and she
never got a penny out of the wreck buta
beggarly two thousand pounds. Her
uncle Drummond was a man who could
not save a farthing — most extravagant old
dog ; so when he died, and the son came
into the estate, there was poor Susan
adrift With about sixty pounds a year,
and no near relation except the ancient
party at Enfield. Many a girl would have
broken her heart; but that's not Susan's
way. She'll make the best of a bad business,
and when that young Arbery's gone

back to the Antipodes take sole management."


"Yes, I understand all that," replied the
banker ; " but why should she speak as
if she was going totally out of society ?
Now, she comes here, for instance ; why
should she imply she will not be able to
continue to do so ? "

Well, for two reasons, I suppose : one,
I don't fancy the aunt will care to be
left alone ; another, Susan knows Peggy
must marry ; and she's not so blind as
to imagine my good daughter would care
for her as a constant or even occasional
inmate. Peg's jealous of her, that's the
truth. Besides, Susan's not grand enough,
or rich enough, or dressy enough, or
stuck up enough to please her ladyship.
Yes, you may stare, but though Peggy's
my own child, I can see her faults. I
don't know where she gets them, upon
my soul, I don't — not from me ; and as

for her poor mother, if your sister hadn't
much wit, at any rate she was a loving
clinging creature. You mayn't believe it,
Gayre, but I've often felt very sorry for
Margaret. Most men would only think of
themselves, but, thank Heaven, that's not
my way;" and Sir Geoffrey paused, either
because he was stricken dumb with
the contemplation of his own merits,
or because he wished to give his
brother-in-law time to recover from
the astonishment he believed such
unparalleled magnanimity might well
excite.

Whatever his emotions, Mr. Gayre controlled
them admirably.

Still, I fail to comprehend Miss Drummond,"
he persisted. " Most girls look
forward to marriage as an end to all
difficulty, the beginning of a brilliant and
delightful existence. Why should she not
feel certain that a husband as rich and

handsome as Cinderella's prince will one
day cross her path ? "

Because, as I told you before, Susan is
as wise as Solomon. She knows well
enough it is not so easy to pick up a rich
husband ; if it were, clever though she is,
she is not the sort of girl to hook a big
fish. Besides, her own sense must tell her
that if Peggy, a baronet's daughter and so
forth, hangs fire, she has not much chance
of going ofi* to any good purpose. Fact
is," went on Sir Geoffrey, shaking his
remarkable head till his hat actually
quivered, " men can't afford to marry
nowadays, unless the lady brings something
in her hand, and something considerable
too. There's no end to the expenses of a
married man. They begin with the engagement
ring, and they don't end when he is
screwed down iu his coffin. It's no joking
matter, I can tell you. Men don't care a
straw, at this date of the world, what a

girl is ; what they want to be told is what
she has. For himself, a man is always
worth his own value in the matrimonial
market, but a woman isn't ; there's such a
deuce of a lot of them ! "

Lir. Gayre was thinking of these utterances,
and many more, as they drove
steadily on through the chill twilight of
that summer's night, when suddenly the
carriage stopped, and Sir Geofirey shouted
to some one they had just passed, " Jump
up, man ; we'll make room for you on the
box ; you've done enough for glory ; come
along ! "

Thank you, I'd rather walk," answered
a sulky voice, which belonged to Lionel
Hilderton, and none other.

With my left leg for leader,
And right leg for wheeler,
I'll distance all racers, says Pat.

Hoo-roo !
I'll distance all racers, says Pat."

chanted the Baronet. " Don't be a fool.

Vol. ii. 26

Lai," he added, in sober prose. " It's thirteen
miles from here to Camden Town, if
it's a step. If you have no mercy on
yourself, have some on your boots ! "

Even Susan Drummond could scarce
have found an apology for the reply to
Sir Geoffrey's genial speech, which though
muttered, was distinctly audible to every
person in the carriage.

Have sour own bad way, then, my
friend," retorted the Baronet ; " I'll not
baulk you. Walk and be ! "

Poor Mr. Hilderton ! " exclaimed Miss
Chelston as they drove on.

"Lovely woman ! " commented Mr. Sudlow.

Yes, it's what we are all bound to go
through," said Mr. Gayre, who, having now
a perfect knowledge of the name of that
lovely woman, derived the keenest enjoyment
from Mr. Sudlow's remark.

"And the most delightful part of the
business is, that by this time next year he

will be thinking what a special Providence
it was that she refused to smile on him,"
capped young Graceless.

I hope you like that, my lady," thought
Mr. Gayre, striving in vain to catch a
glimpse of his niece's face.

Almost in silence the dreary journey was
got through somehow. If there ever had
been a time when Mr. Graceless enjoyed
the society of a respectable woman it was
long past ; and after the utterance of a
few commonplace phrases, he began to
think what a nuisance it was he could not
smoke, to wonder whether the old City
duffer " would stand to the bargain made
with Sir Geoffrey, how much the Baronet
would expect for his share of the spoil ;
and finally, exhausted by these mental
labours, he fell asleep, for doing which
he afterwards apologised by explaining
he had " made a long day," viz. thirty-four
hours, not having gone to bed at

26-2
LIBRARY

all on the night preceding Mrs. Jubbins*
party.

As for Mr. Sudlow, he was in a white
heat of rage at the presence of this interloper.
He felt jealous, envious, disappointed.
Although Miss Chelston had,
during the early part of the day, shown
him a good deal of favour, when once
dancing commenced he found himself
put somehow out of court. Graceless,
without a sovereign in his pocket,
was, in a ball-room, a greater man
than Mr. Sudlow ; and not merely Graceless,
but all the guests introduced by Sir
Geoffrey.

They dance like seraphs ! " said one
gushing young lady to the disgusted Dives,
who did not dance like anything on earth
or in heaven except like himself, who
walked through a quadrille with the
solemn grace of a poker, and extracted,
apparently, a vast deal less pleasure out

of a wild galop than he would have
done from a religious procession.

He likes no concert where he can't play
first fiddle," said the Baronet, afterwards
summing him up ; and as he certainly did
not do that at The Warren, it goes without
saying Mr. Sudlow's enjoyment of the
evening's proceedings was not of an ecstatic
character.

On and still on, weary mile after weary
mile ; the gray dawn came raw and miserable
; objects by the wayside began to be
visible, and it was with a jaded feeling
of relief the revellers found themselves at
last jolting over the London stones. How
hard and cold the river looked in the
first beams of the morning sun ! ^Yhat
a blessed sicrht the Houses of Parliament
seemed, holding as it did an assurance
Middlesex was reached once more! On
and still on. What an endless distance
they appeared to have driven I How

cramped and stiff they felt ! How exasperating
maddening Sir Geoffrey's cheery
and wide-awake tones sounded, as he hailed
his brother-in-law to ask,

Shall we go round by Wimpole Street,
Gayre ? Drop you at your door with
pleasure."

Certainly not," answered Mr. Gate ;
we will get out here ; " and, suiting his
action to his word, he opened the carriage-door
and stepped out, leaving Mr. Sudlow
to follow his good example.

I'll take your place now," said the
Baronet, jumping down from the box.
It's getting a bit chilly. No, Graceless,
keep where you are ; we'll find you a sofa,
never fear. Hope you'll be none the worse,
Mr. Sudlow ; by-by, Gayre ! " and Sir Geoffrey
put up the window, and remarked to
all whom the intelligence might concern
that it was deucedly cold.

What does he mean by it ? " was the

astounding question Mr. Sudlow put to his
companion as the carriage rolled away.

"What does who mean by what?" asked
Mr. Gayre, in amazement.

Your brother-in-law ! What does he
mean by taking that fellow Graceless to his
house and talking about finding him a sofa ? "

Are you mad, Mr. Sudlow ? " said the
banker, '• Do you suppose Sir Geoffrey
Chelston cannot ask any one he likes to
his house without your permission ? "

'• He has no business to allow his
daughter to associate with such a man "

May I inquire by what right you presume
to dictate with whom his daughter
shall associate ? What is Miss Chelston
to you, that you should even express an
opinion on the subject ? You are tired
and a little irritable, Mr. Sudlow ; so I
will only say, that it seems to me you
have of late, more than once, strangely
forgotten yourself I "

SIR Geoffrey TACTICS.

gr^EAVE me to deal with the fellow,
lia Gayre," said Sir Geoffrey cheerfully."
" You are not fit for the task. In
your own way you are confoundedly clever
no doubt of that ; but aptitude for
business is one thing — gad, I wish I wasn't
such a fool about figures and money I — and
a knowledge of human nature another.
You made a mistake with your friend —
one you would not have caught your simple
brother-in-law committing. He never ought
to have gone with us to Mrs. Jubbins —
never. He thinks now Peggy and myself
are no better than her lot, and that he is
as good as we are. He thought great a'uns

of you once ; now he knows your ' native
heath ' is much the same as his own — " and
as the Baronet left his sentence thus unfinished,
in order to light a fresh cigar, Mr.
Gayre felt the pause which ensued more
explicit and humiliating than any words
could have proved.

It was three days after the party at The
Warren. Mrs. Jubbins had been discussed,
re-discussed, praised, criticised, disparaged,
blamed ; and now there was nothing left for
the majority of her guests to do save call
and see whether " the Earl of Merionethshire
" seemed as grand a place when
viewed in cold blood as it had done while
filled with visitors who walked through the
rooms to the strains of music and the
popping of champagne corks. Things during
that three days had not been going pleasantly
with Mr. Gayre ; on the contrary,
when he went to Chislehurst, ostensibly to
inquire how Mrs. Jubbins felt after her

exertions, he found Miss Drummond was
walking through the woods, accompanied
by Mr. Hilderton. The widow told him this
fact with a look of mournful significance,
and he really felt too much dispirited to
inform the lady he was satisfied his niece,
and not her friend, had won the poor prize
of a struggling and sulky artist's heart.
No, many a man was caught on the rebound,
and he did not know, he could not
be sure. After all, the girl might scarcely
understand her own mind ; possibly she
mistook the actual state of her feelings.
This sisterly sort of intimacy, this familiar
intercourse, was dangerous — very.

Supposing Susan were Mrs. Gayre, would
he allow, would he tolerate it ? Certainly,
Mr. Gayre decided, he woukl do nothing
of the kind. It was all very well to talk,
but Lai was not her brother; worse still,
he was disgustingly handsome — and young.
Yes, just the lover a girl might fancy ;

and Susan was only a girl, and the commonsense
view of the matter must be considered
the right sense. The whole thing
was unusual and incorrect. He thought
he would drop a word of warning ; but,
somehow, when the culprits appeared, he
found it would be very hard to make
Miss Drummond understand the full enormity
of which she had been guilty, and
decided that to lecture her on the subject
of " propriety " would be like discoursing
to a child concerning those sins
which it is the endeavour of older persons,
who have eaten of the tree of the
knowledge of good and evil, to keep
hidden from its innocence.

At dinner, to which meal Mr. Gayre
stopped, for Mrs. Jubbins would take no
denial, Susan was charming ; less gay than
formerly, perhaps a little sad, certainly
most sweet. She had been teaching Ida
to ride, and caused some laughter by

an account of that young lady's mishaps.


I don't know what in the world weare
to do without her, Mr. Gayre," said
Mrs. Jubbins, referring to Susan, not her
daughter ; " we shall feel lost."

When is the parting to take place ? "
asked the banker, who felt delighted to
hear Miss Drummond's sojourn at Chislehurst
was soon to be ended.

I am croino' to Enfield tomorrow," said
Susan.

To Enfield!'' repeated Mr. Gayre; "not
to North Bank ? "

I have written to tell Maggie I cannot
return there just at present."

So we shall all have to go into mourning,"
said the banker ; at which remark
Lai Hilderton scowled. He thought this
rich man was sneering at his old friend.

The next check Mr. Gayre met was
received from the artist. In the most

courteous manner possible he asked Mr.
Hilderton to paint Miss Chelston's portrait,
and was met with a flat refusal.

I don't intend to paint any more portraits,"
declared Lai, with rude directness.

Susan looked at him reproachfully and
sighed. Mr. Gayre saw the look and heard
the sigh.

It breaks my heart to think of her
being tied to such a bear," said Mrs.
Jubbins afterwards.

Why did you ask him here ? " inquired
the banker.

I did not ask him. He came, and I
could not well tell him to go. Of course
he will not come when she is gone ; "
which was very poor comfort for the
middle-aged lover.

Calling the following afternoon at North
Bank, in hopes of hearing why Susan
had decided on returning to Enfield, and
when she might be again expected in

Mr. Moreby's villa, he found Mr. Sudlow
partaking of afternoon tea, and was unpleasantly
struck by a change in his
manner, rather to be felt than defined.
They had not met since the morning when
Mr. Gayre administered what he meant fora
crushing rebuke, and the banker was certainly
not prepared to find this former disciple
had cut his leading-strings, and was
walking quite independently about the

world, " showing his d d cloven foot,"

said Sir Geoffrey. ,

Few things could have discomposed Mr.
Gayre to an equal extent. Hitherto Mr.
Sudlow had looked up to him, adopted his
views, being guided by his advice, received
his admonitions modestly and in a good
spirit, as if he knew they proceeded from
one having authority ; but now all that
was changed. He ventured to disagree with
the banker, not once or twice, but many
times ; he spoke more familiarly to Sir

Geoffrey than young Graceless would have
done ; and only the beautiful coldness and
propriety of Miss Chelston's demeanour prevented
his addressing that young lady " as
though she was some girl standing behind
a counter, by Heaven ! " declared the Baronet,
talking "the cad " over after his
departure.

Much exercised about the change which
seemed to him to have been wrought so
suddenly, Mr. Gayre told Sir Geoffrey
that remark concerning young Graceless,
and delicately hinted it was not impossible
some of those rumours the best of
men are not always able to escape, had
reached Mr. Sudlow's ears.

Tt is not that," answered the Baronet,
I don't pretend to be better than my
neighbours. No one can say I have ever
set myself up as a paragon of virtue. I-
admit I have faults ; who is without them ?
Even you, Gayre, are not immaculate, I'll

be bound. As for myself, I am too easy,
too frank, too trustful, too willing to forgive,
too ready to be duped. But it's
nothing he has heard about me that has
caused this transformation. Your friend
Sudlow needs taking down a peg ; his
comb wants cutting, and I'll cut it. Leave
me to deal with the fellow."

And then the credulous Baronet, who
wore his heart on his sleeve for all the
days he came in contact with to peck
at, delivered himself of that pleasant sentence
which annoyed Mr. Gay re more
than he would have cared to acknowledge.

Sir Geoffrey had an absolute genius for
"finding out the raw," and knew there
was nothing under heaven that hurt
Nicholas Gayre's vanity more keenly than
associating him with the old Brunswick
Square "set."

Resolutely the banker had for years
held himself aloof from his father's connections.

In the City lie was considered
proud, exclusive, and a genuine " West-enter."
At the West End, among acquaintances
made during those blessed days
when he served the Queen and never
thought of Lombard Street save as a sort
of gold mine, he was known as an officer
who had won distinction aud a banker
who was '• rolling in money ; " while both
in the City and at the West End people
held him to be exceptionally respectable.
And now, merely for the sake of a oriel's
brown eyes, he had voluntarily let himself
drift into close companionship with one of
the most disreputable men in England —
gone to a party at which, a year before,
he would not have been seen for any consideration
; where dreadful people, who
were " merely rich " felt themselves at
Puberty to call him '• Gayre," and address
him in a "hail-fellow-well-met" manner inexpressibly
galling; and, as if this was not

Vol. ii. 27

sufficiently mortifying, on the top of all
came Sir Geoffrey's statement, which he
knew to he true, that Mr. Sudlow now believed
socially his former Mentor stood very
little higher than himself.

It is always best to look matters
straight in the face," proceeded Sir Geoffrey,
when he had got his cigar well
alight. " There's Peggy to be married, and
Sudlow's the only man who has turned
up we can marry her to. I hate the
fellow, but what am I to do ? Of course,
I must not let my own likes or dislikes
interfere when the girl's happiness is at
stake. It's a pity I can't find a husband
for her in a decent rank of life ; but it is
no use fretting about that now. Well, the
next thing to be done is — get the man upto
the point. I don't intend to have him
dan2[lin<T about here, wasting all our time
and trying my temper. You wouldn't believe
what a confounded nuisance he is.

Why, I have often to stop id, and lose
perhaps the chance of some good thing,
because he does not know when to go. It's
all Tery well for him, but we re no further
forward than we were last June. I can't
bear such dawdling. Gad I the fellow ought
to snap at the chance of marrying a
Baronet's daughters"'

"Apparently he is in no hurry to
snap,' " said Mr. Gayre, with ill-natured
frankness.

He will be in a hurry before he is
much older, or 111 know the reason why''
remarked Sir Geoffrey, "which brings me
back to the point I started from. It is
quite evident, Gayre, that under your
management the matter makes no progress.
Xow I am going to take the conduct of
affairs. I don't ask your help because I
would rather play mv came alone. Fact
is," finished the Baronet, " the berar must
be brought to book, for I can't hold on in

27—2

this way much longer. If I had not been
pretty lucky the ball must have stopped
rolling weeks ago ; and I feel it deucedly
provoking for so much of my hard-earned
money (no man knows how hard I work)
to go in keeping up this house. Were I
alone, any attic at a few shillings a week
would serve my turn. Besides, I have
heard a word drop that young Moreby's
mamma has found a wife for him ; and if
such is the case, you'll see this place will
be sold, and then what's to become of poor
Peggy? Mark my 'words — this place will
be in the market ere long ; you know how
right all my intuitions are ; " and Sir Geoffrey
shook his head with the air of a man
who believed there was not a cranny or
crack in it unfilled by wisdom.

He had good reason, at any rate, for his
belief concerning Mr. Moreby's villa, since
the " word dropped " assumed the shape of
a letter from Mrs. Moreby's lawyer containing

a plain intimation that the sooner
he could find another residence the better
his client would be pleased.

Except in that trifling matter of paying
ready money, or indeed any money at.
all, no one could complain of undue:
delay on the part of Sir Geoffrey. Were
a horse to be bought or sold, a bet tone
laid, a flat to be fleeced, or any-other
little business of pleasure or profit in.
hand, the Baronet was " up to time ; " and
most certainly now he had decided " some
steps must be taken about poor Peggy,"
he did not mean to let grass grow under
his feet.

Accordingly next time Mr. Sudlow called,
as of late he had got into the habit of
doing, unaccompanied by his former friend
and Mentor, he found the drawing-room
unoccupied, and not the slightest sign of
afternoon tea. On the contrary, the gipsy
table, which might be regarded as the

basis of operations, was put tidily away in
one corner of the apartment ; the chairs
stood also in orthodox positions, and the
stands and vases were destitute of flowers.

Mr. Sudlow stared about him bewildered.
He had never before imagined the prettiest
room in young Mr. Moreby's villa could
look so cold and formal. The afternoon
also was dull and depressing. Xo sunshine
streamed across the tiny garden, and no
fragrant logs burnt in the grate. "Logs
;are deuced useful sort of things," Sir
Geoffrey was in the habit of sententiously
remarking.

On that especial day, however, at five
o'clock P.M., affairs were chilling in the
extreme ; and as he stood by the window
.Mr. Sudlow shivered.

'bah! what a place this must be in
the winter," he considered, " with all that
water flowing at the rate of about an inch
an hour down below there ! "

How de-do ? " said the Baronet, appearing
at this point in Mr. Sudlow's meditations,
and greeting his daughter's admirer
with friendly familiarity and two extended
fingers. "Bit raw, ain't it? Come into
the next room — fire there ; like a fire
myself all the year round ; " with which
statement Sir Geoffrey conducted Mr. Sud-low
into the adjoining apartment, where
that gentleman found blazing logs and a
strong smell of stimulants.

I suppose we must consider the best of
the weather's over now," remarked the host
as he threw on another billet.

Mr. Sudlow ventured to hope a fine day
or two might still be expected, but Sir
Geofirey would not listen to the suggestion.
"We're in September now," he said, "and,
faith! winter will be upon us before we
can turn round."

After that there ensued a pause. Sir
Geoffrey was able, as a rule, to maintain a

good even stream of talk, but neither man
could be described as a brilliant conversationalist.


"What Avill you take, Sudlow ? " asked
the Baronet, inspired by a happy idea,
sauntering towards the sideboard as he
spoke.

Mr. Sudlow thanked Sir Geoffrey, but
declined to take anything.

"It's a beast of a day," said Sir Geoffrey,
'pon my soul it is ; worse than if it was
raining. Have something, man ; I am sure
you need picking up ; I know I do."

Firmly Mr. Sudlow, or, as the Baronet
sometimes loved to describe him, that good
young sneak, resisted the temptations and
declined the blandishments of his lady-love's
papa. " I never touch wine between meals,"
he said, repeating a statement Sir Geoffrey
had heard before at least fifty times.

Gad, I envy you ; I only wish I could
do without it," answered the Baronet ; and

to prove how imperatively necessary he
found it to "pick himself up," he forthwith
poured out and swallowed a tumbler of
champagne, laced with what he called a
mere touch of brandy.

Mr. Sudlow looked on during this performance,
but spoke never a word ; indeed,
what word could he have spoken?

I feel a new man," said Sir Geoffrey, in
that capacity strolling back to the hearth
and critically scanning the last \o^ he had
thrown on. " Do — take even a glass of
sherry, Sudlow."

But Sudlow only shook his head.

Deuced chilly, I call it," went on the
Baronet, settling himself in the depths of
an armchair and stretching out his long
legs towards the fire. "Well, and what
mischief have you been up to since I saw
you last?"

Not much," answered the lively suitor,
who detested Sir Geoffrey's jokes, and yet

did not well know low to take offence at
them. "How is Miss Chelston?"

0, she's all right," was the reply —
packing."

Packing ! " repeated Mr. Sudlow.

Yes ; of late days she's had unfortunately
to manage without a maid, poor girl ; so
she's doing the best she can, with the help
of Mrs. Lavender. They've been at it all
day ; but I'm afraid to inquire progress."

"Is Miss Chelston, then—"

She's going out of town," finished the
Baronet, with kindly consideration ; " and,
faith, I'm very glad she is, though I don't
exactly know what I am to do here all by
myself — you'll take pity upon me, and lookin
often, won't you ? — for the girl has been
too long cooped up, losing all her colour,
and so forth."

'• Is she likely to remain away for any
length of time ? " asked Mr. Sudlow.

Can't tell, I'm sure, what she'll do when

o
((

she gets among lier friends — go the round of
them, I suppose. I'll not bid her come back
to North Rank, you may be sure, while she
keeps well and is enjoying herself elsewhere.
In the length and breadth of England I
suppose there is not so unselfish a father
as myself."

Sudlow murmured some remark under
his breath, which Sir Geoffrey chose to
accept as complimentary ; for, after repeating
his statement in different and more comprehensive
terms — viz., that when another
person's interests were to be considered, he
never thought of " Geoffrey Chelston " — he
remained for a short time looking at the
fire with a pensive and satisfied expression
of countenance.

With more course than miojht have been
expected under the circumstances, Mr. Sud-low
essayed a few commonplace observations
; to all of which Sir Geoffrey replied
heartily, yet in a manner which suggested

to the visitor that his mind was wandering
elsewhere.

Is there any chance of my having the
]pleasure of seeing Miss Chelston this afternoon
? " ventured the lover at last.

The Baronet laughed.

My good fellow," he said, " it would be
as much as my place is worth ' to ask
such a thing. My daughter can't endure
to be seen unless she's in parade dress,
every bow and brooch and hairpin in its
proper place. Funny girl! Now she's in
her dressing-gown I wouldn't like to beg
for a two minutes' interview myself."

I did not mean to intrude, of course ; I
only wished — but perhaps you will kindly
tell Miss Chelston I trust she may have an
'extremely pleasant journey'"

"I don't know much about the journey,"
answered Sir Geoffrey; "but she's certain to
have a good time when she gets to the end
of it. Much obliged to you, I'm sure. Ill

say all that's proper and civil. What, must
you go ? Can't you spare me even a few
minutes more ? Xo ? Well, I'll walk with
you to the gate. By the bye, I saw you
the other day, though you did not see me."
Indeed ! May I ask where ? "
In Meridian Square. You were pottering
about ! Had I seen any one to mind
my horse I'd have got down to ask what
the deuce was possessing you to hold a
house-toulouse visitation in a neighbourhood
like that. The whole population must have
been at one-o'clock dinner, I think. At any
rate there were mingled odours of fish,
onions, bacon, and cabbage, and not one of
the aborigines visible. You are in a hurry !
Good-day. Look in as often as you can.
Co6>J-afternoon ! " And the Baronet, as he
shut the gate after Mr. Sudlow, slowly
closed one eye with a waggish expression
of such infinite, if silent amusement, that it
really seemed a pity there was no one at

hand with whom he could share the excellent
joke evidently in progress.

Sulk away, my friend," soliloquised the
Baronet. " The more you sulk the better
I shall be pleased. You've had two or
three nasty falls this afternoon, or I'm
much mistaken. Perhaps for the future
Jack will think twice before he again feels
quite so certain he is as good as his
master."

So your niece is not at home," suggested
Mr. Sudlow to the banker the first time he
was fortunate enough to meet that gentleman.


Where is she, then ? " asked Mr. Gayre.

Gone out of town."

"0! Gone for how long?"

"I do know — not till she has finished
the round of all her friends, as I understand."


Secretly Mr. Gayre reflected that Miss
Peggy's absence would not prove of long

duration if it depended on that contingency
; but lie only said,

"Well, you see, Sallow, j-'ou and I are
the only people left in town. Soon I shall
be the last rose — for you doubtless mean
to take your departure shortly."

"Yes, I think I shall get away for a
while," agreed Mr. Sudlow. " I never remember
so slow a season."

Take comfort ; it is over, at any
rate."

Which way are you going, Mr. Gayre?"

If you had asked me two minutes ago
I should have said to North Bank ; but
as my niece is not there the journey would
be useless. Sir Geoffrey is sure to be out."

He has not left town," said Mr. Sudlow,
in an aggrieved tone.

"Now his daughter is gone you may be
very sure he won't stop long behind. I
understood him to say some time ago he
was only staying on her account."

"I suppose," remarked Mr. Sudlow, ruefully,
" he has plenty of friends always
ready to invite him."

Possibly, probably ; but I really have
no information on the subject."

I daresay now he'll be going to some
great place in the country to shoot."

He may ; I do not know."

''If I could speak French well I'd go
abroad," said Mr. Sudlow, a little inconsequently
; " but it is such a nuisance to be
in a foreign country, and experience a difficulty
about even asking for a glass of
water."

"If Sir Geoffrey were here he would
advise you to get over that difficulty by
never asking for a glass of water ; " with
Which easy observation Mr. Gayre managed
to end the dialogue and betake himself to
Wimpole Street, whence he despatched a
note to his brother-in-law, asking, " What
have you done with Margaret ? "

During the course of the following day
back came Sir Geoffrey's reply :

"Dear Gayre. — Don't you trouble your
head about Peggy. She is out of town,
staying with friends — that is what Peggy is
doing ; and she is going to remain out of
town for the present. As for myself, now
I have that anxiety off my mind, I intend
running down to Snatched's place in Staffordshire
to have a turn among the long-tails.
You had better come too. Lots of
game ; pleasant house to stop at ; colourless
^\4fe, with no harm or good about her ;
excellent cellar ; host who Hies his guests
to enjoy themselves. Snatched would
have been just the husband for Peggy — son
of an ironmaster, or something of that sort,
who left him a large fortune. But then,
you see, there's Mrs. S. ; and even for
Peggy I don't feel disposed to bring myself
to the gallows. If you like to look up any
evening you name, shall be glad to see you ;

Vol. ii. 28

but the place is all, after a manner, done
up in holland and brown paper, and there
are no servants except Sweet Lavender.

"Yours, G. C.

"Think about Staffordshire."

Then she is really out of town," decided
Mr. Gayre. "I scarcely believed it. Who
can he have found to take charge of
her ? "

LANDED.

September had come and gone.

Spite of Sir Geoffrey's gloomy prophecies
concerning an early winter, that
year summer, as if loth to part company
with everything fair and beautiful, lingered
in England till even in late November
such a blue and sunshiny sky looked down
on mead and stream and copse as often fails
to gladden the eye in rose-laden and leafy
June. It was October — a dry glorious October,
with foliage turning red and yellow and
brown and russet on the trees, when the cones
hung low on the pines, and late pears and
apples and plums shone mellow on the
espaliers ; and there was just enough of

28—2

chilliness in the autumn air to make a fire
pleasant, and the country looked its very
best, and the stubble gleamed golden in the
bright sunshine, and sportsmen winding
through woods only just beginning to get
somewhat bare and thin of foliage gave
animation to almost every sylvan landscape.

The Warren was looking enchanting.
Down in the plantations there was an autumnal
rustle and scent ; but immediately
around the cottage it might still have been
July, so firm was the turf, so fair the
lawns, so bright the gardens, so gay the
verandah, with flower and leaf and berry ;
whilst as for Mrs. Jubbins, the gladness of
Nature seemed reflected in her face.

So happy and good a season the widow
had never known. The glory of an Indian
summer was streaming across her life just
as the sunshine lay golden upon the Kentish
fields. Three, often four, days a week Mr.
G-ayre now spent at her house.

Ostensibly he came to shoot ; but then
he might have found far more pheasants,
far finer sport, elsewhere. Were not great
houses open to him ? Had not grand and
notable persons asked for the pleasure of
his company at their country seats ? It
was optional with him, she knew, whether
he chose to chase " the wild deer and follow
the roe " in Scotland, or kill a stray
rabbit on his lordship's twenty-acre lot.
For Inn the rivers of Ireland danced and
glittered in vain, the Yorkshire moors held
no charm, the stately hospitality of great
men's houses presented no temptation.

At last, thought the widow, after the
years, the long patient years, of waiting, he
had become quite one of the family; and
by Christmas perhaps — who could tell? —
the day might be settled dien, the last
drop of bitterness extracted from her cup,
she should exchange the name of Jubbins
for that of Gayre. As regarded the banker

himself, she felt he had grown too delightful
; while still superior to all created
beings, he was yet more human, more accessible,
less cynical. He took the keenest
interest in Ida's equestrian exercises ; he
talked to the boys about their future — ;he
was very earnest that one at least of them
should pursue the path Mr. Jubbins had
trod before.

When he spoke about " oil " it seemed
to the widow that product became nectar.
Attar of roses never smelt sweeter than
rank sperm or olive when purified by Mr.
Gayre's clever tongue.

At last he was identifying his interests
with hers — " taking notice " of her children,
advising her — not coldly, but as one who
took a pleasure in the subject, as to their
future ; and all this had come to pass since
she left Brunswick Square and migrated to
Chislehurst.

Blessed Chislehurst ! blessed Warren !

thrice-blessed Lady Merioneth ! As lie
paced the rooms once trodden by that
noble personage, as her feet pressed the
carpets formerly honoured by the footsteps
of nobility, and looked out of the
windows on the woods for which her
money paid, but in which Mr. Gayre
shot, the widow forgot to remember she
had been Higgs and was Jubbins —
forgot everything in heaven and on earth
save that she believed at length her long
fealty was to be rewarded, and that erelong
she would be solemnly asked whether
she Eliza would take this man Nicholas
for better and for worse.

Poor Mrs. Jubbins ! Men were deceitful
ever ; and Mr. Gayre only made the few
pheasants and rabbits he ever " potted "
at The Warren an excuse for hearing
tidings of Susan Drummond.

Since the great party they had met
thrice — twice at Chislehurst, once at En-field,

whither Mr. Gayre repaired with a
message (which might just as well have been
sent on a post-card) from Sir Geoffrey.
It struck him Mrs. Arbery was not
particularly delighted with his visit, and
that Susan seemed a little anxious and
distraite ; but when next she walked with
him round and about The Warren he
could see no difference in her, save that
she had grown more sweet and beautiful
than of yore. When would Sir Geoffrey
and his daughter return to London ? That
was the only question Mr. Gayre now
accounted to be of any real importance.
Politics were to him as vanity, and the
state of the money market a matter of
supreme indifference. He could not propose
to Susan at The Warren, where his
most telling sentence might be spoilt by
a shout from one of Mrs. Jubbins' untrained
and ill-mannered cubs. It was
equally impossible to say what he wanted

to say out at Enfield, under the eye of
Mrs. Arbery. No ; lie had decided the
when and the where his declaration should
take place, if Heaven only so ordained
matters that his brother-in-law and niece
returned to North Bank before all sunshine
departed. He knew the very spot
in the Eegent's Park where he meant to
lay all he had of value on earth at her
dear feet. He would entice her there, and
before those wonderful brown eyes lay his
heart bare.

He had thought the whole affair out ;
there was nothing to conceal, nothing of
which he need be ashamed. It was for
her sake only he had sought out his
relations, for whom he was now prepared
to do a great deal. Her will should be
his law. Aught a man may do he was
ready to essay, if only she would lay her
hand in his and say, " We will walk
through life together."

Occasionally perhaps he felt a twinge or
two concerning Mrs. Jubbins ; but if a
woman likes to deceive herself, is a man
to blame?

Mr. Gayre felt Miss Drummond was not
likely to censure him greatly for not
asking the vridow in marriage. Susan
moved among the City people ; but she
was not of them. She had scarcely a
thought in common with the bulk of the
persons Mrs. Jubbins knew. She was good
to Ida, tolerant towards the boys ; but !
and ! what a gulf, wide and long and
deep, worn by centuries of culture and
thought and breeding, lay between her
and the rich dowagers who " condescended "
to exchange a few words with Mrs. Jubbins'
young friend, as she flitted about the
place, getting a book for one, a few
flowers for another, a cushion for a third
" making yourself cheap," so Miss Shelton
once truly and indignantly remarked

a thing, by the way, Miss Clielston was

never likely to do.

%/

As for Mr. Sudlow, lie was wandering;
to and. fro upon the earth, like a perturbed
spirit. He had. gone to every
usual and unusual seaside resort within
a reasonable distance of London, and nowhere
found Miss Chelston, either in the
flesh or in the visitors' list. She had
vanished, and nobody apparently, except
her father, knew whither ; Mr. Gayre did
not, or Lavender, or Mrs. Lavender, or
the housemaid, or Mrs. Jubbins, or Miss
Drummond. Mr. Sudlow had tried them
all, openly and craftily ; but it is impossible
to tell what one does not know, and
the suitor could only, by diet of trouble
and time and scheming extract at the
last the answer he had received at the first.

"Miss Chelston was out of town with
some friends." Nobody could tell when
she would return, nobody seemed to know

whether she would ever return ; nobody
was able to throw the smallest light on
Sir Geoffrey's plans for the future, save
that there seemed some idea of giving up
Mr. Moreby's box at Christmas.

And I did hear a word let drop, sir,"
said Mrs. Lavender, smoothing down her
apron, " that very likely Miss Chelston
might winter abroad with a relation of
Sir Geoffrey's," which revelation was in
acknowledgment of a sovereign pressed
into the worthy woman's hand. Had she
vouchsafed this information at first instead
of at last, she would never have
received that twenty shillings sterling coin
of the realm.

Dem ! " said Mr. Sudlow, as he flung
himself away, leaving poor Mrs. Lavender
utterly amazed. " Dem I "

Clearly if Sir Geoffrey failed to understand
many good things, he had a perfect
comprehension of such a nature as

that possessed by the son-in-law he hoped
to secure.

Dem ! " said that worthy, which monosyllabic
curse meant he felt he must now
take action.

And he went out of that there gate,"
said Mrs. Lavender to her spouse, " and
tore down the road as if he were a dog
with a tin kettle tied to his tail ! "

A week later, Mr. Gayre had but just
finished dinner, and was in the act of
filling himself a glass of claret, when the
door opened, and, unexpected and unannounced.
Sir Geoffrey Chelston made his
appearance.

"I know you don't care to see me in
your house," began the Baronet, directly
the first greetings were over; "I must bea
confounded deal less sharp than I am
if I failed to know that. But under the
circumstances I thought you would not
mind. Sudlow has proposed''

No ! " exclaimed Mr. Gayre.

"Fact, my dear boy, and a deuce of a
time lie has been about it, in my opinion.
If I had not packed Peggy bag and
baggage out of town, we should never
have got him up to the point. Yes, five
days ago I was staying with a young
fellow in Norfolk, who has just come
into fifteen thousand a year and some
splendid shooting — gracious Heavens, only
to think of the luck everyone seems to
have but myself! — when a letter arrived,
forwarded on from my club. It was
from our friend, asking my permission,
wanting to pay his addresses, and all the
rest of the business ; a very proper sort
of epistle altogether, except that, apparently,
he had forgotten all about money
matters ; at any rate, he said nothing on
the subject. So I wrote back from Antler
Castle a diplomatic little letter, thanking
him for the honour he did my daughter

and myself; hut intimating it was noi
exactly the alliance I desired. I didn't
say what I wanted, but I made him feel
he was scarcely in the rank — you understand."


]mr. Gayre did. The charming Baronet
had pursued precisely the same tactics in
his own case he was now practising on behalf
of his daughter ; but it was not necessary
to go into that question, so the banker
only said,

'• Did he write again ? "

'•Xo, he came. By the greatest piece of
good fortune, Dashdale — that's my friend,
you know — happened to be at the station
with tandem, dog-cart, livery servants, and
everything likely to impress an out-and-out
cad like Sudlow, when he heard that
individual inquiring how he could get to
Antler Castle. 'Who is it you want
there?' asks Dashdale (a deuced ready offhand
sort of fellow Dashdale). 'Sir

Geoffrey Chelston,' says Sudlow. ' You're
not a dun, I hope ! ' cries Dashdale between
fun and earnest. Sudlow, I believe,
got very red, and said, ' No, he wasn't a
dun.' ' Jump up, then,' says Dashdale ;
give him his head ; stand clear, there.'
And before Sudlow was well settled in his
seat, as sweet a pair of bays as ever you
clapped eyes on were spanking along the
road at a pace which took away our
friend's breath.

' If you believe me,' says Dashdale, ' the
cockney held on — held on, by ! ' "

"Well?" asked Mr. Gayre.

Dashdale — most deuced hospitable man
made him stop for dinner, stop the
night, stop for breakfast, stop for luncheon
and then ordered round the brougham and
sent him over to the station. ' Any friend
of my friend Chelston,' said Dashdale, 'is
welcome to anything I can do for him.'
If I had coached him up, Dashdale could

not have placed into my hands better. 01
course, in a house like that, Sudlow got
a glimpse of the usages of decent society.
Thank God, I am no snob. I would just
as soon eat a crust of bread-and-cheese at
a wayside pub as dine off silver ; still, I
confess I was oiad that, for once, Sudlow
should see the sort of thing I had been
accustomed to. There was not much
bounce left in him when he asked me for
half an hour's conversation in the library."

And the end of it all ? " inquired Sir
Geoffrey's patient auditor.

"I'm coming to that. He wanted my
daughter; what was my objection to him?
T said, ' General rather than particular. I
looked for something beyond mere wealth
in a husband ; ' and I fooled him into
believing Dashdale might suit me for a
son-in-law, as, indeed, he would, only he's
engaged to his cousin, a girl with the
wickedest pair of eyes, and the sauciest

Vol. li. 29

smile, and the best seat across country
you'd desire to see."

"Yes," said Mr. Gayre.

Xo revelation the Baronet could make
would have surprised his relative !

That arrow stuck. ' You see,' I said,
you are only rich.' ' Surely it is something
to he rich ! ' he auro-ed. Of course
I agreed to that. ' But then a great deal
more is needed. In our rank we look for
other things besides money. I am a great
advocate,' I went on, 'for people marrying'
in their own set. My daughter would be
miserable if asked to associate with persons
beneath her. ' "

"'I should not ask her to do anything
of the sort,' " he declared.

' I do not know,' I said. ' I have
noticed a tendency in you to think people
great and grand merely because they have
so many thousands a year. In your estimation,
if I may say so without offence

a lord mayor is an individual to be cultivated.
Personally — though I am not in
the least prejudiced — I would rather not
associate with lord mayors, and I certainly
don't intend to let my daughter associate
with them. You have forced me to speak
plainly,' I finished ; ' and now no offence
being, I hope, given, take my advice, and
look out for some City heiress.' And with
that I rose to end the conversation."

It would have ended with me at a
much earlier period," said Mr. Gayre. " How
you can be so intolerably rude, Chelston,
passes my understanding."

Rude ! I was particularly polite. I
didn't ' Confound his impudence ! ' or bluster
about my family. I was obliged to show
him where he had gone wrong, but I
tried to spare his feelings as much as
possible. However, he would not let me
go. He was willing to do everything in
his power. A golden key would unlock

29—2

the door into almost any society nowadays ;
and, with his money and my daughter's
beauty, birth, and breeding, he thought —
lie felt sure, indeed — there would be no
difficulty in getting into the very first
circles."

' Make no mistake about that,' I said.
'Society is not a theatre, where you have
only to pay your money and walk into
the stalls. Besides, what earthly reason
have you to suppose my daughter would
marry you ? Has she shown the slightest
partiality for you ? ' "

' Well, he could not say she had. Still,
he thought he miofht have a chance if I
would only give him opportunity ; ' and I
let him talk on and on, and at last overpersuade
me into giving a sort of reluctant
and conditional consent to his writing to
Peggy. He wanted to see her, but I
would not allow that. ' I can't have the
girl harassed as you have harassed me,'

I told him. ' She is a timid sort of
creature, and it hurts her, I know, to give
pain so much, she would be just as likely
as not to say ' Yes ' when she wanted to
say 'Xo.'"

"Then he entreated me not to prejudice
her against him. ' Honour bright,'
I promised ; ' if I say nothing in your
favour, I'll say nothing in your disfavour ; '
and he was going to end with that, when
I remarked, ' 0, by-the-bye, before we go
any further we had better understand each
other about one thing — settlements' "

Mr. Gayre smiled cynically, but Sir
Geoffrey did not choose to see that smile.

"Would you believe," he said, "the
beggar did not want to make any settlements
; so we had a very stiff ten minutes
before I could make the least impression
on him. ' He did not approve of settlements.'
'Very well, then,' I said, 'you
don't propose to my daughter.' ' Whatever

the amount of her fortune micrht be, he
would settle a similar sum.' ' Then,' I
said, ' you don't propose to my daughter.'
He would settle three hundred a year.'
no,' I said, ' you don't propose to my
daughter. Hang it, sir!' I went on, 'have
you come here to insult me ? You've
nothing hut money to throw into the scale;
and, by Heaven, if you don't throw ina
good lot of that, wife of yours daughter
of mine shall never be ! Do you think I
am going to have my only child left to
the tender mercies of any husband? No,
no, Mr. Sudlow, you have deceived yourself.
I am not as simple as I look. I
have not lived fifty years in this wicked
world for nothing. And if my daughter
marries, she shall marry as befits her
station. Settlements liberal and all in order
good establishment — plenty of servants —
carriage — everything in the best style —
money no object whatever. Xow you

know my views, and there is an end of
the matter. ' "

"And Mr. Sudlow ?"

"Your friend accepted the inevitable.
Ton my soul, there are people who like
you the better for thrashing them. When
I found out my gentleman's game I did
not spare him, and now he is as tractable
as you please. He has my permission
to write to Peggy through me, and I have
told her she is not to take him at first,
but that she must take him at last. I
wish they could have been married immediately,
but that's impossible. He has
to find a house she likes, buy furniture
she selects, purchase the carriage she prefers,
(if he behaves himself I'll give them a
pair of horses such as you don't often
see), make settlements to be approved by
my solicitors. Gad ! when you think of it,
Gayre, marriage is an awful thing for a
man. Then, on the other hand, Peggy

must provide a trousseau — not a mere makeshift
sort of business, but the best money
can buy ; and afterwards comes the worst
difficulty of all — what are we to do with
the girl in the period between the time
she is engaged and married ? There is
only one person I can think of fit to
patronise her. I must see Susan Drummond
on the subject. She can help mein
that quarter, I know."

''Do you think of going over to Enfield,
then ? " asked Mr. Gayre.

"To Enfield/ Not I, faith! I am not
so fond of cold water, old women, and
sour looks as all that comes to. I'll just
drop Susan a line, and ask her to runover
and see me as soon as ever she can.
We must take time by the forelock now,
or else time may reverse the operation."

"But you don't suppose Miss Drummond
will run over, as you call it, to see
you?"

Won't she ? Ah, you don't bet ; if you
did, I'd lay long odds Susan will come at
any inconvenience to herself. You don't
know Susan — that's flat, my lad. And
now I must go, and you will be very glad
to see my back. It's a queer world, too.
Only to think of the Chelstons and the
Gayres, and the Chelstons and the ludlow
! " Having delivered himself of which
suggested parable. Sir Geoffrey, after stigmatising
claret as cold unhealthy stuff,
which thinned the blood and destroyed the
digestion, poured himself out a tumbler of
Mr. Gayre's rare vintage, and swallowing
it with a wry face, as though it were
medicine, walked out of the house with a
gravity of demeanour and steadiness of gait
which deceived Mr. Gayre's servant into
believing the Baronet was soberer than any
judge.

For one rash moment Mr. Gayre had felt
tempted to declare Miss Drummond should

not be at this brother-in-law's beck and call,
that it was monstrous to ask the girl to
come to North Bank even for ten minutes
during his niece's absence ; but the next,
caution won the day ; only he resolved
that upon the very first opportunity which
offered he would try" to gain a right to
stop all that sort of thing.

But then, good Heavens ! if Susan married
him she would be almost Sir Geoffrey's
sister-in-law ; and this seemed so utterly
monstrous an idea that Mr. Ga3a^e had,
spite of his own will, to sit down and
consider the complication of relationship
which would ensue.

Aunt to Marguerite and Mr. Sudlow and
the Minor Canonesses, sister-in-law to the
Canoness and Canon Gayre! The banker
felt quite disheartened.

"There ought to be some law passed to
relieve people of these liabilities," he considered
; and then he decided to haunt



North Bank till lie heard when Susan might
be expected to pay that extraordinary visit
suggested quite as a matter of course by
Sir Geoffrey, if indeed she ever paid it at
all.

^Jr^"^

BETWEEN WIND AND WATER.

j^SKED you to come over in a way
our worthy friend here evidently
considers extremely free and easy, that I
I might get ten minutes' uninterrupted
chat with you. We've known each
other too long to stand on ceremony, eh,
Susan ? "

I should think so indeed," answered
Miss Drummond, but the colour rushed into
her face as she spoke.

"What on earth," wondered Mr. Gayre,
can make the girl blush so painfully at
times, while on other occasions she does
not seem to have a drop of tell-tale blood
in her body ? "

Can you tell me where bliss Matthews
is to be found ? "

She is living at Shepherd's Bush," answered
Susan.

There, I felt sure you could help me
out of the wood. How is she off? "

Xot very well, I fear," was the
reply.

All the letter for my purpose," said
the Baronet gaily. " Sorry, of course, on
her account, and all that," he went on ;
but if she is not overburdened with this
world's goods, she may be the more inclined
to let bygones be bygones."

Susan shook her head gravely. " What
is it you want her to do ? " she asked.

'• Come here for three months, and 111
make it worth her while."

"I am afraid," said Miss Drummond,
pursing up her pretty mouth till it was
like nothing so much as a sweet pink
rosebud ; then meeting Sir Geoffrey's eye,

lier lips opened, and she broke into a
sudden and irresistible peal of laughter,
in which the Baronet himself joined heartily.

"Faith, it seemed no joking matter at
the time. Sue," he said, as soon as he
could speak ; " and there's Gayre wondering'
what the deuce we are lau<?hinor at."

I can guess," remarked Mr. Gayre,
with a poor semblance of merriment.

The three were at luncheon together.
Mrs. Lavender had what she called "tossed
up " a very pretty repast, over which Sir
Geoffrey Chelston, clothed, shaved, and as
sober as his previous night's doings would
permit, presided. That luncheon was indeed
his breakfast, and with the aid of several
highly-seasoned and savoury dishes, assisted
by strong cordials, he was trying to get
that troublesome stomach of his into good
temper.

"Have a glass of sherry, Susan, do," entreated
the Baronet. " Capital sherry this.

Xow I want you to coax Miss Matthews to
come and take charge of the house for
three months. I am sure she would do
anything for you."

"I do not thmk she would do that,"
answered Susan, with an attempt at gravity
creditable under the circumstances.

Not if I promised to be a good boy
and behave myself? She need not fear any
recurrence of the indiscretion. Deuce take
the girl ! what's she laughing at now ? "

Mr. Gayre," panted out Susan, " if
you could only see Miss Matthews ! "

He need not wish to see her, I'm sure.
Touch of the tar-brush about her complexion,
and figure indescribable. But fact
is, Gayre, I did offend Miss Matthews — as
conscientious a woman as ever entered the
house. An excellent person, but most confoundedly
ugly — perhaps that was the reason
she was good. There is no merit in ugly
people being virtuous. I can't think what

the deuce possessed me ; or rather — I know,
it was some of the worst whisky that ever
came out of a cheating innkeeper's cellar.
She needn't have made such a fuss about
the matter, though. If she looked in her
glass she must have been perfectly sure
what I did was committed in a moment of
mental aberration. Never previously," finished
the Baronet, " in the course of a long
and, I may add, comparatively sinless life,
did I so far forget myself."

'' She would not have minded it so much,
I am sure," interposed Susan, " if Dotterel
had not chanced unfortunately to come into
the room."

"Where, if you believe me, Gayre, on
my sacred word of honour, I was making
that worthy lady tread a measure like Young
Lochinvar. I must have been confoundedly
drunk ; not with the quantity, only with
the quality, of what I had taken. And
when I got home and found the old girl in

the drawing-room, I believe I chucked her
under the chin, and insisted she should
dance a minuet with me. She declared I
kissed her, too ; and I daresay I did, for I
was quite off my head. As a matter of
choice, I wouldn't have done such a thing
in my sober senses for a thousand pounds ;
and then, in the middle of the performance,
Dottrell, our then butler, appeared on the
scene.

She appealed to him for protection, and
straightway opened out on me. I sat down
for the simple reason that I could not
stand, and she did hold forth. Father
Mathew and Mrs. Grundy together could
not have hatched up such a discourse.
She would have gone on till now, only Dot-tell
calmly remarking, 'You had better
come away, ma'am ; Sir Geoffrey does not
understand a word you're saying ; ' with
firm decision took hold of her arm and
marched her out of the room."

Vol. ii. 80

"And the next morning?" questioned
!Mr. Gayre, who now began to understand
more thoroughly than ever the reason why
Sir Geoffrey found his domestic affairs somewhat
difficult to manage.

The next mornings Dottrell woke me
out of a sound sleep in order to deliver a
letter from ]\Iiss Matthews.

' Put it down,' I growled, for I had
such a headache I could scarcely open my
eyes.

' Beg pardon, Sir Geoffrey, but Miss
Matthews wants to catch the 11.25 train,
and '

"let her catch her train, and be blanked
to her ! ' I said, settling down again, for I
had clean forgotten aU about that last
night's minuet. But it was of no use.
Dottrell proved too much for me, and I
had to sit up and face the matter.

' Won't she take an apology ? ' I
asked.

'• Xo, she wouldn't ; all she meant to
take was her salary and departure. But
now, look here, Susan. You tell her I'm a
reformed character ; and that I'm never at
home till morning : and that you'll go bail
for my good conduct ; and that Peggy who
is now quite grown up, and a dragon of
propriety, keeps me on my best manners ;
and that she shall have fifty pounds for the
three months, paid in advance. She'll come
then, bless you I she'll come. If she should
want any further guarantee, refer her to
Gay re. He'll tell her the man never lived
who had a greater respect for elderly
women than myself. Why, rather than
offend one of them, I'd keep out of their
way for ever."

It was too much. Even ]mr. Gayre had
to laugh, as if he saw some fun in the
Baronet's utterances, while Susan faithfully
promised she would say all she could in
Sir Geoffrey Chelston's favour.

30—2

"And you'll say it this afternoon, ^von't
you?" he entreated, "because time happens
to mean money to me just now."

To this arrangement Susan at first demurred
a little. The afternoon would be
far advanced before she could get to Shepherd's
Bush. Miss Matthews might not beat
home. Mrs. Arbery Avould certainly feel
uneasy. But each of these points Sir
Geoffrey combated, and she yielded ; the
while Mr. Gayre sat inwardly fuming at
the way his brother-in-law made use of the
girl, and the manner she allowed herself to
be so treated. Mr. Gayre failed to see the
beauty of making oneself cheap. He could
not understand that the moment Susan
beo'an to think she was of too much importance
to answer to the beck and call of
those she cared for, she would cease to be
Susan Drummond, and become a totally
different person.

If you are going by the Metropolitan,"

said the Baronet, by Away of conclusion,
*^ we can walk together as far as Baker
Street. Will you come with us, Gayre?"

Almost gnashing his teeth, Mr. Gayre
said he would. Where was now his chance
of speaking to Susan? He felt at his wits'
end. He did not know what to do. Should
he sprite? Should he go down to Enfield,
or wait his opportunity, or

This is your hat, Ga^Tc," cried Sir
Geoffrey, interrupting his meditations, " and
here is Susan. I always did say I never
saw a girl who could put on her bonnet as
fast as you. However, as you know, a
bonny bride is soon buskin ; ' which reminds
me that I am to be father, and give
you away some day. You remember our
compact ? "

Very well indeed ; and I will hold you
to your promise," answered Susan.

And then, as Mr. Gayre held the door
open for her to pass out, he wondered to

himself what on earth his lady-love could
see in such a reprobate as Sir Geoffrey to
laugh and make merry With him and smile
on his battered wicked face, as though it
were pure as that of an angel.

Nevertheless, they were a pleasant trio as
they walked to Baker Street ; and Mr.
Gayre, after he had got Susan's ticket and
seen her into the train, he and Sir Geoffrey-accompanying
the lady on to the platform
per favour — lamented his own want of
daring in failing to take a ticket also to
Shepherd's Bush.

But if there is a ' divinity which doth
hedge a king,' there is a higher divinity
which hedges a modest, innocent woman.
Not for all the world would Mr. Gayre
then have so timed his proposal as to hurt
the girl's self-respect, and daunt her fearless
self-reliance.

She has no business to be running about
London in this way by herself," he thought ;

but lie felt he dared not be the man to teach
Susan Drummond she was doing wrong.

Next morning's post brought a note to
North Bank saying Miss Matthews utterly
declined to accept Sir Geoffrey's offer ; but
she — Susan, the writer — had met, at the
house of Margaret's ex-governess, a lady
willing to enter upon the duties he required
at once.

"I am sure she is just the person you
would like," finished the fair scribe ; " not
young'' (good Lord!" groaned Sir Geoffrey),
" a widow " (" 'yare hawks, but she
can't catch me," considered the juvenile
Baronet) ; " rather nice-looking and pleasant-mannered"
(that's a bit of comfort);
has a grandson she wants to keep at
school" (then she must be out of her
teens, at any rate ") ; " and seems to be in
all respects the sort of person you require.
I enclose her address."

To which Sir Geoffrey replied :

You settle with her, my dear Susan.
Anything you say I'll stick to. If she can
come into residence before the week is out,
so much the better."

Upon which authority, it may be assumed.
Miss Drummond acted forthwith, since Mr.
Gayre was duly and truly informed " an
elderly party was coming to keep things
straight at North Bank."

She'll be a deuce of a nuisance, I know,"
finished the Baronet ; " but we must have
something of the sort. Those few days 1
had to stay at home and play propriety
after the Chislehurst spread nearly killed
me. Besides, my time is my money ; and
it wouldn't pay me to play the part of Mrs.
Propriety. Once Peggy has given a sort of
modified consent, she shall come home ;
and I've asked Susan to tear herself away
from the delights of Enfield, and stay with
us for a while to brighten up the house."

It was not long' ere Mr. Sudlow won a

reluctant and dignified acceptance from Miss
Chelston.

'• She feels she scarcely knows enough of
me yet," explained Mr. Sudlow to Mr.
Gayre ; '* but even that looks well, does it
not ? " asked the happy lover, invading the
sanctity of Upper AVimpole Street one morning
before Mr. Gavre had finished his breakfast.
'• She would not have said so much
if she had not intended taking me sometime,
would she ? "

Declining to commit himself to any positive
statement, Mr. Gayre nevertheless
admitted he thought his niece must, at all
events, be enter tainimr the idea of Mr.
Sudlow as a husband.

'• I am afraid Sir Geoffrey will be very
hard to deal with on the subject of settlements,"
ventured Mr. Sudlow.

'• Time enough for you to consider that
question when you have arranged matters
with my niece."

"You know I object to settlements "

So I remember you said before ; and we
need not go over that old ground again.
Keep your objections for Sir Geoffrey. It
is his daughter, not mine, you hope to
marry."

What Mr. Sudlow wanted to know was
whether Mr. Gayre meant to behave handsomely
on the occasion. Five thousand
pounds, he hinted to Sir Geoffrey, would
not empty the Lombard Street coffers,
while it might prove of material assistance
in the housekeeping battle ; but the
Baronet warned him off this treacherous
ground.

Gayre is a deuced odd sort of fellow,"
he said ; " and if he is going to give anything,
he'll give it without being asked —
perhaps slip a dot into his niece's hand
when she is going away to change her
dress. But a certain person, who shall be
nameless, couldn't get sixpence out of him

unless he took the notion. Our best plan
is to let him alone."

^\'liich was all very well for the Baronet,
considered Mr. Sudlow ; but not so well for
the person undertaking to board, lodge, and
dress the beautiful Marguerite for the remainder
of her days.

You see it is not as if Miss Chelston
had a fortune in her own right," ventured
mr. Sudlow at last.

Mr. Gayre looked at him and smiled.

I suspect," said the banker, " if Miss
Chelston had possessed a fortune in her
own right, or in right of anybody else. Sir
Geoffrey would not have bestowed it on
you. Take my advice — if you get youth
and beauty, and birth and breeding, don't
break your heart because there is not
money too. You could not have got one
of the four in the person of my niece but
for the folly of Sir Geoffrey Chelston, formerly
of Chelston Pleasaunce."

You seem to consider my wealth nothing."


On the contrary, it is your weal which
lias given you the chance of marrying my
niece ; and when you are married to her
I hope you will live in a manner befitting
lier rank and her means. And for Heaven's
sake, Sudlow," added Mr. Gayre, with sudden
energy, "give up collecting your own
rents. Dunning weekly tenants is scarcely
an employment suitable for a man whose
wife may one day hope to be presented at
Court."

Mr. Sudlow turned pink and scarlet, and
blue and crimson, in about as many seconds ;
and his moustache quivered as he asked,

Who told you I did anything of the
kind?"

Sir Geoffrey. He says he saw you doing
it. And now do take a word of advice.
Your social future is before you to make
or to mar, and, what is of a great deal

more importance to me, my niece's future
can be made or marred by you. If you
mean to continue to do these sort of things
say so, and the matter shall be broken off
at once. It is quite competent for you to
lower yourself; but my niece shall not be
pulled down to your level. Why, in
Heaven's name, don't you sell all that
wretched property, and try to put your
many talents out to interest in some way
befitting' a gentleman ? "

"Whenever you can prove your ability
to introduce me to really good society," retorted
Mr. Sudlow, " I will follow your advice.
Meantime permit me to say I do not
consider the persons I find you know most
intimately are in any respect superior to
myself."

"You had better repeat that statement
to Sir Geoffrey Chelston," said Mr. Garland
ascertain his opinions on the subject.
I was wrong to interfere in the matter. It

does not much signify to me whom his
daughter marries, or whether she ever marries
at alL"

"With which explicit statement 'Mr. Gay re
rose, and woukl have ended the conference,
lout that Mr. Sudlow, with profuse apologies,
begged him to overlook his little ebullition
of temper.

You are hard on a fellow, you know,"
he finished. " You delight in catching
up and twitting me for taking care of my
money ; though you would be the first to
find fault if I squandered what my father
left me."

But for my grandfather your father
would not have had much to leave," answered
Mr. Garland

then the talk drifted away from the
dangerous question of rank to the surer
ground of money, and peace seemed restored
by the time Mr. Gayre announced
his intention of starting for the City; and

Mr. Sudlow asked him to come round by
Bond Street, as he wished to buy a ring,
and desired the benefit of his experience.

"I do not profess to be any judge of
jewelry," answered Mr. Gayre ; " but I will
accompany you with pleasure, though I
consider your purchase somewhat premature.
However, if the ring is never possessed
by my niece, it will do for some
other young lady ; only there is the loss of
interest to consider, Sudlow."

"I don't care a straw about that," declared
Mr. Sudlow, valiantly. " Once your
niece says ' yes,' and if only those confounded
settlements can be arranged, I
shall be the happiest man in England."

That's what they all say before marriage,"
commented Mr. Gayre, searching
about for his umbrella.

They were just turning into Yere Street
as a cab pulled up opposite Marshall &
Snelgrove's. Before the driver could get

down, a small gloved hand turned the
handle, and in a second the owner of that
hand was on the pavement, and helping
another lady to descend more slowly.

Why, it is Miss Drummond ! " exclaimed
Mr. Sudlow ; then he stopped ; for the flash
of glad surprise in Mr. Gayre's face, and
the eager step made involuntarily forward,
were revelations more extraordinary than
welcome. A man could scarcely have
clapped hands during the fraction of time
it required to make the banker's secret
plain reading to Mr. Sudlow ; and then
both gentlemen were raisins their hats and
oTeetinor Susan, and remarking how extremely
strange it was they should have
met.

The cabman duly paid and discharged,
Miss Drummond introduced the banker and
his companion to Miss Matthews, during
the progress of which ceremony it tried
even Mr. Gayre's gravity to look upon the

highly respectable lady with whom, in the
great drawing-room at Chelston Pleasaunce,
his brother-in-law had essayed to trip a
measure. Nearly six feet tall, gaunt, short-petticoat,
with sUm ankles and lean legs,
and long, thin, flat feet, with a face like a
horse, kindly dark eyes, black hair turning
gray, a good Woman nose, prominent teeth,
more than a suspicion of a moustache : a
less likely woman 1o appreciate the delicate
attention of being chucked under her chin
never existed.

As for Susan, she felt she dared not
look at Mr. Gayre ; there was a suspicious
twitching about her mouth and
a tremor in her voice Mr. Sudlow could
not comprehend, though both phenomena
were perfectly intelligible to his companion.


Going shopping, Miss Drummond ? "
asked Mr. Sudlow, who, in his new character
of an almost engao-ed man, had al-vol.

ii. 31

ready commenced to take an interest in
so purely feminine a weakness.

Yes, really," answered Susan, with a
little nod and a happy smile, and that
sudden and vivid blush which was beginning
sorely to perplex Mr. Gayre. What
on earth could make her colour up at
such a simple question ?

'• I always envy ladies their ability to
sew and their liking; for turnips over silks
and satins," observed the banker.

My purchases," said Susan, " must be
of a much more modest description ; "
while Miss Matthews didactically observed,
she did not know what ladies would do
without the resource of needlework.

As there probably never existed anyone
less able to susfo-est even a vague solution
to such a conundrum than Sir Geoffrey's
brother-in-law, wide though the field of
speculation opened up by Miss Matthews'
sententious remark mis^ht be considered.

the banker wisely declined to enter on it.
Instead he inquired when Miss Drummond
meant to go to North Bank, and finding
'every shortly — next week, perhaps," took
his leave, and, accompanied by Mr. Sudlow,
walked off, followed by warm encomiums
from Miss Matthews, who professed great
astonishment that her former employer
could be possessed of so desirable a relative.


"And what is the younger gentleman's
name, Susan ? I failed to catch it."

"Mr. Sudlow — a captive of Margaret's
spear and bow."

Will it come to anything ? "

I don't know. I hope not. He is only
rich."

If he is rich, then you ought to wish
it may come to a great deal. Margaret
would be wretched married to a poor man ;
and she must be far happier and safer in
the house of a husband than residing



under the roof of her reckless and dissolute
father."

"Poor Sir Geoffrey!" remonstrated Susan.
*' You are far too hard upon him."

No, indeed, my dear, I am not ; and
the only fault I have to find with you is
that you wilfully shut your eyes to the
real character of that dreadful man. I am
so sorry you are going there ; it is really
not respectable for a young girl to associate
with a person who bears so bad a
character as Sir Geoffrey Chelston."

"He has never been bad to me," retorted
Miss Drummond, sharply — " always good
and kind and thoughtful. One can only
speak of people as one finds them."

"Ah, Susan "

"Now it is of no use, Miss Matthews,"
interrupted the girl, with that decision
which often astonished Mr. Gayre ; " I shall
always like Sir Geoffrey. I should like him
even if he picked pockets."

So he does," said the Woman Conqueror,
as the Baronet had been wont to
call his daughter's governess ; " so he does,
if all accounts be true."

I don't care whether they are true or
false. Wliat is the use of being fond of a
friend only when he does right ? I should
want my friends to be fond of me if I
did wrong — as you would be, you know
you would ; so never ask me again to turn
my back on Sir Geoffrey."

As days went by, the object of all this
charming loyalty might have been regarded
almost as a reformed character. The
Baronet was devotion himself to c^ettino-
his daughter well settled with the same
earnestness he brought to bear on betting,
card-playing, and horse-dealing.

Sudlow finds those settlements a rasping
fence," he said to Mr. Gayre ; " but he

shall take it, by ! or give up all hope

of Peggy ; " and because he was steadfastly

purposed to frustrate the slightest
attempt to balk the jump, he rose betimes,
and stayed about the house, and
watched over Miss Chelston, who was
now at home, like a hen with one
chicken. The engagement at length became
a fact accomplished, and Sir Geoffrey
was pleased to signify that he would
put no obstacle in the way of a speedy
marriage.

"You satisfy my lawyers," was his terse
way of putting the case in a nutshell to
Mr. Sudlow, " and you'll satisfy me. To
save all trouble and aro-ment, I have given
them their instructions, by ichich they ivill
abide'' and if any disinterested person had
been by to see the shake of the head with
which the Baronet emphasised this utterance,
he could not have imagined that Miss
Chelston's worthy papa was destitute of
worldly wisdom.

For, indeed, there had come a certain

change over Mr. Sudlow which puzzled
and annoyed Sir Geoffrey. It was not that
he cared for his lady-love less ; hut he
certainly seemed in no hurry to endow her
with the amount of his worldly goods upon
which the Baronet insisted. That meeting
with Susan Drummond told him how small
the fair Marguerite's chance of inheriting
uncle's wealth might be considered, and
hitherto he had always calculated that she
would, sooner or later, come in for a good
slice out of Lombard Street.

He honored to tell Sir Geoffrey and his
daughter Avhat he had discovered, he was
waiting his opportunity to do so ; but he
did not wish to show his new card before
Mrs. Morris, who sat constantly on guard
doing lace work, which she sold to various
patronesses for the benefit of her grandson,
whose school-bills were made the excuse for
that sort of genteel begging greatly in favour
with ladies so situated that they are obliged

to wrest a living from society by hook or
by crook.

He earnestly desired to get the matter off
his mind before Miss Drummond again appeared
at North Bank, and at length his
chance came one evening, when Mrs. Morris
]had been obliged to go to bed with a
severe headache, and Sir Geoffrey was
fidgeting about the room, trying all the
easy-chairs in succession, and thinking what
an awful nuisance a daughter was, and
wondering why Lady Chelston could not,
excepting for contrariness, have presented
him with a son instead, and marvelling
when Mr. Sudlow would take his departure,
and feeling sure there had never existed on
the earth before so exemplary a father as
himself.

Something was said about Mr. Gajre not
coming so often as formerly to North
Bank.

I suppose," added the Baronet, " the

fact is he has other fish to fry at Chislehurst.
I confess I feel rather surprised
at his choice myself. I hoped he might
have gone in for something different ; but
money attracts money, there can be no
question about that."

And Mrs. Jubbins is so immensely rich,"
put in Miss Chelston, softly.

Are you quite sure it is Mrs. Jubbins,"
asked Mr. Sudlow.

"Why, of course, man," answered Sir
Geoffrey ; " who else is there ? Who else
should there be ? "

I daresay you know best," said Mr.
Sudlow ; " still, I have a notion that when
Mr. Gayre marries it will not be the
wealthy widow."

"You speak as if you had some one in
your eye," exclaimed the Baronet, roused
into attention.

So I have."

And who is she ? 0, moray tell us I "

entreated Miss Marguerite. " What I would
give to see her ! "

"You can compass your desire without
any great expenditure of either time or
money," said Mr. Sudlow, triumphantly, for
he felt the moment for making a coup had
come. " Unless I am greatly mistaken,
Miss Drummond will be metamorphosed into
Mrs. Gayre before we are any of us much
older."

Susan Drummond ! " repeated the
Baronet, sitting bolt upright in his chair,
and holding the arms with both hands,
while Margaret, literally, for the moment,
bereft of speech, remained dumb. " I think
you are wrong there, my friend," added Sir
Geoffrey, after a pause, which seemed to
last for years.

"Ami?"

"How in the world could such a notion
have got into your head ? "

I can't imagine how it failed to get

into yours," answered 'Mv. Sudlow, Avitli a
fine scorn.

Poor dear Susan, what a preposterous
idea ! " said Miss Chelston, gently.

"You will find it a true one, I imagine,"
persisted the new prophet.

Fancy Susan my aunt I " suggested the
beauteous Marguerite, in the sweetest
accents, the time her heart was full of
rage and malice and all uncharitableness.

You might get a worse, Peggy, but
never a better," said the Baronet, who.
having now grasped the position, decided
there was something in it. ''If the land
lies as you think, Sudlow, I for one shall
be delighted. On the face of God's earth
there walks no grander woman than Susan
Drummond ; and while I should have made
the Jubbins welcome, I'd go out of my
senses with delight if matters turned out
as you think."

'• You are very disinterested. Sir Geoffrey."

"Xot I, faith; I know Susan would never
take from my girl for herself. She'd bethe
making of Gayre — and — and — us all. I
wonder how it was I never thought of such
a tliino'? Gad, if it had rested with me
they should have been man and wife long
enough ago."

Mr. Sudlow opened his mouth to reply,
but an imploring look from Miss Chelston
caused him to shut it again. "After all,"
lie said, " my uncle may not have an idea
of the kind."

I hope and trust he has," cried Sir
Geoffrey. "You have brought me the best
piece of news to-night, Sudlow, I have
heard for this man' a day! Susan married
to Gayre ! why it sounds too good to be
true. I'll go straight away down to him,
and ask if there's anything in it. We can
walk part of the wa^^ together ; " and the
Baronet rose from his chair with all the
more alacrity that he thought he now

saw this way to getting out of the house
and rid of his future son-inlaw at the same
moment.

"For heaven's sake, Sir Geoffrey, do no
such thing!" entreated Mr. Sudlow. "Your
brother-in-law woukl never forgive me if
he thought I had been wedding in his
concerns. Whatever you do, pray keep
my name out of the affair ; or, rather,
refrain from mentioning the matter at all.
I — I may be mistaken ; but I considered it
only rio'ht to drive you a hint. I did not
know the match was one you would like.
I fancied there might be objections, both
on the score of age and fortune."

Did you ? " said Sir Geoffrey, grimly.
Understand, if you please, I consider
Susan Drummond a fortune in herself.
Why, with her family and Gayre's money,
they might do just what they pleased : and
as for that trifle of disparity, Gayre is a
good fellow, and deserves a good wife :

and, faith, if lie gets Susan, he'll have something
to be proud of."

I never admired Miss Drummond particularly
myself," remarked Mr. Sudlow —
for which diplomatic speech he was rewarded
by an appreciative glance from his
ladj^e-love — "but from the first hour he
saw her I know Mr. Gayre did."

Showed his taste," commented the
Baronet. " However, I'll take no notice of
what you have told us. Never spoil sport
has always been my maxim. Upon my soul,
I feel as much pleased as if anybody had
given me a thousand pounds."

Which creditable feeling was certainly not
shared by his charming daughter. She knew
exactly what Mr. Sudlow was thinking, and
her own opinion chanced to be identical with
his. If Mr. Gayre married Susan he would
not feel disposed to endow his niece withall
he possessed. Miss Chelston had long
fastened her gaze on the Lombard Street

coffers, and it could not be said lie regarded
with pleasure the idea of Susan
getting any share of the spoil.

'don't say anything more about this
before papa," she hinted, during a brief
absence of Sir Geoffrey for the purpose of
draining a bumper to the health of the
future Mrs. Gayre. '• Do you think my
uncle is really thinking of marrying dear
Susan?"

I am quite sure he would like to marry
her," answered Mr. Sudlow ; and then he
explained how the knowledge had come
upon him like a flash of lightning. " Ton
my honour, a child might have knocked me
down," he finished.

"It was wonderfully clever of you," said
Miss Chelston, with a pleasant flattery of
voice, and word, and look ; " but then you
are so clever. Don't you think the disparity
is dreadful, however?"

Yes ; but if Miss Drummond does not

mind that, I am sure Mr. Gayre need not."
0, don't ; I can't bear to think of it,"
murmured Miss Chelston, shuddering ; and
then Sir Geoffrey, refreshed and invigorated,
sauntered back into the room, where he
bean to yawn with such brood effect that
Mr. Sudlow felt reluctantly compelled to say
good-night.

Now, look here, my girl," said Sir
Geoffrey to his daughter, as he took his
hat, preparatory to getting the " cobwebs
blown off* him," " take my advice, and
neither mell nor meddle in this business.
You'd love dearly, I know, to stop the
match, but it will be a deuced fine thing
for you should it ever come off". As for
Susan, if she can fancy your uncle — and
he is not an old man for his age ; he hasn't
had to bear the anxiety I have — I'm sure
she'll never repent taking him. When she
comes here keep a quiet tongue about the
matter. We'll want your uncle's help yet,

I'm afraid, in that matter of the Sudlow
fish ; so for the Lord's sake don't let any
of your woman's whimsies put his back
up."

Only to a certain extent did Miss Chelston
comply with Sir Geoffrey's wishes. Miss
Drummond spent a few hours at North Bank
one day, and promised to return shortly and
stop for a fortnight. It was then she and
her friend had a serious talk about the
Sudlow engagement.

Margaret ! don't marry him ; don't,
like a darling," entreated Susan, at the
close of a long and confidential interview.
You do not care for him, and you do
care for Lai Hilderton."

Miss Chelston laughed scornfully.

Should you recommend me to marry
Lai and make as good a match as you
seem disposed to do ? "

"Perhaps not," said Susan, "for there is
that reason, you know, which might cause

"Vol. ii. 32

anyone to feel afraid of marrying Lai ; but
you have led him on and on, and — "

"Xow, remember, I cannot bear being
lectured, more particularly by you," interposed
Miss Chelston.

"Well, then, tell Mr. Sudlow you can't
marry him, and I won't say another word.
Recollect, so long as I have a home you
need never want one. And I am sure — "

Make yourself very sure, dear, I mean
to marry Mr. Sudlow. I shall not so far
insult my own taste as to say he is the
man I would have chosen. But bego'ars^
you know — "

"0 Mao'oie, Mao-oie!"

"0 Susan! At the end of twelvemonths
I wonder which of us will be the
best off? "

Good-bye, then, you poor mistaken
child, and remember what I said."

"I certainly shall not forget a word you
have said, dear ; " and with a sweet smile,

Miss Clielston kissed lier friend and saw-susan
depart, and then sat down biding
her time, which arrived that evening before
dinner.

Mr. Sudlow was in evidence ; Sir Geoffrey
in high spirits, because his brother-in-law
had walked up to North Bank ; Mrs. Morris
was putting the finishing touches to her
toilette ; Mr. Gayre was looking at the
evening paper, when, in quite an artless
and gushing manner, Miss Chelston opened
her first parallel.

'•I have such a piece of news for 3'ou,
papa," she said, gaily.

Good news. Peg ? "

Very good ; it concerns Susan Drummond."


"Let's hear it, then," cried the Baronet.

She is going to be married " — involuntarily
Sir Geoffrey turned towards Mr.
Gay re, but that gentleman never moved
nor stirred, neither did the crisp sheet he

32—2

held rustle — " to Oliver Dane. You remember
Oliver, don't you? Old Mr. Dane's
grandson," went on the fair Margaret,
almost without a pause, and maintaining
an admirable composure. "He is at present
in some house in the City — Colvend and
Surlees — but he is going to start on his
own account, whatever that means, and the
wedding is to take place before Christmas."

"I don't think it will," said Mr. Gayre
from behind his newspaper ; and as he spoke
a dead silence fell on those present — they
were waiting to hear more.

Mr. Oliver Dane'' proceeded the banker,
deliberately folding up the Globe, " was this
day charged at the Mansion House by his
employers, Colvend and Surlees, with forgery
and embezzlement, and remanded, bail being
refused''

THE BLACKNESS OF NIGHT.

^^HAELY next morning Mr. Gay re was
MmMf^ making; his way into the Camden
Eoad. Overnight, pacing the silent desolate
streets, he had decided what to do. He
would break the news to Susan. Unless
Fortune meant to turn utterly against him,
he felt that he should be the first to carry
the tidings out to Enfield, and so score one
trick in a game that would require the most
careful playing. While his niece was firing
her shot about Oliver Dane, it had seemed to
him that he fell from heaven to earth. The
whole time occupied by her narrative could
have been reckoned by seconds, yet years ere
then had appeared to him a shorter period.

How lie had held his paper so that it
did not even rustle, how he compelled this
voice to utter the words he spoke without
a tremor, were mysteries he could not have
explained himself. Save for a certain ring
of triumph in his tone he was unable to
repress, Oliver Dane and Susan Drummond
might have been total strangers to the banker.

This was the hidden rock he had always
instinctively known stood in his way to port.
Xow he fully understood the reason of
Susan's unaccountable blushes. At last he
comprehended why she was at once so
friendly and so indifferent. Everything
which had puzzled him about the girl Alas
clear at last ; far, far too clear. But she
could not marry this man. All Vv^as not lost.
On the contrary, in this awful trouble he
would be of such comfort, he would so
watch over her, so sympathise with her every
mood, that for very gratitude's sake she
must at length drive him love. And then

he strove to think he would rather not
change matters even if he could. It was
far, far better she should have had a lover
and found him worthless. At his age it
was scarcely to be expected a young girl
could give him the first, romantic, unreal
dream-love of a woman's life ; but the love
that lasts would be his — the love founded
on a rock — on respect, esteem, reason, and
affection. Xo more wild, unpractical, dangerous
friendships with handsome young
fellows like Lai Hilderton ; no running about
at the beck and call of that sinful reprobate
Sir Geoffrey ; no more gallops with hei
easy familiar cousin the centaur. The brightness
of her morning was gone, and she
would now settle down and make a more
charming wife, with the traces of tears on
her cheeks, than she ever could have done
in the sunshine of a ridiculous and impossible
engagement.

It is always wise to make the best of a

bad bargain; and as Mr. Gayre rode
leisurely along, he became so exceeding-wise
that he finally felt thankful such a
person as Oliver Dane was in existence.

I will make myself necessary now," he
decided ; " and, when her sorrow is a little
spent, she will not be able to do without me."

A pleasant vision, truly. Poor dear
Susan, with those wonderful brown eyes,
coming to him, not as a ministering angel,
but as a sorely wounded dove, weeping-out
her grief on his bosom, sobbing her
tears in his arms, feeling him a tower of
refuge in her time of trouble, and giving
this disinterested suitor the last, best,
strongest love of a strong unselfish nature !

Men of Mr. Gayre's type are all too apt
to imagine Providence delights to play
into their hands.

Certainly on that autumn morning, between
six and seven o'clock, Mr. Gayre
felt God was on his side.

The longer lie thought about the matter
the more satisfied he became that things
were working round to promote this own
happiness and Susan's welfare.

Out of evil crowd would come. When
she had got over the fret of losing her
lover, she would bring him, Xicholas, the
whole of her great, loyal heart. Had
the man died, had untoward circumstances
separated her from Oliver Dane, she might
never have recovered the blow. But
forgery, embezzlement, the dock, and a
felon's doom, must, he argued, hurt a
woman's pride, and crush her love, and
clear the course for a suitor Hke himself,
unexceptionable in all respects save
that unlucky item of age. Xot for one
moment did it ever occur to Mr. Gayre
that Oliver Dane might be innocent. He
knew Colvend and Surlees well. Mr. Colvend,
indeed, kept his private account at
Gayres', and he had often heard that gentleman

speak in almost affectionate terms of
young Dane, " remanded on the previous
afternoon, bail being refused."

He was aware that at one time Mr.
Colvend had thought of taking his clerk
into partnership. Such a termination of
the business connection was spoken about
both by Mr. Colvend and Mr. Surlees. Of
late Mr. Surlees, however, had seemed dissatisfied
with their employe. The question
possessed so little interest for Mr. Gayre,
that when both principals wrangled a little
about Dane, he only' considered that person
a ]pore ; lout now he remembered all
their utterances, and came to the conclusion
the young man must have been engaged
in a course of fraud for years. He
knew Mr. Dane's appearance perfectly well
his voice, accent, and manner had always
struck the banker as quite unsuitable to
his actual station.

'• A. gentleman to the backbone, sir," old

Mr. Colvencl remarked ; and now that
'' gentleman " was as good as convicted.

Surlees is not a person to show
mercy," considered Mr. Gayre. " It will
1)e penal servitude. Well, not so long ago
lie would have been hanged I " Cheered
by which consolatory reflection the banker
proceeded on his way.

It was a lovely morning. The Seven
Sisters' Eoad looked its best as Mr. Gayre
rode along. Tottenham Valley, which lies
just behind the Manor House Tavern,
seemed literally steeped in sunshine ; the
morning air blew fresh and pleasant ; the
ground was hard, and echoed cheerily the
sound of the horses' hoofs. Yes, though the
]j1ow had been severe, Mr. Gayre felt he
was recovering from it. Things were not
so bad that they might not have been a
great deal worse. This trouble, pi'operl}^
utilised, must draw Susan nearer to him
nearer and' nearer still. Xow he knew

his ground, and lie lead never known it
before. Putting up this horse at a tavern
in Enfield Highway, he walked on to Isles.
Arbery's house. As he pushed open the
small gate he caught the flutter of a
woman's dress in the garden ; and, next
moment, Susan turned and saw him.

"Wliy, Mr. Gayre," she cried, "what
has brought you here so early? How is
Maggie ? There is nothing wrong with Sir
Geoffrey, is there ? "

She did not know, she had not a notion
of the trouble impending ; and for a moment
Mr. Gayre's heart smote him when
he thought of the sorrow he was bringing
to the dear fair girl, who had never
looked sweeter or lovelier than at that
instant.

"My niece is well, thank you," he answered,
"and Sir Geoffrey was well also
when I saw him last night. I have come
to see you. Miss Drummond. I want to

tell you something I think you would
rather hear from me than — strangers."

"Something' bad?"

I feel you will — I know you must —
think so."

Whom does it concern ? "

"Mr. Dane."

My God ! " — her lips rather shaped
the words than said them — "is he ill, or

dead''

"Neither. But let us go into the house.
This garden is so exposed, and — "

Without a word she led him into the
pleasant drawing-room, which commanded
a view of Sandstone and the Essex hills ;
shut the door close ; and then, turning
to the banker, said,

"Xow, what is it?"

I bring very bad news." He hesitated.

I know you do ; what is it, Mr. Gayre ?
Don't keep me in suspense. What is it
you have come to tell me?"

Have you read this morning's paper ? "

"No, I have not looked at it. Oh, Mr.
Gayre, what is wrong — what has happened
? "

For answer he produced a copy of the
Times, which he had boui>-ht on the road,
and i>ave it into her hands, indicating
a particular paragraph.

I thought," he repeated, " you would
rather hear of this from me than another."

She did not answer. She was reading
the brief passage in yesterday's police
report, which told her her ship had gone
to pieces on the breakers. She finished
it to the end ; then lifted her eyes to
Mr. Gayre's with a look of dumb entreaty
which haunts him even now.

My love ! my love ! " she murmured,
and sat down transformed.

The Susan of old would never walk
among the flowers in Mr. Arbery's garden
again. That Susan was dead and buried

and Mr. Gayre stood marvelling to see the
chancre. Coming' events cast their shadows
before ; and the banker now understood
that yearning look m those sweet brown
eyes. The minor chord that gave such
a strange sadness every now and then to
the music of her young life meant that
trouble was on its way to meet her — the
crushing trouble she now saw face to face.

Minutes passed, but she never spoke.
After that one cry of agonised despair
she sat silent and motionless, while Mr.
Gayre, unable to suggest one word of
comfort, stood looking at her, with a
great pity and a wild jealousy and a mad
joy all contending together in his breast.

Through the window which looked out
on the Essex hills, bright sunshine fell
in golden bars across her hair, her white
soft throat, her hands lying loosely clasped
together in her lap. The girl's whole
attitude was that of utter abandonment.

For the moment she seemed stricken down.
She and hope and youth and gaiety had
shaken hands and parted. To have seen
her then, any one might have imagined
Susan Drummond would never laugh or
smile or jest again. The iron had entered
into her soul. Forgery, embezzlement! The
words were branded on her heart. The
man she knew so well, the man she loved,
accused of such awful crimes ! It appeared
impossible ; and yet there before
her eyes lay the story in black and white.
His accusers said he had forged their signature
; the proceeds of his imputed crime
were found at his lodgings. The notes
paid over the counter of the Union Bank
were discovered in his portmanteau, which
was packed as if for a journey. What
did it all mean? Tossing in a sea of
distressed conjecture, Susan still held fast
to one saving rope — he incas innocent. If
the whole world declared him guilty she

would not believe the verdict. In some
moment of mental aberration she might
have committed a great sin (Susan felt
she would do wickedness for the sake of
those she loved); but Oliver Dane? No!
While the sun rose and the sun set she
could never believe that. He might have
faults, and he had — Susan knew them —
but he was perfectly incapable of such an
act as this. He would want her. Vaguely
this blessed thought began to shoot up —
two fair green leaves of promise to beautify
the arid desolation of the barren land
to which she had been so suddenly transported.
He could not do without her
help. He had no relation, she knew,
who would come forward at such a
crisis. To all useful intents and purposes,
he and she stood utterly alone
in the world. Adam and Eve were
perhaps less solitary in the Garden of
Eden than her lover and herself in what

Vol. ii. 33

some persons consider this over-populated
world.

Directly that idea of help crossed her
mind, she looked at her watch, and said,

There is an up-train in about twenty
minutes. I shall just be able to catch
it, Mr. Gayre, if you will excuse me."

Catch it ! Where are you thinking
of a'oin^ ? "

"To Oliver. I must go to him at once
you know "

No ; by Heaven, that you shan't ! "
broke out Mr. Gayre, fiercely ; then recollecting
himself, he added, " Can't sou
trust me. Miss Drummond? Only say
what you want done, and I will try todo
it. If time, or money, or influence
can help you in this strait, command all
so far as they are within the compass
of my power."

Thank you," she answered, earnestly,
thank you ; " and almost involuntarily

she stretched out lier liaiid, wliicli lie
took and held in both of his while she
went on. "We are so lonely, Mr. Gayre :
we are so far more lonely than any
human being could imagine."

He bent his head and kissed her hand
that white hand which she made no
attempt to withdraw, Which lay in his
as a frightened bird nestles in the palm
of someone Who has rescued it from
fear and death.

If you can trust me — " he was beginning,
when the door opened and Mrs.
Arbery's voice was heard exclaiming a
little sharply :

What are you doing ? Breakfast is

ready, Susan." Then, catching sight of

Mr. Gayre, who was standing very close

to her niece — indeed, quite bending over

that young person in a manner Avhicli

seemed to indicate private communications

of importance were passing between them

33—2

lie added, in a tone of severe and
astonished dignity, "I bee your pardon,
I am sure."

Come in, aunt," said Susan, " we are
not talking about any matter wliicli can
be kept secret. Will you tell her, Mr.
Gayre ? " and the girl turned her face,
from which all the delicate rosebud pink
had flown, towards the window, and
looked with unseeing eyes at the distant
hills, while the story of Oliver Dane's
downfall was recited for Mrs. Arbery's
benefit. It was a long story which did not
take long' in the telling The bare facts
contained enough of sorrow and disgrace
without any necessity for further detail.
Mr. Gayre said as little as he well could,
but that little proved more than sufficient.
If Susan's lover had been tried, convicted,
and sent to penal servitude, Mrs. Arbery
could not have felt more fully convinced
of his guilt.

She listened to the narrative in utter
silence, and when it was finished said
calmly,

I am not at all surprised."

No ? " questioned Mr. Gayre, for Susan
did not speak.

He is a young man I never liked,"
Mrs. Arbery explained. "It was an engagement
I never approved."

"You cannot mean, aunt, that you believe
him guilty ? "

I certainly do not mean that I believe
him innocent. Everything is against
him."

Yes," said Susan, bitterly. " Everything
is against him, everything has been
against him ; but that is no reason why
you should think him a thief. Do you
suppose if I heard you or Will had
committed any sin I should believe the
story ? Oh, aunt, though you dislike
Oliver, do not be hard on him. I can't

bear to hear you speak against the man
I am going to marry — I can't, I can't ! "
and her voice trailed away into low
sobbing.

Mr. Gayre looked at Mrs. Arbery, who,
la3dng her hand on Susan's shoulder,
said,

"My dear, I do not wish to be hard
on him. If he has done wrong he is
suffering for it ; but as for your ever
marrying him now, of course — "

Are we not to have any breakfast
to-day ? " cried Will Arbery at this point
in his mother's diatribe. " Why, what
has happened? What is the matter?"
he went on, looking in astonishment at
the group collected at the upper end of
that long pleasant drawing-room. " What
is wrong, Susan ? "

"Don't tell him," pleaded the girl; "let
him read it ; " and as Mr. Gayre handed
the Times to the younsf man in silence

she rose, and, twining lier arm about lier
cousin's neck, looked over this shoulder
while he glanced at the brief report.

Susan, I am sorry for you ! " he
exclaimed. " What ought we to do ?
Mr. Gayre, you know, I suppose, how we
can be best of use."

You believe him innocent. Will ? "

Innocent ! Of course I do. It is
some awful mistake ; it can be nothing
but a mistake," he added, turning to the
Spanker.

From the manner in which he uttered
the words they might have l^een intended
other as an interrogation or a statement
of opinion. Mr. Gayre chose to accept
them in the former sense, and gravely
answered that he hoped so.

"Mr. Dane may be able to explain the
circumstances. As yet, you must remember
wee have only heard one side — that of
this employers. When his statement is

made the whole complexion of the affair
will probably be altered."

I do not need to wait for his statement,"
said Susan, with streaming eyes.
"I know."

Mr. Arbery took a few turns up and
down the room.

"Don't you think," he asked, appealing
once again to Mr. Gayre, " the thing forme
to do would be to see Mr. Colvend
at once ? "

"Better let me do so. I know both
the partners."

"It — wasn't at your bank, was it?"
hesitated Mr. Arbery.

Xo ; the Union. Mr Colvend only
kept his private account with us."

"What sort of a man is he?"

"Extremely kind. At one time he took
the highest interest in Mr. Dane's future."

"Do you know Oliver, then?" asked
Susan, drawing a quick gasping breath.

I have seen and spoken to Mr. Dane.
Had T been aware you were interested in
him, Miss Drummond, I should have made
a point of cultivating his acquaintance."

Standing here talking," remarked Mr.
Arbery, in a general sort of way, "won't
mend matters. Mother, if you will give
me a cup of tea, the sooner I get off the
better. Cheer up, Susan ; I'll bring you
back good news, never fear."

"I am going with you," she said.

No, Susan," said Mrs. Arbery. " Understand
that I distinctly forbid your doing
anything of the kind. I will not have you
compromise yourself. You know what i
have been impressing upon you for a very
long time past. You thought me prejudiced,
and now you see something far worse than
ever I imagined has come to pass."

"It is quite true," answered Susan —
something much worse than any one
could ever have imagined has come to

pass ; " and she sat down again with something
more nearly approaching a sullen
expression clouding her face than Mr.
Gayre had ever seen disfigure its fair
beauty before.

Shall I send you a cup of tea, dear ? "
asked her aunt, apparently quite unconscious
of having driven any offence ; '* it
will do you good." But Susan only shook
her head.

Come into the other room, or Mr.
Gayre won't touch a morsel ; and he has
ridden a long way to do you a kindness,"
whispered Will Arbery. Whereupon Susan
rose, and, taking her cousin's arm, walked
silently across the hall.

Mr. Gayre watched her at the morning
meal; which was the great meal ot
the day in Mrs. Arbery's house.

She allowed herself to be helped to
ham. She accepted a proffered egg. She
took a piece of toast. She did not again

decline that cup of tea, suggested as
though a cup of tea were a panacea for
all the ills of life. She made pretence
of cutting up and toying with her food ;
but she touched none of it. She never
looked at nor spoke to any one. She
asked no question. She made no remark.
Will Arbery argued out the Dane complication
exhaustively, and Mr. Gayre exhibited
considerable ingenuity in suggesting plausible
reasons why it seemed the most natural
tliincr in the world for three hundred
pounds, paid over the counter at the
Union Bank, on the strength of Messrs.
Colvend and Surlees' forged signature, to
lee found in the lodgings of one of their
clerks, a trusted em2:}loye^ a gentleman they
had once thought of taking into partnership
— but Susan made no sign.

Mr. Gayre then shifted his ground.
He spoke of the high opinion he had
always entertained of Mr. Dane, of the

conviction he felt from the beginning
he was far too clever to be hampered
with two such partners as Colvencl and
Surlees.

"Excellent men," proceeded the banker,
warming to his subject, "but fifty years
at least behind the times. Colvend's notions
are those of the last century."

Just for the moment a faint flush, or
quiver of the eyelids, or pitiful tremor of
the mouth rewarded these utterances ; but
it was uphill work, and Mr. Gayre felt
he was growing almost as anxious for the
moment of departure as Mr. Arbery professed
himself to be, when suddenly Miss
Drummond's eyes, which she had lifted
for a moment, became larger and brighter;
her whole manner changed ; her colour
came and went, and, exclaiming almost
incredulously, " It's Sir Geoffrey ! it really
is Sir Geoffrey ! " she ran out of the room
and opened the hall-door, and met him in

the middle of the straight prim gravelled
walk.

Why, Susan, my girl ! ''

Sir Geoffrey ! " and then the Baronet
found himself, for the first, and, it maybe
added, the last, time in his life, holding
in his arms a perfectly respectable young
woman utterly beside herself with grief
and anxiety, and what she considered a
lack of intelligent sympathy.

"There, then," said Sir Geoffrey, stroking
and soothing her down exactly as he
might have done had she been a horse,
"take it quietly, my beauty. There's 
really to be frightened about. Dane
dane's all right, you know. Gayre and
I will stand bail for him. Tut-tut ! what's
all this trouble? Bless the creature, how
she clings to me ! There's nothing wrong ;
there is nothing to trouble you ! You
are safe now your old papa Geoff has
come to the rescue. Bless you, he'll sloane

rout up the magistrates, and make
them send your lover back to you at
once. It is an outrageous proceeding.
Clever heard of such a thing — never in
all my life. Now, now, now, don't cry
any more. If you do, you'll not be able
to see him when he comes back. What's
that you are saying? I don't think him
guilty, do I ? You silly little mortal !
Why, I'd just as soon believe myself capable
of doing such a thing ; " which
comparison struck Susan even in her then
state of mind as scarcely conveying the
amount of comfort Sir Geoffrey amiably
intended.

Dry your eyes, Susie, and come into
the house and tell me all you know about
the matter, and we'll see what's best to
be done."

With which and such like fatherly words
of rebuke and encouragement Sir Geoffrey
led Susan into the drawing-room, whereas

lie stated, to this immense astonishment,
lie found Gayre.

God bless me ! " lie exclaimed, "to
think of meeting you, of all men in the
world, here ! Why, I'd ten minds to call
for you on my way — I passed the end
of your street. I've never been home all
night — but I made sure you were snugly
tucked up, dreaming of Consols and Lord
knows what besides ! Now, I cal this
really friendly of you. I was just saying,
Mrs. Arbery," he went on, as that lady,
frigidly decorous and deeply exercised in
her mind, made her appearance on the
scene, " that among us we'll put things
right for our little girl."

"You mean very kindly, I am sure," answered
Mrs. Arbery, " but there are some
things which never can be put right. If
you could only persuade my poor Susan
of this, you would be performing an act
of the truest friendship."

"Well see about all that after a while,"
answered the Baronet cheerfully ; " time
enough to discuss all those sorts of questions
when Dane is able to put his oar in. Xow,
Susie, wake up and say what you want me
to do. As I told you, I haven't been to
bed at all, but that makes no difference —
I am ready to go anywhere and see anyone."


I want you to take me to see Oliver,"
murmured Susan, in so low a tone her
words failed to reach Mrs. Arbery's ear.

The girl was still holding Sir Geoffrey's
arm, and almost whispered her request.
Just for a moment the Baronet looked
grave, then he said briskly,

"So I will — so I will. Eun and put
your bonnet on, and we can talk as we go
up."

Sir Geoffrey," broke in Mrs. Arbery, " I
really cannot allow my niece to go to
London with you."

Very sorry indeed to hear it."

Her engagement has been a source of
disappointment, trouble, and anxiety to me
ever since I first knew of it."

I can well understand that. Engagements
very seldom do meet the approval
of any save the pair engaged, and their
satisfaction seldom lasts beyond a week
after marriage. I myself think the whole
thing a mistake ; but, bless your soul, you
might as well try to prevent the sap
rising as hinder two young people falling
in love."

"Young people should fall in love suitably."


So they ought," agreed the Baronet ;
but then, you see, as a rule, they don't,
and in this world we have to deal with
things not as they should be, but as they
are."

That is very true. Sir Geoffrey," answered
Mrs. Arbery, who in her own family

Vol. ii. 34

and amongst lier own friends conducted
herself after the fashion of a Mede and
Persian ; " and it is precisely because I
object to things as they are that I feel
bound to forbid my niece to hold any
further communication whatsoever with Oliver
Dane."

While Mrs. Arbery was speaking, Sir
Geoffrey felt Susan's hand slip from his
arm, and saw her gliding out of the room
through the nearest door. He listened
gravely to all the " elderly party " had to
advance, then took up his parable.

In my best days," he began, " I never
was what is called a ladies' man " (Mr.
Gayre smiled grimly) ; " but I believe I
understand the sex ; or, to be more exact,
I feel the sex is made up of a number
of women differing mightily from each
other, which is a fact your ladies' man
never can grasp. I don't attempt to
generalise men. Why should I attempt to

generalise women ? And so, to return to
what I had to say, don't you curb up
Susan too ti<:rht. If you do she'll sive
you a lot of trouble. Take the right way
with her, and, bless your soul, I"d undertake
to drive her with silken thread ;
take the wrong way, and — "'

So far as I understand your mode of
speech," said Mrs. Arbery, white almost
with passion, "you mean to encourage my
unfortunate niece in pursuing a line of
conduct opposed at once to propriety and
common sense P "

I always lament having to disagree

with a lady," said Sir Geoffrey, with a low

bow — the one gentlemanlike talent the

Baronet possessed was his bow, afoot or

on horseback — " but as you drive me into

a corner, I feel bound to tell you plainly

I consider propriety and common sense

were never opposed to anything Susan

Drummond liked to do. If you can show

34—2

me that they were, I will abandon commonsense,
and ' go in ' for another and better
sense called Susan Drummond."

"Bravo, Chelston ! " cried Mr. Gayre,
almost involuntarily. In acknowledgment
of which the Baronet said :

"All right, Gap-e ; thank ye."

And despite of what I say, and Mr.
Gayre said when he first came this morning,
you actually mean to take Susan to
see a felon?" went on Mrs. Arbery.

"Softly, softly," entreated Sir Geoffrey.
Wait at least till the man is proved
guilty before you call him hard names.
And even supposing the worst comes to
the worst "

"^Vliicli it must," interrupted Mrs. Arbery,
with great decision.

"Well, even in that case, I don't think
it would be well to use such a word
when speaking of OHver Dane. We are
none of us infallible. We don't know

what we might do if we were tempted.
A man may make a mistake, but — "

"These fine distinctions are quite thrown
away on me," retorted Mrs. Arbery.
Eight is right, and wrong is wrong."

Oliver has done no wrong, aunt," said
Susan, re-entering the room at this juncture.
" Give me some good wish before
I go — some good wish for both of us ; "
and she held up her sweet face to be
kissed.

But Mrs. Arbery woukl not kiss her.
Once again she expressed her disapproval
of the whole expedition, and was especially
irate against her son, who, declaring Susan
should go where she liked, and that he
would go with her, drew his cousin's hand
within his arm, and angrily left the house,
leaving Sir Geoffrey and Mr. Gayre to
follow at their leisure.

^j^T was a fortnight later. Oliver Dane
pJP 'lead once again been brought before
the magistrate, and committed for trial.
The evidence against him was conclusive ;
not a creature except Susan believed in
his innocence. Even Sir Geoffrey, who
said he was " deuced sorry for the fellow,
deuced sorry indeed," shook his head
mournfully, and lamented over the weakness
of poor human nature which, he
implied, was alone responsible for ruining
the whole, future of " as promising a young
man as you would wish to see."

Heaven only knows," he exclaimed,
what demon could have possessed him.

I am sure any of this friends would have
found the money. I would, if I'd had it,
and there were lots, I'll be bound, in the
same mind. That woman getting the cheque
cashed was a bad sign — a widow too — and
handsome, ah ! " and Sir Geoffrey shook his
head. "There must have been some screw
awfully loose, Wherever a woman leads,
trouble follows. Wonder who she is?
Awkward mess altogether. Dane is the
last man in the world I should have
thought likely to go wrong in that way ;
but, dear me, what a dance any petticoat
may lead the best of us I You and I can't
be too thankful, Gayre, can we P "

Some persons are more lucky than
wise," agreed the banker, thinking Sir Geoffrey
was a case in point.

That is very true. It is not always
the best rider clears the ditch. But, as I
was saying, it is altogether a most confoundedly
awkward business. Though I am

sorry for Dane, I don't think he is doing
right, and I told him so. 'You ought to
plead guilty, and settle Susan's mind,' I
said. ' If the case were mine I could not
keep a girl on the tenter-hooks. This sort
of thing might be all very well in dealing
with a man, but it isn't fair to a woman'"

And what did he say ? " asked sir. Gayre.

Just the usual thing — that he could
not tell an untruth even to settle Susan's
mind ; that he had not forged the signature
; that the money was forwarded to his
lodgings by some one unknown ; that he
had his suspicions ; that unless he could
change them into certainties it would be
worse than useless to speak ; that he quite
understood it was impossible for Susan now
to marry him ; that the engagement must
be considered at an end ; that his life was
wrecked ; that she, the noblest of women,
must not sacrifice her life through any mistaken
idea of loyalty to him ; that her devotion

was the bitterest drop in a bitter
cup ; that he had not the slightest hope of
an acquittal; but that he could not plead
guilty, or tell Susan he was dishonoured indeed
as well as in the eyes of the world.
Then I said, ' Your boasted affection is a
very poor sort of affection ; I would not
treat any girl after such a fashion. I am
disappointed in you. I- knew your father
to be a fool, and your grandfather a screw,
but I did not think you were a scoundrel.' "

"Eather rough on the fellow," commented
Mr. Gayre.

Enough ! not a bit too rough ! ' Look
at what the consequences will be ! ' I said.
'Susan is just the girl to exalt you into a
sort of martyr. !She will go on believing
in and fretting about you. She will lose
her youth and her good looks. Lie will
not marry, and, if she do not die, she will
live a sad sweet old maid, nursing other
folks' babies instead of her own.' "

You drew quite a touching picture,"
said Mr. Gayre.

"And then he wouldn't," declare:! the

Baronet, with a great oath. " Xo, me

if he would! 1 don't know when I went
through such an interview, and without a
drop of anything either to give me a fillip.
Give you my word, Gayre, I felt quite exhausted
when I came out. Had to go into
the nearest pub, and ask leave to sit down.
It's heartless, you know ; that's what it is,
Hang it ! I'm not particular, you are aware.
If a man commits a crime I wouldn't turn
my back on him ; but to keep on with this
sort of infernal humbug to a girl like
Susan Drummond, why — why, it's the very
deuce ! " finished the Baronet, who was delivering
these sentiments in his own house
and at his own table.

"I suppose it is not on the cards
that the man may be, by possibility,
innocent ? "

Innocent ! for Heaven's sake, Gavre,
don't you get sentimental ! It's all very
well to humour Susan's notion for a while,
and let the girl down gently ; but we, who
have been out in the world, and know a
thing or two, must not talk like children.
Eun your eye over the whole matter.
Here's a young fellow brought up by a
grandfather, who won't allow him sixpence
of pocket-money, and puts him into an attorney's
office. Young fellow won't be an
attorney, goes and enlists ; old Drummond
buys him off, and has him stopping at the
Hall for a while. Then he falls in love
with Miss Susie ; grandfather, delighted,
thinks she will be an heiress ; grandfather
finds out she won't be an heiress, and insists
on the engagement being broken off;
young man comes up to London in a huff,
and, through favour, get's into Colvend's
house. Everybody believes it's all over between
him and Susan. Eventually the

grandfather makes some conditional sort of
promise to find money enongli to buys a
small share in the business. After a while,
Surlees begins to find fault with the young
man, the idea of the partnership is abandoned,
and Dane announces his intention
of s'oinof into business on his own account.
Grandfather discovers he and Susan mean
to be married, and declares he will cut
youHK man off with a shillings. Youno- man
has got a little into debt, and wants money
besides for capital. Surlees gets a hint
that all is not square, and begins to look
into matters, which present some serious
complications. Holds his tongue to make
quite sure — means to speak to Dane when
he has all the proofs complete. At that
juncture a three-hundredfold cheque,
signed Colvend and Surlees, is presented
across the Union counter and paid. Notes
are found in Dane's rooms, in a portmanteau
ready packed. Make what you can of

the case, my friend — it looks confoundedly
black against Mr. Oliver."

Yes," agreed Mr. Gayre — " yes."
"But there is no good in talking to
Susan yet. I told you exactly ^Yllat would
happen if Mrs. Arbery persisted in taking
up the curb another link. Most foolish,
self-opinionated old woman. Thinks because
she won't drink half a pint of ale,
the Almighty has given her dominion over
every living thing that movetli upon the
earth. If she had only let Susan go her
own way at her own pace for a while she
would not have sent the girl mad, as she
has done. When she told me about Susan
having left Enfield, and taken up her abode
with Miss Matthews, I said, 'It's your own
fault, ma'am ; she'd never have got the bit
between her teeth if you'd driven her
easily. But, bless my soul and body, there
are other persons in the world who have a
will beside Mrs. Arberv. Xo — excuse me —

I can't o'er the iii back ; and if I could,
I wouldn't try. The end of it will be she'll
marry Oliver Dane.' "

But you don't really think that likely ? "
exclaimed Mr. Gayre.

"I'll tell you what I think — that Dane
won't marry her. How could he ? The
dear grandfather will give him nothing ;
Susan has but two thousand pounds. Say
he only gets a couple of sears, what weill
he be fit for when he comes out ? No, the
thing is not to be thought of. But our
plan at present is to take no notice — to
her, at any rate. After the trial we'll see
what we had better do."

Miss Drummond appears to have no
doubt of his innocence."

Sir Geoffrey shrugged his shoulders. " All
the fault of the old party out at Enfield
Highway. She would tighten that curb.
It's just the same with a woman as a
horse ; and you know, Gayre, the result of

fretting a young liigli-spirited creature by
holding it in when there's no need to do
anything of the sort. Bless you, I always
try to give them their head for a bit ; and
if Mrs. Arbery had taken no notice, and let
Susie have her own way about this confounded
business, the o'irl would have besoin
to entertain doubts concerning; her lover,
and wanted to know who the woman was,
and why Surlees could not get on with
friend Oliver, and so finally come gradually
round to a sensible view of the
matter ; whereas — " and the Baronet, finding
words inadequate to express the pass
to which Mrs. Arbery 's management had
brought affairs, poured himself a good
measure of champagne into a large tumbler,
"throwing on the top," as he expressed
the matter, "just a flavour of brandy."

If Sir Geoffrey had not been a baronet
the mode in which he tossed off this
bumper and smacked his lips approvingly

after it might have been considered vulgar r
but circumstances alter cases, and circumstances
altered most cases with Mr. Gayre's
brother-in-law.

"All," said Sir Geoffrey, leaning back
in his chair, stretching out his feet to the
fire, and looking with an air of childlike
contentment at the leaping flame, "you may
talk as you like about your clarets — ! "

I am not aware that I have spoken
about clarets at all," mildly remonstrated
the banker.

"Deeds speak as loud as words, and
you always drink that poor thin sour stuff
for poor and thin and sour it is, though
you do pay a price which makes my hair
stand on end ; but then a rich banker is
one quantity and a poor baronet another.
However, as I was remarking, you may
depend upon it a man's face takes the
cast of the tipple he affects. Now claret
produces lines, wrinkles, and gives a sneering

sort of expression to the countenance.
I'd drop it if I were you, and go in for
something more generous and exhilarating.
Why should you look older than your
age ? You are a mere boy in comparison
to the battered craft you are good enough
to call brother-in-law. Let me see, you
are younger than poor Margaret — "

The banker shook his head.

"Well, the difference either way, I
know, is very trifling, and we know what
a baby thing she was when I married
her. Why don't you turn your attention
to matrimony, Gayre ? If you can't makeup
your mind to the widow — and I suppose
you can't or you'd have been stepfather
to the Jubbins fry long ere this —
there are plenty of girls who, I am sure,
would be only too glad if you could be
induced to say a civil word to them."

"I fancy you are right about the
widow," went on Sir Geoffrey, finding his

Vol. ii. 35

brother-in-law did not speak. " Of course
lie lias money; but then you have plenty
of your own, and money is not everything
though it is a great deal, as nobody knows
better than I do. Why shouldn't you
marry, and have a nice wife and pleasant
home? You're just the sort of fellow girls
would take to, and make up romances
concerning. I know them ; bless your soul,
they'd turn you into a hero, and fall
down and worship at once. Think of it,
Gayre. 'Pon my honour, I don't like to
see you drinking claret and living in a
big house all alone, with only servants
about you. Providence never intended such
a thing. It is you that have made the
mistake ; but you may remedy it yet."

"If I take to champagne and brandy
and making love to young ladies?" questioned
the banker.

"I don't suppose you would care to
make love to old ladies, which, by-the-bye.

reminds me of something I wanted to say
to you. I shan't be able to induce Mrs.
Morris to stop on ; and I declare solemnly
I laye not chucked her under the chin
or insisted on her dancing a fandango
Why does she wish to go, then ? "
The usual thing ; all women are alike ;
they laye a craze for what they call
respectability, and a knowledge of what
constitutes impropriety, which knowledge I
myself regard as sinful. Mrs. Morris has
arrived at the conclusion this house is not
an abode in which she ought to continue
to reside. She has her doubts about it
and me. She fails to understand why
visitors do not call; why my daughter is
not asked out ; why we never give parties ;
why you have not Peg staying in Wimpole
Street ; why I can't be induced to return
to six o'clock tea, nine o'clock prayers,
and eleven o'clock bed; why we have not
more servants ; why we do not keep a

35-2

carriage ; why I run household bills ; why
I do not pay every fellow who has a
heavy account to make up.' She feels,
in fact, the air of Xortli Bank may be
injurious to her social health. It seems
she has got a presentation to Christ's
Hospital for the boy. So now, as she can
do without me, she means to leave. Nice
and grateful, is it not P "

How extremely awkward ! " said Mr.
Oayre.

I wanted her to stop till Peggy was
married, but no she won't. ' My dear
Mrs. Morris,' I urged, ' you laye surely
reached a time of life when you might
be able to defy Mrs. Grundy and all her
works.' "

' No woman is eyer so old as to be
able to disregard appearances. Sir Geoffrey,'
she replied ; ' and for myself, though I
have a grandson — ' "

' Yes, yes, yes,' I interrupted, ' I know

you were married at sixteen and your
daughter at fifteen — the usual thing — so
you can't be much over thirty ; but
still— ' "

' Pardon me,' she returned, ' I am over
forty (upon my soul, Gayre, she must
be close on seventy), but I feel it is
as imperative for me to regard my character
now as I did when I was in my
teens.' "

' Most creditable, I am sure,' I replied
; ' but forgive me if I ask what is
the good of shouting "Wolf!" when there
is not an animal of the sort outside the
Zoological Gardens ? Let us walk across
and see the wolves, Mrs. Morris, and say
you will stop a little while longer'"

But she wouldn't, Gayre ; she was as
stiff as you please. She set her lips tight
and she drew down her nose (have you
ever remarked the stiff-wickedness of Mrs.
M.'s nose P), and looking straight at me,

and, fixing me with those steel-blue eyes
of lies, said, ' You must excuse me,
Sir Geoffrey, but my mind is quite made
up. Miss Matthews told me from the first
your place would not suit me, and she
was right. The place does not suit me;
and if I may venture to say so, your
place would not suit-any gentlewoman who
respected herself.' "

"What are we to do about Maggie,
then ? "

"That is just what I wanted to talk
over with you. I have been trvino- to o'er
one of Lai Hilderton's old aunts — people
I had Peg with when they were in Wales
to come up from Richmond and take
charge, but it was no use. They say
she has treated Lai iniquitously, and that
in consequence their dear nephew has
taken to smoking, drinking, and going to
the deuce generally, which of course is
pleasant for a father to hear."

"My fair niece can't help flirting, and
I do not think Mr. Lionel Hilderton
required any goading along the road to
ruin."

Precisely my own idea ; thank you,
Gay re. Now I am going to propose something
I know will astonish you, but don't
make any rash comment till you have considered
the matter in all its bearings. The
right person to take charge of Peg is her
mother ; and if you'll help me a bit with the
pecuniary part of the matter, I am willing
to let bygones be bygones, and for the
sake of my girl make it up with your sister."

You cannot be serious, Chelston."

I never was more serious in my life. I
have a right to take back my wife if I like.
The story is an old one now. At the time
many persons thought Margaret was de.id,
many imagined we separated by mutual consent,
many that I was the sinner ; only a
ver' few knew the rights of the case.

Well, we make it up, we take a small
house somewhere, and there's your natural
protector for Peg at once. Bless you, I've
thought it all out, and feel sure this is the
course we ought to pursue. Don't say anything
yet. Mrs. Morris does not remove
the light of her countenance for a month.
Think it over : a mother for Peg, a home
for Susan, who can't live always with that
gruesome old maid at Shepherd's Bush, all
trouble and anxiety ended, a very small
additional allowance from you, and the thing*
is complete. I never was a man who thought
of myself, and I assure you I have forgiven
Margaret from the bottom of my heart over
and over again. She was a very sweet girl,
that sister of yours, Gayre, and I can see her
now as I saw her that day we first met at
Brighton ; " and the Baronet stooped, as
though to hide a tear, while his brother-in-law
rose and paced the limits of Mr. Moreby's
dining-room.

At last lie said,

You have indeed taken me by surprise,
Chelston."

Yes, I thought you would be astonished, "
said Sir Geoffrey, in the tone of a modest man
who felt serenely conscious he had performed
a good action.

"You say you do not expect me to give
you an immediate answer."

Take your time — take your own time,"
observed the Baronet, tolerantly. "I am the
most considerate man on earth. Xo person
can say with truth 1 ever made capital out
of my matrimonial troubles. Xow did I ? "

I am very sure you never did," agreed
Mr. Gayre, thinking as he spoke that he knew
the reason whv.

<5~^^ <^illi^ ■^^'^

THE TRIAL.

whatever small amount of comfort
>li)j|^ it may be possible to extract from
being the principal figure in a cause celebre
was denied to Oliver Dane. Nothing could
have been more prosaic and commonplace
than his trial. As usual, the Old Bailey was
crowded ; as usual, the l)enclies were filled
by that curious class of persons who are to
be found in all parts of London — lounging on
the seats of the Thames Embankment and
Leicester Square, in the waiting-rooms of railway
stations, and the Law Courts and the few
other places of free resort — engaged in the
herculean task of killing time. Before a comparatively
unappreciative audience the great

scene in this life's story was played out.
Fashionable ladies were conspicuous by their
absence. Stock Exclianii'e gentlemen, with
their hats well on the Jacks of their heads,
and their hands deep in their trousers-pockets,
utterly failed to put in an appearance.
The thousand shades of business to
be met within the confines of the City
likewise felt the case was one which presented
no attraction. A defaulting clerk,
a common case of forgery and embezzlement :
Pooh ! not worth crossings the road to
hear."

A good murder or a big swindle would
Have attracted an appreciative audience ; but
the crime of which Oliver Dane stood accused
being common as picking pockets, it was
before a comparative speaking empt' house,
Messrs. Colvend and Surlees' ci-devant clerk
made his bow.

Through the windows of what is called
the Old Court the sav lights of a winter's

day streamed coldly upon audience, judge,
aldermen, barristers, jury, and prisoner, who
was young, rather over middle height, slight,
well-formed, dark-haired, dark-e3^ed, standing
looking calmly at the judge, and quitting
himself, as even Mr. Gay re could not but
acknowledge, like a man. Confinement and
anxiety had worn, but not otherwise changed,
him. He was still the Oliver of those happy
blissful days which now seemed further away
than childhood. And Susan, who, with a
little bunch of forget-me-nots fastened prominently
in her dress, had come to sit out the
trial, when she saw the dear face of old in
such a place, felt the hot tears coursing slowly
down her cheeks and dropping heavily behind
her veil. On entering the dock for one
moment he glanced around, and in that
moment she made the slightest gesture with
her hand and touched the knot of blue flowers
nestling in her breast. That was all — but he
knew. And then, turning his gaze resolutely

away, lie never again let his e}'e.s stray towards
lier — never once till the trial was over
and the torture ended. Mr. Gay re sat on one
side of the girl and bliss Matthews on the
other. Will Arbery had left England, and all
other friends were either witnesses for the
defence or too angry or indifferent to support
her lover at such a crisis. But for Susan,
Oliver Dane might well, just then, have felt
himself forgotten by God and forsaken by
man. Innocent or o-uiltv, it seemed as though
his fellows had deserted him. In his cell he
had not felt half so lonely as he did in the
crowded court. Mr. Gayre he had seen and
Miss Matthews likewise. Mr. Surlees stood
near the dock leaning against a partition.
Familiar as he was with the City, as a matter
of course, the names and appearances of
many men present where known to the prisoner.
He recognised his solicitor talking to a man
he concluded must be the counsel engaged
for his defence ; a burly coarse-looking individual,

famous for this still in brow-beating
witnesses, he was aware had been retained for
the prosecution. He saw the place of honour
under the canopy filled by an ex-Lord Mayor,
gorgeously attired, with the ' sword of justice '
hung over his head on the wall behind his
seat; then his glance wandered to the judge,
and after that his thoughts beo'an to stray.

It seemed as though all the sin and
misery of the centuries rose out of their
forgotten graves, and came trooping, ghostly
phantoms, into the place which had witnessed
one terrible scene of their earthly
tragedy. The prison taint was around
him, the prison smell in his nostrils. He
could see the dock filled with wretched
men and despairing women ; widows' sons
and gray-haired sires ; fingers, soon to be
cold and still in death, playing nervously with
the herbs, placed to preserve those who were
free from prison fever, fever kept for the
benefit of the captives.

Old stories, long forgotten, recurred to
memory ; all the legends of that shameful
place, where m the name of "Justice,"
so many innocent men were condemned
in the good old days to infamy, torture,
and death, came jostling his elbow, laid
their skeleton hands on his throat, thrust
their pallid faces between him and the
judge, and glided — a ghastly, awful procession
— down the stairs, from step to step
of which they carried, in dumb agonised
silence, the burden of their woe.

All at once a voice brought him back
from dreamland to the fact that he was the
latest member of that terrible crowd. On
the boards where such tragedies had been
enacted it was his turn to play a minor
part.

"Guilty or Xot Guilty?"

"Xot Guilty, my lord."

And then Mr. Gayre knew Sir Geoffrey's
pleadings had been, after all, in vain.

*' It will be of no use urging extenuating
circumstances after that," thought
the banker, looking hard at the accused,
while a feeling of pity, inconsistent in a
merchant and a rival, stirred his heart.

At once the court settled to work.
The prosecutor's case was fully stated.
No detail wdiicli could hurt the prisoner
and his friends was spared ; his birth,
education, antecedents, means, failings,
were shouted in the ear of the public.

He was shown to have been always
somewhat wild — a l)oy hard to control,
impossible to train ; a lad determined to
take his own course to perdition ; a
youth destitute of gratitude, who turned
and stung his best benefactor, an old
and infirm gentleman of large fortune and
the possessor of extensive estates.

Our learned friend is a master of his
craft," thought Mr. Gayre, himself not
wholly indifferent to the suggested iniquity.

Sledge-hammer work the learned counsel
evidently considered quite good enough for
the Old Bailey and Oliver Dane ; and accordingly
down he came, mercilessly crushing
all flowers of grace and beauty the
young man's life might have been supposed
to hold. Everything charming, in
word, deed, or manner, was either a sin
or a snare — often indeed both. He had
bowed his grandfather's gray hairs low
with sorrow ; he had been seen on racecourses
drinking champagne and betting
freely ; he had utterly deceived his excellent
and simple employer, Mr. Colvend ;
he had been insolent to Mr. Surlees : he
had declined the chaste pleasures, the
intellectual converse, of Mr. Colvend's
house, and descended to the lowest social
stratum to be found even in London.
He had consorted with thieves and vagabonds
; he had gone into their haunts, and
treated them with join. One of the frater-vol.

ii. 36

iiity who called at this lodgings, had been
invited to partake of mild refreshment,
which assumed the character of brandy
in its integrity. He (the learned counsel)
was aware an endeavour would be made to
explain away these and other awkward
facts ; but the overpowering evidence on
the part of the firm must render all such
efforts worse than useless. To see a man
of parts — a gentleman by birth, education,
association — one who, favoured by Nature
and caressed by Fortune, might have
hoped to climb to the highest rung of the
world's ladder — standing, like the common
felons with whom he had consorted, in the
dock, wrung his (the learned counsel's)
heart — at which point the learned counsel
thumped that organ. But he had a duty
to perform, and he meant to perform it, without
fear and without favour, just as he knew
the intelligent jury he had the privilege to
address would perform theirs, regardless of

ridicule, undaunted by calumny, undeterred
by the false, though amiable, representations
of the prisoner's too partial friends.

Stripped of its verbiage, the whole
speech, which did not occupy above fifteen
minutes in its delivery, was absurd in the
extreme — so absurd that Mr. Gayre could
see even the prisoner's lip quiver under
his close moustache (" Hang him ! "
thought the banker ; " this poor dog
whose day is ended has a sense of
humour ") ; but it told. Old Bailey juries
;and the learned counsel where old and
fast friends. If jurors never exactly understood
the barrister, the barrister understood
jurors.

"They don't want much," he explained,
in the easy confidence of private life,
but they do like it uncommonly strong.
Pitch into a man, give it him right and
left, and you get a verdict. Mistakes!
Less your innocence " (only the learned

36-2

counsel employed a stronger phrase), " a
judge of the realm can't make a mistake.
If a man is not ripe for hanging to-day
you may feel very sure he will be overripe
next year ; and it is better ta
garner the criminal crop early rather than
late ; that is all." And, strongly convinced
the Oliver Dane crop was ready for the
sickle, the learned counsel hitched up his
robe, settled his wig firmly on his head as
though a thunderstorm were impending,
and " went for " that ungrateful young*
gentleman with a fury and acrimony which
would have delighted those writers for the
press who denounced the Cato Street conspirators.
He, the learned counsel, meant
to show twelve honest men what an unmitigated
and irredeemable scoundrel the
prisoner at the bar really was. And then
he proceeded to examine Mr. Surlees, who
was the first witness called on behalf of
the prosecution ; while Susan Drummond

spoke no word, and turned no look towards
lier companions, though Mr. Gayre
L^ould see she dug the fingers of one
hand into the palm of the other till it
bled ; then she began as of deliberate
intent and tore her handkerchief into
-Strips. The banker beckoned his servant,
who stood not far off, and handed the mana
leaf from his pocket-book. During the
course of that trial Susan all unwittingly
tore ^\e handkerchiefs and a fan to
tatters, festooned her watch-chain into
loops till she broke it, slit her gloves beyond
the possibility of further use, and
picked the whole of the fringe off one
side of her mantle.

A sadly untrained young woman ! If Sir
Geoffrey had been going to the scaffold
Miss Chelston Avould have adjusted every
frill and tucker, fastened her brooch,
smoothed her hair, and rubbed her eyes
into a state of touching redness, ere descending

to receive the condolences of lier
friends.

After all, it must be a great trial to
people who believe these and such-like
items compass temporal salvation to meet
with persons who do not.

Mr. Surlees, judging from his evidence,
seemed to be a man who was at one in
his opinions with Miss Chelston. He had
never thought Dane a business sort of
young man ; he considered he was too
fond of new-fashioned ways. Mr. Colvend
being infatuated about their clerk, he
deemed it only his duty to warn his
partner he did not believe Dane could
ever become a fitting person to take
into the house. He had received more
than one warning about the prisoner-half
a dozen, perhaps, in all. They assumed
the shape of anonymous letters.
He could form no idea from whom they
emanated. In consequence, he examined

the books. He found some discrepancies
in them ; lie was intending to ask Dane
to explain, when his attention was called
to the fact of a cheque being missing.
His suspicions at once fell on the prisoner.
He spoke to his partner, who wanted to
speak to Dane. Instead of speaking to
Dane, however, a detective was sent for.
The detective proceeded to the clerk's
lodgings, where the notes, with which the
cheque was cashed at the Union, were
found in his portmanteau, packed as if
ready for a journey.

Being cross-examined by Mr. Tirling, the
prisoner's counsel, Mr. Surlees was entreated
to describe his idea of a business
young man. Mr. Tirling convulsed the
court, always ready to laugh at nothing,
but did no good to his client. The airy
and humorous way in which this learned
counsel delighted in putting things, in slyly
chafing his learned friend, poking fun at

the judge, and driving Mr. Surlees to the
verge of distraction, amused but did not
convince twelve " conscientious, impartial
and intelligent men."

Mr. Tirling wanted to know more than
Mr. Clennam ever thought of, when he
went to the Circumlocution Office. The
learned counsel commenced operations with
requiring a definition of a business sort of
young man — not too fond of new-fashioned
ways. Finding Mr. Surlees incapable of
putting his notions into the concrete, he
asked all sorts of questions concerning the
model or dream young man. Mr. Surlees
turning sulky at a very early stage of
these proceedings, and the judge interposing
with a remark that he did not really
think the learned counsel's questions had
the smallest bearing on the point at issue,
Mr. Stirling' around the matter out with his
lordship, and, being practically granted permission
to ask such questions as he liked

proceeded to inquire whether Mr. Surlees
took Charles Lamb's good clerk as his
model.

I think all C. Lamb's clerks very excellent
; I only wish we had a few like them,"
was the unexpected reply. Whereupon,
said the newspaper reports, the court was
convulsed, the fact being the laughter was
confined entirely to the bench and the
bar.

"Mr. Surlees' acquaintance with Elia does
not appear to have been intimate," suggested
his lordship, wiping his wise old
eyes. Whereupon there ensued a smart
little dialogue between the bench and the
learned counsel concerning Lamb and
Leadenhall Street, Balfour and the Liner
Temple, which might have seemed more
agreeable to the prisoner had he been unaware
the discussion could not possibly influence
his fate for good or for evil, that,
forgetting all this pleasant fooling, the judge

would eventually sum up dead against
Oliver Dane!

Mr. Tirling inquired whether Mr. Dane
wrote a " fair and swift hand," whether lie
was clean and neat in this person, whether
he kept his books fair and unblemished,
whether, in the mornings, he was first
at the desk, whether he was temperate,
whether he avoided profane oaths and jesting,
Whether the colour of his clothes was
generally black in preference to brown, and
brown rather than blue and green. And
finding' Mr. Surlees unable to answer anv
of these queries in the negative, the learned
counsel suddenly dropped his friendly and
conversational manner, and demanded with
great sternness what further or higher
qualities he could wish in a clerk.

Driven to bay Mr. Surlees answered,

Honesty, for instance."

That won't do," retorted the learned
counsel. " You conceived a prejudice

against my unfortunate client long before
any doubt concerning his honesty crossed
your mind. Eemember you are on your
oath, sir. Now what was your particular
objection to Mr. Dane?"

It was like applying the thumbscrew torture,
and Mr. Surlees stammered out that
he thought their clerk talked too much,
and was a fop.

Instantly Mr. Tirling smote the witness
hip and thigh.

Did Mr. Surlees know the meaning
attached to fop ? "

"Yes, Mr. Surlees thought he did."

Would he be kind enough to explain P "

Mr. Surlees declined this challenge.
There were," he said, " words the meaning
of which could not be explained by the
help of other words."

"There are, are there?" retorted Mr.
Tiring; and straightway begged his lordship
to take a note of this reply.

Instead of doing anything of the sort,
this lordship said lie thought the learned
gentleman was travelling very wide of the
subject indeed ; to which remark the
learned gentleman replied his lordship would
ere long, comprehend the reason for the
course he was taking, and with all due
submission begged to state he felt if he
were to do justice to the prisoner — than
whom no more cruelly maligned individual
ever deserved the sympathy of his fellow-creatures
— he must be allowed to continue
the cross-examination in his own way. The
judge gave consent by silence. The opposing
counsel looked up at the ceiling, and
smiled as one who should say, " Let him
have his fling. It is all of no use ; but he
must do something for his money." The
prisoner knew if his chances had been bad
ten minutes previously they were worse
now. With all the veins of his heart he
wished he had employed no solicitor,

secured no counsel, Lut just let things
drift.

What was the loneliness of his prison
cell in comparison with this idiotic splitting
hairs, and attempt to make a man out
a liar who, to the best of his knowledge
stood there trying to tell the simple truth?

Now attend to me, sir, if you please ; "
it was Mr. Tirling who spoke this sentence.
On your oath, do you consider Oliver
Dane to be a person of weak understanding
and much ostentation ? 0, you don't ?
You are quite sure of that P Very well.
Do you believe it was his ambition to
attract attention by showy dress and pertness?
Certainly not. Thank you, Mr. Surlees
; I thought we should get at something
after a time. Did he strike you asa
gay, trifling man ? Once again, no. I
trust these answers will be remembered.
Was he, then, a coxcomb or a popinjay P
Again No. Xow really this is very singular.

You described Mr. Dane as a fop
yet when one comes to exhaust the matter
it actually seems he has not a single
fop-like quality. Perhaps the other cause
of dislike was founded on ecpialh^ unsubstantial
grounds. You say, sir, Mr. Dane
talked too much; why, even Charles
Lamb's model clerk was permitted the
occasional use of his tongue. What did
Mr. Dane say, when did he say it, and
how ? 0, you decline to answer ! Well,
let that pass. Now I want to know who
called your attention to the fact that a
cheque had been torn out of the book?"

With this question Mr. Surlees tried in
vain to fence ; Mr. Tirling was determined
he would — as he unpleasantly expressed the
matter — " have an answer out of him," and
at length elicited that Mr. Surlees was the
Columbus of this great discovery ; that he
had " called his own attention " to it.

Then, indeed, the learned counsel felt

delighted. In the playful exuberance of his
spirits lie figuratively danced round and
round the merchant, dealing him verbal
]blows, catching' him with a hest and liilje
under the fifth vii ; getting him into a
corner, and making him contradict himself
half a dozen times in as many seconds ;
closing with him as if for a mighty tussle ;
and then at quite an unexpected moment
intimating in a scornful manner he had done
with him.

This might have been all very well had
his ingenuity proved able to tell the jury
how notes paid across the counter of the
Union on one day came, on the next evening,
to be found in Mr. Dane's possession. It
was a circumstance wliicli of course might
be capable of explanation ; lout then neither
Mr. Dane nor Mr. Dane's counsel managed
to do anything' of the sort. The notes had
been sent to him, so said the prisoner ; the
parcel containing them was dropped into the

letter-box of this lodgings, the only information
which accompanied it being that they
came " from a friend." Certainly such a
story did not seem feasible. It was just
swithin the bounds of possibility that it might
be true ; but then it was so much more
probable that it might not. Incredulity was
writ large on the faces of those twelve men
with whom the result lay. There are things
that cannot be got over save by faith, a
quality for which the British juryman is not
usually remarkable ; and if he had ever
possessed it in the case of Oliver Dane, it
may safely be said every step of the trial,
every fact extracted in cross-examination
and from the witnesses produced for the
defence, must have tended to weaken the
conviction of Oliver Dane's innocence.

There never seemed a clearer case of
heartless ingratitude and flagrant fraud.

On the part of Mr. Colvend, at all events,
there could be no suspicion of prejudice or

dislike. Every answer he gave clearly

proved his affection for the prisoner — his

grief and surprise when he heard of the

accusation against him ; yet his evidence,

reluctantly given, could only be summed upas

against Oliver Dane. Had the matter

rested with him, the young man would not

have been given into custody ; but that he

believed in his guilt was evident. He knew

he was going into business on his own

account, and had offered to assist him ;

would gladly have lent him three hundred

pounds or more had he been aware such a

sum was important. !Not a word was said

or sentence spoken during the whole course

of the trial which did not make the case

blacker against the criminal.

He ought to have pleaded guilty,"

thought Mr. Gayre. " Chelston was quite

right ; every fresh scrap of evidence is an

additional nail in his coffin. Even she must

])e convinced now;" and he looked down
Vol. ii. 37

at Susan, who, raising lier anxious eyes,
whispered, as if in answer to his unspoken
words,

"Eemember all this does not change my
opinion in the least. He is innocent. I
do not expect you to think so, but I know
it."

The end was nearly at hand. Sir Geoffrey
Chelston, who had been intimate with all the
Danes — Oliver included — came forward to
state he believed Dane to be a most honourable
fellow, one he had never seen but once
on any racecourse. Pressed as to whether
the prisoner was not fond of horses, he
answered, " Of course ; all gentlemen are ; "
which last assertion might as well have been
omitted, if he wished to impress the jury with
any idea of the advantages to be derived
from his own acquaintance. There was
only one witness whose testimony could
have proved useful on behalf of the prisoner ;
but both Mr. Gavre and Oliver Dane had

80 managed that her name was not even
known to Mr. Tiring.

Wouldn't do, yon know, Gayre," remarked
Sh' Geoffrey, talking the matter
over with his brother-in-law. " Susan
must not be mixed up publicly with that
poor fellow's troubles. Besides, nothing can
materially change the aspect of matters for
him ; it is a mere question of so many
months, more or less ; and what can a
few months more or less signify to him?
while it would l;)e perfect damnation — excuse
the word — for the liirl to be bracketed
with a fellow residing, even temporarily, in
one of her Majesty's gaols."

And, at the most, all she could say is

he might have had her money without ever

asking for it," answered Mr. Gayre. " We

must keep her out of the matter. It is a

redeeming point in Dane that he seems

more anxious by far about her than

himself."

37—2

So he ought to be. Hang the fellow !
what business had he to induce such a girl
to engage herself to a pauper? Now the
only amends he can make is to leave her
free to marry somebody else."

"She won't do that, I think," said Mr.
Gayre, a little hypocritically.

Won't she ! Leave her to Time for a
while. Old Time is the only fellow that
thoroughly understands women. He heals
love wounds, and turfs over graves, and
dries up tears in a way you would scarcely
credit. 'Pon my soul, I've known him work
miracles, and so youth find it with Sue ;
only whatever you do, don't cross her
fancies," finished the Baronet, who already
looked on Susan as Mrs. Gayre, and the
Lombard Street strong-room as unlocked
for his benefit.

It was, therefore, more with an interested
eye to the future than from any sympathy
with the unfortunate lovers that Sir Geoffrey

worked, for Oliver Dane as " though he
were ray own son."

Nevertheless, spite of the fact that he
was a baronet, his testimony told, in the
minds of the jury, against Mr. Colvend's
clerk ; and not even the circumstance, that
in cross-examination, to the great satisfaction
of every one, the judge included,
he threw the learned counsel for the prosecution,
could make things better for a
man accused of robbing his employers.
Sir Geoffrey was quite sure of two things —
one, that Oliver Dane did not bet ; another,
that he did not habitually attend races.

"I'd know a betting-man," declared the
Baronet, "if he were a bishop, or came on
the course in wig and gown. I never saw
Dane on any race-ground but once, and
that was at the Derby, with a lot of other
young fellows like himself. More by token,"
he added, nodding his head, and looking
with a malicious twinkle at the learned

counsel, " that was the very same year you
laid against Bluegown, and lost a pot of
money. I never shall forget your face
when the roar came, ' Bluegown, Blue-gown
! '"

There was such a laugh over this agreeable
reminiscence that the judge's admonitions to
Sir Geoffrey were quite unheard ; and the
Baronet, dismissed by his opponent, who
desired no continuation of so unpleasant a
tale, lounged easily out of the witness-box,
before it dawned on anyone his lordship
was remonstrating with him concerning the
impropriety of his conduct.

After Sir Geoffrey came Lionel Hilderton,
vrlio was called to prove he and Oliver
Dane had gone together into the low haunts
of London in order to study faces and find
models likely to prove useful in connection
with his own work. They had found their
way into very questionable neighbourhoods,
and treated persons who were very like

blackguards and thieves ; but if they lead
what then ? " Xo doubt you " — this pointedly,
and in his most offensive manner, to
the genial gentleman who was badgering
him — " have, in the ways of your trade,
consorted, ere now, with bad characters.
You would be very much offended, I daresay,
if anyone called you a pickpocket
because you may have defended one."

Such license of language really cannot
be permitted," observed the judge.

Then why," asked Lai, his dark eyes
Hashing with anger ^ " does your lordship
allow that person such license of language
in addressing* me ? It is hard to ore a blow
and not to have a chance of striking out
in return ; " following on which remark
there ensued a very pretty little quarrel
between bench and witness. Lai defied the
judge, and the judge threatened to commit
him. Lai said he did not care, and that,
on the whole, he would rather be committed ;

and it was at length only through the
interposition of the learned counsel engaged
on both sides his lordship was pacified, and
the young man induced to hold his tongue,
and the cross-examination proceeded.

"Were you ever engaged in a fight with
the police ? " asked his persecutor.

Yes, and I'd fight them again if they
were insolent. What right had they to
interfere with a man who was doing them
no harm ? "

Do you not think it was wrong to goto
such places as the police warned you
were not fit for any decently-dressed person
to enter ? "

No, not a bit more wrong than going to
church," retorted Lai.

Perhaps you don't go to church, Mr,
Hilderton?"

"Yes, I do, to study the British
Pharisee."

"Dear — dear — dear!" murmured Susan,

in an agony, wringing her hands ; " what
madness could have induced them to call
Lai?"

He has done all that lay in his power to
convict his friend," decided Ix. Gayre. but
he did not utter this idea aloud. "Won't
you come away now, Miss Drummond ? " he
entreated, for he knew the beginning of
the end was at hand.

No ; 0, no ! " she murmured.

I wish you would not stop, dear," said
Miss Matthews.

"I must stay to hear — the worst," Susan
almost whispered.

Still the dreary proceedings dragged their
slow length along ; but at last came the
judge's summing-up. It was dead against
the prisoner, who stood listening, with
crossed arms and an unmoved front, to the
words of wisdom and reprobation which
flowed in smooth passionless accents from
the bench. The question of the prisoner's

guilt or innocence, was left, of course, to
the jury ; but the jury were told how to
decide. The crime of which the 3^oung
man before them was accused struck at
the foundations of society. It was for the
jury to disembarrass their minds of the
extraneous matters which had been obtruded
on their notice, and deliver a verdict on
the merits of the case. His lordship felt lie
need not remind the gentlemen of the jury
that the fact of the prisoner being well born,
well educated, well connected, could not
palliate his sin, if tlie}^ believed he had first
stolen a cheque, then forged his employers'
signature, and subsequently appropriated the
proceeds. It was for the jury to say whether
they considered this serious charge proved.

Apparently, the jury had arrived at their
decision before they even left the box ; for
they were not ten minutes absent before
they trooped back again solemnly. They
had arrived at a verdict.

"How say yoii, gentlemen ? "

And then Susan Drummond, though she
knew what was coming", hell her breath.

Guilty ! "

It seemed as if a thousand voices took
up the word, and shouted it in lier ears.
For a moment she fel like one drowning ;
the waters had indeed covered her souL

Let me take you out," said Mr. Gayre,
touching her arm ; hut lie seemed not to
hear him. Every sense was concentrated
on the judge, who, in measured accents,
proceeded to say lie would not add to the
distress the prisoner must feel at the position
to which a long course of folly and extravagance
had brought him. When he
looked back over his wasted life — a life
which he could so easily have made honourable
and prosperous — it might well seem
as if in the loss of the esteem of all honest
men, in the wreck and ruin of his own
career, in the reproaches of his own conscience,

were the elements of a sufficient and
terrible punishment ; but the crime of which
a jury of his own countrymen had found
him guilty, was one so dangerous to the
community, so necessary to check in a vast
city — the capital of the greatest mercantile
nation in the world, or that the world
had ever known — his lordship felt it
necessary to pass the severe sentence of
seven years' penal servitude.

My God ! " exclaimed the prisoner, like
one stunned ; and at that moment Susan
would have risen, but that Mr. Gay re
prevented her from doing so.

Don't make a scene," he entreated,
don't ; " while from the dock came a cry
of " / am innocent ! " ere the warders hurried
the living man into the seven years' grave
that yawned before him.

EVENTS AEEA^'GE THEMSELVES."

"^^EYEN years, by Jove!" said Sir
P^P Geoffrey, pacing the length and
breadth of Mr. Gaj^e's dining-room, his head
sunk on his breast, his hands clasped behind
his back. " Seven years ! Good God Almighty
! " and the Baronet, in a vague sort
of way, fell to considering what he, Geoffrey
Chelston, could have made of seven long
years spent in penal servitude, had the
Gayres dealt with him " according to law."
Seven years without drink or dice or
pretty barmaid — without flats or cheats, or
horses or racecourses — with no society save
the dumb company of those who had been
found out ' — with the shape of his head and

ears too painfully defined — clad in a suit
for which no tailor could ever dun him —
forced to go to bed with that silly creature
the lamb, and compelled to rise with that
greater nuisance and greater fool still the
lark — obliged to ^o to church, and knuckle
down to the chaplain, and eat, begad, any
beastly stuff a rascally Radical Government
elected to thrust down the throat of gentlemen
in trouble — a damned lot ! "

Thus the tenth Baronet, who had put his
name and ancestry and title and money out
to such extraordinary interest, stung into
mental activity by the fact of so severe a
sentence being passed upon a man who had
not shaved the wind one whit closer than
himself, regarded the " might have been ''
of his own case, while ostensibly considering
the sore plight of that " unlucky devil,"
Oliver Dane.

It all comes of keeping a fellow too
tio'ht," went on the Baronet, talking to Mr.

Gavre as tliougli the banker were an utter
tyro in the ways of this wicked but pleasant
old world. " A man must have his fling
sometime, and if he hasn't it early he'll take
it late. Ton my soul, I'm as sorry for Dane
as if he were my own brother ! It's a deuced
liard case. I am sure I said all I could for
him. Had he been my father I couldn't have
sworn harder, and yet I feel as though I
were in some sort to blame — as if I might
have said more, you know. I declare, Garret
my dying day I shall never forget his cry,
I am innocent ! ' "

But he was not innocent," objected ]\Ii\
Gayre.

I am not so sure of that : standing
almost in the presence of his Maker, as one
may say ; for seven years' penal servitude in
this world appears to me far more like
eternity, and a very bad eternity, than walking
over the border 'into a land the parsons
seem to think will be made pleasant for most

of US who are not hardened and desperate
ruffians — a well-connected and respectable
young fellow like Dane — Heavens ! I remember
him quite a little lad running about in
knickerbockers — would be scarcely likely to
tell a lie."

No one could have felt more sure of his
guilt than yourself," said the banker, angrily ;
*what is the use of talking in this strain
now ? "

"None — not a bit; and that's just what
makes me take the whole thing so much to
heart. Innocent or guilty, such a sentence
is enough to make a man, if he had not the
very strongest faith — which, thank God! I
have — turn atheist. Seven years cut clean
out of a fellow's life ! Better have hung him
at once. Could that old fool of a judge
understand what seven years of penal servitude
means to a gentleman well born, well
bred, well connected ? I feel as if I'd like
to go and assault somebody — I might get the

case ventilated then. And then there's
poor dear Susan breaking her soft tender
heart ; and, as I told her this morning, I
am only able to stand like a brute and
do nothing ; and then what d'ye think she
did?"

Thanked you for your sympathy, I have
no doubt."

"She never said a word. She just came
up to me, and put her arms round my neck
and kissed me, and laid her pretty head on
my shoulder and cried like a child. I'm a
rough and tumble sort of chap, and nobody
ever suggested there was any gammon or
sentiment about Geoffrey Chelston ; but,
upon my soul, Gayre," — and the unsentimental
Baronet, instead of finishing his
sentence, fetched a deep breath — " A womanlike
Susan Drummond can make what she
will of a man," he went on, "hand in
hand with her, a fellow need never wish to
wander out of that path to heaven which

Vol. ii. 38

we are told is so confoundedly narrow and
straight."

I never heard the path was straight,"
remarked Mr. Gayre, " though I fancy many
persons find it so."

"Hang it all, sou need not take me up
so short ! Besides, I gave the spirit of the
text, and surely that's enough. And as for
Susan, narrow or straight, or both, she'd lead
the worst sinner that ever lived to the happy
land school-children sing about. Faith, it
was very pretty to hear them at Chelston,
Gayre ; poor Margaret used — "

Miss Drummond does not seem to have
been able to lead her particular sinner to a
very happy land, in this world, at all events,"
said Mr. Gayre, ruthlessly cutting across his
brother-in-law's pastoral reminiscences.

Now don't be ironical," entreated Sir
Geoffrey.

Ironical ! Good gracious ! "

Well, ironical, or sarcastic, or what you

choose, you were sneering at Dane, you
know you were, and it's not kind to sneer
at a fellow who has got into hot water and
been badly scalded."

I don't know what you mean," returned
mr. Gay re. " I suppose we have all a right
to express an opinion, and when a man
embezzled and forges — "

Well, you need not be hard on him ;
and you are much harder than 1 like to see —
you are, Gayre, upon my conscience."

"And upon my conscience," retorted the
banker, " I utterly fail to understand the
drift of all your profound remarks. It is
impossible in the face of the evidence you
heard yesterday for you, or any man, to
believe Dane innocent, and being guilty he
deserves punishment. Seven years is a heavy
sentence, no doubt, but employers must be
protected. Supposing sou left your purse on
that table, and a housemaid stole it, would
you give her a sovereign and entreat her to

remain in your service ? You know you
would not ; you would send for the nearest
policeman and give lier in charge — "

"I'd do nothing of the sort," interrupted
the Baronet. "She should never have a
chance of robbing me again, but — "

"You would give her a chance to rob
somebody else," suggested Mr. Gayre.

"I'd rather do that than lock her up,"
said Sir Geoffrey, standing to his guns. " I
do not believe in all this law and lawyer
business, and punishing and deterring and
the rest of it. If a fellow goes wrong, give
him a chance of doing right. How can
any one get right working like a navvy at
Portland? Supposing those two City Solon
had left Dane free, and let him repay their
money, it would have been better for everybody,
themselves included."

In that case, he might have married
Miss Drummond, and lived happily ever
after," sneered Mr. GajTC.

I shouldn't have gone so far as that,"
answered the Baronet. " And, indeed, I
doubt if Susan would have wished to marry
him ; now she does ; that's the first effect
of his lordship's sentence. The girl considers
her lover a martyr, which princes me
to what 1 particularly wanted to say. For
Heaven's sake, Gayre, don't hurt her feelings
by speaking as if you thought him
guilty ! If you do, she'll hate you for ever.
There is no manner of use in reasoning
with a woman — women can't reason anymore
than they can grill a steak. Let
Susan have her way. If she likes to believe
Dane innocent, it won't do you or me any
harm. Soothing is the way to treat such
a wound. If any likely young fellow were
about, now would be his chance ; no time
for winning a girl's heart so good as when
it has just been broken, and while her eyes
are still wet with crying ! Gad ! I mayn't
know much about the business world and

money and so forth, but I do understand
women ! Tliougli I am not as young as I
used to be, if I were sinoie I'd engage to
have Susan Drummond for wife in three
months."

Upon the whole it is fortunate for her
that you are not single," remarked Mr.
Gay re.

"0, I don't mean to say that I should
wish to marry Susan," returned Sir Geoffrey:
only that I know I could. We should
not suit each other in the least. I'd drive
her mad ; and she — well, fact is, Susan
would be a bit too good for me. She
ought to run in harness with some steady
fellow, who does not drink or gamble, who
has not been driven half mad with trouble,
and compelled to pick up a wretched living
as I am. I'd like to see her married to
some excellent man she could be proud of
rich, respectable, that sort of thing ; what
I never can be now, Gavre. It would bean

awful business if lie made a mistake
a second time, Just fancy lier tied for
life to a sulky beggar like Lai Hilderton,
or to such an infernal cad as your friend
Sudlow ! " Having planted which sting in
his brother-in-law's soul, Sir Geoffrey walked
to the side-board, and refreshed himself
with about half a tumbler of Chartreuse
that had been produced for his especial
benefit, as he said he felt deucedly queer,
and could think of nothing so likely to
pull him together a bit.

I don't know what I am to do with
Sudlow," he began, after partaking of this
moderate draught. " He's as shy of those
settlements as if they were a ten foot wall.
I bring him up to them again and again,
but he always refuses the leap. Xovr it's
this, now it's the other ; something has
l)een left out, or something has been put
in. He goes to my lawyers : for I can't
have him bothering me, and he won't, he

declares, incur the expense of letting his
own solicitor arrange the matter — 1 am
sure he is afraid the attorney would sell
him — goes to my lawyers, and argues each
point with them. Heaven only knows who
is to pay the piper. I know I shan't
be able."

"And I really don't think Sudlow will,"
said Mr. Ga}Te.

Things are getting deucedly awkward. I
must give up Moreby's crib ere long. His
mother's legal adviser says I may rent the
place on, if I choose to pay in advance,
but that he cannot advise his client to permit
the present unsatisfactory arrangements
to continue, and be blanked to him. Then
I am all at sea as to what I am to do
about Maggie. Clearly Sudlow mustn't be
hanging round the house while the girl is
alone in it ; and I can't be mewed up in
North Bank for ever. If I am to stop at
home all day, the pot would soon cease

boiling. You must see yourself it is of no
earthly use trying to get ' companions ; ' they
won't stop ; money won't make them — love
might. I believe old mother Morris expected
I would propose for her. It's deucedly awkward,
confoundedly awkward. I've looked
at the position from, I think, every possible
and impossible point of view, and the more
I think the more satisfied I feel there is
but one course open, and that is making
things up with Margaret."

Well, of course, you know your own
business best," said Mr. Gayre, who understood
whither all this was tending.

There are few men who would propose
such a plan," said Sir Geoffrey, helping himself
to a little more Chartreuse ; " but I
do not profess to be led by popular opinion.
My notions are not worldly, but I hope
they are Christian. Dear, dear, when I look
back to the old times, and think of margaret
and the Pleasaunce ! Ah ! she was a

lovely young creature, Gayre, and nobody
can deny the Pleasaunce was as sweet a
spot as ever a set of rascally Jews got hold
of ! Lord ! when I shut my eyes I can see
lier standing beside one of the windows in
the great drawing-room at Chelston, framed
in a tracery of leaves and roses, the red
in her cheeks pink as the roses, and her
forehead white as her dress. The fairest
picture: the quaint old furniture and the
sweet young bride. Ah, the house is dismantled,
and Margaret gone ! Man' a man
has hunch' himself for less, Gavre."

It is not a particularly agreeable theme
for Margaret's brother," observed the banker.

"Enough on you," agreed Sir Geoffrey,
deucedly rough. Hard for me — harder for
you. Impossible to wash such a stain
clean out of any family ; and to think that
the cowardly fellow escaped without having
to pay even a farthing damages ! "

It would not have benefited Margaret

mncli if lie had," said Mr. Gayre, who
knew into whose pocket the damages wonki
have found their way.

The more 1 think over the matter, the
more satisfied I feel Peggy and her mother
ought to be together," declared Sir Geoffrey,
ignoring his brother-in-law's remark.

Mr. Gayre also was aware when it was
prudent to maintain silence, and discreetly
held his peace.

Have you thought over what I said
to you a little while since P " asked the
Baronet, finding this astute fish declined
to " rise."

What did you say ? Put your idea into
plain words."

You might help a man a little, more
especially when he is making such an offer as
I am making now. Hang it ! if Margaret
were my sister, and you, her wronged
husband, were proposing to let bygones be
bygones, and have her back, you r-ould not

take things more coolly than you are
doing."

I do not feel elated, if that is what you
mean," said Mr. Farewells

of all the cold, bloodless fellows I
ever met," Sir Geoffrey was beginning, when
a look, in the banker's face warned him to
desist. " We can't be all alike, however," he
added in a tone of bland apology for the

fact.

"We can't all be Geoffrey Chelstons if
that is what you mean," agreed the banker.

We can't be all Gayres either. Gad, in
many ways I wish we could. But now to
revert to Margaret. You would like the
past to be forgotten, eh ? "

"It cannot be undone."

That's true ; but where's the use of
harping upon that? It would gratify you
to know your sister had resumed her old
position and rank, and so forth, eh ? "

I don't know that it would. There is an

old proverb about letting sleeping dogs lie.
Were Margaret to return to England, many-sleeping
dogs in the country would wake up
and begin snarling at her."

no, they wouldn't. Scarce a soul ever
knew the rights of that affair. I am sure,
Gayre, even you must say no man could have
kept stricter silence than I."

Whatever your reason may have been for
holding your tongue, I never found fault with
you for doing so," returned Mr. Gayre,
dryly.

"That's City all over. I wonder if you
would have made such a speech while you
were in the thick of the dashing fellows who
saved India for us ? But never mind, I know
you better than you know yourself, and feel
quite sure business has not really spoiled one
1 can remember as generous and trustful and
enthusiastic a young man as ever wore her
Majesty's uniform."

Mr. Gayre did not answer this bitter-sweet

encomium. Once again Sir Geoffrey lead
touched the raw, as that worthy understood.
'' Well, well," he said, '• we can't be hardhearted
men of the world, and keep the soft
tender hearts of boyhood in our breasts, too.
Still, thank Heaven, all I have gone through
has not made me cast iron. I can't forget,
though you do. I wish we could have been
more like brothers, Gayre. I'm an unfortunate
devil, I know ; but I always was fond
of you, and misfortune is not crime. I did
think you would be pleased at my notion
about Margaret — poor misguided soul ! However,
of course, I can't expect you to see with
my eyes ; so Peggy and I must do the best
we can for ourselves, and that best will be
bad enough. Good-bye. Heaven only knows
dien I shall see you again. I hope you may
always be prosperous, and never know what
it is to hunger for a kind word or look, and
get neither ; " with which Christian aspiration,
that sounded uncommonly like a curse, Sir

Geoffrey was turning towards the door, when
Mr. Gap-e stopped him,

"Wait a moment, Clielston," he said.
"Don't go yet.'

The banker was standing before the fire,
looking into its glowing depths, and did not
see the smile which overspread Sir Geoffrey's
face as he paused to ask,

•• Web, what is it now ? "

•■ That is what I wish to know," answered
Mr. Gayre. "Wliy can't you tell me in so
many plain words exactly what you want ?
If you know anything about me, you ought
to understand the sort of talk in which you
have been indulging is completely wasted.
I despise flattery as much as I distrust
sentimentality. You never liked one of us ;
YOU thought we niiiiht serve your turn. As
for Margaret, a pert serving-wench would
have found more favour in your eyes than
my sister. I declare," added the banker, ina
burst of fury, " when I think of all Margaret

suffered at your hands, I hate myself for ever
having crossed your threshold again, or eaten
your bread, or let my hand touch yours in
amity."

You know I can't hit back, Gayre ; and
it really was deucedly good of you to forget
old grievances — utterly imaginary, upon my
soul — for the sake of Peggy."

A dull red line, like a band, came slowly
across Mr. Gayre's forehead. Perhaps he
was conscious of that tell-tale mark, for lie
never turned towards Sir Geoffrey as he
answered,

I would have done a good deal for my
sister's daughter, but I find that daughter
almost as impracticable and selfish as yourself.
I don't know what can be done for her."

Don't you ? If you chose to give Peggy
a fortune, no man would find her waste it in
making presents, for example."

But I don't choose to give her a fortune."

I know you don't ; you are far too like

her to do anything of the sort. I was only
remarking, if you tried the experiment of
giving Peggy' any of this world's goods, you'd
find she'd take deucedly good care of number
one. She can make a pound go further than
I could five. Faith ! spite of her beauty and
the long line of ancestry she is able to claim
on my side, I often think it would be a pity
to spoil two houses with her and Sudlow.
There is a regular trade smack about the girl
at times which positively amazes me. It just
shows that what's bred in the bone, you
know — "

Where is all this tending ? " interrupted
Mr. Gayre.

I don't know that it is tending anywhere
except to lodgings at fifteen shillings a week
and good-bye to Sudlow," answered Sir
Geoffrey. " I had better be going, Gayre. I
am confoundedly sorry I came."

"What is the amount of annual income
over and above the sum I allow my sister

Vol. ii. 39

YOU require to set up house with Lady
Chelstou at the head of affairs ? Eemember,
I promise nothing. I do not even know that
Margaret would return to you ; if she did, I
fail to understand what is to be said to her
daughter concerning mother she believes
died lomond long' ago. Still, I should like
to know your price ; you came to tell me that
price ; out with it, man'"

Well, as you force me to say, I think ten
thousand pounds down, and five hundred a
year for Margaret's and my life, at our death
to go then to Peggy, would be just to me and
not unfair to you."

Just to you ! " repeated Mr. Gayre.

'- 1 don't expect you to think much about
the justice to me," replied Sir Geoffrey
equably. " Why should you ? Why should
a rich man consider a poor one ? Why
should you, who have always been first
favourite with Fortune, think for a moment
about an out-at-elbows fellow like myself.

The ball is at your foot, not at mine ; play it,
knock me over I Only deal kindly ^vitli
Margaret and the Girl, and I am content to
pianos on to life bv my eyelids as I am doing'
now, till a pauper's grave receives all that is
mortal of the tenth Baronet of Chelston."

'' As for ten thousand pounds down, I
won't i^ive you a thousand pence."

Then I needn't detain you longer. I

am sorry I mentioned the matter at all,

onh' I thought and still think Margaret is

the proper person to take charge of her

child. Xo one but a mother can see to a

girl, and I'd have made things as pleasant

as possible. I'd have stopped out of her

way except when it was necessary for me

to enter an appearance. I'd have left

Margaret and Peggy to manage matters

just as they liked, and only put in a word

if asked to do so. You and your sister

could have selected a residence to suit

her ; bless you ! though I make no fuss

39—2

or pretence, I'm full of consideration. I'd
have left her as free as air. If she ever
wanted to ask a few friends, she could
have sent out the invitations as if from
Sir Geoffrey and Lady Chelston ; and I'd
have come up to time. Of course I
understood, after the way she had treated
me, she might feel more comfortable if I
were not constantly at hand to remind
her of the past. Poor dear soul ! She
couldn't help being a simpleton, I daresay,
but still—"

Sir Geoffrey, will you have the kindness
to leave my house ? "

Mr. Gayre was almost beside himself
with rage.

Certainly, certainly," answered Sir
Geoffrey, with the greatest equanimity.
"If you don't mind, I'll just have another
sip of that Chartreuse, and then I'll be
off."

"Finish the bottle if you like," said Mr.

Gayre, who knew the Baronet was ceram
to do so without his permission.

"Thanked, I will; there's not much
left ; " and Sir Geoffrey, having exactly
filled his tumbler with the precious liquor,
and, in an easy affable way, drained its
contents to the last drop, nodded to Mr.
Gayre and walked out of the room. Next
moment, however, he reappeared.

"I say, Gayre," he began, putting his
remarkable head inside the door, "you've
treated me deucedly badly to-day, I consider
; but still, hang it, if blood is thicker
than water, a brother-in-law is a brother-in-law;
so I thought I'd just come back
and give you a bit of a hint. It's not
very likely you'll ever see Peggy again —
for I'm sure your friend the cad, upon
whom we've wasted such a lot of valuable
time, will never be got over that rasping
settlement fence, and I'll have to start
the girl out as nursery governess or lady-help,

or something of that sort —-still if
you ever should, don't tell her that you
think Dane guilty Though she is my
daughter, she's as nasty and venomous a
little toad as ever held the making of a
truly respectable and conventional woman.
She'd tell Susan instantly. Poor Susan!
Now, there is breed. The Drummond
never married beneath them — never."

Xot even into the Mrs. Arbery clique,"
suo"orested Mr. Gavre.

Sir Geoffrey Alas out on the doorstep
ere the ]banker had got half through this
sentence, and before it ended had crossed
the street and was sauntering along the
kerb, shaking his head with repressed delight,
and smiling' to such an extent, the few
persons he met turned to look back after
his retreating figure.

"That sprat drill catch that herring,"
he decided. "I'll screw fifteen hundred
perhaps out of him, and he'll make margaret's

allowance a thou. sand a year. It
will be a wonderful relief to me. I shan't
then care a snap of my fingers whether
Sudlow marries Peggy or not ; I should
never be a penny the better if she did."

Sir Geoffrey's spirit of prophecy proved
in many respects correct. Mr. Gate's first
determination was, indeed, to sever the
whole connection ; but eventually calmer
thought prevailed. He (would not blind
himself to the truth that it would be making
the best of a bad business to adopt
his brother-in-law's suggestion, and place
"Peg" under her mother's care. He had
no intention of paying a large sum in
order to effect the needful reconciliation,
but lie would be willing to pay something.
It was easy enough to resume outwardly
friendly relations with Sir Geoffrey, ^vho
never took offence unless he meant to make
a profit by doing so. A hint was given
to Lady Chelston of the happiness which

might be in store; and had her husband
been the best man living, she could scarcely
have expressed greater thankfulness for this
generosity or more fervent hope that nothing
might occur to prevent the proposed
arrangement being carried out. Sir Geoffrey
walked jauntily about London with
so jubilant a manner people imagined he
must have had a fortune left to him. Even
Mr. Sudlow began to feel satisfied some
extraordinary piece of luck had fallen in
the Baronet's way, and yielded a point in
the settlements, over which there lead been
ceaseless wrangling. Mrs. Moreby's lawyer
and several rather pressing creditors were
quieted and satisfied without that awkward
business the exchange of money, and things
seemed to be going almost — to quote Sir
Geoffrey's own words — " too smooth'' when
one evening while he was sitting over this
wine with a few choice spirits he had
invited to a " quiet dinner and rubber to

follow," Lavender appeared, carrying a telegram
on one of Mr. Moreby's salvers.

Unwitting of evil, the Baronet cut open
the envelope, and with a bland " Excuse
me," read:

Margaret died this afternoon, very suddenly.
I start for France by night mail''

"Talk about Job!" thought Sir Geoffrey;
but, with suppressed and creditable emotion,
he said aloud, "This," and he touched the
telegram, " announces the death of one very
near and dear to me. Gentlemen, will you
excuse me, and make yourselves at home?
I shall just have time to catch the express
to Dover. Lavender, a hansom, quick, with
a horse that can go. 0, I have no gold!
Can anybody lend me five pounds? Thank
you, very much."

And the Baronet was gone to bid goodbye
to Peggy.

THE WIDOWKPv.

^^^T this wife's funeral Sir Geoffrey

developed (quite a new accomplishment.
He wept! Circumstances lead kept
him compulsory sober ; and sobriety did
what brandy never could have done — made
him maudlin. Mr. Gayre did not believe
in his brother-in-law's tears, yet he felt
touched by them. They fell like rain ; they
were to be seen of all men. The undertaker,
dio knew his money to be safe, was
quite affected, and afterwards spoke of Sir
Geoffrey's emotion as " most creditable to
all parties." In gloomy silence the Baronet
thinking of what might have been and of
what indeed was so near being, stood and

looked at the changed calm face of his once
beautiful wife. He could not have shed a
tear then — he explained that he felt turned
into stone — had the whole of the money in
Gayres' bank been altered to him as the
price of that precious crystal ; lat in the
watches of the night, Wiiicli, contrary to
custom, he was forced to spend in ]ed,
"tossing and turning and burnt up with a
consumuiu' thirst, ]3e<>'ad ! " he evolved a
brilliant idea, wliicli he confided to his
brother-in-law next morning.

"Look here, Gayre," he began. "I
wonder why we can't have sensible ]breakfasts
like this in England, instead of that
eternal tea or coffee which plays the very
deuce with a man's nerves and digestion.
That is not what I was going to say to
you, though. I didn't get a wink of sleep
last night — couldn't sleep, }'ou know. All
the past rushed back upon me like a wave
well, well, it's no use talking about last

year's snow — and it came into my head
that you'd like to have Margaret laid at
Chelston. Of course everything is gone ;
but I fancy I could manage that matter.
As for me, one place drill be as good as
another — where the tree falls, you know (a
most inapt simile, because as a rule the
tree is never allowed to lie long anywhere).
But I do think if the poor girl could
speak, she would say, 'Lay me at Shelton
! ' Lord, when I think of her trotting
about at Christmastide, with a present for
this one and something for the other, I feel
as if my heart would break ; I do, upon
my soul, Gayre ! " And the Baronet
walked out of the room, ostensibly to hide
his emotion, but really to consider at
leisure the extent to which Mr. Gayre
would " fork out " for the glory and
privilege of having his sister buried
among " decent people."

There is an intuition, which seems to

be the exclusive birthright of dogs, children,
women, fools, and scoundrels, that
serves its purpose better than any exhaustive
line of argument. This intuition Sir
Geoffrey possessed to its fullest extent, and
through it he understood his brother-in-law
would at length rise to the bait
offered. In good earnest Sir Geoffrey
could have made no proposition more
grateful to the banker's feelings. If Lady
Chelston were once laid to rest amongst
her husband's kindred, the world might
say its worst, and still be checkmated. If
Sir geoffrey made the arrangements for
her funeral ; if his friends attended it ;
if he, for once, donning a black hat instead
of a white one, appeared as chief
mourner, Mr. Gayre felt he could for ever
after snap his fingers in the face of Mrs.
Grundy. The best he had ever hoped was
to lay his poor erring and 
sister in some quiet grave in a

strange country and amongst a strange
people ; but now the prospect opened
fairly amazed him. Of course he knew he
would have to pay in meal or in malt for
that niche in the Chelston vault ; but he
was willing to pay for it. Sir Geoffrey
had touched everything that was weakest
and most vulnerable in his nature.

"Poor Margaret! — poor dear child! If
she could knoAv, she would like it," he
thought : and the long; years of trial and
shame and sorrow and seclusion faded
away from memory, and in fancy he once
again saw his little sister running races
with him up and down the stairs, and
along the halls and passages of his father's
house and the house occupied by Mr.
Hisfo's. He could hear the swish of the
stiffly-starched white dress, and the pitter-patter
of the tiny feet ; behold once again
the flutter of a light-blue sash, and feel the
long' curls touch his cheek, as, with a

laugh and a bound, she rushed out upon
him from some unsuspected ambuscade.

And there, still and cold, in an upper
chamber, lay all that remained of the
little sister grown to womanhood, who
had made what they all once thought so
great a match ; who had suffered horribly
and sinned grievously, and repented in the
sackcloth of loneliness and the ashes of
isolation, and to whom he had not perhaps
been so kind as he might, and visited
less frequently than he cared to remember.
And life was over for her ; and he could
have made it happier. And yes, certainly,
if it were possible to bring her to Shelton,
she should lie there, though all the
stately matrons and discreet widows and
tenders virgins mouldering to dust turned
in their coffins with righteous indignation
when this poor frail sinner was carried
into the last earthly home the portals of
which might ever open for her.

"You will want money," said Mr. Garret
the Baronet, whose chronic state it was
to stand in need of that necessary article.

But Sir Geoffrey knew when to hold his
hand as truly as he knew when to reap,,
and at first refused to take the cheque Mr.
Gayre had already drawn.

Leave it, leave it, my boy," he said,
with a sj^asm intended to act the manly
part of indicating the emotion he was
strong enough to repress ; " time enough
to spare for all that when we know for
certain if our darling can rest where I
want to lay her. If I am able to do that
for her, I shan't feel so utterly miserable.
It's aU I can try to do, Gayre. And now
I ought to be off at once. By the way,
d'ye happen to have any loose gold about
you? Lord, how money does sift away at
a time like this ! No, no, no ; I don't
want a twenty-pound note. Can't you give
me anything less ? "

If Mr. Gayre could, he would not.

Keep it," he said ; " you don't know
what you may need."

Faith, no ! " exclaimed Sir Geoffrey,
struck by a sudden thought. "I had to
borrow a fiver last night, or I couldn't
have come. Well, good-bye, Gayre ; and
I'll wire you directly I have seen Wookes
that's the name of the fellow who has
Chelston now."

One moment. Don't you think —
shouldn't you like — " suggested the dead
woman's brother almost timidly.

My dear fellow, a thousand thanks !
I had forgotten — I had upon my soul —
what might — what, indeed, must — happen
before it would be possible for me to return.
Poor, poor Margaret ! poor sweet
dear ! " And the Baronet, who had earnestly
hoped he might be spared another
look at that face he never saw in life cold
and statuesque, took off his hat, and laying

Vol. ii. 40

it on the table, lest lie might, from sheer
force of habit, cover his head again even
in the death chamber (" which would play
the very devil." he considered), ran his
fingers through his hair, put on the most
solemn expression at his command — and
the Baronet's expression could not, as a
rule, be described as jocund — and intimated
to Mr. Gayre he was ready.

Perhaps," said the banker, " you would
prefer to go upstairs alone."

Xo, no, not at all. Wli}^ should not
we — the only two who seem to have cared
for her — stand beside her together ? And
you know, Gayre, I must leave her to
your care."

As if, under any possible combination of
circumstances. Sir Geoffrey would have been
induced to remain sole, or indeed any,
guardian at all of the " poor pale " thing
laid helpless on its last bed upstairs !

In that sacred chamber the Baronet did

all, and indeed more than all, man
could expect from man. He kissed the
mask of life there stretched so stiff and
stark ; he touched the clay-cold hands ;
he severed, with the aid of a convenient
pair of scissors — which, indeed, suggested
the idea to him — a lock of hair once
golden, but now plentifully sprinkled with
gray.

Lord, Lord ! '*' said Sir Geoffrey, in
severe expostulation with the Deity, " that
we should come to this ! On such an
occasion what can any trumpery laches
on the part of a man or woman mattei' ? "
After which magnanimous query the widower
left the room, made his way downstairs,
secured his hat, and, grasping Mr. Gayety
the hand, departed in the most cheerful
spirits, producing a great effect on all the
persons he met by his lugubrious countenance
and the persistent manner in which
he shook his head, as though he had tried

40-2

a wrestle with grief and been sorely
worsted in the struggle.

No man was perhaps ever more astonished
than Mr. Sudlow when he read in
the Times the death of " Margaret, wife of
Sir Geoffrey Chelston, Bart., deeply lamented
by her sorrowing and affectionate husband."
He was so much astounded, indeed, that
he found it necessary to call at North
Bank where there was no one to receive
him except Lavender, from whom he failed,
to extract any save the most ordinary
answers.

He had known Lady Chelston — yes,
well ; he remembered her home-coming and
the great doings at the Pleasaunce. She
was a beautiful lady — more beautiful, according
to Mr. Lavender's ideas, if he
might say so without offence, even than
Miss Chelston. Her married life, he thought
he might go so far as to confess, could not
have been a happy one. You know Sir

Geoffrey, sir," Lavender proceeded to remark,
and it is not all ladies who could make
allowance for this ways." Anyhow, they
didn't agree, and they lived apart. It
was better for married folk to live apart
if they didn't live happily together. The
Baronet was gone down to Chelston to
arrange about the funeral. None but
intimate friends were to be present (and
something in the man's manner informed
Mr. Sudlow he was not going to be asked,
and that Lavender knew it). Miss Chelston
(who at that moment of speaking happened
to be upstairs closeted with her dressmaker),
was out of town. Her grief was
terrible ; though she had not seen her
ladyship for years, still, in Lavender's
opinion, a mother was a mother, and, as
Mr. Sudlow put the question so straight,
he did not think Sir Geoffrey ought to
have kept his daughter all to himself ashe
had done. Latterly there had been a

talk of Miss Clielston living for part of
the year with her mamma. Lavender had
always heard Lady Clielston was a great
heiress ; most likely her fortune would
come to her daughter, but even Lavender's
wisdom could not tell exactly how that
might be ; " and then Mr. Lavender, with
a grave face and sad subdued manner,
shut the gate after Mr. Sudlow, and went
back into the house, and had a laugh
with his wife over the suitor's discomfiture.


I can't bear him," said Mrs. Lavender.

Nor me," agreed Lavender ; " but he's
better than nobody, I suppose, and I do
hear he's rolling' in riches."

Meantime Mr. Gayre had returned to
England, and in the large dining-room of
his house in Wimpole Street his sister's
body lay ready for burial. For several
reasons Mr. Moreby's villa seemed ineligible
for so rare a purpose, and it scarcely

needed • Sir Geoffrey's hint that any day
the bailiffs might enter into possession,
which "would be confoundedly awkward,
you know," to decide the hanker as to
the course lie should pursue.

Sorrowing and affectionate," considered
Mr. Gay re, reading the announcement in
the Times. " I daresay ! And now Sir
Geoffrey Chelston, Baronet, who so deeply
laments his dead wife, is eligible once
again, what will he do with this chance,
I wonder?"

Sir Geoffrey could have told him that
the first thing he meant to do was to
offer himself and title to Mrs. Jubbins ;
but his role was to keep up the semblance
of distracted grief for poor Margaret, and
no man understood the beauty and wisdom
of silence better than the bereaved
husband. So far grief had returned him
excellent interest. Mr. Wookes instantly
placed, not merely' the family vault, but

also Chelston Pleasance, at his service.
Mrs. Wookes, and the young person Sir
Geoffrey with a deep sigh styled her
"lovely daughter," were introduced to the
worthy Baronet. Mr. Wookes spoke of
him as "my afflicted friend," and he was
earnestly requested to stop and partake
of " some refreshment," which, under an
immense delusion, he certainly would have
done, had he not been compelled to hurry
off to catch the afternoon express.

"There are so many things to see to at
such a time," he said ; and Mrs. Wookes
sighed, " Ah, ses, there are ! " and Miss
Wookes stared at him hard with wide-open
colourless eyes : and Mr. Wookes
insisted he and Mr. Gayre should comedown
the evening before the funeral and
stay the night ; and " whenever you feel
disposed to stop with us, I can assure
you. Sir Geoffrey, both Mrs. Wookes and
myself will give you a hearty welcome,"

added Mr. Wookes, who, though truly
pious, would have welcomed Lucifer himself
had he come with a handle to his
name.

I really do not know how to thank
you sufficiently," answered Sir Geoffrey,
in his best manner, which Mrs. Wookes
often subsequently defined as " courtly,"
though she might have employed a
different word had the Baronet been a
tutor. " My daughter will be delighted
when she hears I met with such a reception
at her old home."

"How is Miss Chelston ? " instantly
inquired Mr. Wookes.

She is dreadfully cut up, poor thing,
of course," explained Sir Geoffrey. " Still,
she tries not to let me see all she
feels."

Then Mr. Wookes, in a grand pompous
voice, immediately said, " My dear ; " and
Mrs. Wookes understanding observed, " Yes,

I was just about to remark that if dear
Miss Clielston thought a chancre to so
quiet a place woukl do her good, we should
feel honoured by a visit ; " after which
amenities, Sir Geoffrey took a hurried leave,
and entered the conveyance waiting for him ;
first, sotto voce, desiring the coachman to
drive to Chelston Station like the "

There is no time probably which passes
so slowly as that intervening between a
death and a funeral, but at length the
interval was well-nigh bridged over by a
succession of weary hours ; and the evening
arrived when Mr. Wookes was to be gratified
with the presence of his " distinguished "
guest and that guest's less distinguished
brother-in-law.

"I hope they've some decent wine," said
Mr. Geoffrey, as the gates swung wide to
welcome the visitors. " He looks like an
old boy who knows what's what, and the
cellars here are first-rate."

"It might have been prudent to bring
some cognac with you," suggested Mr.
Gayre, with a fine sneer.

0, I'll square the butler ! " answered
Sir Geoffrey amiably ; and then he looked
out of the carriage-window and shook his
head, and remarked his heart was well-nigh
broken, by — , it was ! to think poor Margaret
was not to be carried from the house
which properly belonged to her. "It may
Ijc partly my own fault. I was always too
easy and generous, and never thought
enough of myself; but, gad, that makes it
no pleasant to see a place like this owned
by a fellow who made his money out of
tallow, and to have to ask leave to bury
my wife in my own vault, cap in hand, like
a railway porter ; " which recital of misfortunes
was ended by their arrival at the
house, where Mr. Wookes in person appeared
at the door to greet them, and to tell Mr.
Gayre how delighted he felt to welcome

any relation of his " esteemed friend Sir
Geoffrey Chelston."

You'd like a cup of tea, perhaps, before
you go up to dress," he said, with genial
hospitality. " I always find a cup of tea
so refreshing after a railway journey. There
was a time when I would laye proposed a
glass of wine ; but we're changed all that
we are strict abstainers."

"And so not merely virtuous yourselves,
but the cause of virtue in others," observed
Mr. Gayre, scarcely able to repress a smile
at the sight of his brother-in-law's discomfiture.
For a moment, indeed, Sir Geoffrey
was too deeply indignant to speak; but he
regained his presence of mind during the
course of some didactic remarks from Mr.
Wookes concerning the prevalence of drunkenness,
and the importance of the upper
classes setting an example of temperance to
the masses.

"You are quite right, Mr. Wookes,"

agreed the Baronet-alio had already set
his wits to work to consider how he could
get some brandy " or — or anything, by
Jove," from Chelston. " People do drink
far too much — and eat to," added Sir
Geoffrey as a happy after-thought, feeling
he was clear of the vice of gluttony, at
any rate.

Mr. Wookes reddened. He liked to see
a good table, and to partake plentifully of
what he called " God's mercies " spread
upon it.

As for eating," he observed, " though
we cannot deny that it is a sin to indulge
any appetite to excess, still I consider that
a moderate pleasure in and use of the
bounties so lavishly provided for our benefit
are not crimes. You see, my dear sir," and
he laid a fat pudgy hand affectionately on
Sir Geoffrey's arm, " the difference is this —
fish, flesh, and fowl, vegetables of all sorts,
and sweets at discretion, do not cause

(quarrelling and murders ; whereas spirits —
and under the general head of spirits I include
all .sorts of wine — Wont you have
a cup of tea?" he broke off to ask, feeling,
perhaps, his arguments might seem a little
lengthy to hungry and thirsty men.

Thank you ; I should like one greatly,"
answered Mr. Clare.

And I'd like a o'lass of water'' declared
the Baronet desperately, ''to lay the dust.
My throat is as dry as a London street in
summer."

Ah ! that's because you are in such
trouble," sympathetically said Mr. Wookes,
who knew as well as possible Sir Geoffrey
was one of the hardest drinkers in England,
and who would have liked to offer him
champagne had his new principles not been
dearer to him even than a title.

They were, indeed, as new as his possession
of the Pleasaunce, and he had been
frightened into them by the sudden decease

of ii brother, who died, as one City wag-expressed
the matter to another, " of forgetting
to put any water in his grog."

There is no Light like a convert (pervert
Sir Geoffrey would have said), and Mr. and
Mrs. Wookes were already anxious to begin
the holy labour of washing this Ethiop
white. They belonged to the straightest sect :
not a pint of beer was allowed about the
premises ; dinners Averse cooked, and horses
driven, and tables set, and fruit forced,
and gardens kept in order on the strictest
teetotal lines. The lodge-keepers drank
nothing stronger than milk (like babes
and sucklings," said the Baronet afterwards,
i]i accents of the deepest disgust);
no labourers were employed who refused
to give up malt liquor. Indeed, Mr. Wookes
had drawn such a cordon of sobriety round
his domain that dien Sir Geoffrey, during
the course of the evening, made an excuse
for stealing' out, he found the very beer-louse

in the little village hard by had been
closed, and the premises converted into a
coffee-tavern.

Well, I'm blanked ! " he thought ; and,
making the best of a bad bargain, decided
he would go back and render himself agreeable
to " old mother " Wookes, and get
something definite settled about Peggy's
visit to The Pleasaunce.

This was how he chanced to be " fasting
from everything but sin," when he attended
his wife's funeral, and shed those tears
that excited the surprise and won the
admiration of all beholders.

*' Tell you what, Gayre," he said, as they
returned together to London, " another day
in that house would have killed me. It
was inhuman too, under the circumstances
downright inhuman, and confoundedly
impertinent into the bargain. A man hasa
right perhaps to play tricks with his own
constitution, but he has no right to try to

leave another man with no stomach to
speak of. / shouldn't force a fellow who
came to my house to drink against his will.
Why should I be compelled to swallow
Lj'allons of cold water? — bad as a drench,
egad ! Why, sou see yourself the effect
it had upon me. Whatever I might feel —
and, as a rule, people haven't thought I
felt much — they were mistaken, though — I
could control myself ; but I give you my
word, Gayre, I am still as shaky as possible.
I could cry like a woman now. It
was an awful ordeal ! But the poor dear,
could she have seen, would, I think, have
understood I bore no malice, and that I
loved her to the last — I did, upon my
soul ! " And the Baronet once again took
to weeping so profusely his brother-in-law
began anxiously to examine the time-table,
to see how soon they might hope to reach
a " civilized station," to quote Sir Geoffrey,
where stimulants could be procured."

Vol. ii. 41

I'm a fool," said the widower, wiping
his red eyes, " an utter idiot ; but the whole
thing; has been too much for me. I do
think all the people behaved splendidly.
Fancy, even old Dane coming — though,
perhaps, that was as much to prove he
didn't care about his grandson being; in o-aol
as to show respect to Margaret's memory."

He looks a dreadful old man," observed
Mr. Gayre, wisely passing over his brother-in-law's
final suggestion.

"He looks what he is. Only to think of
that poor young fellow having to break
stones, or carry stones, or whatever it maybe,
for seven long years at Portland, and
this old wretch gloating over the guineas
he can't take out of the world with him,
and that might have saved the lad ! Why
such things should be allowed baffles me !
And that dear poor Susan coming down
here to ask him to help get up a petition,
or a memorial, or something of the sort,

tint the wretch as good as shutting the
door in her face ! Drummond told me
about it at the station just now. Give von
my word, I scarcely knew how to contain
myself."

"What can you mean ? " asked Mr. Gayre ;
^' What is !Miss Drummond doing ? "

As I understand, the solicitor who acted
for young Dane told her if she got a whole
lot of influential people to sign a paper, and
forwarded it to one or other of the big wigs,
she might get the sentence commuted. I
don't believe a word of it myself; but
still the notion may serve to comfort hera
bit till the worst of the trouble had worn
off. One thing, however, I am sure of —
the girl oughtn't to be going about herself
asking for signatures. I wish I had
time and money to take such a labour off
her hands ; " and the Baronet looked hard
at Mr. Gayre, who, after a few moments'
silence, said,

41-2

"I think I am the person to help Miss
Drummond now."

You're the best fellow livings Gate ! "
exclaimed Sir Geoffrey, giving his brother,
in-law such a slap on the shoulder that
the banker winced. " I always said it and
I always thought it, spite of some few angularities
— and which of us is perfect ? —
you are the kindest, and the most generous,
and the truest man in England." Having
finished which peroration, as the train
stopped, the Baronet jumped out of the
compartment at the civilised station, and
returned refreshed.

A DOG IX THE MANGER.

|j|NSTEAD of formally offering the
4j^ " assistance of this experience " by
letter, Mr. Clay re decided to call upon
Miss Drummond, and actually got within
twenty yards of the house at Shepherd's
Bush, when he suddenly hesitated, turned
and commenced retracing his steps.

What can it be ? " he thought.
-' From the moment I first saw this girl
a power stronger than myself seemed
drawing me towards her ; and yet at the
very same moment some spirit of ]prescience
said, " if you allow your inclinations
to lead you now, you will in the
future repent having done so." It is odd,

very odd, at each turn of the affair a
check or warning has met me ; and nowhere
again, almost with my foot on the
doorstep, I feel I cannot meet her this
morning' — feel almost as thon^h I could
wish we had never met. Her influence
upon me too is not for good ; strange, because
she is all good ! If there be any
lasting virtue to be extracted out of my
scheming brother-in-law (which I doubt),
she could extract it. Though Sudlow hates
her, he thinks it necessary to be on his
best behaviour when she is present. The
fair Peo'o-y also is an atom more human,
less affected, less straitlaced, altogether less
unendurable when Susan makes one of
the party. But, so fair as I am concerned,
it is really only since I knew her I feel
capable of treason, stratagem or spoil. If
I could be sure of not beings found out
I would rob mv neighbour, cheat my
friend, commit a murder, and see an innocent

man hanged for my deed, supposing
any one of those acts would bring me
closer to Susan. Then, when I married
her, I should, I have no doubt, find she
had all unconsciously brought the avenging
sword to church with her. I wonder
whether all this is temptation? I am half
inclined to think so ! For generations we
have been such a lot of respectable Pharisees
that no doubt it needed an angel to
teach us we are only common clay, subject
to like temptations, &c. But hold !
Wliat about poor Margaret ? Is Sir
Geoffrey an angel — was Sir Geoffrey ever
an angel ? Here is a difficult conundrum
— Why do I feel myself a worse man
since I have known Susan Drummond ?
Is it because she is a good woman ? Pooh !
what will the end of all this be, I wonder?
Will time solve the riddle ? I have a
strong belief in the ability of time to
solve most riddles, and — Ah, d'ye do,

Sudlow ? who would have expected to
meet yon here ? "

I am often in this neighbourhood ; but
you — "

Set out to call on Miss Drummond,
and then changed ni}^ mind."

Indeed ! You would not have found
her at home, however, if you had called."

! "

She is staying at the Wigwam."

Is my niece there too ? "

Mr. Sudlow shook his head.

Sir Geoffrey means to lunch with Mrs.
Jubbins to-day."

Does he know Miss Drummond is at
Chislehurst ? "

Of course ; it was he told me."

Having successfully planted which thorn
in the bankers bosom, Mr. Sudlow proceeded
on his way, pleased to have scored
even so poor a trick.

He's jealous of his own shadow," considered

the careful young man. " If it
wasn't that my lady would snub me so
dreadfully, I'd have a turn at making love
to her myself, in order to vex the Baronet
and drive Ga}Te mad. Marry him ! The
money is not in Lombard Street would
buy her yet: and when the time comes
that it might, our dear friend will have
found out practically roses wither and
lies fade."

Sir Geoffrey will tell her she may depend
on my help, and so spoil the whole
effect," thought Mr. Gayre, with a feeling
of savage disappointment. " Well,
things must take their chance now. I can
only' wait results."

He had not long; to wait. It was about
a quarter to four on the same afternoon —
the busiest part of a banker's day, only
Mr. Gayre was not busy — when a clerk
took a card into that gentleman's private
office, intimating at the same time the lady

whose name it bore " would like to speak
to him."

Mr. Gayre's first impulse was to rise
and rush out to greet this unexpected
visitor ; but prudence prevailed, and in
his coldest business tone he desired that
Miss Drummond mioiit be asked to walk
in.

Then he waited — waited till he heard
the rustle of Susan's dress, as she drew
nearer and nearer ; waited till the door
opened, and he heard the clerk's warning
to beware of that step, which so often
caused a customer or possible client to
enter the sacred apartment with an undignified
stumble. Then he rose ; he
could refrain no longer.

Pray be careful, Miss Drummond," he
said ; " that step is so very awkward. I
must really have it altered." And then
it flashed through his mind, if Susan
would only promise to marry him, he

might, even at so late a period of his
Use, alter many things, beoinniiio' with himself,
for example.

That was, indeed, a moment to be
marked with a white stone in the bankers
memory. The woman he loved stood there
looking with her soft brown eyes, from
which the remembered sunshine had departed,
up into his face, with a sort of
timid appeal that wrung a heart not over
.susceptible to the troubles of others. She
had come to him voluntarily for help. It
was the beginning of the end. It was for
this he had turned back almost from the
threshold of her home. That which he
so foolishly construed into a warning
proved to be an omen for good — an omen
already fulfilled.

I fear," she began — and there was a
hesitation in her manner he had never
previously seen in it — " I fear I am intruding,
Mr. Gayre. I walked twice up and

down Lombard Street before I could summon
sufficient courage to ask for you."

He did not answer this remark for a
moment. The contrast between the girl,
strong in her fearless innocence, he had
sauntered with on that memorable night
beneath the stars at Chislehurst and this
stricken Susan, who had since faced the
then intangible e^'il she vaguely felt was
advancing to meet her, seemed to him so
cruel he could not find words in which to
clothe his pity.

When he did speak it was lightly.

Strange to say, I went almost to Miss
Matthews' door this morning, intending to
call U23on you ; but then I turned back,
fearing? to intrude — "

I am not with Miss Matthews now."

Xo, so I understand ; but I was unaware
you had one to Chislehurst till I heard
from Mr. Sudlow you were staying at the
Wigwam. ■

I shall only be there till tomorrow.
I have taken lodgings at Islington."

At Islington ! Why ? Forgive me ;
of course I have no right to ask."

Certainly you have every right. You
want to know why I left Miss Matthews.
We disagreed — about Oliver. I could not
bear it — I could not. Everybody is sorry
for me ; but nobody is sorry for him. Now
I don't want people to be sorry for me."

No one could help being sorry for you,"
said the banker, gently.

She looked at him for an instant questioning
; then tears welled up into her eyes,
and she turned her head aside as she said,

I have come to ask you to help me, Mr.
Gay re. It is very bold of me, perhaps,
but—"

I went to Shepherd's Bush this morning
to know if you would not let me try to help
you."

How could you know I wanted help ? "

Sir Geoffrey told me. He said you
were endeavouring to get some petition
.signed. That is so, is it not ? "

"Yes. And 0, Mr. Gayre, if you will
only put me in the way of getting the right
people to sign it, I shall be unutterably
grateful."

Anything I can do for you, be sure I
will do."

"Thank you! — I feel certain of that.
And you won't advise me ; I am so tired of
being advised — so weary of hearing I ought
to sit down and fold ni}^ hands and do
nothing, while he — is — and we were all the
world to one another ! "

I shall not advise you," said Mr. Gayre,
who felt no inclination to minnie his tears
with the girl over the woes of Oliver Dane.
*' Only tell me what you are doing — what
you want done^and I will assist you to the
best of m}^ ability."

How kind you are ! " she cried — " how

good ! I will try to explain how it all
came about. But I fear I am taking up
your time. You are busy, are you not P I
had better write to you — may I P

"Might I not call upon you, Miss Drummond
? I shall be most happy to do soif
you name an hour convenient to yourself."


A)u/ hour," answered Susan — '* any hour
which suits you. I do feel grateful, though
I cannot express my gratitude. How can I
eyer be thankful enough to God for raising
up such a friend for me in my extremity r '
Which, being a (question Mr. Gayre, under
the most favourable circumstances, could
scarcely laye been expected to answer, he
prudently affected not to hear.

I may be fortunate enough to see you
at Chisleliurst this evening," he said, instead
of solving that difficult problem as to
whether Miss Drummond, if she could read
his heart, might regard his friendship in

SrSAX Drummond.

the light of an unmixed blessing. " I was
thinking of calling at The Wigwam. Then,
perhaps you will kindly give me your
address, and let me know when I should be
most certain to find you at home."

But please do not mention the matter
before Mrs. Jubbins," entreated Susan. " She
does not say anything, but I know she is
like every one else."

Surely not every one ! There are exceptions."


"Yes, I forgot. Sir Geoffrey, of course —
kind good Sir Geoffrey."

"Won't you bracket us together. Miss
Drummond ? "

She looked at him searchingly for a
moment before she asked,

"Do you believe Oliver to be innocent,
then ? "

The question was put with such direct
suddenness that Mr. Gayre found it difficult
to parry.

"It is not easy to believe him innocent,"
lie answered ; " but — pray do not misunderstand
me, Miss Drummond — I do not
say lie is guilty. Appearances are often
against a man ; and this is a case in which I,
for one, should not care to express a positive
opinion. Of one thing, however, I am
certain — that, whether the verdict were
righteous or unrighteous, the sentence was
utterly beyond the offence ; and, without
going into the question of guilt or innocence,
I will do all I can to help you and him.
You must not be angry with me," added the
banker apologetically, " because I have not
the same faith in Mr. Dane you possess.
Eemember, I never was intimate with him
in the slightest degree — "

•' That is true," she murmured ; " had you
known you could not have doubted him."

"Besides," said Mr. Gayre, finishing his
interrupted sentence, " I have seen something
of the world, and understand how

Vol. ii. 42

temptation assails, and often overcomes,
even the very best amongst ns."

It did not overcome him," declared
Susan.

Then on your word I am to believe Mr.
Dane sinned against,) not sinning : is that
so?"

If you can."

"I will do precisely what you tell me,
I consider myself a soldier under orders,
and shall hold no personal opinions whatever.
I think I had better let you out by
this private door. You would of course
rather avoid passing through the bank.
Good-bye for the present. Miss Drummond
no, please, don't thank me. If we meet at
The Wigwam perhaps it might be more
prudent to say nothing about your having
been here. Once more, good-bye ; depend
I wil do all in my power for your friend."

And in another second Susan was once
assail in Lombard Street, with the old dull

pain tugging at her heart, spite of the faith
she had in ]Mr. Gayre's power to help young
Dane, and the certainty she felt he would
try to do so.

"But 0, he cannot be of the use he
might if lie only believed in my darling ! "
she considered.

When, some two hours later, Mr. Gayre
arrived at Chislehurst it was scarcely agreeable
to find Sir Geoffrey acting as Mentor
to the youth of the family, who were
listening to his improving stories with
enthusiasm, and encoring reminiscences of
flood and field in a manner which should
have been gratifying to the Baronet.

She can't bear these old tales now," said
Sir Geoffrey, sotto voce, to his brother-in-law,
indicating Susan, who was seated apart in
the larger drawing-room ; " but she'll mend
of that, poor soul. It has been worse thana
death to her. You must give her time,
Gayre — give her time."

42—2

Good Heavens ! have I ever interfered
with her in any way?" asked the banker.

No, no ; I didn't mean that. Only
verbum saps a nod's as good as a wink, you
know, and I really do love Susan like my
own child."

And what was done to the mare that
broke her leg, when old Carey would take
him over the bullfinch. Sir Geoffrey ? " inquired
one of the younger Jubbins.

Shot, Joshua — dead as a doornail. A
rough sort of fellow, Poaching Bill he was
called, happened to come up at the minute,
and we sent him for a pistol to put the poor
brute out of his miser' . Give you my word
there was not a dry eye in the field, except
old Carey's. ' I said I'd teach her who
was master,' declared the gray-haired
ruffian, 'and I did it'"

"If you had broken your own neck it
wouldn't have mattered," I remarked ; " but
by — , sir, you've killed the finest mare in

the county, and if the other gentlemen
present are of my mind, you may hunt the
county by yourself for the future. Fair
riding is one thing, and fair punishment is
one thing ; but brutality's another, and
Geoffrey Chelston will never eat bread nor
shake hands with a man who has done a
gallant animal to death, as you've tortured
one this day."

"And did he hunt the county by himself?"
asked the pertinacious Joshua.

No, my lad ; he went to another county,
where they would have none of him either.
The story followed him — I took precious
good care it should — and so, at last, the
talk and disgrace broke his own heart. His
dying words, I understand, were, "Curse
Chelston ! " but I didn't care for that. I
always say, if you do right, no man's bad
opinion need trouble you. And now, you
see, Carey's in his grave, and I'm telling the
story of his wicked cruelty to a set of boys

who ouo'lit to know low to ^o across
country as well as I do. If you'll persuade
your mother to let you come down and seeme
at Chelston — But there, what am I
talking about ? Well, well, though I haven't
The Pleasance any longer, you ought to
know how to take your fences. There's
Gayre, now ; d'ye suppose lie's a bit worse
banker because he's as straight a rider as
you'd wish to see? Gad, Nicholas, shall I
ever foro-et seeing that wild Irish devil —
that chestnut mare, Leda, I mean — take you
first over the ha-ha, with only one foot in
your stirrups, and then across the Ciel,
before you were fairly settled in your saddle ?
By Jove, it was as fine a bit of horsemanship
as ever came in my way ! She took the
notion in her head and went for it ; and
there was Margaret screaming, and the
grooms running, and I expecting you'd be
brought back dead; and then you just
turned the creature's pretty head — Lord,

what a tiling memory is ! I seem to have
that star on lier forehead before my eyes
this minute — and brought her lack the way
she had gone, gentle as a lamb."

With which, and suchlike pleasing and
instructive anecdotes, the Baronet held the
youthful Jubbins entranced during the compulsory
absence of their mamma, who, in
honour of Sir Geoffrey's presence, had
proceeded to her room, in order to don a
more elaborate dinner-dress.

The feeling Mrs. Jubbins entertained
towards the brothers-in-law was, to a certain
extent, contradictory. Whilst Mr. Gayre
remained the love of her heart, she felt a
pride concerning the easy and familiar terms
on which Sir Geoffrey honoured The Wigwam
with his presence she did not even try to
disguise. The names of great persons '^ve^y
to be as common on her lips as in the
columns of the Court Journal. She repeated
anecdotes of the nobility to her friends on

the authority of the Baronet, wliicli were
not really more untruthful than such anecdotes
usually are. The private history and
daily life of no peer of the realm remained
a sealed book to her. Thanks to good Sir
Geoffrey, she was an fait with everything*
which occurred at Windsor and Balmoral.
lie felt that a visit even from the Prince of
Wales would not quite have overwhelmed
her. She had heard how his Royal Highness
was in the habit of greeting" her friend at
Ascot with " Geoffrey, my boy," and " Shelton,
old fellow," and asking his advice
concerning which horse the Princess should
back for a dozen of gloves. As for the
younger Jubbins, they were simply rapturous
on the subject of Sir Geoffrey.

In his charming way he had pinched the
girls' cheeks, and declared they were " devilish
good-looking," " pretty little things,"
that when they went to Court they would
put some persons noses out, begad! " with a

<>ood deal more to the same edifying
effect.

He got a pony on which Miss Ida could
canter as easily as if she was sitting in an
armchair in her mother's drawing-room, and
himself accompanied that young lady while
she ambled along the Kentish lanes. He
sent Lavender frequently to The Wigwam,
so that the smaller frv mio-ht under his
auspices learn to fall easy on the velvet
turf once pressed by the august feet of Lady
Merioneth. He told the lads stories of his
own exploits and the exploits of other
worthies like himself, and promised that
when lie " pulled his affairs together a bit "
he " would make men of them." He proposed
furnishing a sort of armoury at Lord
riint's former abode, which excellent idea had,
however, to be abandoned in consequence
of Mrs. Jubbins' nervous terror of firearms.

Why, my dear soul," he said to that lady,
if you'd only let me take you in hand, I'd

engage you slioiild in a month list at a
hundred yards'

'• I never said what she'd hit," he confided
to this brother-in-law ; " but it did not matter
]because she thinks everything with a muzzle
can bite, and is deadly afraid even of a toy
pistol. Those big women always are cowards
ever notice that ? Courage decreases as
fat is laid on — fact, I assure you."

In a sentence, then, the Baronet had
secured the favour of the whole establishment.
With the men and women servants
his rank and agreeable manners made him,
as a matter of course, prime favourite. Xo
standing aloof with him.

About people of real good birth there is
never no nasty low sort of pride," declared
the united voice of the servants' hall.

Even the cattle within ]Mrs. Jubbins' hates
evinced a discriminating partiality for so
worthy a gentleman.

'' They're like children, bless you," he said,

to Mrs. Jiibbiii.s, in kindly explanation.
They know who is fond of tlieni. ^^liy,
look at your young folks ! (Gad I who'd
think 3'ou were old enough to be their
mother ?) They'll leave any of your rich
friends, your City niaiiiiates rolling in money,
to come and stroll about with me, poor as I
am. They respect Xicholas Gayre, Banker,
but they like Geoffrey Chelston, Bes-oar —
that's about it."

Concerning his wife, Geoffrey Chelston,
Beggar, had fairly mystified Mrs. Jubbins.
In broken accents he had formerly told how
a reconciliation was imminent ; how he had
been a very bad boy, who meant now to turn
oyer a new leaf — upon his soul he did ; how
Gayre was the best fellow living ; how Margaret
could be regarded but as little lower
than the angels ; what a wretch he had been
to the best woman who ever lived ; with a
great deal more to the same effect, which
often caused the widow to wonder if that

teat trouble which bowed old Mr. Gavre's
gray head, and left Sir Geoffrey's Stepdaughter
motherless, had been all a dream.

In their first shame and misery the Gayres
were unable to hide the sorrow which had
fallen on them within their own breasts ; but
now, to hear Sir Geoffrey, any one might
haye thought all the sin and scandal were of
his own making.

He is certainly most magnanimous," said
the widow, to Mr. Gayre.

Most magnanimous ! *' agreed the banker,
with an irony perfectly unintelligible to Mrs.
Jubbins. " He is quite willing to let bygones
be bygones ; so is Margaret, and so am
I."

I think it may prove a comfort to the
poor girl to ha ye some old friend to whom
she can speak," explained the Baronet, to his
brother-in-law. " The Jubbins is not much,
to be sure ; but she means well and is
faithful, and will serve better at first than

nobody. Ton my honour, Gayre, I like
the widow ; for her rank, indeed for any
rank, .she is a most excellent sort of
person."

She was indeed so excellent a sort of
person. Sir Geoffrey thought, after his wife's
death, he could not do better than confide
a few of the many troubles besetting him to
her. " And now the poor dear's gone and
all that's knocked on the head, and the link
which bound Gayre to us is broken, what is
to become of Peggy God only knows. As
for me it does not matter ; I can make shift
anywhere. Great happiness has never come
to me, and I needn't expect happiness now.
I did look forward to some peace and quietness
with margaret ; lout she has gone to
that bourne — you have read Hamlet, of
course, Mrs. Jubbins ? "

Mrs. Jubbins said she had seen it acted,
and that she felt very sorry for Ophelia.
Upon the whole, the Baronet gathered, she

considered Hamlet rather a foolish young
man, and this mamma a most dreadful and
wicked person.

Only think of the unprincipled creature
marrying again in that way ! " she remarked.

Only think of people marrying again
in any way ! " capped the Baronet ; " I
couldn't, I know. That is a point I have
always admired especially about you, Mrs.
Jubbins. It is not often one meets a woman
young, rich, handsome, calculated to adorn
society, resolute as you are to wear the
willow, even for the best husband that ever
lived'"

Ah, but where would you find so good a
husband as mine was P " sighed the widow.

Nowhere — nowhere," promptly agreed
Sir Geoffrey. " I have heard things from
Gavre about your husband that make me
lament I did not know him." And then the
Baronet, after accepting an invitation to stop
for dinner, walked off to find some of his

young friends ; while Mrs. Jubbins hastened
away to change her dress, considering, as
she did so, that poor dear Mr. J. always did
like her to " look her best."

But for Sir Geoffrey, the dinner would
have passed off very heavily. He, however,
proved the life of the party.

A most agreeable gentleman," said Hopkins,
as he descended to the basement, " as
I am sure I shall always be the first to admit.
Nevertheless — "

Nevertheless what ? " demanded Mrs.
Jubbins' own maid.

Things aren't what they was," observed
Mr. Hoskins, oracularly. " The position is
changed, if I may so express myself. The
events of the last fortnight has altered the
relations of parties. We can't stand still,
Miss Langton."

That's true enough," agreed the cook.
If wages ain't rising they're falling, which
I will maintain to my dying day."

Well, and if we can't stand still, what
then ? " asked Miss Langton.

Mr. Hoskins closed one eye with decorous
solemnity ere answering.

Least said soonest mended. Though I
have a high opinion of a gentleman who
shall be nameless, his manners being agreeable,
his taste in wine as good as my own,
and himself open-handed, I do not altogether
know that it is a match to which I could
give an unqualified approval. There is
wheels within wheels. Miss Langton ; and I
have heard a word or two drop which might
render caution necessary."

Get along with you, do ! " expostulated
the cook. " Missus ain't going to make a
fool of herself, though other people may
choose to make fools of themselves ; " which
was a very unkind allusion to the fact that
Mr. Hoskins meant, ere long, to take Miss
Langton and a public-house, both for better
or w ^e, and leave '' a good place, where he

had nobody to trouble him, for a wife who

did not know low to cook a potato and

a landlord certain to call for his rent

regular."

At that very instant the genial Baronet,

who during the whole of dinner-time had

been on his very best behaviour, was saying;

to Mrs. Jubbins' sons,

Look here, my lads I I promised your

mother I would not let you sit long over

dessert ; and, as I don't want to lose any of

your agreeable company, why, we'll all make

a move. One minute, Gayre," he added, as

his brother-in-law, acting on the hint, rose all

too willingly ; " I have a word for your

private ear. Let the young fellows go.

We'll be after you immediately."

And then the dining-room door closed ;

and, literally in the twinkling of an eye, Sir

Geoffrey had poured out and swallowed a

bumper of sound Madeira.

It's a sin to put a wine like that c ^e
Vol. ii. 43

table when there's no one to drink it but
women and boys, who would just as soon
have a sweet sherry. But that's not what
I kept you back for — it's not, upon my
conscience. I wanted to tell you I saw
Susan slip into your Bank to-day. Nay,
never fire up, man ; surely sight is as free as
the street ; and, indeed, I was glad to see the
poor little soul had turned to you in her
trouble. I meant to tell her she'd nothing
to do in this case but ask and have ; but the
chance did not offer. So, as I was saying, I
saw her pop up your steps just like a hunted
hare. But Mum's the word as regards me ;
and, were I in your place. Mum should bethe
word too."

I have not a notion what you are driving
at, "exclaimed Mr. Gayre, testily. " Why
can't you say what you have got to say
in plain English, and be done with it ? "

! hang me, that's too good ! " laughed
the Baronet, at the same time, as if in

very excess of mirth, jocundly seizing the
Madeira decanter, and filling out another
bumper. " Do you know, Gayre," lie went
on, "I have heard some fool advance the
opinion that the more a man drinks the
less he understands about wine. Did you
ever hear such rubbish? Why, the morea
man drinks, of course, the better judge
he becomes. Practice makes perfect. I
don't suppose even you grasped the whole
science and mystery of money-changing at
the first intention."

'' That is a matter into which I really
must decline to enter at present. Mrs.
Jubbins will be wondering what is detaining
us."

I'll explain that I had to speak to you
on a matter of business — and so I have.
Don't you talk about Susan or Susan's
affairs to the widow. She's an excellent
person, no doubt — I'm sure I have no cause
to say one word against her ; but in all

these City folks there's a deuced hard kernel
; and she wouldn't approve, and she'd
launch out on poor dear Susan, and she'd
advise and preach and talk against Dane ;
and then they'd quarrel, and Susan would
close another door between herself and her
friends. She's just in the humour to fight
anybody for the sake of Dane ; and, Lord,
what use is it ? By the way, why don't
you marry her ? "

What do you mean ? Marry whom ? "

The widow, to be sure."

You misrht as well ask me whv I don't
fly to the moon ; the one inquiry is about
as reasonable as the other."

"Don't think so. In the first place, you
don't want to fly to the moon ; in the next,
you couldn't fly there if you wished ever so
much. Now, you could marry the widow,
and you have led lier to believe you meant
to do so."

"I utterly deny it."

That is all very well ; but lie expects
YOU to ask her, and so do lier friends. As
far as I am a judge, they are only waiting
for the word."

Surely I am not answerable for their
expectations."

Yes, you are — to a great extent at any
rate. Unless a man means business lie has
no right to fool around a house in which
there is an eligible woman, as you have
been circling about The Warren. Gad ! if
I'd been lier brother, I'd have had something
definite out of you long ago. And when
all that is settled, why the deuce shouldn't
you marry her ? She is as well born as
you — both of you are the children of respectable
citizens. If her father did go
wrong, your father might have gone wrong.
Heavens ! which of us has a right to throw
stones ? I don't know how rich you maybe,
but she is rich enough in all conscience
even for a lord to marry ; and if you took

a house in some neighbourhoods away from
that vile City connection, and gradually got
rid of the young fry — perhaps put one of
the sons in the bank — and made a quite
fresh start in the country, I feel confident
you mio'ht "ret amongst the best county
people. It's never too late to mend ! and
if I Agere you I'd try to laye some value
for ni}^ money even at the eleventh hour
I would, upon m}' soul ! The widow is
certainly both personable and presentable.
I've seen worse driviuo- to a Drawing-room.
Besides — "

It is really exceedingly kind of you to
take such an unselfish interest in my affairs,
but — " Mr. Gayre tried to interrupt.

Unselfish I Xot a bit of it, as you'll
know when you let me finish what I was
going to say. There's Peggy, now. If you
married the widow, see what a home there
would be for her — that is if you liked to
ask her to the house."

She and Mrs. Jubbins don't exactly list
matters off," observed Mr. Gayre, maliciously.

That's true at the present moment ; but
if Mrs. Jubbins were Mrs. Gayre, you'd see
she'd take even to Peg to please Peg's
uncle. 'Pon my soul, Gayre, the woman
worships you — that's the plain state of the
case ; and whv, for very gratitude's sake,
you don't make her your wife passes my
comprehension. It's not as if there were
anybody else."

Xo, it is not as though there were anybody
else," a^Teed Mr. Gavre, in a spirit of
the bitterest sarcasm.

And then think of all the good you may
do. Why, to go no further, you'd be able
to offer poor Susan a rest for the sole of
her foot — "

Better at once start an Asylum for
the Fatherless and Afflicted," suggested the
banker.

You might do worse," said Sir Geoffrey,

who had by this time emptied the decanter.
^- What greater happiness can a man desire
than the welfare of his fellow creatures ?
That is a point you rich fellows are somewhat
apt to overlook ; and yet what is the
use of money unless you can do some
good with it ? For my own part, if I were
well off — which, of course, I never expect
to be now — I'd at once begin to consider
how I could best spend part of my wealth
as a sort of thank-offering — • you understand."


"If you have quite finished your remarks,
as you have the Madeira," said Mr. Gayre,
"I should wish to make one observation."

One, my dear fellow ! A dozen, if you
like ; I am in no hurry."

But I am," retorted Sir Geoffrey's " dear
fellow." " What I wish to say is this : I
have not, and I never had, the smallest
intention of marrying Mrs. Jubbins."

"Honour bright?"

And what is more," persisted Mr. Gayre,
ignoring the nipped form of asseveration,
I don't mean you to marry her either."

'' I wonder what you take me for ! " cried
the Baronet, in indignant expostulation —
'' with my heart still bleeding for the loss
of my poor darling ! Ah, Gayre, how can
you say such things ? Why, the flowers on
Margaret's coffin must still be fresh."

"• If that is a question pressing upon your
mind, you may be very sure they are as
dead as she is," answered Mr. Gayre ; " and
for the rest, remember what L say — you
shall not marry Mrs. Jubbins."

"• Well, if ever there was a dog in the
manger ! " muttered Sir Geoffrey, as he followed
his brother-in-law along the corridor.

END OF VOL. II.

3 0112 051972856

Circulating LIBRARY.

I. — That no Book shall be kept more than 14 days.

II. — That any Member or Subscriber keeping a Book beyond U
days, be fined Id. per day.

that all Novels must be returned to the Library in 7 days.

-That if any Book be injured or lost by any Member or

Subscriber, a New Copy must be supplied by him without

delay.

III.
IV

Lr

S

W. H. SMITH & SON'S
SUBSCRIPTION LIBRARY,

186, STRAND, LONDON,
AND AT THE RAILWAY BOOKSTALLS.

dn

te

NOVELS ' C7» iuued to and received from Subscribers in SETS only.
TERMS.

rOR SUBSCRIBERS Obtaining THEIR BOOKS From A COUNTRY BOOKSTALL :

6 Months. 13 Months.

For ONE Volume at a time - - £0 12 O - 1 1 O

f/ftPtli in more Oran One Volume are not avuUableftr this class of Subscription.)
For TWO Volumes „ - - - O 17 6 - 1 11 6

(NtvoU in more than Too Vohtrnts art not avaOable/br tM is class of Subscription. )
For THREE „ „ - - - 180-220

For FOUR „ w . 180-2 10

For SIX „ „ . 11B0-380

For Twelve „ „ .800-880

^^'fe^'

OF THL

UNIVERSITY

Of ILLINOIS

K43ls
V/.3

^ "^ODCl.

MRS. J. H. Liddell,

AUTHOR Ole "THE Senior I'AUTXEK, "GEORGE GEITII, OF Fen COURT, ETC.

7.V THREE VOLUMES.
VOL. III.

LONDON :
RICHARD Bentley & SON, NEW BURLINGTON STREET.

I^^ublisbcrs hit ^rbinarg to Jcr J|lajestg tlje nun,

1884.

CONTENTS.

Clap. PAGE

I. — A Great Surprise 1

II. — Without Foils 2S

III. — Beyond His Strength 65

IV. — '•' How Much ale Yor Sorry .^ " . . . 92

v.— His Price 125

VI. — Ox THE Marine Parade 146

VII. — What Mr. Gayre Wished . . . .173

VIII. —-have You Ever Been to Tooting?" . 102

IX. — Awakening 231

X. — Lucky at Cards, Etc. '2^yQ

XL — The Lesser Evil 2S2

XII. — •• All for Love and the AVorld Well Lost I '' 311

Xii— Anything but Pleasant 325

XIV. — Mr. Gayre Thanks Heaven . . . 343

XV.— Conclusion 377

CHAPTEE I.

A GREAT SURPRISE.

g^i^ACKING the many admirable qualities
Ijtli which — if the Baronet's own report of
himself might be relied on as correct — rendered
Sir Geoffrey such an example and benefactor
to his fellow-men, Mr. Gayre was never
unduly anxious to part with money, even
when he saw a chance of getting a good
return. It would have been difficult,
however, before a month was over, to name
any sum within reason he would have refused
to pay, if by doing so he could have rid
himself of that dreadful Old Man of the
Sea, Oliver Dane. The petition was on

Vol. iii. 44

his mind the last thing at night, and woke
him long before dawn. It strolled by his
side to the Bank, went to luncheon and
returned to dinner ; though it failed to eat
itself, and effectually deprived him of all
appetite, it sat at the table as long as he
did, and only rose when he made a move,
in the vain hope of ridding himself of its
company.

Life was not worth living with that petition
locked away in his safe. It would have
required a great reward to compensate him
for the humiliations heaped on his head in
the matter of Mr. Colvend's defaulting clerk ;
and there were times when Mr. Gayre
believed he should get no reward whatever.
Though he saw Susan often, though the most
intimate and friendly relations were established
between them, the banker could not
blind himself to the fact that it was Oliver
Dane, and Oliver Dane only, the girl considered
: Oliver Dane lying for six months

at Millbank ; Oliver Dane soon going to
Portland; Oliver Dane convicted thief and
forger ; Oliver Dane, in whose behalf he,
Mr. Gayre, was compassing heaven and
earth in order to obtain signatures he did
not know what he should do with when he
had got them; Oliver Dane, whom he hated
with a detestation rare even amongst bosom
friends ; in whose guilt he had always
believed, and whom he certainly did not
imagine he was ever likely to consider
innocent.

He felt weary to death of the man, the
case, and the petition. He would have
liked to argue out the matter at considerable
length with Susan, and try to convince her
how erroneous were all her plans and
projects in connection with the great Oliver
Dane question, but for the certainty that
their first conversation on the subject would
be their last.

"It's just 'take it or leave it,' with Susan

44—2

now," declared Sir Geoffrey. " Never saw a
girl so changed in all my life. Faith, I
always thought there was something stiff
about that short upper lip of hers, but I
little imagined my lady would develop so
hard a mouth. Gad! except as a sign to
bolt, she minds the bit no more than a silken
thread. Why, she was nearly having a spar
with me the other evening because I said I
was afraid the pardon would have to be sent
down to Portland after all. What progress
are you making, Gayre? "

But Mr. Gayre utterly declined to say
what progress he was making, or whether he
was making any. In answer to the Baronet's
question he used some strong language, and
expressed his heartfelt regret he had ever
meddled in the business.

For, supposing the sentence should be
commuted — and I for one do not see the
slightest likelihood of anything of the sort
happening — Miss Drummond's very first act, I

foresee, will be to make our interesting
convict marry her."

Oh, hang it, Dane's not such a cad as todo
that?"

I fancy he is a cad ; but, in any case,
you'll find she'll have the license and everything
ready for his appearance. It is pleasant
to see a girl in earnest ; but I really cannot
think that your young friend will find life
agreeable under the circumstances I have
indicated."

"I tell you I know Dane, and even for
gratitude's sake he would not let Susan throw
herself away on him."

And I tell you I know something of
women, and I declare to you that she will
marry him (even if he does not want to
marry her), for sentiment's sake."

Then had you not better drop that
petition business altogether ? "

I should have done so long ago, if I had
not, in an evil hour prompted by some demon

you, I believe — promised to do my best for
this eligible lover."

Surely it would be doing your very best
to let him stay where he is. What could any
rational being want more? Fed, lodged,
clothed at the expense of his country ;
large, airy house ; regular hours, resident
chaplain, medical attendance, free of charge !
Better let Dane enjoy these advantages till
Susan is married, at any rate. Afterwards
something might be done — he can't be in any
hurry for a year or two — and if a free pardon
were got, the lad could then be slipped out
of the country. Perhaps you yourself might
not grudge a trifle to set him up in some
decent trade at the Antipodes."

Mr. Gayre turned and looked at his
brother-in-law steadily, as if trying to read
his thoughts.

Sir Geoffrey, on his side, returned this
scrutiny with an expression of calm and
satisfied innocence, which Mr. Gayre seemed

to find hard to contemplate, for he said at
last, with angry decision,

I have promised, and it is not my practise
to keep a promise to the ear and break it
to the heart."

'• Most creditable, I am sure," answered
Sir Geoffrey, drawling out the last word so
as to make almost three syllables of it.

Whether creditable or not, such is the
fact."

'' I never suggested otherwise. All I mean
is I trust you may have a better gaol deliverance
than I fear Dane is likely to meet with.
The whole thing seems to chafe you terribly,
Gayre."

Which was indeed the fact. Never in all
his life before had the banker gone through
such an experience. Hitherto when he
asked a favour, friends and strangers alike
had seemed only too pleased to grant it. Todo
anything, no matter how slight, for Mr.
Gayre, was once in the City esteemed both an

honour and a pleasure ; but now, words
could scarcely describe the change that all ina
moment had come over popular opinion.
A cold wave of amazement and disapproval
flowed steadily from every commercial quarter
towards Gayres. Why should a man in the
banker's position interest himself about so
flagrant a case ? The culprit was no kith or
kin or friend of his. His acquaintance with him
had been no closer than that he presumably
maintained with the favoured clerk of any
other old and valued customer. The young
fellow could not for a moment be supposed
innocent. He had deceived an employer who
never missed an opportunity of doing him a
kindness. He had been found guilty after a
long and fair trial. If the sentence were
heavy it was not too severe. Forgery and
embezzlement were crimes which could only
be put down with a strong hand ; other clerks
would hear and tremble ; young fellows tottering
on the brink of temptation would step

back in time ; employers feeling their interests
were considered might take heart and resume
some little of their wonted confidence.

What the deuce — what the did Pyrenean

by trying to upset justice, and get up a
false sympathy for a most deceitful and
unprincipled young man who, having deeply
sinned, was now most justly suffering?

Not so long ago he'd have swung for it,
sir," remarked one City magnate to his fellow ;
and I'm not at all sure but the old way was
the best way too. The gallows and a little
quicklime were an effectual way of stopping
this sickly sort of sentiment. Once a man
begins stealing he'll go on stealing — can't
help it ; and Ga^jre ought to know this as well
as anybody. Sign the petition ! Did / sign
it, do you say ? Not I. " You really must
excuse me," I observed, to Gayre, " but it's a
thing I wouldn't do for any consideration
whatever. Wliy, it's subverting the whole
constitution of Great Britain. No, I am very

sorry to refuse the son of my valued friend
any favour ; but you see this is not a matter
of time or mone3\ It is a question of principle.
I have a duty to discharge to my
brother merchants. How should I be able
to look them in the face if I espoused the
cause of a felon against his employer ? Why,
the case might have been my own or yours :
How on earth could you ever prosecute one
of your people, after doing your utmost to
defeat the ends of justice as you are doing?"
Wretched Mr. Gayre had thought this difficulty,
and indeed all other difficulties connected
with the matter, out alone with his own
heart. He knew that attempting to play the
part of Good Samaritan towards a clerk
would be regarded as an act of wicked
quixotism by the collective wisdom of Mark
Lane and Capet Court. Many things might
be forgiven a man in his position, but interference
with vested rights was not one of
them. He had done himself incalculable harm.

and he had not done OHver Dane any good.
The chances of the " unfortunate nobleman
then languishing in prison " for a mitigation
of sentence seemed quite as good as those of
Mr. Colvend's ex-clerk. Mr. Gay re felt very
weary and worn. He had done a great
many things he would much rather not have
done, and yet Susan remained as far from him
as ever. He knew he was losing instead of
gaining ground. The long talks, the confidential
conversations, the hours spent in fruitless
discussion, and still more useless retrospection,
were full of nothing but Oliver Dane.
The air might be different, but the words
were ever the same — Oliver, Oliver, Oliver!
Susan had once held her peace concerning
her lover till she deluded Mr. Gayre into the
belief that thought of man born had never
agitated her gentle breast. But now the
string of her tongue was loosed she spoke
of little else. The volume of life for her
contained but one name ; all interests, all

hopes, all fears, were bound together with
a single clasp, upon which was graven the
story of one man's sorrows. All this did
not recommend itself to Mr. Gayre. He
would not have cared so much had he discerned
one sign of love or even liking.
Gratitude there was, but it seemed rather
anticipatory gratitude for some favour to
come than appreciative understanding of
the enormous trouble the banker had already
given himself. With that intuition which
so rarely deceives women, Susan had long
before discovered her friend neither liked
nor believed in her lover ; whilst upon Mr.
Gayre's mind there was gradually opening
that vast field of speculative observation
filled by the selfishness of an unselfish
woman.

In those days Susan had no more thought
to spare for any one free to come and goto
laugh and be merry, than a mother nursing
her sick child has for some healthy waif,

stout of limb and sound of lung. The prison
containing Oliver Dane was to her the
whole miserable world ; the man pent within
those cruel walls the entire human race.
Susan could think of nothing, talk of nothing,
except him and his trouble. It was but an
aggravation of the trial that she should beat
large whilst he was in confinement. If her
lover had not been a rival Mr. Gayre must
have found the constant iteration of his
name, and the eternal harping on one subject,
wearisome ; but, as matters stood, he felt
he was fast reaching the limits of his-patience.


To jest openly with a power like Gayres
seemed at the first blush, little short of
profanity. Nevertheless, the banker found
himself exposed to broad hints and sly
allusions, which greatly tried his equanimity

understand there's a pretty face in
the question, eh ? " said one ex-Lord
Mayor, who thought his twelve months of

office had conferred grace to this manners
and a pleasing elegance to his diction. It
was even whispered in City circles the air
of the Mansion House had so affected his
brain that, finding sober prose inadequate
to express lofty imaginings, lie broke into
verse, and indited a ditty, entitled " The
Aged Beggar : an Idol of Threadneedle
Street."

He was a dreadful person, who, if he
once got hold of even a faint similitude to
a joke, worried and played with it as a
puppy worries and plays with some useless
rag. When his friends hoped he had forgotten
the wretched elinor he went off at
score and dug it up again. Even in an
ordinary way Mr. Gayre avoided him as he
would the plague ; but now avoidance was
impossible. His late lordship, as City wags
facetiously dubbed him, which title they
often exchanged for " The Aged Beggar,"
would not be denied. Wlien from afar Mr.

Gayre saw his portly form looming in the
distance he ignominiously tried to avoid
the encounter by turning down some convenient
court ; but such cowardly tactics
usually proved useless. The former chief
magistrate's knowledge of the City was at
least as exhaustive as the banker's ; and
he found no difficulty in executing a flank
movement of considerable ingenuity, and
appearing at the supreme moment from an
apparently blind alley or deceptive doorway.
He had signed the petition, and
therefore felt himself free to make merry
at Mr. Gayre's expense.

I'd advise you to be on your guard,"
he said one day in a stage whisper, meeting
the ex-officer in Copthall Court. " They
do say she was the widow ; " and then,
with a fat laugh, which set his sides shaking,
he passed on before Mr. Gayre could
resent his remark.

Godless and graceless young stockbrokers.

too, who had not the fear of Gayres' before
their eyes, were in the habit of offering to
append their names to any paper — not a
bill-stamp — if Mr. Gayre would procure
them a sight of Dane's " young woman."
Altogether it was horrible. Oftentimes the
banker felt beside himself with anger. His
very clerks he fancied were laughing at
him in their sleeves. He was a mere butt
for cockney wit ; and through some
horrible fatality, Susan's name had cropped
out, and become a very shuttlecock for
men, who could not comprehend the
purity and grandness of her self-imposed
task, to toss from lip to lip.

By almost imperceptible degrees, also, a
doubt as to the correctness of his own
opinions on the Dane question was stealing
across Mr. Gayre's mind. By a slow process
of reasoning he was arriving at the conclusion
Susan had long before grasped instinctively,
that an enemy's hand might be

traced in the transaction. Things had happened
since the trial inexplicable on any
other ground. Proved guilty and punished,
the man and his sin would, in an ordinary
way, have been forgotten ; but for Oliver
Dane there seemed, indeed, no rest. Stories
were circulated about him which Mr. Gayre's
common sense resented as untrue. Mr.
Surlees' utterances concerning their former
clerk were characterised by a stinging bitterness
that seemed to the banker hard to
explain. Mr Colvend's attachment to, and
sorrow for, the young man could, according
to Mr. Surlees, only be regarded as evidences
of a weakened intellect ; whilst Susan herself
was stigmatised as a sort of adventuress,
who, " I feel no doubt whatever, was Dane's
accomplice in the matter. So far as 1 am
concerned, I regret that we did not proceed
against her as well."

This was awful. Mr. Gayre remained
speechless with indignation; and it was not

Vol. iii. 45

till Mr. Surlees went on to say, " I advise
you to be careful what you are about. Take
my word for it, this Miss Drummond is a
most dangerous and unprincipled person,"
that his anger found vent in words.

How he expressed the rage burning within
him he never subsequently could remember.
All he knew was he and Mr. Surlees parted
in hot anger ; and when, during the course
of the same afternoon, Mr. Col vend called
to try to make peace, his well-meant efforts
resulted in signal failure.

Altogether, nothing but humiliation and
irritation resulted from his attempt to " subvert
the British Constitution, and defeat the
ends of justice."

It was discovered a clerk had been ingeniously
robbing the bank for some considerable
time, but Mr. Gayre felt literally
afraid to prosecute. He had never loved
Ie City, but now he grew to hate it. The
pavements of Lombard Street, and the purlieus

of the Exchange, were mere haunts of
terror. He dreaded the sight of his fellowmen,
if those fellow-men had offices within
sound of Bow Bells ; whilst for Susan — the
labour of Sisyphus was not more discouraging
than the endeavour to win smiles from
a woman who refused to smile, whose faith
in her lover never swerved, and whom
absence only made fonder !

So far as the petition went, Mr. Gayre felt
he had got all the signatures he was ever
likely to obtain. Some great names were
appended, but the longer he contemplated
the paper, the less hopeful he felt on the
subject of ultimate success. He stood,
indeed, between Scylla and Charybdis : if
he failed, Susan would blame him in her
heart ; and, on the other hand, he did not
wish to succeed. Xo prospect, indeed, could
have seemed less pleasant to him than the
idea of Oliver Dane's reappearance in the

world of free men.

45-2

I had better have given up all thoughts
of the girl the moment I found out she was
fond of the fellow," he considered, irritably.
Somehow I have botched the whole thinc{,
and every step I take only seems to lead me
further into the mire. Supposing I could
prove him innocent tomorrow, how would
that better my position ? I am not working
for Oliver Dane, but for Nicholas Gayre ;
and I am as far from my object — farther,
indeed — than I was the first day. I think I
shall keep away from Islington for a week,
and try the effect ; she will long to talk to
some one, and must miss me, even for that
reason. Yes, I shall stay away."

It was the last evening of that week, a
Sunday night. He had not seen Susan for
one hundred and sixty-eight endless hours.
He had refrained from writing or calling ;
and having just returned from church,
whither he had gone to kiU time, he sat
beside his hearth, thinking about the man

who was now at Portland — considering what
he was doing, how he felt, how any human
being could face the prospect of seven years
of penal servitude and — live.

It is awful," he said, almost aloud.
And suppose, after all, the fellow should
be innocent ! "

He rose uneasily from his seat, and began
to pace the room with slow and measured
steps.

His hands were loosely clasped behind his
back, his head was bent a little forward, his
whole attitude, his whole expression, that
of a man engaged in deep and unpleasant
thought.

He was, in fact, reviewing the whole
matter from the commencement, and facing
the question of what he should feel to be
his duty supposing he were once really
persuaded of the prisoner's innocence.

If the matter rested with me, now for
instance," he thought — " if I had the proofs

in my hands, how should I act ? That is a
question I might once have answered without
any hesitation ; but now — However, he
is not innocent, and I have no proofs. Who
can that be ? " he added, as the sound of a
modest double rap broke the stillness of the
quiet house ; " not Sir Geoffrey, I hope."

A minute elapsed. There seemed parleying
in the hall ; then his servant entered the
room bearing a card.

"The gentleman" (there was just the
slightest touch of hesitation in the way he
spoke this word) " says he wishes to see you
on business of importance. He will not
detain you long, Colonel."

Samuel Fife ? " said Mr. Gayre, reading
the name printed on the card ; " I wonder
who Samuel Fife may be ? "

He says you know him, sir."

Does he ? I wonder if I do. Show him
up into the drawing-room ; I will be with
him directly."

The name seems somehow familiar, and
yet I cannot associate it with any one," he
added to himself. "Fife — Fife !" and then Fie
opened the drawing-room door, and entered.

Under the chandelier stood a short, stiffly-built,
middle-aged man. He was dressed in
his Sunday clothes — a rough top-coat, dark
trousers and waistcoat, thick serviceable
boots. He held his hat in his hand, and
looked up somewhat nervously as Mr. Gayre
appeared.

Good evening," began the banker. " To
what am I to — Why, it is you, is it? he
added, in a tone of intense surprise. " What
do you want with me — why do you come
here?"

I wrote to you a while ago, and you
took no notice of my letters."

"I never heard from you in my life, sofar
as I am aware."

yes, you did. I wrote to you three
times, signing myself ' Justice.' "

You are ' Justice,' then. I see."

Why did you not send me any reply ? "

Why should I reply ? Why should I take
any notice whatsoever of anonymous communications
? "

"It was true what I said, though, Mr.
Gayre."

That Dane was innocent, and you could
prove him to be so ? "

Yes."

"In that case why did you not speak
before?"

"I should not speak now if I had been
properly treated."

Have you not been properly treated ? "

No."

"Will you not sit down, Mr. Fife? If
we are to talk — and it is unlikely you would
have come here unless you intended to
talk — you had better do so."

"Do you recollect what I said in my
first letter ? " asked Mr. Fife, as he sat down

on the corner of a sofa, glancing at Mr.
Gayre, who had flung himself into an easy-chair.


I recollect you said in all your letters
you wanted money. It is not an uncommon
want ; you are not singular, Mr. Fife.
Many persons desire money ; but there are
not many who get it."

Will you give me what I asked for ? "

That is not a question I can answer offhand.
Upon the whole, however, I think
I may say I do not think I shall give you
any money."

If you are sure of that I will go to Miss
Drummond."

"Why did you not go to her first —
supposing always you have not been to
her ? "

"I thought I could go to her after
I had tried you. I knew it would be
useless coming to you after I had been to
her."

'' Eeally, Mr. Fife, your candour is quite
refreshing."

'^I am o'lad you think so."

'' I do think so ; though I cannot in the
least imagine why you come to me "

'' I come to you," interrupted Mr. Fife,
with startling' directness, " because you are
in love with Miss Drummond — because you
can make her marry you if you prove
Dane innocent — because it will be worth
your while to pay me cell for the card I
can place in your hand."

''I do not know which I admire most —
your frankness or your impudence."

It is not impudence, Mr. Gayre ; and
you are as well aware of the fact as I am.
As you have asked me to sit down I presume
you mean to entertain the matter.
In a word, I have something to sell; will
you buy it ? You know my price ; does it
suit you ? " and, shifting his position, he
took possession of a music-stool which



chanced to be close to the chair in which
Mr. Gayre lay back, his legs stretched out,
and the tips of his fingers idly touching each
other.

WITHOUT FOILS.

r^jUjijiHEEE ensued an awkward silence.
The one man did not want to
speak — the other would not.

At length the spell was broken by Mr.
Gayre, who said, without looking at his
visitor, and as if his words were merely the
outcome of a long course of exhaustive
reasoning.

"You see, some one must criminate himself."


]vir. Fife laughed. "You don't trap me
that way," he answered.

Believe me, I had no intention of trapping
you. I was only stating a fact."

0, of course. I quite understand that ! "

K we are to discuss the matter at all,
Mr. Fife, permit me to suggest you must
do so in a different spirit."

I don't know," answered Mr. Fife, " that
I feel disposed to discuss the matter further.
In effect, there is nothing to discuss. I have
told you plainly, Dane is innocent, and that
I can prove his innocence. I have told you
I want to be paid for my information, and
the price I expect from some one. It does
not much signify to me who pays that
money, but I should imagine it signified a
great deal to you''

Mr. Gayre winced. The man's tone, the
man's manner, seemed terrible to him. He
had never been spoken to with such offensive
familiarity before, even by his equals ;
and as he shot a glance aside at Mr. Fife,
and remembered the former cringing deference
of his address, it came home to his
mind more fully than ever that he was
wading through very dirty water indeed.

and that lie had better get out of it as
soon as possible.

I think," he said, " I would rather wash
my hands of the whole business."

Just as you like. I suppose, however,
you have fully considered what washing
your hands, as you call it, exactly
means ? "

I fear I scarcely follow you."

Mr. Gayre's voice was freezing in its cold
respectability.

I don't believe you do. Now listen.
No, you needn't look so indignant. I mean
no offence. Eemember you are not in
Lombard Street now ; and if you were, I
want nothing out of your strong room
except a sum of money, for which I am
willing and anxious to give you full value.
We're man and man at this minute, sir. I'm
not Samuel Fife, manager at Colvend and Surlees
; and you're not Nicholas Gayre, banker.
We're equals, that's what we are — equals.

If there is any disparity in our respective
positions, the turn of the scale is in my
favour, for I have something you want to
buy, and that you can't buy from anybody
but me."

During the deUver}^ of this address, Mr.
Gayre faced the speaker in amazement.
As he did so, it dawned upon him that
though Mr. Fife was not drunk, he had,
according to his own simple vocabulary,
been " priming himself."

Had Sir Geoffrey been present, he would
have read the " abandoned miscreant ; " a
lecture concerning the wickedness of persons
imbibing who " could not carry their
liquor decently ; " but Mr. Gayre, though
utterly abstemious, did not feel himself
such a saint that he dare adventure upon
any argument concerning the sinfulness of
Mr. Samuel Fife.

Instead of entering into that question,
he remarked.

"I do not know that I want to buy
anything."

"Well," said Mr. Fife, nowise disconcerted
by a statement meant to be crushing,
"you had better know whether you
do or not during the course of the next
fifteen minutes. Time is getting on. It
now" — and Mr. Fife produced a white-faced
silver watch — "wants exactly ^iyq
minutes to nine o'clock. If by ten minutes
past nine o'clock you. Miss Drummond's
friend, have failed to decide what you are
going to do, I shall not trouble you
further. There," added Messrs. Colvend
and Surlees' manager, in beautiful continuation,
at the same moment laying his
silver watch and steel chain on a table
at Mr. Gayre's elbow, "is the time —
Post-office."

"In the name of Heaven," cried poor
baited Mr. Gayre, "why should you suppose
all this concerns me?"

"Better invoke the name of the Deity,
sir," suggested his unwelcome visitor, with
bibulous solemnity : " in that case I should
answer, with no beating about the bush,
I suppose "all this" concerns you greatly.
You're in love with the girl — that's what
it comes to. If you can lay your hand on
your heart and say honestly you are not,
why, the sooner I go to Miss Drummond
the better. She'll pay me my price, I
know."

If you are so sure of that, why do
you trouble me? Why did you not go to
her direct?"

"There are wheels within wheels,"
replied Mr. Fife, loftily. "I have my
reasons, which I do not intend to tell you
not yet, at aU events — perhaps never.
Now, Mr. Gayre, are you making up your
mind, because I am determined to settle
the matter one way or other before I
sleep?"

Vol. iii. 46

"I have made up my mind on one
point," said the gentleman so peremptorily
addressed, " namely, that I will not pay
one sixpence till you furnish me with
some proof you really do possess the
knowledge you profess."

That is fair enough ; but on the other
part, I do not show my hand without
something binding on your side. Give
me the merest scrap of writing as
evidence of your hona-fides^ and I'll tell you
what I know."

"But what you know, or think you
know, may turn out practically valueless."

Upon my soul, I believe you do not
want the fellow proved innocent. I think
if his release rested with you he might
stop in gaol for ever — rot there before
you would lift a finger to get him out ! "

I trust you wrong me, Mr. Fife. At
any rate, you must allow me to observe
your own anxiety on the subject is not so

disinterested you have any right to attribute
such ungenerous feelings to me."

"Pooh!" retorted Mr. Fife; "that is
all very fine, but we both know more of
the world than to believe much in
generosity or disinterestedness, or any
such humbug. What you are afraid of
now is, that when Dane appears once more
on the scene. Miss Drummond won't marry
you. Neither she will, if / tell her. She

will marry Dane, him ! But make a

fair bargain with me, and the game is in
your own hands. ' Take me,' you can say
when I obtain your lover's release ; refuse
me, and my gentleman remains at Portland
for the term to which he was sentenced.' "

What a scoundrel you are, Mr.
Fife ! "

"I am not a hypocrite, at any rate.
And why should the girl not marry you ?
She will have everything money can buy,
except a conceited empty-headed puppy

46—2

without a sixpence to bless himself with.
And she deserves a better fate ; for, though
I don't care much for that style myself,
she is good-looking and has as nice manners
I'll say that for her — as any woman I
ever spoke to."

"Have you spoken to her?" The
amazement in Mr. Gayre's tone was not
complimentary.

Eather ! I lodge in the same house :
if I take a thing in hand I do it
thoroughly ; and I wanted to make sure
of my ground before I came to you.
There has been nothing more than 'Good
Morning,' or ' Good Evening,' or ' It's
cloudy,' or ' What a wet day we have
had!' but it was enough. Her voice
is soft, and her ways sweet. She'll make
you a very suitable wife ; and though, to
be sure, you are not young, I daresay
you'll make her a very good husband."

"Mr. Fife, you shall hold no further

communication with this most faithful and
unfortunate lady ! " declared Mr. Gayre,
rising in hot wrath. "If only to save
her from the degradation of hearing you
mention her lover's name in her presence,
I will pay the exorbitant sum you exact
as the price of your shameful secret."

Come, that's to the point at last.
Hard words break no Jones, and it is perfectly
immaterial to me why you find the
money, so long as you do find it. If you
have a piece of paper handy, just write
that, upon my proving the fact of Oliver
Dane's innocence to your satisfaction — "

"You must do more than that," interrupted
Mr. Gayre.

"Well, word it any way in reason you
like. rU give you the key, but you must
do the rest yourself, remember. Say, when
Samuel Fife has given you the means
of proving Oliver Dane's innocence to
the satisfaction of Messrs. Colvend and

Surlees, you will hand him over an open
cheque — "

I will give you a bank-note ; I wouldn't
write your name on a cheque."

Dear me ! but it is of no consequence ;
a note will do just as well. Now, if you
put that into form, and sign it (I'll not
ask for a witness — I don't believe you will
try to shuffle out of your bargain), we can
get to business — "

"I almost wish I had not passed my
word."

"Ah! but you have, you know: and
besides, though you may choose to break
your promise, I shan't break mine. Make
any further objections, and I see Miss
Drummond before I sleep."

Chafing with anger, more thoroughly
furious perhaps than he had ever felt
before in his life, yet supported by the
determination to do a right and unselfish
action, Mr. Gayre intimated that writing

materials being in his study, an adjournment
had better be made to that apartment.


It does not matter to me where the
thing is written, so long as it is written,"
said Mr. Fife, with easy impudence. " I
have made up my mind for this throw,
and I do not want to waste any more
time before making a clean breast. You
have a very fine house here," he added,
as he descended the stairs ; " but it needs
one other piece of furniture, a handsome
wife. You'll have that before long, though,
no doubt ; and I know whom you ought
to thank for it ; " and he laughed as he
turned his head and looked at Mr. Gayre,
who had much ado to refrain from kicking
him to the bottom of the flight.

Something of this feeling must have shown
in his face, for Mr. Fife proceeded to make a
sort of apology.

Don't mind me to-night," he remarked.

I'm mad ; that's what I am. I'm going
to cut my own throat. I mean to do that
which will force me to leave Colvend's.
Perhaps you would like to know why ? Wait
a little. That's in the story as well."

"I do not feel at all sure that I am
doing right in entering into any compromise
with you," said Mr. Gayre, as, after carefully
closing the library-door, he motioned Mr.
Fife to a seat, and, taking a chair himself,
began to write.

That is a pity," commented Mr. Fife,
with a smile.

Are you aware you have made no stipulation
with regard to your own safety ? "
asked Mr. Gayre.

Yes, I am aware of that ; " and his
smile grew broader.

"I thought I would just mention the
fact," said the banker.

Very kind of you. In common gratitude,
I think I ought to give you a hint ;

don't let your young lady get an inkling of
how you are going to help her lover till you
have made everything safe as regards your
own marriage. If you do, she'll find a way
to slip out of her agreement. They're all
alike : so long as a man can give or get
them something they want, they'll purr
round him, and be pleasant and winning asa
child looking out for sweets ; but the
moment he has served their turn, it's
Thanks, so many ; ' and the pace isn't
known, quick enough to their fancy to
take him out of their sight."

Mr. Gayre ceased writing, and contemplated
the speaker in astonishment.

Your knowledge of the sex seems
almost exhaustive, Mr. Fife," he observed.

I can't tell whether sou are chaffing me
or not ; and I don't care," answered that
gentleman. " There is one thing, however,
I will say — that, let you know women as
you may, I know them better."

"The usual thing," remarked Mr. Gayre.
You generalise concerning the sex from
one example."

Never mind what I do, but remember
what I say. If you don't, you'll repent
it."

"Before I sign this paper, there is one
question I fear I must ask."

"What is it?"

There are no other defalcations ? "

So far as I am aware — none."

Do you object to ni}^ embodying that
statement ? "

Not in the least ; " and Mr. Fife laughed
outright.

Will this do ? " inquired the banker,
wondering what Mr. Fife had found so
amusing in his question.

Yes, that will do ; a lawyer, I daresay,
could pick a few holes in it ; but friends
ought not to be too particular. With your
good leave, I'll just put it in my pocketbook

— SO. That's clone," he added, drawing
a breath of relief; "and now for my part of
the pact. You conclude I forged that
signature, Mr. Gayre ? "

"1 should not have ventured exactly to
make such a suggestion, but, as you are
kind enough to do so, I hope you will excuse
my frankness when I answer ' Yes.' "

Beyond annexing a cheque I had nothing
to do with the matter."

Indeed ! "

*' Truth, I assure you — gospel."

Then perhaps you will tell me who did
write the name of the firm ? "

Certainly ; there shall be no reservations
on my part. The party — or, to speak more
accurately, the lady — was christened Theodora
Alberta Colvend ; but she is usually
called ' Dossie ' by a fond and foolish
parent."

Good Heavens ! " exclaimed Mr. Gayre.
Good Heavens ! "

And ' Good Heavens ! ' again, if you
like," said Mr. Fife ; " my information seems
to surprise you, sir. If you remember, I
more than hinted my knowledge of women
was greater than yours."

But why should she ? Why should any
woman do such a wickedness ? "

Name the devil that eggs women on to
commit any and every sin. You can't.
Well, what do you say to jealousy ? Miss
Dossie was madly jealous of your pink and
white beauty, and, as she was afraid to throw
vitriol in her face, she decided to put Mr.
Oliver Dane out of the way of matrimonial
temptation for some time."

And you helped her ? "

'' I helped her."

And what possible motive could you
have ? "

"Ditto to Miss Dossie's. Scarcely that,
however; for though I did, and do, hate
Mr. Oliver Dane, he might still have been

walking the streets a free man so far as my
enmity was concerned."

You wanted, then — "

I see you are beginning to understand.
I wanted Miss Dossie — that was the bargain.
She promised to marry me, and like a fool, I
believed her — yes, I believed her." And Mr.
Life broke off with a muttered oath, and
something between a gulp and a gasping
choking sob.

Surely she is not worth that," said the
banker, regarding him with quite a new
interest. It seemed strange that an exterior
such as Mr. Fife's should cover joys, sorrows,
hates, loves precisely the same — save only,
perhaps, that they were more intense — as
those, for example, which dwelt within the
breast of Nicholas Gayre.

You're right enough ; she's not worth it
she's not worth that'' and Mr. Fife
snapped his fingers — " not worth one thought
of an honest man ; and before God, Mr

Gayre, I was honest in word, thought and
deed till she laid her fiendish spells upon me.
However, all this has nothing to do with
you ; only I want you to think of me hereafter
as not quite an outcast. I'll be bound
now you fancy I'm going to take all that
money as the mere price of what I know ? "

You ask awkward questions, Mr. Fife."

Never mind that ; answer me truthfully,
if you don't object."

As you press me so strongly, I am afraid
I must confess the idea you have suggested
has crossed my mind," said Mr. Gayre,
delicately.

Wrong again ! " laughed Mr. Fife. " Had
I seen my way to earning even a hundred
a year, once Convents gave me marching
orders, I'd have told you the whole story
long ago with the greatest pleasure ; but a
man can't starve, can he ? "

Feeling many better men than his visitor
had starved, and fearing lest even so general

a statement might commit him, Mr. Gavre
decided that, both in the interests of courtesy
and prudence, he would be wise to hold
his tongue.

I'm taking your money on the principle
of self-preservation, which, as you know, is
the first law of Nature," proceeded Mr. Fife,
taking silence for consent.

And mean to go abroad with it, no
doubt ? " suggested Mr. Gayre.

I don't mean to tell either man or
woman where I'm going," answered Mr. Fife,
in a sudden access of caution. " I think I
may safely say you'll see me no more ; and
that is about all you'll get out of me concerning
my future movements."

Certainly I had no right to make any
inquiry as to your intentions ; and I beg
your pardon for having done so."

0, no offence ; I'm not at all a touchy
fellow. What was I talking about ? 0,
that young jade, Miss Theodora. If you

only knew — if you could only imagine — low
she led me on and on and on ; upon my soul,
Mr. Gay re, there was a time when you might
have thought she liked the ground I walked
on. It was not easy to get me to do what
lie wanted ; but there are words, looks, and
tones no man with blood in his veins can
resist : I could not, at any rate ; " and Mr. Fife
started from his chair, and took a couple of
turns up and down the room before he
resumed his narration.

I am a fool," he said — " I was a fool ;
for though I never in my heart believed she
cared for me, or for any created being except
herself and Oliver Dane — and for him only
• because he would have nothing to do with
her — I let myself be led by the nose till she
had got her turn served."

Other men have been treated in the same
way," said Mr. Gayre. " The story is as old
almost as creation."

And when I claimed my reward," went

on Mr. Fife, unheeding this interruption, " she
laughed in my face. Since, I have wondered
often I did not kill her. I wish now I had
struck her down where she stood, with a
mocking devil in her eyes and a sneer on her
lips. ' Marry you ! ' she said, ' marry you I
That is an honour I really must decline.'
And she wasn't afraid, though we were alone
on Wimbledon Common, and there was not a
human being but ourselves within hail.
You've seen her, Mr. Gayre ? "

The banker nodded.

Well, you know she looks as if a
breath would blow her away. You might
span her waist ; I believe she is so light I
could hold her on my palm stretched out like
that ; " and Mr. Fife thrust across the table a
hand of which a prize-fighter need not have
been ashamed. " Often and often Bewitched
her coaxing and making much of
the old man, till any one might have thought
there was not such an affectionate, tender

Vol. iii. 47

soul on earth. ' My poor Dossie ! ' he
would say, ' my dear, tender, little Dossie ;
she's such a clinging, timid darling.' Clinging
! timid ! " repeated Mr. Fife, with wild
scorn ; " I never saw the thing she was
afraid of yet, except of not getting what
she wanted."

It is strange she was not afraid of you''
observed Mr. Gayre.

"When I found she would not give me
anything for love, I tried the other tack with
her ; but I might as well have held my peace.

I said I would tell her father. ' He won't

-I*

believe you,' was her answer. ' I'll show him
your letters.' ' The person who could forge
the name of the firm could write any number
of letters.' ' But I did not forge the name of
the firm.' 'Ah, that you'd have to prove,'
she said. 'Mr. Surlees would believe me
even if your father did not.' ' He might ;
but you won't try to make him believe you.'
Why won't I ? ' ' Because you would lose

your situation ; you would not be permitted
to retain it an hour.' "

The weak point, then, in your evidence is
that if Miss Colvend choose to deny the
statement in toto, you have no means of
proving her complicity."

I hadn't ; I have now. The cheque, if
you remember, was presented by a woman."

Not Miss Colvend ? "

No ; her maid. She had a situation
ready for the girl to drop into. The very
next day she went out to India as attendant
upon a lady who was going to join her
husband. Miss Colvend sold a quantity of
jewelry to make things square with Adelaide

will have to be found, then , I suppose
; and when she is found perhaps she
may deny the whole story."

no, she won't. She is back in London.

At the Cape, news met the lady that her

husband was dead ; so she took the first

vessel home and brought Adela with her. I

47—2

LIBRARY

UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS

met the girl quite by chance, and, from a
word or two, I know she would be glad
enough to get the matter off her conscience,
if only she could be sure of not
being thrown on the world."

How did the notes get to Dane's
lodgings ? "

i do not know ; but I fancy Miss Colvend
herself slipped them into the letter-box."

There ensued a pause — longer even than
that which had prefaced the gist of the conversation.
Mr. Gayre, in his turn, rose and
paced the room, while Mr. Fife watched him
anxiously. No greater change could be
imagined than that which had taken place in
the manager's look and bearing. He was not
anxious now concerning money, for he knew
whatever course Mr. Gayre elected to pursue
the slip of paper in his pocket-book
represented money's worth. But he was
playing for another stake as well. And if
the banker decided to take no action in the

matter, he would, he felt, rise from the game
a loser after all.

He grew weary with following the tall
erect figure, of hearing that leisurely measured
tread, of trying to gain from the
banker's inscrutable face some vague idea
of what was passing through his mind, ere
Mr. Gayre, pausing suddenly, said,

I do not see my way at all."

No ? "

The whole story is such an improbable
one."

It is true, though."

"I am not impugning your word.
Still, you yourself must admit the tale you
have told me has not exactly the ring of
true metal."

That depends on whether you wish to
believe the gold sterling or not. If you don't,
Mr. Gayre, I will give you back your paper
and go straight to Miss Drummond. Even
supposing she . should have gone to bed, I

know she will get up to hear what I propose
to say to her."

Why should I wish to disbelieve you ? "
asked Mr. Gayre, looking Mr. Fife sternly
and steadily in the eyes.

Because," replied the other, with a
resumption of his former boldness — " because
you are afraid to think Dane innocent.
You are afraid of yourself; you want to
fancy you would ' do right, let come what
may,' as the French say (I daresay I can
read French as well as you, Mr. Garland
you know you won't do right. Why
should you ? The girl will be a thousand
times happier if she marries you than as
Dane's wife. He is a rackety chap ; he
can make the money spin. I don't mean
to say there is much vice about him ; but,
upon my conscience, he can go a pace.
So far as I know, he was never in the habit
of frequenting races ; but he had something
on every one — Derby, Oaks, Ascot, Good-wood,

St. Leger, and plenty more. He,
and that Hilderton fellow too, did go to
some very queer places — places I wouldn't
be seen in. Of course you'll do as you
please ; but were I in your shoes, I wouldn't
get a waster out of prison only to marry
him to a young woman in whom 1 took
an interest. In my opinion it would be
sinful ; but, without doubt, you know best."

Your feeling towards Mr. Dane seems
something malignant," observed the banker.
Without meaning any impertinence, I
really should be glad to know how he lias
injured you. Even according to your own
showing, he paid no attentions to Miss
Colvend, neither did he in any way encourage
her fancy for him."

A true bill on both counts," answered
Mr. Fife. " And I don't much mind answering
your question. I suppose you
wouldn't call me a handsome man, now,
would you ? "

I am scarcely a judge. I feel no doubt,
however, there are many ladies in whose
eyes you would find much favour."

"That's chaffing."

I assure you nothing was further from
my intention than chaff of any kind."

Well, at any rate, I am not handsome,
and you know it. She said I was like
Quill, or the Black Dwarf, or that other
ugly fellow in Victor Hugo's Notre Dame''

I think Miss Colvend was wrong in
fact as well as in taste."

Thank you. I don't believe I am quite
so bad as she made out. I pleased her
well enough so long as she was making a
tool of me ; but, however, that's not the
question now. You want to know why
I dislike Oliver Dane. I'm short, and
broad, and plain. I haven't a good feature
in my face. I'm a common-looking fellow,
according to Miss Dossie ; and for once,
most likely, she spoke the truth. He, on

the contrary, is the right height for a man ;
not too tall — he is some inches shorter
than you — yet tall enough. He has a
straight nose — thank Heaven, that has been
brought to the grindstone ; he has dark-blue
eyes ; he has brown hair cropped
close — it is cropped closer now ; he has
the ' sweetest ' moustache — curse him ! he
has hands white and soft as a lady's — a
use he never expected has been found for
them lately ; he is ten years younger than
I am ; he can dance ; he can sing ; he
can ride ; he can row ; he can shoot ; he
can do anything, in a word ; yet he has
not half my brains or any of my steadiness.
He is a mere popinjay ; but he was preferred
before me. I have served Mr.
Colvend faithfully since I entered his house ;
yet I was left out in the cold, while Dane
was petted and pampered and done well
by. Miss Dossie would have blacked his
shoes if she could have won a smile from

him. Not a soul came into the office but
I knew went out of it thinking, ' What
a delightful manner that young Dane has ! '
If there were any halfpence going, he got
them ; but the kicks were all given to me.
It was hard measure, and you can't deny
it."

As you put the matter, perhaps so ;
yet I do not suppose you would have been
in much better plight had such a personas
Oliver Dane never existed."

"I am not so sure of that. If Mr. Colvend
did not love, certainly, once upon a
time, he valued me. In those days it was
Fife, I wish you could call there ; ' or
Fife, if you can spare time, just run along
and see to this ! ' But, bless your soul,
once Mr. Dane, with his soft hands and
well-kept nails and hair parted down the
middle (I hope the Portland barber has
altered that parting) and white teeth, came
into the house, times were changed for your

obedient. And he wasn't the making of
a business man; he hadn't it in him. I
swear to you, Mr. Gayre, if I were a merchant
and wanted a clerk, I wouldn't give
him a hundred a year. It was only that
plausible manner of his drew men to him,
as aniseed will rats. I don't much like
the smell of aniseed myself, and I never
took to Mr. Dane's manner."

Mr. Gayre smiled, with a cynical relish
of this frank revelation of human weakness.
He could afford to smile, believing, as he
did, himself above all human weakness.

Give me three days," he said, " and
I will tell you my decision."

Great Heavens ! " exclaimed Mr. Fife,
striking his clenched fist on the table so
vehemently that everything upon it trembled,
" do you mean to tell me you need
three days, or one, or an hour, to decide
what you intend to do now the game is
in your own hands ? "

"I cannot see that it is. In the first
place, it may be difficult to convince Mr.
Colvencl of the truth of your statement."

"Then try Mr. Surlees," advised Mr.
Fife, with an unpleasant grin.

"And in the next place," went on the
banker, as suavely as though this advice
had not been tendered, " it is possible I
may not care to stir in the matter at
all."

"That is very likely. By ^! that's

what I thought from the first. You fancy
you will yet be able to win the girl, if
you only keep her and her lover apart
long enough ; but you're wrong. Time
won't make her forget him. Faith, were
I a woman," he added maliciously, " I don't
know that I should forget his handsome
face in a hurry myself! Make your bargain.
You'll be doing the girl a real
kindness, and you'll be doing Dane himself
a good turn, by giving him his liberty.

Don't you be afraid the young woman
won't marry you. She'd marry me on the
terms ; and if she had a little more money,
that is a view of the question I should
certainly entertain."

Thank Heaven, she has not more money,
then I " exclaimed ]mr. Gayre, almost involuntarily.


"So you may; you see it leaves the
field open for you," retorted Mr. Fife, wilfully
misinterpreting the banker's remark.

"At the end of three days — say Wednesday
night — you shall have my answer,"
repeated Mr. Gayre, meanly taking refuge
in simple assertion, and declining further
contest with an adversary able to hit out
so straight from the shoulder and hit so
mercilessly.

I feel very much disposed to cut the
knot by going to Miss Drummond to-night."

You would have taken that course at
first if, for some reason best known to yourself,

it had not seemed more desirable to
deal with me."

There is considerable truth in that statement,"
was the cool reply. "Well, I will
give you till Wednesday ; only understand
one thing, Mr. Gayre — I'm not going to
take your money' and hold my tongue.
Either you tell all I have told you to Colvend
and Co., or I shall do so."

Evidently you take me to be such
another as yourself," said the banker, more
angry than he would have cared to confess,
spite of the chivalrous resolution he had
formed.

"il take you for a man," answered Mr.
Fife, lifting his shabby hat and putting it
on defiantly ; then, as he left the room,
he turned to Mr. Gayre, who was promptly
ringing the bell, and said with jeering
insolence :

If you don't ask me to the wedding, I
hope you will send me a good slice of the cake."

Thank God ! " ejaculated Mr. Gayre,
drawing a long breath, as the door slammed
behind his unwelcome visitor, and looking
round the room rid at last of Mr. Fife's
presence.

Then he sat down, and, his head supported
on both hands, remained for quite
half an hour buried in profound thought.
All at once he rose, and, like one in some
violent hurry, went into the hall, took down
his top-coat, put on his hat as determinedly
as Mr. Fife had done, and was marching
straight into the night, when his servant
hastily appearing, said :

You are surely not going out, Colonel ;
it is pouring in torrents ! "

The " Colonel " never answered, but,
flinging wide the door, passed out upon
the doorstep, where he was met by a fierce
gust of wind and a perfect deluge of rain.

Shall I try to get a cab, sir ? You will
be wet through before you get twenty yards."

Again Mr. Gayre did not answer. He
looked up and down the street, then at the
black vault above his head, and the pelting
storm.

It would be madness," he muttered.
I could not ask to see her, soaked to the
skin. I must defer the matter till tomorrow
; " and re-entering the house, he passed
into the library, which he paced till the
night was far spent.

BEYO^T) HIS STRENGTH.

the woman who deliberates is lost,
^^mS) the man who hesitates does not lag far
behind her on the downward path. When
Mr. Ga}Te put on his coat he meant to go
straight to Susan, and tell her what he had
heard. Casting temptation behind him, he
resolved to do the right, " let come what
would."

Money, time, influence, all — all should be
spent in unlocking the door of Oliver Dane's
prison. He would not palter with his own
conscience — he would not tell specious lies
to his own soul, and profess to be thinking
of the girl's happiness whilst he was really
seeking to compass his own selfish ends.

VoL iii.



He would not give with one hand and
take with the other. In honour and honesty
there was but one course to pursue. At the
price he would have to pay for her, even
Susan Drummond must be considered too
dear. That which was proposed to him
seemed worse than anv crime ; it would be
more cruel than seething the kid in its
mother's milk to sacrifice that tender heart
in the fire of its devoted affection.

If he was base enough to insist upon the
condition suggested to him, how could he
ever again look in those trustful brown eyes
red with weeping, dim with tears — touch
the hand which had once lain close in
that of her lover, kiss the lips he had seen
quiver when she spoke of the ruin one
day's work had wrought in his life ? Such
a sin might not be done — by him. Another
a different man, perhaps — but there he
stopped in his mental sentence. The very
strength of the temptation, the very determination

he had to call up to resist that
temptation, warned him he was in mortal
peril. He was fighting for more than life —
for right, for self-respect, for everything
valuable to a human being, save that which
he felt to be a part of his soul, and which
might never, never now be aught to him —
never for ever. Till that moment he had
only faintly grasped what Susan was to him.
Daily, hourly, the vision of her married to
another, after the first terrible moment of
grim revelation, grew less and less distinct,
till it seemed a mere shadowy memory
of some troubled dream. Even supposing
his endeavours to obtain a commutation of
Dane's sentence were crowned with success
and in the whole world nothing appeared
less 'likely — how could any one with such a
stain on his name, without character or
money, or friends willing and able to assist
him, marry and support a wife? If he
were not wholly worthless he would refuse

48—2

to accept the gift Susan was sure to offer ;
lie would go away, and leave her free — he
would not suffer the girl to mate with him.
But now — now — one hour, and the world
itself seemed changed to Mr. Gayre ; the
blackness of despair closed around him ashe
thought of the glorious hope he could
carry to that lonely girl sitting in a solitude
worse than widowhood. For her the dawn,
the sunrise, the glad sights and sounds of
early day, the songs of happy birds, the
light breeze of morning ; for him the darkness
and ever-deepening gloom of a long,
cold, cheerless winter's night.

This was the point he had mentally
reached when, rushing from temptation and
fully prepared to put the affair beyond the
power of retractation, he was driven back
by the pelting rain, which swept down upon
him in its wild fury and lashed his face,
cutting him almost like the sting of a whip.

Then the whole trouble had to be gone

over again. For hours, as his weary restless
feet fell silently on the Turkey carpet, he
went on telling the same story to himself, repeating
the same arguments, wandering along
the road he already seemed to have been
travelling for years. At such a crisis
thought is worse than useless ; it becomes
the mere drudgery of a horse going round
and round in a mill, making, so far as its
own benefit or satisfaction goes, no progress,
returning every few minutes to the point it
has but just left, and growing at length
well-nigh giddy and stupid from the constantly
recurring sight of objects which have
grown familiar to distraction.

Mr. Ga5rre had arrived at this pass
mentally before he went to bed. Not a
fresh thought or useful idea occurred to him.
Everything Eight could find to say was said
during the first ten minutes after Mr. Fife's
departure. On the other hand, while the
pleadings of Wrong were unduly protracted,

they were not one half so convincing ; had
an impartial judge chanced to be on the
bench, Wrong would have been ordered
out of court at once. Still, that side which
a man wishes to espouse must always make
itself heard ; and accordingly temptation,
though often driven back, again came stealing
up, and laid its soft hand on the banker,
and tried to lead him by almost imperceptible
degrees from the path there is no mistaking
into that which conducts to wilds and mazes
we once should have recoiled in horror from
the thought of being compelled to traverse.
Nevertheless, during the watches of that
lonely night, Mr. Gayre's purpose never
really faltered. He did not shrink from the
wrong, most earnestly he desired to cleave
to the right ; but he felt that the impulse
which had so nearly driven him to see
Susan before he slept, and put the matter
for ever beyond all power of recall, was past.
He would not now be precipitate. Even

for her own sake lie would not offer a cup
of happiness w^liicli might next moment be
dashed to the ground. How was it competent
for him to tell what of truth or of
falsehood lay folded within Mr. Fife's
extraordinary story ? So many things had
to be thought of; there was so much to
consider. No ; most certainly he should
not speak to Susan yet ; with a safe conscience
he might for a brief span longer
maintain that sweet fancy which he openly
confessed to his own soul was a delusion —
that marriage between Oliver Dane and herself
could only be regarded as impossible.

And then he wondered for the hundreth
time whether he could be generous as well
as just. Whether he could ever forget he
had been her lover, and really enact the
part of friend; help Dane, for example,
along the rough road of life, visit at their
house, listen to Susan while she talked about
how everything her husband touched prospered.

But the last part he felt was impossible.


"I might as well," he considered bitterly,
propose myself standing godfather to their
first child, and presenting the best silver
mug and fork and spoon, and coral and
bells, money could buy. No ; I may be able
to rise to such a pitch of magnanimity as
to give him a leg if he can't mount the
good steed Fortune by himself, but all else
is beyond me. Some day I must tell Susan
how I loved her, and never see her again.
She will then think of me with far deeper
interest ; her thoughts will often stray tome
; whether he is near or far off, she will
have one sad corner in the garden of
existence he will never be asked to visit.
She will wonder what the man who, with
her for wife, might have climbed so high,
but who, lacking her, did nothing, is making
of existence ; and if what Fife says is true,
the time may even come when she might

think — Good God ! what a villain I am !
Were I in my senses to-night, I know I
would not, for the sake of holding her in
my arms, have her for one moment, even
in thought, false to the man she loves."
Having attained to which moral state of
of mind, Mr. Gayre at length repaired to
bed.

Both interviews — the short talk with Mr.
Fife and the much longer talk with his
own soul — had taken a great deal out of the
gentleman some persons casually referred to
as "our slow friend the Old Tortoise in
Lombard Street ; " for which reason it was
no doubt that when at length exhausted
nature sought some repose he slept soundly.

The next morning he did not revert to
his idea of rushing off to Islington. Quite
the contrary. Light and air and sunshine
but confirmed his determination to proceed
m the matter slowly and cautiously, to
make very sure he stood safely on one step

before ascending to another, and to be
hampered in his actions by the fads and
whims of no woman living.

I should know no rest," considered Mr.
Gayre, " if once she were aware how matters
stood."

Possibly he was right. Yet still, it would
have been better had she been aware.

The weary day went by — such a day as
the banker humbly trusted he might never
spend again — and at length the hour came
when he meant to ask Susan for that cup
of tea of which he had not partaken in
her company for seven long days.

I am so thankful to see you." This
was her greeting. " I felt so afraid you
were ill. I should have written, but I did
not Hke to be troublesome."

And all the time her face wore a tender
anxious smile, and her eyes, out of which
the sunlight of happiness faded one summer's
morning at Enfield Highway, looked with inquiring

solicitude into his. And she did not
withdraw the hand he held, but let it lie
in his strong warm grasp as though he had
a right to keep it, as though in the whole
wide world there were no Oliver Dane for
whose sake she deemed the love of all
other men valueless.

She did not know : but he knew — knew
that it was impossible he could give her up,
with his own lips pronounce his death-warrant,
and, while opening the gate of
freedom for Oliver Dane, kill every goodly
hope, the tendrils of which had grown
around his heart and entwined their roots
with his very being.

I have been well," he answered ; " buta
rather annoying affair has vexed me.
However — " He broke off to say, "I will
not harass you with my worries. And you ?
You are ill, I fear. What is it — what is
wrong ? "

Only the old story," she answered, sadly.

Waiting is such heart-breaking work. Time
goes on, and nothing seems to advance.
It is more than six months now, Mr. Gayre.
He went to Portland last week."

The banker had forgotten this fact. As
she spoke, however, he remembered : and it
was with a sharp twinge of conscience he
saw the girl's eyes were full of unshed
tears ; that the trouble — her lover's trouble,
was indeed sapping away her great courage.

It has been so difficult to get the
signatures," he remarked, more because he
could think of no other words to speak
than for any comfort or novelty contained
in them. They — he and she — had gone
over the same ground so often, the same
things had been repeated so constantly, that
they were both weary of the subject, which
to him had been one long course of annoyance
and humiliation, while to her it represented
but hope deferred and cruel disappointment.


Now the signatures were procured, what
was to be done with them ? To Mr. Garret
had always seemed a mere waste of time,
this stringing of influential names together ;
while Susan, tossed about by the advice of
friends — counselled to do this by one, to
take some quite different course by another,
and " get out of the whole affair " by a third
was growing utterly hopeless and discouraged.


The week too spent without seeing or
hearing from Mr. Gayre had tried and spent
her even more sorely than that gentleman
intended it should.

As she poured out his tea he noticed how
thin and transparent her hands looked,
how hollow her cheeks were getting, how
fragile her figure had become. With one
sentence he could have caused her face to
flush with hope, and given movement to
those listless hands ; but that one sentence
he did not mean to speak — not, at all events.

while it was capable of giving her unalloyed
happiness.

Lai Hilderton says," began Susan, after
a pause, " that it is a case we should get
ventilated by the press. Do you know
any one connected with the press, Mr.
Gayre?"

Mr. Gayre, thus appealed to, thought fora
moment, and then could not call to
recollection that he did.

It seems to me." he went on, " that the
time is past for that. A chance might have
existed while the severity of the sentence
was fresh in the public mind ; but now — "

"Lai thinks there may be a chance even
now."

There may," said Mr. Gayre, but his
tone was not hopeful.

Ah me ! " murmured Susan, softly ; and
then for a moment she covered her face and
kept silence.

Does not Mr. Hilderton know any newspaper

men ? " asked Mr. Gayre, merely for the
sake of saying something.

No one possessed of any influence,"
answered the girl ; and then she looked at
him with all her heart in her eyes. Wliat
her look meant was, " Cannot you get to
know some person of influence able and
willing to bring Oliver's wrongs before the
public, or Parliament, or the Queen, or anybody
competent to set him free ? "

How he did it, with Mr. Fife's story fresh
in his mind, Mr. Gayre never afterwards
could imagine ; but he looked straight back
at the girl and shook his head.

! " she cried, " do not think me
wearisome, but is there nothing to be done ?
Must I sit here with my hands folded,
whilst he is dragging out such a life as
that? You do not know him — really, I
mean. If you did, you would understand
what I feel. He never could bear restraint
of any sort. It was only for me — for my

sake — he came to London at all. He hated
London, and business, and — sand — " Her
voice shook so much that she could not
finish her sentence.

There is the memorial, remember,"
suggested Mr. Gayre, feeling himseK the
worst of criminals.

But Lai says he is sure that won't
produce the slightest effect."

"It is a pity," observed the banker,
irritably, " you and he did not arrive at
that conclusion a little earlier. If you remember,
from the first I felt doubts concerning
the expediency of moving heaven
and earth to obtain signatures from people
who knew practically nothing of the

case."

She sat with bowed head, her hands
clasped tightly together, the while slow hot
tears dropped heavily from her downcast
eyes.

I did — not — mean — to vex you," she

said at last, with a mighty effort ; " but
the delay, the hopelessness of the whole
thing, is killing me. I can't sleep, I can't
eat, food chokes me ; the horror of night,
the thought of him lying all in the dark,
eating his heart out, with those endless
years stretching away in the distance, seem
more than I can bear. And my feeling is
not selfish — God knows it is not ! If I
could purchase freedom for him tomorrow,
I would die — cheerfully, thankfully — if I
only could think of him able to go where he
liked and do what he liked, even though
I never were to see him again, I could be
content. I am a great trouble to you, I
know, Mr. Gayre? You must be sick and
tired of us both ; but if you could only
think of any plan, or any person, likely to
help him in this awful strait, I would do
anything you told me. I would follow your
advice implicitly. I would listen to no one
else — Lai or anybody. Won't you think,

Vol. iii. 49

Ml*. Gayre ? Forgive me for troubling you
so much ; but it is just like saving a man
from drowning, and you would do that, I
know, at the risk of losing your own life.
0, you will think ; I see you will ! How
can I ever thank you ? "

He could have told her, but he did not.
Once more he was netting that demon of
temptation, and silently swearing he would
not let his better self be conquered, all the
landmarks of his higher nature he removed,
because of a love he had always instinctively
felt was not for the good of his soul.

How should she know? Heaven grant,
he thought, she might never know the forces
of evil beleac^uerino^ the citadel of his
humanity at that moment ! They came in
serried ranks, rushing onwards with almost
resistless power, and at last he understood
fully what the temptation a man has to war
against means, the awful battle he has towage
when once he lets himself be drawn

into such a conflict. At that juncture he
intended to do right. Self-abnegation seemed
grand to him. Again a sweeping sea of
chivalric feeling brought a great opportunity
to his feet; but while he was stretching
down his feeble hands to seize it, the waves
ebbed, and bore the chance back into that
ocean where so many things, once fair and
beautiful and of good repute, lie engulfed.
Yes, I will think," was all he could say,
in a tone which conveyed far, far more than
he intended.

In a second she had risen from her chair,
and taken a step towards him. He never
knew what purpose was in her mind, for she
stopped suddenly, while a painful colour
dyed her cheeks and forehead, and even her
throat.

"I was forgetting something I wanted to
say," she remarked, after an embarrassed
pause. " It is probable I shall be leaving
here soon."

49-2

*' Why ? " Mr. Gayre was so astonished
he could only utter one word.

I have been told I ought not — that is to
say, I have been advised — I should not live
all alone here, as I am doing. Perhaps you,
too, think I have done wrong ; but I had no
intention. I never thought of that side of
the question."

It was one of your own sex, I presume,
who asked you to consider it," hazarded
Mr. Gayre, to whom, even at so supreme a
moment, the idea of Susan and conventionality
being associated suggested a conjuncture
so absurd he could scarcely refrain
from smiling.

Yes ; though I do not exactly know
how you came to that conclusion," and
once again the girl coloured. " There was
a time," she went on earnestly, "I should
not have cared. I should have said, 'Let
people think what they like ; ' but I
could not say that now. I have never

before been quite by myself. I have
always had some other person's wishes to
consult, and judgment to lean on ; but now
my whole life is altered — "

And ? " inquired Mr. Garland

I suppose I must make a change of
some sort. If Oliver were in London — that
is, where he was able to know what I was
doing — it would not matter. He could, in
that case, take care of me, and himself too.
Now, I have got him to think of — him as
well as myself."

That is very true," said Mr. Gayre, with
a ring of bitterness she did not detect.

So I have come to the conclusion,"
Susan continued, more readily, " that I
will take a little cottage somewhere near
London. I don't care if it be no better thana
labourer's. My old nurse would come up
and live with me. Indeed, I have written
to ask her to do so."

0, you have written, have you ? "

This time it was Susan's turn to look
astonished.

Yes. I would have consulted you, only
I could not tell when I might see you next."

I fancy it would have been impossible for
any one to give better advice than that you
have already asked and followed."

"You really think so? I am very thankful.
For other reasons, too, I want to leave
here. I could live cheaper — in — in the
labourer's cottage, and I most anxiously
desire to save every penny I can. If, some
morning, when Oliver comes back, I had not
enough to enable him to make a fresh start
I should never forgive myself; but what
a far, far cry it is to Loch Awe ! Will he
ever come back to me ? » Shall I ever see
him on this earth again ? "

Within a somewhat wide margin, Mr.
Gayre could have answered this question had
he liked ; but he did not like, and so contented
himself with uttering a certain

number of regulation forms of comfort,
which sounded so cold and unreal, Susan
shrank from the consolation they offered.

He does not believe in Oliver's innocence,"
she considered after Mr. Gayre's departure.
" How am I ever to persuade this
the only man who could really help him,
of how incapable my darling is of crime ? "
And because she saw no way of compassing
this, she cried herself into a troubled slumber,
unwitting the banker felt as certain of
Mr. Dane's being guiltless as he did of his
own existence, and that over her head there
slept a person who could have told her the
name of " a conceited puppy's " enemy.

Meanwhile Mr. Gayre's loneliness had been
enlivened by a visit from his straitlaced
brother-in-law.

Gad," began that worthy, " what a time
it is since I have seen you ! Why, you look
as washed out as an old muslin gown !
What is the matter ? Bilious, eh ? "

I have got a confouiidecl headache,"
returned the banker, with that lack of
ceremonious politeness only warranted by
relationship.

Bad — very bad," returned Sir Geoffrey,
with a sympathetic shake, as one who had
exhausted the whole run of human ailments,
and found nothing so hard to bear as a
headache. " ' All work and no play,' you
remember, ' makes Jack ' — far worse than a
dull boy ; a sick one. Xow, look here, my
friend, you know I am not a man to recommend
stimulants when they can be avoided.
I wish to heaven my constitution did not
require them ! If you think the matter over
quietly, Gape, it really is an awful thing to
have a constitution that eternally wants
picking up.' Mine does, worse luck ; if it
didn't, I should indeed be thankful. But
however, what I want to say is this : for a
headache, like yours you know, there is
nothing so good as brandy-and-soda. I

think I have mentioned the fact before, but
I may as well give you the recipe again. I
wouldn't take much — say a glass of brandy
and a split of soda — your man might finish
the soda ; it would not be wasted, pity to
waste anything. Try my prescription,
Gayre ; 'pon my soul you'll find yourself a
new man after it."

Thank you greatly for all your suggestions,
but I do not mean to take anything,
except some sleep."

Balmy Nature's, et-cetera," said the
Baronet. " Well, I'll not prevent your
swallowing that medicine, so I'll be off'. 0,
I forgot what I came to say : Peggy's
back."

When were father and daughter reunited
? "

I wouldn't sneer, Gayre, were I you ;
I wouldn't, upon my soul : it doesn't suit
you, and it's not the thing to make a fellow
exactly loved and respected. But, to answer

your question, Peg and I were rejoined in
filial bonds — no, that's not it ; how the deuce
does the thing go ? However, the dear girl
returned to the paternal roof (for paternal
read Moreby, thanks to the Jews) a week
ago, looking lovelier than ever. We must
marry her, Gayre ; we really must, you
know."

Marry her if you like, she's not my
daughter."

For which little circumstance you maybe
very thankful, if you knew all, I can
tell you."

I don't want you to tell me. I want to
go to bed."

"I'll not hinder you. She went over to
see Susan the very day after she came back."

Did she really ! How very good of
her ! "

"Wasn't it? And she found the poor
little woman altogether out of sorts. I am
afraid she made a great mistake going and

engaging herself to a wild sort of chap like
Dane. Something quiet and sensible and
domestic I should have thought much more
the figure ; but there, you never can tell
anything about what suits girls. "When I
think of your poor sister — tut, what am I
talking about? Just tell your man, Garret
fetch sou one bottle of soda and a thimbleful
of brandy. Acts like a charm. I
know it does with me. No ? then I won't
keep you up ! Good-night — good-met ! '
And the Baronet was gone.

HOW MUCH ARE YOU SORRY ? "

purposely Mr. Fife deferred keeping,
^^^ his appointment on the Wednesday
when Mr. Gayre was to give a final answer,
till the last possible moment.

T thought you had perhaps changed
your mind, and were not coming," said the
banker.

"It seemed to me only fair to let you
have as long as possible," answered Mr.
Fife ; ^' although when a man fails to makeup
his mind at first I generally notice he
experiences considerable difficulty in making
it up at last. Well, how is it to be ? "

"I have decided to go on with the
matter."

Come, that is more to the point. Have
you spoken to Miss Drummond ? "

"Not yet."

When will you do so ? "

I cannot tell ; probably not until I am
able to say, ' Mr. Dane has been proved
innocent. He will be at liberty in a few
days.' "

Good Heavens ! " ejaculated Mr. Fife,
is this Bedlam, and are you one of the
patients ? "

"I should be mad indeed, Mr. Fife, if I
pursued any other course."

It does not make much difference tome.
I suppose you know your own business
best ; but I confess I was not prepared
to find Mr. Nicholas Gayre, of the sign of
the Tortoise, Lombard Street, so romantic
a gentleman. All that remains now for you
to do in the way of self-renunciation and
chivalry is to give the bride away, take
Dane into partnership, and entreat both

husband and wife always to regard you asa
devoted friend. They won't know how
to express their gratitude sufficiently fora
while, and then they'll begin to say,
How intolerable it is to have a stranger
coming in and out at all hours ! He takes
good care we shall never forget that kindness
he did us,' or else Mr. and Mrs. Dane
will begin to wrangle about you. He will
observe he should have preferred to work
out his time rather than lie under an
eternal obligation ; and she will remark,
she wishes he had never been let out of
prison."

Mr. Gayre looked across at his tormentor,
but spoke no word — indeed, he had no
word ready to speak.

When are you going to Colvend ? " asked
Mr. Fife.

"I have not made up my mind."

! " and Mr. Fife laughed ironically.

"May I ask what you mean by your

extremely offensive manner ? " inquired Mr.
Gayre.

"Not much, but enough," was the calm
reply. "When do you suppose you will
make up your mind? There is no time to
be lost, you know."

I do not mean to be dictated to by
you," declared Mr. Gayre, trembling with
passion.

Pardon me, I fancy T must dictate to
you a very little. »Tust give me an idea, will
you, as to the outside period within which
it may suit you to open proceedings ? "

If it is money you want — "

I want money ; but I can do without it
for a short time. And now, as you can't,
or won't, give a straightforward answer to
a plain question, listen to me. I am not
going to wait your convenience. A wrong
has been done, and it must be righted,"
added Mr. Fife, with a nasty jeer. " That
nice young man ought to be set up on his

pedestal again. He needs comfort ; and
we know who will console him. It really
is a shame that an innocent person should
remain under such a cloud merely because
you are unable to decide what you will
do."

I quite agree with you, and you had
better see Mr. Colvend yourself."

Softly — softly ; it is Miss Drummond I
shall see first."

'' See Miss Drummond, then."

But I thought you were going to spare
her the crowning humiliation of an interview
with my unworthy self."

I meant to do so ; but as you cannot
refrain from insolence when addressing me,
I feel it impossible to carry negotiations
further with yoiiJ'

The insolence, as you call it, has, I fancy,
been more on your side than mine. I came
here to do you a good turn, and at the
same time benefit myself. How was I

received? And now, when all I want is
some definite answer from you as to the
length of time you purpose to wait before
seeing Mr. Colvend, you turn round and
advise me to go to my principals, or Miss
Drummond, or anybody likely to make a
beautiful mess of the whole business, in
preference to yourself, who have posed as
OHver Dane's best friend. Friend, indeed !
If you could keep him in penal servitude
for life I believe you would do it."

"For Heaven's sake take the matter into
your hands, and leave me in peace ! I will
still stand to wdiat I said as regards money,
but I should prefer, in other respects, to be
out of the affair."

"Meaning, I presume, you would rather
some other person hung you, than put the
noose round your own neck and kick the
stool away."

It was really appalling! Mental analysis,
the comprehension of hidden motives, know-vol.

iii. 50

ledge of the weakness and Wickedness of
human nature, Mr. Gay re had always previously
considered matters appertaining to
the higher culture He felt shocked to find
a low fellow like Mr. Fife — a man he
would not have shaken hands with on
any consideration — a humdrum routine
creature as he had seemed, could lay
his finger with unerring certainty on a
festering sore, and by the aid of instinct,
or some equally unaccountable natural gift,
jump to the comprehension of motives understood
but dimly even by the person they
influenced.

It is a shock to anyone who thinks himself
acquainted with the ^'orld to find that
kis knowledge is of the narrowest description,
and Mr. Fife's remark affected mr. Ga}Te
like a cold douche.

I fear I scarcely follow you," he said.

yes, you do," was the uncompromising
retort. "In your class of life your remark

is merely, I suppose, a polite hint for me
to amend or retract my words ; but it is
only because I remember my rank is not
yours I have refrained from using plainer
and stronger language. By appointment —
your own appointment, remember — I came
here to-night, as I understood, finally to
arrange details : and first you tell me what
I knew before, that you had decided to goon
with the matter ; and second, because
something I say does not quite please your
mightiness, that I had better go through
with it myself. The whole fact is you
want to ' trim,' and you do not exactly see
how to do it. You do not like to tell
Miss Drummond her lover is innocent, and
trust to her generosity, because you know as
well as I do women have no generosity, and
no gratitude either, if you come to that.
You are averse to going to Colvend because
you feel the first sentence you speak will
put the girl beyond your reach for ever ;

50—2

and you object to adopt the plan I suggested
because you desire to keep up the character
of being something more than human.
That is how the case stands, and accordingly
you wish to drift for a bit, to see if anything
turns up. The captain in the old
song ' Told them he would marry, but he
never said when,' and in like manner you
may keep on ' intending ' to go to Colvend's
till the Millennium, or till the term of
Oliver Bane's sentence has nearly expired."

If you have quite finished, Mr. Fife, perhaps
you will kindly return me the paper I
was foolish enough to sign, and leave my
house."

As to leaving, I shall go in a minute ; as
to giving up the paper, I'm not such a flat.
As to the rest — this is Wednesday — if by
Saturday, you have not spoken to Mr.
Colvend, I shall take the liberty of asking a
private audience with your young lady on
Sunday."

Wliy delay ? Why not tell her all you
know — if you do know it — tomorrow? '

I said before, I had my reasons. I say
again, I have my reasons ; but even they
won't allow me to postpone action indefinitely.
Oliver Dane is ill; next we hear of
him he may he dying. If he should die —
and he is just the sort of chap to break his
proud heart — what becomes of both of us
then ? You would have to whistle for your
young wife a long time before you could get
her, I am afraid ; and I should have to whistle
for my money and something else — "

"How do you know that Dane is ill."

"What does that matter? I know as all
men who are their own detectives always
do know. Yes ; and if you had not been so
confoundedly high and mighty with me, I
should tell you something else it might be
your interest to hear. As matters stand, I
mean to keep my information to myself for
the present."

"Believe me, I-would rather remain in
ignorance for ever than be enlightened by you."

"That is courtesy, I suppose, and good
breeding, and all the rest of it. However, he
laughs best who laughs last. Now I am
going. Saturday, remember, is the latest,
and I shall not come here again. Good-night,
Mr. Gayre. You think yourself a very wiseman
; I will not shock your refined nerves
by telling you my opinion on that point."

He was gone. As he closed the library
door with a bang, Mr. Gayre understood the
Dane complication had entered on a new
phase. After ninety-six hours it could be no
longer in his power to speak or to refrain.
That halting steed, himself, would — unless he
made good use of the short time still at his
disposal — be altogether out of the running.

There might be racing hot and swift —
hope, despair, falsehood, asseveration, exultation,
disappointment ; but his share in
the excitement, the rush, the prize, would

be nil. Not even as a friend might he
hope to participate in the gladness of the
day of triumph, for he understood perfectly
that if he failed before night on that fatal
Saturday to decide, nothing but renunciation
was possible. Mr. Fife, in telling the
story, would make Susan clearly understand
how he had hesitated between good and evil
and failed to do what was right, though he
lacked courage actually to commit a
wrong.

Yes ; that is the way this brute " — so he
mentally styled Mr. Fife — " would put the
case." After all there is but a right, there
is but a wrong ; and would Mr. Fife have
been totally inaccurate in describing the
banker's conduct as cowardly ? Perhaps
the courage or the temperament which
enables a man to plunge headlong into sin
may upon occasion give him strength to
perform some act of enormous self-abnegation
— sacrifice his own life to save some

Other life to all appearance perfectly worthless,
smilingly wave farewell to happiness
for the sake of one who, to our poor
human thought, does not deserve to be
especially happy.

It is a great mystery. The tendency of
our modern life is to wipe all strong
emotions, all supreme passions, off the
society slate ; and yet in a book it has of
late become somewhat bad form to study,
but which will survive as it has survived,
many changes of fashion and creeds of
morals, we are specially warned against
being neither hot nor cold.

Perhaps as Mr. Gayre beheld the face of
that devil which skulks within the heart
of every man and woman, he felt it might
have been better had he chanced to be
weaned on some different creed than one
ignoring our humanity and the temptations
which assail it.

Seven times were the walls of Jericho compassed

ere they fell ; but at the sound of
the final trumpet Jericho was an entrenched
city no longer, because its foundations
were rotten and accursed. If a tree have
no root, how can it produce leaf and bud
and fruit ? The earth, which is gracious
even to its meanest child, may give it fora
short time some poor show of vitality
and greenness, but it is not strong enough
to drink in a sap which shall support even
during the few short days of springtime ;
and so it withers away, and is cut down
because it " cumbered the ground."

In the day of his trial, Mr. Gayre found
himself Wanting ; in the hour when he
should have been strong to bring forth the
best fruit of a man's life, he was barren.
At last he knew it is not enough to decide
that we will resist temptation — we should
flee it. Those who are wise will not let
even its shadow fall across their path.

IT that niorht — that first ni^rht — he had

allowed his better angel to have her way,
and lead him through storm and darkness
to a land of safety, whence return to the
wave-beaten rock where he sat so long considering
was impossible, this terrible struggle
need never have rent his bosom ; but now
he could not with his own hand sign the
death-warrant — with his own lips he could
not speak the words which should give to
Oliver Dane his liberty, to Susan Drummond
her lover.

He could have done great things for
Susan — he could have died for her ; but it
seemed absolutely impossible he could live
without her. He had allowed the grandest
opportunity of his life to slip by. What
would she not have thought of him !
How she would have loved him! And now
he had lost all chance even of gratitude.

Mr. Fife would open the ball ; and some
day, no doubt, tell Susan and the world
how he offered Mr. Gayre the choice of

being first spokesman, and how that gentleman
refused to speak. He might come to
be a common jeer, a mere laughing stock.
Mr. Gay re rose in a fury and paced his room.
He had still time left. It was still not quite
the eleventh hour, though near it. Thursday
was gone. Friday wanted but few hours of
being garnered into the great eternity.
Should he still go to Susan ? No ; he felt
the task beyond his strength. She should
be led to meet her lover, but not by him ;
the delicate rose-tints should once again
blossom on her cheek ; but when that
lovely portrait of tender affection — of perfect
happiness — was finished another artist than
Nicholas Gayre would add after his name
the word " pinxit."

No, he could not do it. He might that
first night, in the mad rush and hurry of
his soul, have battled through the wind and
the rain, and, drenched and buffeted, told
her all the story; how he had loved, how

lie had been tempted, how he had resisted,
how he had come to bring her peace ; and
then once again taking his lonely life in his
hand, passed out into the darkness, away
from her for ever. Desolate though such
an ending of the sweet love-dream might
seem, it would have been a thousand times
better than the ^vreck of honour and honesty
suggested by Mr. Fife. Then the absolute
cowardice of the middle course he was
treading! Was this what years of idleness
and prosperity had done for him ? — years of
sleeping soft and eating regularly, of conforming
to the world's code of conventional
propriety, of holding aloof from sinners, and
consorting only with those who had balances
at their bankers, and were mighty reputable
and respectable men and women?

Yes, it incas this. Ever since he had left
the army, and striven to shape the pattern
of his life to that of those amongst whom
his lot was cast, he knew each day, as it

came and went, found and left him more
and more truly a Pharisee thanking God for
something which probably was not in the
least degree pleasing to the Almighty. He
had grown to like and respect money — or
at least the things money can buy ; the
deadly canker of riches and conventionally
had eaten into his very soul, and gnawed
away the graces of impulsive generosity and
noble chivalry which once undoubtedly were
rooted there. He was not the same man.
Yon poor publican, who durst not as much
as lift his eyes to heaven, would go down
to his house justified, rather than Nicholas
Gayre, banker, who would gladly have given
all he possessed in exchange for strength todo
an act of the most ordinary justice.
But he could not do it. Just as a drunkard
will drain some fiery draught to the last
drop, even while loathing the smell and detesting
the taste, so this man, whose breath
had once come shorter when hearing of great

deeds, while recalling wild achievements,
lacked courage to cut the rope binding him
to the thought of wrong, though honour
lay in doing so, and shame abode in
that from which he refused to cast himself
adrift.

To-morrow will end it all," he thought,
looking forward as a criminal on the eve
of execution may think of the following
noon when he shall have been hours in
eternity.

He would not lift a finger to retard or
to expedite events. It seemed to him as
though during the course of five days and
nights he had lived a lifetime, and he knew
at the end of that time one thing he had
never known before — namely, that passive
resistance is no victory, that a man may
lose far more in the course of even a
short siege than during a battle.

The library clock first chimed the quarters
and then struck nine. But three hours,

and then midnight. Mr. Gay re stood still
in the centre of the apartment. It was
not yet too late ; should he still go to Susan.

Irresolutely he turned towards the door,
and took a hesitating step in the direction
of honour and safety, then —

"Sir Geoffrey Chelston and a lady are
in the drawing-room. Colonel. Sir Geoffrey
would like to see you immediately."

Mr. Gayre stared at the man.

'lady!" he repeated. "What lady?
Miss Chelston?"

"No, Colonel, not Miss Chelston."

Good Heavens, perhaps the Baronet
has got hold of Miss Colvend ! " was the
idea that flashed across Mr. Gayre's mind.
What a lunatic I am ! " he next decided ;
the world contains a few other people and
things besides Oliver Dane and his interests."

He went slowly upstairs ; for the second
time, as it seemed, Fate had interposed
between him and his purpose. He was

making yet another most reluctant move
towards the right when the mysterious
shadow we may feel, but can never see,
laid her hand upon and held him back.

Harlequin-like assuming the gay presence
of Sir Geoffrey Chelston too ! Mr. Gayre
smiled as he stood on the landing, considering
the remarkable shape it had pleased
his deterrent angel to assume. A man
possessed by the almost sardonic sense of
humour nature (or circumstances) had
given him ought to have been able to
steer clear of moral pitfalls. But we are
all imperfect ; and, in his hour of need, Mr.
Gayre certainly found his sense of humour
a mere snare and delusion.

It had not delivered him from temptation
; it had not proved that friend in need
which is the friend indeed ; quite the contrary.
Now the Philistines were on him
in reality, his perception of the ridiculous,
which had so often come to the rescue

when, as regards mercantile non-success,
env3\ hatred, and all uncharitableness might
otherwise have taken possession of his heart,
left him with the power to gibe indeed,
but the inability so fight. He could seethe
absurdity of forty-five thinking of mating
with twenty-one ; but he could not give up
his fancy for all that. Susan was none the
less fair because the summers of her life had
been so few ; he was all the more in love
for the very reason that he had heard so
often the vous rustling made bv Nature
when the first touch of spring sunshine
awakens her from long winter sleep.

No ; it was as well Sir Geoffrey had come.
For almost the first time in his life Mr. Gayre
felt glad to know the Baronet was close at hand.

He opened the drawing-room door and
entered. In the centre of the apartment
directly under the chandelier stood the
once owner of Chelston ; his legs as usual
a little bowed ; his white hat which he

Vol iii. 51

held in his left hand, ornamented by a
broad mourning band ; his whole unique
person serving unintentionally to screen a
lady who, with averted face buried in her
hands, sat in an armchair close behind.

"How do, Gayre?" It was the Baronet
\f\\o spoke. " Knew you'd forgive me.
I've brought a poor little broken-hearted
soul to you for comfort. I said, ' If Gayre
can't help you nobody can. Never met
with such a fellow for helping other people.'
Susan, Susan, my girl, look up ; don't goon
crying like that ! Here's Gayre. Lord
bless you, he'll find some way out of the
trouble." And Sir Geoffrey, who was not
given to the melting mood, broke off with
a very suspicious tremor in his voice,
merely to add next moment : " For God's
sake, Gayre, think what we can do ! I'd
take a petition to the Queen myself, only
I'm afraid she wouldn't read it!"

What has happened ? What is the

matter ? " asked !Mr. Gayre, feeling literally
stunned by the turn affairs had unexpectedly
taken.

There, Susan ; there, my dear ! What
did Papa Geoff tell you P Your own old
Papa Geoff" and the engaging Baronet
stroked his favourite down as if she had
been a horse. ^r. Ga}Te forgave him
though ; the wretched sinner's genuine love
for so pure a creature covered — in his
brother-in-law's eyes — a multitude of faults.
"Didn't I say to you as we came along,
Beyond all things, Gayre is practical ; he
has always his wits about him ; he'll
make something out of this bother. There's
a silver lining, you know, and gad ! if
there's any silver to be got Gayre's the
man to get it ' "

Having concluded which complimentary
speech, Sir Geoffrey reined in, and left
either jockey who pleased to do the rest

of the running.

61-2

Miss Drummond, what is the matter ? "
asked Mr. Gayre.

He had walked across the room, and
was standing close beside her, so when,
for answer, she held out a piece of folded
paper, he could take it from her hand
without the intervention of Sir Geoffrey.

Do you wish me to read this ? " he
said.

Just for a second she turned towards
him a tear-stained face, out of which all
the beauty had temporarily been washed
by vehement weeping, and murmured,

Yes."

"I had no notion of it. It was the last
thing I should have thought of, 'pon my
soul it was," murmured Sir Geoffrey in a
stage aside. It was the last thing also
Mr. Gayre could have thought of, and
yet the most natural in the world. Finding
he made no move, already Mr. Fife had
commenced to open the ground for himself.

Thus ran the note, which had neither
prefix nor signature :

Oliver Dane is very ill ; removed to
infirmary. If his friends mean to come
forward, they must do so now or ne\t:r."

After he had read, Mr. Gayre stood
silent, clutching the paper in his hand.
At last he thoroughly realised the position.
Oliver Dane, innocent, buried as a felon ;
Susan broken-hearted — Susan removed as
far from him as heaven itself. Another
man, and that man Samuel Fife, would
step in, perhaps almost too late to undo
the evil intensified by Mr. Gayre's want
of decision. But what could Mr. Fife or
Susan, or any one Who lacked money and
influence, effect without tedious and possibly
fatal delay ? Xo ; it should not be. Mr.
Fife's action determined him ; all hesitation
was over. One surging wave removed
in an instant all the land-marks of his life.
Good and evil, right and wrong, meant

nothing to him then. He would save the
man, but he must sacrifice the woman.
With his own vacillation he had destroyed
the will to choose. Only a single word
escaped him at that crisis, " God ! " but it
was no cry for help, only an utterance of
despair, as he turned him to the darksome
way that leadeth to destruction.

There ensued a silence which though brief
seemed to Susan endless. Twice Mr. Gayre
tried to speak, and twice his parched lips
refused their office ; but at last he managed
to say, in a tone harsh by reason of the
strong effort required to make himself
audible, and the still stronger constraint he
placed upon his words,

"I do not see. Miss Drummond, why you
should distress yourself so much."

Once again she lifted her tear-stained face,
this time to look at him with amazement,
while she mutely pointed to the paper in his
hand.

"Xo person who knows anything of the
world," went on Mr. Gayre, " attaches the
slightest importance to an anonymous
letter."

She rose and stood erect before him — stood
encircled by the indefinable charm which washer
birthright — stood in her youth and
sorrow the better to say fully what was in
her mind.

That letter is true," she gasped ; " I feel
it, I know it. I was not thankful enough
for my misfortunes. God had been very
gracious to me. Though He saw fit to
separate us, it was not by the great gulf of
death, and yet I murmured ! 0, Mr. Gayre,
what is to be done ? Can't you — won't you
^lielp us? It may seem nothing to you, but
it means life to Oliver ; " And in an access
of grief, this girl-woman, with the marvellous
eyes and hair, such as the Venetian painters
dreamed of but rarely saw, and a tender
heart and a nature grand and strong as ever

Alas held within a hssom binding, flung herself
on the floor, and held out her clasped
hands in an attitude of agonised entreaty to
the man Sir Geoffrey had taught her to
regard as well-nigh omnipotent.

For Heaven's sake don't kneel to me ! "
entreated that man, recoiling a little ; for he
was still sufficiently master of himself to
know he dared not lift the prostrate figure,
lest he should strain it to his heart.

"Gently, gently, does it, old lady," said the
Baronet, as, without the smallest desire to
take her to his heart, he raised the one human
being he loved with an unselfish attachment,
and placed her again in her chair. " Don't
frighten my brother-in law. He's very slow,
but he is indeed very sure. He'll find a way
out of the mess, or my name's not Geoffrey
Chelston ; and, as I feel I am totally in the
way. 111 just — to put the matter colloquially
walk my chalks. You and Gayre will hit
on some plan ; I know you will. In sorrow,

as in love, two are company, you remember,
but a third is a confounded nuisance. And
look here, Gayre, this room may be all very
fine, but it is beastly cold. Don't you see
Susan is shivering like an aspen ? Haven't
you got a fire somewhere ? and can't you
manage a cup of tea or coffee, or — or anything
for her while you are talking over
what is to be done ? Come along, Sue :
come downstairs with me, and cheer up,
my beauty 1 Gayre will find a way out of
this trouble. Don't cry your eyes out.
What would Papa Geoff do if he never saw
the sunshine dancing in them again, eh ? "

Discoursing which innocent and childlike
prattle. Sir Geoffrey guided the girl from step
to step and led her into the library, where
he wheeled up the easiest chair to the fire,
placed her " where you'll get thawed''
patted her on the shoulder, said " ta-ta,"
and left her to '* come to," while he walked
into the hall, followed by Mr. Gayre, to

whom he made a sign, intimating he wished
to speak to him alone.

By, of course, the merest accident Sir
Geoffrey turned into the dining-room, and,
without waiting to be asked whether he
would have anything to " pick him up," in
the merest absence of mind laid hold of a
decanter and poured out a beaker.

Ton my soul"' he said, " I don't know
how women manage to get through their
troubles on tea ; but then, to be sure, look
at the state they reduce themselves to."

"You have at least the consolation of
feeling an undue use of tea has not destroyed
your nerves," observed Mr. Gayre.

No, faith ; and I take very good care
it never has the chance. Now just look at
Susan, poor Susan! She's all to bits. Girl,
too, who used not to know the meaning of
the word 'fear." Why, she'd have gone at
anything in the old days ; and here she is
to-night all of a tremble because she is told

her lover is sick. And that reminds me
she'll need a very light hand, Gayre — she will
indeed ; she'll not stand much. You'll have
to be very cautious. Let her think she's
having her head. I don't suppose we can
do anything, really ; but there's no need to
tell her that. In my opinion it would bea
capital ending to the whole business if
Dane did die ; but of course it isn't natural
that she should take that view. And now
I'll be off. Well, thank you, I may as well
have a thimbleful more. Don't trouble, I'll
help myself. As I was going to say, when
you have finished your talk, bring her upto
North Bank. She must not be alone in
those lodgings. Peggy's gone to the play
with Mrs. Wookes, and is to stop the night ;
but that makes no odds. Mrs. Lavender
will make Susan comfortable. Excellent
woman, Mrs. Lavender, though she is so
confoundedly ugly. Xo ; I can't stop
another minute, really ; besides, I'm only

5 us AX DR Lomond.

keeping you, when I know you are longing to
speak comfort to my poor girl. Good-night,
good-night. Bless you, Gayre ; " and Gayre
was left alone.

HIS PRICE.

r^HgHEN Mr. Gayre re-entered the
iiWp library, Susan was not sitting by
the fire, as Sir Geoffrey had left her, but
standing in the middle of the room, with
a dazed hunted look on her changed face.

"I think I had better go," she said. *'I
know you can do nothing for me ; if you
could, you would have done it ere this. Sir
Geoffrey made me come. He thought
amongst your friends — but I told him — "

Do sit down," entreated Mr. Gayre ;
and he led her to the hearth, where she
almost fell into a chair, and sat staring with
unseeing eyes at the leaping fire-light.

How do people go through such misery

as mine and keep silent ? " lie murmured
at last. "I am sorry to be so troublesome
; but 0, if you knew — if you could
image — " and she broke once assail into
passionate and uncontrollable weeping.

"Do try to compose yourself. Miss
Drummond," entreated Mr. Gayre ;-you
distress me intensely."

I can't help it," sobbed the girl, " though
my tears won't give him life or liberty.
If I could only do something — go to someone
! Is there no human being, Mr.
Gayre, who could help us? Think of him
lying ill — dying, perhaps, in that dreadful
place ! If it were your own brother, or
your friend — but I am talking folly ! I
will go now. I must not occupy your
time any longer."

"You must not think of going yet," he
answered. " I have ordered some tea for
you ; " and even as he spoke tea appeared.
"You will have a cup, will you not?"

It would choke me," said Susan, shaking
her head. "I feel as if I never should
eat or sleep again."

Mr. Gayre stood before the fire, looking
down upon the drooping figure, the bowed
head. At that moment his soul was nota
battle-field, where good and evil were
waging an almost equal war. Sto ; the
fight had ended, and he remained silent
only because he was waiting for words in
which to express his meaning.

All at once he spoke.

"If a man were to say to you to-night,
this moment, ' I wil strive to set your
lover free — there is one way in which I
might be able to obtain his release,' what
would you do for that man? You spoke
the other night as though no price which
could be asked would seem to you too
great."

Nor would it ! " she cried, lifting her
swollen eyes, lit with a sudden gleam of

almost despairing hope. "Do you know
such a man? What would I not do for
him ? Every sixpence I own in the world
he should have. I would be his servant
his slave — "

"Would you ^be his icifeV

She did not say anything ; she only
looked at him in bewilderment.

Would you be my wife ? "

It was done. If he lived a thousand
years he could never recall that utterance.
Till his dying day the expression of incredulous
horror that came into her face
will never quite fade from his memory

You — you — are jesting ! " she gasped.

"Am I?"

"I did — not — think you would have
jested at such a time ; but — "

"Do I look as if I were jesting?" he
asked.

If she had lifted her eyes she would
have seen a man with the whole fashion

of his countenance altered ; his lips (Compressed,
his cheeks pale, his gaze bent on
her with a terrible concentration ; but
she did not lift her eyes. She shrank a
little into herself, mentally cowering under
the weight and horror of the blow he had
dealt.

"You never thought of this?" was ]his
next question.

"No; never once."

"Did no idea of anything of the sort
ever cross your mind ? "

No ; never once."

"You supposed my care for and interest
in you arose from the extreme amiability
of my disposition ? "

"I thought you were my friend."

"There is no such thing as friendship,
there can be no such thing as friendship,
between man and woman," he said almost
fiercely. "It is either love or indifference,
unless indeed it may be hate," with bitter

emphasis on the word. "Perhaps you hate
me now?"

She did not answer ; she did not even make
a sicrn of dissent.

Yes ; that is always the way with your
sex ; they are willing — eager to seize every
valuable a mau has to give, his love, his life,
his money, his time, his thought ; and then
if he ask for the smallest return, he is thrust
out into the cold, to find a path through the
lonely darkness of his after existence as
best he may."

There is little I would not have done for
you, Mr. Gayre," she answered, and there
was no faltering in her voice ; " but what
you ask is not mine to give ; and if it
were "

"Yes; if it were?"

I should not give it you."

I have made such a mistake in my mode
of asking for it ? "

"Yes, you have made a mistake. I was

grateful to you ; I was indeed. But now —
Oh, how can I ever forget what you said a
minute ago ? "

•' I do not want you to forget it. I want

you to remember Xo ; you must not go

yet. As you have heard so much, you must
hear more."

I must not," answered the girl. " I feel
as truly Oliver Dane's wife as if I were
married to him, and the words which would
have insulted me in that case insult me now."

"You are mistaken. I am not insulting
you. I am offering you the truest, deepest,
most loyal love of which my nature is
capable."

"Love I" she murmured, softly.

Yes, a man's love, not a woman's — a
love I have felt ever since I first saw your
face — which I have strucfo^led with, fought
against: — that has for months past cursed
every hour of my life — that is killing me —
that I am glad you at last know has crushed

52-2

all things noble and honest out of my heart,
and made me so base I am capable of driving
a bargain with you — you, for whom I would
die, if, in dying, I could win one look of
love."

She stared at him appalled ; the very
calmness of his tone and the restraint of
his manner lent a greater terror to the
passion of his words.

I never meant to tell you this," he went
on, " God is my witness, when you entered
my house to-night I had no more intention of
letting you catch even a glimpse of the war
I have been waging with myself than you
have of marrying me. A thousand times I
have been on the point of saying something
which should part us for ever ; but I refrained.
All unconsciously you have tempted and
tried me as man surely never was tempted
and tried before ; yet I resisted. But a man
cannot go on resisting for ever, and I am
glad my resolution has broken at last. Yes,

if, after to-might, we never raeet again, I shall
not feel sorry you know that which but for
your own utter absorption, you would have
known long ago."

She sat like one stunned. The tears, which
had well-nigh blistered her fair cheeks, were
dry. Her eyes felt as if red-hot sparks had
been thrown in them ; her lips were parched,
her tongue stiff; and through all there was
a pervading sense of shame and misery — of
having lost something of great price — of
having looked through an unclean window
out on a world which never again for ever
could seem just the same to her.

For the moment she forgot even her lover
forgot his trouble ; as sometimes, in the
worry and turmoil of daily life, we forget
for a brief space our dead. Then it all came
back to her, and she lifted her head and
gazed up at mr. Gayre with a hunted appealing
expression on that face capable of
silently saying so much.

I ask you to forgive me," she said at last,
with a great effort. " I have been absorbed
and — I did — not know."

No, you did not know," lie answered with
a sad cadence in his voice which touched her
inexpressibly.

"I am very, very sorry."

"Why should you be sorry? You have
only wrecked a man's life. What are twenty
lost lives to a woman ? "

"Good-night, Mr. Gayre." She was standing
now. " Don't let us part in bitterness. I will
try to think of all this only as a bad dreani."

How very kind you are ! " he sneered.

Good-night."

Wait a moment. What about Mr. Dane ?
Is he to stop where he is, or — "

She raised her rio-ht hand with a feature
of passionate despair.

Can you Ideally do anything for him, or
were you merely trying me ? "

I cannot say. I would have striven."

'• And you will still do it for him, though
you think me so ungrateful ? "

"No, by Heaven, that will I not! " said ]mr.
Gayre, a torrent of rage breaking down all
the barriers he himseK had raised. " You
have made your choice — abide by it. I shall
not try to influence you further. This night
I part company with you and your lover.
Do what you can for him without my help.
Why should I be the one to give up everything?"


Mournfully she turned a little aside, walked
to the table, then stood and faced him with
a steady front.

What is it you could do for Oliver ? " she
asked.

I have no intention of doing anything
now," he answered.

What was it, then, you thought you
mio'ht have done ? "

I regret being rude to a lady, but I must
decline to answer that question."

Do you think you could have done anything
? "

I could have tried."

But you have always tried."

Well, yes, that is true. Stills formerly I
felt my trying would not effect much, or
perhaps I should not have been so eager in the
matter. Before you go, it is better for you to
understand me thoroughly. I believe there
is oue chance for your friend, which, properly
worked, may unlock his prison door. Shall I
try that chance, or not ? It is a question for
you to decide. I will not hurry your decision.
Take till ten o'clock tomorrow
morning, and then give me an answer. On
the one hand, liberty for the man you profess
to love ; on the other, happiness to the
man who loves you. For I do love you as
Mr. Danenever could. I ask nothing from.
you unless he walks out a free man.
Should that day never come till the term of
his sentence has expired, you will remain at

perfect liberty to greet him when he returns
to you."

And he is ill — perhaps dying now."

I know nothing of that ; He may or he
may not be ill. As I said before, you ought
to attach no importance to an anonymous
letter."

But I dreamt last night he was dead."

I really fear I consider a dream of less
importance even than an anonymous letter."

"And if he did die?"

"I should say he would be better dead
than alive at Portland"*

She did not answer. She looked down at
the carpet, then up at Mr. Gayre, then down
at the carpet again before she said,

I will go now. I am sorry to have given
so much trouble."

You will return to North Bank ? "

She shrank at the sound of the name,
and said,

"Oh, no— no!"

As you wish, of course. You must allow
me to see you to Islington."

'" Don't, please don't ! " she entreated, with
a fervour which was far from complimentary.

"Just as you like. My servant shall go
with you. I will send him for a cab."

I would much rather walk."

As this will most likely be the last time
on which you may ever be harassed by my
advice, I must entreat of you to do what I
counsel now. You are in no state to walk,
even were such a course fitting. I will not
intrude further upon you till Eawlings has
procured a conveyance."

He did not trust himself to stay longer
with her. He knew he had spoken roughly,
barbarously, yet he felt that the words
uttered were as nothing in comparison with
those he had kept back, and enough of
manly instinct still remained to make him
dread a prolongation of the interview. Had
she gone on crying and breaking her heart,

had she pleaded to him for help and mercy,
he might have at least kept the devil, that
was tearing him sore, out of sight ; but the
horrible disappointment of finding she would
not even entertain a thought of buying her
lover's liberty on the terms proposed was more
than he could bear.

'' Let her try what she can do, even with
Fife's help," he thought bitterly ; " and if
Dane die while the affair has been messed
up and muddled, she will at least have
the consolation of knowing she remained
true to her sex, if not to her lover. Yet
I was a brute. What other answer could
I expect ? "

Had he only been able to obtain a
glimpse of Susan's mind, he would have
found the very abruptness of his declaration,
the suddenness by which she was made
aware of the nature of his feelings, had produced
an effect on the o-irl's imagination years
of gentle wooing must have failed to do.

She felt horror-stricken as he laid bare
before her the passion of his soul, and her
strongest sentiment, next to what Oliver
was to do, proved an absorbing pity for
the man who loved her vainly, and a deep
reproach towards herself.

I ought to have known," she thought,
as she sat looking into the depths of the
blazing fire, that seemed no fiercer than
the heart the secret of which she had been
allowed to see. "I have been all wrong.
This was what Margaret was insinuating
the other day. If we live in the world
there are things we must not blind ourselves
to," and she covered her face, though
there was no one but herself, to hide the
shamed blushes crimsoning her cheeks as the
full nature of the position in which she had
placed herself was, in its nakedness, revealed.

Your cab is at the door, ma'am," said
Eawlings, just as she reached this culminating
point of utter misery.

Instinctively she drew down her veil ere
passing out into the hall, where Mr. Gayre
stood waiting for her. Gravely he offered
his arm, which she just touched with the
tips of her fingers. Eawlings opened the
cab door, and, at a sign from his master,
mounted the box beside the driver, while
Mr. Gayre, standing bareheaded on the
pavement, said, in a low voice,

Shall I come for your answer tomorrow,
or should you like me to send for it ? "

She paused a second. His question put
the whole of the issue at stake into a concrete
form before her.

I will write," she at last murmured.

Eemember that after tomorrow / can
do nothing.'

"Nothing?"

Nothing whatever. And now, in case
we never meet again (whether we do or
not rests wholly with yourself), let me say
good-bye and God bless you ! "

He was gone. Before she had time to
speak, almost before she was able to drawback
the hand she had half stretched forth
to lay on his, she saw him pass out of
the darkness of night into the solitude of
his desolate home. The door closed behind
him, and she was driving with her own
memories and fears, for bitter company,
through the streets.

There are assuredly times in life when
we are incapable of sustained thought. At
such periods the mind drifts like a dead
thing over the ocean of being ; it is tossed
by the waves and buffeted by the currents
and driven by the wind ; but, till it awakens
in a different hereafter, it knows next to
nothing of the tempest it has ridden through
the incongruous points it has touched, the
abysses it has swept over.

Mr. Gayre had reached that state.
Thought was out of the question. Impulse
and passion had urged him on till.

among billows of temptation, the better life
was beaten well-nigh into insensibility. He
paced the room till he was weary, but when,
exhausted, he flung himself into his chair,
he could not rest. Once again, driven by
the fiends within him, he was forced to
resume that ceaseless march, up and 
and down, till he had walked miles over
those few yards of carpet.

His servant was a long time absent.
Islington might, to his irritable fancy, have
been in Africa, judging from the period
occupied in covering the distance.

Three times had he rung to inquire if
Eawlings were back and he was just about
to ring again, when the man entered with
a note.

"I was detained, Colonel," he said apologetically
; " the lady kept me over an hour
while she wrote this letter. You have
been wanting me, sir?"

"Yes — no — it does not matter, now," answered

his master, scarcely waiting till the
door closed ere tearing open Susan's
missive.

"I cannot stop till morning," these were
the words it contained, " to tell you that
I have made up my mind — / agree'"

She had added a line after this, and
then blotted it out. Despite his earnest
endeavour, Mr. Gayre failed to gather
what she had written and deleted ; but
there stood forth, as if in letters of fire,
the sentence he once never expected to
read — / agree. She did not trouble him
with the reasons which had caused so extraordinary
a change, she made no prayer,
put forward no excuse ; the paper was not
stained with tears, the telegraphy was clear
as usual. In the travail of her soul such a
decision could only have been born, yet
there was no hint of agony in the cold
decision of her resolve.

I AGREE ! " After hope was dead, at a

moment when despair was holding high
carnival in his soul, he had got what he
wanted. Success was his at last ; and success
had come thus.

After a time, when the first astonishment
was over, and his scattered senses began
slowly to return to their owner, he sat
down and wrote Susan a long letter.

What he said he never afterwards could
clearly remember ; but it calmed and comforted
him. After the fret and turmoil of
the week he felt indeed strangely tranquil
when, in the early morning, he went out
to drop his letter in a pillar-box near at
hand.

I will call," he had written, " about nine
tomorrow to see you ; " and behold it was
tomorrow already, and he had but time
to snatch a few hours' sleep ere Eawlings
roused him with the words,

Seven o'clock. Colonel ! "

Vol. iii. 58

ON THE MARINE PARADE.

%H^ONG ere Eawlings awoke his master
isti out of that sound 6'leep which can
only be induced by utter mental or physical
exhaustion, Susan Drummond was about
her business. She had made up her mind
on the previous night what she meant todo,
and starting from fitful slumbers she
rose before a streak of dawn tinged the
darkness, to begin a work out of which all
hope and happiness was eaten.

But even in the first anguish of her self-abnegation
she was not miserable. She
had given up everything to try to save her
lover, and she did not mean now to make her
own task harder and his life wretched by

looking idly back on a past which seemed
more remote as well as more beautiful than
those far-away hours of childhood when lie
first knew Oliver Dane.

If she were able to save him, if by any
sacrifice she could give him life and freedom,
what did her personal sacrifices matter ?

She had always hoped and prayed that

if a great trouble came to her she should

be given strength to bear it bravely. The

fretting of uncertainty was what had broken

her health and bruised her spirit. Xow

there could be no more uncertainty. She

had cast all on one great die in a game,

the stake for which was Oliver Dane's liberty.

She had done all she could, and she felt

content. For the first time since the trial,

since that desperate cry of "I am innocent!"

rent the silence of the court, she could think

of her lover without hot tears rising to her

eyes — without feeling a wild sick desire to

rush off and tear the very walls of his 



house with her poor impotent fingers, so that
she might be doing something to lessen the
barrier between him and God's free earth.

In her anguish she had cried aloud in the
night-time. When there was scarce a star
to be seen, when the moonbeams cast lines
of mournful silver light on floor and walls,
and threw masses of chequered and changing
brilliancy into the darkness of her
chamber, she rose and paced the apartment's
narrow limits, and wondered whether those
cold sorrowful rays were piercing the gloom
of Oliver's cell : whether his heart was breaking
at the thought of the time when they
together, hand locked in hand, looked
up into the heaven of the tender summer
night, their happy souls too full for speech.

But now all that was over ; to that great
unrest had succeeded a period of almost
unnatural repose. She would have given
her Hfe for him, but as no one wanted her
life, she had sacrificed something which she

felt to be more valuable — her future. Yet
not sacrificed ; for she flung the gift thankfully
and with rejoicing at the feet of a man
who would never know the price she had
paid for his freedom.

It was a changed Susan who went downstairs
at the appointed hour to meet Mr.
Gay re.

He looked at the girl with wonder.
Where were the tears, the passion of grief,
the sorrowful scorn of his own meanness he
had witnessed only the previous night ? The
tears were spent, the passion was over ; the
girl Susan had departed into that shadowy
land of memory, from out of which, anymore
than from the grave, no friend who
once vanishes into it may return to smile
upon or greet us save in mournful recollection,
and in her place stood a woman who
would never again laugh with the gladness,
or weep with the passion, or mourn with
the despair, he remembered so well.

She gave him her hand, but it lay cold and
still in his, like a dead thing ; in her sweet
eyes he saw deep depths of sorrow, but no
light of welcome ; the very tone of her
voice was different. A swift wave of remorse
swept over Mr. Gay re as he looked on the
change wrought by a single night. Had he
killed her, he could scarce have felt more a
murderer than in that first moment of
remorse ; but the emotion rested on his soul
no longer than a passing shadow. The
woman seemed dearer to him than the girl
had ever been ; her beauty greater ; the
grave dignity of her manner, the utter ably
sad cadence in her tone, proved more captivating
to his middle age than the young
charm and gay grace of the Susan Drummond
he should never see again.

Always he had felt there was a chord in
Susan touched as yet by no one ; and now
he understood the nature of its harmony,
there arose an evil rejoicing that his had been

the hand to awaken the full deep swell a
human heart never gives forth till, having
eaten of the tree, it becomes as a god,
knowing good and evil.

Yes, he had done this, and so become
a part and parcel of her life for ever. Let
her forget what else she might, it would be
impossible for her to forget him. The lore
he had taught her was more subtle and
mysterious than love, for it showed her
the sin love is capable of begetting, told her
something of the terror of passion; whereas
hitherto she had tasted only its sweetness.

In one night she had grown afraid of him,
too ; afraid of the wrong a man will do, not
merely though he loves a woman, but because
he does so. Already she had graduated ina
school many of her sex — maids, wives, and
mothers — never enter ; nay, of the very
existence of which some remain in ignorance.

She dreaded both his power and his will.
Once she thought of him but as an ordinary

friend ; now she recognised him for an enemy.
If he had not seen the change in her face,
Mr. Gayre would have known from the first
words she spoke that, since they parted on
the previous evening she had thought more
about him than during all the preceding
months of their acquaintance.

I received your letter," she began.
Thank you for writing it ; but we need
not talk about what you said in it, need we ? "

If you see no need," he answered, " we
will not discuss the matter. I think,
however — "

At all events we need not talk about it
yeU'' she interrupted. " Perhaps," she added,
looking at him, as if trying to read his very
soul, " we might never have to discuss it."

'you mean in the event of my efforts
proving abortive ? "

Partly that ; " and her eyes fell under
a sfaze steadier than her own.

"It is better you should understand me

clearly," he said, and the change in her voice
was not more marked than that in his " remember,
I shall hold you to your promise I I
know if you chose to cheat me you could ;
but I am sure you would not cheat me."

No," she replied slowly ; " you know I
would not cheat you."

Neither will I delude you — do not
imagine I shall release you from your bargain
it was optional with you to make it. There
is time even yet to cancel it — do you wish to
cancel it ? "

Not unless I could save Oliver by other
means."

"It is still doubtful, remember, whether
he can be saved by any — "

So you told me in your letter."

And as it was optional with you to enter
into such an agreement, so it will be
optional with me whether I hold you to it
or not. I shall. It is only fair to tell you
this, to warn you to expect nothing

either from my weakness or my generosity.
And do not say to yourself ' If he loved me,
he would not exact such a price,' for you
would be wrong. It is precisely because I do
love as only men like myself who have passed
their youth can love, that I swear if any
human being can compass Mr. Dane's liberty
he shall walk out free. Then you must
marry me. I leave it all to your honour,
5^ou see. Were I wise, perhaps I should
stipulate for my price first ; but I trust
you implicitly — I, who once thought never
to trust a woman again."

"You may trust me."

"And some day you will love me. Do
not shake your head ; no woman marries
her first lover ; indeed, I do not believe
the woman lives that could tell who her
first lover was. I have no doubt Oliver
Dane was not yours."

I have loved him all my life."

And no one else ? "

No one else ! ''

Then I shall have only one rival ! " he
remarked.

I want to say something to you, Mr.
Gayre."

What is it ? "

He must never know."

"I do not understand you."

She twisted her white fingers nervously
together.

"Never know why I did it. Let him
think me fickle, false, wicked. I would
rather he supposed me the worst girl ever
breathed than that he came to understand
I had done what you ask for his sake.
Liberty would not be sweet ; he would fancy
the very air tainted, if he knew the price
I had paid to set him free."

Are you not mistaken ? Is not Mr.
Oliver Dane a gentleman who would prize
liberty on any terms ? "

"No. And it is you who are mistaken.

Mr. Gayre, why is it you hate him so
much — he, who never injured }'ou ? "

You love him," was the answer, and a
dead silence supervened.

"There is another thing I must tell you."

If it be of the same nature, it might
be well to defer the communication till we
meet again."

It cannot be deferred. I had another
letter last night."

"From whom?"

I do not know ; but in the same handwriting
as that I showed you."

And—"

It said, ' No time should be lost if anything
were to be done for Oliver Dane.
Some word of hope ought at least to be
sent to him at once.' Can any word of
that sort be sent him ? "

I do not know ; my acquaintance with
prison rules is, unfortunately, of the
slightest."

But 5^ou will ascertain ? "

"Yes, I will ascertain. For my own
sake I do not desire that any harm should
happen to Mr. Dane."

Sorrow enough will meet him. 0, Mr
Gayre, how can you ? If you were fond of
any one, I would not try to take you from
her — not if I cared for sou as much as — "

You do not," he finished.

That was scarcely what I was about to
say ; but — "

It will serve, and is perhaps a shade
more courteous than the form you had in
your mind. Again, believe me you are
mistaken, or else you are an exception to
every rule of your charming sisterhood. I
have seen — great Heavens ! what have I not
seen done by women ! No trick has been
too cruel, no artifice too mean, to sever
lovers, to entice a man's heart. Ay, and I
have known worse than that. I have
known a woman set out with the deliberate

intention of winning affections she meant
to fling away, and did fling away, as a
child casts aside a broken toy. I have
known the best years of a man's life
ruined because he found himself jilted by
such a woman —-his faith destroyed, his
hopes blasted, his belief in purity, goodness,
honour, ay, even common honesty, shaken
to its foundations."

She could not answer him. Because she
had no knowledge of how such things
affected a man, was it competent for her
to deny their reality ?

Further, she grasped he was talking of
himself — that in the background of his
life's picture there lurked just such a
woman as he had indicated — smiling, fair,
false.

No," he went on less vehemently,
"believe me, nor man nor woman can tell
the evil that ' desperately wicked ' thing
the heart is capable of conceiving and

executing till it is placed where its poAver
for sin has a full and fair chance of
development. You have no right to say
what you would or what you would not
do. How can you know. You have no
experience to fall back upon ; you are
like one walking in darkness who thinks
he sees. Yesterday morning nothing would
have seemed more incredible to you than
that you should promise to marry me.
Who can predict what a day will bring
forth? Who dare say temptation shall not
tempt, wrong shall not conquer me?"

I cannot tell'' she said, answering his
thoughts rather than his words. " All I
know is that, whether right or wrong,
what I have done has been done for
Oliver. If it be a sin, I cannot help it.
There seems no other way in which it
is possible for me to serve him. It maybe
I ought not to commit so great a
wrong to you, myself, and him ; but I

cannot think of him ill, dying perhaps,
and remain firm while there remains even
a chance of saving him. I am only a
woman after all."

"If you were only a woman you would
consider yourself first and your lover last.
It is because you are what you are — "

Do not go on, please," she entreated ;
and he stopped suddenly, knowing what
she meant — namely, that it was outside
their contract to speak about love till his
portion of the compact was fulfilled.

What are you doing Oliver ? " she
asked after a pause, during which she had
sat listening to the howling of the wind —
it was a boisterous morning — and fancying
what words her lover traced in its sound.

"I have done nothing yet. I am going-today
to see a person I think may do
something."

"Then why—"

Do I not go about the business at once ?

I could tell you, but I do not like. Yet I
will tell you. I stayed here because I
am mad — because I could not help saying
and doing and looking that which makes you
hate me. But I will leave you now, and not
come again till I am able to say either I have
some hope of obtaining his release or that
I shall never be able to obtain it ; " and
without word or touch or glance of farewell
he was gone, leaving Susan more utterly
alone than she had ever felt before. He had
been her friend, and he could be her friend
no more. The only news it was ever Hkely
he should bring her would be death to all
hope for her lover, or the tidings that the
date of her own execution was nigh at
hand.

Can I go through with it ? she thought,
with a sickening horror ; and then the courage
which had carried so many a Drummond
high above all considerations of danger and
supported him in death rose strong and

Vol. iii. 54

great within lier. " It is for Oliver," she
whispered, and clasped the talisman of her
lover's name closer to her loyal heart.

Meanwhile Mr. Gayre was hurrying City-wards,
as if pursued by a thousand demons.
He had done the things he ought not to have
done, and left undone those he ought to have
done. He had sneered at Susan, whose
tender nature was vulnerable to all his
shafts. He had twitted her with love for
her lover, as if a woman should not believe
her lover without peer. He had failed to
comfort — nay, rather he had torn her. He
had been — good Heavens ! what had he not
been ?

But at least," he thought, while slackening
his pace as he drew near Prince's Street,
she shall find no half-hear redness with mein
the matter of Oliver Dane. The sooner
he is released the better I shall be pleased ; "
and before repairing to his own place of
business he turned into the office of Messrs.

Colvend and Surlees, wliicli was close to
Lothbury.

Mr. Colvend in ? " he asked a porter.

"No, sir. Mr. Colvend has gone to
Brighton."

Can I see Mr. Surlees ? "

Mr. Surlees is out, sir. He will not be
back to-day. I think he is going down to
Brighton also this afternoon."

Since his first glimpse of Susan Drummond,
some check had always interposed between
Mr. Gayre and whatever purpose he might
have in view ; but he meant to take no
check now. Less civilly than usual, because
hitherto he had always striven to be courteous
towards persons in the City, even
though his heart was not one with them, the
banker remarked :

I suppose, however, there is some person
in charge to whom I can speak on
business ? "

Certainly, sir — Mr. Fife, sir. Perhaps

54—2

you will walk into Mr. Colvend's room, and
sit down for a moment. I will tell Mr. Fife
you are here."

Mr. Fife, in the character of chief clerk in
the old-established and steady-going firm of
Col vend and Surlees, seemed a very different
person from the insolent individual who in
his own, had bullied and taunted Mr. Gayre
in Wimpole Street. The atmosphere of the
City, and the consciousness he was only a
person in the receipt of salary, had so
impregnated the manner of his working
hours that it was at first quite a deferential
and cringing Samuel who, in a couple of
minutes, entered Mr. Colvend's private room,
and said,

I hope I have not kept you waiting,
sir.

Troubled as he was, Mr. Gayre could have
laughed outright. The famous story of
those bankers in Newcastle who, when the
great hair movement first made a stir.

intimated to their clerks that, " though out of
business hours they should not presume to
dictate what their employed were to wear, yet
within those limits they must request the
absence of moustaches," recurred to him.

Drink, however, unlike a man's own hair,
can have its times and seasons ; and during
business hours Mr. Fife never indulged in any
wilder carouse than half a pint of bitter.

I am sorry to find Mr. Colvend absent'*
said Mr. Gay re ; "I wished to speak to
him."

On a private matter, or on business
connected with the firm ? "

"On a private matter,"

! Can I be of any assistance to
you ? "

You can give me Mr. Colvend's address."

And so the cat ate up the blackbird, and
things went on as usual," commented Mr.
Fife ; and he took a rapid turn up and down
the room.

"I have no doubt there is profound
wisdom underlying your remark ; but,
wanting the key—"

•' Being eaten up meant a good deal to the
blackbird, but nobody else was much concerned
by the catastrophe. Heaven and
earth are likely to crash together in the
Colvend establishment ; but in Lombard
Street people will try to overdraw their
balances just as usual. And I don't suppose
any difference in the Bank-rate will be
reported tomorrow."

If you will kindly give me Mr. Colvend' s
address, I need not detain you longer."

Mr Fife did not answer. He took another
turn over the Turkey carpet ere he said,

Man and boy, I've been in this office a
matter of — But that does not signify. What I
was thinking is, I'll have to clear out now."

It certainly does not seem likely that you
will be entreated to remain," commented
Mr. Gayre.

I wonder if I have been a great
fool ! "

"That is a point on which no one can
possibly arrive at so accurate an opinion as
yourself."

Anyhow, I'm not going to draw back
now. That young minx shan't have everything
her own way. When were you thinking
of going down, Mr. Gay re ? "

By the next train."

Better not. Stop till after eye o'clock,
and I'll go too. You will want me, you
know."

H — m," remarked Mr. Gayre, doubtfully.
Well, 3'es — perhaps I shall."

"You won't find it all plain sailing," said
Mr. Fife. " Miss iDossie can lie through a
deal board, and make her father believe her.
You must see him and Mr. Surlees together,
and I ought to be one of the happy
party."

I have no particular objection. But how

are we to insure the presence of Mr.
Surlees?"

How ? He will be there, of course :
where your treasure is — you remember."

'' I have not an idea what you mean."

Why, that he is going to marry that
simple, innocent, fragile, timid darling, Miss

Dossie, her ! " and Mr. Fife turned white

with rage, and tramped up and down the
room, as though he were treading over Miss
Dossie's body.

She has cursed my life," he said ; *' but
she'll find she has met with her match. Ill
stop the publication of those banns, anyhow."

"I hope and trust you will be able to
prove your story. It would be exceedingly
awkward if "

I know that," interrupted Mr. Fife ;
and I tell you fairly, we'll have a lot of
bother both with the old man and the young
lady. That is one reason why I want to
go down with you. I can say what you

can't say. I'll not let either father or
daughter humbug me''

Do you think, then, that they could
humbug me ? "

They would try," said Mr. Fife, in a tone
which suggested he considered the attempt
might not be wholly unsuccessful.

In that case we will go to Sussex Square
together," said Mr. Gayre, glancing at the
slip of paper on which the manager had
written Mr. Colvend's address.

"Not nice weather for a trip to the seaside,
is it ? " suggested Mr. Fife ; and then he
opened the door for the banker to pass out,
and deferentially attended him through the
outer office.

At that moment the same idea crossed the
minds of both men.

I shan't cross this floor many more
times," thought Mr. Fife.

He has paid tolerably dear for Iuj^
whistle," considered Mr. Garrets

the I express rushed down to Brighton
that evening the wind howled and tore
around the train, and seemed to be trying
races with it. It had been a wild day, and a
wilder nio-ht was coming; on. There was
scarcely , a creature about on the Marine
Parade when Mr. Gay re and his companion
walked in the direction of Kemp Town ; but
at almost the loneliest part of the road
there stood a female, wrapped in a long-cloak,
looking out seaward, into the black
and dreary night. Neither man noticed her.
Mr. Fife was speaking, and Mr. Gayre's head
was turned towards him.

I suppose you have squared matters with
Miss Drummond," the manager said ; " because
if not — " and the remainder of his
sentence was lost in a sudden gust of wind.

The woman turned and stared after the
retreating figures. It was Susan Drummond.


She had that day fled from London with

lier nurse, leaving a note for Mr. Gayre,
stating she felt she must get away for a
short time, and promising to send her
address when settled.

A terrible unrest had again taken possession
of her, but it was pli3^sical rather
than mental. She could not remain still.
The stormy blast was no fiercer than the
fever coursing through her veins ; invisible
hands seemed drawing her into the night ;
voices, audible but to herself, cried to her
from the sea ; the darkness was filled with
fantastic shapes ; everything appeared
different from what was actually the case.
A moment after Mr. Gayre had passed she
began to doubt whether she had really
seen him, whether the words were not a
delusion of her own brain.

I wonder what is the matter with me ? "
she thought. " I suppose I ought to go
home."

She did not, however, make any effort todo

SO. She remained, with the wind buffeting
her, with the sea mainland lamenting
below, with the night getting wilder, and
the gloom growing denser, till a hand was
laid on her arm, and the old servant, who
had been anxiously seeking her, said :

My dear, what are you doing ? You
w411 catch your death of cold."

I do not know what I have been doing,"
she answered. " Where am I ? Oh, nurse,
take me somewhere — anywhere away from
all these dreadful people and this horrible
noise ! "

WHAT MR. GAYKE WISHED.

that have you done with Susan,
liyil Gayre ? " asked Sir Geoffrey
Chelston, wilkinson morning into the
dining-room at Wimpole Street, where his
brother-in-law sat at breakfast. "Now that
I have caught you I mean to get an explicit
answer. I call here, and I call at the bank,
and sou are never to be found. I write
to you, and for reply I receive something
to the effect that if / could tell you
where Miss Drummond is, you would be
much obliged to me. I can hear neither
tale nor tiding of the girl Her aunt does
not know where she is, or her cousin, or
Lai Hilderton, or Mrs. Jubbins. And 1

don't know; aucl I may just as well tell
you, I consider the whole affair deucedly
strange. I left Susan in this house, and
I've never set eyes on her since."

"Do you suppose she is in this house
still? "asked Mr. Gayre, buttering a piece
of toast with great deliberation.

I do not know what to suppose. One
way and another, 1 feel distracted. I half
suspect Sudlow wants to cry off. And now
there's Susan. If you do not know where
she is, you ought to know, Gayre ; that is
my candid opinion."

Miss Drummond is at Brighton."

"Brighton! What on earth took her
there ? "

To get ill, I suppose ; at any rate she
has been ill."

"And why could you not have told me
all this long ago ? "

Because I have only been acquainted
with her address since eight o'clock this

morning. She has had fever or something
of the sort, and was unable to write. She
is getting better now."

I feel a load taken off my mind," cried
the Baronet. " Ton my soul, I have been
madly anxious about the poor girl. Best
girl in the whole world ; and to think of her
being laid up all alone at Brighton."

She isn't alone ; she has some former
servant with her. Won't you have some
breakfast, Sir Geoffrey ? "

"Xot a morsel, thank you — must be off.
And yet, now I think of it, if you could
just let your man bring me a glass of beer,
I fancy I might manage a slice of that cold
beef — second thoughts, you know, eh,
Gayre? "

Wish. Gayre rose and rang the bell. As he
returned to his seat the Baronet eyed him
critically.

I say," he cried, " what's up ? What have
you been doing to yourself? Why, you

are losing all your flesh ; you are not half
the man you were a month ago ! No panic
in the City, I hope ? "

If there were, I do not suppose it could
affect me much. A house which does not
go in for great gains cannot afford to incur
the risk of heavy losses. No, I have been
worried to death about that Dane business.
I had better have gone and hanged myself
before meddling in the matter."

Ah, by-the-bye," said Sir Geoffrey, with
guileless innocence, " what is this I hear
about Dane ? "

I don't know what you may have heard
about him."

Why, that he is not guilty, and all the
rest of it."

Who says he is not guilty ? "

"That is beyond me to tell you. There
was a paragraph about him in the Chelston
Banner, a vile, low Radical broadsheet.
Wookes sent it up to me marked. The

London Correspondent stated lie had good
reason to believe the whole case would be
reopened ; that it was whispered one of the
parties engaged in what seemed to be a
most nefarious plot against the young man's
reputation was about to give himself up to
justice; that a thorough investigation had
been solicited ; that extraordinary facts had
already come to light, and further startling
revelations might be expected ; that a
gentleman in the City, possessed of wealth
and influence, had gone into the matter
heart and soul ; and that it was chiefly
owing to his exertions the whole villanous
conspiracy was exposed. Several romantic
circumstances were connected with the case,
and the name of a young lady freely whispered
as having taken a somewhat active
part in the affair."

During the course of this recital Mr. Gayre's
face was a study. His colour changed from
white to red and from red to white once more ;

Vol. iii. 55

he compressed his lips, an angry light shone
in his eyes, and he struck the table passionately
as he said,

That scoundrel will make a nice mess of
the whole matter."

'' Dear me ! Then there is something in it !
Poor, poor Susan, I am so glad ! If you
Remember, Gayre, I always said Dane was
innocent. When you were hardest upon him,
I maintained no young fellow, born and
brought up as he was, could have sunk into a
common thief."

"You did no such thing," retorted Mr.
Gayre. '' You said he was guilty, and complained
he would not make a clean breast of
the matter."

No, excuse me, Gayre, it was you."

"Excuse me, Sir Geoffrey, no man could
have spoken more strongly than yourself — "

Of course, m his behalf ! When all the
world was against him I raised my voice,
and-with

a muttered oath Mr. Gayre pushed
back his chair and rose from the table.

I know of old," he said, " it is of no use
trying to pin you down to any statement, or
expecting you to remember anything except
what suits your own convenience ; but I tell
you fairly I am not in any mood to stand
much more of this fooling. Would to Heaven
I had died before I ever heard the name of
Oliver Dane ; and I wish I could go to some
part of the earth where I should never
hear it again ! "

After which expression of opinion, Mr.
Gayre left Sir Geoffrey to his meditations.

The baronet shook his head.

Poor fellow ! " he said, in audible soliloquy
he's harder hit than I thought ; shouldn't
mind betting something now his chances are
not worth a brass farthing, or half the money.
Pity, too ! Well, I did all in mi power. It
was a match I should have liked vastly.
Lord, who'd have thought of things taking

55—2

the tiirii they have ! Daresay Dane will get
a lot of damages out of those rich beggars.
Hope he'll chance on a good solicitor — some
sharp lawyer up to his work ; that's what I've
wanted all my life. Must talk to Susan about
it." And Sir Geoffrey went to the sideboard,
and poured himself out another tumbler of
beer ; having drunk which, and casually
remarked to vacancy that his throat was as
dry as a whistle, he went off about his business,
whatever that might be.

Meantime, in hot rage, Mr. Gayre had
chartered a hansom, and drove down to the
Borough, in a street off which thoroughfare
Mr. Fife had hired a "second-floor front,"
large enough to contain himself and all his
worldly possessions. His first interview with
Mr. Colvend on the great Dane question
proved his last. He was not permitted to
remain long enough in the office, even to
balance his petty cash ; and had there been

anything wrong in his accounts, things would
have gone badly with him. Usually the
mildest of human beings, Mr. Colvend's indignation
against the ex-manager knew no
bounds ; and when Mr. Fife insisted upon
being brought face to face with the fragile
Dossie, he absolutely refused to produce his
daughter till Mr. Surlees said, in common
justice, that young lady should hear the
charge made against her.

That young lady denied everything. She
clung to her father ; she asked how he or anyone
else could believe such dreadful stories
about her ; she declared she had never
written a letter to Mr. Fife or spoken to him,
except in her father's office, in her life. She
looked at Mr. Surlees with great appealing
eyes shining through a mist of tears, and said,
Surely you won't desert me ; " she called
Mr. Fife a " bad, wicked man ; " she ran up
and down the gamut of all her little arts and
graces, and finally bursting into a torrent of

passionate tears, rushed from the room, Mr.
Gayre, with deadly courtesy, opening the door
for her.

Mr. Colvend followed his daughter with
feeble and tottering steps ; already lie looked
an old and broken man.

When he was left alone with Mr. Gayre and
the manager, Mr. Surlees rose, walked to the
hearth, and standing with his back to the fire,
and hands deep in his pockets, remarked,

Here's a nice kettle of fish."

It was so nice a kettle of fish that not only
had Miss Colvend lost her husband who was
to have been, but a dissolution of partnership
between Mr. Colvend and Mr. Surlees
became imminent.

"And whenever," remarked Mr. Fife to
Mr. Gayre, " two men fight, if you notice
some doiJ- <j;ets a kick. Fm the dos that has
got kicked this time."

And serve you right," thought Mr. Gayre,
but he did not say so.

Amongst the various persons concerned
somehow or other, Mr. Dane's little aft air
had come to a deadlock. Mr. Colvend po(jh-
cooled the idea of taking action in the
matter ; Mr. Surlees would not. Mr. Gay re
was at a loss to know how to proceed. Time
drifted on, and an innocent man lay at Portland,
fighting with disease and eating' his
heart out.

Cannot you get a message conveyed to
him somehow ? " Mr. Gayre asked Mr. Fife
who inquired what good that would do, unless
some one meant really to push the matter
ahead.

''• / don't intend to let Miss Dossie and her
papa walk over the course," said Mr. Fife, a
little later. " Fit find a way of forcing their
hand, or my name's not Samuel."

This, then, was Mr. Fife's notable scheme,"
considered Mr. Gayre, as the hansom swirled
round corners and dashed along crowded
thoroughfares.

"It was you put that notice in the Clielstim
paper," he said, entering Mr. Fife's room,
where he found him busy smoking a pipe.

Even so — it was I."

"And what object could you hope to
compass by putting in such a rigmarole of
nonsense ? "

"It is not nonsense."

Why, who in the world is going to give

himself up?"

I am, if things are not soon put on
some different footing. I have got a friend —
as clever a chap as you'd wish to meet — and
he told me that was the best and only way
to checkmate them and benefit myself."

"I think it might be checkmate to you.
So you have been taking advice about this
business, Mr. Fife, have you ? "

Only in a general sort of way. I'm nota
man likely to make confidants, unless I
see my interest in doing so. I can keep
my own counsel till I find it pays to open

my mouth. By the way, Mr. Gayre, have
you ever been to Tooting ? "

No ; why do you ask ? "

0, only out of curiosity. To revert to
the Dane question : is it likely, do you suppose,
that Messrs. Colvend and Surlees mean
to stir in this matter at all ? "

Not if they can avoid doings so."

And they consider themselves honest
and honourable men, I suppose ? "

Mr. Colvend does not believe your story."

'' None so blind as those that wont
see !"

And Mr. Surlees' notion is, Mr. Dane's
friends are as well able to take up the
matter as he. What I gather from his reluctant
remarks is, that he knows he must
have a great deal of trouble about the matter,
but he wants to have as little trouble as
possible. He means, I see, to put no obstacle
in the way, and is willing to facilitate any
steps which may be adopted to obtain Mr.

Dane's release. You can judge, therefore,
the annoyance I feel at the unwise step you
have taken."

1 am not so sure it Alas a mistake," said
Mr. Fife, with a nasty leer.

"Xo?" questioned Mr. Gayre. "While I
am here, Mr. Fife," he added, "pray oblige
me by putting out that pipe. I don't want
to aro about the City reeking of tobacco."

"I have no wish to offend you," returned
Mr. Fife, at once complying with the banker's
request. " Upon my soul, I'd rather work
for than against you, if only I could make
you understand it's of no manner of use
trying to gammon me. You see, I was not
brought up to the genteel humbug sort of
business, and I had to see so much and do
so much of it at Colvend's that I'm more
than a bit tired of trying to act the saint
when I feel myself a sinner. Now to tell yuu
what you came here in such haste to knoAV.
Do I think that little paragraph in the paper

will Stir up Colvend and Surlees ? Xo, I
don't — except to bitter wrath."

Then what made you put it in ? "

Well, you see, there are a few other
persons on earth besides Colvend and
Surlees."

Meaning — "

"Meaning in this especial connection ]\[r.
Oliver Dane's friends."

I am afraid Mr. Oliver Dane has no
friends except Miss Drummond."

Xot even you?" And at this juncture
Mr. Fife took up bis pipe once more, but
immediately laid it down again.

"I have tried to do what I could — I
hope I always shall continue to do what I
can— for Mr. Dane— not, however, on his
own account ; I never laid claim to being
a friend of his."

Suppose we drop all disguise, Mr. Garland
talk as if we were — I really don't exactly
know what : because, were I a partner,

say, in Glen's house, likely as not I
should put a gloss on for you ; and suppose
that's it — supposing you were such
as myself, what would you say to me, and
I to you, eh? "

"Eeally, Mr. Fife, I do not know;
much the same, however, I imagine, as I
am saying to you now, and you are saying
to me."

"Not a bit of it!" exclaimed Mr. Fife.
What I should say is this : "I meant to
make one person speak, and that person's
surname is Gayre, Christian name Nicholas.
He has been trying to drift on with Miss
Drummond, and now he knows he must
speak if he does not want somebody else
to forestall him ; and as he dislikes having
his cattle hurried, he is furious with Samuel
Fife for spurring them on a little."

"Your knowledge of me and my motives
seems exhaustive," observed Mr. Gayre.

"I am very glad you think so, because

that is precisely my own opinion. I have
o^iven a food deal of thought and attention
to you, one time and another. Long before
this question about Dane arose I used to
wonder — wonder like the deuce — how any
man in his sober senses could let a business
such as yours go to the dogs."

Is the manner in which I conduct my
business any concern of yours ? "

No ; I only wish it were. People would
soon see some changes in Lombard Street
that might surprise them. I know what is
passing through your mind — ' bachelor's
wives and old maid's children ; ' but a
bachelor can surely tell when a man's wife
is going wrong, and an old maid need
scarcely be a Solomon to know her neighbour's
boys are a set of unruly brats."

If my affairs have given you any
amusement, Mr. Fife, I am sure I ought to
feel gratified. As to Miss Drummond, even
had I been disposed to repeat to her the

story of Miss Colvend's evil-doings, no opportunity
has presented itself for doing so.
I have not seen Miss Drummond for nearly
a month."

Why, what's the cause of that ? "

Illness, from which she is only now recovering



"Whew!" whistled Mr. Fife. "That's a
bad job. I wish I had known. If I had,
I wouldn't have trumped your ace just yet."

It can't be helped," said Mr. Gayre ;
accepting his own defeat and Mr. Fife's
concession with an air of lofty magnanimity.
" I confess I did desire a little time
in which to prepare Miss Drummond's mind
for the fact that it might be possible to
prove Mr. Dane innocent. Now, however,
thanks to you, matters have reached a
point which compels me to go straight
from here to my solicitors."

All right," answered Mr. Fife ; " and if
they tell you there is only one way to



clear Dane, I'll stand to what I said, and
give myself up. Ask your solicitors
whether they think I'd get clear off, and
if not, the term for which I should be sentenced.
I want to know, for more reasons
than one."

"Very well, I will ask them," agreed
Mr. Gayre, wishing more than ever, as he
made his way down the narrow staircase
of a house let out in " apartments," he had
never heard the name of Oliver Dane.

HAVE YOU EVER BEEN TO TOOTING ? "

^T is somewhat humiliating to consider
how much sickness and how little sorrow
affects our personal appearance. A bad bilious
attack will pull a man down more than the
death of his wife ; toothache keeps a sufferer
on whom it has fastened its fangs wide awake,
though heartache often fails to do so.

All her mental anguish — and there could be
no question but that since the previous summer,
the girl had passed through a season of
intense and continuous agony — had failed to
work the change in Susan Drummond a few
weeks of serious illness sufficed to do,

Mr. Gayre felt unutterably shocked when,
ushered into the room where she sat in an

easy clair propped up with pillows, he saw
the havoc so short a time had wrought.

Pale, wan, emaciated — a mere shadow of
her former self — her eyes dull and weary, her
listless hands thin and nerveless, her whole
tired attitude that of one who had just
returned worn out from so long a journey
into the Dreadful Valley — it seemed almost
as though she might better have gone on to
the end of her awful pilgrimage, and entered
a land from whence no tone returns to earth,
no echo even of a sigh.

Could this really be Sir Geoffrey's Susan,
with whom he had ever associated the idea
of strong health and almost superabundant
vitality ?

"Miss Drummond," he said — and those
were the only words he could speak, ashe
tenderly took her wasted fingers in his
own strong clasp — and looked mournfully
at the woman he loved.

Won't you sit down," she asked, feebly

Vol. iii. 56

HAVE YOU EVER BEEN TO TOOTING ?

Sl^T is somewhat humiliating to consider
^|§ how much sickness and how little sorrow
affects our personal appearance. A bad bilious
attack will pull a man down more than the
death of his wife ; toothache keeps a sufferer
on whom it has fastened its fangs wide awake,
though heartache often fails to do so.

All her mental anguish — and there could be
no question but iliad since the previous summer,
the girl had passed through a season of
intense and continuous agony — had failed to
work the change in Susan Drummond a few
weeks of serious illness sufficed to do,

Mr. Gayre felt unutterably shocked when,
ushered into the room where she sat in an

easy clair propped up with pillows, he saw
the havoc so short a time had wrought.

Pale, wan, emaciated — a mere shadow of
her former self — her eyes dull and weary, her
listless hands thin and nerveless, her whole
tired attitude that of one who had just
returned worn out from so long a journey
into the Dreadful Valley — it seemed almost
as though she might better have gone on to
the end of her awful pilgrimage, and entered
a land from whence no tone returns to earth,
no echo even of a sigh.

Could this really be Sir Geoffrey's Susan,
with whom he had ever associated the idea
of strong health and almost superabundant
vitality ?

"Miss Drummond," he said — and those
were the only words he could speak, ashe
tenderly took her wasted fingers in his
own strong clasp — and looked mournfully
at the woman he loved.

Won't you sit down," she asked, feebly

Vol. iii. 56

the while she smiled a wan, sad smile,
which smote him to the heart.

Why did you not send to some of your
friends ? " he asked, " it was cruel to leave
us in ignorance of where you were, in
such uncertainty as to what could have
become of you."

"No one knew where to send," she answered.
" I wrote as soon as I could."

"I wanted to write to you," said Mr.
Gayre, " but having no address — "

"Yes— about what? Oliver?" and for
the first time she hesitated a little over
his name, and coloured painfully.

"Yes, about Mr. Dane."

"Is he— free?"

"Not yet, but — " as she turned her head
aside with a faint gesture of sorrowful disappointment,
" pray do not look so wretched.
Miss Drummond. I have every reason to
hope his imprisonment will not continue
much longer."

You are-■■ only saying that to comfort
me. Perhaps he is dead. I have been ill
such a time. Tell me the worst ! Oh ! if he
is dead, I wish, I wish, I had died too."

"He is not dead. Upon my word of
honour, as far as I can know anvthins^ I
have not actually seen, I believe him to
be well again, or at the worst, very much
better. A message, I understand, has also
in some manner been conveyed to him, so
that he knows friends are at work who
soon hope to compass his release."

But friends have always been at work —
and hitherto no good has resulted — and I
don't think any good is likely to come from
their efforts. Oh ! what shall I do — oh ! my
darling what can I do? If only — only you
were able to tell me," — and as she finished
this last apostrophe, which was not in the
least degree addressed to Mr. Gayre, great
tears rolled down her cheeks— tears she was
too weak to wipe away.

56—2

almost at his wit's end. " The words are a
mere form, and what can the form signify in
such a case. You want to get Mr. Dane
away from Portland ; do not quarrel with
the means likely to compass that object
most speedily."

I will not — I forgot. Liberty for him on
any terms — any'' and she laid her head
wearily back on the pillow, "yet I can't
think Oliver would care for freedom as a
favour, which ought to be given to him as a
right. He must know nothing about it till
lie is out again. Were I a man — " and she
stopped and made a sign for Mr. Gayre to
give her water.

It was sweet to do even this much for her,
but it was dreadful to feel how she shrank
from contact with him as he held her up,
and see the way her feeble hand shook, and
hear the glass tinkle against her teeth,
because he who once would have been denied
no privilege of staunch and kindly friendship.

had passed the border line and mentioned
love.

Putting a strong constraint on himself,
as a father might have done he withdrew
his arm, and took the water from her lips,
and crossed the warm covering over her
panting breast. Then he said, moved by
what demon he could never afterwards
imagine,

"Were you a man you would feel like
a man, and the man does not live who, after
a few months, ay, days, of penal servitude,
would not take his liberty on any
terms."

She did not answer him for a minute.
Restlessly she moved her averted head, as
though struggling with some great emotion.
Before turning her face again towards him,
she said, in a feeble voice, yet with the
greatest decision,

Had Oliver been the poor creature you
think him, I should never have promised to

almost at his wit's end. " The words are a
mere form, and what can the form signify in
such a case. You want to get Mr. Dane
away from Portend ; do not quarrel with
the means likely to compass that object
most speedily."

I will not — I forgot. Liberty for him on
any terms — any'' and she laid her head
wearily back on the pillow, "yet I can't
think Oliver would care for freedom as a
favour, which ought to be given to him as a
right. He must know nothing about it till
Fie is out again. Were I a man — " and she
stopped and made a sign for Mr. Gayre to
give her water.

It was sweet to do even this much for her,
Lut it was dreadful to feel how she shrank
from contact with him as he held her up,
and see the way her feeble hand shook, and
hear the glass tinkle against her teeth,
because he who once would have been denied
no privilege of staunch and kindly friendship.

had passed the border line and mentioned
love.

Putting a strong constraint on himself,
as a father might have done he withdrew
his arm, and took the water from her lips,
and crossed the warm covering over her
panting breast. Then he said, moved by
what demon he could never afterwards
imagine,

Were you a man you would feel like
a man, and the man does not live who, after
a few months, ay, days, of penal servitude,
would not take his liberty on any
terms."

She did not answer him for a minute.
Restlessly she moved her averted head, as
though strucrcrhnof with some «-reat emotion.

O CO c c

Before turning her face again towards him,
she said, in a feeble voice, yet with the
greatest decision,

Had Oliver been the poor creature you
think him, I should never have promised to

be his wife. Though that is all gone and
past, you must never say anything against
him to me. For even in spite of all his
faults — and he has faults — I shall think
of him as the one perfect man I ever knew.
A man could not be perfect who was more
than human."

"It is something," said Mr. Gayre, "to
know how to avoid your displeasure. I
only wish you would tell me how I could
win your favour."

"I am so tired," she moaned, "I wish
you would go. No, I did not mean to say
that — only I feel weary — weary — "

I am going," he answered. " I will
not intrude longer, but before I go tell me
what I can do to please you."

She could not speak the words that
trembled on her lips, but she looked at him
with that piteous look of dumb entreaty we
sometimes see in the eyes of an animal
utterly at our cruel mercy, then —

"Be just to Oliver," and hid her face,
whilst «rivinor him her hand.

Yes, this was all he could ever expect
from Susan Drummond. If his name never
passed her lips, it would be " Oliver,"
Oliver " " Oliver," in her heart forever.


Mr. Gayre had some time to wait before
a train started for town, and he employed
the interval in walking along the Rotting
Eoad till he found a point whence he
could reach the shore.

The tide was out far as tide at Brighton
ever is, and while he stumbled back over
the great stones and shingle he took a
savage satisfaction in telling himself the
mess he had made of a life that once
promised a brilliant future.

First Love, then Money, then Love
again. Accursed be both love and money,"
he muttered, regarding that horrible waste
of long and unpicturesque sea which is seen

to such advantage from the East End of
Brighton.

"When she marries me — and she will
marry me, because such as she cannot
give a promise and take it back — the same
loyalty which has kept her true to a man
under a heavy cloud will keep her faithful
to her husband. I shall have to dread no
rival save the never-to-be-forgotten and
perfect — And yet, my God'' he added, turning
quite unconsciously seaward, as though
he felt somewhere — somewhere beyond the
low horizon running in an expanse of dull
grey water — the God in whom he believed —
our God who sits above the water-clouds
would hear the cry of one of His creatures,
who in no great or grand fashion had
drifted so hopelessly wrong — " I would
rather try conclusions with any rival than
contempt any man than repugnance."

What have I done ? " he thought, walking
slowly along the beach, with head bowed and

hands clasped idly behind this back, " that
twice I should have loved women who had
no look or smile for me. I — " and then,
memory, taking him gently by the hand, ofave
Ili back the shy glances, the faltering tones
of those who in the days of the dead gone
by, which could be his no more, would have
been o-lad to take him for better, and
equally ready to leave him if worse ever
came.

It's all a mystery," he thought, as sometime
or other we have most of us thought,
when trying to solve the great problem of
lives mismatched, or worse than mismatched ;
and then he went back to town, and in the
stir and bustle of London forgot the lesson
of which, by the mournful sea, he had
caught a mere glimpse, but which there
was nothing surer than that, in some form
or other, he would have to learn to the
last word ere he understood Xicholas Gayre.

Once again time went on, the days flew

by; two or three afternoons a week,
occasionally more frequently, the banker
ran down to Brighton, but he made no
progress with Susan. In fact, he made as
little progress with her as his solicitors
seemed to do with the Oliver Dane conspiracy.


At last there came an hour when Susan
spoke plainly. She was getting strong again ;
she could walk a short distance ; the far-away
look he had come to know so well lay
constantly folded within the deep brown
depths of her tender eyes. The roses which
go on blooming, even over the grave of
human hope and happiness, had begun to
tint her cheeks once more ; her figure gave
promise of again being rounded. The
Susan he once knew had gone like the last
year's snow, but a fairer, nobler, more
worthy Susan paced the Marine Parade,
rejecting the supporting arm he would
have wished her to lean on for life.

Once again spring had come upon the
earth — spring, early spring, that year filling
the world with gladness — gay with flowers —
bright with sunshine ! All through the
land hawthorn was blooming, and birds were
singing, and wild flowers decking the fields
and river-banks and copses.

The sea looked blue and gUttering, as it lay
calm under the azure sky ; but Susan had
no thought to spare for sea or sky, or white-winged
vessel. Still Oliver Dane remained at
Portland, breaking his heart or eating it out,
according to whether despair or frenzy was
at the moment in the ascendency.

I mean to leave Brighton, Mr. Gayre," she
said, at length ; " and return to London."

"You prefer London?" This was interrogative.


"I think I may be able to do something
for Oliver, there — and I know I am doing
nothing here."

Mr. Gayre bit his hp, but made no reply

They walked on a little further, and then
Susan, pausing and looking over the parapet
down at the shore beneath, went on,

And I have been also thinking that when
I do go back to town it might be better if
you did not call so frequently."

May I ask your reason ? "

He knew his wisest policy would have been
silence but the question rose to his lips and
he had no power to restrain its utterance.

You know," she said, " our arrangement
was conditional — "

"Yes — but we mentioned no special time
in which those conditions were to be fulfilled.
It is not from any lack of endeavour
on my part that — "

•'lam quite willing to believe you," she
interrupted, " it would be terrible to think,
really, you had not done all in your
poWer — nevertheless — "

"It is a matter which cannot be
hurried — "

I mean to try if I cannot hurry it ;
and if through my exertions Oliver should
be set at liberty — "

Our contract is to be considered at
an end ; is that what you want to say ? "

"I feel it had better be at an end.
You see," she went on more firmly, now
the first step had been taken, " if Oliver's
release cannot be procured soon it mayas
well never be procured."

"You think so?"

Yes I do — a fcAV months more and he
will have been in prison for a year. You
cannot tell me now, certainly, that at the
end of another year he will be free. It
may be all very well for us — standing
here — able to go and come as we like,
but for him — " and she broke with a little
passionate cry for help to the God she
sometimes thought — she could not avoid
thinking — had deserted her.

"If — " and her voice was calm and

steady once more, " if, though innocent, I
cannot prove his innocence — if there is no
justice or mercy to be hoped for — we
must bear our burden of sorrow as best
we can. He has lived somehow through
this awful time. If I can do nothing I
must live, too, that I may meet him when
he is once more free. I have made up
my mind, Mr. Gayre. It was for OHver,
I said I would marry you if you obtained
his release. It is for Oliver I say that
as you seem able to do nothing to help
him, we must part. No woman cares less
for the world's opinion than I, but I am
bound to consider the man whose wife I
mean some day to be. Though he has
lost everything else, he shall find he has
not lost me."

Mr. Gayre did not answer immediately —
he felt stunned. That she could arrive at
such a decision was an idea which had never
occurred to him. Something lay beneath

the surface. Could Mr. Fife — could anyone,
have sent her that cutting from the
Chelston paper. No, he scarcely thought
that — but —

I presume you do not mean to sit
down and abandon Mr. Dane to his fate
without making some further attempt in his
behalf."

No. I told you I thought I could help
him, and I intend to try."

And may I not be permitted to assist ? "

Well, you see, Mr. Gayre, so far your

assistance hitherto has been of but little

use, and — "

I have asked such a price for it," he

finished.

I would have been willing to pay that
price for it ; I would have paid any price,
almost, before my illness to set Oliver free,
and ever since, till quite recently, no thought
of refusing to act up to the letter of our
bond occurred to me. But you have not

Vol. ui. 57

fulfilled your part. Oliver is still in prison ;
time goes on, and nothing is done on his
behalf. His innocence is not proved ; even
that free pardon of which you spoke is not
obtained. Why should I remain in servitude
when no good results to him. If nothing
can be done by man, I must ask God to
give Oliver and myself strength to bear
our burden with submission, and live as
cheaply as possible, so that when he comes
out he maps have a home to receive him,
and money enough to take us both abroad
should he wish to leave England."

In other words, Miss Drummond, you
have thought of some scheme by which
you may obtain his release irrespective of
help from me."

Yes, I have thought of a plan, but
I daresay it would never have occurred tome,
had your help promised to be of the
slightest use."

"May one inquire what your plan is?

If it be a secret," lie added, seeing she
hesitated, " pray do not feel yourself under
any compulsion to tell me."

There is no reason Thy I should not tell
you," Susan answered-before I left
London, if you remember, I received two
anonymous letters."

"Yes, I recollect."

Well, I think the writer meant kindly
by Oliver and me."

Possibly."

"And what has occurred to me to dois
this : Advertise and entreat the writer
of those letters to come and see me. I have
thought the matter over, and it seems tome
there is hope in the plan, even if only
a forlorn hope."

"There maybe."

You do not seem to think much good
likely to result from my scheme ? "

"My own have not hitherto borne so much

fruit I dare venture to disparage yours."

57—2

told himself it was impossible no means
could be found to liberate an innocent
man. His solicitors, though slow were
sure, but if Susan took the helm she
would do one of two things, either run
her vessel on the rock, or else, by dint
of sheer determination, 2fet the case brought
so prominently before the public that Mr.
Colvend, by the mere force of popular opinion,
would be compelled to urge his daughter
to confession.

Further, he distrusted Mr. Fife. He could
not understand the expression with which
the ex-manager occasionally regarded him.
He had no reason to suppose the man
meant to play him false, yet that some
scheme was maturing in his busy brain, he
felt it impossible to doubt. He knew him
to be needy, unscrupulous, desperate ; sofar
he had been living on the money Mr.
Gayre paid him, but from time to time he
threw out hints which implied his views of the

future were larcfe, and that it was not his
intention to render those dreams realities by
dint of hard-work.

Had enough of it for dog's pay," lie
explained ; " whatever halfpence might be
going Dane got — I had the kicks for my
share."

Likely as not the moment Susan's advertisement
appeared he would go to her, get
money from her, and tell her the whole
story.

Xo, I'll stop that," thought the banker,
looking askance at his companion, who,
with eyes bent down, seemed trying to
solve some knotty problem, " and you shall
marry me yet. You will find you have not
to deal with a boy, or even Oliver Dane," —
having arrived at which conclusion he said

o

aloud,

Though I am not to write to you
you will write to me, if you think I can be
of any service — and you will not go away

and hide yourself without leaving even an
address where a letter might find you."

"I did not do so before, intentionally,"
she answered. " You know 1 was so ill, so
very ill. Just when you spoke I was
thinking about the night when I came down
here. It seems a long time ago, but perhaps
you remember what a stormy day it was."

Yes, Mr. Gayre did remember — he was
never indeed likely to forget that journey
from London, with the wind lowing round
the carriage — and rain dashing itself at
intervals against the glass.

It was a wretched day," he agreed, " and
a adore wretched evening."

Well, do you know I could not rest in
the lodgings, but came out here, where weare
now, alone in the wild weather. I must
have been mad to do such a thing — and am
going to tell you the oddest fancy. As I
stood here — just about here — I felt sure I
saw you pass. A strange idea was it not?

It was not half so strange and inexplicable
as the tell-tale colour which rushed
up into Mr. Gayre's face. He could not
help it, he could not command his features.

Were you here — really ? " asked Susan,
astonished. "I always thought it must
have been a fancy of mine— but — "

"It was no fancy," said Mr. Gayre, "I
came down here on the Oliver Dane business.
I hoped to have settled it that
night."

"And there was some one with you."

The banker made a gesture of assent.
He could not have spoken then to save
his life.

And he said, ah ! " and Susan pulled
herself up in the middle of her speech, as
we sometimes start in the middle of a
dream.

They did not exchange another word
till they reached the lodgings. Mr. Gayre,
though uninvited to do so, followed the

girl in. Susan did not sit down, and so
he could not.

I am to go, then," he said, " and never
return unless I bring you good news — it
is rather hard for me, is it not ? "

It is better," she murmured.

Yes, for you, perhaps. I wonder, though,
if my absence will make you as much
happier as you suppose — whether you
won't miss me a little. Before we part,
can't you find one kind word, Susan, to
say to a man who loves you as he never
loved any creature before."

It was the first time he had called herby
her Christian name, but she did not
take any notice that he had done so. Lifting
her eyes she looked him straight in the
face, and said :

I will try and forgive you, Mr. Gayre."

Forgive me for what ? " he asked.

For hating Oliver, for seeking fee or
reward in this matter, for donor so little to

help him in his strait. I know you would not
have done anything if you could have helped.
Had the cases been reversed, he would not
have acted as you have done. He would have
moved heaven and earth to compass your
freedom ; he would not have tried to take your
promised wife from you ; he would not have
insisted on a woman marrying a man she could
never love nor respect, as the price of her
lover's freedom."

Good-bye," he said, holding out his hand,
do not let us part in anger ; you will be
sorry after I go, to think you could speak
such cruel words. I asked for a blessing and
you give me instead something akin to a
curse. I wanted some pleasant memory
to carry away with me into the world, and
you impute the worst possible motives tome,
whose only sin has been, loving you too
well and faithfully. No, you need not tell
me to go, I am going. Why are you so
angry with me, that you will not give me

even your hand ? What is the reason of this
extraordinary charge ; why will you not
speak? Well, I had better go, I suppose.
Good-bye, Susan. Good-bye, my darling."

Good-bye," she answered, coldly.

He took a few steps towards the door, then,
moved by some sudden madness, turned,
and before she could have the slightest idea
of his purpose, had clasped her in his arms,
and kissed her over and over again.

She did not struggle, she did not speak a
word, only when he released her, which he
did as suddenly as he had caught her to him,
she stood for a second, looking with eyes
full of wonder and reproach, and then, still
in silence, walked out of the room.

Mr. Gayre was not perhaps in the
happiest state of mind for seeking an interview
with Mr. Fife, yet it was to that
individual's lodgings he repaired immediately
he arrived in London.

Before he slept he felt he must know the

course Mr. Fife would adopt. If Susan
advertised for the writer of those letters
would he go to her, that was the question
Mr. Gayre put plainly to Messrs. Col vend
and Surlees' late manager.

"/ shan't take a morsel of notice,"
declared Mr. Fife. " What's the reason
of this new move ? She's not satisfied I
suppose."

Very much the reverse."

What's the matter with her, Eome
wasn't built in a day, or a night either,
and it's not so easy to fret a man out of sfaol,
as anybody might suppose till he tried the
experiment. Besides, what does she want?
Her young man running loose about the
world, no doubt ! If she could only realise
the fact, he is far safer where he is — and
when all that is settled, why doesn't she
marry you — I thought the matter was finally
arranged."

Mr. Gavre shook his head. "We will

not discuss Miss Drummond any further if
you please," he remarked ; and on Mr.
Fife saying, " all right," very cheerfully,
the conversation would have ended, had not
the ex-manager suddenly put this question :

"By the by, Mr. Gayre, have you ever
been to Tooting."

You asked me that same question sometime
ago," said the banker. "Is it a conundrum,
or have you any special reason for
referring to the place ? "

Well, yes, I have. Look here, Mr.
Gayre, should you like me to put sou in the
way of making a lot of money ? "

Money is always useful. Is there a gold-mine
anywhere in the Tooting direction ? "

There is a quagmire, at any rate, where
a fortune is in the way of being lost. When
I used the word making, I ought to have
said saving. I can prevent your being a
good bit out of pocket, or I am much mistaken."


Prevent my being out of pocket ! What
do you mean ? "

Precisely what I say. I believe I can
be of use to j'Ou, Mr. Gayre ; but I do not
want a sum of money this time — I want a
commission. Will you give me ten per centon
any loss I am able to put you in the way
of avoiding ? "

I have no objection to make such a
promise, if I see that the loss without your
interposition would have been certain."

"Will you stick to that?"

"Yes, subject to the condition mentioned."

The commission is too heavy. Look
here, let us say five per cent certain, and I
will leave the rest to your generosity — or
rather to your justice, for I don't believe
you are generous."

"You ought to be honest, Mr. Fife, for
you do not flatter."

"You would not give me sixpence more
if I did flatter you. Now, before we engage

on this other matter, I should like to understand
exactly how you and Miss Drummond
stand. She wants to see me, and you do
not want me to see her. What's up ? "

"I have told you. She thinks she can
find some means to obtain Dane's release."

And supposing she did — what then ? 0,
you don't want to tell me that ; come, jon
had better. There was once a lion, you
know, and there was likewise a mouse. Two
heads are better than one, remember, particularly
when the second head is mine.
What was the nature of the arrangement
you made with her ? "

Mr Gayre stood silent. Even to this man,
who had been his evil genius, he could not
tell the nature of the bargain he had made.

Shall I guess for myself? " said Mr. Fife,
with a nasty laugh. " The arrangement was
conditional — speak if I am wrong — and
the lady now wants to back out of it. I
could have told you exactly how it would be.

They are all alike. The very best of them
can't bear to wait a minute for anything.
If you are unable to hand the article they
ask for across the counter they will have
none of it. You ought to have married her
first ; made her fulfil her part of the contract.
She will never marry you now. If the truth
were known, I daresay she is tired of Dane
too — perhaps seen somebody else she fancies
better than either of you."

No, that she has not ! " exclaimed Mr.
Gayre, vehemently, finding voice at last.
I wish to heaven she had ! She speaks of
nothing, cares for nothing, thinks of nothing,
but Oliver Dane. I can see she is now
gradually making up her mind to wait for
him. She has done a rule-of-three sum.
One year has nearly gone by — seven years
will in the same way pass somehow for both
of them. Once she relinquishes all hope oi
getting the sentence reversed, she will put
down the number of days before he can

Vol iii. 53

walk out a free man, and every night, after
she says her prayers, strike one off the list."

"Do you mean to say, then, matters are
quite at an end between you ? I thought,
from your wanting me to keep quiet, you
had not quite played out all your own cards.
Tell me the real state of the case. After
to-night you will not be able to devote much
time to Dane's affairs, and you will need my
help there, too, or I am greatly mistaken."

Though still not easy to talk of the
matter, Mr. Gayre found it easier to say he
had still three months, during the course of
which, if Dane could be set free, Susan
would marry him.

It's not long," observed Mr. Fife, rubbing
his chin, when, after a considerable amount
of hesitation on the banker's part, he found
himself in possession of the girl's expressed
determination, " but we must see what can
be done. It is getting dusk now, Mr. Gayre;
if you will kindly put on your hat, we will

make the best of our way to Tooting. If
you do not care to be seen travelling with
me — and, indeed, it is as well we should not
seem acquainted — we can behave like total
strangers on our journey."

I leave the whole matter to you," said
the banker, carelessly; though, indeed, there
was nothing he less desired than to be going
about the world in the character of Mr.
Fife's bosom friend.

Long before they reached their destination
it was quite dark, but by the aid of a lamp
close at hand, Mr. Gayre was able to take inmost
of the details connected with a fine
old house, to which his companion silently
directed attention.

It stood well back from the road, and

was approached by a gravelled sweep, which

enclosed a circular grass-plot. There were

trees and shrubs of old growth about the

place, and an air of stability and repose

marked the house and its surroundings.

53—2

You would not say that establishment
could be kept up on a few hundreds a year,"
suggested Mr. Fife, as they stood together
looking over one of the entrance gates.
There is a stable at the rear, and one
very good horse in it. There is a coach-house
and a natty brougham in it. There
is a garden which requires two men to keep
in order ; and there is a presiding deity in
the shape of a lady, who cannot get through
the day without being waited on by a
butler, a maid, a housemaid, and a cook.
Just a quiet, modest, steady-going, respectable
establishment ; no show, no ostentation ;
nevertheless, one that must require some
small amount of money to keep going.
Don't you agree in my opinion ? "

Certainly," said Mr. Gayre, sorely
puzzled.

"The lady," proceeded Mr. Fife, "who
resides in that house is supposed to be a
widow, possessed of a fair fortune. Her

reputed name is Stanley. She is not very
young — over thirty, at any rate — but she is
handsome. You have taken in as many of
the details of the place as is possible, unless
we could get inside, which we can't. We
must not stand here any longer. I want to
call on a friend in the neighbourhood for
five minutes; so if you will charter a cab
and drive home to WimjDole Street, and give
your servants orders to admit me when I
appear, I will follow you as quickly as
possible."

You intend to tell me something you
think I ought to know ? "

Yes ; for Mrs. Stanley is not a Widow,
was never married, and has not a sixpence of
her own."

"Then who — " began Mr. Gayre.

'• What I mean to tell you when I get to
Wimpole Street is the name of the man who
supplies the sinews of war necessary to carry
on that campaign."

AWAKENING.

^irr^1l[^0EE than an hour elapsed after Mr.
pl^hJ^ Gayre's return to Wimpole Street,
before Eawlings, opening the library door,
announced Mr. Fife. Contrary to his evening
custom, that gentleman was perfectly
sober ; and as he deferentially took a seat
opposite the banker, he looked once again a
model clerk — a man who had not a thought,
hope, wish, beyond the counting-house and
his employer's interests.

He was paler than usual, and seemed
fagged, which fact he accounted for by
remarking,

"It's a long pull from Tooting here."
Surely you have not walked ! " said Mr.
Gayre.

"0 no! I haven't walked; but take it
any way you like it's a long pull." Then he
sat silent for a while, contemplating the
candlesticks as if he were appraising them.

I am going," he at last began, speaking
slowly, and never removing his steady gaze
from the candlesticks, " to tell you the name
of the man who keeps up the establishment
we were looking at this evenings. He is
called Nicholas Gayre."

Are you mad ? " asked the banker. " I
never was at Tooting in my life before. I
never knew there was such a house as that
you took me to see, and I never heard there
was such a person on earth as the Mrs.
Stanley who, you say, lives there, till you
mentioned it."

That may all be — indeed I know it all is.
Nevertheless, it is you and no other who rent
the house, pay the wages, settle with the
tradespeople, and spend Heaven only knows
how. much on madam — "

You will perhaps presently kindly explain
the enigma."

Presently — yes. I suppose " — and at
this point Mr. Fife turned his eyes towards
Mr. Gayre — " you will not dispute the fact
that a business cannot stand still ? "

I should have thought it possible."

Should you ? Well, it can't ; nothing
under heaven can stand still ; it must be
always advancing or retrogression. When
sour great-grandfather died he left a fine
business behind him. When your grandfather
died the business was a fine one still,
but the diminishing process had begun. The
world was going on, the business was being
left behind. When your father died, comparatively,
Gay res' had dwindled to quite
a small concern ; when you die — "

*' Pray proceed ; do not allow any feeling
of delicacy to stop you," urged the person
whose end was so plainly alluded to. " When
I die—"

"There will be no Gayres if you do not
meantime either attend to your business
yourself, or see that somebody else attends to
your business for you."

"May I ask the connection between all
this and the house at Tooting ? "

Certainly ; I am getting on to that.
When your father died he left you, amongst
other things, a safe business, if a small one."

You are quite accurate, Mr. Fife."

And a perfectly honest staff of clerks ? "

I believe so. Till quite recently I never
had any reason to suspect the honesty of anyone
in the establishment."

And in that case it was not you discovered
there had been peculation ; it was your
manager, Mr. Mangrove."

"It was his duty to discover if anything of
the sort was going on."

Exactly. And whose duty is it to discover
if anything is going wrong with Mr.
Pengrove ? "

With PenoTove ! 0, that is too absurd ! "

Is it ? I suppose Mr. Pengrove's salary
does not exceed eight hundred a year ; in
fact, I know it does not."

I do not know where or how j^ou obtain
your information, Mr. Fife, but in this instance
it is correct."

"While up to the year 1866 he had but
five hundred. Daring the crisis of that
summer he proved himself so able and trustworthy
that your father advanced his salary
to six hundred."

Again you are right."

Since that period you gave him another
advance of a hundred ; and last year finding
personal attention to business more and more
irksome, and the society of your brother-in-law
more and more fascinating, and your
manager more and more trustworthy, you
finally raised his honorarium — that is the
word, is it not? — to eight hundred."

"Though of course delighted to find how

thoroughly acquainted with the details of my
business you are, I must confess to some
surprise as to how you have mastered
them."

I could tell you that, too ; but it is a
matter quite beside the question, and would
only detain us from the point we have to
consider. Mr. Pengrove, then, till about the
end of the year 1871, had nothing except
six hundred a year on which to support a
wife, educate his children, and what is called
maintain his position."

Mrs. Pengrove was an heiress."

Heiress to what ? Xo money, certainly.
To ill-health, I admit, and a tendency not
uncommon amongst ladies, of rendering home
somewhat unpleasant to her husband''

Do you know for a fact she did not bring
Mr. Pengrove a fortune ? "

For a fact. Mrs. Pen-rove was a Miss
Barley, the daughter of a gentleman out at
Horton, who amused himself by preaching

thunder and lightning sermons on Sunday ina
little whitewashed barn, and supported a
large family by selling exceedingly bad
grocery through the week. Miss Barley had
nothing but her face, and that soon faded ;
she looks now like a very poor portrait in
water-colours which has hung for a long time
on an exceedingly damp wall. Mr. Pen-grove
I presume, told you his wife had a
fortune ? "

"Merely incidentally. Whether she had
or not was, of course, no business of mine."

0, of course not ; no more jove: business
than whether Jane, your housemaid, meets
her young man round the corner."

Mr. Fife, will you kindly say in so many
words how that house at Tooting concerns

me?"

"With the greatest pleasure, Mr. Pengrove

is Mrs. Stanley's ' trustee.' Mr. Pengrove is
constantly at the house on business ; and
one of these fine days he will marry the

lady, and take up this abode at Tooting
altogether."

"Bless my soul, the man can't marry
her! He has trot a wife already, as you are
well aware."

Yes ; but that wife can't live long. She
has an incurable disease. It is only for
contrariness ' she has not died long ago ;
and when she does die, you shall see what
you shall see if you fail to put a stop to
Mr. Pengrove's little game at once."

And what is his little game ? "

That is for you to find out. I have
sketched an outline ; you surely can fill in
the details. I have no exact means of
telling how much you will find yourself
to the bad ; but I should imagine the
deficiency will turn out to be not less thana
hundred thousand pounds."

"What?" said Mr. Gayre ; and he said
no more, for the simple reason that he
could not.

And if you don t want to be utterly
ruined," went on Mr. Fife coolly, "you
will put your own shoulder to the wheel,
and try to get your cart out of the rut."

But how ? " asked Mr. Gayre, at length
finding voice — " how could any man rob
me to such an extent?"

I'm sure I cannot tell ; you know the
position of your own bank better, I should
imagine, than anybody else, except sour
trusty friend and servant, Mr. Pengrove.
If you have not money in your strong-room,
you have, I suppose, money's worth.
Where are yon going ? No, for Heaven's
sake, Mr. Gayre, don't make au}^ disturbance
to-night. If you go to Pengrove's
house, he'll give you the slip safe as yon
are alive. Let it be till tomorrow morning.
Get to the bank early — he's always
there early ; have him into your private
office, and don't let him leave it till you
know where every title-deed and bond and

mortgage is you may ere long be called
uj^on to make good,"

I will go down to the bank now, and
examine the securities. If I find one missing,
I shall give him in charge to-night."

Do ; and / give you not longer than
eight-and-forty hours to repent not taking
my advice. Why, your bank is not a strong
one — you know that ; and if at a day's
notice the deposits are withdrawn and all
securities required, you may as well put
up your shutters."

I would rather do that than — "

But whv should you do anvthincr of
the kind? You must make up your mind
to lose a lot of money, but you need not
lose all. If you must have revenge, welland
good ; but first count the cost. It's
all very well to cut off your nose to spite
your chin ; but after a while a man must
begin to miss his nose. If you only keep
a quiet tongue in your head, you may pull

through yet ; if you don't the bank of
England couldn't save you so far as to
enable you to get a living out of Gayres'
in the future."

Far into the night Mr. Gayre and Mr.
Fife sat talking. According to custom, at
a certain early hour the female servants
repaired to bed, leaving Eawhngs on guard
below. He was the most discreet and faithful
of butlers ; yet even he could not help
marvelling what his master could find to
say to that low impudent fellow Fife.

He might just as well ask me into the
library, and order up a devilled bone and
some punch for my supper, as have him
there," grumbled the man to himself;
and then Mr. Gayre's bell tingled, and
Eawlings, quiet and decorous, went upstairs
and waited just inside the door to
hear what his master wanted.

Shut that door," said Mr. Gayre, " and
come in."

Eawlings obeyed.

"I am afraid something is wrong in
Lombard Street," began this master.

Truth is," interposed Mr. Fife, fortified
by hot brandy and-water, " I know there is a
great deal wrong in Lombard Street, have
just come round to give your master a hint
and—"

"Allow me for a moment, please, Mr. Fife.
I shall want your help tomorrow, Eawlings ;
therefore please see breakfast is ready at
eight, and that you are at liberty to leave
for the City at half-past. I will give you
full directions in the morning."

Thank you, Colonel," and the man could
scarcely refrain from the old military salute,
so delighted was he to be taken into confidence,
so relieved to find this unaccountable
intimacy with Mr. Fife indicated nothing
worse than something going wrong in Lombard
Street. "Though, indeed," thought
Eawlings, " that might mean a good deal

Vol. iii. 59

to some of us. I wonder if the Colonel
would go back into the army ? I don't
know how I should take to that myself
after the time I've had of it here."

Do you think you can trust him ? "
asked Mr. Fife, as Ealing left the room.
I would trust him with my life,"
answered Mr. Gayre.

Ah, but this is not a question of life ;
it is one of money," said Mr. Fife, with a
sarcasm that would not have disgraced the
banker himself.

Late though it was before Mr. Gayre went
to bed, he never closed his eyes. He had
slept after the loss of his self-esteem, but
he could not sleep now the loss of money
was in question.

At last he realised all the bank had done
for him ; how little he had done for the
bank. What Mr. Fife said was painfully
true. As each succeeding Gayre for generations
had departed, he left in proportion

to the times, less money behind him. It
was pretty nearly the old story of the single
talent repeated in Lombard Street. Safety
the Gayres had thought of to the exclusion
of progress ; and now, as a fitting sequel,
the last of the name seemed likely to be
not merely shoved up in a corner, but left,
in addition, well-nigh destitute.

"And you have no one to thank but
yourself'* Mr. Fife had most truly observed.
If a man professes to be in business, he
should attend to his business. Your father
did not ask you to give up the army Merely
that you might drop into the bank for an
hour a day. He could have found a dummy
to do everything you latterly professed todo
— better."

It was of such utterances as these, and
of how certainly he had left things to " take
their chance," Mr. Gayre thought as he
tossed restlessly from side to side.

Even then Ruin might be keeping watch

59-2

in Lombard Street, though the outer world
were still in ignorance of her presence.
Kuhn ! worse than ruin ! Value lay, or was
supposed to lie, in the strong-room at
Gayres' to a larger amount than the whole
of the money he owned in the world would
cover.

Nothing had been advanced upon those
deeds and mortgages and bonds, and plate
and jewels ; but " — and at this point Mr.
Gayre started up with the intention of
fijoinor there and then to Lombard Street to
learn the worst — " if these things were not
forthcoming, how should he meet man or
woman who had confided them to his
keeping ? " The Act of God was one thing,
the carelessness of man another ; and Mr.
Gayre knew, since he relinquished the idea
of making Gayres' a big power in the City,
that he had been criminally careless both
of his own estate and the goods of other
people.

During this last year particularly," conscience
limited, in no uncertain tones, " each
day you have been getting worse and worse ;
each hour you have been leaving more and
more to subordinates."

A true bill," he murmured. " I have
not done any real good since I saw Will
Arbery riding Squire Temperley's hunter in
the Park. AVould to Heaven I had selected
any other route that morning, never stopped
to speak to Sudlow, never set eyes on my
niece, never watched young Arbery managing
that horse, never seen Susan Drummond !
Yes," he added vehemently, " I would to God
Susan Drummond had never crossed my
path ! "

It was not the first time he had expressed
that wish ; but even when the powers of
good and evil were waging war within him,
he had never felt it more fervently. To be
not only lowered in his own esteem, but to
be poor as well, seemed more than he could

bear. Hitherto, if he gained Susan he
accounted the world well lost ; but when it
came to the test, when he was called upon to
lose much the world accounts of value, Mr.
Gayre could not be quite so certain.

Suppose at that moment Ruin was actually
in the cellars of Gayres', crouching beside
The Tortoise, removed from its proud position
by his grandfather, what could Susan avail
him ? She did not love him rich ; was it in
the least degree likely she would care more for
him when poor ? How could he humble himself
to tell her that even riches had refused to
stop with him ; that his boasted wealth was
gone, and his social position also ? She
would say, perhaps, they would have to
make the best of matters ; say it with that
look of half contempt and whole dislike he
had learned to know so well. He never
could make her care for him : while the sunset
and the moon rose, while grass grew and
water flowed, he never, let him do what he

would, might win a glance of love or a smile
of welcome from the woman he had treated
as a conqueror might a slave.

Over and over and over again, through the
watches of that dreary ni^^ht, he conned the
words of that song so many of us, under like
circumstances, have set to doleful music of
our own making, the burden of which is
Loss, and the refrain Despair.

He tried to sleep, but he could not. He
strove to cheat himself into the belief Mr.
Fife had spoken untruly, but even that poor
reed broke as he touched it. Mr. Fife's way
of talking was not that of a man who desired
to delude or conciliate. Quite the contrary
Mr. Fife was terribly plain. He said Mr.
Pengrove had stolen, was stealing, would
steal ; that Mr. Gay re had no more right to
complain of having been robbed than a
shopkeeper who puts his goods out on
the pavement for any thief to walk off
with.

Confidence," he went on, " may be a very
fine thing in theory, but your customers, I
fancy, would think caution a vast deal better
in business. You should have kept your
keys yourself, Mr. Gayre, and seen the locks
were not tampered with."

Long before it was time to go to Lombard
Street Mr. Gayre had finished breakfast.

Having agreed to follow Mr. Fife's advice
he could not, as his inclination prompted,
rush down into the City and go through
the contents of Gayres' strong-room without
another moment's delay.

If once the affair gets wind you may
suspend payment," Mr. Fife told him. '" Follow
my counsel, and, unless things are in a
very much worse state than I think they
have yet had time to get into, you may, with
hard work and judicious management, pull
through. But remember, you will have to
work hard, and bring all your common sense
to bear on the matter. Half the bankrupts

in London smash up because the moment
some bother comes they lose their heads. I
am talking of the honest men. Swindlers
rarely make a mistake of that sort."

At length the moment arrived when he
might make a move, and, like a greyhound
let out of leash, Mr. Gayre started for the
City.

It was the first time in his experience he
had ever wished to go there ; and even
in the midst of his anxiety he could but
smile to consider the reason. " I have
let all these years slip by," he thought, " and
now in a moment the fear of poverty brings
me to my feet, as the hope of gain never
could have done."

In Lombard Street he met Mr. Fife, and
turned with him for a moment into Change
Alley.

Think you are in command again,
Colonel," said the ex-manager very earnestly.
It needs as much courage to face a difficulty

like this as to stand fire. I'll be at hand
when you want me."

The interview between Mr. Gayre and his
manager was not long, but it sufficed to
change Mr. Pengrove's whole appearance.
Wlien he entered the private room he looked
a smug, prosperous respectable man of
business ; when he came out he resembled
nothing' so much as a thrashed hound,
longing for a quiet corner in which to lay its
aching bones.

But there was to be no quiet corner that
day. He had to go on with his work just as
if detection were still in the far distance. He
was obliged to assist in checking the securities;
he had to compel his trembling lips to speak
and try to steady his hands, and strive to
seem unconscious that even when, for appearance'
sake, he went out at one o'clock
for his accustomed chop, he was never lost
sight of for a moment.

During the whole of that busy day Mr.

Gayre's thoughts did not once stray to Susan
Drummond. For the first time since their
ill-starred meeting, he forgot the fact of her
existence. The hours were so full of excitement
and anxiety, Love found himself out of
court ; and when, late at night, the banker
returned to Wimpole Street, lie saw, almost
with indifference, a letter addressed in a handwriting
which four-and-twenty hours previously
would have stirred his every
pulse.

The contents were merely to the effect that
Susan had returned to her former lodofinors.
The note began " Sir " and ended " yours
truly."

"I shall have to think about all this later
on," he considered, feeling in very truth he
was unequal at that moment to think of any
subject save whether it would be possible to
save his credit.

You must Et money, and that immediately,"
had been Mr. Fife's last words before

he left the bank, where he stopped for hours
after every one else — even Mr. Pengrove —
was gone ; and it was how to get money
without exciting wonder or arousing suspicion
which occupied Mr. Gayre's mind ashe
walked ceaselessly up and down his
dining-room.

Able to come to no conclusion, exhausted
both in mind and body, feeling his tired
brain at last refuse to answer to his call, he
went wearily up-stairs to bed, where,
perfectly certain he should not close his eyes
all night, he fell into a deep and peaceful
slumber.

The sun was streaming into his room,
when he awoke with a start, and the words
some one had spoken to him in a dream still
ringing in his ears.

"Mrs. Jubbins will lend you the money
go to her."

Yes, Mrs. Jubbins would lend him the
money, but could he go to her ?

Mr. Gayre thought not, and the close of
another anxious day found hin in the same
mind.

"Have you decided on the best way of
quietly raising enough money ? " Mr. Fife
asked, when once again they parted at the
bank. "There is no time to lose."

Mr. Gayre knew that. Nevertheless, he
felt he could not possibly ask for help from
Mrs. Jubbins.

If your bank," said Mr. Fife, who really
was working heart and soul in the matter,
had been like any other bank, there would
be no trouble about the matter ; but no
legitimate reason exists why Gayres should
be short of cash. You don't discount, you
don't advance ; you run no risks ; you have
done nothing like anybody else ; and the
consequence is, now you need to borrow,
everybody will imagine there is something
wrong. Yet money must be got till you
are able to turn yourself round. Have you

no friend who could and would help you at
this pinch ? "

Mr. Gayre answered that he had friends,
but he did not like to ask them.

"Perhaps you would rather go into the
Gazette ? " suggested Mr. Fife. " I foresee
that will be the end of the matter if you
delay much longer ; and it would be a
thousand pities. Lord, if you only had
a few capable men about you, what might
not be made of this business even now !
Why don't you go to your solicitors ? "

Xo, Mr. Gayre thought, he would not goto
his solicitors then, at any rate.

"There is one person I feel sure would
lend me all I want," he, at last explained,
with a little natural hesitation.

Then for Heaven's sake do not lose a
minute in seeing him ! " cried Mr. Fife.
Any day or any hour some one of these
things may be required, and the worst of
most of them is that no money could replace
them."

That is too true, unfortunately," answered
Mr. Gay re. " I will go now, before I change
my purpose."

"That is right," said Mr. Fife I "and I
hope from my soul you may be successful."

LUCKY AT CARDS, ETC.

^f^RS. Gubbins was not in her pleasant
'^ drawing-room when Mr. Gayre
arrived at ' the Warren. After a minute
or two spent at one of the windows idly-trying
to catch the only peep of the Nock-holt
Beeches obtainable from Lady Merits
dower house, the while every instinct
lie possessed was revolting from the errand
which had brought him down, Hoskins
appeared, to say this mistress was in the
wilderness — should he send for her — or
would Mr. Gayre prefer to go to Mrs.
Jubbins there. Mr. Gayre preferred the
latter suggestion, and, making his way into
the wilderness by a walk which led straight

from the trim terrace into a grassy hollow,
where the trees irrew so thick they found ita
hard strucff^le for existence — where bracken
and grass and blackberry runners, and
hemlock and srorse and wild flowers all
mingled in rank and picturesque luxuriance
soon found, by the noise of voices, he must
ascend to a higher part of the grounds, left
almost as much to the gardening operations
of nature as the dell he had plunged
into.

It was with a little cry of genuine pleasure
and surprise that Mrs. Jubbins, seated on a
mossy bank and surrounded by some of
her younger children, welcomed his arrivaL

You are such a stranger," she began
but I won't waste a moment in scolding
YOU now YOU have come. I am so glad to
see you again," and Mrs. Jubbins really
looked delighted as she stood, handsome,
prosperous, happy, and middle-aged, with
the sunbeams glistening upon her luxuriant

Vol. iii. 60

hair, her well-developed figure, and lier
rich, yet quiet dress.

You have not lunched ? " was almost her
first question.

'" Yes, thank you, I have."

Then what should you like best to do,
go in doors, or stop out here, and enjoy this
perfect afternoon ? "

Mr. Gayre, deciding to enjoy the perfect
afternoon, found a seat for himself on a
felled tree, and took off his hat with a view,
as Mrs. Jubbins decided, of making himself
quite at home.

Never perhaps on the face of this earth
did man feel himself less at home, but he
was in for the matter and did not intend his
courage should fail him at the last moment.

"Where have you been all this time,"
asked the widow, " out of town ? "

No, not out of town except for a day,
now and then ; I have been very fully
occupied."

And how is your niece ? "

Very well, I believe — I have not seen
her for some time."

"When is she to be married?"

I really do not know — I have not seen
Sir Geoffrey either very lately. Have you?"

Xot since Easter. He does not come
here now — "

"Oh"— and mr. Gayre looked at Mrs.
Jubbins, and Mrs. Jubbins looked at Mr.
Garland

I am so sorry," added the widow,
for I thought him a most delightful person,
so amusing — and original — "

Happily," interpolated Mr. Gayre —

"But he chose to take offence, and of
course I could not beg and entreat of him to
come here on a merely friendly footing."

It was much safer not," said Sir Geoffrey's
brother-in-law.

And how is that dear Miss Drummond ? "

"She is getting better."

60—2

"Still at Brighton?"

"She was the other day," answered Mr.
Gayre, who had his own reasons for not
mentioning the fact that Susan was in
London.

What about that wretched man, Dane ? "

I trust he will be at liberty ere long."

Dear me, I hope not."

Wliy do you hope not, Mrs. Jubbins ? "

Because that poor girl will marry him,
and there can be nothing but misery for her
with so dreadful a creature."

"There are persons who believe he was
wrongly convicted."

That is too shocking — of course, if he
had been innocent he would not have been
found guilty."

I do not think that exactly follows."

Oh ! but it does, you may be quite
certain. I was talking to Deputy Pettell
about the matter only yesterday, and he
assured me there could be no possible

doubt upon the subject. Of course lie must
know, having so much to do with the Lord
Mayor, and being constantly at the Mansion
House."

'' I should not dream of pitting my poor
opinion against that of Deputy Pettell."

Xow you must not be naughty, Mr.
Gayre. I can't allow it. I really can't.
Mr. Deputy is a particular friend of mine,
and he is not to be laughed at."

''I was not laughing at him, I assure you.
Nothing could possibly be further from my
mind than laughter of anv sort."

And I am sure I do not feel inclined to
laugh when I think of that sweet Miss
Drummond behoof married to a convict."

But, my dear Mrs. Jubbins," expostulated
Mr. Gayre, " you signed the petition for that
convict's release."

So I did, but I never thought anything
would come of it."

Mr. Gayre laughed — though in no mirthful

mood Mrs. Jubbins' answer tickled his
fancy.

You are always making fun of us poor
women," said the widow. " It is really the
case, though ; I would not have put my name
to anything of the sort if I had thought
there was the least chance of Mr. Dane
being released. I did so hope that poor Miss
Drummond would have foro-often him, and
married somebody else. I knew Sir Geoffrey
hoped the same thing — indeed, he more than
once implied he knew a gentleman who was
very fond of her, and would make her a
most excellent husband."

He did not mean himself, I suppose,"
suggested Mr. Gayre.

Oh ! Mr. Gayre, how can you ? — Why,
she is a mere child in comparison with him,
and besides — "

Sir Geoffrey was thinking of some one
else ! " finished the banker, with a dubious
smile.

I did not mean to imply that," said Mrs.
Jubbins, laying a sprig of moss on the back
of one white hand, and smoothing it with
the other. "It was of Miss Drummond.
though, we were talking. If you have any
influence over her — and of course I know
how retreat your influence is over every
person with whom you come in contact —
do persuade her to forget that wicked young
man."

It is an unfortunate fact," answered Mr.
Gayre, " that I have not the smallest influence
over Miss Drummond. I do not think
an angel could turn her out of any road
she thought would lead to Oliver Dane."

I am afraid that is too true. The very
last time I saw her she told me she should
prefer water and dry bread with him, to
anything in the way of luxury wealth could
furnish without him."

"She will, I fancy, shortly be able to
indulge her preferences."

I do not like to speak hardly about her,
but it seems to me infatuation. If we did
not know those old spells and things had
long been done away with, I should almost
say she must be under some possession or
fascination.

"So she is — she is in /t^yc?," returned Mr.
Gayre.

But there ought to be some sort of
reason in love."

'there ought, but there rarely is," and
Mr. Gayre sighed involuntarily, and looked
down towards the hollow where Mrs. Jubbins'
young fry, tired of the improving conversation
between their elders, had betaken themselves.
He and the widow were alone.
Sunbeams were glistening through the leaves
the wind was gently stirring the boughs,
a great peace reigned all around ; if he was
ever to say what he had come to say he
felt lie ought not to let this opportunity slip.
Mrs. Jubbins was looking at him a little

perplexed. He raised his head and looked
at her, then plunged into the matter, at
that moment nearest to his heart.

I have come down to-day," he began,
to ask you a favour — a great favour."

'• Whatever the favour may be it is
granted," she said, quickly.

"Xo," he answered, "you must not bind
yourself in any way till you have heard
what it is."

The ice was broken, what he had to say
seemed easier with every word. If there
were one thing Mrs. Jubbins understood
better than another, that thing was business.
She liked sentimental books, she had a fancy
for romantic and melancholy poetry, she
adored rank, and would have done aught a
woman might to get rid of that dreadful
name she had taken for better for worse in
St. Pancreas Church, but when all was said
and done her one talent was for business.
Even while Mr. Gayre continued speaking

she grasped the position, she saw exactly
where the difficulty lay, and how it was
to be surmounted ; no need of tedious explanations
or wearisome repetitions with her.
Mr. Gayre had to listen to no weak expressions
of wonder, or feminine ejaculations
concerning the sinfulness of Mr. Pengrove.
In fancy, it is true, Mrs. Jubbins saw Gayres'
tottering to its foundations, and herself as
guardian angel, restoring the stability of
the bank with her money bags ; but, refraining
from all gush or effusion, she simply
said,

You can have as much as you want.
Every jenny I own, if necessary. I know
the money which I feel I only hold in trust
for my children will be safe with you. I am
very grateful to you for coming to me."

There is nothing' like doing: things
thoroughly. Mr. Gayre felt almost stunned
by such impulsive generosity, such unquestioning
confidence. He forgot the

ideas which annoyed and the mannerisms
that amused him in Mrs. Jubbins, and remembered
only the warm-hearted woman
who had never once ceased in her attachment
and friendship for himself. He lead not
treated lier well, he thought ; lie had not done
justice to the nature his father always declared
he could not sufficiently extol.

Yes, Eliza Jubbins was a thoroui^dilv o-ood
creature. To eyes wearied with looking
at possible ruin, she seemed positively
beautiful, seated on that mossy bank, tearful
yet smiling — so glad, so very, very glad he
had come to her.

Thank you for your trust in me," he said.
I will not abuse it."

Xo need to tell me that," she answered,
the very idea I ''

It was a delicious afternoon. To Mr.
Gayre's fancy, Heaven seemed to have comedown
to earth on a brief visit. The utter
peace of Nature in her milder moods had

never before appealed so strongly to his son.
There was rest in every sight that met his
eyes, in each sound that came wafted to his
ear. As in a dream he looked at dancing
leaves and velvety moss and opening fronds,
a!) the rich Ijrown of the old ferns that still
littered the ground, at the pine cones and the
last autumn's acorns and oak apples bountifully
strewing the ground, at the tiny wildflowers
blooming amongst the short grass,
almost too minute for individual notice yet
spangling the sod with such beauty as the art
of man might strive in vain to equal. There
was a solemn hush about the place also to
one accustomed to the din of London — a
hush broken only by some sound of country
life ; near at hand a thrush was sinfrinfr honor
gushes and snatches of song ; down in the
hollow the young folks were laughing and
playing ; from further off, softened by distance,
came the gruff shout of a waggoner to
his horses. The air was full of the thousand

nameless yet subtly exquisite scents of spring.
As a man just rescued from drowning might
survey with languid rapture the aspect of
some fair land of safety to which he had been
borne, so Mr. Gayre looked at the sylvan
scene surrounding him, listened to the
twittering of birds, the rustling of leaves,
the occasional scurry of a rabbit, inhaled the
balmy air and all unconsciously drank in the
health-giving odours of resinous pines.

"How pleasant it is here," he said, "what a
delicious spot to rest in."

Yes, it is very nice," agreed Mrs. Jubbins,
but I do wish sometimes it was nearer town.
People will not come so far, and really, after
London, one cannot help finding the country
dull."

I daresay any one living in it always
might find it dull, but to me this spot seems
perfect."

"You would tire of it if you were here
always," declared Mrs. Jubbins, with decision.

I do not mean The Warren is not very
pretty and all that, but, dear me — I so often
wish it could be transported bodily eight
miles nearer the Bank. I should not so much
mind if there were any pleasant neighbours
who would drop in of an afternoon or
evening in a pleasant way, but when one has
to get one's society as well as many other
things, down by train, the country becomes a
trial."

Have you not society in the neighbourhood,
then? "

"There is plenty of society if it would be
sociable, but it won't. To be anybody here
it is necessary to be enormously rich. In
Brunswick Square I used to think 1 was a
person of some consequence, but amongst all
the great people about me I assure you I feel
very small indeed."

Mr. Gayre turned an interested glance
upon the lady. Hitherto it had seemed to
him anyone with such an income as was

possessed by Mrs. Jubbins might have secured
a fair social position. Beyond a certain point
it lead not before occurred to him money was
essential to social standing.

He had heard of such things as a pair not
associating with a single brougham, of
butlers refusing situations where one footman
at least was not kept, but his own path
having' led him out of the way of these nice
distinctions of modern rank, he had always
felt inclined to believe stories of the kind
must be the invention of some poor wretch ina
garret, striving to earn an honest penny by
gibbeting respectable people, of whose habits
and thoughts and modes of proceeding he
knew literally nothing.

And at times I really find it very dull,"
went on ]airs. Jubbins, who having got her
father-confessor in an agreeable mood seemed
determined to improve her opportunity.
•' Of course there are my children, but they
have their pursuits, and indeed, occasionally

even for their sakes, I lon^r for something
different in the ^vay of friends — greater
variety. Of course the people my dear
husband knew and esteemed always must befriends
of mine, but the world has gone on,
and since I came down here I see clearly
that what seemed very good society to him
and your kind father would not be thought
very much of now."

It was a very safe sort of society, at all
events," suggested Mr. Gay re.

I know that ; but look at the sons and
daughters of some of the families your
father was most intimate with. They are
enormously rich, they have had advantages
such as I never thought of, they can talk all
sorts of languages, they can play and sing
and paint like professionals ; they mix amongst
the aristocracy, there is no line drawn now
between the City and the West End if people
choose to entertain, and push themselves
forward. Things were very different once,

and not so lon^r as^o either. I am old-fashioned
enough to dislike such rapid changes,
and to feel that though I am, thank God, so
well off and happy, it is a little hurtful to be
left out in the cold."

The banker sat silent for a minute, then
he said, " I often wondered you have never
married again."

"Have you — I do not think you need,"
she answered.

There ensued an awkward pause — not long
but sufficient for a proposal had he wished
to made it. Mrs. Jubbins sat on thorns, till
unable to bear the idea that she had in
any way committed herself, she added, as if
in continuation, " Where should I ever meet
with any one who would do full justice to
my children. Of course, I might have
married, every woman who has money can
do that— but— "

He did not make her any reply; he
looked at the moss, at the flickering leaves,

Vol iii. 61

at the modest wild flowers, while his thoughts
raced backward to the time when his
father wanted him to ask this woman to be
his wife.

He micfht have done a o-reat deal with her.
He might have made much of his life,
taken a position in politics, become a landed
proprietor, gone on, as Mrs. Jubbins truly
said, other people had gone on, doubled
the ten talents committed to his charge,
beyond all things been spared the awful
trial of loving' a girl ounce enough to be
his daughter, who would never care for
him while seed-time and harvest endured,

It was all a tangled hank, that might
once have been woven into something
beautiful and useful, but which now —
With an impatient gesture he changed his
position, and idly clasping his hands, remained
with head bent and eyes fixed on the
ground, while Mrs. Jubbins watched him, and
wondered what he could be thinking of.

I am sure," she said at last, " you will
be kind enough to stay and have some
dinner with us. ^Iw and Mrs. Gibson have
taken a house on the Common, and they
are comines over this evening. It would
be such a pleasure to me if you could
stop and meet them — I know you do not
care much for City people, but — ."

You must indeed think me ungrateful
if you suppose it is likely I should refuse
any request of yours."

Xow," cried Mrs. Jubbins, with an attempt
at playfulness which sat a little heavily upon
her, "I can't have anything of that sort. It
is I, and I alone, who ought to feel grateful
all these years you and your father have
been showering kindnesses on me, and
hitherto I have not had even a chance of
making the slightest return. Then you will
stop for dinner. Thank you very, very
much."

They strolled back to the house through

61-2

the wilderness and the dell, over the grass
that stretched down to the hedge dividing
the Warren from the high road, up the
steps into the garden, and so leisurely back
to the House through banks of flowers and
across green soft sward.

"It is a lovely place," said Mr. Gayre,
with conviction, as he stood within the
porch looking at the still peaceful quiet of
the scene, and he repeated the same idea
to himself as he leaned later on beside
one of the windows of a dressing-room
built out so as to command a view of
tangled greenery and lofty forest trees. The
ground at this point slope I sharply away
from the house, and he could see down
into the hollow, round which were planted
beautiful and rare shrubs ; rhododendrons
grew there in the wildest profusion ;
variegated hollies lifted their heads on high,
the graceful Italian broom and the double
gorse clustered together in friendly acquaintance.

Nothing which could please the eye,
and gratify the taste, and delight the heart
seemed absent from that fair little domain.
It was an emerald gem encircled by a band
of deeper green.

A human being might be very happy
here if he did not bring his own misery
down with his furniture," thought Mr. Areas
he turned from the window and addressed
himself to making such a toilette as was
possible under the circumstances.

The bodily fare provided that day at
dinner was as good as fare could possibly
be, but the mental nourishment appalled the
banker. It partook of the nature of mental
bran and though wholesome was scarcely
satisfying.

Mr. and Mrs. Gibson had been old and
valued friends of the lamented Mr. Jubbins —
they had also, though in a distant sort of
way, known the elder Mr. Gayre, and their
talk was of times gone by, and how things

had changed, and the price of property hi
the neighbourhood of Chislehurst, and the
rents of good houses " good fine houses " in
the squares, in the better period of old.

"Ahl"- said Mr. Gibson, "there was no
necessity then to trouble oneself with keeping
carriages and horses — and a lot of fellows in
the stables to eat a man out of house and
home — one could cover one's friends then
with a handkerchief. It was just across
the square, or over the way, or up the
street, all quiet, and comfortable, and friendly
no hurry to catch trains — no tearing and
rushing about the world. Modern improvement
may be a very fine tlnng, but give me
the days before steam, sir, life was worth
having then."

I trust, Mr. Gibson, you find life a little
worth having still," Mrs. Jubbins interposed,
and then Mrs. Gibson said it was all talk —
that no one appreciated the convenience of
railroads more than Mr. Gibson, Who could

not endure stopping trains. " You know
sou can't, Charles."

It was all perfectly safe conversation ; no
human being could have objected to it on
the score of morality, but Mr. Gayre felt as
if he were back in the " old days before
steam," and should never get out of them
again.

Xor when that wears dinner was finished,
and Mr. Gibson had drank as much wine ashe
thought o'ood for him, did the banker
find himself at liberty to depart.

Mr. Gibson does so long for one rubber,
Mr. Gayre," pleaded Mrs. Jubbins ; and then
of course a table was opened and the
inevitable pack of cards produced — and the
usual jokes about partners uttered — and then
a dead silence settled down, and Mr. Gayre
found himself in possession of a series of as
bad hands as man could be dealt.

They played for money — Mr. and Mrs.
Gibson were partners to Mrs. Jubbins and

Mr. Gay re. It was perhaps for this reason
the banker's run of ill-hick was regarded by
his opponents with such equanimity.

Never mind, Mr. Gayre," said Mr. Gibson,
cheerfully, as he pocketed his share of
the spoil. "Lucky at cards, you know,
unlucky in love." And the old gentleman
laughed at his own wit till the tears ran

o

down his cheeks, while Mrs. Gibson said,
archly, " You ought to be ashamed of yourself,
Charles," and Mrs. Jubbins coloured and
tried to smile.

Mr. Gayre also made a feint of joining
in the merriment, but considering the result
of his last encounter with Cupid it may
not seem surprising that his well-meant
efforts failed to prove signally successful.

The interminable evening wore on and
at length the banker was able to remark that
if he wished to get back to London that
night he must really say good-bye.

"The best friends must part," remarked

]mr. GifcsoD, regretfully, " we have to thank
you for a most enjoyable evening ; Lor,
what a time it is, Matilda, since we have lead
such a game of whist."

Good-night," said Mrs. Jubbins, giving
Mr. Gayre her plump hand, which he held
for a second longer than seemed to Mrs.
Gibson absolutely necessary. " And I heard
her say to him, distinctly," mentioned Mr.
Gibson, as he and his wife drove home a little
later on, " you have made me so happy."

Perhaps that was the reason he repeated
his joke to Mr. Gayre as that gentleman was
searching for his hat''

There really seems to me," he said, " to
be a great deal of truth in the proverb I
quoted just now — 'Lucky in cards, you
know.' "

"What an insufferable old donkey,"
thought the banker to himself, as he took
the short cut through the gardens, to the
station.

THE LESSER EVIL.

shells is nothing more true than that
misfortunes never come singly.
They love company, and when the
first of the dreary brood knock for admittance
the dwellers in any house selected for
so great a distinction may feel tolerably
certain that several more unwelcome guests
may speedily be expected to follow.

It seemed to Mv. Gayre, as he walked up
Wimpole Street, that Fate must be pretty
well tired of buffeting him, that she could
scarcely hold within her quiver another
barbed arrow wherewith to harass his body
and lacerate his soul. Be felt inclined to
regard Mrs. Jubbins' generous compliance

with his wishes as a sion the worst was over,
and a new and better era about to commence.


Silently he sang a song of thanksgiving ;
the peril but just escaped was so recent, he
felt a sense of gratitude stirring within him,
to which hitherto he must have been almost
a stranger. Once more he breathed freely.
He saw he could save the bank, and saving
the bank meant saving Xicholas Gay re
also.

I have never been sufficiently thankful,"
he considered, in which reflection there was
indeed a much greater amount of truth than
the banker imagined ; truth is, we remember
the perils we have encountered but take no
note of those we escape, and it is always the
good things human beings have lost or lack
they clasp tight within their memories, whilst
blessings literally showered upon them are
forgotten. " Not sufficiently thankful " — why
this unconscious Pharisee had never been

thankful at all. He wanted too much out of
life, and behold, that he might understand
fully the value of the gifts he had despised
he saw his possession of them trembling in
the balance.

But all danger was now past, he decided ;
no need for him to contemplate the possibility
of having to go down into the ranks and
painfully strive to work his way up once
more into that state of life which had been
his only by purchase. He felt most grateful
to Mrs. Jubbins for having relieved him from
the pressure of extreme anxiety, and after a
vague sort of fashion he did thank Providence
for having sent him so generous a
friend at such a crisis. H conscience whispered
the remark that he had not treated
Mrs. Jubbins exactly well — plausibility, ready
for the emergency, suggested the greater
Mrs. Jubbins' disappointment the greater
her merit ; had she given with the one hand
and taken with the other the virtues of

self-renunciation could scarcely have been
attributed to lier. It would be quite competent
for him always to think hereafter of
Mrs. Jubbins as his good — his best friend ;
and the reflection pleased and soothed him,
spite of his positive assertion to Susan
Drummond that friendship between a man
and a woman is an impossibility. Circumstances
alter cases, and as he felt love towards
Mrs. Jubbins to be on his part out of
the question he reverted to that convenient
word which he averred to Susan was nothing
but a delusion and a snare.

Confound that stupid old owl, with his
'lucky at cards unlucky in love,' " he repeated,
as he put his key in the lock at Wimpole
Street. "All that sort of thing is such
execrable taste and makes a woman so
uncomfortable, too," — and then he stepped
across his threshold to meet a fresh misfortune,
which had been patiently awaiting his
arrival.

Mr. Fife left this note for you, Colonel,"
said Eawlings, coming across the hall, " he
told me to give it to you the moment 3'ou
returned. He waited for a long time," and
then the man paused and pretended to be
putting his master's umbrella in the stand,
while Mr. Gayre tore open Mr. Fife's communication
and read —

"Pengrove has given us the slip. I was
always, if you remember, doubtful of your
friend the detective, who, I imagine, has
been ' squared.' P's disappearance means,
I am afraid, that there is something wrong
you have not yet discovered. Quite knocked
up and must get some sleep. Better call on
me as you go to the bank tomorrow — does
not matter how early. P. never showed
after luncheon to-day."

Call me at six tomorrow morning, Rawlings,"
said Mr. Gayre, after he had read
this agreeable communication twice over.
"What is the matter?" he added, for the

first time noticing Eawlings' manner, '' anyone
else been to see me ? "

"Xo, Colonel, no one except Miss
Chelston."

Miss Chelston ; Sir Geoffrey, you mean,
I suppose ? "

Miss Clielston ; she came about four
o'clock, and Mrs. Bancroft had the spare
room got ready, and she went to bed an hour
ago — she said she felt so tired — "

My niece in this house," said Mr. Gayre,
^vho really doubted the evidence of his ears.

Yes, Colonel, I took her luggage upstairs,
and there is a letter in the library, in which,
she told me to tell you. Sir Geoffrey had explained
everything."

I suppose I am going to hear some other
pleasant piece of news," thought Mr. Gayre,
passing into the library and taking up his
brother-in-law's epistle.

"Dear Gayre," (it began)— "Peg Avill
take this to you. Poor Peg, I am forced

to bundle her out of North Bank at a
moment's notice — long expected has come
at last ! A scoundrelly wine merchant,
whom I may without any vanity say I
made — put in an execution yesterday. Just
shows what one has to expect from that
sort of person. ^\^iy, the beggar must
have had thousands of orders from fellows
who drank his wine at my table. If right
were right he ought to be in my debt, instead
of its being made out all the other way.
However, he can't get sixpence out of me,
that's one comfort. This is the solitary
advantage of being poor — you can't strip a
naked man — not but what, if the law would
let them, many of these rascals would like to
flay a debtor.

Of course I had to go down to Moreby's
lawyers. They put a man in ostensibly
to put the other bailiff out — and they're
serving me the pretty trick of keeping him
in — They are acting as badly as gentlemen

of their kidney know how. Fortunately
it does not matter much to me — I wouhl
rather leave here, but for Peg — poor halle
desolate woman, don't be hard on her if you
can help it ; you are not the Almighty, remember,
and there is no necessity for you to
visit her father's and mother's sins on the
girl. I'll write you acfain as soon as I know
what I am going to do. I shall keep out of
the way for a little while, as I know thei-e's a
nasty thing now, called contempt of court,
whereby any pestilent ruffian of a creditor,
when he fails to get his money in meal can
apply to have it in malt, in other words
take your body if he fail to pick your purse.
Heaven only knows what is to become of me.
It is all darkness— I do wish earnestly sometimes
Heaven would kindly give us a hint as
to its intentions — a lot of time and trouble
might be saved, if we only knew the
dii-action in which we were expected to
work.

Vol. iii. 62

I can't give you any address, for I don't
know myself where I am going. Very likely,
however, you would just as soon be without
one, as you are near the top of the hill, and I
am close to the bottom.
Don't be hard on Peg.

Yours faithfully,!

"' Geoffrey Chelston, Infelix.

By-the-bye, you had better take Sudlow in
hand. He's an awful cad and I can do
nothing with him — I always thought that
party at Mrs. Jubbins' was a mistake — He
ought not to have been disillusioned regarding
your social standing. However, that can't
be helped now, and as he's so old a friend of
yours possibly you may be able to bring him
to book. Good-bye, if you never see me
again, remember, I did my best — but a man
who has wind and tide always against him
can't do much."

Mr. Gayre's first feeling when he finished

Sir Geoffrey's valedictory address was
surprise that the baronet had not thought
long previously of so simple and excellent a
way of burdening someone else — and that
someone himself — with the fair Marguerite.
It seemed to him that the young lady might
just as easily have been passed on to Wimpole
Street months before. If the transference
were possible now— and in the face of the
evidence before him how could he doubt its
possibility — no reason existed why it should
not have taken place then.

Flinging himself into a chair he tried to
think the matter out and failed. Strive as
earnestly' as he would to consider the question
of his niece, his mind constantly wandered
down to the bank or the securities, all locked
or not locked, in the strong room.

Sleeping and waking the bank was now on
his mind. IsTot more sorrowfully did the
five foolish virgins lament that fatal delay in
buying their oil which involved such 



amorous consequences than did Nicholas
Gayre mourn concerning the way he had
neglected his business, and allowed what
remained of a once fine property to drift sofar
across the sea of loss.

Returning from Chislehurst, it had seemed
to him safety and honour were still possible ;
but now he beijan to doubt. What if a
further loss were really impending — if some
security quite beyond his power to replace
had been abstracted ? In such case he saw
no resource, except to make a full and
swift confession, give up every sixpence he
owned in the world, and middle-aged though
he was, try to make some fresh start in
life.

Why had all this trouble come upon him
he wondered ? Other men had fallen in love
with young girls and won them too ; other
men had trusted to subordinates without
being absolutely beggared through over confidence
; other men better born, more highly

connected, possessed of friends, mixing in
the very first ranks of society, had " gone in "
for business and found good in it instead
of evil. Dimly he understood the fault lay
somewhere in himself, that he had been too
sure, too confident of the sagacity and
honour and honesty of that excellent person
Xicholas Gayre ; by slow degrees it
was dawning upon him that not merely
was he no better than those outer sinners
the publicans, whom he had in his heart
derided, but that he was a great deal
worse. One short year ago had any one
said — "You will behave to the girl you
love like a cad, you will try to shirk
your duty to your neighbour, and strive
to skulk by on the other side if you can ;
you will ask a woman for money you
know has always hoped you would marry
her, and accept substantial help, though
you are well aware you never had a
feeling of affection for her ; you will almost

succumb under the apprehension of loss of
money, and let a low vulgar fellow beat you
in resource, and in promptitude " — he would
have answered, " Is thy servant a dog that
he should do these things ? " — and behold he
had done them and more.

There was nothing to set on the other
side of the account ; the few good actions
he had performed were prompted, he was
well aware, by any other spirit than that of
unselfish benevolence. Could he in future do
any better ? — he asked himself, as he lay that
nio'ht between such intervals of refreshing
sleep as nature pleased to vouchsafe.
He had meant to try, but now he did not
know. If anything more than what he was
already aware of had really gone astray at
the bank, he felt a dead man might as
readily offer to make atonement to the living
as he? Now he grasped how greatly lie
had valued money, and once during the darkness
he wearily wandered away into sleep, with

the words of a long-forgotten text recurring
to his memory : " There is he that scattered
yet increaseth."

Nicholas Gayre had not scattered even a
grain of wheat he could avoid, and he had
not increased ; rather poverty threatened to
come " as one that traveller," and it
was with an uneasy sense of the converse
of the text being in his own case literally
fulfilled that he followed this first suggestion
into the mazes of dreamland where
he lost it.

Early the next morning, after pencilling
a few lines of reluctant welcome to his
niece, who, being fond of her ease, had no
fancy for " brushing the dew at early
dawn," Mr. Gayre proceeded to Mr. Fife's
lodgings.

"There may be nothing in my notion,
you know," said that gentleman, " but upon
the other hand there may. ' Bolting' seems
to me an uncommonly bad sign."

"But I have gone through all the securities,
and they seem right enough."

Perhaps. If I were you I'd go over
them all again ; there is such a thing, you
know, as — "

Forgery," suggested Mr. Farewells

I was not thinking exactly of
forgery," said Mr. Fife, "My notion is,
he has ' substituted.' You see it would be
easy enough to get a fresh cover drafted,
and I'll be bound, you never took time to
examine more than the outside of the deeds
you hold in trust."

Good Heavens, no," exclaimed Mr. Gayre,
practically, therefore, there may be no
limit to the extent of his defalcations."

I shouldn't go so far as that," answered
Mr. Fife ; " after all, the thing has not been
going on very very long. I knew about the
amount of his losses, and though I can't tell
how much that little game at Tooting cost,
still I have allowed a pretty tidy margin for

the expenses there. If you remember, I said
1 thought you Twould find yourself a hundred
thousand out of pocket. We have not quite
touched that sum in our investigations
Suppose the worst comes to the worst, you
will find a hundred and fifty thousand
amply cover everything. I suppose Gayres'
can stand that."

Not if the bank is to keep open "

H — m. Well, the best thing we can do is
to get to Lombard Street and find out the
exact nature of the leak. We can talk
about stopping or sinking afterwards. You've
found someone, I hope, to lend you enough
money to go on with."

Yes — but I shan't take it unless I see
my way clearly to pull through."

Well, we need not discuss that point now.
It may be necessary to apply for a warrant
for our friend, but don't do that till later in
the day. Let him get as long a start as
possible. We don't want hin back too soon.

if ever. Now if you walk quietly up to the
Bank you'll find me at your private door
almost as soon as you're ready for me."

During the whole of that day each person
who wanted to see the manager was informed
his wife was ill, and he absent from business.
If on receiving this reply any individual
adventured to enquire whether Mr. Gayre
happened to be in town, he received for reply
the unexpected intelligence that Mr. Gayre
was in town but so deeply engaged he
could not be interrupted. There never was a
truer statement: Mr. Gayre chanced, indeed
to be engaged! All the forenoon and most
of the afternoon he was busy checking the
securities and he finally left himself barely
time to ^o round and see his solicitors and
proceed with one of the firm to the Mansion
House, where he applied for a warrant to take
the person of Titus Pengrove, on the charge
of robbery and of dealing with valuable
securities.

Then he walked to the station and took
train for Chislehurst. He had made up his
mind he would not take Mrs. Jubbins' money
nor he knew it was impossible for him to
meet his liabilities and keep on the bank.
He must withdraw capital from the business
and he could not, even on the Gayre system
of commerce, do that and still manage to
keep afloat. Only the previous night safety
seemed possible ; less than twenty-four hours
had served to change the whole aspect of
his life.

The Chislehurst woods were not less fair,
the grass was not less green, the spring-flowers
had not closed their petals, the air
was full of the sweet scents that yesterday
seemed so fragrant. Nature was the same,
but the man who looked upon her exceeding-loveliness
had changed totally. His body
lacked strength, his limbs were weary, his
forehead burned, his parched lips made
speech painful, his mind was so distracted

lie took no notice of distance, save by the
measure of physical fatigue ; the hill leading
to the Warren, in those few hours since
last he breasted it, appeared to have grown
strangely steep, the series of rustic steps
leading up through the garden from the
wicket gate to the house seemed interminable
; two or three times he was forced to
pause while ascending them ; for him tasselled
larch and silvery birch and burnished
copper beech and trembling linden, had
donned their bravest apparel all in vain.
He was like one blind and deaf wandering-through
a world of beauty and delight. Asa
sick man rejects the most delicate food, asa
broken heart finds discord m the most
harmonious music, as laughter grates on
the ear of grief, and mirth increases the
sadness of sorrow; so to Nicholas Gayre all
the sweet sounds and influences of nature
seemed to his dulled senses and hopeless
heart but so many aggravations of his grief.

For others, for the children, for happy lovers,
for eager youth and prosperous middle life,
and ripe old age contented to sit basking in
the sunshine of ease and competence,
flower and bud and leaf and bird might add
fresh charms to the soft beauty of spring
and the glory of summer ; but to this man,
born and bred amongst those who considered
money a necessary essential before the most
ordinary happiness could be hoped for ; and
who now saw the fortune he once fully
believed founded on a rock beaten by the
rain and shaken by the wind and engulfed
by the floods and levelled with the earth ;
what thoughts, save those of loss and
disaster, could the changing seasons ever
in the dark future bring ?

The power of riches — the possibility of
fame, the hope of love, the wild longings,
the noble aspirations of youth, all gone
all vanished like the pageant of a dream,
what remained for him to do ? Nothing

save to tell Mrs. Jubbins the truth and
release her from a promise given in
ignorance of his actual position. And for
Susan? Yes, he would do right there too
but he could not think about her just
then ; for a moment he lingered, looking
into the hollow where he had stood beside
her on that happy night so long — so long
aofo, when the sound of the music floated
softly down among the ferns and the undergrowth,
when with her hand resting on
his arm she talked about love in a cottage
and looked under the starlight a woman
to love on earth, an angel to lead a man
to heaven.

And what had he made of that chance ?
i?Llmost with a groan he put that question
aside, and walking on as quickly as his
tired limbs permitted, once more found
himseK at the porch inquiring if Mrs.
Jubbins were within.

He found her alone in the smaller

craving-room, engaged, with a humility
quite touching when evinced by so rich
a woman, in modestly knitting a stocking.

Well, this is delightful," she cried,
How do you do Mr. Gayre — why, what is
the matter," she added, " surely you are not
ill?"

"No, I am not ill'" he said, "but something
has happened," and then he told
her.

They were both standing. She had risen
to greet him, and he opened his budget of
ill news so suddenly — and it was such
awful news — she never asked him to be
seated ; the ordinary questions of life for
the time were completely driven out of mind.

For a minute or two after he ended, she
remained perfectly still, grappling with the
difficulty — trying to make the whole matter
clear to her comprehension ; then laying
her white strong hand upon his arm she
spoke these words :

S Usa'' DE UMM 0.\ 1).

•' We mustn't let the bank go ; whatever
we do, we must not let the bank go."

"I can't prevent it going," he answered.

But we can," she persisted, " if my poor
husband were alive now — if your dear
father could come back to us — they would
both say, ' Don't let the bank go.' Why, it
is madness even to think of Gayres' suspending
payment. You know the worst now,
and between us we can surely weather the
storm. Sit down and let us consider what is
best to be done. You say some of my
securities have been abstracted ; that does
not matter in the least ; there are plenty
left. Oh, Mr. Gayre ! I wonder if it was for
this all the money was left in my hands,
so that I can do what I like with it,
without asking the consent of any human
being."

He did not answer — he could not — the
revulsion of feeling was too great, too
sudden. Ten minutes before he had regarded

himself as virtually a beggar, and
now —

But before we get to business you must
have something to eat, I daresay if the truth
were known you have not tasted food to-day.
Xo, do not look like that, I cannot bear to
see you. Surely — surely — you won't object
to taking help from an old friend. Besides,
as I told you yesterday, hitherto it has been
all the other way. I have been the person
obliged. It is merely my turn now ; you
can't grudge giving me the happiness of
helping you a little. If the cases were
reversed I know you would do the same f('i-
me, and more."

He knew no such thing, indeed he knew
the very opposite ; impulsive generosity,
unreasoning friendship, liberality except on
undoubted security, had never been failings
of the old-established and highly respectable
Urn of Lombard Street bankers. Mr.
Gayre would not have objected to lending

Vol. iii. 63

Mrs. Jubbins a few thousands, or even to
giving her a moderate sum of money had she
really stood in need of it, but to act the part
towards her, or anybody else, she was proposing
to act towards him (and she a clever
woman of business, and one who knew the
value of capital !) would have seemed to him,
and perhaps with reason, the height of
madness.

She had grown quite earnest in her
appeal. The same loyalty of feeling which
impelled the Jacobites to exile and the
scaffold was stirring in Mrs. Jubbins' warm
heart then.

Gayres had ever been to her what the
Stuart were to the Cavaliers. She could not
reason about the matter ; it seemed impossible
to her that Gayres' should go while she had
the power of saving it. The spice of
romance which hand in hand with the most
practical common sense had ever walked
beside Eliza Jubbins, nee Higgs, was at

last fully asserting itself. Still a handsome
Avoman, possessed of a face on which jeers
had as yet traced very few lines, well
preserved, prosperous — for the moment sentiment
and the consciousness of meaning to
perform a kindly action made her actually
beautiful.

The evening sunlight fell across hair thick
and glossy as ever ; her fine eyes were
soft and liquid with emotion, her mouth
was sweet with tender smiles as she pleaded
to be allowed her share in trying to save
Gayres' ; her hand was unconsciously pressed
more heavily on the banker's arm and yet
he could not speak, only slowly he took
that persuasive hand in his, and held it
close while he looked wistfully at his old
playmate.

Before that look her eyes fell — her colour
rose, and she would have released her hand
but that it was locked too fast to be
withdrawn without an unseemly struggle.

63—2

You will let me help you," she said,
dissembling even to herself, as women always
do at such a juncture.

If I may keep this hand," he answered,
and kissed the ringed fingers she did not
now even strive to withdraw.

It had come at last ; after years he had
proposed, and in this fashion.

That morning it never entered his mind

he could ask Mrs. Jubbins to marry him,

that morning she could not have conceived

it likely that bliss was ever to be hers.

She may have wished it had come at some

other time, and in some other guise, but

it was welcome at any time and in any

form. The whole matter did not seem to

her strange. Before Mr. Gayre returned

to town she felt as though she had been

engaged to him for years. On both sides

it was indeed as old Mr. Gayre would have

said, "most suitable" — what poor Mr.

Jubbins might have thought was quite a

different affair. At parting, Mrs. Jubbins
said, " Now you will promise me to see a
doctor this evening, for I feel sure you
are going to be ill," to which Mr. Gayre
replied, "I will see a doctor, but I shall
not be ill now

Upon the whole it seemed perhaps pleasant
to have even Mrs. Jubbins anxious concerning
his health ; except so far as the malady
might affect Oliver Dane Susan would
probably not have cared had he been
smitten With small pox! Travelling back
to London, Mr. Gayre, reviewing the position
at his leisure, found more cause for satisfaction
than discontent. He felt very
grateful to Mrs. Jubbins, yet he shrank
from the idea of marrying her.

When menaced by two dangers, however,
it is true wisdom to select the least, and
Mr. Gayre decided the widow was by far
a lesser ill than beggary. And he meant
to act fairly to her and to her children.

SUSAN DliVMMOND.

Perhaps he thought he had given a tangible
proof of the bona fides of his intentions
by making that tardy offer of his
heart and hand.

ALL FOR LOVE And THE WORLD WELL LOST ! "

IfJ^HOUGH in no gay mood Mr. Gayre
^A^ laiigiied as these words crossed his
mind. He recalled his own experience. If
ever man had been passionately in love that
man was himself, and yet when put in the
scales love flew up to the beam, and money
weighed down the balance. 'rit is all very
well for young people," he thought, " to talk
like that ; young folks always expect the
wherewithal to feed love wil spring up
like the grass. Prudent papas, mercenary
mammas, who have saved and toiled for
their children, are to provide the few items
love requires to make itself comfortable.
Love — true love, the love of the poets, wants

its rent paid, its taxes settled, its tradespeople
satisfied, its servants fed, its pocket-money
found by somebody else ; the moment
real Love finds there are a few difficulties in
the way, and that bed, board, and lodging
must be hardly toiled for by the lover, it
has a nasty, but wise way of metamorphosing
itself. It ceases to have golden locks ;
it assumes the form of Mammon sometimes
in a wig, but always in a carriage, and with a
satisfactory income."

All of which tirade merely meant that
Nicholas Gayre was trying to reconcile himself
to the course he had taken. It was he
who felt his love required many other things
beside bread and cheese for its maintenance.
If we come to that in the days of King
Nebuchadnezzar there were but few of the
children of Israel found constant to refuse the
meat and the wine they considered defiled,
and able to remain faithful to the pulse and
water which "save them " knowledge and skill

in all learning and wisdom, and Daniel understanding
all visions and dreams." The heart
of man has not changed much since then.
In his soul mr. Gayre knew that even had
Susan cared for him he should have preferred
the fieshpots of riches to the manna of
poverty.

Xo one finds it exactly pleasant to face the
fact of his own worldliness, and the banker
found it convenient and almost pleasant to
meet the knowledge of his own unworthiness
with a gibe.

Besides, Susan disliked, and Mrs. Jubbins
liked him. If marriage in his then state of
impecuniosity were to be at all, it had better
take place with a woman who brought not
merely money but love into the state
•• (ordained by God."

There could be nothing more certain than
til at Mr. Gayre meant to act quite honestly
by Mrs. Jubbins. He intended to pay her
back every farthing she had advanced, to

promote lier children's interests, to be a
father to young people who were antagonistic
to every taste ; in a sentence "to do the
right thing." He felt very grateful to the
widow, he liked her better than he had
ever thought to like her. He intended to
give way to her in many things, he purposed
being a good steward, a faithful husband ;
nevertheless, he loathed and despised himself
for having made such a bargain, he who
never hesitated about riding " straight into
the jaws of death," who had once sprang
into the saddle more cheerily than bridegroom
ever went forth from his chamber.

He could not even say to himself that he
had acted from impulse. His reason felt
satisfied with his conduct though his soul
recoiled from it. The thing he had done
was " after his kind," — no use for him
even to say he had not followed his nature.
This much there was to be said in extenuation
of that step which could not be retraced.

He had proposed not because he knew he
should otherwise fail to get what he wanted,
but merely in grateful recognition of the
widow's kindness. Such generosity he felt
merited some return, and so he offered all he
had to offer — himself. It was far more than
enough he considered, with a shudder. That
one entry reversed the debit and credit side
of their account. He merely meant to take
the use of her money for awhile, and in
exchange he had given her his life. Well,
it did not much matter. Hitherto he had
not made so great a use of his opportunities
that one more flung away need break his
heart. He would conform to the world's
ideas — he would settle down to business — he
would believe in the greatness of city
magnates, he would try to forget that time
which seemed so far away — when the blare of
the trumpets — the call of the bugle, seemed
to him the sweetest music ever heard by
mortal ear. He would remember youth with

its illusions was sone — that middle a«je with
its realities had come — that, worst of all,
the autumn and winter of life were creeping
on — that he was growing too old for sentiment,
and that besides Susan Drummond did
not love him, while to Eliza Jubbins he had
ever seemed a hero of romance !

A great deal of unpleasant work still lay
before him. He had to put the bank straight,
to arrange many business details with Mrs.
Jubbins — see how things stood between his
niece and Mr. Sudlow — hurry on his lawyers
about the Oliver Dane affair, and last but
certainly not least, end everything for ever
between himself and Susan Drummond.

In England a man cannot legally marry
two wives. Often he finds one more than
enough, and it was evident that now Mr.
Gayre was engaged to the widow he must
sever all connection with Susan Drummond.

So far Mrs. Jubbins had behaved with the
strictest propriety — but her old playfellow

had not forgotten those resonant kisses, those
fond embraces, which made existence terrible
to him in his boyhood. With trembling
fingers Mr. Gayre just lifted the veil of the
future and peeped behind it. The prospect
was awful — most awful — so awful and abhorrent
he dropped the curtains incontinently.
Nevertheless it was better than ruin and disgrace.
Greatly to be preferred a line in the
marriage list to a paragraph in the money
article. The Gayres had held themselves so
high and believed they were so secure ! Mr.
Jubbins had looked up to them, and lo and
behold it was his money made in oil which
was now to prove to the Gayres temporal
salvation.

Well, it is of no use banking facts, and
the first thing evidently to be done was to
release Susan from her agreement. But how
to word the case, He certainly could not say.
I am going to marry Mrs. Jubbins," or " I
have lost my money." How on earth would

it be competent for him to put it ? Mr. Gayre
felt he could only await the chapter of accidents
; lie low and watch results.

But yet he must in some way indicate
the way of the wind to Susan. It was
essential he should tell her that ill-starred
engagement might be considered at an end ;
therefore next day, before he showed at the
bank, he repaired to her lodgings, where the
landlady, who in person answered the door,
greeted him with a pleased smile, and said,
Miss Drummond was at home.

He waited for her a minute or two, then
Susan appeared, and with a stiff bow recognized
his presence.

"You wished to see me," she said, laying
lier hand on the table and speaking as
though she had been walking very fast, and
found it strangely hard to get her breath.

"Yes, Miss Drummond, if you will kindly
sit down I shall perhaps be able to talk a
little better."

About— Oliver ? "

"No, singular as it may seem, not about
Oliver. Besides that gentleman, there are a
few millions of other persons in the world,
myself a unit amongst them, you understand
that."

And, Mr. Gayre — ?" she said, rising and
looking strangely cold and resolute, as she
spoke.

Just for a moment he swayed his hat
gently to and fro ere he spoke — then —

I have come to release you from our
compact," he said, quite quietly.

She looked at him, startled.

Do you mean — ? " she asked, at last.

Just what I say," he answered, " I bring

you liberty ; never again need you look

at me as one abhorred ; never more will

it be necessary' for you to shrink from my

touch ; you are perfectly free."

He thought he heard her murmur, "My
God, I thank thee," but the cry of gratitude

was merged iu the question, "And what
about OHver. Oh, Mr. Gayre ! don't give us
both up together."

No," he answered, " no, I shall never
cease striving for his release till you and he
meet once more. Good-bye, Miss Drummond
good-bye, my dear. I was mad once, for
which I beg your pardon. I am sane now,
and really I do not think I need beg your
pardon at all."

But Avhat about Oliver ? "

"He must wait a little, his case is being
seen to. Gracious Heaven, Miss Drummond,
you have heard me just now give up my
soul's desire, and yet you never say, thank
you ; you have no thought or pity save for
Oliver.' Take him, marry him," added the
banker, shaken by a sudden whirlwind of
passion. " Only I pray God that, living or
dead, I may never hear his name again."

^- Mr. Gayre — Mr. Gayre," she cried, rushing
to the door after him and laying a detaining

hand upon this arm, which he tried in vain to
-shake off

Go," he said, " go, I lament the day I
£erst saw you, the hour I first spoke to you ;
till that time I respected myself fairly, but
sever since I have been acting a mean,
cowardly part towards my Maker and my
fellows. For the Almighty's sake, do not
tempt me to lose my soul and my substance
as well. I never was rich, and my love for
you has left me bankrupt, not merely in
heart but also well-nigh in pocket. Let me
go while I am master of myself — good-bye."

But still she held him, she clasped his arm
with both her hands, and her tears fell down
like rain as she sobbed " I can't bear it — I
cannot. You shall not leave me till you say
you forgive me — that we are friends."

Friends ! " he repeated, scornfully. " How
like a woman — to prate ahoiit friendship to a
man who has loved as I have loved. You
have been very cruel to me — you are not

Vol. iii. 64

really sorry for me now. You do not know
what love means when youth is over — when
spring has gone, and no fresh sap can ever
rise again to nourish one green leaf of hope
and promise."

Oh ! do not say that," she entreated —
"there will be a fair springtime yet for you.
The day must come when you will meet
some one you can love and marry — and — "

"I shall probably marry," he interrupted,.
but love again I never can — besides, who
could love me. You have taught me that
the whole passion of my soul — the undivided
affection of my heart — is incapable of winning
one tender smile, one feeling of regard — "

But oil ! " she said, looking up at him
with swimming eyes full of sorrow and
womanly pity, " my love was given long
before we met. If it had not been — had I
never known Oliver — "

He could bear no more. With a sudden
wrench he tore himself away, leaving the

girl, who liacl never come so near loving him
before, in an agony of grief. For the
moment she foro-ot even Oliver — the o-reat
tide of her faithful affection seemed to ebb
out in one husre wave — leaving an arid waste
of memory, on which was traced only the
image of a broken and despairing man.

Had she known more of his nature,
however, she would have understood that
paroxysm of ungovernable agony was but
the dying struggle of a passion which had
torn and tormented him. Even in the first
misery of that final parting, he felt a sense
of relief that all was over. The face of
his dead wore as yet no look either calm
or beautiful, but at least, the misery of
suspense would not have to be gone through
again for ever. He had suffered, no human
being could know how horribly — he had
grown hateful to himself — he had been
falling lower and lower in his own esteem,
till at last self-examination became torture.

64—2

He had done thugs of which he could not
have believed himself capable — he had
forgotten honour, mercy, justice, all, because
a woman had sweet, wistful brown ej'es,
and the fairest face he ever looked upon.

If love fail to purify the waters of a
human soul it fouls them, and it is not
without reason we pray the best instincts
of our nature may produce a blessing, nota
curse. It rests with each amongst us
to decide which course to pursue. We can
climb, blinded it may be into tears and shod
with sorrow, to heights, illuminated by a
sun which never streams across any low or
unworthy road mortality elects to tread ;
or we may trail our love through the mire
of earth, till nothing remains at last but
the marred and broken image, from which
our anguished hearts shall finally behold
the last trace of comeliness fade utterly
away.

ANYTHING BUT Pleasant.

'v^■■^, >^/-v• .

ROM the time settlements were first
mentioned his most partial friend
could not have described Mr. Sudlow as an
ardent suitor.

He had tried every means of avoiding
making any, and when he found Sir Geoffrey
what the baronet described as " stiff," he
bejran seriously to re-consider the whole
question of marriage.

He had learned that money makes any man
of value in the matrimonial market and it
occurred to him that he might do a good
deal better than Miss Chelston. He might
not get a more beautiful wife, but there
was no reason why he should not secure one

even better born and moving in the best
circles. Mr. Sudlow's only weakness chanced
to be a craze for good society, and he
had not long possessed the privilege of
Sir Geoffrey Chelston's friendship before
he clearly understood whatever the rank
of that gentleman's acquaintances might be,
his daughter did not visit at grand houses or
receive visits from ladies whose names were
ever likely to figure in the Court Journal.

Not all the baronet's finessino^ and talk
about great people could deceive him on
this point. For a short time he suffered
himself to be deluded into the belief that his
adored one could introduce him to those
charmed circles where fashion holds his^li
carnival, but this idea was soon dispelled.

As regarded Mr. Gayre also. Sir Geoffrey's
notion was rio-ht. The banker had ceased to
be a hero to his former admirer. There are
some persons it is unsafe to admit to a
private view of dignity in dressing gown and

slippers, and Xortli Bank and The Warren
exactly represented this sort of attire to Mr.
Sudlow's artless inexperience. To quote his
own mental phrase, he didn't " think much "
of the Chelston or Gayre set. He had never
met and he was never likely to meet the
Canon, and if he had, even that respectable
clergyman would scarcely to his mind have
represented a Court card. Sir Geoffrey
-certainly did know some persons of title, but
then as a rule they were black sheep, and,
whether black or white, took no pains to conceal
that they meant to have nothing whatever
to do with Mr. Sudlow. He was far
too careful and model a vous? man to find
favour in their eyes. He looked many times
-at a sovereign before changing it ; he would
not bet, he did not drink, he knew nothing
about horses, he was not amusing, or good-natured,
or useful ; he bored even Miss
Chelston to death, and she certainly was
not a peculiarly lively person.

Altogether Mr. Sudlow felt greatly disappointed
Avitli the result of the first love-affair
he had adventured upon that could
with any propriety, be spoken about, and
he was steadfastly purposed if possible ta
make those settlements a cause for breaking
off the match. It was ridiculous to expect
him to marry a mrl who had not a shilling
or a settled social position, who, spite of
being a baronet's daughter, was in reality
more thoroughly a nobody than himself
If Mr. Gavre liked to ive his niece a
fortune, he would put down an equal amount.
There was no reason why the banker should
not do this, yet Mr. Sudlow scarcely fel
brave enough to make the suggestion.

When he received a note, however, from
Mr. Gayre, asking him to call in Lombard
Street, lie began to think matters might
still take a favourable turn. He knew Miss
Chelston was in Wimpole Street, but he did
not know why, and under the circumstances.

it was natural enoucfli he should imagine
Mr. Gape at last meant to " act handsomely"
by her.

Walking along the Strand to keep the
appointment he ran across a man he had
met in North Bank. As a rule he passed
Mr. Sudlow with a careless nod, but on
this occasion he stopped and, with hands
plunged deep in his pockets and hat tilted
back from his forehead, said :

Heard if Chelston is out of danger ? "
I didn't know he was in any danger."
Didn't you really ? Awful smash — mare
bolted with him the very day after he went
down into Yorkshire ; he was picked up for
dead, so Graceless tells me. Pity, too ! never
saw a finer horseman. Hope they'll save
his leg," and Mr. Helsey, who was waiting
for a friend, leisurely took his cigar out of
his mouth and looked at it with a contemplative
cast of countenance.

I am very sorry," remarked Mr. Sudlow.

Sure you are — not half a bad fellow.,
Clielston. No one's enemy but this own.
That was a bit of a bother up at North
Bank, wasn't it ? "

I have not heard — "

Why bless my soul, you know nothing,
and I thought you were hand and glove there,
not but what Graceless said lone: ^2fo he
believed you meant to cry off. You are just
as safe too, perhaps. Shouldn't care for
Clielston for a father-in-law myself, and
though the girl is quiet and demure enough,
still where there has been anything with the
mother I think its risky work. Jlliat I you
don't mean to tell me you never knew that,
I wouldn't have spoken only I made sure
you knew all about it. I believe Lady
Clielston was as little in fault as a woman
sever can be when she goes off with somebody
not her husband. It was a hard blow for
the Gayres ; the old man never really held up
Diis head after it. Ah ! here comes Jennings,

Hope Clielston will pull through all right.
Ta-ta."

Mr. Sudlow did not pursue his walk eastward
— instead, he dispatched a curt note to
Lombard Street saying he could not call,
and giving no hint when it might suit his
convenience to do so. The note reached Mr.
Oayre before he left the city — he kept very
different hours from what had formerly been
his wont, and he decided to take Mr. Sudlow
on his way home.

"I have come to have some talk with you,
Sudlow," he said, " about my niece."

"Yes, Mr. Gayre."

I consider matters are in a very unsatisfactory
state between you — and as her father
has left her in my charge I want to come to
a, thorough understanding with you on the
subject."

What is it you wish to know ? "

First, when the settlements are to be signed
next, when the marriage is to take place."

Mr. Sudlow hesitated — lie didn't like Mr.
Gayre's tone, and he liked the look of Mr.
Gayre's clenched hand laid firmly upon the
table still less. There was very little of the
banker about that hand, and there was a
great deal too much of the cavalry officer.
At that moment the old Adam was very
strong in Mr. Gay re. He had a fierce
desire to quarrel with somebody, and he
felt he would rather quarrel with Mr. Sud-low
than am other human beino\

I am waiting for your answer," he said.

You are very imperative," Mr. Sudlow
replied, " what is the cause of all this sudden
haste ? "

There is nothing sudden about the
matter. The affair has been at a stand-still
for months. On one paltry pretence and
another you have managed to put ofi* the
signing of these settlements from autumn to
spring, and we are no further forward now
than we were in the autumn."

That is true, and I fear we shall never
get any further forward."

What the devil do you mean, sir?" asked
Mr. Gayre.

Just what I sav. It is of no use trvini^
to bully me, Mr. Gayre. I don't intend
to sion those settlements and I don't mean

o

to marry sour niece."

Mr. Gayre sprang from his chair, and Mr.
Sudlow sprang from his. Just for a moment
they looked across the table at each other,
then —

Sit down, you coward," said Mr.
Gayre, " I am not going to strike you.
Xow, tell me the plain English of all this ?
What makes you say you will jilt the
girl?"

I was duped into proposing to her."

You were what ? "

1 was misled."

Who misled you ? "

*' You must know I had every reason to

suppose lier father was a very different
person from what I fid him to be."

I know no such thing. From the very
first, when you woukl insist on being introduced
to my niece, I toil you in so many
words her father was a blacken, a scoundrel,
and a cheat. If you did not choose to believe
me — if you would persist in thinking a
baronet could not fail to be a paragon of
virtue, the fault was yours, not mine ; but
you did not think anything of the sort ;
you have some other reason for wanting to
back out of your engagement, and I insist
on your telling me what it is."

I always objected to those settlements."
"Why did you not then refuse to make
any ? When Sir Geoffrey said you should
not have his daughter on any other terms,
why did you not tell him fairly you declined
to marry her ? You have not acted straightforwardly,
Mr. Sudlow ; you have kept silly
about the affair till I am tired

of hearing it named. But I intend to put

matters on a different footing. It was come—



patent for you once to withdraw your
offer — but you shall .not do so now. I
mean you to marry her soon — or else know
some excellent reason why you won't."

It is something outrageous to expect
me to make such settlements on a girl
utterly destitute of fortune."

It would be something outrageous if a
girl possessed of any fortune were willing
to marry you

Xow it is of no use takins' that tone
with me, ]mr. Gayre, I won't stand
it."

You'll have to stand it and a good deal
more before you have done with me,"
retorted Mr. Gayre. " And as we are upon
the topic, I tell you fairly that if my niece
had not been as selfish, calculating, and
worldly as yourself, I should never have
thought of letting her marry you. In most

respects you 'will, however, be admirably
matched."

We never shall be matched," interrupted
Mr. Sudlow.

"We'll see about that," said Mr. Gayre.

I should have married Miss Chelston
honos ago," remarked Mr. Sudlow, " if you
would have made some suitable provision
for her, but I am now (quite determined
to break off the affair entirely."

I know, then, what I shall do," and Mr.
Oayre took up his hat —

I have been kept most shamefully in
the dark. It was by the merest chance I
heard there had even been a scandal about
Lady Chelston — and — "

Oh ! that's it, is it ? " and Mr. Gayre
laid down his hat — " you had better think
twice about what you purpose doing, my
friend. When this matter comes into court,
as come into court it shall, it will be pleasant
for you to hear counsel state that the

individual who makes an old story about a
woman, who had such excuse as wife living
never could urge before, whose husband
never brought a charge against her, who
condoned her error, who laid her amongst
his own people, the pretext for refusing
to marry her daughter — is the grandson of
a felon, transported for life for robbery and
attempted murder."

"How dare you state such an infamous
lie ? "

Lie is a nasty word, but we will let that
pass. I always knew your grandfather had
been a convict, but I did not know the full
measure of his crimes till I came the other day
upon all the papers connected with the
affair. The public will find the story very
exciting' and entertaining reading have
nothing more to say now, except that I shall
be glad if you will remove your account tomorrow,
and transfer your securities to the
keeping of some other banker. You objected

Vol. iii. 65

to employing any solicitor over those settlements
— I should advise you to look out for
some sharp lawyer now, for you will require
one before you have done with me — Good
evening."

As he walked up Wimpole Street, Mr.
Gay re felt conscious that he was extremely
tired, and needed a long night's sound rest ;
but the day's work was not yet over. He
had scarcely sat down to dinner before
Eawlings announced that Mr. Colvend
wished to see him particularly.

"He will wait, Colonel" said the man.
'' He said you were on no account to disturb
yourself."

When Mr. Gayre entered his library he
found the poor old man sitting in a listless
attitude, with head drooped and hands
clasped together between his knees.

You must forgive me for coming so late,"
he began ; " but — " and there he stopped :
Twice he tried to finish his sentence and

failed, and then fairly giving way, he covered
his face and cried like a child.

What is the matter — what has happened,"
asked Mr. Garret

is my daughter, my poor Dossie. She
has had l^rain fever — she has been dreadfully
ill," moaned Mr. Col vend, in a series of
gasping sobs — " Jut that is not the worst of
it. Oh, Mr. Gayre ! have pity upon me. I am
afraid what that scoundrel Fife said was too
true. There is no doubt she was fond of
Dane and that the trouble unsettled her
reason— my unfortunate girl — my dear, dear
little Dossie."

"I am very sorry indeed for you," and Mr.
Gayre did feel most truly sorry for the
wretched father.

Yes, it is an awful business," went on Mr.
Colvend, wiping his eyes and trying to speak
calmly. "Awful, only to think of that young
fellow, and of that poor brave girl who stuck
to him through all — I dont know what to

65—2

do. How is this wrong ever to be set right.
Though she is my daughter, an innocent man
must not continue to suffer for her fault.
Would to God, Surlees had never given Dane
in charge ! The prosecution was quite against
my wish. The doctors do not think she will
ever recover her reason."

Under the circumstances that is perhaps
scarcely to be regretted," said Mr. Gayre.

Just the remark Dr. Johnson made ;.
but oh ! there is no living; creature can tell
what this has been to me ; ever since the
terrible truth was forced upon me, I have
thought about that unhappy young man till
it seemed as though I should go mad
myself."

I do not imagine if you join with me
there can be much difficulty now in procuring
his release."

I will do anything and everything in my
power. The cause of this frightful illness
was that Fife came to the house and told

Dossie, as all other means of clearing Dane
seemed unavailablejie meant to give himself up.
He frightened the poor little thing to death,
said her letters to him would be read in
court. Wlien I got home I found her in the
most dreadful state of mind ; of course I did
not believe she was in fault then, any more
their I believe Fife's statement that night you
came to see me at Brighton ; but I can't
blind myself any longer ; she had never
been crossed before, and she lacked strength
of mind to bear up under the trouble of
knowing Dane was in love with someone else.
Why couldn't he have fancied my darling? —
I'd have given her to him, poor child I She
was all I had — and now — "

Gone mad, has she ? " commented mr.
Fife, when mr. Gayre subsequently repeated
the substance of Mr. Colvend's statement to
that individual. " Don't you believe a word
of it ; she's not the sort to go mad. I daresay
she has had a touch of brain fever, but it

would puzzle a wiser man than Doctor
Johnson to tell where temper ended and
fever began. If they mean to get Dane
out, though, without any fuss or publicity, I
shall be well enough content now ; I am
going to turn over a new leaf and I think I
would rather not turn it before a magistrate."


It is a great pity you do not turn over
a new leaf," said Mr. Gayre, " for you certainly
are exceedingly clever."

And trustworthy," added Mr. Pise, " that
little matter of the cheque, notwithstanding.
Oh, I forgot to mention, Mr. Sudlow was at
the bank three times to-day while you were
out. He wants you to make an appointment
he left a message he had something very
special to say."

Did he ? " said Mr. Gayre, scarcely able
to refrain from smiling

GAYRE THANKS HEAVEN.

pGHT seeks slipped by so fast that
2 like the seven years Jacob served
for Earlier it seemed but a day, and Mr.
Gayre, seated one glorious summer's morning
in his private room at Lombard Street, was
dreamily reviewing the events which had
occurred since the previous July when a
letter was brought to him, directed in Sir
Geoffrey's sprawling handwriting. It was a
lengthy epistle that Mr Gayre cut open, not
without some curiosity as to what the
contents might prove.

"Dear Gayre" (began the baronet) —
Though you never liked me as much
as I liked you, I fancy you will be glad

to know I am at last getting better.
Whether my leg will ever lee a good legit
is difficult to tell. The doctors say not —
which is the reason, I feel inclined to think
it will. Lord, what a lot they are ! If
I had followed then bidding I'd have been
comfortably tucked up with a spade long
and long ago ! What do you suppose they
kept me — me — on for one blessed fortnight —
you'd never guess — milk in some confounded
form or other. Gad, I was so weak and
wasted at the end of that time, when I
looked down at my hands I thought they
belonged to somebody else. Remonstrance
was not a bit of good. Bless you, a
fellow that used to come and feel my pulse
two and three times a day would have
put a navvy on the same diet as a newborn
child ! I'd never have picked up
again if it had not been for the landlady,
who is as trim and smart an article in
petticoats as you ever set your eyes on.

She keeps all the business of this house
going — ostler, waiters, chambermaids, and
the whole trans: of them. Her husband's
occupation is dyincr as fast as he knows
how (the doctors have put him on milk
and soda water — ugh ! poor wretch) and
the only recreation he has strength enough
left to indulge in is whist. There are generally
some decent fellows stopping at this
hotel, so we manage to make up a party
most evenings. While I was pretty bad
we were in the habit of playing on my bed,
.so you see time has not been spent quite
unprofitably after all. However, as I was
saying, if it had not been for Mrs. Fits
rather a high-flying sort of name
isn't it P you would never have been troubled
more, by yours truly —

' For heaven's sake,' I said to her, ' get
me something fit for a man to drink — not
cat-lap.'

'But the doctor, Sir Geoffrey.'

' My dear soul,' I expostulated, ' I am
not a calf — if I were, I have no doubt I
should relish milk greatly ; being what I
am, if I don't have some brandy soon, I'll
not answer for the consequences.' Firmness,
Gayre — it was firmness saved me. How
Mrs. F.'s father did laugh to be sure, when
she told him ; his name is Sponner, and it
is said he had netted seventy thousand
pounds by always betting against the favourite.
He's a funny old chap, who can scarcely
write his name. 'That's a good one,' he
roared. ' Sir Geoffrey Chelston, the hardest
rider and the heaviest drinker in England,
put into training on kettle tea and
pap. No — no, my lass, that won't do at
any price. We'll find him something better
than that, doctor or no doctor.'

"You may imagine I am pretty comfortable
here. I don't exactly know who is
going to pay the piper, but I rather expect
Dash wood will stump up. 'Twas his mare, or

rather one lie was thinking of buying, took
the notion of trying a race with the wind.
I never went so fast before, and I suppose I
may venture to say I never want to go such
a pace again. All's well that ends well,
though, as I feel quite sure I could not have
dropped into better quarters. I thought I
had not much to learn in the matter of horseflesh,
but the old gentleman has given me a
wrinkle or two.

I had no doubt but that you would get
Sudlow to terms. It is a sort of thing far more
in your line than mine. You don't say how you
managed to screw him up, but so long as he
is screwed the modus operandi signifies little.
Yes, you arrange about the wedding as you
like. I can't come up for it, but I wrote to
the Canon to know if he wouldn't tie the
knot P ' You had best let bygones be
bygones,' I said, ' peace and goodwill in
families is both politic and Christian. My
daughter is making a capital match, and it is

always prudent to cultivate friendly relations
with a niece who is well off. Peggy is
a confoundedly handsome girl — a girl any
-uncle might be proud of with a rich husband
at her back,' so to cut a long story short the
"Canon will officiate, that is, if you like. I said
I had always kept clear of the faniih^ quarrels,
water, either cold or lot hoeing a thing quite
out of my line.

"sow the matter rests between you two
brothers ; just do as you please, it makes very
little difference to me. Give Peggy my blessing
— I am afraid she won't care for that much,
but I have nothing else to present her with. I
certainly think she and Sudlow will run in
harness very well together. A selfish man
sought always to marry a selfish woman. This
will sound like a mistake, but it works well
in practice. Entre nous it would have been a
thousand pities to spoil two houses with such
a pair. There is a hard commercial smack
about them both that fills me with astonishment.

If Peg had been different she would
have sent him to the right-about long ago.
If Sudlow had been different I could have
hobbled him last summer.

What a splendid girl poor, dear Susan
has proved herself. Fancy her smuggling that
picture of Delilah out of Hilderton'sstudic.

The young hound ! — what a scandalous
thing to paint my daughter's face in such a
connection. He meant to exhibit the painting
somewhere too, and then there would have
been the deuce and all to pay. I am afraid
Peg did not act fairly by the lad. She's an
out-and-out flirt — a dangerous flirt — these
quiet demure women always are. However,
she's met with her match in Sudlow. They
must arrange matters when they are man and
wife. Meanwhile you and I may thank
Heaven we are well out of the whole business.
Directly Peg's matter is settled I shall present
my petition in bankruptcy. Poor girl, she
does not know all her father is going through

for lier sake ! I had thought of having Peg
turned off' at Chelston (the Wookes would
have been only too delighted to stand a wedding
spread at The Pleasaunce) but second
thoughts are best and it seemed to me we
should act prudentia (one ought always to
keep an eye an that future) to play no
triumphal march while the disgustingly
woolly sheep, Sudlow, was led up for sacrifice.

Besides, the Wookes are total abstinence
folks and you know what that means when
the success of a marriage feast is in the
balance.

You have managed splendidly about the
settlements. In confidence I may tell you,
if it had been impossible to get Sudlow upto
the starting post so weighted, I'd have let
Peg take her chance without any settlements
at all. After my first London experience
of her, I knew she would be a most
difficult vouno' woman to ' run,' and I think
we both deserve the highest praise for getting

her married at all ! My letter has been the
work of two mornings. Of your charity
write often, if you can, to this poor ' Exile of
Erin.'

I don't complain. You know I never
complain ; still there is no denying the fact
that solitary confinement in the height of the
London season is rough on

Yours faithfully,

Geoffrey Chelston.

^'P.S. — One little suggestion. Don't you
think it might be well to pay that milliner's
bill of Peg's? Of course I want to put
it in my schedule ; but if I do I'm afraid
Madame Rosalie will apply to Sudlow for
it, and kick up no end of a row, in the
event of his Lot paying her, and whether he
paid her or not he would make things confoundedly
unpleasant for the girl.

If you agree with me I am sure you will
do what I can't, namely, settle with Madame K.

As you are acting so generously about the
bridal rig-out all could be paid under one
head, and it will be the last thing you will
ever have to do for Peg. Tell Susan, by the
time her execution morning comes, I mean to
be well enough to act as father.

I am so glad about Dane. As I always
said no better fellow ever breathed, and from
the ver' first I felt sure his innocence would
be proved. When you are amongst jewellers
I wish you would choose some pretty trifle
and send it with the enclosed to Susan. I'll
square that account with you out of the veris
first bit of luck which comes in my way.

G. C."

Mr. Gayre felt inside the envelope for the
enclosure mentioned. It proved to be a slip
of paper on which were written the words,.
"From Papa Geoff."

For a short time Sir Geoffrey's brother-in-law
sat contemplating this epistle Avitli a sort
amazed admiration. There had been a

period when it would have maddened him,
but that period was past, and he couki now
regard Sir Geoffrey dispassionately as a
person upon whose like it seemed most
improbable he should ever look again.

Besides the letter was almost an epitome of
the events which had occurred within the
space of little over a year. Was it really
something less than fifteen months since that
day when he sauntered idly across the grass in
Hyde Park, and saw Sudlow leaning over the
rails? Why, those months seemed to him a
whole existence. He had nearly lived a life
in the time. What a sermon it all was on
the vanity of human hopes, and on the uselessness
of mortal projects. What a satire to
be commissioned by Papa Geoff, to buy a
wedding gift it was intended he himself should
pay for, to present to the woman he loved!

I thought to manage Sir Geoffrey," he
considered, " and Sir Geoffrey has managed
me. I wonder if he will outwit his new

Vol. iii. 66

friend Mr. Sponner. Nothing more likely.
And what about Mrs. Fits-Hugh when Mr.
FitzHugh goes out of business, and relinquishes
whist and leaves her a widow?
Humph," and Mr. Gayre, lighting a match,
applied it to the baronet's letter and watched
the precious missive burn to dust on the
hearth.

Whatever his faults, and he had many, the
banker was not really mean. All his instincts
led him to loyalty, for which reason he did not
docket and pigeon-hole his brother-in-law's
epistle and consider " This may prove useful
some day."

What he did, however, consider was that he
wished he had not to go to Chislehurst in
order to spend a " nice, quiet, comfortable
afternoon." He was forced to spend many
such afternoons at The Warren and they
filled his soul with a terrible despair. Wliat
should he do when he was married and life
became a series of such afternoons ? Already

Susan was avenged. Never had lie shrunk
with greater horror from the idea of passing
existence with him than he recoiled from
the notion of spending the years " fev>- and
evil " which might be in store for him with
Mrs. Jubbins.

It was the old Brunswick Square business
over again. She had changed the venue,
but the pleadings were the same. He never
for half-an-hour together o't out of the
Jones, Brown and Robinson set. Deputy
Pettell and others of that connection literally
:swarmed upon the carpet. Their houses,
their furniture, their carriages, their servants,
their friends, their parties, their travels, their
sayings, their doings — was he never, till death
brought peace, to hear any other sort of
conversation? Talk of moulding Mrs. Gubbins
! He might as well have thought of
making her a girl again or of cutting downier
goodly proportions to the airy symmetry

of a Hebe! Endurance was the only thing

66-2

left for him, and to do Mr. Gayre justice he
did bear the eternal flow of talk about
nothing with saintlike equanimity. He had
sold himself for a mess of pottage and he
would have to wear the chains of his
captivity, though they galled his flesh and ate
into his very soul. Already there had been a
few differences of opinion, in all of which
Mrs. Jubbins marched off the field with a
grand composure in the character of conqueror.
She would have felt greatly surprised
had anyone told her she was or
wanted to be a conqueror ; she honestly
believed she was deferring to Mr. Gayre in
all things. It is difficult for a woman whose
first husband has made an idol of her,
and whose widowhood has proved a long
career of doing exactly what she liked, to
understand her ways and ideas or even her
manners and habits can possibly be uncongenial
to any one who wishes to marry her.
Mrs. Jubbins had fallen into the not

uncommon mistake of imagining that all she
did, and all she had, stood far above the
vulgar height, where holes could be picked
in either her doings or belonerino-s. She had
her own notions and of course those notions
were right. She had her possessions and
those possessions in her opinion were
precisely the proper possessions. She wished
to live in town, and as a natural consequence
it was ridiculous to suppose Mr. Gayre could
really prefer the country. He knew nothing
about the country, and she did ; she had
lived in it for a whole year and was deadly
tired of it ; he had not lived in it at all, if
he had he would be tired of it too. This
was Mrs. Jubbins mode of reasoning, and it
is unnecessary to state that the result of
discussion future arrangements with Mr.
Oa}Te invariably ended in his apparent conversion
to her views ; considering what Mrs.
Jubbins had done for him he would have
been most ungrateful to insist he had any

right to maintain his own opinions, but the
banker sometimes thought he should like to
know whether he might ever be permitted
to have an opinion at all. It was very well
for Mrs. Jubbins to say, as she did say continually,
" I want to consult you." But it was
scarcely so agreeable to find that these
consultations meant well-nigh interminable
talks about what the lady wanted to do.

Mr. Gayre knew perfectly well no better
nor kinder woman than Mrs. Jubbins, so far
as her light went, ever existed, but he also
knew she would wear, and was indeed wearing,
him to death.

There were things about her which reo



minded him constantly of his father. He could
not forget the monotonous round of small
interests, petty details, contemptible gossip,
and narrow ideas which made Brunswick
Square more irksome to him than narrow
cell ever seemed to prisoner. Then he
could not say, "My mind to me a kingdom

is," for he often felt this mind was stultifying
while he listened to the even flow of babble
that did duty for conversation in Mrs.
Jubbins' house.

Could he face the prospect of being
cooped up in a town house with that eternal
trickle of twaddle always running through
his ears ; with the Petrels, and the Jones, and
others of the same ilk, for his only home
society ; with his old friends banished to
his club — for he could not— no, he felt he
could not — invite men whose ideas were
cosmopolitan, who had travelled, and thought,
and read, and seen life, understanding the
phrase in its best and widest sense ; to
come and listen to discussions concerning
the amount Mr. Robinson's " mansion " at
Walton had cost to build, or the questionable
taste of Mrs. Brown, who having been
taken up by a" grand High Church set," had
so far forgotten what her poor papa's ideas
of Popery were, as to go to early service

and walk about the West End clad in
hodden grey, and wearing a close bonnet
made of brown straw, just as if she were
the wife of a clerk in the receipt of thirty
shillings a week.

Further he could not disguise the fact that
antagonistic as Mrs. Jubbins might be to him,
she was beginning to feel him even more
antagonistic to her.

Honestly, he meant to make her an excellent
husband ; but he had no intention of
being a foolish one I At the first offset it
was clearly understood marriage should not
be thought of till sufficient time had elapsed
to enable him to release his own capital, and
finally put matters between him and his
future wife on some business and tangible
footing. For a time this arrangement worked
admirably but it could not last for ever, and
with dismay Mr. Gayre found himself expected
to play the part of lover to a lady he
had known ever since she wore short frocks.

and blue sallies — and whom lie should certainly
have thought old enough to know
better. Something of the awe she formerly
felt for him still remained ; but it was wearing
away. No later than the occasion of his last
visit to Chislehurst, she entered through the
open window near which he was seated in
order to ask him some question, and in the
most simple and natural manner came behind
his chair, put a hand on each shoulder and
called him " dear''

Mr. Gayre thought of this experience with
a shudder. He recalled the sudden chill her
action had sent through him, and earnestly
trusted the 2^ood, generous soul felt nothings
of the deadly tremor which for a moment
turned his strength into weakness.

He could not draw back now. In honour,
in common honesty, he was forced to go on.
As long as he could make the woman who
trusted him happy and content, what did it
signify how wretched he felt ? He had been

placed in a sore strait — on the one side lay
the Scylla of poverty, on the other the
Charybdis of an uncongenial marriage.

Matrimony was the only interest Mrs.
Jubbins Avonld have accepted and that he
could laye offered for the use of her fortune.
Yes, looking back he could see no other
course possible for him to pursue. Given
that he dared not face bankruptcy, no
resource remained but to marry the relict
of Mr. Jubbins. The position did not bear
thinking about, so deciding not to think about
it Mr. Gayre put aside his papers and started
for Chislehurst,

He found Mrs. Jubbins arrayed in a yer}^
pretty summer dress, which did not become
her in the least. Susan or his niece would
laye looked lovely in it ; but the soft flo^y
of the light material, and the cunning
of delicate colours, were death
to Mrs. Jubbins' mature charms. Nevertheless,
he had to say something about her

attire, and he spoke a few words of compliment
with such grace as he could assume.
That was the first event of an afternoon
he will never forget as long as he keeps
his memory. From the first moment things
went on steadily chafing his spirit and
finally inducing such a state of irritability,
that finally addressing one of Mrs. Jubbins'
young people in a tone of sharp decision,
he said, " Don't be so rude, sire"' Mrs.
Jubbins' offspring were, as a rule, extremely
rude — but no one had ever ventured to tell
them so before, and the lad stared at
the banker ere, turning on his heel, he
walked out of the room, whistling defiantly.
Mrs. Jubbins looked at Mr. Gayre, and
Mr. Gayre looked at Mrs. Jubbins — but
neither spoke. The boy had been offensively
impertinent ; even a mother's partiality
couldn't deny that fact. Mr. Gayre regretted
his hasty speech, but felt he ought not to
apologize. He waited for Mrs. Jubbins to

make some remark, but to this surprise and
relief lie took no verbal notice of what
lead occurred.

Instead, she began to talk of The Warren,
and her wish to return to town.

''I have been thinking," she said, "that
I should like to take a house somewhere
in the Kensington direction. I do not
care much for Palace Gardens, though the
houses there are good, and of course it is
nice to look out on the Park. I prefer
Camden Hill. I really do not think I
should object to Camden Hill."

You have quite decided, then, not to
return to Brunswick Square ? "

Quite — the neighbourhood, you see, has
so altered its character. Besides, the
lease has not long to run, and I feel sure
Mr. Rotten would be glad to take it for
the remainder of my term."

"And I had a letter this morning from
an old Indian friend, who is coming home

on leave for eighteen months, asking me
to look out a place for him within twelve
miles of town. The Warren would, I know,
suit him exactly."

I am so glad. I have taken it on for
another year, and 1 should not like to
be under two rents."

That is a thing to be avoided, certainly,"
and then there ensued another silence. Mr.
Gayre felt he was spending a very quiet
afternoon indeed.

Shall we take a turn through the
grounds ? " asked Mrs. Jubbins, " the gardens
are looking beautiful. As Mrs. Gibson
was saying only yesterday, they do Hole
very great credit indeed."

As he had observed, a score of times
before, Mr. Gayre again observed there could
be no doubt but that Holditch understood
his business.

'• I must just get a parasol, so we may as
well go through the hall," and accordingly

they passed through the hall, where Mr.
Gayre had seen Susan sitting amongst the
showers on that night which seemed so long
and long ago.

As though she had known of what he was
thinking Mrs. Jubbins, directly they got upon
the gravelled walk leading down the hill-side
on which the gardens lay, began,

That dear Miss Drummond was here
the other day ; she came to say good-bye."

Why, where is she going ? " asked Mr.
Oayre.

To her cousin's, to the place where she
spent her girlhood. She is to be married
from there ; did you not know ? "

I did know something of it, but I had
forgotten. How is she looking ? "

"-' Radiantly happy; poor thing, I am so
sorry for her ! "

"Sorry! Why?"

Oh, because she icill marry that young
man, and what can be in store for her but

misery. Nobody will ever believe in this
innocence, and even supposing lie had been
innocent when he was sent to that dreadful
place, how can he be fit for any nice woman
to associate with after livings among' thieves
and murderers and, as Deputy Pettell calls
them, the very scum of the population ? "

I do not think we need discuss that
question again," suggested Mr. Gayre, who
had heard it discussed till he was tired.

Then they have so little money ; nothing,
I assure you, but the trifle she has
left out of her own small fortune."

"They have a great deal of love,
though."

"But, good gracious, people can't live
entirely on love ! and after all I am afraid,
though I did not say so to her, there is
much more love on the one side than on
the other. I shall never feel quite satisfied
about that business of Miss Colvend. If
lie had not paid attentions to the young

lady, of course, she would never have
thought of getting so violently fond of
him."

You must understand such matters
better than I," said Mr. Gayre, humbly.

And I have not patience with his folly
in refusing to accept compensation from
Mr. Colvend. He says it would look as if
he were being bought off — like taking hush
money. So ridiculous ! ' He ought to take
all he can for your sake, my dear,' I told
her, but she wouldn't see it. Her cousin
means to try and get lira an appointment,
but I suppose he can only expect some
paltry salary."

"I rejoice to hear she is looking welland
happy."

"Yes, but I am afraid that won't last. She
spoke very gratefully about you, though
not so gratefully as I consider she ought,
considering the enormous trouble you gave
yourself over Mr. Dane's affair."

"I only wish I lead been able to do more
and do it sooner," he answered. " Ah I there
fifes Joshua ! Did you see how he turned
back the moment he saw us ? He hasn't forgiven
me yet for telling him not to be rude."

"Xo, poor boy ; you see my children have
never been spoken to in that way."

If you really think I went beyond the
limit of what I ought to have said I suppose
I ought to apologise."

"Xo, no, don't think of such a thing,"
said ]airs. Julius, hurriedly, "you did not
mean to vex me, only — only — you scarcely
understand — you have not been accustomed
to young people and, besides — "

He looked at her inquiringly, as she paused
and coloured violently. " I fear I have
annoyed you even more than I thought," he
said, " Believe me, I had not the slightest
idea ray remark would wound you in anyway.
I am very sorry. You know if there
be one person in the world whose feelings I

Vol. iii. 07

should consider more than another, that
person is yourself."

She made a little sign to ask him to stop ;
then, all of a sudden turning and beginning
to retrace her steps, she murmured in a
voice so low he could scarcely catch her
tones,

I want to speak to you ; let us go and
sit under the ash trees ; we shall not be
interrupted there."

Mr. Gayre assented, wondering greatly.
He had not understood an inexplicable
change in her manner, which he noticed from
the first moment she greeted him. What
could she be going to say? He racked his
brain to imagine what had happened.

Afterwards he remembered each detail of
that interview, could recall the way the
sunbeams lay athwart the road ; could seethe
trembling of the leaves, feel again the
touch of the gentle wind which lightly
swayed the branches, but just at that moment

all sense of observation seemed swallowed
up in amazement.

It is no use beating about the bush,"
she began, and her voice was not quite
steady. "I will tell you at once what I
have been thinking. AVe must never marry —
our engagement must end."

"Why?" he asked.

"The last two months have been very
pleasant to me," she went on, unheeding his
question ; " one week out of them I may
say was the happiest in all my life. ^\lien
I look back I can never remember a time
when I did not care for you ; when I was a
girl you were the hero of my imagination,
the ideal man of all my girlish dreams."

He was about to speak but she laid her
hand on his, as a token she did not want him
to do so.

When I was left a widow and my mother
told me your father wished you and me to
marry I felt life almost too happy ; I forgot

67—2

my dead husband and all he had done forme
and mme, and thought of you and you
only. I am not ashamed to tell you this
now," she proceeded, after the slightest
break ; " because it is all past and done with ;
we will, I hope, be good friends for ever ;
but I have thought matters over, and know
it is best we should be nothing more."

"May I again ask you why — I shall not
try to influence your decision, but if not
disagreeable, I wish you would tell me

CD ' ./

the causes which have induced you to
arrive at it."

I will tell you as well as I can. First
of all, the conviction has been growing
upon me, for a long time, that we were
unfitted for each other-sit is no sudden
fancy of mine — that we should never be
quite happy together. You have your
notions and I have mine, and we could not
make them agree. Even in upholstery,
the things I like you don't like — and it is

the same in other matters. That we insight
o-et over thoui>-h ; but what I never could
get reconciled to is that you do not care
for me — really. If you ever had cared forme
you would have said so, years ago — "

Passionate attachment," he urged, "can
perhaps scarcely be expected from a man
of my age— but — "

"Yes, I understand all that," she interrupted,
" but I should not feel satisfied.
I know now, why, at times, lately I have
been so unsettled and miserable — yes,
miserable — even while I believed myself
happy — but there is more still. I have
yet another reason — "

I must indeed be a heinous criminal,"
he remarked, with a faint smile.

Xo," she said, " you are not to blame
at all, the fault is entirely my own. I
have no right to marry — anybody. My
husband left me in charge of a great trust,
and I ought to try to be worthy of it.

How could I do justice to this children and
to you. I never thought of marrying anybody
but you — and I shall never think of
marrying again. I mean to live for my
sons and my daughters, and to be what
your father once said I was — a faithful
steward."

It is perhaps quite as well, then, that I
spoke to Joshua as I did to-day; otherwise,
you might not have found out your duty
till it was too late," said Mr. Gay re.

Yes, I should. I had found it out, and
what do you think shoved it to me ? "

'• I would really rather not hazard any
conjecture."

"Miss Drummond."

'why, what did she say?"

She said nothing, except two words.
I'll tell you lioAv it happened. When we
were talking together, and she Alas speaking
about how happy she was, I could not
help telling her I was very happy too. I

forgot, for the moment, you and I had agreed
to let no one know how affairs stood for
the present— and I went on — ' I am gong
to marry a man I have loved all my life;
your friend, Mr. Gayre.' I assure you, it
slipped out quite accidentally."

Yes, and then — "

She repeated " J//\ Garret'' just like
that, in an incredulous sort of tone — yet still
IS if she was shocked — and I shall never
:beget the look in her face, like some one who
could scarcely believe her ears. Then she
recovered herself and said, prettily, she wished
us all sorts of happiness — but the wa' she
cried out Mr. Gayre, and her startled
expression, have haunted me ever since. I
could not close my eyes last night, I felt
so wretched, and then when you spoke to
Joshua as you did, I knew it was best we
should (consider everything at an end. As
for the money, don't trouble yourself about
that — keep it as long as you like — I always

knew you would not wrong me or my
children of a penny — but lending money is
one thing and marrying another ; and noah say
you are not angry with me, and that we shall
never cease to be friends?"

'mrs. Jubbins, I never respected or admired
you so much as I do at this moment
and I shall always be your devoted friend,"
said Mr. Gayre — and it is only right to ache
spoke from his heart.

Relief ! " Was that any word to express
the load taken from his heart ? As he r^
turned to town that night he felt yer
humble, very penitent, very thankful.
Heaven has been more merciful to me
than I deserve," he thought, and who can
deny but that there was a considerable
amount of truth in the observation.

Conclusion.

whitsuntide 1877. May once again,
:5? for the third time, since that
morning when Mr. Gayre stood beside
the railings in Hyde Park, and watched
Margaret Chelston's meeting with the
"fairest of fair women."

London was virtually deserted. On the
previous Saturday London had dispatched
lier hundreds, and tens of hundreds, her
millions, indeed, into the quiet country, to
the seashore, and the continent. On
Monday morning there was not a street
situated hi as low and poor neighbourhood
a district visitor could name, but found
means to raise enough money to charter

some sort of conveyance and proceed behind
wretched horses that inst long previously
Have learned to curse the sound of a
cornopean, to such places of resort as
represent fun and fashion to the excursions
mind. The great Metropolis was like a
city of the dead. Round and about the
Royal Exchange many commercial corpses
lay awaiting burial, but the ceremony being
(compulsory delayed till after Bank Holiday,
the men whose cheques and bills had
been dishonoured were waiting? in suburban
villas and great West End mansions,
for some miracle to happen in the interval
which should enable them to begin the
struggle of business life afresh on the
Tuesday folio vdng Pentecost.

In the streets scarcely a human being
was to be met with — cabman recognising a
possible fare afar off hailed him with
effusion : a few country cousins wandered
four abreast along the pavements without

getting " shouldered " for their pains ; lads
who had no pennies wherewith to pay
train or tram fares, tied white woollen
.scarves tightly round their throats, and started
to walk for the nearest places where stickle-hacks
could be fished for, or the pleasing
.sport of seeing starved donkeys being
thrashed by brutes armed with heavy
sticks witnessed. Scarce a soul was abroad.
The better classes who were forced to
remain in town kept close within doors ;
on the railways all distinctions of class
were virtually abolished ; it was possible
to walk from Temple Bar to Lydgate
Circus down the middle of the horse-road';
the West End conveyed a pleasing impression
of rustic seclusion ; men walked to their
clubs as if a large balance of the seventy
allotted years remained in which to stroll
along the shady side of the street ; in the
home counties rhododendrons and early roses,
hawthorn, laburnum, lilac, a thousand wildflowers

— yellow buttercups, meek-eyed daisies
springing grass — girt London round with a
natural belt of emerald green, gemmed by
a thousand stars of divine hues, such as no
astronomer, no jeweller, ever, out of his own
consciousness, could have imagined.

In the hedgerows, by the wayside, flowers
were springing, blooming, dying. It was an
early year, and in London a May sun positively
beamed upon its inhabitants. There
were not many belonging to the better condition
of life remaining to be beamed on ;
still one man, well-considered and reputed
to be wealthy, was walking down Duke
Street, St. James', on his way to Victoria
Station.

The quietest of quiet pedestrians, the
sedate of sedate gentlemen ! Certainly not
very young, presumably not very old, a clean-cut,
closely-shaved, military-looking sort of
person, who might have been anybody, from
peer to poet, but who happened to belong

neither to the Upper Ten nor to the dear
Bohemia.

Suddenly the silence of the West End
street was rent with,

"Gayre, Gayre I Hill ! Hill I " and
Gayre, for so the gentleman was named,
turning round, beheld a figure on the
opposite side of the way, making frantic signs
for him to stop.

Ah ! you remember me," this individual
said, as they shook hands in the middle of
the horse-road. " Gad, you are looking' well.
Years, I vow, run by and leave you younger."

Why, Sir Geoffrey, I did not expect to
meet you here."

And, by Jove, I did not expect to meet
you. Just see here, Gayre," and the baronet
affectionately passed his arm through that of
his brother-in-law, as if they were the dearest
of dear friends, "I swear it is like water in a
thirsty land to look on your pleasant face
again. I am glad to have even this glimpse

of YOU. I called at Sudlow's, but, faith, I
found such cold welcome there I was glad
to return to mine inn."

They are not a very genial pair, certainly."


Neo, but you remember what I always
said. I mayn't be a very sharp fellow,
but I'm the very deuce in the wa' of
prophecy. I always knew they would suit
each other to a T. Lord, how she did goon
about my marriage."

' You hold your tongue, my girl,' I said,
there was trouble enough to get you
married.' That shut Iter up."

And how is your wife ? " asked Mr
Gay re. For . answer his brother-in-law
pulled a newspaper from his pocket —
smoothed it carefully over his knee — turned
to the first page, folded it up so as to leave
the " births " outside, and pointed out one
especial paragraph for perusal.

The paragraph ran thus —

"At Brockborougli, near Doncaster, the
-wife of Sir Geoffrey Chelston, Baronet, of
a son and heir."

It is all their own composition," explained
the happy father. " Gad, I Irish they'd 
an heir, but I'm nobody now, of course.
I came up to town to be clear of the fuss
Old Sponner is just out of his senses with
delight at being grandfather to an embryo
baronet."

"I am sure I congratulate you all very
heartily."

"It's more than Peggy did. I said, 'It's
of no use your turning up your nose; you'd
better by far be civil to the young stranger.
He is born with a silver spoon in his mouth.
He'll have lots of money when he comes of
age. Old Sponner swears he shall have all
his money, and his mother says shell see I
have no chance of touching it. By-the-bye,.
I stopped a night at Susan s on my way up.
She's got a jolly little girl, and she is prettier

than ever — and as foi' Dane — lie's fairly
crazy about her. You'd think no man ever
owned a wife before. She's just the same as
she used to be, only a little quieter. I think
she can't quite forget all that trouble. She
is the best creature ! She persuaded Lai
Hilderton to leave London, and he lives in a
cottage on the estate, with Sue's old nurse
to cook his meals and mend his socks. He's
doing real good work, I hear — don't profess
to care for that sort of tliino' myself!
Weren't you surprised to hear Dane had got
his grandfather's property? Good job the
miserly old sinner could never make up this
mind to sign a will. Well, they are a very
happy pair — as happy a pair as 3'ou'd wish
to see. I often wonder you never married,
Gayre, but perhaps you're as well as you are
women as a rule are a confounded lot of
trouble."

"I am sorry you think so, for I have
asked one to take care of me."

Who is it— Mrs. Jubbins ? "

Mrs. Jubbins will never marry anybody.
Xo, this is the daughter of a man who was
my superior officer when I first entered the
army. She is a charming girl, or rather
woman, for she is nearly thirty, and
I hope and believe we are exactly suited to
each other. Her father leaves for India
before the end of the summer, and then we
shall take up our residence permanently at
The Warren. You recollect Mrs. Jubbins'
hearty there ? "

"Eather," said Sir Geoffrey. " Well, I'm
heartily glad to hear this, my boy — and whenever
you're ready, only let me know and I'll
'some and look you up. Gad. you've decided
on a sweet place. I am more pleased than I
<:an tell you to think you are going to live
at The Warren — always thought that dear
good creature, Mrs. Jubbins, was the wrong
thing in the right place there. Money's
not everything — that's what I say a dozen

Vol. iii. 68

times a week ; but I can't get the set I've
got mixed up with to believe me."

You have quite recovered from your
accident ? "

Yes, quite, thank you — leg's a bit stiff still,
but I can ride as well as ever, Heaven be
praised — don't know what would become of
me if I couldn't. By-the-bye, I was deucedly
glad to hear you are allowing interest on
balances now. I can send you lots of accounts,
and I don't want a penny of commission.
Yes, indeed, it was quite a surprise tome
to hear some fellows saying, the other day,
the old Tortoise might chance to outstrip some
new hares yet. There's Graceless ! I must be
off. Hi ! Gayre, just one thing more. Mark
ni}^ words. You'll see that youngster wont be
able to drink a drop of anything stronger than
water. I know he'll turn out a regular milksop.
Shouldn't wonder if they make a parson
of him. The Reverend Sir Ferdinand Shelton.
Baronet. You'll find that's what it will be

Ferdinand is this mother's selection. Well,
good-bye, don't quite forget me."

The banker stood looking after Sir
Geoffrey's retreating figure for a few minutes;
his legs were a little more bowed and his hat a
little more on one side than usual, but otherwise
there was no change in his appearance.

Forget you " — thought Mr. Gayre as he
turned away — " Never ! "

Title END.

Printed by Kkllv & Co., Gate Street, Lincoln's Inn, & Kings?ton-on-Thames.

[ti. AXDC.

A

"^r<<^'

3 0112 051972864

^■(<;^^J■^•^:;^^v••^2'.vl^

■■7'
