ILLINOIS » IPRARY

AT URBANA-CHAiVJRAIGN

BOOKSTACKS

sis Soo/^fias been treated for mold on:
It is now safe to handle

STRUGGLE FOR FAME.

31 ^obel.

BY

MRS. J. H. Liddell,

AUTHOR OF
THE MYSTERY IN PALACE GARDENS,' ' GEORGE Get H OK
FEN COURT,' ETC.

IN THREE VOLUMES.
VOL. T.

LONDON :
RICHARD BENTLEY AND SON,

Publishers in ordinary io etc iB;ai«stu the (^uccn.

1883.

[A// Rights Reserved

i



Mi

h.

©tiritafeb to
MES. SKIEEOW,

20, SUSSEX GARDENS, HYDE PARK,

IX EE3IE1IBRAXCE OF
Staunch FRIENDSHIP AND TENDER SYMPATHY.

\^

Latter

r. PILGRIMS

II. MR. KELLY'S FRIENDS -
in. MR. P. Assert, PUBLISHER
IV. AX ASPIRANT FOR FAME
V. LADY HILDA HICKS
VL ' how's MARIA ?' -
\'IL THE Dawson AT HOME
VI I L GLENARVA - - -

IX. MR. Gifford

X. FATHER AND DAUGHTER

XL Stony-hearted LONDON

NIL EVERY DOG H.\S HIS DAY





8.3
lOS


1G9



29:i


CHAPTER I.

PILGRIMS.

^^HE 17th October, 1854 ; adult, cloudy
C^ ^^ morning, a mist of rain making e veiy-
^Oo^ thing damp and uncomfortable, a
raw wind blowing off the Channel,
Morecambe Bay looking its dreariest, the
Irish steamer, very late, just in, laden with
passengers and cattle ; the former in time to
hear the London express had gone, the latter
frightened and troublesome, already giving
assurance — subsequently, no doubt, amjDly
fulfilled — that the work of debarkation would
not be light or easy.

A Babel of voices, ropes tripping up unwary
passers-by, chains rattling, beasts bellowing,

VOL. I. 1

sheep bleating, drovers swearing, sailors shouting,
porters shouldering luggage, a good column
of black smoke issuing from the funnel, the
deck wet and slippery, a smell of fried fish
mingling with odours of bilge-water, coffee, and
tar, rushing up the cabin stairs, men and women
with all the colour washed out of their faces
looking mournfully at the weather : altogether
a miserable scene, which appeared the more
wretched because on the previous afternoon the
sun had been shining brightly in Ireland, and
it seemed as if in England the sun never meant
to shine again.

Standing a little out of the confusion, looking
at the spectacle presented with strange and
unaccustomed eyes, were two passengers, whose
worldly position it would have been difficult at
the first glance to decide.

Judging from their features and carriage,
they seemed to belong to the better class ; but
their dress betokened narrow means, and their
manner was that of persons who shrank from
ordinary contact with their fellows. There
was an indescribable air of holding themselves
apart, which seemed to proceed more from the
fear of being rudely touched or intruded on

that from any feeling of pride. They appeared
interested, although half frightened, and they
cast looks upon the land that lay close beside
the steamer, which showed they had not
crossed to it for a mere visit, but were anxious
to forecast what of evil or of good the country
which now held out so chilly a welcome might
have in store.

Not belonging to them, but travelling quite
alone, was a young man, who scrutinized the
strange shore with a keener and more impatient
regard. He was better clad than either of his
fellow-passengers ; he owned an assured self-reliance
they apparently lacked ; he seemed
more fit to eno-ao-e in the battle of life, and
yet he looked restless and anxious, perhaps
because he was eager for the fray to begin, or
possibly because at heart, so far as his own
future was concerned, he felt doubtful of its
issue.

At an earlier period of the morning, while
the vessel was still creaking and groaning
towards her destination, he had exchanged a
few words with one of the two persons mentioned,
and, having done so, he at all events
entertained no doubts concerning the social

1— •

me.

position of the father and daughter, for in that
relation they stood to one another.

Mr. Bernard Kelly instantly put them down
in his own mind as what he called 'has beens,'
and considering the state of popular feeling in
Ireland at that time concerning the numerous
class thus tersely indicated, he was wonderfully
little impressed by his conviction ; the fact
being that he had decided to ' cut Ireland,'
because he was heartily tired of everything in
the country — turf, poor gentry, bacon, and the
very few chances it offered to a ' clever fellow
like himself.' Mr. Kelly was a very clever
fellow, and he was going to London to see
whether the metropolis would greet him with
effusion. Morecambe seemed singularly indifferent
to his advent, which perhaps damped
his expectations a little, and caused him to
throw a certain amount of cordiality into the
remark he made as he passed Mr. and Miss
Westley on his way to the narrow gangway
which, placed high above the terrified cattle,
led to the landing-place.

Mr. Westley's answer was courteous, but
not familiar. He knew the rank from which

Mr. Kelly had spnuig. He understood it was
he, and such as he, who got on, and pushed
themselves forward into the front rows of life.
He felt content such things should be, but as
yet he could not quite fraternize with a person
he considered so completely below himself.

Mr. Kelly, being unembarrassed by any
luggage save a carpet-bag which he carried in
his hand, made his way ashore as soon as it
was possible for him to do so ; but Mr.
Westley, who could not boast good health,
and who dreaded a crush, and who owned,
moreover, under the tarpaulins a considerable
amount of baggage, the moment he heard the
express had gone, drew his daughter to a seat,
and taking his place beside her, would have
waited there calmly for an hour or two perhaps,
had not the mate suggested it might be well
for him to 'keep an eye on his boxes.'

Poor Mr. Westley, who had never during
the whole course of his sixty years of life been
able to keep an eye on anything, rose and
proceeded limply to act upon this hint, but he
was swayed hither and thither by loud-talking
men and shrill voiced women; his mild expostulations
were drowned amidst the noise

caused by frenzied passengers clamouring for
portmanteaus, trunks, hampers, packages,
sacks, and he was glad speedily to retreat upon
the word of a porter who, in the dear familiar
accents of a land left behind for ever, assured
him : ' There's no call for ye to stand here to
be shoved about, yer honour. Troth and faith,
ye may trust me to see to yer boxes myself.
You'll find them and me at the station sure
enough, if ye walk up there quietly when the
throng clears a bit.'

No advice could have been given more in
accordance with Mr. Westley's own inclinations.
There never existed a person who so
cordially detested bustle and turmoil as this
tall, worn-looking gentleman, upon whose
figure his coat hung far too loosely, and who,
moving slowly back to the bench where he had
left his daughter, sank down beside her as
though the slight exertion of moving across
the deck was too much for his strength.

Tired, papa V asked his daughter.

No — oh no,' he answered, but his tone
belied his words ; ' only I shall be glad when
we can get out of this smoke, and confusion,
and din.'

We could laud uow if you like

There is no hurry,' he replied ; ' we had
better wait till the luo^oaae is out.'

What a pity the express is gone !'

Yes. I wonder when there will be another
train.'

There is one going in about three-quarters
of an hour,' volunteered the steward, who
chanced to be close at hand, *but you'll be
just as soon if you wait till the afternoon.
This one stops at all stations, and the next goes
right through. They would make you and the
young lady comfortable up at the hotel.'

Thank you,' said Mr. Westley, but he did
not tell the man he meant to follow his
advice.

Your luggage would be quite safe at the
station, sir,' added the steward, ' and then the
young lady needn't be hurried over her breakfast.'
He knew these passengers had declined
to partake of that meal on board the boat.

And how much later do you say we should
be getting into London ?'

The steward had not said they would be at
all later, and uow repeated that statement,
with the addition that although he could not

speak from this own knowledge, he believed
they would reach London sooner. ks a rule,
he explained, passengers who failed to catch
the first express — and from his manner Mr.
AYestley imagined such failure to be generally
the case — preferred waiting for the second.

I think we had better be moving now,
dear,' remarked Mr. Westley to his daughter,
seeing that the way was at length clear.

Civil to the last, the steward followed them
with a cloak and umbrella, which Miss Westley
took from him when they reached the shore.

It is only a step to the station,' he explained,
* and after you've seen to your
luggage, anyone will tell you which is the
hotel. Good-morning, sir, and I wish you a
pleasant journey.'

Thank you,' answered Mr. Westley, once
again. In his best days he had never been a
man flush of words, brimming over with talk ;
and now, when those days were all behind,
speech did not flow very readily from his
lips.

Nevertheless, indeed all the more perhaps,
the steward felt no doubt on his mind as to
what he ' had been,' and for a minute he stood

looking after father and daughter, with a
mingled expression of wonder and compassion
in his eyes.

Lord help) them !' he said to the mate,
who chanced to come up at the time. ' They're
no better than a couple of children.'

Do you know who that is V asked the
captain from the paddle box. He had lifted
his cap as the passengers left the boat.

No,' answered the mate, * and yet I think
I have seen him before. Who is he ?'

Mr. Westley of Glenarva.'

You don't say so !'

Yes, I do.'

Meanwhile Mr. Westley of Glenarva and his
daughter were pacing slowly towards the railway
station.

You must have some breakfast, dear,' he
said.

Oh no, papa ; but you '

I could not eat anything.'

They had a quantity of luggage, which was,
however, all on the platform in charge of the
porter who had passed his word for its safety.
As the man reckoned up the number of bags,
boxes, trunks, and baskets, Mr. Westley glanced

at the pile and sighed. He was marvelling,
not without reason, what in the world they
were to do with all their things when they
got them to London.

I think,' observed Mr. Westley to his
daughter, as they stood surveying their worldly
goods, ' we had better go on by the first train.
It will save a great deal of trouble.'

I am sure it will.'

We may just as well be sitting in the carriage
as in the hotel.'

We shall be far more comfortable.'

But I do not like the idea of your not
having any breakfast.'

'I have plenty of biscuits and apples in my
bag ; but I wish you would take even a cup
of tea.'

I could not, dear ; later on, perhaps.'

And then they walked along the platform,
and peered into the different compartments ;
and at length, having settled upon one near
the middle of the train, put in their wraps
and small parcels, after which Mr. Westley,
relieved, went to see their luggage placed in
the van.

You are not going by this train, sir, are

you V asked one of the officials, after he had
looked at Mr. Westley's tickets ; ' you'll be just
as soon if you wait for the express.'

We may as well be getting on,' answered
Mr. Westley.

That's as you like, of course, sir.'

Now, papa,' said his daughter, when he
returned to their compartment, ' do take a
biscuit.'

More to please her, apparently, than from
any desire to eat, he took the biscuit, and
drank a little wine and water.

I shan't want anything else till we get to
London,' he remarked, with a smile which
lit up a face that had once been strikingly
handsome.

^ I wish we were there,' answered the girl
wistfully.

Upon the whole, Glen,' observed her
father, ' I am afraid we have been penny wise
and pound foolish. We had better, I fancy,
have paid a little more and gone by the usual
route.'

Why, papa !' — Miss Westley 's surmise at
the proposition advanced was beautiful to
behold — ' we shall travel first-class for less

than second ayouIcI have cost the other
way.'

'There is something in that he agreed,
gaming round at the cushioned seats, which
to the eye of modern extravagance would have
seemed very poor and uncomfortable ; ' but
only consider the time of night it will be before
we get into London.'

The Fleetwood boat might have been late,
too,' she insisted.

It might,' said Mr. Westley ; but his tone
seemed to imply his convictions were opposed
to her surmise.

I hope we shall have the carriage all to
ourselves,' observed his daughter.

'Most likely we shall. The steward said
through passengers generally waited for the
express.'

For my part, I feel sure the slow train will
be the pleasantness. We shall have time to
see more of the country. AYhat do you say,
papa V

I think I will defer giving my opinion till
we arrive at Euston,' answered her father,
leaning back in his place.

I am so dad we decided to come first class,'

exclaimed the girl, observing how naturally he
laid his head against the well-padded partition,
and then she turned and looked out at
the station for a minute or two. She was
thinking, perhaps, how little of comfort or
pleasure or luxury life had held for him for
many a year.

]mr. Westley of Glenar^\a ! Yes, he was
that still, and would be nominally till he died ;
but for all the good Glenarva was doing him,
or was ever likely to do him, he might have
been Mr. Westley of any other place.

In the whole of Ulster there were few
more beautiful domains than Glenarva. Mr.
Westley himself believed, and there were others
of the same opinion, that no estate of the same
size could have been found to equal it. Neither
the memory of man nor local history knew of
a time when a Westley did not own Glenarva.
Its gates had opened wide to receive heirs of
all ages and all temperaments. The nondescript
animals surmounting the pillars which guarded
the entrance to the long, dark avenue, could,
had voice been given them, have told of all
sorts of funerals that wound slowly up the
side of the hill, and then dipped behind its

crest and disappeared, as one Westley after
another had compulsorily sought a more enduring
dwelling than Glenarva. The spendthrift, the
miser, the keen politician, the man of pleasure,
the recluse, the eager sportsman, the gallant
officer, the bronzed sailor, had all in turn
entered into their patrimony, and had each,
after few years or many, been borne out from
it to the family vault in a ruined church,
which lay desolate, surrounded by the lonely'
moors inland. And now there was a AYestley
of Glenarva who knew the gates of his old
home would never, living or dead, swing open
again for him. He had possessed, and he had
lost ; his chance had been given him, and he
had misused it. Strangers resided now in the
familiar house; their servants brought their
horses round for them to mount ; for them the
gardens yielded their produce ; for them the
trees produced their fruit, and the crocuses
peeped forth in the spring, and the summer
roses bloomed, and mignonette and heliotrope
mingled with the sad odours of the autumnal
days. His heritage was to all intents and
purposes gone, not through vice, but folly ;
when he died another Westley would take

possession, one who had sons to inherit, instead
of his daughter, the only child ever born to
him ; the slim, unformed, shabbily dressed
girl, whose heart was so full of pity for her
father's trouble that it often felt fit to break.

There was something about Mr. Westley,
indeed, which evoked an extraordinary amount
of sympathy even from strangers ; how much
more, then, of sorrowful devotion from his
daughter, whose passionate love for him had
been so far the love of her life.

If no one else comes in,' she said, after that
pause, ' you will be able to have a long sleep,
papa. I dare say you had none at all on board
the steamer.*

Not much,' he answered.

Well, you must have some now,' she exclaimed,
taking up a plaid and laying it over
his knees.

What, this minute. Glen V remonstrated
her father. ' Give me till the train starts, at
any rate. What an impetuous child you
are !'

Glen,' as he called her, smiled, while a little
suspicious moisture still hung upon her eyelashes.
Whatever her sins in the way of

impetuosity, no one would have thought of
accusing Mr. Westley of a simiLar error.

I never was in a hurry but once that I can
remember,' he often declared ; ' and it proved
once too often.'

Was that to be married V sometimes ventured
a listener.

And then Mr. Westley's answer was invariably
a severe —

*No, sir, it was not.'

Now they are shutting the doors,' remarked
his daughter ; ' so we may consider
ourselves safe.'

But no. Just as she spoke, a passenger,
carpet-bag in hand, came hurriedly along the
platform. The whistle sounded. ' Here you
are, sir,' said a porter, reopening a door he had
just slammed. The new arrival jumped in,
and Mr. Westley, unclosing his eyes, which he
had shut in horror of the din, recognised his
fellow-traveller of the steamboat.

I did not intend to shave it so close,' observed
that individual breathlessly.

You are only just in time,' said Mr.
Westley.

And had to run sharp for it, too,' was the

answer. * Bub I saw no fun in waiting for the
express.'

If any remark occurred to Mr. Westley with
reference to this statement he did not make
it. He closed his eyes again as if excessively
tired, whilst the young man, who was to
journey in the same compartment to London,
opened his bag, and, as is the fashion of many
travellers, began sedulously searching among
its contents for something which, again in unconscious
emulation of other travellers, he
failed to find.

Whilst he was engaged in the prosecution
of this ever-hopeless task, Miss Westley looked
at him curiously.

She saw a man of four or five and twenty,
with dark brown hair, which had probably at
some former period been red, as his whiskers
were still. He wore no beard or moustache ;
his eyes were of that yellowish-hazel which so
often accompanies hair originally red. His
face was rather pallid, and its expression inscrutable.
His features were fairly good, though
in no way noticeable. His topcoat was of an
sit is not going too far to say — offensive
shade of brown, and all his garments lacked

VOL. I. 2

^1

the stamp of even such fashion as the provincial
towns then conferred. They had evidently
been made strongly and slowly, out of
abundant material, by some too honest village
tailor. His boots were new and clumsy, his
hat new also ; and he looked, as Miss "Westley's
dear friends, the vicar's sons, would have said,
just caught.'

As the idea occurred to her, an irresistible
smile wandered, like the rays of a wintry sun,
over Miss Westley's face, and she turned it
aside.

At that moment the young man, having
ended his vain exploration, closed and locked
his bag, and looked at her.

He saw what he mentally termed ' a slip of
a girl,' whose features while in repose all seemed
out of proportion. Her mouth was too wide,
her eyes too large, her nose too short, her hair
too sunny for the dark heavy lashes that lay
on her pale cheeks. Her figure was perfectly
unformed, and set off to no advantage by her
dress — an English poplin of a dark blue colour ;
an old silk jacket, too thin by far for the time
of year ; a brown straw bonnet trimmed with
brown ribbons and lined with dark blue silk ;

a pair of old kid gloves, and a 23air of new cashmere
boots, polished round, and laced up the
side, as was then universal.

She's not much to look at,' thought Mr.
Bernard Kelly, candidly critical ; and he was
right, though any one of the six sons in whom
the Vicar of Bally shame rejoiced would have
said :

Why, Glen Westley is the prettiest girl I
ever saw. I don't believe there is a prettier
anywhere.'

But they knew a different Glen "Westley — a
laughing girl, with bright merry eyes, hair
tossed by mountain breezes, red parted lips,
showing white, even teeth ; cheeks rosy with
exercise — a girl springing from rock to rock,
riding over the hills, bending hither and
thither to escape a shower of salt sea-spray.
Not this Glen — oh no. That other who had
run races with them on the sands, and
gathered shells with them on the shore, and
galloped with them across the moors, and
burnt nuts with them at Hallowed, and
dyed eggs with them at Easter, and eaten
gingerbread nuts purchased at the nearest
fair, and gone surreptitiously with them to

2—2

penny shows, and been for years the companion
and delight of their young lives ; where
was she ? Gone, like last spring's flowers.
They would never see her again while suns
rose and moons waned for ever.

Most truly the Miss Westley upon whom
Mr. Bernard Kelly bent his speculative gaze
was not much to look at. She was in a very
transition state ; further, she felt at the moment
most miserable. The wretched weather,
the tardy landing, the look of utter weariness
on her father's face, the feeling that she was
in a totally strange country, to which, perhaps,
they ought not to have come ; the want
of a proper night's rest, the absence of any
great store of physical strength on which to
fall back when an extra demand was made
upon her energies, all conspired, not exactly
to make her regret having left Ireland, but to
doubt whether she had not proved in this, as
in other matters of minor import, too impetuous.


After she had done a thing — but never
before — Glen always believed she had been
too hasty ; she felt sure she was right till
a thing was beyond recall ; then she began to

doubt. She experienced no fear of her own
powers while retreat was possible ; but when
once it was too late to draw back, she was
seized with dreadful misgivings, which hiding
within her own breast, she had acquired the
character of being a most resolute and determined
young person, possessed of a courage
beyond her years, and an obstinacy which
would some day land her in a position of
considerable difficulty.

When she was a child it had been freely
prophesied she ' would break every bone in
her body,' be brought home ' maimed for life,'
share the fate the country-side fully believed
in store for the Vicar's sons, of being drowned
and borne out to sea ; and now she had * done
growing ' and settled down into a ' young-lady,'
it did seem hard to those who had loved
and trembled for her personal safety, that she
should turn so wilful in other ways, and give
her poor father no rest till he left a place in
which he was at least known and respected,
and drag him off to London, where he might
as well be nobody. It was not generally
known that mr. Westley was as anxious to
leave Ireland as his daughter, but those who

were acquainted with him thoroughly understood
that but for 'Miss Glen' he would never
have stirred a step. Of that fact Miss Glen
herself was as fully persuaded as any of her
Job's comforters could have been ; and what
she sat considering as the train sped south
was, whether it had been really wrong of her
to urge him to adopt the course he said he
believed was desirable. She had been very
earnest in pressing matters on ; she had refused
to listen to the words of wisdom of the
country-side ; she had turned a deaf ear to all
remonstrance and to all lamentation, and yet
when the final parting came, and she realized
that she would never look on sea or land, on
green hill or kindly face with the same eyes
again for ever, she fairly broke down, and her
last memory of Bally shame was that she could
not see the stumpy church tower, or the grand
headlands, or Shame's Bay, or the friends who
came to see them off, or the children at the
cabin doors, or the pigs grunting on the
roadside, or the donkey that at the moment
lifted up his voice, or the white goats standing
on their hind-legs to nibble the hedges,
or the . ducks in the stream, by reason of

a mist of tears that blurred every familiar
object.

And it was of all these things left behind
for ever, and the unseen, unknown future
which now seemed so terrible lying before,
Miss Westley chanced to be thinking, while
Mr. Kelly was mentally deciding, * Your face
will never make your fortune, my dear.'

At that moment the young lady, whose
matrimonial charms were thus so summarily
disposed of, moved her hands towards a bundle
of wraps lying on the opposite seat.

Watchfully gallant, Mr. Kelly anticipated
her wish, and while he was unfastening
the straps remarked, in a light and airy
manner :

Old gentleman seems tired I'

Miss Westley stared at the speaker. She
had not been accustomed to hear her father
alluded to as * old,' and the word struck her
like a blow. It was a question, however,
she could not well argue, and so contented
herself with answering : * He is not very
strong.'

He does not look strong, at any rate was
the too ready reply.

Not much used to travelling either, I supposes
continued Mr. Kelly volubly.

Now this was a point on which Miss
Westley could have held forth with advantage.
' Not used to travelling !' She felt
inclined to explain to this irreverent young
man her father had seen more in one month
than he probably would ever see in his whole
life.

All the recollections of foreign towns and
scenery, which had made the romance and
pleasure of long winter evenings, while the
waves of the Atlantic came thundering in on
the coast, and the wind was sweeping across
barren moors and lonely hills, recurred in an
instant to her memory. She could have told
him stories by the hour, the scenes of which
were laid in Paris, Rome, Madrid, and other
towns, the very names of which he had most
likely never heard ; but she refrained. She
only smiled faintly, and left Mr. Bernard
Kelly with the impression that even the
elder of his fellow-passengers had never
been more than a dozen miles from home in
his life.

Going through, miss ?' asked Mr. Kelly,
after a short pause.

We are going to London,' answered the
girl ; and there was a little hesitation in her
tone, as if she felt reluctant to confess the
fact.

That is what they call " going through "
here,' explained Mr. Kelly, in kindly consideration
for her ignorance. ' Shall you make
a long stay V

I do not know ; it depends upon

that is, most probably we shall stay there
altogether.'

That is what I mean to do,' said her fellow-passenger
; ' no place like London ;' and he
drummed an air with his fingers on the arm
of his seat, after having fortified his courage
with this general declaration, which has probably
wrought more disappointment individually
to thousands than will ever be known on
earth.

You are fond of London, then V Miss Avesta
observed tentatively. It was the first
remark she had volunteered.

Yes, as fond as I can be of any place I have
never seen.'

Oh, you have never been there then V

No ; but I have an uncle there. He is a
magistrate or something.'

Is he r

Yes. He has done well for himself, I can
tell you. He might have stayed in Ireland
long enough before he could have got up as
high as he has. He lives some place near
Cavendish Square, if you know where that is.'

I have never been to London.'

No ; but you might be acquainted with
somebody who has. And so you think you
will stop in England altogether ?'

It is most likely.'

I dare say you were glad enough to leave
Ireland V

No ; I was very, very sorry.'

Were you, now ? That is more than I can
say.'

Perhaps you were not leaving any friends
behind V

Oh, as for that, I was leaving my father
and mother, and sisters, and brothers, and
cousins, and aunts, and uncles.'

I wonder how you could do it.'

Do you ? Now, my wonder is why I

stayed among them so long. If lie has any
stuff in him, a man wants to get on in the
world, and what is the use of stopping where
there is no opening of any sort, kind, or
description V

This question was so identical with that she
had herself propounded to her father, Miss
Westley felt she could not possibly negative
it.

We are not having a very fine day for our
journey, are we V said Mr. Kelly, after a
pause. ' May I look at one of your books ? It
will serve to pass the time,' he explained, in
unconscious derogation of his companion's
conversational powers to do so.

I am afraid you wil not find much in
them to amuse you,' answered Miss Westley ;
they are only some odd volumes that were
forgotten till after our boxes were corded.
Falconer's "Shipwreck," Thomson's "Seasons,"
Moore's " Melodies" '

You seem to be uncommonly fond of
poetry,' observed Mr. Kelly.

I used to be,' answered Miss Westley,
speaking as if from the heights of years.

It is a taste we grow out of as we get old,'

remarked her auditor, with a suspicious twinkle
in his eyes.

Yes, I think so,' agreed the young lady
simply.

The long journey dragged slowly on. At
almost every petty station the train seemed to
stop. The travellers stayed a considerable
time at Preston ; they were shunted at Crewe ;
they dawdled at the outskirts of towns, and
waited where they could contemplate turnip
fields at their leisure. Mr. Westley slept and
woke again to find himself but little nearer
London. At Crewe some variety promised to
be imparted to the proceedings by the entrance
of a lady who was handed into the compartment
by a meek-looking clergyman, with
whom, through the open window, she remained
in earnest conversation till the train again
started ; but all Mr. Kelly's hopes were dashed
to the ground when he beheld her produce
Berlin wools and an ivory needle, and commence
to crochet a shawl.

After she took her seat, that gentleman had
no eyes for Miss Westley. The new-comer
was about the same age as himself; richly
dressed, self-possessed of manner, comely of

person ; her wavy black hair, her dark eyes,
her round cheeks, her regular features, her
utter absorption in her work, her indifference
to the country they were passing through, the
way in which she totally ignored the presence
of any other person in the compartment besides
herself, produced a deep impression on
Mr. Kelly.

He imagined she must be some great lady ;
that she was rich — being; English — went, in
his idea, without saying. He watched the
progress made by those busy white fingers, on
which rings glittered, with a fascination which
did not fail to produce its effect upon Miss
Westley. Upon the whole it was a relief to
everyone except the lady, when at Stafford
another passenger joined their company : this
time a short, thin, active gentleman of about
thirty, evidently of an inquiring turn of mind,
for even while settling himself in the corner
seat Mr. Kelly vacated for his benefit, he
threw a comprehensive look over the occupants
of the compartment, bestowing on each
a swift scrutinizing glance, which Mr. Westley
lazily returned, but that made his daughter
feel somewhat abashed.

Thank you ; so much obliged,' he said to
Mr. Kelly, with an ineffable smile, as that
gentleman cleared away Falconer, Thomson,
and Moore. * Do not let me disturb you ; it
is very good of you, I am sure ;' and then he
dropped down opposite the lady, and picked
up her wool, which he had swept down, and
bowed and smiled, and received a gracious
inclination of the head in acknowledgment.

miserable day,' he remarked to the company
generally.

'And it gets worse,' answered Mr. Kelly,
accepting the observation as a delicate personal
attention to himself.

The weather always is bad when one goes
to London ;' just as if, thought Mr. Kelly, he
was travelling backwards and forwards three
times a week. But he said nothing audibly ;
and feeling, perhaps, that he had done his
duty, and broken the ice in an agreeable
manner, the stranger took some papers from
his left-hand breast-pocket, and began to look
them over. He could not make much of
them, however, for already darkness was beginning
to close in ; so, putting each carefully
back one by one in his pocket-book, he

asked Mr. Kelly, in a light and cheerful
manner :

And how did you leave Ireland V '

By the Belfast boat,' answered Mr. Kelly,
taking the question literally. He was deeply
offended; the stranger's English accent seemed
in itself an insult, and that he could possibly
from his own speech be known for an Irishman
assumed the form of a grievance too sjreat to
endure.

Oh, I did not mean that exactly,' said the
other, confident his conversation was proving
productive of the most unqualified pleasure.
What is the position of the country ? What
is the state of popular feeling V

About as usual,' was the reply. ' The
people are not satisfied ; they never have been,
and they never will be.'

Dear me, that is very serious.'

I don't see why they should,' went on Mr.
Kelly argumentatively. ' Perhaps if the English
lived on potatoes and salt they might not
be satisfied either.'

But why do the Irish live on potatoes and
salt?' inquired the gentleman in search of
information.

Mr. Kelly, looking at him, decided he was a
man who would go on asking questions till he
dropped down dead.

Because they can't get anything else ; at
least, now they can only get meal and salt,
since the blight, you know.'

But surely if they worked '

There is no work to be had.'

Not in tilling the soil V

It is of no use tilling the soil ; there is no
sun in Ireland to ripen crops if they were
planted. Nothing does well in the country
but grass.'

Then it ought to be converted into a great
dairy farm.'

That would require money.'

But that could be got '

We'd be very much obliged to you if you'd
tell us where.'

Capitalists are always glad to find a good
investment for their money.'

The last place on earth they will send it to
is Ireland.'

Isn't that the fault of the Irish V

Time enough to answer that question when
the experiment has been tried.'

In the north, where capital has been invested,
the people are fairly prosperous,' said
Mr. Westley, who felt it incumbent on him to
fire a shot for the honour of his native land.

But the question of religion does not enter
there. I have always understood it is Romanism
which makes the difficulty in other parts
of the island.'

It does no such thing,' said Mr. Kelly
brusquely.

What do you think, then, keeps the country
back

The " three curses " of Ireland — dirt, drink,
and tobacco,' was the prompt and decisive
answer.

'Dear me, I never heard that before. It
is very interesting. Then you think, sir,
if the people ceased smoking and drinking
and washed themselves, they would be prosperous.'


They need one other thing — to be thrown
over openly by England.'

I hardly grasp your meaning

I'll make it plain enough. England's the
rich relation, who, while professing a great
deal, really does nothing for Ireland. Still

VOL. I. 3

the Irish are always expecting help from her.
That is, the notion keeps them unsettled.
Instead of turning: to themselves and seeing
whether they can't do anything with an undrained
island and a wretched climate, they
are always waiting for assistance that never
has, and that never will come. What can
England do for Ireland except pour her millions
of money into the country ? and she is
not such a fool as to do any such thing. If
she could pluck up courage enough to say to
Ireland in plain words, 'ego to the devil !" —
which is what she really feels — it would be the
best day's work she ever did both for herself
and her " sister," as she calls the green isle ;
green isle indeed ! — green enough in all
conscience !'

The gentleman of an inquiring turn of
mind looked at the lady with the rings, who
slightly raised her eyebrows and shrugged her
shoulders.

Observing this, Mr. Kelly turned to her and
said : ' I meant no offence, ma'am ; the remark
slipped out before I was aware of it. I have
not displeased you, I hope V

Displeased ! oh no !' she answered

suavely ; ' you have amused me very much
indeed

Amused f thought Mr. Kelly, hot with
indignation. * There is scarcely a man you'll
meet with in Ireland he went on desperately,
turning to his male auditor, ' but is waiting
for a commission, waiting for an appointment,
waiting to get into the constabulary, waiting
for an agency, waiting to be made something
in the Excise ; in England a lad is apprenticed
to some trade by the time he is fourteen,
but whenever you get across the water the
young fellows are doing nothing but trying to
kill time till they are made inspectors, or
officers, or such like.'

You do not think that is the fault of the
English, I suppose V

I do not think it is the fault of the Irish,
at any rate,' returned Mr. Kelly.

*And what,' asked the gentleman still in
search of information, addressing Mr. Westley,
is your opinion about the state of things in
Ireland V

I am afraid,' said Mr. Westley, and the
tone of his voice was a positive relief after
the uncultured brogue in which Mr. Kelly

3—2

lead delivered his sentiments — ' I am afraid I
have no opinion to contribute to the general
store.'

It was noticeable that after this the Irish
and the English passengers divided into two
contingents.

The last comer and his vis-a-vis drifted into
conversation, of which only occasional scraps
were caught by Mr. Kelly ; he on his part
devoted himself to the Westleys, suggesting
various little expedients calculated to make
the journey less wearisome to Mr. Westley
and Miss Westley, asking her at one stopping-place
to allow him to take her to get a cup of
tea, which offer, however, she declined.

Father and daughter might nV)t be, and in
his opinion were not much, but he considered
them infinitely preferable to English * upstarts,*
for which reason he did what he could for their
comfort ; but withal both seemed quite worn
out when, at nearly eleven o'clock p.m., the
train stopped at Camden Town to collect
tickets.

How near are we to London now V asked
Mr. Kelly of the guard.

Next station, sir.'

Next station,' repeated Miss Westley. 'Do
you hear that, papa V

In a few minutes they were standing on the
platform at Euston, dazzled with the bright
light of the gas-lamps. They had reached
the goal of their hopes at last, cold, tired, and
exhausted.

It was too late even to think of trying to
find the lodgings they hoped had been secured,
so a cab was eng-ao-ed to take them and their

o o

luggage to some quiet and reasonable hotel.

I am now quite sure,' said Mr. Westley
wearily, as he stood looking at the porters
piling box after box on the roof of the cab,
we should have done better to come by the
dearer route. ' Penny wise and pound foolish,
my child.'

Glen did not answer. She felt too tired
and too miserable to speak. Just then, without
a hair ruffled, the lady who had travelled
with them drove out of the station, looking as
prosperous and comfortable as ever. The gentleman
who thirsted for knowledge had bidden
them good-night and was gone too ; and the
last thing she saw and heard as they also
departed was Mr. Kelly arguing with an indignant

cabman, who refused to take him to
Stratford ' getting on for twelve

Why, it's six miles if it's a yard,' said that
irate individual.

Then I'll walk,' decided Mr. Kelly ; but, influenced
by the representations of a porter, he
thought better of this project, and, carpet-bag
in hand, started for an hotel in the City he
had heard favourably mentioned by a certain
Timothy Neill, who, travelling for a firm of
Irish butter merchants, sometimes used the
house.

MR. KELLY S Friends.

Sex is a somewhat wide address,
yet when anyone of Mr. Matthew
Donagh's many acquaintances asked
him where he lived, it was the nearest
they were able to obtain. Mr. Donagh
had an airy way of answering all such
questions, and the manner in which he said,
Whenever I have leisure to go home I run
down to my little place in Essex,' left an impression
in the minds of his hearers that their
friend's little place was, to use their own
simple phraseology, ' a very snug sort of crib,
situated probably somewhere near Comfort, or
Houghton, or Farnham, or perhaps even farther
out. Mr. Donagh vouchsafed no more accurate

information on the subject of his residence,
and those whom he consorted with in the City
and at the West-end had not the faintest idea
that when in London he went home every
night of his life to a small house with a large
garden he had been fortunate enough to discover
in West Ham Lane, within two or
three minutes' walk of The Broadway, Stratford.


Incredible as it now sounds, such residences
at moderate rents were then to be found within
a few miles of the Royal Exchange. Railway
accommodation was bad, omnibus not much
better, and trams were unknown ; but people
did not think as much of any distance which
could be traversed on foot as they do now, and
Mr. Donagh often in the cheerful companionship
of his home circle declared to sympathetic
listeners that Abbey Cottage suited him to
a'T.'

In the county of Essex, where Abbey Cottage
was situated, he maintained as masterly a
reserve concerning his occupation in London
as he did in London about the precise locality
of his 'little crib.' All even his female belongings
knew about him may be summed up

in three words : he was ' connected with literature.'


To his credit be it said, he contrived to do
what many persons connected with, literature
fail to accomplish — viz., make a good thing
out of it. He made so good a thing, indeed,
lie might have been a very prosperous individual
if he had taken care of his money, and
curbed his liking; for his national beverage, the
soft dew of the mountains.

Mr. Donao'b was an Irishman, though indeed
few persons grasped the fact. He would
much rather not have been, but amongst other
mistakes made by Fate regarding him, she had
ceded to the Emerald Isle the privilege of
being his birthplace. Circumstances, however,
causing his removal while still a lad to England,
he employed his early energies so
diligently in mastering the difficulties of the
Saxon tongue, that in the periods which flowed
volubly from his mouth it was almost impossible
for the uninitiated to detect a trace of his
origin. The man who could achieve such a
victory as this was capable of great things.
In his way, Mr. Donagh had done great things,
of which he felt deservedly proud.

Personally, he was a remarkable-looking
individual. At the first glance anyone might
have taken him for a man of some importance.
His aquiline nose, his regular features,
his slightly arched eyebrows, his ruddy
complexion, his handsome mouth, his white
teeth, his closely shaven chin, his light hair,
a little curly, clustering around a forehead
where high thoughts and aims mis^ht well
find a home ; his keen blue eyes, his upright
carriage, his walk, which was firm and self-asserting
; his command of language, his
manner, which was a good imitation of the
manners of society — all seemed to indicate Mr.
Donagh was no common person. Constant
mistakes were made concerning him. He was
continually accosted for a dignitary of the
Church, believed to be a well-known barrister,
again addressed as Dr. , in lieu of

a famous physician of the time, and more
than once he had been deferentially spoken
to in the City, so great was his resemblance
to a celebrated financier of the period.

All these honours he accepted with a
gracious dignity all his own, though he was
perhaps conscious he owed them to his cb-less

rather than to his actual man. Accident or
design had guided him to a style of costume
which was very effective, and which included,
amongst other details, a shirt the immaculate
whiteness of which was set off by jet studs ;
a faultless collar, and a cravat like the driven
snow. The season might necessitate a change
of coat, but nothing else in his attire varied.
Black and white like a magpie, he was to be
met about London in all parts and in all
weathers. He would stand in pouring rain
under an umbrella to exchange confidences
nth a friend, and roll out mellow sentences
full of strange words to an acquaintance. He
seemed equally at home on the deck of a
penny steamer, and in the first-class coupe of
an express train. He was willing to go anywhere
and talk to anyone. Many considered
him a person well worth conciliating. Indeed,
those who knew him best deemed the promise
of his co-operation on a new journal an augury
of success.

As regards temperament, Mr. Donagh was
easily uplifted, and still more easily depressed.
He possessed indomitable perseverance ; he had
a bad temper ; the ability of saying most

insolent things in a most offensive manner ; a
keen sense of humour, so long as the lightnings
of wit were not playing around his own
person ; a fatal tendency to believe good fortune
would last for ever ; a habit, if he earned
a sovereign, of instantly spending ten shillings
on something he did not in the least require ;
a haughty, domineering disposition, which
might not have been altogether inappropriate
had he been the Emperor of Russia, but which
in a person obliged to earn his bread seemed
ridiculous in the extreme. He was shallow,
affectionate, capable of feeling grateful, apt to
take offence, ready to forgive when there was
anything to be made by forgiving, economical,
extravagant, scrupulously honest in
some things, eminently unprincipled in others,
honourable in many ways, chivalrous in his
sentiments and with a gift for lying that
amounted to genius.

What with his fluent tongue, his ready
pen, his power of repartee, his overflowing
imagination, his faculty for believing anything
he wished others to believe in, not merely
possible, but accomplished, Mr. Donagh was in
any literary enterprise a valuable friend and

a dangerous foe. He was willing enough to
help any lame dog over a stile, to lend the
lame doo; half a crown or five shillings if he
had it to spare — a matter of rare occurrence —
and to speak for him when perhaps indeed
there was not much that ought to have been
said in his favour.

Mr. Donacrh was not married. ' For ob^-ious
reasons,' he once observed to an acquaintance,
who ventured an inquiry on the subject, ' I
never married.'

The acquaintance lacked presence of mind
to ask what the obvious reasons were. Certainly
not any real want of means to support
a wife who might have helped him to save
what he did make. In the absence of a Mrs.
Donagh, he resided sith an aunt and cousin ;
or, to put the matter on a sounder footing, an
aunt and cousin resided with him. They also
were unmarried, and nobody could have told
which was the elder, had not one worn a cap,
and the other gone about what she called
bare-headed.'

If Mr. Donag;h had contrived to eliminate
from his speech all marks of his Irish extraction,
not so his mother's sister, Miss Cavan,

and his uncle's daughter, Hester Donagh.
They were sweetly, beautifully Hibernian.
If they had only just landed at St. Katherine's
Wharf from the Dublin steamer, they
could not have been more un-english — in
mind, manner, accent, and mode of expression.


Mr. Donagh regarded them with a tolerant
sort of pity, accepting their devotion in a
lordly spirit, taking all they did for him asa
matter of right, which indeed they considered
it, and treating them kindly, though not
familiarly — permitting no interference with
his affairs — and keeping them in utter
ignorance of where he went, what he did, the
persons he knew, and the amount of money he
made.

If they had been serfs and he a king, he
could not socially have drawn a wider line of
demarcation than he did between his relatives
and himself. He attended church in the
morning and they in the evening. * They
had their pursuits,' he said, ' and he had his.'
Neither of them had ever been asked by Mr.
Donagh to walk out with him, or to take a
day's, or even an evening's, recreation in his

company ; and it was clearly understood that
if by any evil chance they met each other in
the City or at the Mayest-end, no notice was to
be taken by the ladies of their relation.

What had led to this arrangement was a
contretemps which might, but for Mr. Donagh's
presence of mind, have resulted in harrowing
consequences.

One day he was standing with a number of
young fellows, just at that point where Dun-cannon
Street debouches into Charing: Cross.
They were what Mr. Donagh termed ' swells
cigars, rings, chains, canes, and eyeglasses,'
and it was all ' Mat, my boy,' and
Donagh, old fellow,' and the 'rest of it,'
when j must as ' Mat, my boy ' was in the
middle of a peal of laughter — and his laugh
was something to remember, so hearty, so
spontaneous, so infectious — the muscles of his
face seemed to petrify into a horrible contortion
as he beheld a sight of dread and
disgrace.

It assumed the shape of an elderly woman
dressed in a rusty black gown, an equally
rusty black shawl falling back off her
shoulders (for the day was sultry), an old

black bonnet that had got knocked to one side,
and black cotton gloves out at the fingers.
With a fatuous smile on its old face this
apparition, on catching sight of the faultlessly
equipped Mat, quickened its steps,
evidently with the intention of accosting its
relative ; but ' by the mercy of Providence,*
afterwards thought Mr. Donagh piously, / I
was equal to the occasion.'

Moving back a pace, he raised his hat with
such preternatural courtesy and solemnity that
the demon was exorcised. If it did not flee
howling, it retreated at all events with an expedition
which soon removed its obnoxious
habiliments from sight.

A worthy creature,' remarked Mr. Donagh,
in answer to earnest inquiries as to whether
that was his ' young woman,' ' but ignorant
of les convenances. Most faithful ; attached to

my family. Knew my father .' And soin

disconnected sentences he diplomatically, to
use one of his pet phrases, ' averted a denouement!


To say, however, he did not feel greatly
vexed with himself would be to slander his
better nature. He was more than vexed. If

he could have admitted such a thing, he was
ashamed. As he walked home that evening,
earlier than usual be it noted, he argued the
question out.

It boots not,' he considered — even in
soliloquy he never condescended to the
common words affected by an inferior order of
mind — 'what matter of urgent importance
called the poor old soul from the peaceful
seclusion of West Ham to the human vortex
whirling and seething in the West Strand.
She was not there of her own free will, of
deliberate intention. Ought I to have acted
differently, and boldly acknowledged our
relative positions ? I do not conceive so.
There are persons capable of such deeds of
heroism, it is true, but in destroying themselves
they sacrifice others ; yet I regret such
a catastrophe should have occurred. From all
points of view it is to be lamented.'

He was very silent during tea, a fact Miss
Cavan attributed to annoyance, for which
reason, when * Hetty ' chanced to leave the
room, she began :

I have been thinking I ought not to
have thought of stopping to-day, but I

VOL. I. 4

was so taken aback at " lighting " upon you
that '

'Not a word, I beg,' interrupted Mr.
Donagh. *It grieved me deeply, I assure
you, to have to initiate the part I did ; but
mine is a most difficult and delicate position.
You do not know the world, and therefore
you can perhaps scarcely comprehend the ruin
it would have wrought had those men, seeing
you dressed in the garments of poverty,
suspected you were my aunt. They would
have thought themselves ever after entitled
to treat me like a dog — like a dog,' repeated
Mr. Donagh. rising from the tea-table,
and with heightened colour walking to the
window.

Dear me ! I am thankful you put it off as
you did,' said poor Miss Cavan. ' I was
obliged to go to Piccadilly, and remarked to
Hetty as it looked likely to rain I would not
chance my silk ; and when the sky cleared,
as it did about twelve, I thought I would
walk from the Bank and take a look at the
shops as I went along; and then all in a
minute I saw you, and I was so surprised and
pleased '

It was at that juncture Mr. Donagh, cutting
across the thread of his aunt's discourse,
said he thought, * having; a view to the
possibilities of what might happen,' it would
be well to determine that for the future, no
matter when or with whom he might chance to
be, his aunt and Hetty had, ' in the interests
of prudence,' better affect not to see him.

You might speak to me at a most mala
propos time,' he explained ; ' break off an
important negotiation, for example, or compel
me to introduce you to some one it would be
undesirable for you to know. Of course, I
am about amongst all sorts and conditions
of people, and perforce I have to be civil to
them, but with you the case is different ; you
are in the happy position of being able to
choose your acquaintances.'

Though it served its turn, this was a pleasing
fiction on the part of Mr. Donagh.

What chance had two ladies of uncertain
age, whose personal income was under forty
pounds a year, generally forestalled ; who
were neither clever nor beautiful, whose time
was principally occupied in ironing Mr.
Donagh's shirts and hemming Mr. Donagh's

4—2

cravats, and nagging their little maid-of-all-work,
and making frantic exertions to keep
the house as Mr. Donagh considered a house
should be kept — hearth-stoned, black-leaded,
window-cleaned, scrubbed, polished, and curtained
— to make acquaintances in what they
liked to term their own rank of life ?

Heaven only knew what that rank might
be. They certainly did not. Though fond of
referring to Castle Donagh, and a certain Daniel
Donagh of wild and famous memory, it was
quite certain they did not come even within
the category which Mr. Bernard Kelly indicated
as * has beens.' They at all events had
never socially been any better than they were.
They had known more prosperous times, when
they could have ' sat down to turkey everyday,'
for the same reason perhaps which Doctor
Johnson assigned for eggs being only a penny
a dozen in the Highlands ; when ' everybody
knew who they were,' and they drove to church
on their jaunting-car ; but [even then their
acquaintances were not what Mr. Donagh would
have termed the creme de la creme. Far from
it, indeed, though it suited them to forget that
fact, and talk, even in the ' charmed privacy of

domestic life,' as though they had visited with
the ' best in the county,' and ruffled it with all
the ' quality' of their native land.

Abbey Cottage was a good index to the
character of those who inhabited it. The
garden in front — both wide and long, for the
house stood well back from the road — was
always neatly kept ; but the garden at the
rear could only be considered a howling wilderness,
where, amongst weeds, a few superannuated
fruit trees fought hard for existence, and
the family washing was hung to dry. Inside
the cottage one sitting-room was fairly furnished,
and another, where Mr. Donagh wrote,
not totally destitute of comfort ; but the parlour
— appropriated to meals, needlework, the
ladies, a cat, and a canary— was an awful
apartment, the untidiness and poverty of
which could only have found a counterpart in
the person of Miss Bridgettata Cavan.

Towards evening; a struo;o;le was made to
render this room presentable, in case 'Mat'
should return to tea. When he signified his
intention of not appearing at that meal, Miss
Cavan and her niece 'took a bite' anyhow.
They were in the habit of 'taking bites' in

very * anyhow' fashion — in the kitchen, in the
washhouse, any place — and they preferred
their food when eaten thus in haste and standing.
They were most unselfish women, caring
little what the * bite and sup' consisted of, so
that 'Mat, poor fellow,' had something nice
and hot and appetizing, so that his shirt
buttons were all right, and his cravats stiff,
and his collar defrayed, and his pocket handkerchiefs
fine and of a lovely colour.

Mat's linen, as Mat liked to wear it, was a
very serious trouble and expense ; but his willing
slaves felt more than repaid for many a
small personal deprivation and many an
anxiety regarding irons that would not get
hot, and starch that would stick, when they
saw him depart in all the glory of the ' best
Irish,* bleached to a whiteness, and got up with
a ' gloss,' they believed and declared could be
touched ' by no English laundress.

The small amount of correspondence in
which they indulged was kept up with a few
old friends in their native country, one of
whom chanced to be Mrs. Kelly, mother to
that Bernard who was tired of many things in
the Isle of Saints. Miss Cavan had always

considered Mrs. Kelly a more profitable than
pleasant acquaintance. She looked down on
the worthy matron, in fact, and but for the
receipt of occasional hampers, which were
acknowledged by Mr. Donagh's womenkind by
such little presents as they could afford, and
the execution of trifling commissions in London,
it is possible they would have dropped
the connection altogether.

As matters stood, however, occasional epistles
were exchanged between West Ham and Cal-lincoln,
and this was how it came about that
one morning; Miss Brido;etta informed her
nephew, Barney Kelly was coming to London,
and wanted to know if they could tell him of
a decent lodo;ino;.

When Miss Cavan made that remark about
Mrs. Kelly's son, Mr. Donagh looked up from
what his aunt pathetically called ' that weary
writing,' and inquired with more asperity of
tone than the occasion seemed to warrant,
what the young man was coming to London
for.

To better himself, I suppose,' answered
]VIiss Bridgettata. * Ye know Mrs. Kelly has a
brother here it was always said would one day

send for them all. He pushed on beyond the
common, got made a magistrate, and married
some rich lady that brought a great fortune
in her hand.'

I remember now, to be sure said Mr.
Donagh, mollified, and thoughtfully biting
the top of a quill as he spoke. ' But Bernard
cannot be coming over to him, or Mrs. Kelly
would not ask you to recommend lodgings.'

It is to Mr. Balmoy, for all that, he's
coming : not to stay at his house, ye know ;
but the uncle's going to do something for
him. By what Mrs. Kelly writes, Barney is
just full of genius, and only wants the chance
to do as well as anybody. Trust those Bal-boys
for shoving themselves along. There's
another of her brothers in Australia it is
reported has made a mint of money ; and we
know she brought Kelly five hundred pounds,
which he ran through before the first child
was born ; and the old man had only a general
shop in Derry ! Many's the time Miss Ready
told me she had been in it as a child to buy
sweets '

You can write,' said Mr. Donagh, interrupting
this harangue with a graceful wave of

his pen, ' and ask Bernard Kelly to make our
modest abode his home till he has time to
look about him.'

Ask him here ! Is it that ye mean V cried
Miss Cavan, bewildered.

'Why not?' inquired her nephew. 'Though
Abbey Cottage is not Castle Donagh, and the
casualties of generations preclude my entertaining
guests with the princely hospitality
that characterized the economy of my progenitor
Dan, still we can offer this young mana
bed and a pitcher of water, and I dare says a
morsel of bread. Write, I say; or shall I V

If ye wil,' hesitated Miss Cavan. ' But
before ye put pen to paper, Mat, just think a
bit. We know nothing about Barney. I've
never set eyes on him since he was in short
frocks, and bare legs and red socks, and
knitted boots ; and the Kellyss aren't of any
account, and the Balmy are of less. We've
but to look at Mrs. Kelly to know what she
is. Good-hearted enough, and free-handed,
I am sure wee have a right to say; but
still '

I suppose,' interposed Mr. Donagh, ' that
what is exercising a deterrent influence on

you is the idea that Abbey Cottage is not grand
enough to receive such a guest. Make your
mind quite easy on that score. The meanest
house in England is, as regards its appointments,
a palace — literally a palace — in comparison
with mansions in Ireland. Why,
when I was there last, a gentleman in a large
way of business asked me to dine with him,
and we were waited on — you may not believe
this, but it is a fact— by a strapping wench ina
bedgown, with her sleeves turned up, and
showing arms as thick as a navvy's, and as
red as fire. Why, the veriest little drab in a
lodging-house here would have felt ashamed
to be seen in such a plight.'

Ye told me that before,' said Miss Cavan,
who indeed had not been so much impressed
by the anecdote as she might. ' But still,
Mat '

We need not discuss the question any
further. I will write the invitation, and do
you get a room ready. When is he to
arrive V

He leaves the latter part of next week.
He is coming round by the Dublin boat for
cheapness.'

Then that gives you plenty of time ; and
see here,' added Mr. Donagh, dropping into
the vulgar idiom, as he saw his aunt in a
somewhat desponding mood about to retire,
you may require to lay out a few shillings in
muslin and so on. Here is a sovereign;' and
he presented that sum to Miss Cavan as
though the coin in question were possessed of
the purchasing power of a Rothschild.

Poor Miss Cavan ! there was scarcely a
necessary article that guest's chamber contained.


Mat has forgotten himself this time, I'm
thinking,' she remarked to her niece. ' Nothing
less will serve him than to ask Barney Kelly
to stop here, and you know all the Kellyss
have eyes like gimlets ; and there's not a
thing in the spare room but a bedstead and
the feather-bed.'

We'll just have to strip our own,' observed
Hester.

And after we've done that it won't look
much,' remarked Miss Cavan dolorously ;
and as for food, why, it is well known the
Kellyss never were within half a dozen flitches
of bacon, and beautiful hams, and the best of

poultry; and though Mat talks about a pitcher
of water, if the son is like the father he'd
drink the Shannon dry, but only if it was
whisky. However, there is no use talking ;
we'll have to get on with the work next week,
that we may be clear to see to his room before
he comes.'

Work with poor Miss Cavan meant seeing
to Mat's linen. Seven shirts a week, at least,
were required by that gentleman, besides an
additional one now and then when he ' dined
outs or went to the theatre. To see ' Mat * of
a fine summer evening strolling along in full-dress
to the ' play,' was better to some people
than the play itself.

Somewhat as the troubadour touched his
guitar, Mr. Donagh lightly and gaily flung osiris
friendly epistle. He was, as he himself
said, ' a master of all styles' — the prosaic, the
persuasive, the defiant, the bantering, the sarcastic,
the curt, the playful, the scathing. In
every one of these he considered himself
unique. The graceful way in which he accepted
an invitation either to take * pot-luck'
or to go down with a few fellows to an elaborate
dinner at the Star and Garter, was ' all

his own.' The ease with which be dashed off
what any other person might have considered
difficult letters was indeed remarkable, and the
grace of his note to.JMr. Bernard Kelly should
have charmed that young gentleman, though
it failed to do so.

He writes like a fool,' said ]VIr. Kelly to
his mother.

You're too ready with your tongue, Barney,'
observed Mrs. Kelly ; for at that precise period
Barney chanced to be somewhat out of favour.


Oh, I make no doubt he means to be civil
enough,' was the answer, ' but it is ridiculous
writing such a parcel of rubbish. Here's a bit
from Shakespeare, and a line from Milton, and
a quotation from Pope, and '

You'll be able to hold your own with the
best of them there,' exclaimed his parent
proudly ; ' why, you might have done nothing
else but sit and read all your life I'

I haven't done much else, but I hope it
will come in of use to me now. Don't trouble
yourself, mother, about old Donagh ; I'll send
him a grateful enough reply, never fear.'

And tell him the day you are leaving, and

the time he may be looking out for you ;' all
of which Mr. Bernard Kelly did, and then,
changing his mind at the last minute, started
for Belfast instead of Dublin, and leaving his
heavy luggage to go round by *long sea,'
crossed himself by the * cheap excursion,' arriving
in London quite a week before anyone
there expected the pleasure of seeing him,

Mr. Donagh was sauntering about his front
garden before breakfast (he had a way of doing
this without his hat, and of scrutinizing the
flowers and bushes with apparently the keenest
interest, which won for him the approval and
admiration of many passers-by), when a young
man, putting his arm over the gate, unfastened
the latch, and, unmindful of the request
plainly painted on the right-hand post,
Please to ring the bell,' walked straight up
the path without ' with your leave,' or ' by it'
either.

Mr. Donagh advanced a few steps to meet
him, and then paused, patiently awaiting the
stranger's approach.

Your business, sir V he asked, in his best
and loftiest manner.

The new-comer burst out laughing.

My name is Kelly, and you are Mr.
Donagh, I suppose V

The words were simple. But oh, oh! as
Mr. Donagh subsequently explained, if a shell
had burst at his feet he would have been less
surprised and horrified.

This Bernard Kelly — this the guest he had
so rashly invited under his modest roof — this
the monster after a fashion created by himself —
this the nephew of the great Mr. Balmoy — this
a young gentleman coming to push his fortunes
in London !

I am delighted to see you,' and Mat's face
beamed, literally beamed with the brightness
of the smile he wasted on the arid desert of
Barney Kelly's gratitude ; ' but how does it
happen you are here so soon ? AYe did not
hope to see you for a week yet.'

There was a cheap trip, and so I took advantage
of it. I trust I am not putting you
out. If 1 am, say the word, and 111 go back
to the hotel where I stopped last night.'

Oh dear, no ; put us out, indeed !' and Mr.
Donagh, placing one hand on Mr. Kelly's
shoulder, surveyed him affectionately the
while he considered how on earth he should

manage to give Miss Bridgettata notice of this
arrival, and prevent the awful spectacle of
that spinster in the undress she wore at breakfast
appearing before the eyes of her rough-and-ready
compatriot.

How did you leave them at home V And
something in the tone and the question recalling
his friend of the train to recollection,
Mr. Kelly smiled. Naturally, Mr. Donagh
could not see what he was smiling at.

All right. How are the old ladies V

My aunt and cousin are quite well, I thank
you,' said Mr. Donagh stiffly. ' This creature
has no reverence,' he considered.

What an awful prig !' thought Mr. Kelly.

If you will walk into the drawing-room
for a moment,' suggested Mr. Donagh — he
had been edging slowly up to the house,
trusting they might be observed from the
windows — *I will apprise the ladies of your
arrival.'

Too late. The last word was barely uttered
before Miss Cavan, in a sketchy but not picturesque
costume, wearing a pair of blue
worsted stockings, her feet slipping about in a
pair Qf Mat's old carpet-shoes, her hair in curl-papers,

her cap awry, her whole aspect that
of some anointed witch, appeared in the hall,
exclaiming :

The tea'll be '

The rest of the sentence froze on her lips.
The look of horror on Mat's countenance was
reflected on her own, and she stood speechless,
staring at Mat's companion, who, with wonderful
composure, said :

I am Barney Kelly, Miss Cavan. I am a
good deal earlier than you expected, but I
hope I am not too early for you to be glad to
see me.'

It was done wonderfully neatly,' observed
Mr. Donagh, when talking over the matter at
a later period.

The sound of the well-beloved brogue, the
touch from a vanished past, instantly broke
the spell which had bound Miss Cavan, and in
accents which fairly matched his own, she bade
Mr. Kelly heartily welcome.

This is Barney himself, Hetty,' she cried,
as another lady in an equally unstudied
toilette, attracted by the bustle, appeared in
the hall, and then there ensued what the

yoL. I. 5

maid-of- all work in the adjacent kitchen called
a jabber of Irish.

Ten minutes later Mr. Bernard Kelly was sitting
in Mr. Donagh's parlour, with his back to
the wild garden, as much at home as if he had
lived at Abbey Cottage all his life. He had a
bushel of news to communicate about the people
Miss Cavan used to know in the happy past,
when the Donaghs drove to church on their own
jaunting-car : who was married, who was dead,
who had gone to the bad, who had emigrated to
America, who was living at Castle Donagh,
who was coming to Ready's old place. The
ladies might never have seen London, never
been privileged to reside in West Ham
Lane, so fresh and green did their memory seem
concerning a number of persons who ought,
Mr. Donagh considered, to have been 'beneath
their notice.'

For himself, he took refuge in the Times, and
when breakfast was finished asked Mr. Kelly
if he meant to go into the City then, or wait
till later in the day.

Faith, I don't mean to go out at all again
to-day, if Miss Cavan will let me stop where
I am answered Mr. Kelly. ' I have scarcely

had a wink of sleep the last three nights,
and that's a mighty comfortable-looking sofa
over there.'

Yes, and it's as comfortable as it looks,
and so yell say when ye stretch yourself upon
it,' exclaimed Miss Cavan.

Then if you will excuse me ' observed

Mr. Donagh.

Oh, I'll excuse you fast enough,' said Mr.
Kelly. ' Take yourself off, and don't mind me.
The ladies and I will find plenty to talk about,
never fear.'

'Plenty to talk about,' thought Mr.
Donagh, as he went into his own special
sanctum preparatory to starting for the * centre
of civilization ;' ' but how,' and he placed his
hand on his forehead, ' shall I ever be able to
endure the crudities of this barely civilized
creature V

Whilst Mr. Donao;h was absent attending
whatever business mio-ht be claiming his
attention, the ' creature ' he thus disparagingly
referred to washed, brushed, slept, dined, had
a glass of punch, talked to Miss Cavan, and
evinced a laudable amount of curiosity as to
what the redoubtable Mat wrote. In Ireland

5—2

they knew he had done very well, or, as Mr.
Kelly otherwise expressed it, ' made a great
hit ;' but nobody there had ever met with any
of his books.

Find me one of them, Miss Cavan,' he entreated,
* and I'll be as quiet all the afternoon
as a mouse in a meal-chest.*

I only wish I could find ye one,' answered
Miss Cavan, who, now arrayed in a silk gown,
and having her hair dressed in two pensive
ringlets, and a cap ornamented with blue
ribands covering her head, looked a very different
figure from that she had presented
a few hours previously. ' But Mat never
tells us what he writes ; he might never
have appeared in print for all we know
about it.'

What does he contribute to V asked Mr.
Kelly, after he had digested this unexpected
piece of information.

Everything, I think,' answered Miss Cavan
vaguely. ' Looking over the magazines and
journals and papers he brings home, we often
come across bits we feel sure are his ; but it
vexes him so if we put any questions, we have
stopped asking them.'

Well, that's a queer notion, too,' said Mr.
Kelly, referring to Mat's reticence.

He says we wouldn't understand,' went on
Miss Cavan, between whom and their guest
had sprung up one of those sudden friendships
which are sure to wither away almost as
rapidly as Jonah's gourd ; ' but if we can understand
other things, what is there to hinder
us " making off " his V

Nothing, unless he writes in an unknown
tongue.'

It might be Hebrew for all we know,'
maundered on poor Miss Cavan. ' Now,
there's a new thing come out called the Galaxy,
and I feel sure he has to do with that ; but do
you think he will tell us which article is his V
And the lady's voice was uplifted as she spoke,
more in sorrow than in anger.

That first day passed off, so far as the ladies
were concerned, very well indeed. There was
one little cloud, when, Miss Donagh playfully
suggesting a love-affair must have been at the
bottom of Mr. Kelly's sudden determination
to come to England, that gentleman blazed up
for a moment, and angrily inquired if anybody
had been telling anything The charming

Hester's wondering disclaimer, however, instantly
calmed down this excitement, and he
apologized for his hasty speech by remarking
that Callinacoan was such a place for scandal
no man could imagine what stories mio-ht o-et
about concerning him.

With Mr. Donagh, however, things did not
go on quite comfortably. That gentleman
saw so much about Mr. Kelly which in his
opinion required ' toning down,' he was
unable to refrain from dropping various hints
which, though his guest at first wisely ignored,
he felt compelled at last to notice.

Mr. Balmoy was the peg Mr. Donagh chose
to hang all his remarks on. He warned ]mr.
Kelly against this, that, and the other, because
the society in which the magistrate had no
doubt moved since he crossed the Channel
must have given him a distaste for accent,
phrases, and manners Hibernian.

He advised his young friend to pay a little
more attention to his personal appearance.
People think so much of dress nowadays,' he
was kind enough to explain.

The more he drank, and he drank a good
deal, the more he seemed disposed to assume

the role of Mentor. It was excessively irritating,
but Mr. Kelly, though not a good-tempered
man, bore all his host's strictures
with wonderful patience, till at length it struck
him it might be well to nip this sort of impertinence
in the bud.

Look here, Donagh,' he said accordingly ;
I didn't come to England meaning to keep
my eyes shut, but for all that I am not going
to adopt the speech, ways, and customs of the
first fellow who tries to make me believe he
knows more of the inner life of what is called
good society than I do myself. I have much
to learn. I am aware ; but, to be quite slain,
I don't think you are the man to teach me.'

It is doubtful if mr. Donagh had ever in
the whole course of his life before been hit
so hard ; the blow was given so straight from
the shoulder — it was delivered with such force
between the eyes — that Miss Cavan s Mat was
sobered in a moment.

If I have been intrusive, pardon me,' he
said, with frigid politeness. ' Taking an interest
I now perceive to have been foolish in
your welfare, I could not refrain from mentioning
a few trifles I thought you would do

well to attend to. My interference, I
see, however, though conceived in a friendly
spirit, was officious. I shall not offend
again.'

'I shall really be obliged if you refrain
from criticism, at all events till I feel somewhat
less of a stranger in a strange land,* said
Mr. Kelly, with that readiness of speech and
manner which had already surprised Mr.
Donagh.

I shouldn't wonder if he has something in
him,' thought that gentleman, with a sort of
lofty incredulity. * At all events, he has
qtiite brains enough for a Government clerk,
which is what his uncle seems disposed to
make of him.'

The next day was Sunday, during the
course of which nothing remarkable occurred ;
but on Monday matters did not progress very
well. Before they started for town, which on
this occasion they did together, Mr. Donagh
made two discoveries — one, that Mr. Kelly
was not flush of cash ; and the other, that he
was inclined to be impertinent.

My dear fellow,' cried Mat, rushing in his
shirt-sleeves into his young friend's bedroom,

do you happen to have change for a twenty-pound
note ?'

Do I happen to be Governor of the Bank
of England ?' retorted Mr. Kelly.

Well, have you got a couple of sovereigns V

Yes. Do you want them V

If you would be so kind, just till I can
get change.'

It was when Mr. Kelly was ' so kind ' his
host saw the whole of his worldly wealth did
not appear to exceed ten pounds.

Humph !' considered Mr. Donagh, who felt
this amount was scarcely sufficient to start on
in London. However, the uncle, of course,
might come down handsomely, and no doubt
in the home stocking, knitted and filled by
sirs. Kelly without her husband's knowledge,
there were many pound-notes.

The other matter seemed more serious.

As they passed to the hall-door. Miss Cavan
and Miss Donagh, both wearing stays, and
having their air out of paper, detained their
beloved Mat for the tender embrace and
rapturous kiss without which he was never
permitted to cross the threshold.

From the step outside Mr. Kelly viewed

this performance, and Mr. Donagh heard him
mutter quite audibly :

Well, I'm !'

They argued the question out going up
West Ham Lane, Mr. Donagh asserting this
*osculatory farewell gratified two most faithful
and loving creatures,' and Mr. Kelly saying
he didn't care who got the kiss so long as it
wasn't himself.'

His tone implied such an amount of thankfulness
on this score, Mr. Donagh felt quite
down-hearted, and began to realize he had
taken an Old Man of the Sea on his back,
whose powers of observation were far too
acute to prove agreeable.

I wish I had taken my aunt's advice, and
never asked him to the house,' thought poor
Mat. * However, if the uncle is civil, that
will pay for all.'

Mr. Kelly could not imagine why his friend
should ask so many questions and appear so
anxious concerning the magistrate.

He is out of town at present,' explained
this candidate for an appointment.
He has not been well. I will call early next
week.'

It was a wonder he didn't ask you to stop
at his house,' said Mr. Donagh.

Oh, they are grand people — too grand by
far to have a wild fellow from Callinacoan
quartered on them,' said Mr. Kelly slily.

The time wore by slowly. There was a
nameless something about his guest Mr.
Donagh could not fraternize with. He was a
strange specimen,' he decided.

The specimen annoyed Mr. Donagh greatly
with trying to discover what he wrote.

That is my Blue Beard's chamber,' said
the master of Abbey Cottage. ' Everything
else about me is free to you, but respect the
one locked door.'

It is mighty odd,' answered Mr. Kelly.
Why can't you tell us what you do V

Because I love Truth,' was the reply. ' I
revere, I worship her. I could easily tell you
I write leaders in the Times ; but I do not, because
that would not be fact — it would be
fiction.'

I shouldn't believe you if you said you
wrote for the Times,' remarked Mr. Kelly, with
disconcerting frankness.

No, and I never will tell you anything of

the sort. If you must know, I am a disappointed
man. I have not made my mark as
I expected, and so, instead of grumbling, I
maintain a discreet silence.'

I suppose it is very difficult to make a
mark.'

The experience of the ages would seem to
imply as much.'

Do you know, I have tried my hand at
authorship myself,' and Mr. Kelly laughed
and coloured.

Have you V Mr. Donagh's tone was the
reverse of encouraging. ' In some " Poet's
Corner," no doubt.'

Yes, there and elsewhere. I used to think
I could turn out something worth reading,
but now I have given up the notion.'

Wisely, I should say.'

Judging from the results even you have
achieved, I should say so.'

It was this sort of thing which Mr. Donagh
called ' banter,' but felt really like a sword-thrust,
which caused him to long for Mr.
Kelly's departure.

To do Mr. Kelly justice, he troubled the
Abbey Cottage with very little of his society.

He went out directly after breakfast, and
scarcely ever returned till tea-time ; so that as
far as food was concerned the cost of his maintenance
could not be regarded as excessive.

But he takes it out in the drink,* whimpered
Miss Bridgettata. ' There's a gallon gone
already, and it makes no more impression on
him than if it was pure spring water.'

Which was perhaps the less extraordinary
as his share of the gallon, which could only be
regarded as the lion's, produced a considerable
effect on Mat.

That gentleman, however, by confining his
libations to the City and West - end, had
earned for himself a character for sobriety in
his domestic circle a teetotaler might have
envied. Even Miss Bridgettata often urged him
to take 'just a thimbleful ' when he was prostrate
with one of his ' dreadful headaches,' and
almost weeping told Hetty how, almost with
loathing, he refused to try a prescription she
knew would * give him a lift.'

At a very early period of his visit Mr.
Kelly perceived Mr. Donagh had no intention
of taking him about London — that is to say,
about any part of London where they were

likely to meet many of Mat's numerous acquaintances.


He's ashamed of me thought Mr. Kelly
bitterly ; but as it suited him to take no notice
of this feeling on his friend's part, he went his
way and Mat went his. During the course of
the week which seemed so long to the dwellers
at Abbey Cottage, he contrived to see a great
deal of London, and found many opportunities
of comparing his own personal appearance
with that of other young men of a like grade
in life. As he truly said, he had not come to
England to keep his eyes shut, and for this
reason he astonished Miss Donagh by appearing
one evening at tea with his hair cut in
the latest style and his whiskers trimmed
just elegant,' as the lady expressed the fact
in her simple vernacular.

More wonders, however, were in store. On
the Saturday week following Mr. Kelly's appearance
at West Ham, a letter arrived from
his uncle, to say he had now returned to
Upper Wimpole Street, and would be glad to
see Bernard if he called between three and
four o'clock on the Monday following. This
epistle, which, indeed, he had not expected,

put Mr. Kelly into the highest spirits, and
possibly induced him the next morning to
electrify his host by descending to breakfast
decently dressed.'

When or how he had procured the new suit
of WTJl-made clothes, which made him ' look
another person,' he did not inform Mr. Donagh ;
but there they were, and there was he in
them.

^ Come, there is hope,' thought Mat, with a
gratified smile : ' after all, my words have borne
fruit ;' while Miss Donagh openly expressed
her admiration, and assured Mr. Kelly in an
easy and friendly manner, * There was money
bid for him.'

As a man gets uneasy the day before his
execution, it was noticeable that Mr. Balmoy's
nephew lost some portion of courage as the
time for the momentous interview drew nio-h.
It is not too much to say he grew nervous ;
and finally, during the progress of that friendly
tumbler which wound up the evening, asked
Mr. Donagh if he would mind accompanying
him to Upper Wimpole Street on the morrow.

Mat snapped at the proposal, and declared
that in the cause of friendship he was willing

to forego appointments, invitations, everything.


I'll see you through it, my boy,' he said,
clapping Mr. Kelly on the shoulder with an
air of patronage which made the young man
almost repent his invitation.

However,' he thought, ' anything is better
than going alone, and the fellow is presentable
enough.'

Presentable enough !' Heaven and earth
must have come together had Mat heard him.

In the cause of friendship Mat the next day
stood ' a luncheon at a well-known City tavern,
after which meal the pair started, both in the
best of spirits, for Upper Wimpole Street.

Mr. Bernard was indeed in the wildest humour.
He talked and rattled on as they walked up
Chancery Lane to meet a West-end omnibus,
and proved that he could be what Mr. Donagh
had much doubted — a pleasant and witty
companion.

He has a great deal in him which only
wants bringing out,' decided that gentleman,
as with neatly furled umbrella he signalled a
passing 'bus.

Mr. Kelly got in first. Mr. Donagh following,

took a seat beside him next the door.
Opposite Mr. Donagh a gentleman was already
seated, most elaborately got up — a regular
buck of the old school — with frilled shirt,
diamond brooch, tremendous cravat, long-waistcoat,
high coat-collar, best superfine
hat, kid gloves, gold-headed cane, highly
polished boots, and gold watch-chain, from
which depended a bunch of seals and
charms.

His head, long and narrow, was surmounted
by beautiful white curls, his whiskers, nicely
curled also, were white as snow He looked
some superannuated leader of fashion — someone
who might have been a contemporary of
Brummell, but had survived to a more prosperous
old age.

To Mr. Donag;h's amazement, the moment
Mr. Kelly caught sight of this old * swell,' he
greeted him with a friendly —

Ah ! how d'ye do V

The gentleman looked as much astonished
as mr. Donagh felt.

T — aw — really, sir, have not the pleashau
of your acquaintance,' he said.

Mr. Kelly looked at him and nodded.

VOL. I. G

How's Maria V he asked, smiling pleasantly.


By this time the attention of the other passengers
began to be aroused.

Sir — I repeat, sir — I do not know who you
are, sir,' spluttered out the gentleman, purple
with indignation.

Where is Tom now ?' went on Mr. Kelly,
after he had apparently received and digested
a satisfactory answer concerning Maria.

The man's mad !' cried his victim, looking
helplessly round on the occupants of the omnibus,
who by this time were laughing outright.
Sir, I have to tell you I never saw you, sir,
in my life before, and I trust I shall never see
you again.'

I always told you he was the flower of the
flock,' said Mt. Kelly.

It was too much. The passengers screamed ;
the omnibus was full, and nine persons roared
in concert as the poor old gentleman yelled:

Conductor ! conductor ! I say, conductor,
let me out ; you have got a lunatic inside. I
shall summon you and him. And '

m come round and see you one of these
days,' were Mr. Kelly's last words, as the gentleman

was set down in the very muddiest
portion of the road, where they left him
shaking his stick after the retreating vehicle.

What on earth possessed you to do such a
thing V asked Mr. Donagh.

I don't know. There was something in
the look of the old fellow I couldn't resist.'

^[r. Donagh shook his head gravely, but
made no further remark ; and shortly afterwards
they got out, and proceeded on foot
towards Wimpole Street. Arrived there, the
butler, who opened the door, said Mr. Balmoy
was not at home, but asked them to walk
in, as that gentleman would return almost
directly.

With a feeling; amounting; to reverence, Mr.
Donagh trod the thick carpets, and surveyed
the wealth and luxury which was presented at
every step.

This is something like,' said Mr. Kelly,
flinging himself into an easy-chair. ' He seems
better off even than I expected.'

I wonder if we shall be asked to dinner,'
marvelled Mr. Donagh to himself

They waited patiently five minutes, ten
minutes, fifteen minutes, half an hour ; at the

6—2

end of that time a step was heard, the door
opened, a gentleman entered, and in his uncle
Mr. Kelly recognised their companion of the
omnibus !

Mr. Donagh never could accurately recall
what happened after that. He had a confused
memory of angry words, of an attempted
apology, of a bell being rung violently, of
hearing himself and his friend ordered out of
the house, of seeing the butler glide before
and quietly and deferentially fling wide the
door for them to depart, of feeling that Mr.
Balmoy stood in the hall to see them actually
off the premises, and of finding himself in
Wimpole Street, ready to sink under the pavement
with mortification and shame.

MR. P. Assert, PUBLISHER.

ON G before the Thames Embankment
was thought of, save as a scheme
of Sir Christopher Wren's — which
it was a pity had not been carried
out by him, but that never in the later times
could by anybody be made a reality — Craven
Street, Strand, was as quiet, respectable, and
central a position for a residence as could
have been desired by a person whose ideas
were moderate and tastes urban.

Mr. Yassett had no extravagant notions, and
he dearly loved a town, more especially he
affected London, in particular those small portions
of it described in legal documents as
The Cities of London and Westminster ;'

and though, to a certain extent, it might be
true that chance first led him to take up
his abode in Craven Street, there can be no
question but that choice induced him to continue
living there.

As a boy he had often been in the then no
thoroughfare, one end of which was close by
Charing Cross and the other abutting on the
river, and he used to think, looking at the
staid, comfortable residences, that men and
women who dwelt in them ought to be very
happy ; while as a man he considered, when,
having secured a long lease of one of the
houses situated on the east side, he took possession,
that he would never leave Craven
Street till — he could not help it.

His mind was deeply imbued with that taste
for antiquity which enables an individual
familiar with the history of former days to
make companions of the very stones of the
street.

To outward view a lonely man, Mr. Assert,
in reality, never felt solitary. He had his
business to interest him by day, and when, in
the evenings, he took a stroll round the neighbourhood,
there came to him from out the

past — on the one hand, lords and ladies, kings,
courtiers, statesmen, who had lived and loved,
sinned and suffered, and rejoiced and made
merry, and died and been buried within the
Liberties of Westminster ; and on the other,
trooping through Temple Bar and over Ivy
Bridge, grave citizens, turbulent apprentices,
rebels, traitors, the martyrs of Smithfield,
authors from Grub Street, Milton from under
the shadow of All Hallows ; Shakespeare,
straight from Golden Lane or Playhouse Yard ;
Johnson, from Cough Square ; and Goldsmith,
on his way to clothe himself with confusion at
Northumberland House.

Standing just within hearing of the din of
the Strand, there was nothing which pleased
Mr. Vassett better at times than to picture
the period when that thoroughfare, where now
all is ' crowding and bustle,' and ' continual
hurrying to and fro,' was ' a bare and marshy
shore,' where, doubtless, the ' hollow-sounding
' cry of the bittern from its reedy nest has
often broke upon the ear of the half-naked,
but gaily ornamented, human wanderer from
the neighbouring City of Mists.'

Nature had made Mr. Yassett an antiquarian

necessity, a publisher. It is not often that
nature and necessity, hand locked in hand,
manage to tread the road of life together.

There was no violent antipathy between his
tastes and his business ; though had Heaven
seen fit to place him in a connection where
amongst the accumulated dust of centuries he
could have been perpetually unearthing some
treasure of the past, he would have preferred
it undoubtedly to considering manuscripts,
possibly more legible, but certainly much less
interesting than black-letter. Dead authors
never could have given the trouble and annoyance
living writers contrived to do ; but still,
neither in the world we live in nor in any
other, so far as we know, can people have
everything their own way. Mr. Yassett was
a philosopher, and recognised this fact ; moreover,
out of living writers he had done very
well indeed, which perhaps did more to reconcile
him to their existence than even philosophy.


He was a prosperous man ; his lot chanced
to be cast at a time when, to quote the words
of those who recently have not been so prosperous,
* Some money con Id be made out of

publishing.' Owing to circumstances or himself,
Mr. Yassett had achieved this feat, and
another equally important, viz., keeping his
money when he had got it. From the agreeable
seclusion of Craven Street he was able, at
the period when this story opens, to contemplate
coming years without any terror of
poverty ; on the contrary, he had thousands
well invested, and was able to think of both
his printers and the firm that supplied him
with paper without any fear of that day of
reckoning which, though deferred, looms
darkly and certainly before the mind's eye of
many a modern publisher in an apparently
large and prosperous way of business.

As has been intimated, Mr. Yassett's ideas
were modest, his notions perhaps a little old-fashioned,
his views somewhat circumscribed.
He was doing a very safe trade, and stood
very well If he could not claim to be a
Murray, no one could speak of him as a disciple
of the Minerva Press.

No one knew' better than he did that the
works he published were not likely to live,
but in their generation they were good, useful
amusing. That they were not likely to go

down through the ages did not much trouble
the gentleman who had assisted at their birth.
He felt they would live long enough ; they
had served their purpose, and could die when
they pleased. He felt no such frantic desire
for posthumous fame as rendered him unhappy
because he could not compass it. If
Shakespeare had come back to earth, Mr.
Vassett would not have risked anything he
considered very valuable — say, for instance,
the lease of his house in Craven Street — for
the honour of standing godfather even to a
second Shylock. The world's applause he did
not consider worth the loss of one night's
sleep : further, he had a notion not uncommon
amongst those who prefer to seek their mental
food among the past of literature, rather than
browns e on the light productions of the present,
that no more great books would ever be
written. Mr. Vassett was no optimist concerning
the books of the future. Looking
around, he saw what he considered almost a
dead level of mediocrity. Whether the few
who struo-o;led out of the mass and achieved

CO

distinction, who were run after by readers,
and run down by the critics, would be thought

much of in succeeding generations, was a
question he professed himself glad he had not
to decide. He admitted they had many merits;
but when asked if he considered they would
stand the test of time, he returned the safe
answer that he did not know.

There was another thing also he did not
know, as he sat at breakfast one November
morning in the same year when Mr. Bernard
Kelly, and Mr. and Miss Westley, and the
gentleman of an inquiring turn of mind, and
the lady with the wavy hair, all travelled
together in the same compartment to Euston
■ — viz., anything about the sword which was
impending over his devoted head. Mr.
Vassett entertained an antipathy towards new
authors which must be indigenous in the
publishing bosom, since it obtains to the
present day, unless indeed in those cases
where one of the * new school ' spreads wide
his arms to welcome some pigeon with sheeny
plumage who professes his desire to be
plucked forthwith. Publishing, he felt,
might not prove an unpleasant business if
tyros would but refrain from bringing manuscripts
: poor Mr. Vassett had seen so much

of ' inglorious Milton,' of would-be Sheri-dans,
of young persons who believed they had
the * gift ' of historical romance, of poets,
novelists, essayists, and travellers, that could
he only have conceived the possibility of four
would-be authors entering London on the
same day, and the same hour, and by the
same line of rail, he must have been reduced
to despair. All unconscious of what fate held
in store for him, he was on that November
morning: wrestling; in imagination with one
author, a letter from whom lay open before
him. He felt firmly determined to oust
her out, but he gave no thought to the other
four demons waiting to enter in.

His correspondent was a lady of title, who,
having married a wealthy City man and then
separated from him, had decided to take the
public fully into her confidence, and state in
several three-volume novels the causes, the
many causes of complaint she considered she
had against the gentleman whose name she
still bore.

That sort of thing was not so common in
those days as it has since become, and Lady
Hilda Hicks's books sold remarkably well : not

so much on account of any great intrinsic
merit they possessed — though Lady Hilda
was in her way clever — as of the amount of
ill-nature and scandal and misrepresentation
she managed to put into them.

Lady Hilda was extremely inconsistent.
She had married Mr. Hicks for his money, she
never pretended she had married him for anything
else, and then she turned round and
abused her husband for possessing money.
No Billingsgate fish-wife could have bespattered
a man with fouler insinuations and
accusations than this daughter of an earl,
who had sold herself willingly for the
'almighty dollar.'

There was scarcely a crime in the Decalogue
she failed to lay — by implication — to his
charge. Under the poor disguise of Bricks,
Cricks, Pricks, Licks, and Picks, she held up
his honoured name to scorn and ridicule.
Hicks had been a power in the City ; now,
unless it was on a cheque or a bill, the words
served as a mere peg on which to hang irreverent
jokes and scurrilous jests.

Lady Hilda ridiculed her husband's friends,
ideas, house, business, manners, with an utter

absence of shame, reticence, or the most
ordinary womanly feeling, which might have
put to the rout even some later writers upon
the subject of matrimonial grievances.

People were always wondering what she
would say next. She had her party of
sympathizers, and a large following of readers,
and, as has been before said, her books sold
remarkably well.

Nevertheless, Mr. Vassett was beginning to
feel he had brought out enough of them.
Naturally he was loth to refuse novels written
by a woman of fashion as well as of talent,
but, as he said very truly, ' there is a limit to
al] things ;' and in his opinion Lady Hilda,
rendered daring by success, was passing the
limit within which he cared to have anything
to do with her. So far Mr. Hicks's lawyer had
not written to him, but if he went on publishing
all the lady indited he knew that any
morning he might expect to see an ominous
legal-looking envelope lying on his breakfast-table.
Annoyance Mr. Vassett was well
aware fell to the lot of everyone in business ;
but this special annoyance he was determined
should not disturb his peace, even though

Lady Hilda left him, as she often threatened,
to go to one of what she insultingly called the
good houses.' Having ventured to remonstrate
with her ladyship on some passages in
her latest manuscript, to which his reader had
not without reason called his attention, her
ladyship replied in a letter which brought the
blood to Mr. Yassett's cheeks, and took the
flavour out of his coffee and the freshness
from his roll.

'Pretty well — pretty well — vastly well,
Lady Hilda Hicks!' he exclaimed, with a spiteful
accent on the last word. 'No, I won't
publish another of your novels, let the consequences
be what they may. Take them where

you like. Take them to the !' and here

Mr. Vassett became exceedingly emphatic, 'but
don't bring them to me. If your husband is a
fiend, I pity him, earl's daughter or no earl's

daughter. If you were my wife I'd — I'd ;'

but when Mr. Yassett tried to imagine what he
would do were Lady Hilda his wife, he was
obliged to relinquish the attempt. He really
failed utterly to conceive what he would do
were that awful woman, who could — crowning:
horror ! — write, tied to him for life.

Thank Heaven !' piously exclaimed Mr.
Vassett ; * things are bad enough, but they
are not so bad as that. I can get rid of her,
and Hicks can't. I have made money out of
her, and he has to find her even the money
that pays the printer who sets up the type in
which he is abused. Unhappy man ! what
could have induced him to marry such a
virago V And with equanimity quite restored
by these agreeable considerations Mr. Yassett
resumed his breakfast, finding his appetite had
returned— that flavour was restored to the
coffee and freshness to the roll.

A good-looking man, though not handsome ;
good-looking in all senses. Honest, wholesome,
truthful, kindly, despite a certain sternness
of expression which had come with the
lonely years, just like the grey hairs that,
so far as the man's age was concerned,
should not yet have been sprinkled among the
black.

There was a little romance, a little sad
plaintive story in his life with which few were
acquainted, and of which he never spoke.
When he was quite young, a mere lad, in
the employment of a bookseller in Soho,

lie lodged with some people who had known
his father, and were kind to the boy on that
account.

They had one little daughter, a fair flaxen-haired
child, between whom and himself there
sprang up one of those attachments which
seem so unintelligible, and yet which sometimes
prove so enduring.

In this case, at all events, it endured.
When the lad was grown to manhood, when
the child's flaxen curls were smoothed in
sunny braids from the maiden s brow, they
remained just as fond and foolish, as simply,
innocently devoted to each other as had
been the case in the early days of their acquaintance.


Then her family was in a worldly point of
view above him, but things were more equal
now. He had climbed up many rungs of
the social ladder, and they were coming
down.

Maggie's father was something in the City,
and as time went on it needed no gift of
second sight to prophesy he would have
eventually to make his way into the Bankruptcy
Court. A. series of misfortunes over-vol.

I. 7

took him. The posts, like the messengers
who came to Job, brought nothing save
tidings of some fresh disaster. Duly and
truly he ran the allotted course of trouble,
anxiety, despair. He went through ' the
court,' and then he died.

After that Maggie and her mother left
London and removed to Halliford, near
which hamlet a relative farmed some sixty
acres.

It was not then Mr. Vassett conceived that
aversion to the country which remained with
him through life. Quite the contrary. On
the Sundays and holidays, ' when the relaxation
of the claims of literature,' as Mr. Mat
Donap-h would have said, left him at leisure
to visit his former playmate and present
sweetheart, the embryo publisher thought
nothing could be fairer than all that pensive
valley of the Thames — the river, the swans,
the cygnets, the its, the bulrushes, the water-lilies,
the blue expanse of heaven, the low-lying
fields where the cows looked at him
with mild, wondering eyes, the hawthorn trees
white with bloom, the wealth of wild-flowers,

the tall poplars, the quivering aspens, the
lonely houses, the quaint little towns.

He was young then — young and soft, and
in love, and the best of life lay, as he fancied,
before him, and there was a glamour over
the landscape — that glamour which sheds its
rainbow hues over any earthly landscape but
once in our short existence, — and all things
seemed fair to him, and all the future full of
happiness !

Well, he had his innings, and it is not every
man who can say that. He and Maggie were
married, and for fourteen months not even a
clouded obscured the brightness of their
sunny home. Then, unaccountably, the
young wife began to droop. It was in the
early part of September, when all that part
of the country is aglow with ripening crops
and ruddy checked apples, that the doctor
sent Mrs. Vassett back to Halliford to try
whether the fresh sweet air would chase the
pallor from her face, and restore strength to
her slight frame. Had they told the husband
then her case was hopeless, he might have
borne the blow that came so soon better ; but
as matters stood he kept believing she would

7—2

ere long be restored to health — that when their
child was born he should see her well and
strong again.

All in the dull winter months, the worst
which could happen happened. He was sent
for in haste, and though he did not lose an
hour or second was too late. AVhen he arrived
there were no loving tones to greet him,
no sweet eyes to smile their welcome. Instead
of greeting or smile there was only that which
had been his wife, lying white and still, with
her dead baby by her side.

So it ended. The dream of spring-time,
the summer's idol, the fruition of autumn :
the human harvest was ripe, and the dread
reaper had put in his sickle and garnered the
grain. It was all over — the love, the hope,
the anxiety ; nothing remained save the certainty
of loss. It was then the blue in the
sky, and the green of the trees, and the scents,
and songs, and rustle, and silence of nature
grew distasteful to Mr. Vassett.

It was a dull, grey, chilly afternoon when
they laid the young wife down to rest in
Clipperton Churchyard. Once he had thought
that a sweet and lovely place, but as he wandered

miserably about alone whilst the short
winter day darkened down, it seemed to him
the most mournful spot on the whole of God's
wide earth. He went sadly to the swollen
Thames, where the discoloured waters were
rushing by with a threatening yet sullen
fury ; he looked across at the fields they had
paced many and many a time hand in hand
together ; he stood beneath the trees where
they had waited side by side for the boat into
which she stepped so lightly; he saw one lonely
swan trying to stem the current — and then he
burst into a passion of tears and wejDt as if
his heart would break.

What were success, money, position, to him
then ? What were happiness, prosperity,
worldly consideration ? Words, mere words
that might to others bear some signification,
but to his mind seemed unintelligible
sounds.

He returned to town a changed man. The
blessed necessity for work after a time brought
some mitigation to his grief. Once more he
took up the burden of life, to find that there
was even for him a meaning in the words
that seemed, standing beside the Thames on

that desolate winters day when he left his
wife in Clipperton Churchyard, to be but
bitter mockery. Business went well with
him ; he possessed everything he would have
liked to own when she walked with him. His
love and his loss had grown such an old, old
story that when he thought over it all he felt
sometimes as if the boy and girl who wandered
about Soho, or the pretty green at Halliford,
and that quaintest of quaint villages Littleton,
who had plucked the wild-flowers, and walked
across the meadows, were some creatures who
had never really been part and parcel of his
later most prosaic life.

Yet it was the memory of what they had
done and said, and hoped and fancied, which
brought that occasional softness into his face,
and tender light into his eyes, many an author,
discouraged by his words and manner, took
heart of grace again at sight of.

He had a weak spot in his nature, and
Lady Hilda Hicks knew it. He was not so
hard as he looked, or so resolute as he wished
people to think him.

He could not bear to say ' No ' to a woman,
and he disliked refusing help to a man. Fortunate

Mr. Yassett, whose lot was cast in days
when women as a rule were not pushing, and
men had not grown quite so hopelessly impecunious
as they have since become ; when,
in a word, in the literary world females still
retained some reticence, and males the traditions
at least of self-respect ; when the world
was nearly thirty years younger, and authors
were about three hundred times more modest,
retiring, and simple than they are now ;
when Lady Hilda Hicks was an exception
to all known rules, and old-fashioned
people felt doubtful as to whether a young-person
who wrote novels could be ' quite
proper.'

If Mr. Yassett had only realized the fact,
it was in Arcadia and not Craven Street he
was deliberately finishing his breakfast, when
a lean, clean-shaven, closely buttoned-up,
ascetic-looking; individual, after having knocked
gently at the door, turned the handle and
entered the room.

Well, Pierson, what is it V asked Mr.
Yassett, without going through the ceremony
of good-morning, which after years is somewhat
apt to pall.

An elderly gentleman and a young lady
want to see you.'

AVell, they can wait, I suppose V

They have been waiting.'

Give him the Times, and '

He has read the Times, and she does not
seem to care for a book interrupted Mr.
Pierson.

What is their business V

Won't confide it to me ; the usual thing,
however, I suppose — for he carries the inevitable
roll of paper.'

What does he mean by coming here at
such an unearthly hour ? Can't you ask him
to call again later in the day V

No, I think not.'

Why not V

He looks ill ; and — and — they are not the
usual run.'

Perhaps he is a prince in disguise.'

No, he is not that ; but he has travelled
and read, and he can talk, and there is a something
about him I fancy you would rather not
send away.'

Pierson, you are a fool.'

Well, that's not my fault, is it V

When you know that, although you are
not worth your salt as a reader, I keep you on
out of '

Charity,' supplied Mr. Pierson, with unmoved
countenance.

No ; out of a mistaken notion you will
stand between me and the incursions of people
who fancy they can white. 1 would not give
ten shillings — not five shillings — a week for
your opinion on manuscripts, but you could,
if you liked, prevent my being worried to
death with incompetent authors, and you
won't. I do call it too bad of you, Pierson.'

I am of some use to you, though, I suppose,*
suggested Mr. Pierson.

I do not know in what way.'

Why, to speak of nothing else — I introduced
Lady Hilda '

Lady Hilda !' exclaimed Mr. Vassett. ' I
wish I had never heard of or seen her. I wish
I had never published a book for her. I wish
she was at Peru or anywhere else I should
never set eyes on her again.'

Dear me,' said Mr. Pierson mildly, ' what
has her ladyship done 1 What is the cause
of this outburst V

Read that, and you will know answered
Mr. Yassett, throwing her ladyship's letter
across to his factotum. ' I suppose I had
better go down and get rid of this gentleman
you seem somewhat afraid of.'

Oh dear, no ! I am not afraid of him,' remarked
Mr. Pierson, looking up from the
perusal of Lady Hilda's epistle.

I thought you observed you would rather
not send him away.'

^ I did make some remark of the kind ; but
that is a horse of quite another colour to being
afraid of the man.'

Though he does come armed with a manuscript.'


I fancy the manuscript is his daughter's.'

Worse and worse I' ejaculated Mr. Yassett.
Poor wretches ! they are not very formidable,'

said Mr. Pierson, ' but they are quite
new ; we have not had anything like them in
Craven Street before. Don't go down with a
prepossession against them. Hear what they
have got to say, at any rate.'

I suppose I shall be forced to do so,
whether I like it or not.'

I should say in this case you will find that
perfectly optional ;' and Mr. Pierson returned
to his perusal of Lady Hilda Hicks's letter with
the most exemplary composure.

AX Aspirant FOR FAME.

IME and circumstances had imparted
to Mr. Vassett's face and demeanour
a stern gravity, which stood
him frequently in better stead even than the
discouraging; words he so often believed it his
duty to utter.

The author did not live who could with any
truth say that on the occasion of his first
interview Mr. Yassett had seemed glad to see
him. Quite the contrary. The publisher received
all new writers with a manner which
implied that, as there were already far too
many candidates for literary honours, it was
ridiculous to expect any help from him to
introduce another.

He was weary of persons 'possessed of
genius,' of persons who brought manuscripts,
of men and women who, regarding him as a
mere porter at the gates of the temple of
Fame, came clamorously demanding admission
into the sacred precincts.

"With known authors he could fill his lists
as full as he cared to do any day, and it was
therefore with the most prudential motives
he steeled his heart against the prayers of
young beginners, and set his face to repel the
attacks of ' rising talent.'

Poetry in especial was his abhorrence. He
would almost as soon have seen a serpent enter
his office as an ' attempt in blank verse,* or ' a
few trifles thrown off in moments of inspiration,'
by ladies who believed nothing so
charming, so touching, so truly beautiful, had
ever been published.

He had laid do\sTi a hard-and-fast rule
about poetry, however, which, precluding all
fear of pecuniary loss, reduced his interviews
with poets and poetesses into mere dialogues,
more or less disagreeable, according as the 'he'
or ' she ' were pertinacious and conceited, or
modest, and willing to take ' No ' for an answer.

Tales and sketches were not so easily
managed, for although writers of prose proved
generally more amenable to reason than producers
of verse, he could not say he never
undertook to publish such things at his own
proper cost, and he was therefore frequently
forced to retain manuscripts for perusal, and
to write notes declining them, and, in fact,
to ' consider the matter ' — a process he found,
as a rule, very unpleasant.

Whenever he could get Mr. Pierson to take
his place, and dismiss the intruders graciously
send them off, for instance, with some cock-and-bull
story, to Murray, or Hurst and
Blackett, or Saunders and Ottley, or anybody
else of note — he felt infinite satisfaction in
being well out of a troublesome business.
But occasionally Mr. Pierson played him false,
and then he was placed on the horns of a
dilemma ; he had either to be determined
in his own proper person, and send 'rising
talent ' about its business, or to promise that
some hundreds of pages of manuscript should
be read, and the propriety of accepting the
production entertained.

What he had said was perfectly true : he

did not consider Mr. Pierson s opinion of a
manuscript — i.e., in favour of a manuscript —
worth the paper it was written on, and therefore
when that gentleman observed, ' I think
there is some suis" in this,' Mr. Vassett had
to read it all himself, in order to make sure
he was not either sending away a second
Buller, or committing himself to a dead loss.
Mr. Pierson knew very well what was good ; but
Mr. Pierson did not know what would 'take.'

Mr. Vassett, on the contrary, had felt the
public pulse so long, he could say with a sort
of unerring certainty, ' This will never sell ;'
Yes, I have no doubt it is very admirable,
and so forth, but I should prefer that some
other person lost money over it.'

In selecting his authors, he possessed exactly
the same gift successful masters possess
in choosing their servants : individual merit
and personal liking had no more share in
influencing his decisions than such things
have in determining the engagement of a
clerk or the hiring of an errand boy. He
could not have explained the process by
which he arrived at his conclusions, and certainly
neither could a wealthy merchant communicate

the intuitions which enable him to
select fitting instruments to carry out his
wishes. No doubt it had occasionally happened
that Mr. Vassett closed his doors upon
authors who made their mark elsewhere, but
success in these cases was often more the
result of chance than anything else ; and, on
the other hand, it may be certainly averred
Mr. Vassett never made an author free of
Craven Street whose advent subsequently
entailed pecuniary loss. It was not by one
great coup, outweighing a series of annoying-failures,
Mr. Vassett had made his money ; soif
his authors were none of them stars, they
were at all events eminently safe. He knew
about what they would sell, about what they
would cost to advertise, about what the reviewers
would say concerning their works.
No need to lose a nio;ht's rest wondering
the subscription would go off, or whether
he should see his money back again. He had
no faith in ' firework ' publishing, and, truth
to tell, he had very little faith in genius either.
He believed, if he believed in anything as regards
authors, in plodding. Compilations,
reminiscences, biographies, travels, historical

romances, and such like, he looked upon with
a certain favour ; he could understand how
they were done, and why ; he was able to
trace the method by which such webs of
literary industry were woven ; he could mark
the progress of the busy shuttle, and predicate
the result which would be produced by any
practised hand. But to make something out
of nothing, to write a book, not from observation,
but from pure imagination, to create
characters, and then make them move and
speak and act like men and women ; — it was
very odd,' Mr. Yassett considered, 'very odd'
indeed !

He felt it indeed so odd, and so very little
of this sort of writing worth publishing had
come his way, he did not care to trouble himself
much with fiction of any sort. It was
out of his line, he said, though recently he
had published one or two novels which had
not done badly.

Would his early visitors prove poetical cr
three volume ' or practical, he marvelled, ashe
wended his way downstairs. Under any
circumstances he decided to get rid of them
civilly. He had enough authors, he did not

VOL. I. 8

want any more ; and having quite made up his
mind on this point he opened the door of his
private office, bowed gravely to the two persons
he found there, and then, walking round
the table to his own peculiar chair, seated
himself and waited to hear what the gentleman
opposite might have to say.

The gentleman began by remarking upon
the weather. It is not a subject that seems
remarkable for novelty. Most things which
can be said about it have been said. But it
forms a good sort of preliminary course in the
way of conversation.

Yes, it was dull,' Mr. Yassett agreed.
But at that precise season of the year we
could not expect much sunshine.*

Well, I suppose not in London V said the
gentleman.

Mr. Vassett intimated it was not to be expected
anywhere.

The gentleman thought in the open country
the sky might be a little brighter.

Mr. Vassett did not know in what part of
the country.

The gentleman ventured to hint he had
seen fine sunshiny winter mornings in various

places, and something in the way he spoke,
and the allusions he made to towns in
England and towns abroad, induced Mr.
Yassett to imagine the roll of manuscript he
saw darkly looming in the future of their
interview might take a shape which would
enable him courteously to get rid of his
visitors by the simple process of stating there
was no portion of the civilized or uncivilized
earth he was open at that precise time to
accept any account of.

He knew perfectly well his man was not an
experienced hand — that he was not a ' writer,'
that he was too old to begin, that he would
never do any good, that all he had seen had
been seen before, that all he had to say had
been printed before, that probably the manuscript
was some old diary, or journal made up
from letters written home from Some, or Constantinople,
or Palestine, and

We have taken the liberty of calling upon
you about a tale,' remarked the gentleman,
suddenly snapping the thread of Mr. Assert's
reflections. ' We saw one of your advertisements
in the Morning Post, and wo

thought '

8—2

I publish very little interposed Mr.

Vassett, ' and I fear '

We know how full the literary market is
went on the gentleman ; ' but everything
must have a beginning. My daughter is very
young yet ; still, I fancy what she has written
possesses some merit, and if you would be so
kind as to glance over one short story and
give your opinion on it, I should really feel
very grateful.'

It is the daughter, then,' thought Mr.
Vassett ; and he turned his eyes upon this
fresh troubler of his peace with an expression
which held no welcome in them.

Yet as Mr. Vassett looked his expression
changed. She was a child — bah ! the notion
of that young thing writing ! It was too
absurd. But the glint of the golden hair, the
soft curves of the girlish face, the half-eager,
half-bashful glance she cast appealingly at
him, the shy gesture with which, taking the
roll of paper out of her father's hands, she
rose and placed it in his own, the scarcely
audible ' I only brought the first two
chapters,' reminded him of a past long gone,
brought for a moment far-away springs and

summers out of their distant graves, and
filed his office with the perfume of the hawthorn
of May, and the odour of June roses,
dead years and years before.

He took the manuscript, untied the ribbon
which confined it, opened the sheets out flat,
and then laid them face downward on his
blotting-pad.

You have begun very early,' he remarked.


I have been writing for years she answered.


He smiled and turned towards her
father, who, replying to the look, said
simply :

I fancy she has something in her.'

Mr. Vassett shook his head in mournful
deprecation of this opinion ; then regarding the
manuscript as if it were some very nauseous
draught which must be swallowed, he took
up the written matter, and looking at the title,
read :

" The Hanes of " — of what — of where V he
asked.

Of Carrigohane,' supplied the author.

Oh !' said llr. Yassett, and thus enlightened
he read on.

He read to the bottom of the first side of
copy, and then he re-read it.

Humph !' he remarked.

He was surprised — no use in disguising
that fact ; he had not expected what he
found.

The writing will do he said, ' but the title
won't.'

She was such a simpleton still, in all save
the genius God had given her, she did not
know what he meant, but thought he was referring
to her handwriting, of which in those
days she felt proud.

I could alter the title,' she suggested, ' if
—if '

I see it is an Irish story,' said Mr. Yassett,
eagerly availing himself of this loophole of
escape.

Yes. I don't know anything about England
yet,' murmured the girl, in a manner which
suggested in a week or two she hoped to supply
the deficiency.

And Irish stories are quite gone out.'

• I could try something else,' lie answered
feebly.

Whether the world is right or wrong, I
do not pretend to say,' observed Mr. Yassett,
addressing his observations to the gentleman,
and blandly ignoring the authoress altogether ;
but it has an idea that young ladies cannot
possess the amount of experience necessary to
produce a readable book. For her age your
daughter's style is good, very good indeed ;
it is, therefore, not impossible in the course of
a few years ■'

He paused suddenly, stopped by an exclamation
which was quite involuntary from the
girl.

Years ! and she had thought to commence
making money that week, that day, that
hour !

At sound of her little cry of despair, for it
almost amounted to that, Mr. Yassett turned
towards where she sat, and said :

I am afraid my words seem hard to you,
but indeed it would be madness for you to
think of publishing anything at present. You
are far too young. What can you know
about the world or its troubles V And he

smiled upon her benignantly, as though
she were a mere child, who had just left off
dressing her dolls in order to play at authorship.


I am not so young as you think,' she
answered, somewhat pettishly, ' and i do know
something of the world.'

Both men laughed — one a little cynically,
the other sadly.

Your daughter will not resent the imputation
of youth so bitterly a few years hence as
she does now,' suggested Mr. Vassett.

And till we came to London her sole lookout
over the world was from windows that
only commanded a view of the Atlantic,' supplemented
the girl's father.

Oh, papa ! how can you say so V she remonstrated.


Well, my dear, it matters very little what
I say or think ; the question is what others
believe. How are we to get to know,' he
went on, addressing Mr. Vassett, ' whether she
has any talent or not ; whether it is worth her
while to go on writing, or '

What is the alternative V asked Mr.
Vassett.

I must go on writing !' interposed the girl,
before her father could answer.

Whether you fail or succeed V

Till I succeed or fail.'

And the publisher and the author looked
each other straight in the face.

In that case there is no more to be said,'
observed Mr. Vassett, after a second's pause.

He spoke coldly, for there was no quality
he disliked more in a woman than pertinacity.


She saw he was vexed, and yet to leave
without receiving some word of counsel from
this oracle seemed to her like letting a rope
slip which might bring her to land.

If you only could tell me what I must do
how I ought to set to work — I should be so
grateful. I do not mind about waiting,' she
added valiantly.

He opened the manuscript again, which he
had rolled up to return at the first favourable
opportunity, glanced down once more upon
that awful title, and then looked across at the
girl he would have liked to send back to the
schoolroom or the nursery, or the Atlantic, or
wherever she might have come from.

My dear young lady,' lie said, in this best
manner, ' how can I tell you what I do not
know myself? There is no royal road to
fame. Those who have achieved it tell me
the path is rough, and hard to find ; that it is
lonely, often dark, always toilsome ; while for
those who never reach the goal — — '

They have attempted, at any rate,' she
finished, as he paused, and there ensued a dead
silence.

It was Mr. Yassett who broke it.

Literature,' he began, speaking in a general
and didactic manner, ' is, so far as I am aware,
the only profession in which persons imagine
they can embark without the smallest training
or preparation, or the remotest idea of the
labour involved in producing an even moderately
successful work.'

I am not at all afraid of any trouble,' came
from the special ' person' for whom this rebuke
was intended. ' If you only tel me what I
ought to do I wil try to set about it at
once.'

But this was precisely what neither Mr.
Yassett nor any other human being, author,
publisher, or critic, could have told her. It is

a question which has been asked hundreds of
times. It is one which will be asked hundreds
of times in days to come. When beginners
bes: for advice their real meaning; is :
How shall I compass success V

At the first blush it seems a reasonable
enough inquiry to put to an individual who
has travelled the highways of literature ; but
it is one perfectly incapable of reply, and
for this reason Mr. Yassett answered :

If I could publish a key to the problem
you want to solve it would sell so well, I
should never need to bring out another book.
The land you want to enter has no itinerary —
no finger posts — no guides. It is a lone, map-less
country, and if you take my advice you
will keep out of it. The pleasures even of
successful literature are few and the pains
many.'

But if there were no authors there would
be no publishers,' said the girl, smiting Mr.
Yassett under the fifth rib.

I think, dear interposed her father, ' we
must not intrude any longer. This gentleman
has already given us a great deal of time,
and '

I wish I could do something really to help
sou,' observed Mr. Vassett. ' Under no circumstances
could this and he lightly struck
The Hanes' of that place with an unpronounceable
name as he spoke, * be of the slightest
use to me ; but if you like I will have the
manuscript read, and get an opinion upon it
for you.'

Oh, if you would !' cried its authoress
rapturously.

But should the opinion be adverse V he
suggested.

I will try not to be disappointed.'

Very well, then. I will write to you in a
few days. Kindly favour me with your
address,' he said to the tall, delicate-looking
gentleman, who, taking out a card, presented it
to Mr. Vassett, after erasing one address and
pencilling in another.

Mr. Westley,' read out the publisher. ' Ina
week's time, then, say.'

Thank you ; we are exceedingly obliged for
the trouble you have taken.'

Not at all ; do not mention it,' and Mr.
Vassett, opening the door of his private room,
walked with them across the outer office.

If father and daughter had understood
they would have regarded this proceeding
in the light of a most delicate attention ;
but they did not know, and did not therefore
feel so much impressed as they might have
been.

Just as they were about once again to thank
Mr. Vassett and depart, the door of the outer
ofl&ce swung open, and an apparition appeared
on the threshold which fairly amazed the
young person who thought she could write
something: worth readings It took the form
of a lady, fashionably and expensively dressed.
Her silks were of the thickest, her velvets of
the richest, her furs of the most expensive,
her manner assured, her movements
graceful. She looked at Mr. Vassett with
a comical smile, and giving him a familiar
nod, stared hard at Mr. Westley and his
daughter.

Something in the languid indolence of the
former, and the timid, innocent look of
the latter, arrested her attention, and she
scarcely heeded Mr. Vassett's annoyed apology
:

Pardon me for one moment, Lady Hilda.

Perliaj^s you will kindly walk into my room ;
I will be with you directly

Having satisfied her curiosity, lie swept
across the outer office into the inner sanctum,
where, throwing herself into Mr. Vassett's
chair, she utilized the interval in examining
the manuscript he had left lying on the
table.

She was quietly perusing ' The Hanes of
Carrigohane ' when Mr. Vassett returned.

Who is that girl V she asked, looking up
with the most perfectly unembarrassed expression
of countenance.

I am afraid I can scarcely answer your
ladyship's question without giving offence,' he
replied stiffly.

Nonsense about offence !' she retorted.
My ladyship does not take offence very
easily. Who is she V

A young girl who has, I fancy, almost as
much to learn, as you. Lady Hilda, have to
unlearn.'

For a moment Lady Hilda looked at the
speaker in undisguised astonishment. Then,
breaking into a peal of hearty laughter, she
exclaimed :



You dear old thing ! I do believe I liavc
at last succeeded in making you angry. But
we must not quarrel. We have known each
other far too long for that. Let us hiss and
he friends''

LADY HILDA HICKS.

^^^wHE expression of countenance with,
which Mr. Yassett received Lady
Hilda's monstrous and impossible
suggestion is simply indescribable. Accustomed
though he was to her ladyship's random
remarks, this latest utterance shocked him beyond
measure. When subsequently he told
Mr. Pierson what she had said, they both
laughed at the wagon de parler as a good joke,
but at the time IMr. Yassett failed to see any
jest in it.

Beyond everything he was * proper.' Even
from a forward young person in his own rank
of life such a proposal would have struck him
as indecorous in the extreme, while on the

part of ]\Ii\ Hicks' titled wife it seemed too
terrible for belief.

If this was to be the end of ladies writing-novels,
if they meant to indulge in such dreadful
and embarrassing speeches, the sooner a
stop was put to the whole business the better
for society. * How much more suitable the
spinning wheel and the working of tapestry,'
he thought, forgetting, no doubt, that there
were as ' fast ' wives and maidens mewed up
within convent and castle was as ever drove
in the Park.

Lady Hilda looked in his perplexed face and
laughed ao;ain.

I was dreadfully angry when I wrote to
you,' she said. ' Why will you persist in
vexing me ? You know I would never say a
disagreeable thing to you if you did not provoke
me.'

They were happily drifting away from that
dangerous phrase, which Mr. Vassett knew
she was quite capable of following up with
even worse if the humour seized her, and he
felt consequently able to answer with severe
composure, * he feared her ladyship was somewhat
easily provoked.'

VOL. I. 9

No, I am not,' she retorted, 'not in the
least. I have the sweetest and most forgiving
temper possible if people only take it in the
right way ; but of course you cannot expect
an author to be pleased when you write and
say all the finest passages and most telling
dialogues in a book must be cut out.'

In my letter mention was made only of
certain sentences which must be struck out or
altered before the book can be published by
anyone.'

'Why must they be struck out or
altered V

For one reason, because no publisher wishes
to have an action for libel brought against
him.'

I won't trouble you for the others,' she
said, * but now just let us talk that question
of libel coolly over.'

You must excuse me, Lady Hilda. It
would be mere waste of time discussing
the matter. I have quite made up my
mind '

Set your foot down amended the fair
authoress.

Set my foot down, if the expression seems

preferable proceeded Mr. Vassett, ' that
unless the whole of the libellous portions of
the book are expunged, I will have nothing
whatever to do with it ; and in fact, to be
quite frank, I wish to have nothing to do with
it even if it were altered to the extent indicated
in my letter.'

Dear me !' exclaimed Lady Hilda.

I do not wish to say anything rude,' proceeded
Mr. Vassett, warming to his work, and
nettled by his visitor's tone and manner,
but in justice to myself I cannot refrain from
remarking that your ladyship allows yourself
a latitude of expression which causes an
amount of annoyance to which I feel it would
be incompatible with other business arrangements
for me to continue to subject myself.
Even if I had nothing else to attend to, the
mockery and — and the abuse '

She had commenced checking off his observations
on her fingers, but when he stopped
really too angry to proceed with whatever he
may have intended to say, her whole manner
changed in an instant.

I am sorry,' she cried, if not repentantly,
at any rate with an admirable counterfeit of

9—2

repentance. ' I can't make any fuller apology,
can I ? You must forgive and forget. Remember
what an impetuous mortal I am. I
know I do get into passions ; I have never
laid that good old creature Watts' caution
sufficiently to heart, I suppose ; but they are
over in a moment — a mere flash in the pan.
You could never be so cruel as to think of
sending me among those dreadful bears the
other publishers, I, who am your own, your
very own, who made my success with you,
and who have also brought you into note.'

Lady Hilda,' began Mr. Vassett solemnly
her impetuous ladyship's sentences had a
beautiful knack of carrying a sting in their
tail — ' you have made that assertion before,
and I have not thought it necessary to contradict
it '

No, I shouldn't, if I were you,' interrupted
Lady Hilda carelessly. ' Oh, here's Mr.
Pierson,' she went on with joyous eagerness,
as that gentleman, not knowing who was
there, looked into the room. ' Come in ; weare
just wanting you,' she said, for he was
about to withdraw. * Mr. Vassett and I have
had our little quarrel out, and are now the

dearest of clear friends again ; only he wants
some little things altered in my new book,
and I am not very willing to alter them.
What do you say ? Now, you shall be
umpire, and give the decision on my side, of
course.'

Anyone seeing Mr. Pierson as he stood
listening to Lady Hilda, and not knowing who
he was, might have taken him for a strict
ecclesiastic of the Romish Church. Lean
almost to emaciation, pale, clean-shaven,
dressed in a closely button ed-up loose black
coat, the end of his thin nose just touched
with a delicate red which might have been
painted in with cold or severe fasting, a look
of deep thought in his brownish grey eyes, his
long wasted hand laid flat on the rich morocco
binding of an old edition, he was as unlike the
popular ideal of a ' reader ' as can well be
imagined. He had always believed in the
earl's daughter, even when Mr. Vassett was
most inclined to ' pooh-pooh ' her, and she had
never scrupled to use him as a weapon against
her ' dearest of dear friends.'

You think Mr. Vassett is dreadfully unreasonable,
now don't you V she asked with a

winning smile, intended to captivate both
men.

Lady Hilda was still a very pretty
woman, considerably under forty ; perfect in
her dress, redolent of perfume, powdered,
gloved, booted for conquest. It were idle to
deny these things, added to her rank, her
worldly position, and her talents had their
effect, nevertheless —

I really do not see,' began Mr. Pierson,
and in a certain clear, metallic coldness the
reader's voice matched his features, ' how Mr.
Vassett could, without considerable alteration,
possibly publish the new novel.'

And even if you were able to see,' interposed
Mr. Vassett, taking refuge in very
decided language, a sure sign of weakness,
it would make no difference to my view of
the question. The novel is one I should
much prefer not to publish at all, and I
certainly shall not publish it unless the objectionable
paragraphs to which I have directed
the author's attention are altered most materially.'


He spoke to Mr. Pierson as if the author
were twenty miles distant. Lady Hilda looked

at the reader, smiled, shrugged her shoulders,
and made a 7iioiie.

You won't desert me, Mr. Pierson, will
you V she said, almost tenderly.

Considering it was that gentleman who had
pointed out the objectionable passages to his
employer, he found it impossible to do otherwise
than assert that he really could not take
the responsibility upon him of advising j\Ir.
Vassett to bring out the book without considerable
pruning and softening.

Hacking and ruining, you mean,' amended
the authoress.

No ; I think all the changes mr. Vassett
wishes made wil improve the story. It is so
clever, that it would be a pity to mar the whole
by leaving in paragraphs which certainly
detract both from its interest and its merits.
You would be the first, Lady Hilda, to blame
Mr. Vassett if he allowed a novel to appear
Tvith the blemishes which at present obscure
this work.'

Should I V said Lady Hilda derisively.
Words, words, words, Mr. Pierson ; and it is
not right of you both to take this tone with
me because I am a woman. If I were a man,

Mr. Vassett wouldn't dare to dictate which
passages should be retained and which expunged.
Supposing he ventured to do anything
of the sort, a man would say, " It is
my business to write, and yours to publish. I
don't presume to meddle with your trade, and
you shouldn't pretend to meddle with mine."
That is what ^ vcidin. would say. But as it is
only poor little me, without even a husband
who will stand up for the wife he vowed to
cherish, I must submit, I suppose. I give
you leave to alter the expressions Mr.
Vassett 's superior wisdom considers unfit to
print. I bow to his imagined knowledge of
the usages of good society, and to his intimate
acquaintance with the manners and
customs of the Upper Ten. Only, for
Heaven's sake, Mr. Pierson, do your spiriting
gently. Don't make me very ridiculous in
the eyes of those who do know something
of the sort of life 1 have attempted to
describe.'

Mr. Vassett turned red, and made a gulp),
as if he had suddenly swallowed a very nasty
pill, and then he began

I should much prefer, Lady Hilda, that

you took your novel somewhere else. The
trouble I have '

Now, now', now,' she interrupted sweetly,
do not let us go over all that old ground
again. Like a dear, kind soul, make up your
mind not to try to quarrel with me. It is
of no use, 1 assure you. Two people are required
to make a quarrel, and I wall not be
one of them. You have got me for better or
worse. I'll be as good as I can, and you must
be good too. Be kind to him, Mr. Pierson.
Something has annoyed him this morning.
Oh, I know. He is thinking too much about
a very bread-and-buttery young lady he says
has a great deal to learn. Don't have anything
to do with teaching' her, ]mr. Yassett.
Take my advice ; very young ladies are
dangerous. I know. I was, little as you
may imagine such a thing, bread-and-buttery
once myself !'

Whether it was the way she made this
assertion, or the contrast suggested by it, who
can say ? The two men could not, though
they laughed outright.

That is better,' exclaimed the lady who
had left her bread-and-buttery days behind.

I love to see you laugh. It is a thing you
both seem so unused to. Now, while you are
in a good temper, I will run away.'

And suiting her action to her word, Lady
Hilda tripped out into the passage by what
she called the ' near ways and was in her
brougham before Mr. Pierson, hurrying after,
could open the door for her.

No, I don't want to say a word more to
you,' she exclaimed, letting down the window
and instantly shutting it up again.

And then she smiled sweetly and waved her
little hand, and departed — a vision of loveliness,
so the passers-by considered.

Mr. Pierson went back into the calm silence
of Mr. Vassett's private room.

I wonder what devilment she is up to
now?' he said, addressing Mr. Vassett in a
tranquil tone, which formed a curious contrast
to his words.

I feel greatly inclined to send her manuscript
after her,' observed the publisher
valiantly.

Don't, unless you want her here again tomorrow.'


What an extraordinary being she is !' remarked

Mr. Vassett. And then he told his
reader about that dreadful proposition.

Some men would have taken her at her
word remarked Mr. Pierson. ' I wonder if
that is the way she brought Hicks to the
"scratch?'

Mr. Vassett considered in familiar conversation
Mr. Pierson had a knack of occasionally
making use of expressions almost as vulgar as
Lady Hilda's where objectionable, but he found
it extremely difficult to insinuate such an idea,
and so allowed the phrase concerning Hicks to
pass.

You were not equal to the occasion,'
W'Cnt on Mr. Pierson, referring to Lady
Hilda's suggestion. ' You missed a chance,
Vassett.'

Now the danger was over, something in
the suggestion seemed to Mr. Vassett
infinitely amusing. Perhaps on the whole
he was not sorry the interview had gone off
well.

He knew other publishers envied him the
possession of such a treasure. He was well
aware he should feel vexed to see the book
announced in any other list save his own.

He could afford to laugh, having won, and he
was particularly gracious to Mr. Pierson, who
had, he felt, helped him over a somewhat
difficult stile.

'how's m a R I A V

)N very bad spirits Mr. Bernard Kelly
stood looking at the ornamental
water in St. James's Park.
It was a dull, mournful afternoon. At
about ten minutes to twelve the sun had made
a sudden appearance, but not finding the
aspect of things in London to his mind, retired
for the day before the clock struck.
Never, even in his native land, had Mr. Kelly
been out in more depressing weather. A good
steady deluge of rain, a look-out across a wide
morass, with a semi-circle of grey lonely hills
bounding the horizon, and a sorrowful weeping
sky brooding over the whole dreary landscape,
would have seemed a relief in contrast

to the brown, leafless trees, the wretched grass,
the disconsolate water-fowl, and the mimic
lake rippling darkly in the gathering gloom of
that miserable afternoon in late November.

Bad as the day was, it did not outdo the
aspect of Bernard Kelly's fortunes. As yet
he did not look like a hopeless man, but for
the first time in his life he was beojinninor to
understand what 'despair' meant. His coat
was not shabby, but the wearer felt out at
elbows as regards ' luck.' Since his arrival in
London, nothing had gone well with him.
That unfortunate escapade of his in the
omnibus had not merely deprived him of
patronage in the only quarter where he could
apply, but affected the home supplies.

Madam,' wrote Mr. Balmoy to his sister —
whom he had hitherto always addressed as
My dear Lucretia ' — ' When I promised to
use my influence to advance the fortunes of
your son, I thought you were sending to England
a gentleman. I find instead — a Boor
and a Buffoon. The sooner he returns to the
low associations of his native land the better.
If he remains in London, I greatly fear the

next occasion on which we meet I shall be on
the Bench and he in the Dock. Spare me
and yourself this crowning humiliation.
Your obedient Sergeant,

R. Balmoy.'

When she received this communication,
Mrs. Kelly, though no rapid scribe, instantly
despatched two letters to London ; they were
carried into Callinacoan by a bare-footed and
bare-legged boy-child clad in ragged petticoats,
who was told to ' run for his life,' so
as to get them into the box before the mail
went out.

The epistles were extremely brief, but to the
point. That to Wimpole Street ran thus : —

My Dear Brother,

In the name of all that's wonderful,
what has Barney been up to now V (a phrase
which seemed to the magisterial mind to contain
within itself a whole indictment).
Your loving Sister,

L. Kelly.'

While the missive which went out with the
mail to West Ham proved even shorter.

Mrs. Kelly enclosed Mr. Balmoy's letter
inquiring, on a piece of coarse paper which
had contained brown sugar, ' What have you
been doing on your uncle, Barney V

Delaying his reply to this maternal
question, Mr. Kelly found his uncle had
answered it for him at great length.

Distracted by no sense of humour, Mr.
Balmoy gave the facts in a strictly judicial
manner. Divested of every particle of the
ludicrous, Barney's sin seemed not merely
great but senseless. In Mr. Balmoy's account
the intended joke fell so utterly flat, was
made to appear so childish a performance
altogether, that Mrs. Kelly's pathetic —

'You're done for now, Barney; what
possessed you V found an echo in her son's
inmost soul.

The Kellyss were a family destitute of the
elegant g-races which distinguished the
Donaghs, and therefore when Barney wrote back
that the ' devil had possessed him,' Mrs. Kelly
did not accept the phrase as unfitting or disrespectful.
She merely intimated, in reply,
that ' it was no good talking that sort of
nonsense ; anyone could resist the devil if

lie chose. There was Scripture for it, though
she did not exactly know where, but no doubt
Mat Donagh, who was so clever, could lay his
hand on that text. Barney would have to
resist the devil and other things if he ever
meant to get up in the world like his uncle.
He'd have to learn to keep a quiet tongue in
his head. He had better look into the Bible
she had packed among his summer shirts, and
see what was said there about the too-ue.
It was a burning shame for him to try to play
his fool's pranks on an old man, and one,' went
on Mrs. Kelly, ' more especially, that could
never from a child bear to be laughed at.
You had best go to him again and say you
are sorry ; maybe he would get you something
to do in the Customs. I am told
there's a heap to be made in the Customs
just by holding your tongue; but oh, Barney,
that's a thing I am afraid is a bit beyond
you!'

If the exchequer had been full, Mr. Kelly
would have treated these maternal utterances
with the indifference he had been wont to
accord his mother's words of wisdom in the
days which now seemed so far behind ; but

VOL. I. 10

with funds gradually sinking, with no employment
or chance of employment, without friends
willing to help, or acquaintances of any sort
in London, it cannot be considered wonderful
that Mr. Balmoy's nephew found it impossible
to look cheerfully at his position.

He had written to his mother for money,
and that morning received her answer, which
certainly was not one likely to raise his
spirits.

'My dear Barney,

I enclose a pound, which is all I have
and all I can get. You'll have to turn to and
do something for yourself, for as far as I can
see there'll not be much help to be had from
here for some time to come. Your father has
been on the drink, steady, since Callinacoan
fair-day, and he lost or was robbed of the price
of a heifer and the old black horse, on the
road home. Larry was thrown trying to put
a new hunter Captain Desmond brought back
with him from Donegal, over the stone wall at
the foot of the Duke's field at Castle Donagh,
and got his leg broken in two places. Doctor
Kane says it will be a six months' job ; and the

Captain's so wild because that contrary brute
of his went off by himself across the moor and
sprained his shoulder leaping the boulders for
his own diversion, he won't allow Larry a
farthing of compensation, though everybody
knows Larry couldn't be blamed for what was
the horse's fault. The agent is talking of
raising the rent on us. They say Mr. Fortescue
has put him up to it, but now you are
gone I don't think much of that myself. Tom
Kelly from Galway came here the other day.
He is going to try to establish an agency in
Belfast for " pure peat whisky," but your
cousin John thinks the Excise '11 never let him
do it. His opinion is you did wrong about
Miss Fortescue. He believes you would have
done better to run off with her, because then,
for very decency, the family must have made
her a good allowance. As he observes, "they
couldn't let the old woman starve ;" and you
might have got a fine farm or a post in Dublin
if you had held out. However, there's no
good talking about last year's snow. Hoping
you will soon be able to tell me you have got
to work,

'Your loving Mother.'
10—2

They are all turning against me thought
Bernard as he stood on the bridge, with arms
resting on the rail, looking down into the
water. ' What to be at I'm sure I don't know.
I can't walk into a strange office, and bid a
man I never saw before give me something todo,
and I see plainly enough Donagh does not
mean to lend me a helping hand. He was
talking about the Colonies last night, but I am
not gone there yet, Mr. Mat. You are sick of
me, but not more sick than I am of you.
Still, what can a fellow do ? What the deuce
am I to do V

He pulled a few shillings out of his pocket,
and looked at them mournfully. Then he
replaced the amount, and was about to resume
his study of natural history, when a cheery
voice amazed him by saying in his very ear :

Ha ! good-afternoon. Well met !'

Turning to the side whence this address
proceeded, Mr. Kelly beheld a total stranger,
well buttoned up in a topcoat with fur collar,
and wearing a hat perched so much on one
side, he immediately began to speculate how
soon it would be gambolling among the swans
sailing about below.

I have never seen you before, sir lie
answered. * You are labouring under some
mistake.'

Oh no, I am not,' was the answer ; ' I remember
you very well

' You have the advantage of me, then,'
retorted Mr. Kelly.

Now you are natural,' cried the other ;
and nature does not sit half so well upon you
as art. Strange, a man's own part never seems
to fit him so well as that he assumes. There,
don't look so savage, my friend. " Hows
Maria r'

The expression of Mr. Kelly's countenance
was murderous.

I can't tell what the devil you mean,' he
said. ' I don't know you, sir, and I don't
want to know you.'

By heavens !' interrupted the other, ' this
is too magnificent, He's the other man.
'* Where is Tom noir T ' and he laughed till he
choked himself.

Sir, you are either mad or drunk, or
both !' exclaimed Bernard KeUy. ' I never
saw you before, and I never want to see you
again ;' and he was turning on his heel

when the stranger, laying a persuasive
hand on the sleeve of his coat, murmured
blandly :

"7 always said he was thefloiuer of the fiock!''
Don't go off in a rage. Lord, this is
splendid ! I didn't mean to offend you. I
have hoped and longed we might meet again
some day. I never saw anything better done —
never. Why, man, you ought to make your
fortune. Shall I ever forget — shall I ever
the face of your ancient friend as he stood
in the mud shaking his stick after us ? I
have told the story over and over and over
again. But I couldn't do the thing as you
did it. Where in the world did you acquire
the trick of that excruciatingly bland and
fatuous look the amiable deaf assume 1 On
no stage did I ever behold a better presentment
! I would not for five pounds have
missed the little interlude.'

You were in the omnibus that day, then 1'
conjectured Mr. Kelly, somewhat mollified.
I did not notice you.'

Ah ! my friend, you were too well employed
on the stage to observe the audience,'
said the other. ' As I before remarked, it was

in its way the best bit of acting I ever
beheld.'

If you knew what it cost me, you might
think as I do — that the game was hardly
worth the candle.'

Indeed ! The matter did not end there,
then V

No ; faith, it only began. Who do you
suppose the old swell was V

Can't form even a wide conjecture.'

Balmoy, the Leather Lane magistrate '

Bless and save us ! Well '

And my uncle.'

I can't stand this ; you will kill me !' cried
Mr. Kelly's admirer, breaking into peal after
peal of laughter. ' Oh ! if you could only
have seen your own face — if you could only
have heard your own voice, as you made that
statement — you'd never have forgotten either.
And so that was old Balmoy, and Balmoy is
your uncle ? He had not you up for brawling,
had he ? How did it happen you were unacquainted
with his appearance ?'

I had never seen him in my life. He
came to London before I was born. I was on
my way to his house when, as ill-luck would

have it, I got into that confounded omnibus.
He was to have put me in the way of earning
my living, but instead of doing anything of
the kind he has turned all my own people at
home against me. So you see, sir, whoever
you are,' finished Mr. Kelly, ' that when I
thought I was taking off the old swell I was
really cutting my own throat.'

I don't know that,' said the other ; * my
experience goes to prove that the little apparent
accidents, which turn a man off one set
of rails and shunt him on to another, are
really merciful interpositions — providence, if
you prefer that expression. In what way did
your uncle suggest you should earn your
living? Eemember I am quoting your own
words.'

He would have got me into some Government
office, I imagine,' said Mr. Kelly.

You are old for that ; but of course
influence can override a baptismal certificate.
It would have been a crying sin, however, to
bury such talents as yours in a napkin, tied
up with red tape. Might as well be a clerk
in the City.'

I wish to Heaven I was anything — anywhere

! When you spoke to me I was just
considering; what the deuce to be at

Till getting low V suggested the stranger.

Mr. Kelly stared at him. Similes drawn
from trade were not common in Ireland at
that time.

Devil in your pocket V amended the other,
seeing the young man's lack of comprehension.


Well, I can't say I am particularly flush of
cash.'

And what do your friends advise you todo
now ?'

Get to work. Very good counsel, no
doubt, if they would only tell me how to
follow it.'

You are not alone in London, are
you?'

I am stopping with some people I knows ;
but for all the use they are to me I might as
well be alone.'

Business people V

No ; Irish,' answered Mr. Kelly, quite unconscious
of the absurdity of his reply. ' He
is a literary man.'

The stranger pricked up his ears. * What

is his name ? I know every literary man in
London, I believe.'

Donagh.'

Donagh ! Never heard of him. A new
hand, perhaps V

'No. He has been connected with the
press for years.'

'Writes under a nom de plume, then.
Well, can't he put you in the way of getting
some cash ? A clever fellow like you ought
to be able to handle the pen.'

*I have knocked off some little things,'
confessed Mr. Kelly. He did not feel one-half
so shy with this free-and-easy stranger
as he had done with the master of Abbey
Cottage.

I knew it — I could have sworn it,' exclaimed
the other ; ' we shall hear of you yet !
Such talent was never born to waste its
sweetness on the desert air of a Government
office. Where were you going when I intruded
my company V

I was not going anywhere.'

Which way do you intend to bend your
steps now V

1 have not decided.'

Let me decide for you, then. Come home
with me. I want to know more of you.
Besides, as two heads are, it is said, better
than one — a proverb the truth of which I beg
leave to doubt ; for I am sure I know some
heads no dozen of which would be equal to
one such as yours, for example ; still, let that
pass. To revert to what I intended to remark
: between us, we ought to be able to
set you going in something.'

'You are extremely kind, I am sure,' answered
Mr. Kelly, with a little coy hesitation.


Kind — not a bit of it. If you consent to
waive ceremony and partake of such poor
hospitality as I can offer, all the kindness will
be on your side, all the pleasure on mine.
Stay ; you don't know who I am. 1 think I
have a card. No ; well, this will serve as
well ;' and with an air he handed Mr. Kelly
an envelope addressed to ' S. Dawton, Esq.,
The Wigwam, South Lambeth.' ' That is my
name, sir — Dawton.'

Indeed said Mr. Kelly, who did not seem
so much astonished by the information as S.
Dawton, Esq., evidently expected.

You have heard it before, do doubt,
often V cunningly suggested Mr. Dawton.

I can't remember that I have,' answered
Mr. Kelly, who thought his new friend meant
to imply the name was a common one in England,
like Smith.

Mr. Dawton looked at him in surprise, then
gravely shaking his head, remarked : ' Such is
Fame.'

Is the name of Dawton famous, then V inquired
Mr. Kelly, who felt he had, as he
mentally told himself, 'put his foot in it.'
You must excuse my ignorance ; I have been
so short a time in London '

It is a name known not in London merely,'
observed Mr. Dawton. ' The provinces —
Dublin — Edinburgh — America — Australia —
wherever the English language is spoken —
wherever the Union Jack floats in the breeze ;
but never mind that. If you think you
have sufficiently studied the appearance and
manners of those arch-impostors below" us,
come along. We shall find some dinner ready.
You have not dined, I hope V

If Mr. Kelly had, like his friend Mr. Mat
Donagh, been 'knocking about London' for

even a short time, he would have felt at no
loss to determine the profession of Mr. Dawton,
who believed his reputation to be as wide as
the world is round. He had noted that clean-shaved
face, the wig, which, though well-made,
could have deceived no human being possessed
of ordinary powers of observation ; the peculiar
mode of address, and the more than singular
method of standing; : but all these things,
whether taken singly or collectively, failed to
give him a cue to the man's real calling.

Subsequently, when ' behind the scenes '
seemed as familiar ground to him as the
stable-yard of ' The White Goat' at Callinacoan
had ever done, when he was able to exchange
as smart repartee with actors and actresses ashe
had * cut his teeth on' in the bar of the
hostelry aforementioned, he wondered at his
own stupidity. Just as an experienced eye
can detect a moulder by the knees of his
trousers, so in the after-time he could have
told a gentleman accustomed to tread the
boards by twenty little signs unintelligible to
the outside multitude ; but when, after a little
hesitation, he intimated his willingness to proceed
to The Wigwam with Mr. Dawton as

guide, Bernard Kelly, though he devoutly believed
he 'had seen a thing or two,' knew
really as much about life as the barefooted
gossoon' Mrs. Kelly had hurriedly summoned
from herding the geese to carry her despatches
to Callinacoan post-office.

You won't object to frugal fare, I hope,'
said Mr. Dawton, as they walked to ' take boat
at Westminster.' So strong is the force of
imagination that it is possible Mr. Dawton,
when he used the phrase in vogue when there
were 'jolly young watermen' and cavaliers
with plumes and doublets, felt himself for the
moment a contemporary of Buckingham. ' I
leave all the details of housekeeping to my
better-half, who, I can assure you, is emphatically
the better-half of my fortunes, and therefore
it is a simple fact that I never know what
she intends to appear smoking on the board.
There will be something of the nature of fish,
flesh, or fowl, and perchance a tart or pudding,
but what I cannot say. Pot-luck, you know.
Will you, if the luck of the pot is not over-good
to-day, forgive all shortcomings for the
sake of a welcome which is very hearty and
true ?'

Mr. Kelly professed himself quite ready to
be satisfied with anything that might be
going.

I should be a churl he said, ' not to relish
bread and cheese in such good company ;' a
speech which pleased Mr. Daw ton mightily,
and elicited the consolatory information
that Mrs. D. might be trusted to have something
better than bread and cheese awaiting
them.

Not, mind you,' proceeded Mr. Dawton,
that I hold such fare to be despised. I
never enjoyed anything in my life more than
1 did once, in the Midlands at midnight, a
few slices from a home-made loaf, and a
wedge cut out of a cheese sixty pounds weight,
the repast washed down with the best home-brewed
ale I ever tasted — ale brewed from
Worcester hops, my boy!'

Mr. Kelly, who was almost as tired of cheese
as of bacon and poor gentry, who had never
tasted home-made bread except bannocks
baked on the paternal griddle, and who disliked
ale rather than otherwise, remarked dij)lo-
musically that he thought the relish with which

a man ate his food all depended on the appetite
he brought to it.

When I have been out shooting he observed,
* I have thought a raw turnip an aldermanic
feast.'

I don't doubt it,' agreed Mr. Dawton.
Only, as the alderman said about the leg of
mutton, " it was a pity to waste a fine
appetite on a turnip." That's Lambeth
Palace, the Archbishop of Canterbury's place,
and there to the left stands the Dollars'
Tower.'

I know,' replied Mr. Kelly ; ' I have been
up this way before.' And he might have
added that he was better acquainted with the
history of Lambeth than Mr. Dawton, who
lived in the parish, and had read as much
about the Dollars as any Archbishop of
Canterbury, if indeed the reading of archbishops
ever takes a turn in that direction.

But he was wondering at the moment what
sort of a place The Wigwam would prove
to be.

The first thing you have to do in England
said Mr. Matthew Donagh to him, with sublime
impressiveness, * is to get rid of every

Irish notion you failed to leave behind you on
the other side of the Channel

Mr. Kelly considered this speech great
nonsense at the time, but he was gradually
coming round to the opinion that there might
be something in it. His ' notions ' had already
prepared so many disappointments for him
that he began to wish he could have commenced
his London experiences with his
mind in the state of that celebrated white
sheet of paper mentioned by Mr. Locke, and
referred to by many persons since the days of
that writer.

The Wigwam ' in Ireland would have
meant a lovely cottage — large or small, according
to the means of the owner, but still
lovely — beautifully situated, probably on the
bank of some clear stream or tranquil lake,
hemmed in with trees among which copper-beech
and mountain ash and delicate birch
appeared conspicuous, the rough-cast walls
covered with roses and passion-flowers and
jessamine, the roof of thatch, and furnished
with deep eaves, where thousands of sparrows
held carnival ; a rustic porch ; a cottage —
simple in its appearance, yet so comprehensive

VOL. I. 11

in its capabilities that, according; to the means
of the occupier, the meal to which a guest was
bidden might mean ham and eggs and potatoes
piping hot, or the best effort of a French
cook brought over by some gentleman to Ireland
for ' the shooting.'

Already Mr. Kelly knew he could not expect
meandering trout streams or glassy lakes
or fine sea views, or coppice and brake in the
purlieus of London ; but he thought his new
friend's house would prove some rural crib,
left behind by mistake when the country
moved farther from town. In his walks to
and from the City he had come across many
odd places of this sort about Stratford and
Bow, and even nearer Mile End, for the East
End was not then such a nest of workmen's
dwellings as it has since become. Access was
somewhat difficult, and the cost of transit to
any one of these suburbs by no means small.

Mr. Dawton nimbly and with short active
steps — Mr. Dawton talking volubly aU the
way — conducted Mr. Kelly from the Nine
Elms pier through a neighbourhood that
gentleman was totally unacquainted with,
along Nine Elms Lane and across the Wandsworth

Road, up Mile Street, and so into the
South Lambeth Road, out of which, after a
little time, they turned sharply to the left,
and proceeded along a lane bearing evidences
of not so very long ago having been quite in
the country, that would, had they pursued it
to the other end, have led them speedily into
the direct highway to Clapham. But they
were now at their journey's end. Stopping
before a dull-looking dwelling, and pushing
open one of the gates, for there were two
opening upon a small sweep of gravelled drive
overgrown with grass and moss, Mr. Dawton
bade his companion welcome to The Wigwam.

A poor place,' he said, ' but retired ; within
a walk of the City, yet as secluded as though
we were fifty miles from the busy haunts of
men. The name was a happy inspiration of
my own. Observing the house advertised, I
came to see it. The agent gave me an order
of admission, which ran thus :

^" Admit — Dawton, Esq., and friends, to
view Buhl House."

I declare I felt paralyzed, and if the rent
had not been very low I should never have
troubled myself further about the matter.

11—2

The house was built by some City man for his
own occupation, a cordwainer or something of
the kind, who, having made a pot of money,
built himself a big mansion out Streatham
way, and wanted to find a tenant for his former
abode.

It wasn't everybody's money, but it was
mine ; so I took the place, and without by your
leave or anything else rechristened it The
Wigwam, sending a printed notice of the
change effected to the tradespeople, post-office
authorities, and police inspector. Bless you,
in a week every soul in the parish knew where
The Wigwam was situated. Those who had
never before heard of Buhl House heard of
it then. We had the bars of the gates painted
to represent arrows tipped and feathered, and
my son carried out a beautiful design on the
posts, embodying every sort of amusement
in which the Ked Indian indulges — canning,
hunting, swimming, dancing, fighting, scalping.
Till the weather spoiled the effect those
symbolical posts were the talk and admiration
of the neighbourhood. People used to walk
out on Sundays to see them. The Wigwam
was as good as an exhibition of pictures to the

populace. That is the way to get a place
known, eh V

Inwardly wondering why any man should
wish to attract such publicity to his private
residence, Mr. Kelly agreed that it was. In
one respect he resembled the children of
nature still represented, though very, very
dimly, on the gate posts. He evinced no surprise
at anything. If his new friend had
taken him to Buckingham Palace, and stating
the Queen might be expected to appear presently,
asked him to take a seat meanwhile.
Miss Westley's travelling companion would
have died rather than evince the least sign of
astonishment. He was not going to let the
Saxon imagine he had seen nothing but bogs.
He would, if he could help it, give the English
no opportunity of laughing at his ignorance.

Many matters he might forget or overlook,
but he never forgot or overlooked Bernard
Kelly. This young man had every element
in his nature for compassing success — a cool
head, a cold heart, a selfishness which was as
instinctive as his love of ease and money, his
dislike of those who where badly off, and his
jealousy of those who had the world's ball at

their feet. If he could only have looked forward
a little he need not have felt uneasy
about his own literary success up to a certain
point. Supposing he failed to succeed beyond
that point, it would only be because he was
not half so clever as he thought, and as his
friends believed.

To Mr. Kelly the appearance of The Wigwam
was much less suggestive of Need Indians
in the untrammelled freedom of virgin forests
than of rent, rates, and taxes, water laid on
by the company, gas supplied by meter, and
the other appliances and drawbacks of civilization
; but it was evidently with the keenest
sense of bivouacking out in the wilds that his
host cordially bade him enter the hall, the
walls of which were painted in a like eccentric
fashion to the gates and posts, and throwing
open a door, ushered the unexpected guest
into the presence of his squaw, as in moments
of exuberant abandon Mr. Dawton was wont
to call the comfortable-looking, comely,
sensible lady who had * kept things together '
when, if left to Mr. Dawton's own management,
the household must have dropped to
pieces altogether.

My dear said her husband, as Mrs. Daw-ton
rose at their entrance, and though apparently
somewhat surprised at the appearance
of a stranger, extended her hand in
ready greeting. ' Congratulate me. Quite by
accident I came upon the gentleman whose
acquaintance I have been so desirous of
making. He has kindly consented to take
share of whatever may be going for dinner.
I don't know his name, and if I did you
wouldn't be much wiser ; but you will at once
recognise him if I mention the pass-word,
Hows Maria T '

Oh, really,' exclaimed Mrs. Dawton, and
her voice was as pleasant as her face, ' I am
delighted to see you ; and my sons will be
delighted also, I know. We all feel as if we
had known you for years.'

' What is Tom doing now f " asked Mr. Daw-ton,
laughing. ' I introduced myself in that
way — upon my soul I did, Bess I You never
saw a fellow look so savage in your life. He
couldn't, just for the minute, make out what
the dickens I was at.'

Well, you will allow I have fulfilled one
part of the programme, which you did not

expect that day we met in the omnibus,'
said Mr. Kelly. ' I have come round to see
you soon /'

Neat, neat, confoundedly neat and ready !'
cried Mr. Dawton, whose pleasant flattery was
as balm to the wounds Mr. Donagh's too
friendly candour had inflicted. * The idea of a
man of your abilities contemplating the swans
in a desponding mood ! We'll strike out
something, never fear. Where are the boys,
Bessie ?'

Ted and Jim will be here presently ; but
Will and Ben are out, and said we were not
to wait for them.'

Then you had better order up dinner at

once. If Tom's friend but there, I really

must, even as a mere matter of convenience,
ask you to give me a name.'

Kelly,' said Tom's friend, a little confused
at his omission. ' Bernard Kelly.'

Thank you. I was going to remark if you
were half as hungry as I am, something to
eat would not be unwelcome.'

THE DAWTO^'s AT HOME.

E. KELLY, in the solitude of The
Wigwam's best bed-chamber, when
he had accepted his host's offer of
warm water and a ' brush u^^,' felt
himself at last in very comfortable quarters.

The house was a far better house than Abbey
Cottage ; the furniture was far better furniture
than any in which Mr. Donagh's female belongings
took pride ; an indescribable look of plenty
pervaded the establishment, a good savour
floated up the staircase and hung about the
landings ; the servant who answered Mr. Daw-ton's
summons was neat, and young, and
pretty ; his welcome had been cordial as cordial
could be. Out of the cold and dreariness of

St. James's Park into the heat and comfort of
a well-built, well-aired, well-furnished house,
with the prospect of an excellent dinner, was a
change for the better Mr. Kelly felt able to
appreciate as much as any man that ever lived.
He had come to England for the flesh-pots
which he had been told were common in that
country ; but so far his fare proved no better —
nay, far worse, indeed — than at home. The
style of housekeeping at Abbey Cottage combined
with wonderful completeness every fault
to be found in Erin and in Albion, while Mr.
Donagh's cordiality he found gradually cooling
down from boiling to freezing point. As he
stood looking at the swans, Mr. Kelly was
speculating amongst other things as to the
number of degrees Mat's first genial hospitality
could still fall.

When he once again entered the drawing-room,
which apartment was at The Wigwam
converted into a pleasant and common parlour,
where all the furniture was good and nice-looking,
but kept for use rather than show, he
found two of 'the boys' added to the party.

One of them had reached the mature age of
thirty, and the other was fast travelling to

the same milestone. The eldest, Mr. Dawton
introduced as ' my son Ted, who is clever with
his brush;' the next, Jim, being mentioned
carelessly as * a fellow, managers and editors
were rather sweet on.' Both of these gentlemen
hailed Mr. Kelly as a brother.

How's Maria V had passed into a household
word amongst the AVigwamites, and while soup
was still in progress, Jim, to whom his father
explained their new friend's position in a slang
which would not have disgraced Newgate,
observed that he was sure something might be
made of the incident which had procured them
the pleasure of Mr. Kelly's acquaintance.

rU think the matter over,' promised Jim,
finishing a glass of sherry as he spoke.

Whereupon Mr. Daw ton nodded his head
confidentially to their guest, and intimated ina
stage whisper that ' if Jim took it up he
could knock a good thing off in a day.'

Mr. Kelly had not the faintest notion what
Jim proposed to ' knock off ;' but as he inferred
beneficial results were to accrue from the process
for himself, he received the information
vouchsafed in wise and thankful silence.

Before the pudding, which in Mr. Dawton's

invitation hung tremblingly in the balance of
possibilities, had made its appearance, Bernard
Kelly heard more 'shop' talked than during
the whole term of his residence under Mr.
Donagh's roof Actors, musicians, artists,
authors — these people had them all at their
fingers-ends ; not speaking about literature,
and art, and music, and acting from any
external point of view, but familiarly, as men
do who, making their living by writing, singing,
painting, or acting, talk concerning the
things, persons, and surroundings amongst
which they pass their lives.

No reticence at The Wigwam about the
names of magazines, editors, contributors,
plays, dramatists, tenors, sopranos, altos.

Ted, Mr. Kelly to his intense astonishment
gathered, was a scene-painter ; a branch of art
he had hitherto somewhat confused with house
decoration of an ordinary and humble character.
In the family councils, however, Ted was evidently
a person of weight, differing in this
respect from Jim, who, though appealed to
when matters of imagination and invention
came on the tajMS, was clearly not considered
either by himself or anybody else so useful

and practical a fellow as Ted. While cheese
was in progress the party was reinforced by
Will and Ben, for whose benefit the joint was
brought back ; and while they ate they unfolded
a perfect budget of news, to which their
father and brothers listened eagerly, and Mr.
Kelly with an amazement he could scarcely
conceal. They had been among the editors, and
heard and seen everything apparently which
was to be heard or seen in London. Names
he had read of, but never hoped to become
familiar with, were bandied about the table
like shuttlecocks. The writers of anonymous
articles were declared, the reasons for bad or
good reviews given, the machinery which kept
the literary world going was exposed, the
motives influencing proprietors and publishers
revealed, the latest gossip repeated, the most
recent jokes laughed at, the row between rival
houses or jealous authors fully explained.

This is living,' thought Mr. Kelly, as he sat
drinking in those refreshing waters, drawn from
the very fountain-head of the wells and springs
into which he too desired to dip his pitcher.
These fellows evidently enjoy existence; why
does not Donagh, I wonder T And then he

determined he would not mention Donagh to
them at all.

But Mr. Dawton mentioned that gentleman
for him, asking Will, who seemed the chief
authority in matters connected with the
magazines and newspapers, if he knew anyone
so called.

No,' he said, ' but yet I fancy the name has,
somehow, a familiar sound. What is he on V

Thus directly appealed to, Mr. Kelly answered,
vaguely, he believed he was 'on'
several ' things.' Already he had learned some
of the tricks of their language.

'He is very reticent about what he does,*
proceeded Mr. Donagh's friend ; ' but I heard
his aunt speak concerning a new venture, The
Galaxy''

As with one accord, when Mr. Kelly pronounced
this word every man looked up.

Why, that's our Mag,' exclaimed Jim, ' our
own particular : we all write for it.'

And no one of the name of Donagh does, of
that I am very sure,' added Will ; ' I know
every man on it.'

Except ' suggested the scene-painter

significantly.

'Ay, by Jove, perhaps we have now unearthed
a mystery ! Do you think,' he added,
addressing Mr. Kelly, ' your friend could write
a slap-up prospectus, picturesque, alluring,
attractive, original, calculated to catch fathers
as well as daughters, to strike the fancy of
husbands and wives, of the babe in arms and
the octo2[enarian with senile smile tottering
the grave V

Yes, I think he could,' answered Mr. Kelly ;
'more particularly if it read all the better for
not having a word of truth in any sentence
it contained. I do not imagine Donagh
would allow truth to prove a drag on his
wheel.'

Then we have found our man,' exclaimed
Will solemnly ; ' let us drink his health.
What fun it will be to tell old Lodger we
know who his genius is 1 he twitted me with
him the other day. " Ah ! Will, my boy,"
he said, " when you can turn out anything
half so clever we'll raise your screw." He
spoke of him as some great swell, and now

only to think — ahem ' And Mr. William

Dawton, stopped in the middle of his sentence
by a vigorous kick dealt him by his brother

under the table, poured out another glass of
wine, which he hastily drank to cover his confusion.


Dessert being: laid in the drawing-room on
a table pulled close up before a blazing fire,
they all adjourned to that apartment, where
the young men of the family at once bethought
themselves how they could amuse their guest.
Ted brought forth a portfolio of drawings and
caricatures ; Jim, who could, so his father
averred, 'make the piano speak,' played and
sang, and gave his famous imitation of a night
passed in the quiet country by a gentleman
unable to sleep in town because of the noise.
During the whole time he spent in bed, whither
he repaired early to avail himself of this opportunity
of making up his arrears of broken
rest, there was not one minute of silence. The
dogs in the farmyard baying the moon, the
clatter of the horses' hoofs as they moved in
their stalls, the peculiarly irritating and constantly
recurring bang of the iron ball coming
up against the ring to which their halters were
attached, the cooing of the pigeons whenever
they turned in their nests, the mad and emulous
crowing of cocks, who, wakened up out of their

first sleep to let the stranger know what was
in store, the moaning of a cow for her calf,
with a battle of tomcats as an interlude, and
the clatter of the morning milking-pails for a
finish, constituted the salient points in an entertainment
which did not occupy more than
fifteen minutes.

Mr. Kelly, who, as the reader may have
already conjectured, was not easily moved to
mirth, laughed till he cried. Like most people,
he was pleased with what he could perfectly
understand ; and with every sound young
Dawton mimicked, from the 'Come back,
come back,' of the guinea-fowl to the sharpening
of the mowers' scythes in the first faint
light of day, he had been acquainted since his
childhood.

That always brings down the house, sir,'
said Mr. Dawton speaking professionally and
metaphorically. While his son was giving
this recital, he had been standing in a 'waiting
to come on' attitude, between the old square
piano, a veteran in the Dawton service, and
the easy-chair in which Mr. Kelly lay back,
listening with the keenest enjoyment. 'Jim
has given "The Quiet Country" before Royalty.

VOL. I, 12

You may look astonished,' wliicli indeed the
listener did, for as yet he had scarcely grasped
the fact that these men were one and all professionals,
either in fact or in intention. * What
do you think of him ? I do not pretend myself
to be an impartial judge, but competent
critics predict he has a great future before
him. I am told that a certain Prince who
shall be nameless, but whose opinion in such
matters carries great weight with it — a word
to the wise you know, verbum sap., eh?
remarked, " I consider him better than
John." '

Mr. Bernard Kelly was so utterly unacquainted
with the manners and habits of
Royalty, that if Mr. Dawton had affirmed a
certain Prince declared Jim cleverer than Jack,
he would have been in no position to contradict
the statement.

He had not the faintest notion what his
host was talking about ; as to who the 'John'
thus airily referred to might be, he felt it impossible
to form an idea.

When in doubt,' says the old authority on
whist, ' play trumps,' and Mr. Bernard Kelly
was beginning to understand that amongst

strangers it is an equally good rule for a man
when in doubt to hold his tongue.

He kept silence then, and was immediately
rewarded for his abstinence.

Mr. Dawton, who, never feeling in doubt,
never refrained his tongue if he could help it,
finding Mr. Kelly made no comment after that
astonishing utterance concerning * John and
determined to elicit some expression of opinion
on the subject, proceeded to remark :

'Not but that I always myself considered
Parry a good deal overrated.'

At length Mr. Kelly understood what his
host had been driving at. When first he came
to London, in those desirable days ere the foul
fiend tempted him to make a butt of his own
uncle, turn the wealthy and respectable Mr.
Balmoy into ridicule, and bring the worthy
Leather Lane magistrate into contempt, Mr.
Donag;h was in the habit of talking to his compatriot
about the sights of London, and over a
friendly tumbler saying, ' I must take you one
night to see this or hear that,' as if, felt Bernard
Kelly, he were a good little boy just put
into all-round jackets, home for the holidays,
and Mat his guardian, guide, philosopher,

12—2

friend. He would not have cared much about
the manner of the promise so given had Mr.
Donagh only fulfilled it in the letter ; but that
gentleman had never taken him an}'^'here,
except once to St. Paul's on a Sunday afternoon,
when they heard some good chanting
and a very poor sermon.

Amongst Mat's many excellent intentions,
with which Mr. Kelly reckoned a large portion
of the lower regions was already substantially
paved, that of treating his friend to one of
John Parry's musical entertainments chanced
to be included. Mat had spoken eloquently
on the subject. He gushed and wept and
laughed, as he talked of all that ' wonderful
genius' could do. The more he drank the
more he praised ; the stronger he mixed his
punch, the louder were his encomiums concerning
what Parry, * sitting quietly as I am now,'
would compass ^dth a piano, which Mr. Donagh
usually referred to as ' an instrument,' and
himself.

Nothing had ever grown out of these conversations
; the suggested ' orders,' the numbered
seats, the reserved sofas confidently
promised and grandly indicated, had followed

the same process as that of other things,
smaller and greater, Mat was too ready to
speak concerning, with lofty assurance ; but
his remarks now served a purpose little anticipated
by the speaker. In addition to the
other elements of success before honourably
mentioned as likely to serve Mr. Kelly well in
his metropolitan experience, that gentleman
was possessed of a most retentive and unscrupulous
memory. Not a word Mat ever uttered
had fallen on deaf ears. The grain he scattered
with so liberal a hand was carefully garnered
by his friend, who now, in answer to
Mr. Dawton's disparaging remark concerning
Parry, said, with the air of a man having
authority :

And yet how good he is !'

Certainly. No one can deny that,' agreed
Mr. Dawton, a little taken aback by the decision
of Mr. Kelly's tone. ' But he lacks
variety. When you have seen him once you
have seen him always.'

Well, there's that, to be sure,' observed
Mr. Kelly, who made up his mind to go and
see Parry once, at all events, as soon as he
possibly could.

We are orinoco do " Jinks v. Sinks,"
father,' interposed Will at this juncture. The
three brothers had been speaking apart while
the Parry controversy was on the carpet.
That is, if you think Mr. Kelly would care to
be troubled with any more of our nonsense.'

I do not know when 1 have been so much
amused,' answered Mr. Kelly for himself; and
there was a great deal more truth in his complimentary
utterance than any one of the
Dawtons could have supposed possible. Their
guest's previous life had flowed rather over a
dead level of dulness.

We shall be back in a minute said Ted, as
the three left the room, while Mr. Dawton remarked,
either as a general and dispassionate
statement, or with a laudable view to keep
up the dignity of the family, which he might
have felt was likely to suffer through his
sons' accomplishments being displayed too
lavishly :

This sort of thing keeps them in practice,
you know. It answers to a morning gallop on
the turf.'

The great case of ' Jinks v. Sinks ' had been
conceived and written by Wil, simply to

exhibit the humours and peculiarities of two
well-known barristers of the period. Ted sat
as judge, presiding with an owl-like gravity
and a countenance of unwinking non-comprehension
of what was going on, which seemed
to Mr. Kelly, who had in the course of his
aimless rambles about London seen the legal
luminary in question, more perfect even than
the raging, declaiming, sneering, bantering,
interrupting, contradicting of the two legal
gentlemen, who, the more fiercely they quarrelled,
the more determinedly referred each to
the other as ' my learned friend.'

It may be that he was getting a little tired,
for mental excitement had not been a form of
fatigue often presented to any human being in
Callinacoan — or the brothers may have flagged
a little for lack of the *' footlights and the clapping
' — one thing is certain, ' Jinks v, Sinks '
did not prove quite such a success as the farmyard
serenade.

You are a bit done up, boys,' observed Mr.
Dawton, gazing with parental solicitude at the
three young faces under three barristers' wigs.
We'll have a glass of grog all round. What
do you say, Mr. Kelly ? Are you willing to

second my motion ? Mother, may we have in
the kettle V

Mothers consent was taken as much for
granted as the royal signature. Still, like
obtaining the royal signature, Mr. Dawton
considered the form essential to be gone
through.

During the varied performances Mrs.
Dawton had sat beside the hearth, smiling
pleasantly and proceeding diligently. Now,
directly appealed to in that matter of the kettle
which involved many items beside boiling
water — she rang the bell, and quickly as a
.stage banquet appeared a tray on which was a
stand containing three bottles, accompanied by
tumblers, spoons, lemons, sugar, and what Mr.
Mat Donagh, in the redundancy of his ordinary
language, would have styled * The impedimenta
and all appliances to boot of a splendid conviviality.'


Now, Mr. Kelly,' exclaimed the host, with
somewhat watery eyes surveying the bottles,
over the distribution of the contents of which
he had presided perhaps too often in the course
of his life ; ' what's your particular ? — whisky,
I'll be bound.'

Perhaps it was because of this very confidence
that Mr. Kelly selected brandy. Mr.
Dawton, saying he was ordered gin by his
doctor, who presumably could have been little
acquainted with the condition of his patient's
interior, seized upon the decanter filled with
that insidious liquor ; the three elder
brothers mixed whisky for themselves, but
Ben, who was, as his father represented, going
in for teetotalism, took nothing but a glass of
wine.

Mother ' being asked by the head of the
family if she would have her potation then
or ' later on,' laughed, and selected the latter
alternative.

If her conscience had not been very clear of
offence she might scarcely have liked the jests
and covert joking Mr. Dawton indulged himself
in concerning her abstinence ; but as
matters were, she went on placidly with her
work, only looking up a little anxiously when
her husband replenished his tumbler. His
glass had a nasty knack of running dry long
before its proper time, and poor Mr. Dawton
could not bear to see it empty. Perhaps it
was for this reason, and to provide against

possible contingencies, he put in almost a
double quantity of gin. Unfortunately, however,
for the sake of his good intentions, he
forgot to 'fill up' afterwards with a corresponding
addition of water.

All this Mr. Kelly, who was an adept in
the ways and signs and tokens of drinking,
noted ; from his youth upwards he had lived
amongst those in whose homes the green
bottle or the square decanter was regarded as
an indispensable article of furniture, and consequently
his studies in the various modes
different men took their liquor might be considered
exhaustive.

Spite of Miss Cavan's animadversions, he
had no inclination towards becoming a drunkard
himself. He could perhaps ' carry,' as
his friends at Callinacoan worded the matter,
more whisky than was altogether good for
him ; but he knew when to stop, which Mat
Donagh did not, and he could have ' pulled
up ' at any minute, a feat c]uite beyond the
master of Abbey Cottage, whose moral breaks,
naturally of the feeblest and most theoretical
description, were now completely out of working
order.

In common with many another importation
from the Green Isle, Mr. Kelly had arrived in
London with a preconceived idea that the
English, being unblest with cheap whisky, did
not drink, and it was therefore with a good
deal of interest he watched Mr. Dawton, wondering
what quantity 'the old boy,' as he
mentally termed him, ' could stand,' and
speculating on the particular form into which
the evil genius of gin would metamorphose him.

During a momentary silence, made eloquent
by the fumes of the various liquors which
had completely filled the room, aided by the
smoke of four cigars — Mr. Dawton alone declining
to take anything out of Ted's offered
case — there came twanging, first at some remote
distance, and then nearer and nearer
still, the sounds of a banjo, and next instant
the door was opened cautiously, and a blackface,
surmounted by a comical hat of striped
red and white calico, peeped into the room.

Come in, come in ; you are welcome-cried
Mr. Dawton a little unsteadily. ' Give us a
stave ! Minstrelsy, a friendly tumbler — why,
the Queen herself could desire no better entertainment
!'

Mr. Kelly burst out laughing, lie could not
help it, and the young Dawtons followed
suit.

Doesn't he make up lyell T said Ted, referring
to his brother, who certainly did look
a veritable nigger minstrel, and who now
struck up one of the melodies not so common
in England then as they have since become,
which he sung with a verve and a wild enthusiasm
that threw Jim's farmyard imitations
into the shade.

Here in its way was genius, and Mr. Kelly
instinctively recognised the difference between
this youngster and his brothers.

Capital !' he exclaimed ; ' splendid !' And
involuntarily he clapped his hands, and then
they all clapped and shouted 'Encore!' and tears
of pleasure filled the fond mother's kindly
eyes ; and Mr. Dawton, on the strength of
Ben's performance, mixed himself yet another
tumbler, and quoted huskily, with a sly leer
at their guest, ^ I always said he was the flower
of the flock.'

Thus encouraged, Ben once again ' touched
his guitar,' and commenced another song, the
chief feature in which was a sudden ' Yah,'

which came in the middle of every verse, and
was delivered by the young fellow with startling
effect.

He had not, however, got quite to the end
of the second stanza, when once again the
door opened, this time to admit the trim
parlour-maid, who, coolly advancing to the
table, the personification of order and composure
amidst riot and confusion, said :

Mr. McCrea, sir, has called, and-wishes to
speak to you.'

With a theatrical gesture Mr. Dawton
dashed the palm of his open hand against his
forehead and looked wildly at his wife, who
had risen from her seat, and was regarding
him with an expression of reproachful regret.

I called as I went into town, Bessie, I did,
upon my word,' declared poor Mr. Dawton,
answering the unspoken accusation he knew
was in Bessie's heart. ' He was not in, and I
did not care to pay that slip of a girl ; and
when I got up to Glasshouse Street I forgot
all about him, and having the money in my
pocket I settled with '

Never mind that now, father,' interposed
Ted, with a certain rough tenderness ; ' tell

Mr. McCrea to come again tomorrow, or say I
will look in as I am passing

It is of no use, sir,' answered the servant ;
I told him master was engaged, but he said
he would wait till he was disengaged.'

The ruffian !' exclaimed Mr. Dawton, starting
up ; ' let me deal with him.'

No, pray, father,' entreated Ted, pushing
him back into his chair. ' I have a fiver ; give
the fellow this, Mary, and say that his account
shall be settled within twenty-four hours.'

And say also, Mary, if ever I catch him inside
these gates again, his vile carcase shall
pay the penalty,' added the head of the household.


There was no countermand of this message ;
all present understood apparently Mary might
safely be trusted not to deliver it.

The girl went out of the room, closing the
door behind her ; there was a moment's lull,
then, just as Mr. Dawton, recovering his
equanimity, bethought him of hospitably passing
the brandy towards his guest, the handle
of the lock was blunderingly turned, and a
terrible apparition appeared upon the threshold
and came heavily across the carpet.

It was Mr. McCrea, the family baker, who,
having the same evening been craftily told by
the journeyman of a speculative and hated
rival that ' them Dawtons were going to make
a bolt of it had come round armed with his
bill, and thirsting for vengeance. He brought
up to the table with him a smell of rum,
which seemed to overpower the odours of all
the other liquors, rum — ' cold without ' —
which he had liberally partaken of at home,
and rum in its integrity which he had called
for at a public-house in passing, to strengthen
his resolution and increase his indignation
against ' swindlers,' who, though they really
had paid him considerable amounts of money,
never reached the British tradesman's notion
of good customers, viz., weekly settlements,
and no question raised as to the quantity or
quality of the articles supplied.

What good's this to me ?' asked Mr.
McCrea, a red-faced, bloated-looking fellow,
who certainly merited the name Mr. Dawton
had bestowed upon him. He held the five-pound
note given him by Mary lying open in
his left hand, and with his right stubby forefinger
he stood beating a tattoo upon it — a

tattoo tremulous by reason both of rum and

rage.

*That'll I do with this?' and he glared
around the group while waiting for an answer.

It was Will who replied for the family :

^ As to what you will do with it, Mr.
Scream he said, ' we cannot really be so impertinent
as to suggest ; but as to your first
question, I have always imagined a five-pound
note must be of good to anyone.'

Mr. McCrea was so totally amused to 'chaff
of any kind that for a moment Will's words
and Will's manner staggered him ; but he was
not a person to be easily repulsed, and therefore
ignoring the 'impertinent puppy,' as he
for ever after styled Mr. DaT\i;on's third born,
by the simple process of turning one broad
shoulder towards him, the baker, whom the
momentary check had rendered still more
irate, proceeded :

I'd like to know which on you, coming to
my shop, which shop is kep' by an honest
man as pays his way honest, and a man as is
respected, though he may not be able to drink
his brandy, and his whisky, and his gin, and
his sherry wine at other follies' expense —

which on you, I say, would be satisfied when
you wanted a half-quartern if I put you ofi"
with a third of a half quartern ? How 'm I
to pay my miller with this V — and the tattoo
on poor Ted's hard-earned five-pound note
recommenced with greater energy than ever.
He's coming tomorrow, and if I tell him
it's all I could Set from them as has eat his
flour made into loaves, he'd say, " More fool
you to give trust." My bill's a matter of
sixteen pounds seven shillings and fourpence
three-farthings, and sixteen pounds seven
shillings and fourpence three-farthings I mean
to have if I stop here all night

Indignation, and a consciousness, perhaps,
that the evening's potations might have somewhat
interfered with his powers of oratory, had
hitherto kept Mr. Dawton silent ; but when
The McCrea — who was not a Scotchman
born, thrush at times, when he relaxed from
the cares of business, he boasted of a genealogy
North o' Tweed which conducted the
hearers into shadowy mists * abuse ' Ben
Nevis — paused, Mr. Kelly's host burst out with
Insolent varlet !' and would have proceeded
to even wilder flights of eloquence had

VOL. I. 13

not Ted cut across the thread of his discourse
:

*Much as we appreciate the pleasure of
your company, Mr. McCrea,' he began with
cutting politeness, ' we should be loth to put
you to the inconvenience of remaining away
from your home till morning ; so if you will
kindly step back into the hall, from which I
am not aware that anyone invited you, we
will look up sixteen pounds seven shillings
and fourpence three-farthings, which you say
we owe you.'

*It's a cursed imposition!' remarked Mr.
Dawton, with a loftiness of tone and manner
which would have seemed more impressive
if his wig had not got a good deal to one side.
What Mr. McCrea might have answered to this
sweeping condemnation can only be imagined,
for at this juncture the imperturbable Mary laid

her hand on his arm, and simply remarking :
There's a chair in the hall, sir, if you like to

sit,' led him like a tipsy lamb out of the room.
When the door was shut behind him, the

whole family looked at each other for a moment

in silence, which Jim was the first to break.

Bursting into a peal of laughter, he cried :

It is too ridiculous. This is quite a new
experience. Father, did you ever come across
an infuriated baker before V

No, dear, and I hope your father never will
again,' said Mrs. Dawton softly, with a little
unconscious emphasis upon the word ' father,'
which may have implied she herself scarcely
expected such an exemption. ' Don't laugh,
Jim ; at least, not till the man is out of the
house. What are we to do with him, Ted ?'

First let us see how the finances stand,'
was Ted's stout and cheery answer.

Give the brute a cheque, and get rid of
him,' suggested Will.

I don't think in his present mood he would
take a cheque,' said Ted; and, indeed, there was
nothing; surer than that Mr. McCrea could not
then have been pacified with what he was
sometimes wont to designate as a ' bit of worthless
paper.' ' Besides, my account was drawn
nearly dry last week. No, let us see what
we can make up. How much have you.
Will V

They all turned out the contents of their
pockets and purses — halfpennies, pennies,
sixpences, shillings, half-crowns ; a poor show.

13—2

Ted began gloomily to sort the money into
little heaps.

I am afraid the silver I have about me
won't be much help said Mr. Kelly, discreetly
omitting all mention of the one-pound Bank
of Ireland note snugly lying inside the folds
of his mother's letter ; ' but still '

We won't rob you, Mr. Kelly — thank you
all the same,' answered Ted, looking up from
his task. ' Where's Ben ? Ben is never within
a sovereign '

As he spoke, Ben, who had left the apartment,
now re-entered it, and from a wash-leather
bag poured out his contribution to the
general fund. ' Three pounds eight and sixpence
!' exclaimed his brother. ' Bravo, Ben !'

If you please, Mr. Edward,' said Mary,
who had followed the youngest Dawton into
the room, 'cook has three-and-twenty shillings.'

It is not every cook who could send up a
dish like that,' observed Jim, as Mary laid the
amount mentioned on the table.'

It is not every cook who would,' amended
Mr. Bernard Kelly, which remark elicited from
Mr. Dawton a husky ' Good, good — deuced
good !'

But still, with all,' said Ted, surveying his
collection of coins, ' we only make up twelve
pounds five, and in his present condition it
would take Mr. McCrea till morning to count
over the small silver and halfpence. No ; I
had better go out and borrow. Dulce will lend
me five pounds, I am sure.'

I should not ask him, if 1 were you,' advised
Ben, whose black face and nigger costume
made the aspect of the Dawton family
in serious conclave utterly ridiculous. ' There's
Arty's money-box.'

To be sure there is ; I never thought of that.'

Just for a moment Mrs. Dawton looked uneasy
; then, apparently satisfied there was no
help for the matter, she said :

You must keep an exact account of what
you borrow, Ted.'

Oh, I'll see to that,' answered the drop of
the household, taking the box, which was
curiously carved, and had evidently been perverted
from its original uses to serving th
mean purpose of a mere receptacle for money.
Have you got the key, mother V

For once mother was at fault ; she had not
got what was required.

Trust Arty for not letting it out of her own
keeping remarked Ben.

I don't want to break the thing open said
Ted, turning the delicate toy round, 'for I
might damage it. Who has some small keys V

No one seemed to have any possession of
the sort, till at last on Mr. Kelly's bunch
there was discovered a small and, to look at,
apparently perfectly useless little key, which
belonged to an old blotting-case his mother
had packed amongst his linen.

That's done the business !' exclaimed Will,
as his brother shot back the worthless lock
and emptied the money the box contained
into his left hand. ' By Jove, here's a mine
of wealth ; I wish I had thought of its existence
yesterday.'

Here's Arty herself,' said Mrs. Dawton, asa
young girl in mantle and bonnet now appeared
on the scene. ' We have been obliged
to open your box, Arty love, to get rid of
Mr. McCrea.'

Very well answered Arty, reconciling herself
to the inevitable ; ' but you must pay it
all back again, remember,' she added, addressing
Ted.

Oh, I say I' from Ben.

I like the idea !' from Will.

I am sure it is being put to the purpose
intended by the donors,' from Jim. ' It was
meant to clothe the naked heathen, and we are
only using it to pay the man who fed the hungry
Christian. Your friend Mr. Jenkins must not
depend upon receiving one farthing of this
money about quarter-day. He will have to
fall back on somebody else's box to satisfy
his landlord. Speak, Ted ! Have you got
enough gold at last to mollify the evil spirit
of the McCrea ? If so, let me pay the fellow,
and kick him to the gate.'

Just stay where you are,' said his brother,
a little sternly. ' The man has a right to his
money ; and though he was rude, that is the
more reason why we should behave better.'

Oh dear !' exclaimed Ben, ' how high and
moral we are all of a sudden, after robbing-art's
heathen ! What a difference a few
pounds makes ! You would not have felt so
truly virtuous, Ted, if you had been forced to
go to the bar of the Blue Tiger, and, cap in
hand, ask old Dulce to lend you five pounds.'

Hold your tongue,' said Ted sharply.

That's all the thanks a fellow gets
grumbled Ben.

The change which came over Mr. McCrea
when he was asked to give a receipt for sixteen
pounds seven shillings and fourpence three-farthings,
duly counted over, was little short
of marvellous. He would have apologized
elaborately, but that Ted cut short his wanderings
with an imperative mandate to sign
his name and conclude the interview.

I am afraid I have not a farthing about
me,' he said, after feeling in every pocket for
this amount of chang-e.

We'll trust you that,' said the irrepressible
Jim, who had opened the drawing-room door
about a couple of inches, and was peering
through the gap thus made ; * in fact, we'll
give you the farthing.'

Mr. McCrea, turning; in the direction whence
this generous proposition emanated, beheld
Jim's mischievous face surveying him.

Ah !' he remarked to Ted, who had reddened
with annoyance, ' it's well to be young and
have no weight of care to carry on the
shoulders. When it comes to having to get
both ends to meet, and both always a bit too

short, a man finds he has something else to do
than making fun and diversion.'

'Very true, Mr. McCrea. You find the
money right,. I think V

Quite right, thank you, sir,' said Mr.
McCrea, turning his hat round and round in
his two fat hands, and looking steadily into it,
apparently searching for some suitable observation
at parting.

Mr. Edward Dawton found one for him.

I will wish you good-night, then,' he said.
Taking the hint thus broadly given, the

baker, executing a courtly wave of his shabby
hat, remarked :

Servant, sir ; much obliged, I am sure.'

Open the door for Mr. McCrea, Mary,' said
Ted, with cruel and elaborate civility.

Mr. McCrea edged himself out of the door
Mary held wide, as though he had but about
three inches of space through which to squeeze
his burly figure.

Good-night, my dear,' he said to the trim
young handmaiden.

Good-night, sir,' she answered demurely ;
and then the door was closed again, and Mr.
McCrea found himself sixteen pounds odd the

richer, and in the way of becoming a good
deal wiser.

You understand, Mary,' remarked Mr. Ted
significantly — meaning no loaf from the McCrea
bakehouse was ever again to find its way inside
The Wigwam.

Oh yes, sir.'

AVhen Ted rejoined the social circle he found
order once more calmly reigning in the .
Arty, who had been introduced to
Mr. Kelly, was carefully examining her box to
see if it had been in any way damaged. Jim
was seated at the piano, and he struck a note
now and then, humming softly to himself.
Mr. Dawton had ' mixed ' again, and was
urgently entreating Mr. Kelly to follow his
example.

Shortly he grew a little maudlin, and began
to bemoan his fate, and whimper over the
base ingratitude which left a son of Vincent
Dawton's to be the sport and insult of a
scoundrel who sold hot rolls.'

The best of the evening was clearly over.
Mr. McCrea, like a desolating whirlwind, had
swept over The Wigwam, and nothing anyone
could do or think of was likely to restore

matters to the footing on which he had found
them.

Even the fire seemed to burn less cheerily
and mr. Kelly began to wonder how he was to
get back to Stratford.

"Which will be my best way from here to
the City V he asked ; and then he was told to
take train at Yauxhall for Waterloo, from
whence he could get anywhere.

Look up any manuscripts you have by
you said Will, ' and we'll see what can be
done with them ;' while Mr. Dawton offered,
as well as he was able, a ' shake-down,' ' sofa,'
rug on the hearth,' 'just another thimbleful
to keep out the night air,' and then fell to
weeping and bemoaning himself once more.

Never mind my father,' said Ted, as he
stood at the o-ate of The AViswam, showing
new friend the direct way to Yauxhall,
he is always like that when he has an extra
glass.'

"With great sincerity Mr. Bernard Kelly
answered that ' he did not think anything of
it,' and, after a cordial ' Good-night,' strode
off, unconscious of all the changes that day's
experience was to effect in his life.

As belated travellers step inside fairy rings,
or cross enchanted thresholds, so in his aimless
wanderings Bernard Kelly had, without being
in the slightest degree cognizant of the fact,
strolled into the realms of Bohemia.

Time had passed quickly within those
charmed precincts, and it was so late when he
reached the City, the last Stratford 'bus had
gone.

When in the small hours he arrived at
Abbey Cottage, the door, after a long delay,
was opened by Miss Bridgettata in an indescribable
state of deshabille. Her stockingless
feet were encased in a pair of Mat's old
slippers ; she had evidently only huddled on
a thick petticoat over her night-garments ;
an ancient shawl was wrapped round her
shoulders ; and her grey hair peeped out from
under the flapping borders of her cap.

In the name of wonder,' she asked, ' what
has kept you till this time of the morning ?
We gave you up long and long ago. Step
easy. Ah, do,' she added. ' If Mat gets a
broken night he's never worth a farthing the
next morning.'

What Mr. Kelly muttered under his breath

about Mat and his night's rest, as he paused
at the foot of the stairs and pulled off his
boots, was not pleasant ; but Miss Bridgettata
did not hear his remark. She was engaged
at the moment in a futile attempt to snuff the
guttering dip she carried with a hair-pin,
which for this purpose she took out of the little
wisp of grey hair twisted up under her remarkable
night-ca J).

If Mat had been there he would have asked

her ' why the the proper implement for

such uses was never by any chance in its correct
place V But Mat did not happen to be
there, and Mr. Kelly felt utterly indifferent as
to how Miss Bridgettata snuffed her candle, or
whether she ever snuffed it at all.

At the moment he was wishing with his
whole heart he could leave Abbey Cottage,
and afford to pay for lodgings. He was
thinking what a wide, desolate place London
is for a man with only a one-pound note and a
few shillings in his pocket. He was considering'
the difference of the welcome which would
have been accorded to Mr. Donagh had he
claimed the hospitalities of Moss Moor Farm,
from that Mr. Donagh extended to him ; and

as he ' stepped easy ' up the narrow staircase,
and trod gingerly past Mat's sleeping apartment,
he felt very bitter when he thought of
the scant courtesy extended to him at Abbey
Cottage, and the bare meals now furnished by
those who had, as he well remembered, received
hamper after hamper of the best his mother
could pack tight in them.'

When he left The Wigwam it was with the
first feeling of real hope that had come to
cheer the blackness of his night since the uno



fortunate episode which offended all his relatives.
Spite of the McCrea interlude, the
evening proved to him as refreshing and exhilarating
as a glass of champagne, or a whiff
of pure mountain air, and as he paced the
fastnesses of South Lambeth and took train
for Waterloo at Yauxhall, he half believed Mr.
Dawton's assertion that it was well he had
quarrelled with his uncle ; that fate held
something fur better than a post in a Government
office in store for a clever fellow like
himself.

As he neared the City, however, his mood
became less jocund. He remembered, as he
passed the closed and silent offices of great

firms, how he had wondered if amid all the
life and bustle and business of Cockaigne at
mid-day, there was no vacant place he could
fill — no master who would give him a chance
of honestly earning; his bread.

Even in the semi-darkness of a town,
illumined only by its glimmering street-lamps,
he seemed to see again the figures he had
looked at in broad day, and longed earnestly
to address — great merchants, well-known
financiers, men, some of them, who, having
come to the great metropolis with no possessions
save youth and industry, might presumably
feel a kind of sympathy for one well-nigh
as poor as was their own case formerly. Then
his mood changed and grew fiercer, and the
smile with which be bethought him of what
Mr. Balmoy might have to say if a delinquent
were brought before him charged with pinning
Rothschild to the wall in Swithin's Lane, and
shouting ' Employment, or your life,' was more
cynical than mirthful.

Along every step of the way that conducted
him eastward to Abbey Cottage he dragged a
lengthening; chain of care. The farther he
left South Lambeth behind, the greater became

his sadness of spirit. It was as though there
he had left the sun shining, while at White -
chapel he was plunging into the accustomed
fog. If a man finds a house, or the people
with whom he is domesticated, producing an
enervating and depressing effect upon his
nature, let him get out of the one and cut his
lot adrift from the others as quickly as
may be.

There are conditions of life which paralyze
the best powers of a person's mind, against
which it is as vain to struggle, as impossible
to make head, as for the body to keep itself
active amid ague swamps. There are dwelling
gs and families who constitute what is
ironically termed ' a home circle,' capable of
transforming' the strength of Samson into the
weakness of the blind and feeble man the
Philistines laughed to scorn, the generous
courage of David into the mean treachery of
him who caused Uriah to be set in the forefront
of the battle.

Intuitively Bernard Kelly felt the Donagh
onenay/e, and the Donagh style of life, were
dragging all activity and spirit out of his
brain and body.

If I could only see my way to earning ten
shillings a week, I'd be out of this to-morrow
he thouorbt, as he tossed through the hours of
the sleepless night. * London is an awful
place for a stranger who knows nobody worth
knowing. De Quince might well speak of
the streets as stony-hearted. Blow high, blow
low, however, I'll try to put matters here on a
different footing. My friend Mat shan't have
it all his own way. Confound his smug face
and his white shirt, and his stiff choker, and
his long words, and his sanctimonious secrecy !
Wait a bit, my friend — wait a bit, Mr
Matthew Donald ! perhaps some day you will
wish you had not shown Barney Kelly quite so
plainly you would prefer his room to his
company. '

VOL. I. 14

GLENARVA.

JT would not have proved the slightest
comfort to Mr. Kelly, while engaged
in those exercises of self-pity
and Donagh-commination just recorded, to
know that the opinion of another personas
regarded the helpless feeling of being-stranded
in a vast city was identical with
his own.

The joys and the sorrows, the hopes, the
cares, the disappointments, the successes of
other people, were matters which affected that
gentleman but little, save so far as they influenced,
or were likely to influence, his personal
career.

From the moment he alighted at Euston, he

lead never given a thought to the companions
who journeyed from Ireland with him. It
would not have vexed him to know they were
all begging their bread — it would not have
pleased him to know they were doing well —
unless he was likely to gain out of their prosperity.
It would not have strengthened his
own heart to feel others were marching along
the same road, bravely setting their faces to
meet difficulties and conquer obstacles, hiding
sad fears under the cover of ready smiles, and
turning cheerful countenances which concealed
grave anxieties to a world which, though nota
hard, or an unfeeling, or an ungenerous
world, is ever — and rightly, perhaps — impatient
of outward manifestations of woe. In their
different ways and degrees the four persons
who travelled with Mr. Kelly were nervously
considering what the result of that day's
journeying would prove. Least, perhaps, of
all, Mr. Westley ; most, no doubt, his daughter,
both because her temperament was impulsive,
and the weight of responsibility she had incurred
seemed to her youth overwhelming.

As to her father, he had come to London
filled with a hope which, though destined never

14—2

to be realized, buoyed him over the first and
worst portion of the metropolitan campaign.

Looking back over his life — a survey which
it may well be doubted whether he ever undertook
— he might have seen enough to warn him
of the fallacy of entertaining great expectations
on any subject ; but Mr. Westley was a
man who had never learned much from experience
in the past, and who it seemed very
certain would never learn much from it in the
future.

Yet upon the whole, till in one of her crazy
moods Fortune smiled upon him, if he had not
done well, he had at least not done ill. His
father said he was too lazy to work — his
mother that he was too delicate to study.
There might be truth in both statements —
anyhow, while still quite a young man, he
abandoned the medical profession, which it had
been his own election to pursue, and went
abroad with a certain nobleman whose acquaintance
he had made at college, and who
really entertained what might be termed an
attachment for the gentle, dreamy Irishman.


Desmond will never do anything in the

world,' remarked his father — * he has no backbone
; lucky he is not the eldest son.'

If he had been, Glenarva must have come
to him on the death of the speaker ; but he
was the youngest of three, and the property
then seemed as far from him as the crown of
England.

In due time it devolved upon Captain
Westley, En., to whom his father left a fine
fortune with which to keep up the old place.
If he had willed the fortune to go with the
place it would have been all right enough ;
but, as matters stood. Captain Westley settled
every penny he was possessed of upon his
wife, a certain Lady Emily Winston, and
dying without children, was succeeded by
Major Westley, who, having contracted an
unfortunate liking towards a person he could
not marry, for the sufficient reason she was
already provided with a husband, lived with
her and a numerous family at Glenarva in a
strict retirement, which none of his neighbours
strove to induce him to leave.

For over ten years visitors did not pass
through the gates guarded by the stone
animals, who sat resolutely on their haunches

and lolled out their carved ton ones at all who
went that way. It was known Major Westley
only waited the death of the obdurate husband
to make the lady whose presence scandalized
the countryside Mrs. Westley ; and his brother
was expecting every day to hear of both
events, when quite different tidings reached
him. The Major it was who died, leaving no
child capable of inheriting Glenarva ; and the
place, therefore, descended to Desmond — the
man with no backbone, and no money independent
of the estate, except a hundred and
fifty pounds a year, in which, in accordance
with his father's ridiculous testamentary disposition,
he had only a life-interest ; at his
death it descended to whomsoever might at
the time be the owner of Glenarva.

It is unnecessary to say the first thing this
fortunate younger son did was to take a wife.
Needless to add she had no fortune, and that
she came of people who were not well ofi". It
was an old attachment — she and Desmond had
been engaged for years, and but for the chance
of the Major's horse throwing him while leaping
a stream he had often jumped across as a
boy, the engagement might have gone on forever,

since certainly Mr. Westley was most
unlikely to make enough to] support a second
self.

As matters stood he was close on forty, and
the lady over thirty, when they vowed to take
each other for better or worse. Two years
later a daughter was born, whom, in the
delight of his heart, the proud father decided
to call Glenarva.

She never can be Westley of Glenarva,* he
said to his wife, ' so she shall be Glenarva
Westley.' More adaptable than many an absurd
name, when the evil days fell upon her
father this baptismal appellation was capable
of judicious abbreviation. ' Glen ' did not
sound ridiculous, even when the young lady so
styled was shorn of wealth and rank, and had
sunk into a comparatively humble station.

And it was for my sake he lost everything,'
the girl considered mournfully. ' It
was in trying to make a fortune for me he
spent his own.'

She could not have explained the matter in
fewer words. Knowing he would be unable
to leave his daughter Glenarva or any part of
it, and disdaining the simple expedient of laying

a certain sum aside for her dot, Mr.
Westley, with that infatuation which may
indeed be regarded as a sort of madness, took
shares in a venture which was to make him a
millionnaire, and Glen an heiress.

In vain people who knew something of
business implored him not to be rash, to count
the possible cost before he embarked in so
hazardous an undertaking;. The man never
yet lived who did not believe himself wiser
than his counsellors. Mr. Westley would
listen to no warning or remonstrance, and it
was only when he saw grass growing in the
courtyard of what had been opened with a
great flourish of trumpets as the Monster
Bank for the North of Ireland, and received
an intimation of the first call, that he began
to doubt his own prudence, and rushed off to
consult the family lawyer.

The tale of the years that followed may be
guessed. First one luxury and then another
was dispensed with ; the establishment was
curtailed, grooms were sent about their
business, horses and carriages were sold,
company given up, gardeners discharged.
Glen's English governess dismissed, every expense

cut down, a wild attempt made to remain
on in the old house, though the very
lawn was let out for grazing. But no retrenchment
could meet the drain of those
perpetually recurring calls. At last it became
necessary to find a tenant for the house and
pleasure-grounds, and it was then the whole
county beheld the unexampled sight of a
living Westley having to abandon Glenarva
to strangers and go forth, his daughter by his
side, into the wilderness of the world — into
the land called Poverty.

If there was comfort to be found in anything
at that time, Mr. Westley probably
extracted ii from the fact of his wife having
died and been buried before this crowning
humiliation came upon him. Her funeral
train wound up the long dark avenue where
the trees interlaced their branches overhead,
and the evergreens grew so tall and thick.
Over the crest of the hill her coffin had been
borne with all fitting woe and pomp to the
family vault in the ruined church, amid the
desolate moors that stretched in all directions
far as the eye could discern. Not for her the
poor cottage and the rough service and the

cruel pinching economy ; she at least died at
Glenarva, in a noble room, the windows of
which looked down upon a green sea of
waving boughs and leaves that danced and
glittered in the sunshine, and on the day of
her funeral the roads all around were alive
with carriages, and persons who followed the
hearse, anxious to show the last tribute of
respect to a very good lady, whose married
life had been but one long anxiety.

Glen was still a child when her mother died,
and nearly two years elapsed after that event
before the final crash which necessitated removal
from the old home. Though old for
her age, she failed to understand all that leaving
Glenarva would afterwards mean to her.
In early life egotism is so strong, it seems to
the young they must remain persons of importance,
no matter where they chance to be.
Moreover, women rarely feel the deep attachment
for place men entertain ; they do not
know the world, and they are far too prone to
believe a change of any kind must be a change
for the better.

Considering the life which lay before her,
it was well for Mr. Westley's daughter that

he had to leave Glenarva before the terrible
monotony, the enforced isolation, the utter
absence of everything bright, cheerful, and
hopeful, stamped itself upon her nature. They
went to a small house many miles distant
which belonged to Mr. Westley, and which,
chancing to be vacant at the time, seemed to
offer a harbour of refuge to the ill-fated
gentleman. It stood bare, without even a
tree to shelter it, half-way up a hill fronting
the sea. No grander situation could well be
imagined, and to Glen the transition from her
old home — shut in and smothered by greenery
to the wide expanse of land and water, was
like passing from darkness to light — from
gloom to sunshine.

She, at all events, was happier by far in
that whitewashed cottage, where the roses
climbed over the windows and a thatched roof
defied the violence of the gales which so often
tore round the building, than she had ever
been in the grand house, with its long avenue
and stately portico and imposing front. For
the first time in her existence she found companions
of her own age — six turbulent lads —
with whom she played at ball, ran races, rode

shaggy ponies unshod, unroofed, half-wild,
and wholly untrained, like themselves. They
galloped them along the sands and over the
hills ; they had a boat, in which a man would
have thought himself mad to peril his existence,
but that always brought the young
scapegraces safe back to shore, though they
had to bale out the water almost incessantly ;
there was no game those lads played in which
they failed to instruct Miss Westley, no place
they went to that they did not desire her
company. Before six months were over she
looked and was a different creature. If Mr.
Westley had only known a tenth part of the
perils she ran, of the hairbreadth escapes she
could have told him about, of the chances of
drowning she gave herself, of the headlong
rides across country, of the steep cliffs climbed,
of the caverns explored, of the rapid streams
traversed by means of slippery stepping-stones,
of the treacherous rocks visited at low water
in search of dulse — he could never have endured
the anxiety ; but, absorbed in the contemplation
of his misfortunes, utterly broken
and wretched, he saw nothing of what was
really going on, and felt glad his daughter

could find some amusement which brought a
colour to her cheeks and a light to her eyes,
and made her happy and cheerful at home
merry she could not be in his presence.
When out with the boys she laughed as
loud and as long as they ; but all idea
of laughter died within her when she
looked at her father's sad face and drooping
figure.

To him the mean cottage, the desolate landscape,
the raging sea, the howling tempests,
were constant reminders of a state and a
place to which he could return no more forever.
For his daughter the breezy walk, the
narrow path on the very verge of some tremendous
precipice, the exhilarating canter, the
dangerous sail with far too much canvas
crowded, and one gunwale generally underwater.
For him only an armchair by the turf
fire, or a saunter in the sun, with the memory
of trouble behind and the expectation of trouble
in store.

It is not too much to say he hated his new
home — that when in the morning he looked
out over that expanse of desolate sea or still
more desolate land, his heart sank within him

at the idea of having to pass another long idle
day amid such surroundings.

But when Glen was about fifteen there came
on her suddenly a mighty change. It was
wrought almost in a day, and it was caused
by a perfect comprehension of her father's
position. Some one said he was breaking his
heart ; another hinted things were not yet
at the worst with him. Then the girl
asked in a few minutes more questions about
their reverse of fortune than she had put
in her life before. Nor were they at the
worst, she found. At some not remote period
they might not even have money enough to
buy the little they required ; further, it was
quite certain that sooner or later she would
have to earn her bread.

For hours after she went to bed on the
night when her eyes had been opened,
Olenarva Westley lay in the moonlight wide-awake.
What could she do ? If she had
been a man there were fifty things to which
she might have turned her attention ; but
being only a woman, which way would it be
best, or indeed possible, for her to face the
world ?

At length she rose, and, crossing to the
window, looked out. Beneath her lay the
ocean, calm as a sleeping child ; in the offing-one
white-sailed vessel appeared sleeping
too.

The moon shone calmly down upon the
water and traced a bright pathway, as it
seemed to her fancy, across the tide. All
thought is but the offspring of some previous
thought ; all invention only the outcome of a
former plan. As the flower is contained in the
seed, an apparently sudden project has been
growing in silence to maturity ; as the infant
lying in his cradle will one day be represented
by a stalwart man, so every purpose and execution
of our lives has had its hour of unconscious
babyhood. When we see the result weare
apt to forget there must of necessity have
been a long time of growth. For a year the
whole forces of nature are at work to perfecta
single leaf, and which amongst us can
tell the length of time even one solitary
idea has been germinating before it takes

definite form and substance before our
es ?
For many a long day Glenarva Westley

eyes ?

thought the idea which sprang into birth as
she looked out on the quiet sea and that broad
track caused by the glittering moonbeams was
one conceived under the spur of the moment ;
but in after years she comprehended how differently
the matter actually stood. During the
whole of her young life there had never been
a time when to every look and tone of nature
she failed to respond with the deep sympathy
of an imaginative and poetical temperament.
The waving of the branches, the moaning of
the wind, the long dark avenue at Glenarva,
the rich hues of the summer flowers, the sound
of flowing water, the sweet scents that came
borne on the breath of gentle June — each one
of these things and a thousand more filled her
with an exquisite delight, just as the sight of
a desolate graveyard touched some deep note
of sadness, and a long stretch of wintry shore
with grey waves breaking sullenly on the beach
awoke thoughts she could not have communicated
to anyone.

In fancy she had peopled each lonely scene
her eyes rested on. She dreamed of heroes
and heroines, of great deeds of courage, endurance,
devotion. Whilst at Glenarva she did

not live in the monotonous world by which
she was surrounded. Down the long corridors
of the past walked the men and women of
other days to greet the lonely girl, and accompany
her with their phantom presence. Amid
portraits limned by poets and artists long
smouldered into dust she wandered in imagination.
Fair women and gallant gentlemen
smiled sadly down upon her as she passed.
Music, painting, romance — all had been training
her for this end ; that she herself should
begin to struggle and labour, to see whether
she was really fit for any work, and if so, for
what.

^ I will T\Tite,' she said, standing in a flood
of moonlight ; and, opening her little desk
there and then, she began.

Years and years afterwards she chanced to
come across two or three sheets of letter-paper,
on which were sentences traced in a
girl's unformed hand — only a few sheets,
yellow with time, and yet as she looked at
the few sentences traced in ink faded with
age, an epitome of her life seemed evolved out
of them.

What had she not hoped and believed then,

VOL. I. 15

what had she not experienced and suffered
since ? Reversing the experience of Moses,
it was on the Promised Land of Morning she
gazed back, and the Wilderness of Evening
she saw stretching at her feet.

Nowadays, the smallest child has some idea
of 'how books are made;' but the schoolmaster
had not taken so many walks abroad at the
time when Glenarva Westley conceived the
idea that she would add one to the already
lengthy list of authors, and she knew as little
about the ordinary details of the literary profession
as any young lady even at that time
well could. It was fiction, of course, on which
she concentrated the powers of her mind; nota
tale or a story, or a modest narrative on an
unpretending scale, but fiction in three-volume
form and constructed after an ambitious pattern.
As day succeeded to day, she piled
sheet on the top of sheet, and when recalled
from the ideal world to the workaday reality
surrounding her, did what she had to do, said
what she had to say, with a smile on her lips
which perplexed many persons who saw nothing
to cause such continuous evidences of
cheerfulness, but that really owed its origin to

a settled conviction she was getting on admirably,
and would ere long be able to restore
the shattered fortunes of the then Westley of
Glenarva.

The fact may seem mournful, but it is true :
the girl knew no more really about the difficulty
of earning money in those blessed blissful
summer days when she took to writing asa
profession, than she did about authorship.
To her inexperience anything and everything
seemed possible now she had found out her
talent, and meant to put it to usury. Amongst
the few plans she proposed to execute when
she had made her fortune and reinstated her
father in the house of his ancestors may be
mentioned rebuilding the Vicarage at Bally-shame
; purchasing an organ for the church,
paying dear old Miss Grunley a salary for
playing it ; allowing ten pounds a year to each
poor family in the village — a sum she believed
would raise their condition from abject poverty
to luxurious affluence ; laying out a carriage-drive
to the cottage, and planting — climate and
Atlantic blasts notwithstanding — shrubberies
around it ; installing the old servant who attended
to their few wants as housekeeper, and

15—2

leaving her in charge to keep all in readiness
for the return of ' the family,' when wearied of
the pomp and formality at Glenarva. Further,
in her mind's eye she saw the very boat she
meant to give to the boys ; the gold watch
Ned should receive on his birthday ; the
presents she would purchase for the Vicar and
his wife when she went to Dublin to lay out
her money to the best advantage ; while she
never beheld the fishermen's nets hanging out
to dry, but she mentally ordered the material
to keep their shuttles busy through every idle
hour of the hard, honest life they led.

No achievement seemed to her impossible.
Had anyone suggested she might by way of a
finish clear ofi* the National Debt, she would
secretly have considered that more wonderful
results had been achieved. But what she
thought at that period nor man nor woman
knew. Not even to the boys — her friends, her
comrades — to no human being did she confide
her secret. If the world of letters had been
a hitherto undiscovered continent, and she the
Columbus to whose longing eyes its trees hung
with rarest fruits, its paths strewn with precious
stones, were alone revealed, she could not have

maintained a strainer and stricter reserve as to
the treasures she had found in the fairy-land
her feet were traversing.

The Vicar's sons could not think what had
come to Glen. In her eyes was the reflection
of a sun the very existence of which was unknown
to them — from mines they did not wot
of the girl was digging of the fabled gold that,
though at first it seemed so precious, turns to
ashes when required for use.

As a child she had been fond of planting her
own little garden with full-blown flowers which
drooped and withered within the hour ; and
through all that early time of literary effort
and non-success she was but repeating the old
experiment — setting out rootless hopes and
fancies, the glories of which dazzled her imagination
and gilded with unnatural brightness
the waves of the deep dark ocean she had set
out to traverse, unwitting that from the unknown
shore for which she was blindly steering
there is no return.

She began her life-task in utter ignorance of
how to set about it. She did not know how
books were printed or published. She had
never met an author ; more, she was not acquainted

with any person who ever had met
one. The dim ideas she entertained on the
subject were gathered from seeing at various
times some sermons yellow with age which the
Vicar laid aside after service, in a cupboard
in his study. Battered and illegible enough
were those ancient finger-posts ; still, they
seemed better to Glen's mind than a road without
any finger-posts at all. She wished she
could have talked to him on the subject which
lay so near her heart, but she felt as shy of
speaking about her writing as she might about
a lover if she had got one.

During the months which followed that
moonlight night, when in the travail of her
soul she brought forth the resolve which changed
the whole of a life which otherwise might have
been passed as governess, or companion, or wife
to some poor curate or struggling country
practitioner, she wrote enough to have filled,
had it ever been printed, several volumes. She
wore herself out, she fell ill, she got betteragain.
She gave up scribbling for a little while ; but the
madness was on her, and she had soon to return
to her little desk and the welcome solitude of
her low wide bed-chamber overlooking the sea.

For ever after there were scents, and sights,
and sounds, which affected Glenarva Westley
Tvith a strange, sad, faint sense of sickness
which caused her heart to die away within her ;
which brought, with the wash of the glittering
waves, with the wild rain pelting against the
windows, with wind-tossed white-crested billows
madly racing to find their death on a storm-beaten
shore, with the heavy perfume of
jasmine and the sweet breath of pallid roses
subtly stealing through the open casement, a
memory of what she had lost in the struggle,
and a total, though it may be only temporary,
forgetfulness of all she had gained.

Ah me ! How little she prized the wildflowers
of her sweet free youth, while they
were still springing and blooming beside her
path ! and yet how fair they seemed when remembered
amid gardens brilliant with the gay
colours in which Summer decked herself, or
fields where golden grain was ripening under
cloudless skies, or woods already — spite of the
glory of their autumnal tints — foretelling the
swift approach of the drear dark winter which
follows the brightest season man s life on earth
can know !

MR. Gifford.

Though no one in Miss Westley's
small 'world could be considered
gifted with any extraordinary
powers of perception, still, those
about the girl must have been stone-blind had
they failed to notice the change which had
come over her.

Save at the Vicarage, public opinion was
almost unanimous in considering the transformation
an improvement. Long previously every
woman in Bally shame had, standing over their
turf fires while they turned their bannocks on
the scorching griddles, or, seated on great
stones in front of their doors in the fine
summer weather, knitted stockings and patched
their husbands' heavy coats, arrived at the conclusion

that the only thing for Miss Glen to do
was to get married. ' And then the master —
God bless him ! — could live with her

A belief was entertained in the village that
eventually the Captain's widow — now remarried
and known as Lady Emily Wildersly — would
adopt bliss Glenarva. It was known her ladyship
had twice sent for the girl to stop with
her — once at Portress and once in Dublin —
from both of which visits Teenie, servant at the
cottage, declared the young mistress returned
home 'just loaded with presents

When the Vicar's wife saw those presents
she said nothing, but she thought a great deal.
To her mind at all events it was clear Lady
Emily had no intention of acting the part of
fairy godmother to the Ballyshane Cinderella.

But other people were not so wise, and it
was considered a o-reat o'ain when [Miss Glen,
of her own accord, began to turn up her back
hair, and 'take kindly to her book.'

The quality thinks a great deal of reading,'
remarked Miss Bella Weill, the village dressmaker,
' and Teenie says bliss Glen is always
studying.'

She's losing her colour a bit,' one of the

fishermen was rash enough to observe, thoughtfully.


Why, that's all the better,' cried Miss Neill,
whose own complexion was somewhat muddy ;
the gentlefolks don't like much red in their
cheeks. Lady Emily herself is more like a
marble statue than flesh and blood. She is
just a picture to look at.'

And it's time Miss Glen was taking thought
to herself,' capped another crony ; ' she must
be getting on for sixteen now '

Turned sixteen,' said Miss Neill, rapidly
basting ' a seam as she spoke.

Turned sixteen I' repeated the other.
Well ! oh, then she is getting on — it's a mercy
she has taken up with her book at last.'

If the speaker, who, being unable either to
read or write herself, could scarcely be considered
a competent authority on the vexed
subject of education, had only imagined the
sort and description of book with which Miss
Westley occupied her abundant leisure, she, in
common with every other human being round
and about Ballyshane, would have thought the
young lady ' ofi' her head.'

Those were not the days when, in remote

districts at all events, embryo authors were
patted on the back and taught to consider
themselves marvels of genius ; and perfectly
aware that even her most modest aspirations
would meet with no favour, the young author
kept her secret, and in the solitude of her own
mind dreamed her fancies, perfected her stories,
indulged her hopes, and bore her disappointments.


For already she had adventured many doves
out over the world's waste of waters, and
though they almost all returned to her with
terrible promptitude, not one bore an olive-leaf
of promise back with it. The agreement which
prevailed amongst editors and publishers as
to the worthlessness of what she sent them was
perhaps on the whole not remarkable, though
it seemed so to Glenarva Westley.

When her manuscripts were acknowledged,
it was ever in a note that contained a rejection.
The notes were differently worded, but the
sense was the same. Afterwards she marvelled
at the faith which, spite of these constant rejections,
caused her to persevere ; but the fact
was that, having built up her great dream-castle,
she dared not of her own will sweep

down turret and battlement, flying buttress
and stately keep, and return to the narrow
limits of a home which had once contented
her.

She carried her manuscripts to the nearest
town, where she posted them to London, and
Dublin, and Edinburgh, and to every other
likely address she saw advertised in the 
Times newspaper the Vicar's brother
sent him, and w^hicli he immediately lent to
Mr. Westley. Trudging along the Queen's
highway with her parcels made up into one
good-sized package, enveloped in brown paper
to defy the curiosity of any eyes she happened
to encounter, Miss Westley might have been
regarded as testifying 'Hope.' Returning to
Ballyshane with cjuite as large a package, she
might have sat for ' Despair ;' but this feeling-did
not continue.

Disappointment obscured the cloud-palace
for a time, but the cloud-palace was there notwithstanding
; ere long the sun of imagination
dispelled the mist wherewith some cruel correspondent
had encircled it, and then once
more pinnacles shone and vanes glittered ;
across the lowered drawbridge she walked

into a spacious courtyard, whence, as fancy
suggested, she wandered into room after
room furnished with more than Oriental mao
munificence, and without the slightest regard to
cost.

Notwithstanding, it all told on her. The
fisherman was right ; she had ' lost her colour
a bit,' and with her colour had gone something
of her old high spirits. Still upon occasions
she went on mad expeditions with the boys.
Still half-wild ponies were ridden across the
moors. Still in the crazy old boat Glen
perilled her own life, and those as yet unwritten
works for which the world did not
seem impatient; still dizzy heights did not appal
or breakneck paths deter her. But she had
changed — the boys were never weary of telling
her so.

What's on your mind, Glen V they would
inquire. ' Has Lady Emily asked you to go
and stay with her^again ? Pluck up courage,
and say you won't stir a step. What has she
ever done for you that you should do anything
for her V

There is nothing on my mind,' the girl
answered one summer's day, a year after she

had taken to writing, ' and we haven't heard
from Lady Emily for ages. Even papa thinks
she means really to cut us at last

And you are fretting about that, I suppose V
said Ned, the eldest, scornfully.

I am not fretting at all,' protested
Glen.

I know what's the matter with you,' broke
in one of the younger fry.

What is V demanded his five brothers and
Glen, in chorus.

She is in love with old Afford.'

Oh, what a story, Hal !' expostulated the
young lady thus libelled.

It's not ; look at her — look how red she is !
she could not be any redder if she had just
said to him, '* Ask pawpaw ;" ' and Hal struck
a lackadaisical attitude as he imitated not so
badly Mr. Guilford's ultra-elegant mode of pronunciation.


I have a great mind to box your ears,
Master Hal,' observed Glen, still covered with
confusion.

I do not care whether you do or not, if
you will only send me a good wedge of the
wedding-cake. His mawmaw will be able to

get it at trade-price, no doubt. I hope it
may have plenty of almond stuff on the
top.'

After this, Glen's love for Mr. DufFord, or
Mr. Dufford's love for Glen, or the mutual
affection the pair entertained for each other,
grew to be a standing joke with the young
savages, as Mr. DufFord, in correspondence
with his mother, called the Vicar's sons. A
relative had offered the Ballyshane clergyman
a wonderful chance of seeing ' foreign parts '
without expense ; and whilst he was availing
himself of an opportunity which, as his wife
said, might never occur again, Mr. Dufford,
who at the time happened to be looking out
for a curacy where there was little to do,
plenty of good society and a fair salary,
kindly consented to * lie on his oars ' at Bally-shame.


He was the son,' so said the boys, ' of a
rich hut honest tradesman of Cork.' He had
been to school in England, and taken his
degree at Trin. Col., Dublin. He thought
himself extremely handsome. He believed his
manners would have graced the Court of St.
James. He had plenty of money, and was * old

enough as Ned once expressed the matter, ' to
be a great fool.' And to Ned's irreverent eyes
no doubt he seemed so. His calm life had
hitherto been passed amongst people as proper
and commonplace as himself. His talk was of
fashion and the grand persons he knew. To
those jibing young sinners at the Vicarage
his conversation proved an inexhaustible fund
of amusement. His ideas were reproduced for
Glen's gratification amid peals of laughter.

He could ride, but only the conventional
and regulation horse ; he could swim, he
averred, but declined to bathe off the rocks,
to which six grinning lads joyously conducted
him ; he would not put his foot in the boat ;
he would not be coaxed to climb the cliffs,
stating that a ' man who had passed his life in
study would turn dizzy where a goat or a mere
mountaineer might tread secure.' He was extremely
particular about his food, and he
turned up his nose at the clerical jaunting-car
which had done duty at Ballyshane as long as
the Vicar himself

For the rest, he sang when he could get
anyone to accompany him ; and he felt no
hesitation in confessing he believed the way in

which he took off his hat to ladies was the very
acme of chivalry and breeding.

"When first made acquainted with Miss
Westley he treated her in a lordly and distant
manner which delighted both Glen and the
boys. But when he grew more at home at
Ballyshane, and learned who Mr. Westley
really was, and understood a certain Lady
Emily was included amongst the Glenarva
gods, he unbent, and actually volunteered to
take the Times up to the cottage with his own
white hands, which looked as if they had
never done anything useful in their lives ; and
their looks did not greatly belie them.

Med be ashamed to own such hands,' Ned
said hotly.

Glen laughed, and cast a quizzical glance at
Ned's, which certainly did not err on the side
of being too white, too soft, or too small.

I like a hand which has some work in it,'
went on Ned, in clumsy explanation; 'but
there, all women are alike : they're fond of
dandies ;' and Ned turned away, his honest
eyes full of tears, and his boyish heart full of
vexation.

At times he really thought Glenarva felt a

VOL. I. 16

partiality for the new-comer, to whom, sad to
say, he habitually referred as ' a whelp,' which
was not a respectful way of speaking concerning
a man on the wrong side of thirty, * accustomed
to society,' and standing very high
indeed in his own opinion.

Fact was, that when Mr. Dufford so far condescended
as to ' take up the Westleys,* he
chanced one day in the course of conversation,
or rather of the monologue which usually
obtained during his visits at the cottage, to
mention, amongst other things true and false,
that he had met an authoress who had achieved
a considerable reputation. At the word. Glen,
roused from the apathy into which Mr. Afford's
descriptions of town life and ' the best
society ' generally plunged her, plied him with
questions not merely concerning the lady in
question in particular, but authors and literature
in general ; and then it transpired that to his
other attractions the clergyman added the
ability to ' throw off a few little things,' which
had actually appeared in print, and which he
promised to send for from Dublin, if Miss
Westley would care to see them.

Bearing in mind that Miss Westley was an

author herself — and an amateur author besides
it will not seem surprising that the impression
left on her mind when she did see Mr.
Duj6ford's effusions was how very much better
she could write herself ; but as this feeling in
nowise checked the interest she took in his
efforts, the curate naturally thought her interest
in his stories meant an interest in himself,
and while he talked learnedly about printers
and publishers and authors, concerning all of
whom he knew literally nothing, he watched
Glen's rapt expression of countenance, and
decided that if Miss Westley were well dressed,
and debarred from association with those
dreadful boys, and placed where she would
have the advantage of mixing in polite society,
and refined by contact with his own superior
mind, she would not, on the whole, be so much
amiss.

He had seen worse girls, much worse girls,
who, though they had been to boarding-schools,
and instructed by the best masters,
and appeared at parties and balls, were not
one half so appreciative as Lady Emily's niece.

It was in this conjunction he spoke of Miss
Westley when he wrote his ' mawmaw ' a

16—2

description of the girl he had found * running
wild by the seashore at Ballyshane.' He
knew the pleasant weakness of DufFord senior,
and that any title could withdraw him in a
moment from the contemplation of his butter
firkins.

Meantime Glen, utterly ignorant of the
honour Mr. Dufford had some idea of conferring
on her, appeared to the Vicar's sons somewhat
inconsistent ; for though she seemed to esteem
the clergyman's various talents as little as
they did, still there was no denying the fact
that she listened eagerly to his conversation.

I believe you are in love with the fellow,'
said Ned sharply. ' How you can read that
stuff of his puzzles me.'

Well, if it's any comfort to you, I don't
think much of it,' answered Glen, secretly
wondering what Ned's opinion would be of
her ' stuff.'

And so the summer glided on — days of
brightness, days of blue skies, days of cloud
and rain ; days, as seemed afterwards to the
girl, full of the purest happiness ; days, had
she known it, which should have been very
precious to Glenarva, for they were the last

she was to spend in that golden time of the
year and her own life at Ballyshane.

Glen ' — it was Ned who spoke ; Ned, lying
at the foot of a great rock, with his head resting
on the girl's lap, and his face a little pallid
and twisted with pain — 'tell me something
honestly now. You do not care for Dufford,
do you V

No,' she answered — her own face was a
good deal whiter and more drawn than Ned's
'I do not like him at all.'

And you won't marry him, will you V

He does not want me to marry him,' she
said lightly.

That's all you know about it. Glen, I'm
afraid I am a great nuisance to you ; put my
head down on the stone ; I shall do very welland
you are only cramping yourself.'

^ 1 am not cramped at all, but you must be
in agony. I wish Hal would come. Oh, Ned !
what will your mamma say V

Why, that it serves me right, to be sure.
What else would you have her say ? However,
it is better for me to be taken home ill
with a broken leg than Hal with a broken

neck. I wonder if I shall be lame for
life

Do you really think your leg is broken,
Ned?'

Sure of it. Well, it will give old Grunley
something to do.'

Ned's statement was quite true ; the catastrophe
so long prophesied had come to pass
at last. In rushing over the Lonely Beef —
as a jutting and dangerous promontory was
locally termed — to cuff Hal, who more persistently
than usual was seeking the nearest
way to destruction, Ned had slipped on some
seaweed and came dowTi with such a crash,
Glen felt assured he would never move again.

She flew rather than ran to the spot, to find
him vainly trying to rise, and striving to smile
up in her face, though his own was covered
with blood.

A near touch this time, Glen,' he said.
Oh ! don't do that, Hal,' as the boy strove
to lift him ; * my leg is broken, I think. Run
as fast as you can and get help ; tell them to
bring a gate or something. Eun now, and if
you see my mother, be sure to say I am not
much hurt.'

Oh, Ned, Ned 1' cried Glen ; and then she
sat down on the sand, and . lifted his head
gently into her lap, and with her handkerchief
stanched the blood which trickled from a cut
in his head.

It might have been worse,' observed the
lad ; * it might have been you ;' and then he
lay still, bearing his pain silently, and speaking
a little at intervals, and at last relieving his
mind by putting that home-question concerning
DufFord the detested.

As a matter of course, Glen went every day
to the Vicarage to see how Ned was getting
on, and, perhaps equally as a matter of course,
Mr. Dufford seized every opportunity of walking
back with her to the cottage.

For a short time Glen made no objection to
this arrangement ; but at last, when her companion
commenced to pay her small compliments,
and make little tender speeches, she
thought it well to slip quietly out by the back
way, and so avoid the tete-a4etes she began to
find embarrassing.

He will soon be going now,' she thought
one evening, as she opened the yard gate and
tripped across the field beyond ; ' only two

Sundays more, and I can go which way I
choose. Good gracious ! there he is. He
must have watched me as I left ;' and Glen,
with her cheeks aflame, stood at one side of
the dry ditch she was about to cross, looking
blankly at Mr. Dufl'ord, who, standing on the
other, and extending one of those faultlessly
white hands which stirred poor Ned's wrath,
said, with the smile of a seraph :

Alloiu me to assist you.'

Oh, thank you,' answered Glen, ^ but I can
get over quite well myself.'

Which indeed, as a rule, she could do ; dry
ditches or ditches full of water, or ' gaps '
filled up with rough stones, or openings
roughly made through thorn hedges, or
brambles, never having presented any insuperable
difficulty in the way of Miss Westley's
pedestrian progress across country ; but on
the present occasion she was destined not to
fare so well.

Usually Glen wore dresses, as regards length,
better adapted for getting in and out of boats,
climbing headlands, and skipping over rocks,
than for what Mr. DufFord would have called
drawing-room costume ; but ere she left home

on that sunshiny afternoon she had donned a
muslin robe taken from among the olio of
oddities wherewith Lady Emily was good
enough to endow her, which, at the critical
moment, when in the act of springing up the
opposite bank, tripped her up so ignominiously
that if Mr. Dufford had not caught the wilful
young lady, she would have measured her full
length in the sandy, crumbly soil that slipped
away from under her as she stumbled.

It is a very awkward place to get over,'
remarked Mr. Duflford, in bland apology for
her misadventure. ' You had better have let
me help you at first ; but you are so independent,
Miss Glen.'

Glen made no reply ; she was too angry
and too much ashamed even to attempt a
defence. She only looked down ruefully at
the skirt of the large-patterned, washed-out,
and hideously ugly muslin dress, which, in
addition to its former attractions, now boasted
a rent as long; and wide — so it seemed to the
girl — as the ditch that lay behind.

Take my arm — pray do,' entreated Mr.
Dufford, in his most winning tone and best

English accent.

Oh ! I could not possibly, thank you,'
said Glen, unceremoniously repossessing herself
of the hand he had taken in his own. * I
must hold up my dress, you know,' she added
hastily, and with a good deal of confusion.

Mr. Dufford looked at the garment in question,
as if he did not see the necessity.

There is no dust in the fields,' he observed,
as a general sort of proposition, applicable,
however, to the present case.

You would not believe, though, how grass
ruins muslin,' said Glen, desirous, doubtless, of
imparting useful information.

Does it really ? I shall remember that ;'
and Mr. Duflford smiled as he spoke, for he
had known ladies quite willing, more than
willing, to run the chance of so ruining even
costly dresses, for the sake of perambulating
with a delicate pearl-grey glove laid daintily,
yet tenderly, on the black sleeve of his own
clerical coat.

Quizzically he looked down at the rag —
thus he mentally styled poor Glen's borrowed
plumes — the girl was holding with both hands
out of harm's way ; then his glance wandered
to the young face, framed in a shabby bonnet

which had suffered many things both by sea
and land, and then he said in a soft caressing
voice :

Do you know, Miss Glen, if the idea
were not too preposterous, I should almost be
tempted to imagine you had been avoiding
me lately.'

Should you V answered Glen faintly.

Yes, indeed,' he went on, delighted with
her manifest uneasiness, which he attributed
to anything rather than its true cause — a fear
of meeting one of the boys.

Several evenings lately I had planned to
myself the great pleasure of walking home
with you — always, until now, to be disappointed.'


As this was a statement which did not seem
to require an answer, Glen kept silence, involuntarily,
however, quickening her pace.

Don't walk so fast, Miss Glen,' entreated
her companion. ' Surely there is no such great
need for haste ; pray take my arm.'

'I couldn't possibly,' repeated Glenarva,
appalled by the honour he desired to thrust
upon her ; ' you see I must hold up my dress ;'
and she clutched her gown as if the rag of

muslin was the only thing left between her
and perdition.

Mr. DufFord glanced at the girl benignantly.
If her clothes were torn, if her bonnet were
battered, if her boots were thick, and her
hands encased in old thread gloves, such defects
could be easily remedied when he translated
her to that superior state of life in which
he himself moved and had his being.

And she was really very nice, he decided,
watching the blushes coming and going on her
sunburnt face. Her voice sounded sweet in
his ears : the wild, free life had made her upright
as a dart ; her carriage was easy ; her
movements, on the whole, save when she
tripped over Lady Emily's cast-off finery,
were not awkward. There was something to
be made of her. She had read ; she had
thought. Yes ; he could mould, and train,
and fashion her. It would be a gracious task,
a work of love, to cut Glen into the conventional
pattern, and make her a town young
lady, who might never have seen a pony,
steered a boat, or swung in the old swing with
the half-rotten rope ; or shaken down plums,
or eaten apples by the bushel !

The sea looks very lovely this evening,' a^
last observed Mr. DufForcl in his best manner,
waving with an air of lofty condescension his
white hand, on which a ring glittered, towards
the scene spread below.

'Yes,' agreed Glen, stealing, as she answered,
a sidelong glance at Mr. DufFord's
well-brushed hat, superfine coat, trousers to
match, spotless boots, snowy shirt, and enamelled
studs.

Not one of these items, harmless as doubtless
they were singly and collectively, had escaped
the criticism and censure of the boys, and it
certainly occurred to Miss Westley, as she
took in the clergyman's whole appearance,
that however admirably adapted he might be
to grace a town promenade, say to improve
the general aspect of Sackville Street, he was
not, artistically speaking, the right thing in
the right place as a central figure in the landscape
he was good enough to admire.

Old Jim Bishop, for example, unwashed and
unshaven, in his long red cap, with his coat
ofi", his trousers tucked up, and his feet and
legs bare, going over the wet sands, carrying a
net over his arm, would have come out much

better in a picture than Mr. DufFord, with his
hack wavy hair and trim whiskers and general
air of conventional prosperity and orthodox
respectability.

Glen, however, could imagine a man accustomed
both to courts and camps, who might
not have seemed so utterly out of keeping —
nay, she had actually beheld such a one, who,
calling at Bally shame on a spring morning, ashe
came from the Giant's Causeway, was escorted
by the Vicar to various points of
interest in the neighbourhood.

He had afterwards lunched in the wainscotted
parlour she loved so much, and she
and the boys, unseen themselves, peeped
through the privet hedge at the tall commanding
figure which strode down the drive ; and
talked for many a long day after about the
general's military bearing and warlike moustache,
and the scar that disfigured his face,
and the battles he had seen, and the fields he
had fought on, and the victories he had won,
and the courage he had never lacked.

No thought of joking or jeering amongst
those young sinners as they recounted the
veteran's deeds of daring. With bright eyes

and flushed cheeks they repeated their stories
o'er and o'er again, and, gathered together on
the rocks in a picturesque group, or squatted
around a bonfire fed with potato-aulis, told
how the man who had been at college with
their father, and sat under their roof and
broke bread at their table, rose from lieutenant
to captain and captain to major, and
fought his way upwards in lands beyond the
sea, which seemed to them in those days unreal
and beautiful as places in an Eastern
legend.

All this, suggested by that one swift look
at her companion, had passed through Glen
Westley's mind before Mr. Dufi"ord spoke
acrain.

' And I shall soon be leaving all this beauty
and peace behind,' he said sentimentally, as
though he did not in his heart detest the
country and all its ways, and love better the
rattle of one Dublin jaunting-car than the
many-toned music of the Atlantic waves.

Shall you V observed Glen.

She knew to an hour when he was going,
but did not feel herself equal to any other
original remark on the subject.

On next Friday week,' he explained.
Alas r and he sighed in a manner which
might have brought tears to the eyes of any
properly educated young woman, 'I shall
carry many sweet and happy memories away
with me from Ballyshane.'

Dear me !' thought Glen, with a tinge of
regret ; * where can he have found them V

And I want dreadfully to carry something
else away with me also,' he proceeded.

His tone was peculiar, and Glen looked up
at him in surprise.

"What is it V she asked.

Cannot you guess V he said softly.

No ;' and Glen's thoughts took a rapid and
comprehensive summary of the few articles of
rarity or value possessed by the Vicar and her
father.

It's not the Chinese box, is it ? — or perhaps
you mean the petrified dog's head papa
showed you the other day V

It is something belonging to your papa,
but not the dog's head,' answered Mr. Duflford.

What can it be V puzzled Glen ; ' we have
so little '

And then a look in Mr. Dufi'ord's face

stopped her wonder short, and all the blood in
her body, as it seemed to the girl, came rushing;
and tinoiino- into her cheeks.

eyes,' said the clergyman benignantly, and
as he spoke he took one of her hands, muslin
dress and all, between his own, and held it
tight ; ' it is that I want to carry away with
me ; a kind thought from your papa's daughter.'

I am sure we should not think unkindly of
you, Mr. Dufford.'

Was it really she who had uttered these
words, or another ? The voice sounded to
Glen afar off. The sea was glittering and
dancing up and down before her eyes, the
headlands were spinning round ; she could not
see the grass under her feet or her companion ;
she felt a hot scorching sense of shame and
misery. Was she vexing herself about nothing,
or had Mr. Dufford in a second taken leave of
his senses '? What had she ever done that a
man should talk nonsense to her, and hold lier
hand so close she could not release it ?

Ah I but I want more than that — far more,'
said he, almost in a whisper, bending down
till his whiskers actually brushed her cheek.

A moment more and he would have kissed

VOL. I. 17

her ; but in that moment Glen snatched her
hand away, and put a good space between
them, and so averted the catastrophe impending.


I really must get home, Mr. DufFord,' she
panted out, as calmly as agitation and amazement
would let her speak ; ' papa will be wanting
his tea.'

I am very sorry,' answered Mr. DuiFord,
but I cannot let you go till I have said what
I want to say.'

She stood there, with the sea rippling in on
the shore below with the shabby bonnet
standing out in full relief against the soft
evening sky, with Lady Emily's old washed-out
muslin, still in its last moments retaining
some pretensions to fashion, trailing on the
short grass behind her, and yet with a dignity
in her girlhood and a reproachful expression
in her face which compelled Mr. DufFord to
keep to the distance she had set between them,
while she exclaimed :

I do not know what it is you want to say,
but, whatever it is, I wish you would leave it
unsaid.'

Matters have gone too far for me to do

that, Miss Westley,' he replied. ' In justice
both to you and myself, having said so much,
I must say more. No, please don't go away ;
I am not coming near you. The dearest wish

of my heart — Glen ' He broke off

suddenly, descending from his stilts, as he saw
by her eyes she was meditating flight. ' I love
you — I want to marry you — will you marry
me V

She looked at him with absolute incredulity.
It could not be real. She must be dreaming.

Marry you !' she repeated in her bewilderment
— ' marry you !'

The honour was too great, the boon he proposed
to confer too vast for her to instantly
grasp the glory and beauty of the lot offered.
She could not realize the seriousness of his
proposal, could not take in the length and
depth and breadth and height of such condescension
on the part of a man over whom
ladies had quarrelled ' ere then.

Well, he could not be vexed with feelings
so proper and so natural. He would be very
gentle with her ; he would give her time to
recover her scattered senses, to comprehend
he meant every word he said. He did love

17—2

her : though she had been a tomboy she was
not unfeminine ; though she conformed to no
canon of beauty she was not bad-looking ; she
was spirited and cheerful and good company,
and came of an old stock, and had both connections
and friends possessed of influence
they would no doubt use for his advantage.
Money he knew he should have, position was
what he wanted, and

Mr. Dufi"ord,' said Glen, who was by this
time pale enough and calm enough to satisfy
any social requirements, ' don't you think you
had better forget what you said just now, and
go back to the Vicarage V

How charming it was ! She would not take
an ungenerous advantage of words perhaps
hastily spoken. In her modesty she felt he
could do far, far better than marry an ignorant
young girl, destitute of fortune, whose father,
having played at ducks and drakes with a fine
estate and handsome fortune, was forced to
hide his diminished head in a cottage little
more pretentious than those inhabited by the
Bally shame fishermen. He had never liked
Glen so much before ; he had never previously
imagined she fully appreciated the wide difference

in their positions. After all, she was
young and inexperienced, and though she
could ride wild horses she was not accustomed
to love-making, and his abrupt proposal had
frightened and astonished her.

My dear child ' — beautifully Mr. Duflford
considered he managed to blend in his manner
the dual character of pastor and lover — ' I do
not want to forget. I wish to go forward. I
desire, when I return to the Vicarage, to carry
thither with me the memory of sweet looks of
encouragement, of kind words of hope,' and he
moved close to where she stood, and would
again have taken her hand ; but Glen, without
really changing her position, though in shrinking
from him she seemed to draw back a little,
said, in a tone and with a manner which surprised
the curate as much as he had surprised
her :

Do not do that, please, Mr. Dufford ; aud
I am very sorry to vex you, but I shall never
marry anybody.'

Mr. Dufford tried to laugh, but the effort
did not prove very successful.

All young ladies say they will never marry,'
he remarked.

I mean, however, what I say,' answered
Glen.

'That is nonsense,' expostulated Mr. DufFord.
You must marry, you know ; and I am sure I
could make you happy. You need not give
me an answer now — not even before I leave
Ballyshane. I am quite content to wait, to go
away without another word, if you only say
you do not quite hate me.'

I hate no one, I hope,' answered Glen, *but
I cannot marry you.'

Why not V

I have told you before — I shall never marry
anyone.'

But what are you going to do V he asked,
almost involuntarily. * If anything should

happen to your papa ' Then, feeling he

was treading on dangerous ground, he hesitated
and stopped.

You mean, I suppose, I should have no
money V supplied Glen.

Well, I confess that thought did cross my
mind,' answered Mr. Dufford ; ' and it would
comfort me — oh, so inexpressibly ! — if you would
let me place you beyond the reach of pecuniary
anxiety.'

Glen shook her head. ' I shall never marryat
all,' she said, ' and I should certainly not
marry for money.'

Or for love V supplied mr. Dufford.

I am not likely to fall in love' — which the
curate felt to be a plain way of stating she had
not fallen in love with him.

Matters were looking anything but pleasant.
The turn affairs had so unexpectedly taken was
one for which Mr. Dufford was in no respect
prepared. It began to dawn upon him this
girl, this chit of a girl, who had seen nothing
of life or society, or men or women, or the
world, and possessed no money or position,
actually meant to refuse him.

Her words were nothing, but her manner
was serious. He knew Glen's manner, and he
could not doubt but that she really intended
to decline the hand he offered.

Let us walk on,' he said, awaking to the
consciousness that, being set upon a hill, their
figures must be visible from the beach were
anyone there to see. ' I spoke too suddenly,'
he proceeded, with a look in his face which
touched Glen, in spite of her own vexation. ' I
took you by surprise.'

Yes, I was surprised,' she answered.

But when you have had time to think
quietly over what I have said '

'Time cannot make any difference to me,
Mr. Dufford. I shall never marry.'

The English of which is, I suppose, you
will not marry me V

Or anyone else,' added Glen ; quite sure
in her own mind she was speaking the truth,
and laudably anxious to make her positive
refusal of Mr. Dufford's proposal less ungracious
by generalizing it.

May I without offence inquire your reason
for saying this — that is, always supposing you
have a reason V

Glen looked at him askance, but she was not
offended — quite the contrary; the slight tone
of sarcasm in his question gave her assurance
that though this lover's temper might be ruffled,
his heart was not broken. No girl can associate
constantly and intimately with a man for
months, and fail at the end of them to understand
some of his peculiarities ; and even had
this young lady been willing to remain blind
to Mr. Dufford's weak points, the A^icar's boys
were not likely to leave her in ignorance of the

fact that he was, as Ned concisely worded his
statement, ' Trimming over with conceit and
folly.'

Instinctively she felt it was something not
much worth fretting herself about she had
wounded ; and accordingly, with more composure
than he anticipated, she answered Mr.
DufFord's question by explaining that for one
reason she never intended to leave her father.

And could you suppose,' said Mr. Dufford,
with a tender reproach in his fine eyes which
he brought to bear full upon Glen's sunburnt
face, ' that / should ever ask you to do such a
thing ? No; I trust he would always make our
home his. In my estimation it would be a
high privilege to minister to his declining
years, to surround him with comforts, to provide
him with congenial and suitable society,
to regard him as my father as well as yours,
to study his tastes and feelings to the utmost
of my ability.'

Mr. Dufford intended this for a very telling
speech ; but it failed to touch Glen, who only
murmured something about his being very
kind, but she did not think her papa would
like to live with anyone. 'And I know,' added

the girl hastily, seeing her admirer about to
speak, ' that I should not. Papa and I are
going to stay alone together always she
finished decidedly.

Oh !' said Mr. Dufford, and there was a
world of meaning in this monosyllable as he
uttered it, but Glen failed to read what he was
thinking of; indeed, she did not try. Her
only desire was to hurry on, and terminate the
interview as speedily as possible.

Mr. DufFord did not, however, intend to let
the matter drop thus. When Glen thought
he was vanquished, he was really collecting
his forces for a fresh attack.

They where now descending to the shore road
Miss Westley had so imprudently abandoned
when she skulked out of the Vicarage by a
back way, only to be ignominiously trapped
by the enemy she sought to avoid, and Mr.
Dufford felt no time should be lost in trying
to make another effective movement.

Surely,' he began in his slaves accents, ' we
need not walk as though we were training fora
match. You will not be tried by my companionship
much longer, if it is so disagreeable
to you. Stare me a few minutes, therefore, of

your time, which I do not imagine is very
valuable.'

She made no reply except that involved in
slackening a pace which had, indeed, downhill
been almost breakneck.

I need not ask if you are fond of your
father, Miss Glen,' began the curate.

1 would not marry for his sake, Mr. Dufford,
if that is what you mean,' said Glen, who
really now felt herself at bay.

AAYell, you certainly are one of the oddest
girls I ever met,' exclaimed Mr. Dufford.
(Glen's decided opinions on many subjects
which seemed quite out of the natural range of
thought for so young a person had ere now
amazed and amused him, but he was not prepared
for such a prompt expression of her
sentiments.) ' Why you should imagine my
harmless words held any hidden meaning of
the sort you impute to them I am quite at a
loss to imagine. You speak as if you had
spent your life in considering the question
of self-sacrifice in daughters — a question I
imagine, perhaps erroneously, can not possibly
hitherto have come within the scope of your
observation.'

Had Glen spoken out, she could have told
Mr. DufFord this matter of marrying for the
sake of somebody else was one that in her
capacity as author she had considered fully and
exhaustively.

She had weighed it in the balance and found
it wanting. Love, also, she had put into her
mental crucible, and though she felt satisfied
this absorbing madness could never disarrange
the even tenour of her thoughts, she had arrived
at the conclusion nothing but love — and
that of the most vehement and enduring description
— could justify marriage.

She believed there was a limit even to what
daughters ought to do for their parents, and
had long been satisfied that limit was passed
when, for the sake of providing food and
shelter, or even screening a father from disgrace,
a girl was asked to wed a man she
detested.

This formerly merely abstract idea being,
at a moment's notice, presented to her in the
concrete, she had not the least difficulty in
making up her mind, and in showing she had
made up her mind, that for the pleasure or
advantage of no human being would she become

the wife of the gentleman who, for some to
her unaccountable reason, had taken a fancy
to her.

But Glen was not o-oino; to tell Mr. Dufford
the way she had arrived at this conclusion, and
merely answered that, having read about such
things, she felt it would be very wrong to
marr' merely to provide a home for some one
who wanted it.

In those days the wording of Glen's sentences
sounded to herself quite unworthy of a writer ;
but this much at least could be said in their
favour, they did not as a rule err on the side
of ambiguity'.

*I quite agree with you,' answered Mr.
Dufford, ' but I suppose you will concede there
is no reason whv, because a suitor brings o-ood
gifts in his hand, he is therefore to be sent
empty away. Come, dear,' he added, suddenly
ojettino; off his high horse and anterior his
tone, ' let us be reasonable. I do not ask you
for an answer now ; so on your side do not refuse
my offer without at least thinking about
me a little. I want to be your friend and
helper as well as your lover, Glen. I would
be a son to your father. Xo one can look

upon him and fail to lament he should be so
utterly out of his sphere as he is at present.
It seems to me his affairs must have been
dreadfully mismanaged for such a total collapse
to have ensued. Now, my father, though he
did not rise from the ranks or commence life
with the few pence English people are so fond
of talking about, is a thoroughly business and
practical man. Give me the right to interfere
in your affairs. Say no more even than this,
I will give you an answer to what you have
asked me at Christmas," and I can truthfully
say, that if money, or time, or energy can restore
Glenarva to Mr. Westley, he shall be
back in the old place when next summer's
roses are in bloom.'

The girl was crying ; he had touched her at
last — touched the vein in her heart which bled
on the slightest provocation.

You will not be cruel,' went on Mr. Dufford,
who lacked wisdom and feeling; to let well
alone; ' you will give me the right to look after
your father's interests — darling !'

At this term of endearment Glen stopped
suddenly, and, with the fire of a sudden indignation
drying up her tears, turned upon her

lover, and interrupted the flow of further
eloquence.

Mr. Dufford/ she said, ' I could never care
for you in that — that way ; and so please do
not think of trying to help papa. He — he
wouldn't like it. He may go back to Glen-arva
yet. I hope he will. I sometimes think
he may ; but if he does, it won't be by my
marrying — anybody. Besides,' she added,
thinking to clench the nail she had driven
home, * there is nothing in the whole world
could induce me to marry a clergyman. 1
should be miserable as a clergyman's wife —
utterly wretched. '

You would rather, I suppose, be running
wild about the country with a clergyman's
six unruly, ill-mannered sons,' observed Mr.
Dufford, whom she had at last stung in his
tenderest part.

Yes, I would far rather,' retorted Glen,
getting up speed again, and walking along the
splendid high-road — which, by reason of the
limestone underlying it, shone before them
like a white, glittering thread of light — at a
pace which did much more credit to her pedestrian
powers than to that feminine weakness

and Yielding; softness of character which Mr.
DufFord considered the crowning graces of a
woman's nature. There had been such irritation
in her tone that the clergyman thus disparaged
felt it would be useless to imperil his
prospects by further remark, and accordingly
they walked rapidly on, side by side, till they
reached the rude gate, made of unbarred fir,
which gave admission to Mr. Westley's present
home. Mr. DufFord had not again spoken,
and it is almost unnecessary to add that Glen
had maintained a discreet silence.

Now, however, standing; against the closed
gate, which was only fastened by the primitive
expedient of passing a noose of rope over one
of the fir rails and the post, she said, extending
her hand in token at once of amity and
farewell : ' I am sorry you have come so much
out of your way.'

Not at all,' he answered, ' not at all ;' but
he did not take her offered hand or make any
movement as if to part.

Glen looked surprised, and stood embarrassed
: she thought she had told him to go as
plainly as she well could, and as he did not
take the hint, she was at a loss how to act.

There ensued an awkward silence. Glen
would not ask him in, yet she felt unequal to
passing through the gate and leaving him outside.


Alexander-like, Mr. DufFord cut the knot of
this difficulty. Lifting the loop, he said, ashe
thus enabled her to enter the rough cart-road
leading up to the cottage : ' I will trouble
you with my company for a few minutes
longer, Miss Westley ; I should like to pay
my respects to your father.'

It was the last thing Glen at that moment
wished him to do, but she could not well
make any objection to so moderate a desire.
Accordingly they picked their way over the
coarse black and white gravel as they followed
the course of the path which ascended to the
cottage.

VOL. I. 18

FATHER AND DAUGHTER.

T did not take Miss Westley long to
pull off her bonnet and dress, fill a
huge basin full of cold water, and
in defiance of repeated warnings from Miss
Neill that * she would ruin her complexion,'
bring out a rash,' ' destroy her skin,' and so
forth — bury her face in its depths.

Then she brushed and smoothed her ruffled
hair, slipped on a cotton gown Teenie had not
ten minutes previously laid over the back of a
chair — clean, stiff", freshly ironed — fastened a
snowy collar with the one article of jewellery
she possessed, a small gold brooch ; and
thus 'prepared to meet anyone,' ran downstairs,
into the parlour, where the tea equipage

was already set out, and everything ready for
Glen to take her place as mistress of the ceremonies.


As a matter of course, Mr. Westley had
immediately invited the curate to share their
meal, and when the daughter of the house
entered the room, she found the pair conversing
as easily and pleasantly as though no
question of marriage had been raised concerning
herself by anyone.

If he says nothing about it to papa, I am
very sure / shan't,' considered Miss Westley,
taking her seat and looking prim enough to
suggest to Mr. Dufford's mind the idea that
after all his lady-love was somewhat of a
humbug.

The correct thing, he felt, would have been
for her to remain in the solitude of her
chamber, and send down a message to the
effect she had a bad headache and begged to
be excused.

To take an offer of marriage, and such an
offer, as coolly as she might the suggestion of
a second helping of pudding, was, Mr. Dufford
felt, only to be accounted for on the ground
that Glen was not merely a little savage,

18—2

ignorant of les convenances, but that the girl
really could not grasp the extent of the
honour and advantages he proposed to confer
upon her.

She was young, of course, and many allowances
must be made ! Further, he felt he had
committed a mistake in addressing her first.
He should previously have spoken to her papa,
but then it had never occurred to him Glen
would be other than delighted with his offer.
He had felt confident for him to ask was to
have. Truly a man never can tell what is in
store when a woman is concerned. Instead of
kisses, for instance, Mr. Dufford got, figuratively
speaking, a slap in the face. Glen's
words, it is true, were not many ; but containing
as they did a rejection, by no means
hesitating or half-hearted, they stung like the
lash of a whip. Well, all he could do now
was to strive to repair his error, get the father
on his side, and then, backed by the paternal
approval and authority, take an opportunity of
again attacking the daughter's heart.

Glen very speedily gave the chance he
wanted for an uninterrupted tete-astute with
Mr. Westley. The moment tea was over, and

Teenie — clad in a stuff gown, with, a small
plaid shawl pinned decently across her
shoulders, a fair white apron, and a snowy
cap with picturesque borders carefully offered
encircling her sad but contented old face — had
removed the tray. Miss Westley, without a
word of apology, left her admirer to do his
best or his worst in the way of reconciling Mr
Westley to him as a suitor.

The girl knew perfectly well what he wanted,
and felt if she did not voluntarily quit the
room, Mr. Dufford in dulcet accents would beg
her to do so.

I am not at all afraid of what papa will
say,' thought Glen ; but she was a little
nervous for all that, and she grew more nervous
as time went by, and the even murmur of
earnest and continuous conversation ascended
from below.

^ I wonder what they can be finding to talk
about all this while,' she considered. ' Now,
whatever he says to papa will make no difference
to me. I don't like him, and I never
shall ; and I don't trust him, and — oh dear, I
wish he would go !'

She had opened her desk and tried to rate,

but for once that solace failed lier. She reread
a note which in the morning seemed
intensely laudatory and gratifying, but even
words of praise penned by a gentleman who
spelled ' excellent ' with one ' 1 ' failed to comfort
her. She paced her room restlessly ; she
stood with her arms resting on the window -
sash thrown wide, and looked, while the roses
softly touched her face, over the sea and the
land — both of which, as they lay spread out
before her eyes, were soon to become memories
to Glenarva Westley.

If I am to do anything, I must do it soon,'
she thought, with the impatience of youth,
which thinks every minute spent in waiting is
a year lost. ' I wonder — I wonder — I wonder
what is the way to get into print ; if I could
once have anything published, I am sure I
could make money — heaps of it ;' and then
the dear delightful dreams of all she would do
when very, very rich came again to enchant
her imagination. Glenarva ! wealth ! consideration
I There was not a cloud in the
azure of the heaven she looked on with the
eyes of her mind — though over the real world
lying at that minute around, twilight was

creeping down, and sea and land, bay and
headland, were fading softly and gradually
from her sight.

At last the sound of movement in the room
below ! The door opened — she heard her
father's voice in the hall — he was speaking to
Mr. Dufford in the porch covered with
creepers ; she drew back from the window,
still however watching and listening eagerly.
Mr. DufFord was saying something, then a
step crunched over the gravel, and the curate
went out into the gathering darkness — alone.

Her father did not accompany this visitor
to the outer gate, as was his pleasant wont.
Even by so slight a token she knew the interview
had ended as she could wish, but still
she did not go down immediately. She drew
a chair to the window, and sat down for a
little while. Had Mr. Dufford really spoken ?
Yes, of that she felt sure ; would her father
name the matter to her ? Glen could not tell.
They had ever been parent and child rather
than friend and friend — even concerning his
troubles he had been reticent towards her ; it
was from others Glen knew the full extent of
their misfortunes, and understood she would

some day, if she lived, have to support herself.


The moon had risen ere the girl gathered
courage sufficient to enter the quiet parlour
where her father had, since Mr. DuiFord's departure,
remained sunk in reverie.

All in the dark, papa !' Glen exclaimed, as
she entered.

'No, dear; there is the moonlight,' he
answered, pointing to the cold silvery beams,
that seemed to thrust the roses aside to fall
clear and unearthly upon the floor. ' Come
here, my child,' he went on, as she lingered in
the shadows, ' and let me look at you. I am
told he went on, as he took her face and held
it framed in both his hands, 'that my little
girl is almost a woman, old enough to be
asked in marriage.'

Papa, papa !' and the girl clung to him
passionately.

It is now,' he said, tenderly touching the
head laid on his bosom, ' that you miss your
mother, my darling.'

No, no !'

You want some one to talk to fully — to
speak all your thoughts to.'

You — you, papa,' she cried, ' if you will
only let me.'

Let you ? oh, my dearest Glen 1'

There ensued a minute's silence while they
stood clasped in each other's arms. Then Mr.
Westley, gently disengaging himself from his
daughter's embrace, said interrogatively :

Now, Glen '

Yes, papa dear.'

What have you to tell me V

What do you want to hear V

1 scarcely know, my child. I am told you
are possessed of will sufficient to say " Xo " to
a man who, I believe, means very fairly by
you. Is that so. Glen V

Yes, papa — you are not vexed with me, are
you V

My love, it is your own future you have to
give or withhold. You are sure you could not
marry Mr. Dufford, dear — sure and certain V

Most sure and most certain,' answered the
girl. ' What did he say to you, papa V

He said a great deal,' answered Mr. Westley
thoughtfully, ' which had little or nothing todo
with the real matter in hand. Because the
real matter is, Glen, whether you like him or

could like him. If you do not and could not,
there is no more to be said.'

Do you wish me to marry him, papa T

I will answer your question, dear, when
you tell me if you wish to do so.'

No — papa — no — I don't like him. I never

shall like him !'

Then there is no more to be said.'

Oh, papa, if you really wanted me to

marry him, there might be ever so much to be

said !'

But I don't. Glen. Good heavens, no !
Only ■

Only what V she questioned.

I was wondering,' he said sadly, ' what my
darling's future would be.'

Then in a moment the girl's carefully
guarded secret escaped her.

I think I can make a future for myself,'
she cried, with a trembling exultation in her
voice, and then she told him all.

In the after-days neither could have indicated
the form or mode in which the knowledge
was given and received ; but Glen's explanation,
though hurried and excited, was clear, and Mr.
Westley's intelligence acute.

Write !' he repeated. ' Is it possible ?'

To Glen it was so possible as to be quite
certain. Had not she proof positive upstairs
in piles of rejected manuscripts ? Had not
she letters from editors and publishers by the
score, politely regretting their inability to
avail themselves of the tales she offered ?

Had she not also that precious note saying
her 'story was very excellent ; and adding the
honest but, under the circumstances, perfectly
unnecessary caution, 'but if you decide to
publish at your own expense, you must not do
so on my judgment alone ^?

This advice, which in Glen's judgment was
superfluous, tried the girl's faith a little, though
Ned would have explained her correspondent
was in his orthography merely following a
good Biblical example.

The boys were in those days far ahead of
Miss Westley in all Scriptural knowledge.

In Chronicles, and indeed in all other portions,
they could, so Ned declared, 'beat her
in a canter ;' and therefore Glen really did not
know the gentleman who professed such admiration
for her talents was merely in the one
case following old fashions, and in the other

forestalling the modern innovation of dispensing
with doubles.

Still the praise, however spelt, was grateful;
and the authoress felt delighted to place
this testimony of what others thought of the
productions she deemed exquisite in her
father's hands.

You see, papa,' she said, ' not one of them
says I have no ability.'

But, my dear, not one of them says he will
take your manuscript.'

That is true,' she sighed, ' but ' — unconsciously
paraphrasing Disraeli's famous utterance
— ' they will be glad some day to take anything
I offer.'

•' There is nothing like hope,' remarked Mr.
Westley, in the tone of one who had never
hoped in all his life.

There is nothing like perseverance, papa,'
amended Glen, ' and I have made up my mind
to succeed. Oh ! if I could but once see a
publisher, I think I might get him to print
something ; and a start is all I want — I feel it
is aU.'

Her father smiled. ' As a rule, dear, a start
is what most people require. You are but expressing

the old idea of " /^ premier ]pas " in
another form.'

Mr. Westley said this pleasantly, yet with a
certain doubtfulness of manner which Glen
fancied, and truly, was caused by his strong
impression there were several other small
items needful for his daughter's success besides
a start.

Should you like me to read you some of
the things I have written V she asked eagerly,
anxious at once to commence the task of conversion.


'Not to-night, my love answered Mr.
Westley, meanly deferring the evil day, and
perfectly unconscious he was in so doing only
following the lead of all friends and relations
happily able to follow the bent of their own
inclinations. ' I must leave a letter out before
I go to bed for Teenie to send to the Vicarage
in the morning.'

To Mr. Duflford V

Yes, Glen.'

To tell him '

That, as he wished, I have talked the
matter over with you, and find you are not
disposed to alter your decision.'

'Did he mention anything to you, papa,
about his father being able to get you back
Glenarva V

Yes ; amongst other subjects he touched
on that.'

And what did he mean V

I don't know, my dear ; and I am inclined
to think he did not know himself,'

He said your affairs must have been mismanaged.'


It is a natural idea. Lookers-on always
fancy they see more of the game than the
players.'

Then you do not think anything that could
have been done was left undone V

For my benefit — no. The ruin effected
has been tolerably complete ; but if my lawyer
had chanced to be dishonest, we should have
found ourselves a good deal worse off even
than we are. Mr. Dufford, senior, may be a
very wise man — judging by the money he has
made, I am sure he must be — but Solomon
himself could not undo the evil wrought by
my own folly, and under no circumstances
should I feel inclined to " lay the state of
affairs," to quote our friend the curate, before

his father. It is one thins; to be bes-glared, and
another to flaunt one's rags and tatters in the
public street.'

Mr. Dufl'ord must have put papa out
dreadfully,' Glen decided as she went up to
her room that night, leaving Mr. Westley in a
solitude which the unwonted exertion involved
in writing one important letter seemed to require,
and in this surmise she chanced to be
quite correct.

Mr. Westley had been greatly ' put out.'
After all, it is not pleasant for a shy, sensitive
nature to hear hard truths hurled at it even
by a good-looking curate. Mr. Dufford determined
not to jeopardize his chances by over-delicacy,
and failing to impress upon his
lady-love's father the full extent of the
Westley impecuniosity, dealt some very telling
blows as he proceeded with his arguments.


Not a shilling owned by the elder Dufiford,
not an acre of land or house he possessed, was
forgotten. Mr. Westley was literally pelted
with sovereigns ; he felt during the interview,
indeed, smothered in bank-notes. He was not
even left the slight satisfaction of believing

himself better born than this clerical aspirant
for his daughter's hand. When Mr. DufFord
began to ' get up in the world he felt it incumbent
to look out for a decent family-tree,
which he easily got by paying for it ; and as
this tree had grown and ramified with the
growth of his riches, it was now of such goodly
size it could bid the Westleys and half a dozen
other of such illustrious families come and
roost on its branches.

Mr. Westley had not enjoyed the acquaintance
of Mr. Dufford, junior, for so long a time
without hearing frequent reference made to
his descent ; but matters ha vino* now arrived
at a point when the curate felt it necessary to
marshal all the family forces and pass them in
review before the eyes of Glen's father, he
raised every apocryphal ancestor out of his or
her grave, and paraded the whole host for the
benefit of a most patient listener.

In reply, Mr. Westley said nothing — indeed,
what could he say ? His guest's glib tongue
confused rather than enlightened him ; and at
the end of over an hour's diligent attention,
the only three facts he felt thoroughly able to
grasp where that his unobtrusive poverty had

been intruded on and insulted — that opposite
to him sat a man whose heart was set on
marrying his daughter, and that Glen had with
rare good sense refused to have anything todo
with him.

But yet, what was to become of the girl if, or
rather when anything — asMr.DufFord expressed
the contingency. ' happened to her father ' ?

For the first time he saw her — as the curate
was o'ood enough to draw a vigorous sketch
of the future orphan — penniless, forlorn,
ignorant of the world, unfitted both by education
and temperament to battle with it — his
poor, dear Glen ! his child, he had lost his all
in hoping to make an heiress.

He was cut to the very heart. Though he
did not know it, Mr. Dufi:brd had drawn a
knife across veins that throbbed with deep absorbing
love for his daughter.

The sun which illumined for Glen the
gloom of Mr. Dufford's proposals had not
yet arisen on her father's horizon ; and even
now when he stood in the full blaze of this
new knowledge, it failed to show him a way
out of the incertitude of his position.

He was not stricken dumb with delight at

VOL. I. 19

the prospect of his daughter entering herself
in the race for fame. Things which of late had
vaguely puzzled him about her were now clear ;
but he felt doubtful whether the fancy she had
taken might not, instead of mending matters,
make them worse.

However, let what would come, he could
not regret that she had refused Mr. DufFord.
The double character in which that gentleman
offered himself, as son and son-in-law, fairly
appalled Mr. Westley. ' Yes, it is better Glen
can't fancy him,' he decided; and finally, taking
pen in hand, he wrote a few courteous lines to
the rejected suitor, who, when he read them,
felt as he had never done before in the whole
course of his life.

To remain at Ballyshane after what had
occurred was impossible. He did not in the
least degree understand the Westleys, and
thought his offer and Glen's refusal would soon
be common property. Only one other Sunday
intervened before the time appointed for Mr.
Beattie's return, but when the post brought
him several letters he feigned to have received
a missive urgently requesting his immediate
presence in Dublin.

Diplomatically he put the question to Mrs
Beattie.

Did she think it would be possible for him
to leave at once ? Could a substitute be procured
? Was it likely one of the clergymen
in the neighbourhood would take the duty on
the following Sunday ? Any expense which
might be incurred he should, of course, be
most happy to meet, but the business which
recalled him was of vital importance. Would
dear Mrs. Beattie set her woman's wits to
work and see if she could help him out of
the dilemma ?'

Dear Mrs. Beattie, who was at that moment
darning stockings — a necessary work Mr. Duf
ford, as a rule, regarded with much disfavour
threaded a coarse needle with blue worsted,
and commenced operations upon a large hole
before she answered.

The prospect of getting rid of the curate
filled her with such delight, she could not for a
moment trust herself to speak. Then she
said, with praiseworthy composure, that she
had no doubt, under the circumstances, the
Rector of Artinglass would either some over
himself or send one of his curates.

19—2

And so you really believe I may leave with
an easy mind V remarked Mr. DufFord.

I am sure you may she answered. ' Even
if we had to close the church for one Sunday, I
don't suppose it would do the people much
harm to go to Meeting'*

Mr. DufFord looked at the lady with severe
incredulity.

I never thought,' he said, in a tone of
lofty rebuke, ' to hear such a sentiment from
the lips of a Christian woman !'

Dissenting places of worship are in Ireland called
meeting-houses — not chapels.

Stony-HEARTED London.

^c^AYE to the initiated — nay, it will be
better to amend the phrase, and
say even to the initiated — a manuscript
is a very fearful and terrible thing to
contemplate. Within its folds lurk unknown
horrors, and the thought either of reading the
scroll, or hearing it read, fills the stoutest heart
with dread.

It is better, however, to read for one's self
than let the author read. Probably there
is no infliction, save the rack, equal to that,
and yet it was an ordeal through which poor
Mr. Westley had, after the night when Mr.
Dufford drank tea at the cottage for the last
time, very frequently to pass.

His daughter felt no more pity for him than
she might have clone for a lay figure. She
tried her productions upon him, but was not
particularly delighted to find he built his
hopes of success less upon her great merits than
upon the exceeding feebleness of some other
writers whom he named. Glen's heart did not
swell with pride at this sort of encouragement.


I have read much worse, my dear ; or, ' If
Mr. and Miss Blank can get their stories published,
I really do not see why yours should
not be accepted.'

It was very faint praise, but still Glen's
courage did not fail her. In her own opinion,
the tales she read to her father were perfect ;
they had not a spot or blemish ; they were
amusing, pathetic, dramatic, but she could not
blind herself to the fact that for some reason
they did not touch the listener as they did
the reader ; that there was something lacking.
What was if? the girl wondered. She had
put her own whole heart into the work, but she
could see plainly the heart of another was not
moved by it. She understood this perfectly,
because she remembered the first time any

music she made ever found its way to a human
soul.

It was a little air she heard when staying
with Lady Emily Wilderness, an air the
whole beauty and effect of which lay with the
player. But the lady under whose fingers the
piano seemed to sob out the plaintive melody
was a mistress of her craft ; and Glen, catching
the trick from her, so reproduced the effect
one evening at the Vicarage that Mrs. Beattie,
her eyes full of tears, kissed the girl tenderly,
and Mr. Beattie turned away to the window,
and looked wistfully over the sea, and the
boys spoke no word, good or bad, and days
passed away before Ned remarked :

I say. Glen, how stunningly you played
that new thing you learnt in Dublin.'

It was a cruel disappointment to the author
to find her words of beauty and of wisdom fall
flat, as, indeed, they did. And what made the
matter worse was that she knew very well the
fault must lie in her writing ; it did not originate
in any want of appreciation on the part
of her father. No ; though undoubtedly it is
as a rule, true that a prophet is not without
honour save in his own country and amongst

his own people, in this instance Mr. Wester
would only too thankfully have recognised and
acknowledged the existence of inspiration in
his daughter. He was willing to believe, but
faith wanted some stone on which to build.
Of course he did not possess the feeling of
power which was driving her along a road the
end of which was hidden from mortal eyes.
All he understood at the time was that Glen
seemed able to spin little stories he fancied
ought some day to find a purchaser.

Suddenly, however, the genius the girl had
in her quickened into life. So far there was
nothing in her writings which shadowed forth,
even dimly, any promise of a great future.
But all at once there came a mighty change ;
and one evening, after her return from a long
lonely walk over the headlands, the while a
wild sad sea tossed its billows towards a gloomy
sky, Glen somehow managed to produce a few
pages which made Mr. Westley remark, after
a few minutes' amazed silence :

I really do believe, dear, you have it in you
to do something ; but I am afraid you will find
the way long and very steep.'

While he believed her safe in the plains of

mediocrity, he Lad not foretold the weary
path and the steep hillside ; but now — now —
the whole, prospect of her future life seemed to
get lost in the mists of possibility. She had
touched his heart, and he felt it might be she
should touch the heart of others.

Oh, papa ! — dear papa !' — she cried, feeling
the impression she had made at last, and as
she spoke she could not see sky, or angry billows,
or stretching moorland, for happy tears.

From one point of view, how marvellous
seems that general prejudice in favour of the
commonplace; and yet when we come to think
the matter over calmly, it is utterly impossible
to say there is not a great amount of reason in
the idea that safety is only to be compassed
by confining ourselves to the customary.

Where one person stands in need of the
services of the extraordinary, a thousand are
willing to pay for the help of the ordinary.
Fur example, paint a child's head just as its
mother is accustomed to see it, and ten million
mothers will buy the worst lithograph of the
drawing which can be produced for sixpence ;
hut — and oh ! my friends, the virtue of a ' but '
in such a case — from the very travail of your

.soul produce a picture that cannot fail to live
through the ages, and each person you know
will stand appalled, doubtful whether to praise
or blame, but certain in either case to say you
have chosen the road which leads to sure and
fell destruction.

So long as he felt his daughter was treading
the safe path of mediocrity, Mr. Westley had
only regarded her writings as something which
might bring her a living ; but now — but now
with all his heart and soul the poor father —
who could see so short a way ahead — hoped
and trusted Glen might never need fully to
use such talents as she possessed.

For God Almighty had given her both
strength and genius — the brain to conceive,
the courage to develop. Circumstances had not
forced the one, or cowed the other — yet.

So far the girl was mistress of her own
position, and she utilized this fact characteristically,
and in a mode auguring well for her
future success. Save a few of her very earliest
productions — which she laid aside tenderly, asa
mother might the outgrown dress of her first
baby — after that last achievement she gathered
together all her old manuscripts, and one day,

when Teenie was engrossed in ironing, and
feeling [Mr. Westley's shirts and Miss Glen's
dresses the only things much worth being
anxious about on earth, carried the papers
down to a remote part of the garden, where she
watched them consume till no scrap remained
of that mound of rejected addresses.

Then, with a lightened heart, she betook
herself to a different sort of writing — bolder,
more ambitious, and indeed, considering her
youth and inexperience, extraordinary.

Where does she jet her ideas V thought Mr.
Westley, idiom the change almost frightened.
Where ? If you put the question to Glenarva
now, she would ask you in return :

Whence does the dove o;et the o-Hntino:
colours that shimmer and glitter and keep continually
changing in the light V And for me,
I can tell you no more.

Still, though her work held the promise of
better things than the manuscripts she had
destroyed, acceptance of her efforts seemed far
off as ever, and she began at length almost to
sicken of rejection. The returned manuscripts
appeared to lie like a load on her heart.

It is because I have to tell papa,' she

tlioudit, and there was a good deal of truth in
this idea. The girl did not find pain lightened
when shared ; on the contrary, it seemed
doubled.

AVhat a weary road that grew to be at

engtli between Ballyshane and Artinglass !

and yet not so long ago she could remember

treading' it with feet that felt winged bv

Hope.

Months ran on in this state, when one day
Mr. Westley's lawyer, returning from Londonderry
to Belfast, broke his journey at Bally-money,
and drove across country to see the
ruined gentleman. He wanted to confer with
him about a little matter which he thought
ought to return some money.

The tenant at Glenarva wished a few trees
cut down, and it occurred to Mr, Merritt that
a considerable amount of judicious thinning
might be effected in the autumn.

To Mr. Wester the felling of timber seemed
little short of desecration, but in the Glenarva
woods chestnuts were now smothering; oaks ;
willows, elms, and pines hopelessly jostling
each other.

If the best trees were to live, it was high

time some one set the axe to work ; and as at
that period there chanced to be a further demand
on Mr. AVestley'« purse, the opportunity
appeared favourable for suggesting a means of
replenishing it.

Mr. Merritt stayed over the night, and of
course saw a good deal of Glen, who had,
somewhat to his surprise — for people are apt
to forget the passage of years — shot up since
last they met from a child into ' quite a young
lady,' as the lawyer remarked.

He thought her, on the whole, rather good-looking,
and a quiet, well-behaved girl ; and he
mio-ht not then have even another minute to
the consideration of her future but for the
chance of his mentioning over the breakfast-table
that he had lately been to London.

Oh I' cried Glen impulsively, ' what would
I not give to be able to go to London !'

I hope you will go some day,' said Mr.
Merritt vaguely and politely, and he said no
more at the moment ; but subsequently, when
he and Mr. AVestley were slowly pacing the
cliffs, he astonished his client by asking :

Why don't you go to London ? You could
live almost as cheaply there as here, and your

dauojliter miffht have a chance then ' — he did
not say of what, but Mr. Westley understood,
and winced. ' Consider the matter,' went on
Mr. Merritt ; ' I think the idea is one well
worth turning over in your mind.'

The lawyer did not know it was one Mr.
Westley had already been turning over in his
vague, hesitating, irresolute fashion.

Glen,' he answered, ' I know, would like
to go.'

Of course ; she said so,' returned Mr.
Merritt briskly, ' and it is quite natural — she
must be moped to death in this place.'

'Moped to death!' That might be the
lawyer's idea ; but when she had achieved her
wish, and the London she so ardently desired
to visit was reached, and Ballyshane lay as far
behind as childhood. Glen's pillow was wet
with tears, shed because of the terrible homesickness
some natures never experience, but
which to those that do seems as bad as
death — indeed, is no poor type of the last
parting.

By the agony the girl endured for nearly
two months after her arrival in England it was
easy to foresee what the actual loss of those

she loved would prove in the sorrowful hereafter
— the donkey, the ponies, the cats, the
dogs, the boys, Mr. and Mrs. Beattie, Teenie,
Doctor and Miss Grunley, recurred severally
and collectively to Glenarva Westley as she
lay awake at night or paced the London streets.
She sickened for the roar of the waves, for the
taste of the salt brine, for the sweeping wind
straight off the Atlantic, for the sight of the
turf fire, for the smell of the familiar griddle-bread.


She could not eat ; food, even such as their
landlady considered necessary for her own
physical support, was quite beyond their means;
and she had thus no equivalent for the milk
new and pure, the butter straight from the
churn, the eggs that had ' seen no sorrow,' and
the fish fresh from the sea — unaccounted
luxuries when capable of being procured for a
few pence, but things to be wished for when
no longer to be had.

Only a great courage and a persistent will
kept the girl up during many trying awful
weeks.

At first her father seemed cheerful and in
good spirits. London, though unvisited for

years, was not strange ground to him, and
it somewhat comforted Glen to see his quiet,
and to her unintelligible, enjoyment of streets,
which appeared to her but one long weary
maze, filled with people they did not know,
and who knew nothing of them, and with
whom the girl felt satisfied they never for ever
could have anything in common.

But even this source of consolation soon
failed, and Mr. Westley sank for a time into, a
state of deep depression, which Glen, who was
totally ignorant of the hope that had arisen in
his mind, could only attribute to disappointment
at the chilling reception her best writing
met with, and regret for having left the sure
safe haven of a place where, though poor, they
were loved and respected.

One day, when she felt terribly low herself,
she ventured to suggest the question to her
father whether lie thought they had done a
foolish thing in coming to London.

No, my dear, certainly not,' he answered.
^ T think in time you may be able to get
something to do here, which I am very sure
you never could at Bally shame. Why do you
ask, Glen V

Because 1 thought you were dull and out
of sorts, papa.'

I have been a little vexed because of the
non-success of a little scheme of my own, that
is all — and another thing, I do not like lodgings.
When the spring comes I think we
had better look out for a cottage somewhere.'

Very well, papa,' answered Glen, though
her heart sank within her at his words. If
they found it hard to make both ends meet in
lodgings, how were they to accomplish the feat
in a house of their own ? She knew the
amount of their income only too well ; and at
last she had well-nigh lost hope concerning her
writing. A dreadful experience had come
upon the girl. She could produce nothing ;
the trees were not more bare of leaf or bud
than Miss Westley's once active mind of an
idea. To pen an original line was a matter
c[uite beyond her ability. She had lost even
physical energy, and weary in body and sick
at heart, with a dreary persistency carried a
bundle of manuscript from publisher to publisher,
only to meet with 'No,' worded in a
hundred different ways, but still pronounced
with unmistakable decision.

VOL. I. 20

Father and daughter had indeed, without
knowing it, settled themselves in as unfavourable
a neighbourhood for persons fresh from a
wild seashore as can well be conceived ; and
Glen did not possess sufficient wisdom and
self-pity to understand that starting upon a
long day's march with nothing to sustain her
strength save a cup of weak tea was almost a
sure method of compassing failure.

She went now with her manuscripts alone.
She found she must do this or abandon the
attempt altogether, and after a few feeble
protests Mr. Westley let his daughter do as
she liked. To watch the faces of publishers
and editors, to wait for the inevitable refusal
he had learnt to expect, was, he felt, beyond
his ability.

At first it seemed to him a dreadful thing
for Glen to go out alone through the crowded
streets and walks into strange offices and ask
to see unknown gentlemen, unchaperoned ; but
he soon saw that a girl in narrow lodgings
in an unfashionable part of London, plainly
dressed, and only adventuring into the main
thoroughfares upon business, is, however bred
or born, quite a different creature from a

young lady residing at the West-end who has
never in all her life crossed the threshold of
her house without an escort.

Glen was safe enough, he felt that, and so
he swallowed this pill as he had gulped down
many another affront to his pride ; and in
quite a regular and systematic way she made
a round of the trade, who one and all were
perfectly agreed upon one point, namely, that
even if Lady Morgan or Miss Edgeworth, or
Banim, or Carleton, were to return to life and
offer an Irish story for their acceptance, they
would have nothing to do with it.

Ireland at that period had dropped to a
tremendous discount. Fashionable novels,
Glenarva was told, were the rage — tales of
high life — chronicles of the doings and sayings
of the upper ten in London — nothing else, one
gentleman was good enough to tell her, would
go down. Several names of successful writers
were cited for her benefit — novels shown her
which had achieved notoriety.

In those days Glen did not in the least
doubt her own ability to produce a most interesting;
narrative relating; to wicked lords
and fine ladies ; but, unfortunately, when she

20—2

approached the task she found she could not
write at all.

Matters were in this state when, one dull,
damp, miserable afternoon, the girl, after a
longer round even than usual, during the
course of which she had seen and talked with
the editors of several new magazines destined

o

to an early death, found herself towards the
close of the short day standing on the steps of
their lodging-house, which to her mind seemed
almost like a mean prison.

The street lamps were lighted, and within
doors the hall as she entered was almost
dark.

Wearily she turned the handle of the sitting-room,
where her father was leaning back in an
armchair, talking to a gentleman who sat at
the opposite side of the hearth.

As she paused on the threshold surprised,
for no visitor had hitherto appeared to brighten
their solitude, Mr. Westley said :

Oh ! here is my daughter ; Glen — Mr.
Facere.'

EVERY DOG HAS HIS DAY.

Though Mr. Bernard Kelly was

not suffering from homesickness
or experiencing any wild longing
for the sight of his relations, still about the
same time as Miss "Westley thought she had
well-nigh sounded the depths of despair, her
fellow-pilgrim, with hands plunged into empty
pockets, where a whole legion of devils seemed
to be holding high carnival, gloomily decided
he had somehow ' got to the back of his
luck.'

It was very low water with him. Things
indeed had got so bad, he more than once
found himself pulling out his watch and contemplatively
regarding its merits, not as a

chronometer, but as an article upon which he
might raise money. His training had caused
him, however, to regard a visit to the relative
sportively referred to by the young Dawtons
as the ' gentleman with three balls for crest '
in the light of a crowning humiliation, and he
felt almost that when reduced to such a strait
he would retire from the sight of men ; for
which reason he still could tell Mat and his
female belongings the 'right time,' a matter
which seemed at West Ham wrapped eternally
in mystery.

As for Mr. Donagh's watch, it appeared
never to be right for a week together. Either
the spring got broken, or some misfortune
happened to the glass, or the hands failed
to move properly, or the works wanted
cleaning.

Before he had been many weeks at Abbey
Cottage Mr. Kelly became quite accustomed to
disappearances which at first struck him as
most remarkable. Nothing Mat and his belongings
now did or left undone interested him
in the least. He saw very clearly the Donaghs
were not likely to prove the slightest help on
his way, and that, even so far as the mere

matter of shelter was concerned, all they desired
was to get rid of him.

Mr. Donagh actually went so far as to ask
Miss Cavan one Sunday morning at breakfast
if * the Fideles, from Saffron Walden, were
coming at Christmas ;' but the poor lady
proved herself so unequal to carry on the
ingenious stratagem for which Mat had forgotten
to prepare her mind, that Mr. Kelly
heard him afterwards, in softly modulated but
intelligible terms, reproaching his relative for
being * destitute of the first rudiments of
sense,' because if we do not 'take Basin
by the horns, he ^vdll inflict his incubus
upon us till we succumb from sheer exhaustion


That same afternoon Mr. Kelly boldly took
Mr. Donagh by the horns, and asked whether
he might for a time remain at Abbey Cottage
as a lodger — paying for his ' shot.'

I know I shall be having money ere very
long,' he explained, ' and I will then settle up
honestly. Meantime, you could put that two
pounds you borrowed as a trifle to my
credit. It would be a great convenience tome
to stop here for a little longer he added,

but I do not like encroaching on your hospitality.'


*My good friend,' returned Mat, with a
benign air of pity and forgiveness which might
have seemed effective to anyone but the unimpressionable
mortal he addressed, 'we don't
profess to keep a lodging-house !'

I did not mean any offence, Donagh/
explained Mr. Kelly. ' I only wanted to
know if you would let me share the expenses.'


Couldn't think of such a thing,' answered
Mat wisely. ' Fallen I know we are — every
dog has his day, and the Donaghs have had
theirs, and it is past and gone — but still
while I am able to keep a roof over my head,
1 trust I shall never have to descend so low as
to take pecuniary acknowledgment for extending
its humble shelter to a friend.'

Then I am very sorry to say you will
have to keep him as your guest till the state
of the exchequer improves,' said Mr. Kelly,
who did not mean to move till it suited him
to go.

You are very welcome to such poor
hospitality as I am able to offer,' returned

Mat ; but his tone was far from cordial,
and his manner lofty and dignified in the
extreme.

From that day Mr. Kelly, who was by no
means deficient in shrewdness, could not avoid
noticing the ridiculous suggestions his host was
always throwing out on the subject of employment.


Apparently, in Mr. Donagh's opinion no
field of labour was too distant, no post too
obscure, for his friend. He had arrived at the
conclusion he declared, after a long experience,
that any place on the face of the wide earth
presented a better opening for a man than
London.

Look at me,' he said, * after all these years,
knoTSTi as I am, respected as it is only right
and fair I should be, a power, though I say
it myself of myself — I repeat a power — still
just from hand to mouth, nothing tangible,
nothing certain. Why, I declare to you there
was one week, shortly before you came tous,
I earned close upon a hundred pounds in
two days, while during the whole of this last
month I have not received a fifth part of that
amount.'

^ I wish I was in the way of getting even
a tenth every month,' returned Mr. Kelly.

I dare say you do said Mr. Donagh
patronizingly.

And I must remark,' proceeded Mr. Kelly,
a little nettled by his host's tone, ' that it
seems to me, judging from the small quantity
of writing I see you turn out, twenty pounds
a month, if you never made another sixpence,
is a very good screw.'

And permit me to remark,' retorted Mr.
Donagh, 'that, primarily, you know nothing
about what I do, and therefore are not in a
position to form any opinion whatever about
my concerns ; and, secondarily, that since you
came to London you have grafted upon your
Irish solecisms the most extraordinary amount
of slang I ever heard accumulated in so short
a space of time, even by those whose circle of
undesirable acquaintances was much more
extensive than I can imagine even yours to be.'

My acquaintances do not as a rule talk on
stilts, if that is what you mean,' answered Mr.
Kelly, as he went off laughing, to indite a
letter to one of his mother's brothers who had
succeeded to the paternal shop in Derry.

The burden of this epistle was, ' Send me
ten pounds, for I am regularly stranded. Once
Christmas is turned, I have good hopes of
getting on ; but till then, without help from
some one, I scarcely know how I can manage.'

A week elapsed, but brought no answer. At
the end of three more weary days, however.
Miss Cavan handed their visitor a letter with
the Callinacoan post-mark.

It was from Mr. Marcus Balmoyle, and
stated that his nephew's letter had to be forwarded
on to him from Derry, or he would
have answered it sooner.

I have come here at your mother's request,'
he went on in very crabbed characters to explain,
' to see what's to be done at all with your
father, for he'll neither kill himself with drink
nor keep from it ; and now I am here, I feel I
might just as well have stayed away. It was
an evil day for the whole of us when she set
eyes on Daniel KeUy I And then there's you,
as might have been a comfort and a credit,
making your family a laughing-stock both
here and there, setting the one of our name
we were so proud of, and who would have

made your fortune, against the whole of his
relations. It's a burning shame for an able-bodied
man to be writing home for money like
a helpless child. Here's eve pounds, in a
bank draft at seven days (which saves the
commission), and I tell you plainly this is the
last farthing you need expect from any of us.
Barney, Barney ! you'll just have to set to and
do what I know you abhor from your very
soul — work. You must try and make an
honest living, "if it is only by picking
pockets," as the Quaker said.

I was talking to the priest about you this
morning, and he remarked what a pity it is
you have not been brought up in the true
faith, because then some of the good fathers
in London might have been able to give you
a hand. I told him I didn't think it mattered
a pinch of snuff', for I believed you had not a
bit of religion about you.

'Tell Miss Bridgettata, with your mother's
respects, I am going to ship off a hamper as I
go home for her. She may find it useful
about Christmas-time, particularly with you in
the house. If you play as good a knife and
fork across the Channel as you did at home, I

know it is not sixpence a day would find your
breakfast, to say nothing of other meals ; and,
indeed, I wonder to myself you haven't more
spirit than to be troubling the Donaghs as you
are doing, and running the chance of wearing
out your welcome into the bargain.

Your mother bids me let you know Miss
Fortescue and the new pad-groom from England
were married three days ago on the sly.
Mr. Fortescue is willing to give two hundred
pounds down if they'll sail for America, but
the husband wants double that and leave the
old woman behind. It's a pity, when you had
got things so far on, you took fear. You
might have made yourself for life ; and if she
wasn't young, she had genteel ways with her,
and any amount of good clothes.

We shall all be glad to hear you have got
some work, and mean sticking to it.

Your loving uncle,

Marcus Balmoyle.'

Whatever Mr. Bernard Kelly's feelings
might be on reading this epistle, there was no
alloy in the pleasure Miss Cavan experienced
at the prospect of the coming hamper ; and she

rushed off with the news to her nephew, who,
on hearing that good Mrs. Kelly was forwarding
another * crate of edibles,* commented ' on
the principle of sending coals to Newcastle '
with that princely manner of his which
ignored such vulgar creatures as the butcher
and the baker. Indeed, Mr. Donagh seemed
to think all food came into the house spontaneously,
and was supplied gratis.

Oh ! you wouldn't find such butter as hers
if you searched London through,' answered
Miss Cavan, whom the certainty of a well-stocked
larder filled with unselfish delight.
We'll not need now to buy anything for our
Christmas dinner ; and the eggs'U see us well
into the New Year. And I'll hang the bacon,
and '

Pray, spare me these distressing details,'
interposed Mat, waving his hand as a signal
that he ' would be alone.' At the time he
was in an exceedingly impecunious condition,
and consequently more than usually inclined
to lordly silencing of his womenkind.

He had spent his hundred pounds, and a
good many other pounds to the back of that.

Christmas, with its bills, its duns, its many

requirements, and its accustomed difficulty of
providing money, was what Mr. Donagh, in
his simple language, described as ' imminent.'
Further, he had saddled himself with an old
man of the sea, whose presence would, he felt,
render a six-months-old hen turkey tough,
and make butter fresh from Mrs. Kelly's churn
ranker than anything Miss Cavan, in the
exercise of an economy laudable in intention,
though unwise in fact, sometimes procured
from ' that thief of the world,' as Mr. Marlow,
a local grocer, was usually styled by the ladies
at Abbey Cottage.

But Fate and Mr. Kelly decreed otherwise.

When that five-pound Bank of Ireland draft
arrived, Mr. Kelly said to himself :
If I'm ever to get out of this hole, whereas
my uncle implies, I have worn out my
welcome, if I ever had one, I must make a try
for it now.'

A few days previously he had seen tire
advertisement of a lodging to let in Bermondsey,
which he thought would suit both
his convenience and his purse ; and he went
to look at it with a trembling determination
to cut himself adrift from West Ham, and

sink or swim, unaided and unimpeded by his
own countr3rfolks. Cautious, however, in all
things, he did not close with the landlady on
the spot. He told her he would think the
matter over, and while he was doing so he
bent his steps towards a tavern much frequented
by the younger Dawtons, where,
indeed, already he had met one or other of
them frequently.

As it happened, just as he was walking up
the court, at the top of which the familiar
portals stood invitingly half open. Will Dawton
overtook him.

I am so glad to have chanced on you today,'
said the young fellow cheerily, clapping
him on the shoulder, 'for at last I am the
bearer of good news. Our editor has read
your story, and accepts it, and says you may
send in another as soon as you like.'

Mr. Kelly made no answer, for the simple
reason that he could not. The revulsion of
feeling was too sudden, the relief too great.
He stood still and silent for a few seconds,
like one dazed. Then Will Dawton took his
arm, and led him into the dingy tavern, remarking
the while :

Never mind, old boy. I know what it is.
The first time I saw my name in print I had
to walk for half an hour about the Temple
before I dare venture into Fleet Street ; and
as for Jim, he disgraced the family by throwing
up his tile in the Strand and kicking it
across Wellington Street. He narrowly escaped
being taken in charge.' And thus talking, he
conducted Bernard Kelly to a box in a quiet
corner, and whispering a command to the
waiter, he hung up his hat, and after performing
the same office for the man who had at
last got his start, proceeded :

Let me see, this is Thursday. Wel, it
would be no use trying to see the editor this
week ; but you had better come about Monday
or Tuesday and be introduced. You must not
mind his finding fault. He is always finding
fault. He was chosen for his present post
solely, I believe, on account of his disagreeable
manner ; but he is all right when you get
below the surface. Now have some wine topick
you up.'

Though he had not a penny in his pocket,
Mr. Kelly drank and was comforted. Hope
was now in residence instead of the legion of

VOL. I. 21

devils. A day — an hour — a minute had sufficed
to change the whole aspect of his life.
He felt a man, not a beggar ; he would be
able to leave Abbey Cottage — to tell his uncle
luck had turned, to make a joke about Miss
Fortescue ; he could laugh at the humours of
his friend, and say what he had never dared to
say before when the reckoning came.

I must ask you to lend me half a sovereign,
for I have no money about me except a bank
post bill, which has still a week to run, and be
hanged to it.'

You are not going to be paymaster,
though,' answered Will, who when he had
money flung it about right royally ; 'but if you
want anything changed, I'll get it cashed for
you. What are you going to do this afternoon ?
Come home with me and have some dinner ;
the old folks will be delighted to hear you are
accepted.'

But Mr. Kelly declined to avail himself of
this invitation. There was, he told young
Dawton, something he wished particularly to
attend to that very day, and accordingly after
he had got his five pounds duly counted outby
the obliging waiter, and drunk some more

wine and eaten a few biscuits, and made an
appointment to meet his friend at the same
place on the following Tuesday at one o'clock,
he wended his way lack to Bermondsey and
closed with the widow, who promised to have
a couple of rooms ready for him to take possession
within a week.

That night he gladdened ]mr. Donagh's
heart by mentioning three facts — namely, that
he had at last got something to do ; that he
was going to dinner with some friends on
Christmas Day ; and that he had found lodgings,
into which he proposed to move very
shortly.

Indeed I' exclaimed Mat. ' May I inquire
the name of the locality in which you intend
to bivouac V

Bermondsey,' was the explicit answer.

You have probably selected that neighbourhood
as being near the scene of your future
labours.'

I think I shall find it convenient for my
work,' returned Bernard Kelly ; and, declining
Mat's offer of a second tumbler of punch,
which was made with a cordiality to which
that gentleman's manner had for a long time

21—2

been a stranger, he lit his candle, and marched
off to bed.

For some reason best known to himself, Mr.
Donash evolved out of his internal consciousness
a conviction that his 'uncivilized compatriot
' had, through the ' medium of some
other savage from the wilds of the sister
island,' procured a situation at one of the many
wharfs in Kotherhithe. Mr. Kelly had said
nothing calculated to lead to such an idea ; but,
upon the other hand, when he found the
nature of Mat's surmises he took no step to
dispel the illusion. He never mentioned the
Dawtons ; he refrained from uttering the name
of the Galaxy ; he said not a word about his
literary efforts ; he remained silent while Mat,
overflowing with good spirits which the prospect
of Mr. Kelly's speedy departure induced,
made many jests and remarks he afterwards
wished he had kept to himself, and reassumed
all the old lordly airs that for a time he doffed
only in order to don a robe composed of
general sulkiness and irritability.

He gave the departing guest many raps
about his accent, his manners, and his deportment,
by inference suggesting there was only

one model of a perfect demeanour in London.
He revelled amongst long words, lie held himself
up as an example, he bounced and bragged
about what he had done and what he should
do till his listener could have kicked him.
He rolled French and Latin phrases through
his mouth as if he were gargling with foreign
languages, and he ' mixed ' ]Dutch in a manner
which next morning made poor Miss Cavan
hold up her hands in horror at sight of the
depleted contents of the decanter, and observe
to Miss Donagh that if Barney did not ' mind
himself,' he would soon be ' a worse drinker
than his father.'

Bernard Kelly knew pretty well what they
were all thinking — but he said nothing.

He only vowed that if ever the chance came
his way, he would not spare Mat.

There are men who, though ready enough
to register such vows in the time of adversity,
speedily forget them when the sun of prosperity
appears above the horizon ; but Mr.
Kelly had no weakness of this sort — quite the
contrary.

Mat failed to understand this, however. In
his egotism and conceit he persisted in considering

* Young Kelly' a poor insignificant
creature ; and even had he been told that Mr.
Barney was an edged weapon with which it
was extremely dangerous to play, he would not
have believed the story.

Somehow or other, nevertheless, the pair got
through four days of the time intervening
between the guest's departure without any open
rupture, and they might have bade each other
farewell tolerably civilly had not the week
opened for Mr. Donagh with some stroke of
good fortune which immediately threw that
gentleman's extremely ill-balanced mind ofi"
its equilibrium.

At his best it was hard to get on with Mat,
whose conversation was an even mixture, according
to Mr. Kelly's mental summing up,
of * uninteresting reminiscences and lies ; but
when luck befriended him, the master of Abbey
Cottage grew simply unendurable.

Then he ascended the throne, assumed the
crown, seized the sceptre, folded the ermine
majestically around his form, and held forth.

Heavens 1 how he did hold forth ! If he
had been the father of railways, if he had invented
balloons, if he had owned the Times

newspaper, if he had paid off the National
Debt, if he had won the battle of Waterloo,
he could not have rated his achievements
higher.

And the worst of the matter was, he never
said what those achievements were, and so
gave his companion no chance of disputing
their value. Instead of doing this, he adopted
the safe plan of criticizing Mr. Kelly's failures,
and extolling his own success by the mere force
of contrast.

Now, this is an extremely irritating process
to the individual who has failed, or who is
supposed to have failed. It is one under which
the best-tempered man might be excused for
losing his patience, and Bernard Kelly was not
good-tempered. He had suffered many things
at Mat's hands, and that night he found the
temptation to hit back and hit hard more than
he could withstand. In the course of his * connection
with literature,' Mat seemed to find
drink as necessary as ink, and even before he
began to 'mix' that initial tumbler for which
Mr. Kelly's presence gave him so plausible
and fatal a pretext, anyone, except his female
belongings, must have perceived he was in that

state Jim Dawton figuratively indicated as
Pretty well, I thank you !'

Very shortly he grew hypercritical, and
spoke with a candour which, unhappily, is not
confined to gentlemen in his then condition, of
the many shortcomings of his fellow creatures in
general, and the scapegoat Bernard in particular.

The supposititious wharf came in for a large
share of his animadversion. He could not understand
anyone 'voluntarily, or even under
compulsion, sinking his identity amongst tar
and bargees.' ' No doubt he was peculiarly
constituted, but rather than chain himself like
a galley-slave to the desk, at the beck and call
of some coarse and uneducated master, wallowing
in the mire of his ill-rotten riches, he
would turn peripatetic tinker, and mend the
domestic kettle.'

There is one advantage, and only one, I
can perceive in the nature of the appointment
you have accepted,' he went on. ' Your Irishisms
will pass unnoticed amongst a class whose
native English is a libel on language. Adhere
you are going you will not find your accent
an insurmountable drawback, as it might be
elsewhere.'

:;a

I don't think I will,' answered Barney.
One of the accidents of my life, for which,
though it was brought about by misfortunes
almost unparalleled, I can never feel sufficiently
thankful,' pursued Mat, ' is that fate willed
I should be brought up on the right side of
St. George's Channel. To have found it indispensable
in the first flush of early manhood
to unlearn the habits of the most impressionable
years of life would have been well-nigh
unendurable. Some one says the perfection
of language is so to speak that no man could
declare the country of the speaker.' And
having thus modestly placed this keystone in
position, Mr. Donagh complacently took a long
pull at his tumbler and waited to hear Mr.
Kelly's remarks upon what Mat was in the
habit of calling his ipse dixit.

All jVIr. Kelly elected to observe was this :
If there be any truth in the extremely foolish
statement you have just repeated, you fail to
reach the ridiculous standard indicated, for no
human being could imagine for a moment you
were anything but an Irishman.'

I confess I don't understand what you

mean said Mr. Donagh, turning red and looking
very angry.

I mean exactly what I say. Though you
have been so many years out of Ireland, anyone
who wasn't an absolute fool could tell in a
moment the place you hail from.'

Do you wish to insult me V asked Mr.
Donagh.

No, indeed. Why should you be ashamed
of the country of your birth ? I would rather
be thought to have been born in Ireland than
any other place. Indeed, I never knew any
fellow who tried to cut his native land except
yourself, and it really is great nonsense
on your part, Donagh, because, as I said before,
you can't disguise the matter — your tongue
bewTayeth you. If only, to go no further,
I never heard you pronounce anything but
the word " boy," I should know on which
side the Channel you had spent your calf
days.'

Here is a second Daniel come to judgment !'
exclaimed Mat, addressing vacancy, his lips
trembling with rage, the while he tried to
speak with composure.

•' I am not a Daniel at aU, first, or second,

or third,' answered Mr. Kelly. ' I only say if
I were in your place, I would not try to talk
as the English do. It comes natural to them,
but it is not natural to you, and your accent
does not sound natural. Besides, you use
phrases no one but an Irishman ever employs,
and not even an Irishman who had been
taught better

You really are extremely good said Mat.
Will it be troubling you too much to ask you
to instance one of the phrases you are so
kind as to indicate ? That is, if you are
able.'

Oh, I am able enough,' answered Barney.
Do you remember this evening telling your
aunt about one of your acquaintances who
would not step off the boat V

Certainly. And what then V

'You said : "So, if you please, the gangway
had to be shoved ashore for him." Now,
that is an Irish vulgarism, not an English.'

To state that Mat was stricken dumb would
be an exaggeration, because he still retained
the power of speech ; but he felt like a boy
who, after having stood at the top of his class
in one school, suddenly finds himself shifted

to the bottom and called dunce in another.
He was so angry and amazed, his indignation
could not find vent all in a moment, and he
was obliged to take refuge in what he considered
the cutting sarcasm :

And where, may I venture to incj[uire, did
Mr. Bernard Kelly acquire his marvellous
knowledge of the signs and tokens which distinguish
an Irish gentleman from an English ?
I should have considered such lore quite out
of the beaten track of his former life. Who
was the teacher, where the college ? He never,
I am satisfied, studied the niceties of language
amongst the porcine animals on his
father's farm !'

Mr. Kelly coloured. ' Never mind,' he said,
who was my teacher, or where the college ;
but take my advice, and don't be ashamed of
your country. Amongst people who know
what is what, your affectation of superior pronunciation
must render you a complete laughingstock.'


The string of Mr. Donagh's tongue was at
length loosed.

This comes well,' he observed, with a withering
glance directed to the corner of the room,

*from the guest seated on my own hearthstone.'


Hang it, Donagh !' retorted the guest referred
to, ' am I always to take and never
to give ? Am I to keep silent for ever while
you go on taunting me and extolling yourself?'


I have never taunted you !' thundered Mat,
striking the table with his clenched fist.

What have you been doing, then, the
whole of this evening till I broke cover ? I
am as good a man, and as clever a man, and a
precious deal more sensible man than you ;
and yet if you were Solomon and I Phil Drain,
the town fool at Callinacoan, you could not
evince greater contempt for my understanding.
I would never have said anything about your
accent had you only let mine alone. As you
are fond of criticizing, consider a little what
you are yourself. Look at home before you
begin to look about you out of doors.'

This is the viper,' began Mat, in a dull sort
of recitative — ' this is the viper I nursed in my
bosom, the ingrate I welcomed to my humble
home.'

Now stop that, Donagh, do,' broke in Mi.

Kelly ; ' in the first place, you never welcomed
me ; and in the second '

He has shared what we had to offer him,'
pursued the irrepressible Mat, 'he has been
treated as a son of the house, he has eaten of
the best we could procure, and drunk of the
same liquor as myself I deemed him harmless
if dull, grateful if deficient in the higher
qualities ; but now I see the true nature — the
cloven hoof begins to show itself, the Kelly
taint becomes apparent, the '

The true nature of Mat's peroration was
never revealed, for at this juncture Mr. Kelly
rose, and, taking his tumbler, still half full of
punch, flung the contents under the grate, and
saying, ' It is so late I am obliged perforce to
avail myself of the shelter you think so much of
for the nio'ht, but I will never ao;ain take bite or
sup under your roof,' walked out of the room,
leaving Mat alone with the decanter and his
own wise thoughts.

ril just have a thimbleful more to compose
myself,' he decided, after he had recovered
from the first astonishment caused by Mr.
Kelly's words and Mr. Kelly's exit; but so
many thimblefuls were required for the purpose,

that when he at length essayed to go to
bed he experienced great difficulty in finding
the whereabouts of the friendly baluster.

It was not very late, however, next morning
when he descended to the parlour, where he
was anxiously greeted by Miss Cavan with the
inquiry :

*What have you been doing on Barney,
Mat ? Mary says he started off at screech of
day without any breakfast, or waiting even to
have his boots cleaned. I don't wonder at
his wanting nothing to eat, considering what
he drank overnight. There's not a tablespoonful
of whisky left ; but it's strange he
should go out with dirty boots, and him so
particular.'

Mr. Donagh closed his eyes and groaned inspirit.
Never, never before had his aunt's
figures of speech ' seemed to him so abhorrent.
Pray moderate the rancour of your tongue,'
he entreated ; and from these few words Miss
Cavan understood he and Barney must have
had a 'fall-out.'

And it was a pity, too,' she said afterwards
to her niece, ' when the time was so short they
had to put in together.'

I am glad thought Mr. Donagh, ^ he is
going to that wharf in Eotherhithe ; such a
ruffian is not to be encountered with impunity
in civilized society.'

END OF VOLUME I.

BILLING AND SONS, PRINTERS, GUILDFORD AND LONDON.

(?., C. & Co.

ILLINOIS LIBRARY

AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN

BOOKSTACKS

3i ^obel.

BY

MRS. J. H. Liddell,

AUTHOR OF
THE MYSTERY IN PALACE GARDENS,' ' GEORGE Leith OF
FEN COURT,' ETC.

IN THREE VOLUMES.
VOL. II.

LONDON :
RICHARD BENTLEY AND SON,

^ixblishtxs in originals io ^a ^ajfsts the conan.

1883.

[Al Rights Reserved

uu ^ u

m ^ o

CONTENTS OF VOL. 11.

CHAPTER PAGE

I. MR. KELLY'S Day - 1

II. LADY HILDA's HUSBAND - - - - 22

Il MR. PIERSON * RECEIVES ' - - - - 45

IV. MR. PIERSON * EXPRESSES HIS SURPRISE' - 83
V. MR. Facere - 107

VI. STRANDED - - - - - - - 145

VII. A STRANGE ENCOUNTER - - - - 174

VIII. NED'S LETTER 224

IX. YES 260

X. SUCCESS - - - - - - - 286

XI. MARRIED - - 309

CHAPTER I.

MR. K E L L Y S D A Y.

S best he could Mr. Kelly whiled
away the hours till one o'clock,
when, according to agreement,
he met Mr. Dawton, and was by him introduced
to the editor of the Galaxy a
periodical which not long before had been
started under good auspices. Amongst its
contributors were numbered the best men of
the period. On every page sparkled wit,
talent, high spirits, high thought — now dead,
or grown old and very feeble. It was
a most excellent magazine ; stories, poetry,
articles, were all admirable.

VOL. II. 22

Bernard Kelly, who would have been glad
to procure insertion anywhere, felt proud
beyond description to think he should appear
before the public in such capital company.
How's Maria V had indeed done something
for him.

What about the Government office now,
eh T the head of the Dawton family had said
one day when he encountered his new friend
in the street ; and Mr. Kelly answered only
with a smile which told he accounted the loss
of his uncle's patronage a gain.

As it was the fortunate author's intention
to return to West Ham to remove his effects
from beneath Mr. Donagh's roof that same
afternoon, he declined all young Dawton's
blandishments and invitations ; but while they
stood together in Fleet Street arguing out the
question whether or not Mr. Kelly should
regard The Wigwam in the light of a short cut
back to Stratford, they were joined by three
other congenial spirits, all of whom likewise
were what they called ' members of the same
gang.'

Just at the same time. Mat, after a most
satisfactory interview with the manager of the

Galaxy, which had resulted in the transfer of
a goodly amount of current coin of the realm
into his pockets, emerged from the office, an
.air of holy calm pervading his countenance, a
saintly smile flickering about his lips, and his
whole deportment that of a man at peace with
himself and the world at large.

As he passed the group Will Dawton and
one of his friends spoke and nodded to him,
while Mr. Donagh returned their salutations
with befitting dignity. Had the matter
ended there, all would have been well ; but
one of the others, turning his head to see
who was thus greeted, recognised a familiar
presence, and called after the retreating
figure :

Well, old fellow ! and how goes it V

At the words Mat looked back, and saw
not merely the man who uttered them, but
Barney Kelly — Barney evidently hand and
glove with these gay * swells ' — Barney, with
a laugh frozen in his throat at sight of the man
he had parted with on such bad terms some
fifteen hours previously.

Here was in visible presence the haunting
terror which had made Mat's life of late a

22—2

weariness to him. Here he met that ' ruffian '
in the last place he desired to see him, and
amongst the very set of people he most
dreaded his knowing. He had presence
enough of mind for most accidents, but it
failed him now. There were few things he
could not face, but he felt it impossible to
make the best of this encounter. With a
smothered reply and an almost involuntary
wave of his hand, he turned on his heel,
and diving down one of the narrow streets
leading southward, was immediately lost to
view.

I did not think you knew him !' exclaimed
Mr. Kelly.

Know him !' repeated Will Dawton, to
whom the remark was addressed. ' Of course
we do. Everybody knows him.'

But you told me you did not.'

Nonsense ! you are dreaming, man.
When did I ever say anything so ridiculous
V

The night I asked you about him you said
you knew no one of the name. '
« 'What name r

His name — Donadi.'

But that's Mat — majestic Mat, marvellous
Mat, miraculous Mat, mendacious Mat.'

Of course, Mat Donagh.'

Young Dawton took the speaker by the
shoulders, and looked him straight in the
face.

Is that your friend V he asked.

Yes. That is he — what does he write ?
Oh ! for heaven's sake, Dawton, satisfy my
curiosity.'

I really don't know,' answered Will
Dawton, with a pleasing reticence.

I don't think he writes anything,' interposed
one of the others ; ' he touts for advertisements.'


What is that V asked Mr. Kelly.

There was a roar of laughter at this question,
and then young Dawton said :

Pray treat IVIr. Donagh's name with due
respect, Myers. He is a most important
factor in the success of the Galaxy. Truth is '
he went on, speaking to Bernard Kelly —
your friend is the best advertisement canvasser
in London.'

What is an advertisement canvasser V inquired
Mr. Kelly, whose ignorance on most

subjects connected with literary matters was
almost as great as his curiosity.

Will Dawton answered the question. In a
few telling sentences he explained, adding,
that though possibly the Galaxy might exist
without its ' crack ' novelist or sledge-hammer
leader-writer, or sportive essayist, or tender
poet, or cynical reviewer, it could not live
without Mat. Understanding the cause of
the gloom which overshadowed Mr. Kelly's
countenance, he good-naturedly went even
further, and implied that while it might be
practicable, though difficult, for the Galaxy
to secure such another editor as it happily
possessed ; though a double to the present
efficient publisher probably existed in London,
yet a second Mat could never be found, so
bland, so winning, so persuasive, such a
favourite, even with the roughest of advertisers
; such a treasure, in fact ; such a
very mine of wealth, indeed, to the journal
which had been fortunate enough to secure his
services.

All these utterances Mr. Kelly received with
a show of satisfaction he was far from feeling.
The assurance that Mat could net his five

hundred a year * without turning a hair,'
capped by a further hint from one of the
company that he might easily double the
amount named if ' he chose to stick to it
scarcely filled his heart with that pleasure the
statement ought to have aroused.

Mat came to London, 1 have heard,
meaning to make a great splash in literature,'
proceeded the last speaker ; ' tried prose and
poetry both, hacked about for a while on the
Somers Town Sentinel, and did slating
notices for the Pelham Pioneer, but he could
not get on as he expected, and therefore
adopted what he calls his present profession.
He says it was quite by accident he took to it ;
but, however that may be, he makes a deuced
good thing out of the work. And he is so
high and mighty into the bargain. He won't
do this, and he can't accept that, and his
peculiarities have to be humoured, or ofi" he
goes. AYe poor devils of authors are forced
to study the fads and whims of publishers
and editors. In our case the boot is quite
on the other leg. What do you say,
Dawton ?'

Will Dawton laughed.

I don't think you study anybody's whims,'
he answered ; then, turning to Bernard Kelly,
added, ' I suppose your friend has a snug crib
down at — what is the name of the place —
West Ham?'

*He lives in a good house,' replied Mr.
Kelly. He was not going to disparage Mat's
habitation to these lively young men, or
correct them as to the amount of that gentleman's
income, which indeed, for all he knew to
the contrary, might have been princely.

'And where did you get to know him,
Kelly?'

He comes from my part of the country.
His ancestors were great folks once upon a
time. There is a place not far from Callings
that goes still by the name of " Donagh's
Leap ; " no man and horse, before or since,
could take it. They were a rare wild lot, the
Donaghs of Castle Donagh — went through their
money and their acres at the same rattling pace
they followed the hounds.'

Anyone could tell at a glance Mat had
come of a good stock,' observed one youth
who wore a glass screwed into his right eye.
There is a sort of " keep your distance " about

his manner \YliicliI confess always impresses me.
Well, I suppose some must go up and some
come down. It's only fair, old families should
have their noses brought to the grindstone, in
order to let the newest snob have his turn.
Every dog has his day, and I dare say Mat's
forbears had theirs.'

Yes ; he was saying just the same thing
no later than last night,' answered Mr,
Kelly, privately reflecting that his day was
come. He could meet Mat now on his native
heath. He knew, if nobody else did, that his
host was groaning in spirit, weeping and
wailing and gnashing his teeth at the idea of
that ' uncultivated boor Barney ' having at
length come to the comprehension of what he
did — the kind of literature to which he devoted
most of his shining hours.

In good truth, Mr. Donagh was more annoyed
than words could express ; not even
the money in his pocket reconciled him to the
notion of Barney knowing how he got it.
There did not exist a human being he less
desired to become intimately acquainted with
his affairs than the guest he had persisted in
inviting to Abbey Cottage, whom he had not

treated civilly, and who was now in a position
to smite him hip and thigh with a weapon
snatched from Mat's own especial armoury.

^ What a cursed casualty !' he considered, ashe
wended his way to a tavern he wot of in
the heart of the City, where the steak was of
the juiciest, the ale mellow, the cheese ripe,
and the port unexceptionable.

In such modest haunts he managed to get
rid of a good deal of superfluous cash, but
on the occasion in question no appetite appeared
with the viands. Barney Kelly had
destroyed his relish for food — Barney, who
with one slight kick could destroy the lordly
castle Mr. Donagh was supposed, by those
who knew no better, to inhabit — Barney, who
at last understood exactly ' what he wrote,' the
true nature of the manuscripts which, figuratively
thrust under the domestic pot, kept that
utensil boiling.

Contrary to his usual habit, it was scarcely
five o'clock when he put his latch-key in the
lock and let himself into Abbey Cottage.
Miss Cavan had ' just closed her eyes between
the lights, and was taking a bit of a nap.*
Miss Hester did not chance to be in, having

stepped across to the Broadway for a pen'orth
of tape ;' but the maid-of- all work, hearing
the master's step, looked out into the hall, and,
in answer to a question concerning Mr. Kelly,
said :

No, sir, he has not gone yet — he is up in
his own room.'

Mat, full of the purpose which had brought
him home so early, straightway ascended the
stairs and knocked at the door of his unwelcome
guest's bedchamber.

Come in !' cried Mr. Kelly lustily, with a
dreadful cheerfulness in his tone.

Mr. Donagh want in, and found the objectionable
Barney in his shirt-sleeves, kneeling
before a portmanteau he had filled to overflowing
and was struggling to lock. A solitary
dip illumined the apartment. Amongst the
many things which had not been done at
Abbey Cottage was laying the gas upstairs ;
and in the exercise of that economy which was
evinced by saving at the spigot and spilling
at the bung, the Donaghs had got into the
habit of considering one candle enough in all
conscience for any man, and more than enough
for any single woman.

As Mat entered, Mr. Kelly looked up.
You are back early,' he remarked.

Yes,' agreed Mr. Donald, as lie closed the
door.

He paused for a few moments before he
spoke again — moments Mr. Kelly utilized
in forcing the portmanteau to fasten. He
was busy with the straps when his host said :

I conclude you now know the secret of my
life.'

I am sure I cannot tell,' answered Barney
carelessly ; ' I know how you earn your bread,
if that is what you mean.'

Yes, that is what I mean — you have learnt
how, in order to supply the most vulgar and
ordinary wants of existence, a Donagh has
been compelled to forget the traditions of his
family, and descend so far in the social scale
as to accept a commission for the orders he is
able to wring from reluctant and paltry tradespeople
— men the very fact of whose existence
his ancestors would scarcely have deigned to
recognise.'

'There is not much use in talking about
your ancestors,' replied Mr. Kelly, rising and
planting one foot on the portmanteau, so as to

get a better purchase of the strap he was
wrestling with. ' I think you ought to consider
yourself a deucedly lucky fellow,
Donagh, though your only '' connection with
the Press" is through the medium of the advertisement
columns

Mat waved his hand with a deprecating
gesture, and shook his head mournfully, the
while he said :

The heart knoweth its own bitterness,
and with the gall and wormwood of mine no
stranger may intermeddle. I had my aspirations,
I had my day of proud hope, my
conviction of eventual success in the highest
walks of literature, but between promise and
fulfilment intervened the cursed necessity
money — money to provide food and raiment —
to satisfy grasping landlords and impracticable
collectors of rates and taxes. But why
prolong this agonized explanation ? I beheld
all my soul had longed for — all my higher
nature had panted to reach and possess —
engulphed in the vortex of carling household
cares — of common domestic wants in which
ere now many a nobler ship than mine has
foundered.'

'Well, it can't be helped,' observed Mr.
Kelly indifferently, looking round the room
to see which of his belongings he had best
begin cording next. ' What's the good of
crying over spilt milk ? And you have been
very fortunate, Donagh ; it is not everyone
who fails in literature that has the luck to
find such easy and profitable work as you have
taken to.'

Easy !' repeated Mat scornfully. * Profitable
! yes, truly, I do make a sufficient
yearly income ; but I did not come to you
intending to complain of my lot, or to ask
sympathy for blighted hopes which once blossomed
fair and gay — no ! my object now is to
entreat your forbearance — your chivalry.
Those poor women below still believe in me.
They know nothing of the horrible depths to
which I have descended. Let them remain
happy in their childlike ignorance — let them
in their innocence cull the flowers which have
sprung from the grave where my genius lies
buried, and sport with the blooms which have
their roots in my broken heart.'

Mr. Bernard Kelly, accustomed as he was
to Mat's figures of speech, stood transfixed

during the delivery of this final sentence,
which was uttered in a subdued voice, and
with a touching humility. When Mr. Donagh
paused a spell seemed broken, however, and he
answered :

It is too late ; I have told your aunt what
you do.'

Miscreant !' exclaimed Mat passionately ;

ingrate, to rush home and sting the bosom
that warmed you !'

There was no particular reason why I should
keep your counsel,' said Mr. Kelly carelessly.

You had it in your power to help me, and you
took very good care not to do so. You might
have got me on the Galaxy long ago, and now
I am writing for it ; no thanks to you.'

Writing for the Galaxy f echoed Mr. Donagh.
Amidst all his trouble he had never dreamt of
this additional misfortune.

Yes, my friend, " 'tis e'en so," ' answered
IMr. Kelly. ' I assure you I haven't found my
accent or nationality the slightest hindrance tome
in literature ; quite the contrary.'

Having received which fresh arrow in his
broken heart, Mat turned slowly, and without
uttering another word left the room.

It was three hours later. Mr. Kelly had
taken his departure — or, as Miss Cavan tersely
observed, ' the house was shut of him' — and the
ladies were seated at needlework when the
master of Abbey Cottage, who had declined
to partake of tea with his relations, or to allow
a cup to be sent in to him, suddenly abandoning
the seclusion of his sanctum, appeared in
the parlour.

Walking up to the chimney-piece, he took a
commanding position, with his back resting
against the marble slab. Neither Miss Cavan
nor Miss Donagh spoke. They saw that in his
face which held their kindly tongues silent.

Girls,' began Mat, and his features twitched
a little as he uttered this inappropriate word.
You know the worst now. Do you despise
mer

Despise you ?' repeated both in a breath ;
and next instant two fond, foolish, faithful
women were cliuMor round his neck, sobbing
out endearing phrases, and conducting themselves
altogether in a most idiotic manner.

Ah ! you poor souls !' exclaimed Mat, wiping
his eyes — for he was really deeply touched —
'Why did I leave it to Barney Kelly or Barney

anybody to tell you the story of my lost life
and marred career ? Why didn't I trust you
from the first V

'Ay, why didn't ye?' asked Miss Cavan,
and then they all fell to weeping again. But
after a time the luxury of sorrow began to
assert itself, and they settled down to the enjoyment
of their misery in the most comfortable
manner possible.

The ladies felt that it was their own Mat
they had got back at last, while Mat, 'now
that the felon irons of silence and dissimulation
were struck off his spirit,' revelled in telling
the story of how he had 'conquered fate.'
With bated breath and eyes fastened eagerly
on his face, Miss Cavan and her niece hung
enraptured on his accents, and listened entranced
as he spoke of the ' lions' he had found
lurking in his path, of the difficulties he, a
second David, had taken by the throat and
killed.

And indeed it's yourself could make your
way, if it was even through stone walls,' exclaimed
Miss Hetty admiringly, while her aunt
opined Mat's energy was so tremendous that a
'dungeon could not contain, or fetters bind it.'

VOL. II. 23

Never, perhaps, had the household at Abbey
Cottage spent so pleasant an evening. Mat
off his stilts seemed quite a different person
from Mat up in the air. He was quite ' affable
and familiar.'

Though Barney let out what he did for
nothing but spite,' said Miss Cavan, with that
quick perception of motives which, as Mr.
Donagh was good enough to declare, ' distinguishes
the feminine mind,' ' he did us a good
turn. If he knew how comfortable and cosy
we all are he'd be ready to bite off the end of
his tongue for envy. Ye'll never keep anything
from us again, Mat, no matter how bad
it is, will ye V

Mat declared he would not, which was a
very large and a very unwise promise ; but at
the moment he had no mental reservations —
his heart was full of gratitude and compunction.


How could I ever have been ashamed,' so
ran his thoughts, * of these admirable creatures,
who combine in their own persons every virtue
of their sex ? Why did I sacrifice to society
that which should have been offered on the
altar of home V

Possibly it was with some idea of even at
the eleventh hour repairing this error that Mr.
Donagh presently suggested they should have
a 'morsel of supper together in peace and
comfort. '

Suppers did not much obtain in that house,
and were rarely of an impromptu character,
being, as a rule, confined to Sundays, Easter,
and Christmas.

Mat partook of so very few meals at home
that the ladies seized upon his idea and
adopted it wdtli the delight of children bidden
to a feast.

Thanks to Mrs. Kelly, there's plenty and
to spare !' exclaimed Miss Cavan ; and proceeding
to the kitchen, which was vacant, the
servant having retired to bed, she soon * tossed
up a little repast' her nephew assured her was
a chef-cVceuvre.

Very merry were they all, and very happy,
and in such unwonted spirits that when Mr.
Donagh, who was told by Miss Cavan, ' You
must have a glass of punch to-night. Mat,
though Barney is not here to take one with
you,' said he should not touch a drop unless
she and Hetty partook of some also, the poor

lady, who scarcely ever drank anything stronger
than tea which had stood brewing till it was
bitter, answered he might, if he pleased, mix
her and Hetty a very very little, only he must
be sure to make it ' as weak as weak.'

Which was accordingly done, after an appropriate
remark from Mat concerning the time-honoured
joke ' Hot, strong, and sweet,* and
then, to the end that aunt and niece might not
seem to be * sitting down to punch regularly,'
they drank the seductive beverage out of
one tumbler, which gave rise to a running fire
of—

IVe had as much as I need, Hetty
Nonsense, aunt.'

Well, I'll just put my lips to it.'

Go on.'

If I take any more I shan't find my way to
my bed.'

'Mat, you've put twice too much whisky
in.'

Have a teaspoonfuL'
Not a drop.'

Wet your lips.'

I'll have half if you will,' and so forth, tiU
it was all gone, and Miss Cavan had washed

and polished the tumbler and ' put it past *
carefully, so that Mary's weak morals might
not be destroyed by such an awful example on
the part of her mistresses.

Poor simple women — dear, honest, kindly
souls — what a trial you must have proved to
any man save the one for whom you would
cheerfully have laid down your lives ; and yet
how exactly you suited him and adapted yourselves
to the many angles and twists of his
complex character !

LADY Gildas HUSBAND.

Meantime Mr. Vassett's path could
/(1 15 hardly have been considered one
strewn with roses.

He had got into the thick of a difficulty,
and did not exactly see his way out of it.

The next time,' he said to Mr. Pierson,
the next time I have anything to do with a
lady, and that lady a lady of title, you may
write me down anything you please.'

One swallow does not make a summer,'
returned the reader, who, having given it as
his deliberate opinion that ' some day' the
Irish girl' would make her mark,' did not
mean to eat his words or retract his advice, ' to
encourage her.'

But Mr. Vassett was adamant. ' Have we
not had enough of petticoats ?' he asked. ' Men
can't deal with women in business matters. If
her ladyship were of the other sex i'd know

what to say to her, but as it is ' and a

gloomy silence enfolded the conclusion of ]VIr.
Vassett's sentence in mystery.

She is a slippery customer, as I always
thought observed Mr. Pierson, speaking as if
he had prophesied the exact trouble which had
occurred.

You never thought she would serve us the
scm^vy trick she has done.'

Why don't you go and see Hicks V asked
the reader. Mr. Vassett shrugged his shoulders
with a gesture of distaste.

What's the good of writing; about such a
matter ? You could tell him more in five
minutes by word of mouth than it would be possible
to explain by letter in five months.'

I do not feel disposed to seek an interview
with Mr. Hicks. As a business man, there can
be no question he will consider I have acted
with culpable carelessness.'

Pooh !' exclaimed Mr. Pierson. ' As thro
happy husband of his wife, he must understand

the nature of the lady who has let us into
this hole letter than we could be supposed to do
I am inclined to imagine his intimate acquaintance
with her peculiarities will not make
him look more favourably upon my part in the
transaction.'

Shall I go and beard the citizen in his den V
asked Mr. Pierson. ' He can't put me in the
Tower, or take me before the Lord Mayor, and I
don't care what he says. Hard words, you
know, break no bones.'

Mr. Vassett remained silent for a minute,
casting this suggestion about in his mind ; then
he said :

No, I shall first write. A letter will serve
to open the ground, at any rate.'

And when shall you open the ground T inquired
Mr. Pierson, with the suspicion of a
sneer.

This day,' answered Mr. Vassett, speaking
determinedly.

And what do you intend to say ? Shall
you tell him the high jinks her ladyship has
l)een playing V

Mr. Yassett winced visibly under this dreadful
expression.

I wish, Pierson, I really do wish ' he

was beginning[, when the other cut him short.

Yes, I know you do ; but never mind that
now. Are you going to say exactly what has
happened, or is it your intention to lead him
gently on till you consider he is prepared to
hear he will have to fork out '

Pierson ! Pierson !'

Nearly double the amount he was led to
expect,' finished Mr. Pierson, resolute not to
amend his expression, but to complete the
sentence in its integrity.

All I mean to indicate in the first instance,'
replied Mr. Vassett, Tvith as much dignity and
precision as a severe cold in his head would
allow, 'is that I find it will be necessary to
lay before him a difficulty which has arisen in
connection with the novel placed by Lady
Hilda in my hands for publication. We shall
then hear what he says in answer, and my
future course will be to a great extent guided
by the terms of his communication.'

I can't see the use of all this diplomacy
remarked Mr. Pierson, in that disparaging
tone which never failed to rouse his chiefs
temper. 'Why not go to the man at once,

and explain the trick this wife has played you ?
Bless you, he won't be astonished ! He must
know her. He is perfectly vvell aware there is
no sort of cheating she is not up to. Better
take a 'bus into the City tomorrow, and get
the matter oft' your mind at once. That's
what I should do.'

Is it V said Mr. Vassett. ' Then it is what
I should not do.'

'Oh, of course you know best.'

'Yes, I imagine I do. Rapid and violent
measures are always, in my opinion, to be
deprecated. '

Mr. Pierson looked at the speaker and
smiled, as he said suggestively ;

If much time is expended on this interesting
correspondence you will have Lady
Hilda coming here to know why she has not
received the remainder of the proofs.'

Should her ladyship come, I shall know
what to say to her,' observed Mr. Vassett.

All right ; only don't ask me to help you
out of that scrape.'

I am not aware I am in the habit of either
getting into scrapes or of asking you to help
me out of them.'

Oecg again Mr. Pierson smiled. There are
times when a smile is more irritating; than a
blow, and Mr. Yassett felt at that moment as
if he could not endure his reader's impertinence
much longer.

You allow yourself too much license of
speech, Pierson,' he said coldly.

Do not confound me with Lady Hilda,
pray,' entreated Mr. Pierson. ' Ashen she
swoops down here for proofs, you will know
more about license of speech than you do now.
However, it is not my business, thank goodness
! What have we got here V he added,
thinking it prudent to change the subject,
and turning over some newly arrived manuscripts
Mr. Yassett had brought downstairs
and laid on his table. ' " Three Years in
the Southern States of North America,"
by Sir Richard Draper, M.P. AYhat is that
about V

You had better see,' answered Mr. Yassett,
with less urbanity than usual.

" From Mexico to Moscow," by an ex-diplomatist,'
proceeded ]mr. Pierson ; ' who on
earth wants to know anything about either
Mexico or Moscow V

A considerable number of persons, I should
say observed Mr. Yassett loftily.

Mr. Pierson glanced up for a moment with
a very good semblance of surprise, and then
continued :

estella: a Life - Study," by Gregory
Bacon. Why, I returned that a week
ago.'

So the author writes. He says he knows
you did not read it, and that he returns the
MS. to enable you to do so.*

Set a trap), I suppose V remarked Mr.
Pierson, with unmoved composure ; ' turned a
leaf upside down, or left a scrap of silk between
two jDages. I did look at the opening
and the wind-up ; it is rubbish. " Reminiscences
of the Footlights," by S. Dawton.
You will look them over yourself, I suppose.
Six French Actresses," by C. Cheshire —
Cheshire Cheese.'

I think that may be worth attention remarked
Mr. Yassett, ignoring the attempt at
wit involved in this transposition.

It is clean, clear copy, at any rate ' — commented
Mr. Pierson, reconciling himself to the
inevitable. ' And here is another " specimen'*

I declare, from our young Irish friend — " The
Next Heir " — not a bad title

Send it back at once interposed ]mr. Vassett,
with a firmness worthy of St. Senatus,
as well as the other manuscripts of hers you
were speaking of. We'll have no more women
here.'

'Lady Hilda! Lady Hilda! What have
you not to answer for !' said Mr. Pierson,
shaking his provoking head with solemn
waggishness. as he gathered up the bundles of
manuscript, and retired with them to his
sanctum — a little room built out at the back
of the premises and lighted from the roof, and
which had possibly been a tool-house in the
days when gardens, but no publishers, were
to be found in the select seclusion of Craven
Street.

Rid of his reader, Mr. Vassett began to
indite his letter to Mr. Hicks. Though he
said little more than he had indicated when
speaking to Mr. Pierson, the epistle occupied
some time in the composition, for not merely
was the theme one on which it seemed to the
publisher inexpedient to commit himself, butin
addressing a citizen — a man who was

merely wealthy or as Lady Hilda expressed
herself, ' disgustingly rich ' — Mr. Yassett's pen
assumed almost unconsciously an elegance of
diction, a choice of phraseology, and an ambiguity
of style intended to produce an impression
on Mr. Hicks, who went as straight
to the point as a bull at a red rag, and who
had about as much talent or taste for diplomacy
as, once again to quote from his wife's
forcible vocabulary, ' a mad dog.'

The situation was indeed painful to the
publisher ' in his capacity both as a man of
sense and a man of business.'

Very early in their acquaintance with Lady
Hilda he had so far gauged the character of
that fascinating individual as to induce him, in
order ' that subsequent complications and misunderstandings
might be avoided,' to obtain
from Mr. Hicks an authority to expend a
certain agreed sum which might fairly be
presumed to cover all expenses connected
with and attendant on the publication of a
three volume novel.

Her ladyship's idea of the nature of the
partnership of matrimony may be gathered
from the fact that she stipulated all profits

arising from the sale of her books were to be
paid over to her without deduction of any
kind — not the net profits, be it understood,
but the gross — and even when this was done
faithfully, not merely for love of honesty, but
for fear of the authoress, she grumbled and
scolded, and accused Mr. Vassett in very plain
and vigorous English of cheating her. She
tried hard to make him pay for the press
copies, while as for allowing the publisher to
keep a copy for his own reading, and in pleasant
memory of their agreeable relations, ashe
courteously suggested. Lady Hilda would
not hear of it. She said she could never
understand why she was defrauded out of the
retail price. The novel was advertised at
thirty-one and sixpence, therefore why did
she not receive a guinea and a half? Pitched
battles had she and Mr. Vassett over this
question, and also the ' thirteen as twelve '
which fio-used in his accounts.

It is all nonsense,' said Mr. Vassett, ' talking
to me about a woman not comprehending
business. What she cannot see is justice, so
long as half-a-crown is to be made by remaining
blind.'

Nevertheless, as has been said before, he
was proud of having Lady Hilda's name in his
list, and if he did not get meal out of the wife
he got malt out of the husband ; therefore,
though he and her ladyship were always
quarrelling, they had rubbed on together ' fairly
well,' as the Scotch say, till she took it into
her head to write a book he could not publish
without the certainty of being dragged into
several actions for libel.

Even one action for libel being a possibility
too terrible to contemplate, he set his foot
down, and compelled Lady Hilda for once to
yield her point and allow the obnoxious paragraphs
to be expunged.

Duly and truly Mr. Pierson, who in common
with his principal entertained, not without
reason, the gravest doubts of her ladyship's
good faith, toiled again through the manuscript,
erasing all personal and questionable
suggestions, and reducing the novel to a level
of dull propriety which might have satisfied
the requirements of a bench of bishops.

At this point, considering he had seen
enough of the book to satisfy his curiosity
for the present, he relinquished all responsibility.

Where the works of authors he
deemed important were concerned, it was Mr.
Vassett's practice to run through the proofs
himself, only referring to Mr. Pierson when
he thought some change mio;ht be effected
with advantage.

The reader, however, prepared manuscript
for the press with such care and judgment
that, as a rule, no corrections had to be made
in Craven Street. The author saw to all those
which were necessary, and it need scarcely be
added that whatever other mistakes the printer
might fall into, he was never guilty of the
omission of not charging for even the slightest
alteration in the text.

For a time, then, Lady Gildas's latest
novel had proceeded joyously through the
press.

No matter how long a publisher may have
elected to keep a book back, there always
comes a period when he wishes to get it out
without delay. This is the case at the present
moment, and this was the case in the very different
era when Lady Hilda had the field of fiction,
comparatively speaking, to herself. Mr. Vassett
having heard of an important work being

VOL. II. 24

in preparation ' by a rival house, desired to
get the start with Lady Hilda's novel. Then,
as now, the librarians had only a certain
amount of money to spend ; and then, as now,
they did not like spending that certain
amount if they could avoid doing so.

Quite aware of this, it seemed good in Mr.
Vassett's eyes to hurry on the printers ; and,
accordingly, proofs came fast and thick to
Craven Street, and were posted every day to
Lady Hilda.

The proofs were not returned for press from
Craven Street, but they were from Lady
Hilda's residence ; and as fast as she returned
the sheets her corrections were attended to,
and the book printed off.

The first volume was completed, the second
also, and the third was half-way through,
when, at the printing-office, the attention of
one of the principals was drawn to the enormous
number of author's corrections in the
novel — corrections which not merely involved
the alteration of sentences and the necessity
for revises, but the re-imposing of pages, and
in some cases the almost entire resetting of
chapters.

Taking up one of the proofs, black and
almost illegible by reason of her ladyship's
emendations, in order to satisfy himself there
was reason in the complaints made on this
subject, he saw enough to induce him even
at the eleventh hour to inform Mr. Vassett of
the increase in expense he might confidently
look forward to.

Lady Hilda has almost rewritten the novel,'
he said.

Mr. Pierson did not happen to be in the
way when this communication reached Craven
Street, but within five minutes of its receipt
IVIr. Vassett was en route to Soho — and fora
quarter of an hour after he arrived at
the printing-office it might have been thought
the end of the world had come. Everyone
was talking at once — explaining, recriminating,
remonstrating ; men in paper caps were
running hither and thither, clasping soiled
revises in their blackened hands. All the
compositors seemed wanted in a hurry ; the
manager displayed corrected proofs ; boys
scurried about after perfect copies — there was
such a to-do it might have been thought the
Father of Mischief himself had got loose among

24—2

the type and was setting up broad sheets by
the score.

There is one comfort, Mr. Yassett,' said
the head partner at length, meaning to be
consolatory, ' we discovered the matter in time
to prevent publication.'

Mr. Vassett could bear no more. He was
known as a publisher of mild and courteous
manners, not given to strong language or many
words ; but on the occasion in question, though
he did not say much, what he did say was to
the purpose, and there was an energy in his
diction and a concentration in the one sentence
with which he flung himself out of the
office never to be forgotten by those privileged
to hear.

All those goodly reams of double crown
wasted, all that composing, and reimposing,
and re-setting, and revising, and re-reading,
and printing off, worse than useless ! all the
advertisements thrown away ! Mr. Yassett
felt as if he should go mad.

And then arose the extremely interesting
question : * Who was going to pay for this V

The printers had given him clearly to understand
they did not mean to lose their money ;

from Mr. Hies Mr. Yassett only held a
guarantee for a certain fixed amount ; from
Lady Hilda it was vain to expect anything
except gibes and insolence ; and there was one
thing quite positive, Mr. Yassett did not
intend to pay the bill himself.

Under the circumstances, therefore, it will
be seen some necessity for diplomacy existed.

You are fond of exercising a little strategy,'
Mr. Pierson was ill-natured enough to say.
Here is a capital opportunity :' and then
ensued the conversation recorded at the beginning
of this chapter.

Poor Mr. Yassett ! Well might he declare
the next time he had anything to do with a
woman's book the sky would fall. No wonder
he told Mr. Pierson peremptorily to return
Miss Westley's manuscripts.

I call it a piece of great impertinence on
her part,' he remarked later in the same
day, ' to continue sending me a chapter or
two as a " specimen." As I have told her, no
one can form an opinion unless a whole book
is submitted for perusal. Authors nowadays
seem to think publishers exist simply for their
convenience,'

As far as the rejection of manuscripts is
concerned said Mr. Pierson, ignoring Mr.
Vassett's general statement, and confining
himself to the special iniquity of which Miss
Westley had been guilty, * I can form an
opinion as well from reading one side of copy
as a whole book. The acceptance is quite a
different matter.'

Pierson, you are talking nonsense,' said
Mr. Vassett, not, perhaps, without reason.

At any rate,' replied Mr. Pierson, * I shall
not tell the girl she must send in a three -
volume novel before I express an opinion on
her work.'

Tell her to send nothing answered Mr.
Vassett. ' If I cannot get manuscripts I care
to publish from men, I will cease to publish.'

But Mr. Pierson did not obey this command.
He returned Miss Westley 's ' specimen
' with a little kindly word of encouragement.


She'll do something yet he considered ;
but she may wait a little — waiting does not
hurt them.'

By 'them' he meant authors, and more
especially lady authors. He had never tried

authorship himself, and he knew nothing; of
the long-drawn-out sickness of hope deferred,
which though it may harden the tree — takes
the bloom off the fruit, and renders success
when it comes quite a different thing to what
youth believed it would prove.

When we grow tall enough to gather the
grapes that once hung high above our reach,
the taste is not what we imagined we should
delight in ; but, after all, is not this the case
with all the grapes of life — wealth, love, fame,
happiness ? If we could only realize at the
beginning what poor things in reality the
clustering bunches we spend our strength
striving to grasp, are in fact, what a vast
amount of trouble we should save ourselves
long before we arrived at the end ! Only in
that case we might probably do nothing ; and
so it is best for men and women to go on
hoping and believing, even though the close
of their day should find the sun setting amid
clouds of disappointment.

Even a publisher has disappointments.
Eemember that, discouraged authors ! and
take heart again. If the children of this
world, in the shape of hard and stern capitalists,

have their losses and crosses, how can
writers, over-apt to consider themselves children
of light, expect to find the literary road
easy under foot, bordered with shady trees,
and fragrant with sweet-scented flowers ?

The next day Mr. Vassett received Mr.
Hicks' answer to his diplomatic mission. The
happy husband's reply ran as follows :

Dear Sir,

I must ask you to explain the nature
of the difficulty you mention to my solicitor,
Mr. Daunt, Crosby Square, who, I trust, will
be able to arrange matters with you satisfactorily.


Yours faithfully,

T. Hicks.'

*This is dreadful,' thought Mr. Yassett.
To explain the matter to Mr. Hicks had
seemed bad enough, but to explain it to a
vague solicitor, one of a class he regarded with
laudable misgivings, seemed impossible.

Now you see you ought to have taken my
advice, and gone in person to the fountainhead,'
observed Mr. Pierson, when he was told
what Mr. Hicks said.

I had better write and explain the state of
the case,' suggested Mr. Vassett feebly.

You had better do no such thing,' retorted
Mr. Pierson; 'see this Daunt man at once,
and get the thing off your mind. For my own
part, I think you ought to feel thankful a
solicitor has been imported into the question,
for he may perhaps stand between you and
Lady Hilda.'

I can't go anywhere with this dreadful
cold,' said Mr. Vassett, coughing as much ashe
could, and striking his chest pathetically.

It was deferring the evil day, and Mr. Pierson
knew this, but he only answered :

There is no time to be lost. Shall I go V

No ; it will be better for me to write,'
coquetted Mr. Vassett.

For heaven's sake don't commence a correspondence
which may continue for a year,'
entreated Mr. Pierson. 'Let me go and try
the ground. I promise you I won't say a word
that can implicate you.'

It was some time before Mr. Vassett would
listen to this suggestion ; and if he had not
dreaded receiving a visit from Lady Hilda
before he knew in what way to deal with her,

the reader would probably never have carried
his point. Mr. Pierson was extremely fond of
meddling in matters which one would have
thought in no way concerned him, and on a
few occasions he had consequently proved really
of use to his chief.

After all considered Mr. Yassett, ' he can
speak about what I have done for Lady Hilda,
and all I have suffered at her hands, as I could
not possibly speak myself. His brusqueness will
probably not offend a lawyer as it might a husband
; and, on the whole, it is perhaps prudent
to put the affair in train as soon as possible.'

For these reasons, and for another much
more cogent than any of them, viz., that he
did not want to go himself, Mr. Yassett at
length graciously yielded an apparently reluctant
consent to the course proposed.

Fearful of any change of mind if he allowed
time for the publisher s mental thermometer
to vary, Mr. Yassett, though the rain was
coming down in torrents, set off at once, pooh-cooling
all suggestions as to the advisability of
delay, and saying for his part he would rather
catch a cold than that Lady Hilda should catch
them unprepared.

For she will insist on the book being published,
you may depend on that,' said the
reader, buttoning up his overcoat preparatory
to leaving Mr. Vassett to consider at his leisure
the extreme likelihood of these words proving
prophetic.

Several hours elapsed before Mr. Pierson
returned — he had waited to see Mr. Daunt, he
had also lingered to dine, and loitered to partake
of something hot to keep out the cold.

He was dripping with wet — he looked spare
and hungry as ever — and his appearance would
have done credit to a man who had been fasting
for a long time, and did not exactly know
where his next meal was to come from ; but
there was a buoyancy in his step and a twinkle
in his eyes, and a self-satisfied expression on
his face which assured Mr. Vassett he had to
some extent, at all events, succeeded in his
mission.

'Wells' said the publisher.

Well !' answered Mr. Pierson, provokingly
reticent.

Did you see Mr. Daunt V

Yes, and had a long talk with him. By
Jove ! it was lucky I went.'

Will they pay the money V asked Mr.
Vassett, anxious to hear Mr. Pierson's " luck"
had assumed some tangible and desirable
shape.

Oh yes, that will be all right said Mr.
Pierson carelessly. ' Daunt is going to advise
Hicks to make no fuss about it — but what do
you think? Hicks hunts her ladyship to go
each to him /'

You don't mean that V
Yes, I do ; and I have undertaken to get
her to go back.'

You will never induce her to do anything
of the kind.'

Shan't I ? We shall see.'

MR. Pierson ' RECEIVES.'

T was a most miserable day in the
miserable February of 1855. The
snow which had fallen previously
lay still on the horse-roads. A way had been
cleared through it on the side-paths, but only
in a perfunctory manner, and pedestrians were
compelled in many thoroughfares to walk single
file between frozen banks of mud. The sky
looked black and heavy, as if laden with more
snow. Sleet and rain drifted in the faces of
the passers-by ; while a damp cutting wind,
swirling round corners, and rushing down
cross-streets, and raking the main arteries of
the metropolis, bade defiance to topcoats, and at
times rendered umbrellas worse than useless.

A most miserable day, indeed, to be abroad ;
but then what day during the early part of
that year proved otherwise ? and it was with
a pleasurable glow of satisfaction that Mr.
Pierson, ensconced in Mr. Vassett's own office,
looked at the fire he had just stirred up to a
blaze, which went flaring up the chimney, and
glanced around the comfortable room wherefor
the time being he was monarch of all he
surveyed.

Mr. Vassett was upstairs with a cold, the
newspaper, and his correspondence ; and during
his compulsory absence from business Mr.
Pierson occupied his office, sat in his especial
chair, piled coals on his grate, stood on his
hearth, and warmed himself, and, looking out
at the wretched weather, reflected gladly he
was not as those poor sinners who were forced
to trudge the streets and get soaked with mire
and rain, but snugly housed in a room which
was well furnished, and cosy, and free from
draughts, and which, moreover, he was paid
for sitting in, and doing very little while he
sat.

Ostensibly he was reading manuscripts,
several of which lay on the table ; really he

was looking about him in a listless, idle, contented
sort of mood.

The bookcase with its glass doors and well-filled
shelves ; the thick carpet, worn a little
round the table and where the feet of anxious
and hopeful, and despairing and successful,
and well-to-do and impecunious authors had
trodden ; the bust of Socrates, mellowed by
time and smoke ; the picture, hanging in a
bad light, which Mr. Vassett had picked up a
bargain in Drury Lane, and still believed to
be an old master and priceless, though he
could find no one else to share his opinion ; the
quaint chimney-piece and the round mirror
above it — placed, fortunately, too high to
reflect the distorted face of any human being ;
the library-table, on which so many letters
had been written and cheques signed ; the
small cabinet, where were dozens of manuscripts
kept till the proper time came for
returning them to their owners ; the window,
the lower panes of which were cunningly
ornamented with various curious designs intended
to prevent a too close scrutiny of the
back regions — all these things and many more
had been familiar to Mr. Pierson for years.

yet they now seemed to strike him with a
quite fresh sense of pleasure and novelty, and
to inspire the feeling that in so comfortable
and home-like a room it would be a pity to
exhaust his mind by doing anything.

'Bad as the weather is considered Mr.
Pierson, 'they'll be coming in after a while.
It is of no use beginning anything. I'll just
lie on my oars for a little ;' and, having so
decided, he threw himself into Mr. Vassett's
easy-chair, stretched his legs out over the
hearth rug;, and, basking; in the heat of an
immense fire, began to think, amongst other
things and people, about Lady Hilda Hicks.

I wonder she doesn't come. I made quite sure
we should have seen her ere now,' he thought.
What can she be doing '^ We may be certain
of one thing, at any rate, namely, that whereever
she is she is up to no good ;' and he gazed
into the fire dreamily as his thoughts wandered
off to the affairs of mr. Hicks and his wife, and
his hopes that he should make something out
of the settlement of the matrimonial squabble.

There are things understood which are never
exactly spoken, and Mr. Pierson knew Mr.
Daunt would write him a cheque if he was

able to can out what he had promised to
undertake.

He will " recognise " my part in the transaction,
to adopt Vassett's favourite expression,'
thought the reader, ' and I certainly do not
consider he can do that properly under twenty
pounds. How shall I spend twenty pounds
when I get the cheque ? It is a long time
since I had twenty pounds of my own in my
hand at once.'

There were persons who pitied Mr. Pierson,
who thought what a sad thing it was for a
man possessed of his intellect — so well educated,
so clever, so industrious, so honest, so
assiduous — to be forced by cruel circumstances
to fill a subordinate position. Mr. Yassett
himself had once been of this opinion, and
really hesitated about offering him the vacant
post in Craven Street ; but he knew ]mr. Pierson
better now, and if he did not exactly comprehend
why he had never got on, he grasped
the fact that his reader never would get on.

There were two qualities, amongst many,
Mr. Pierson lacked — ambition and self-denial.
If he desired a thing to-day, and found himself
possessed of enough money to purchase it, he

VOL. II. 25

would purchase, no matter what he went without
tomorrow : and as he loved his ease more
than power, or position, or social standing, the
prize could not have been offered which would
have induced steady application on his part.

By starts he was industrious and energetic ;
but as a rule he had to be driven to read
manuscripts and answer letters and return
proofs.

Had it not been for this quality he might
have risen high in a good house — eventually,
perhaps, become partner in it to a small extent
; but there came a time when even his
abilities could not counterbalance his sins of
dilatoriness and omission, and he and the
great publishing firm referred to parted company
not on the best of terms.

It was then Mr. Yassett, who had been
acquainted with Mr. Pierson slightly for years,
met him lounging aimlessly along Piccadilly,
and stopped to speak.

Mr. Pierson was full of his wrongs — and, as
the other side of the case did not chance to be
represented, he made out a very full bill of
complaint.

He rehearsed all he had done for the firm.

and did not hide his own light under a bushel.
He mentioned all the many great writers who,
coming to his principals poor and unknown,
should have been sent empty away but for his
prescience. He dwelt upon the manner he had
worked up ' a certain magazine when the
editor walked off in a huff, taking his staff
with him. He declared he had been treated
with the vilest ingratitude. He expressed his
belief that the elder partners, though they had
got of late ' mighty uppish ' and hard to endure
would never have parted in the manner they
did with so old and faithful a servant, but for
the machinations of a certain ' young puppy '
lately admitted into the business.

And what are you doing now V asked Mr.
Vassett, with a sincere feeling of sympathy ;
for, as was natural, he did not love the great
firm with that affection brother publishers
should entertain for each other. ' What are
you doing now ?'

Starving,' answered Mr. Pierson.

It was not quite true, but it served. Mr.
Vassett knew that it was easy for a man who
has not saved, soon to feel the iron grip of
actual want. He felt very sorry indeed for

25—2

LIBRARY ' ^ — -

Universe n^ ttiT'^JOfs

Mr. Pierson, whom hitherto he had always
seen well dressed and apparently well cared
for. He knew large houses are not, as a rule,
too considerate. He was aware that the ways
and manners and habits of ' young puppies '
are often trying to those over whom they
chance to be placed in authority ; it hurt him
to see a ' man like Pierson ' with a frayed
shirt-collar and a coat very white at the
seams ; so he said :

Mine is a small business after that you
have been accustomed to ; but still it has
grown a little too large for me ; therefore, if you
care to come to Craven Street till something
more suitable offers, I dare say we can agree
about terms.'

Mr. Pierson jumped at the proposal, and
declaring that he had no doubt they could,
volunteered to ' look in ' the next afternoon.

Thus he came, and thus he stayed. The
business exactly suited him ; if he liked to
absent himself for a day, or even two, Mr.
Yassett made no complaint ; if he chose to let
the manuscripts accumulate for a week, the
publisher was not — to quote his own expression
' after him tooth and nail.' So far as he

could like anyone — which was not far — he
liked his employer ; he would have felt extremely
sorry had Mr. Yassett failed or died,
for he knew he would not drop into such
another berth ; he had as little to do as the
heart of man could desire, and that little he
did at his own time and in his own way. Mr.
Yassett treated him not only as an equal, but
as a friend. He was not kept at arm's length
in Craven Street, as he had been in Golden
Square. He knew all the ins and outs of
every transaction ; he was shown the letters ;
he was consulted in difficulties ; he was remembered
in success ; and, in a word, Mr.
Yassett, without making any fuss or display
about the matter, did to ]mr. Pierson as he
would that others should have done by him
had he been in a similar worldly position, and
if an attached and devoted adherence did not
Yjrove the result, it was merely because Mr.
Pierson was utterly deficient both in attachment
and devotion. He had not cared for father
or mother, brother or sister — he did not care
for wife or children ; and, therefore, it is not
to be wondered at that he did not spend his
days thinking how he might best exhibit deep

gratitude for all Mr. Yassett's kindness to
him.

He was faithful to the best of his ability,
and if that ability was not of the most trustworthy
order, Mr. Vassett did not expect to
find perfection even in the person of a reader ;
so the two got on together very well indeed.

At an early stage of their business connection
an arrangement had, with the concurrence of
Mr. Pierson, been entered into between Mr.
Vassett and Mrs. Pierson — namely, that a certain
sum was to be 'kept back' each week in
order that the rent might be duly provided for
as each quarter came round.

That's all I wants from him,' exclaimed
Mrs. Pierson, who, as Mr. Vassett mildly put
it, * was not a highly educated person.'

At that period he pitied Mr. Pierson most
heartily for having so thrown himself away,
but he learned in the course of time the pity
was due to the wife.

It is a very strange world,' Mr. Vassett
was wont to remark, and in this conclusion
no doubt Mrs. Pierson would have agreed with
the publisher most fully.

That Mr. Pierson much preferred Mr. Vassett's

house to Lis own is as little doubtful as
that Mrs. Pierson always felt thankful when
her husband was out of the way. For this
reason it was ]mr. Pierson made long hours at
Craven Street ; often stopping to take tea
with his employer, and not slipping on his out-of-door
coat so as to be ready to start when
the first stroke of the clock indicated that the
time for leaving business had come, as is too
much the habit with old and young gentlemen
on salaries at the present day.

The reader was still exercising the powers of
his mind, not in deciding upon the merits of
any particular manuscript, but in speculating
concerning the probable amount of the cheque
he saw, in anticipation, signed and cashed,
when the clerk who reigned supreme in the
outer office — who attended to the book-keeping,
kept bores civilly at bay, supplied the wants
of collectors who then, as now, went about
with heavy loads on their shoulders, and
grumbled a good deal when they could not
instantly get what they wanted, and always
seemed to be sent out in the worst weather
possible, and where afflicted with chronic
coughs, and indulged in a good deal of ' chaff'

opened the door and announced that a lady
wanted to see Mr. Yassett.

Well, he's ill, you know,' answered Mr.
Pierson.

'Will you see her then?' asked the other
with a sad want of respect, born perhaps of
knowing more of Mr. Pierson even than his
master did. ' She has never been here before,'
he added in explanation.

What is she like V inquired the reader.

She is just like the rest of them,' returned
the clerk, in whose breast familiarity with the
aspect of 'rising talent' had bred something-very
near akin to contempt.

Show her in, then,' said Mr. Pierson, resignedly
murmuring as he turned to the table
and began turning over the manuscripts. ' I
must some day get Muggins to tell me " what
they are all like." '

The lady entered. Though she had just
come in from the wet street she looked trim
and spruce enough to have stepped that
mom went out of a band-box.

Her hair was not dishevelled; her bonnet
was straight, the strings tied in an admirable
bow. On her skirts there was no speck of

mud ; her boots were not splashed; her manner
was calm and self-possessed. It might have
been quite a beautiful day in summer for all
the signs of distress she exhibited.

What a dreadful person to live with T
thought Mr. Pierson ; but he only remarked
audibly, whilst with a solemn dignity worthy of
Mr. Vassett himself he indicated a chair, 'that
the weather was most unpleasant.'

It is not very agreeable, certainly,' said the
lady, with admirable composure ; ' but at least
it has this advantage — one finds every person is
at home.'

Mr. Pierson did not compromise himself by
making any reply, and his visitor proceeded
:

It is such an absolute waste of time calling
at different places and finding no one within able
to give a definite answer on any subject.'

Still Mr. Pierson did not speak ; there were
times when he was fond of thus playing a waiting
game, and on such occasions he proved
himself an absolute master of the art of silence.
By experience he knew nothing brings a
woman so soon to the point as making no
comment on what she says ; and having taken

a dislike to this visitor, he thought he would
get her to the point as soon as possible.

The result proved his wisdom, for in her
very next sentence she broke ground.

I sent a manuscript to you a fortnight ago
she said, ' with a note requesting you to give
me a speedy answer. As yet I have received
no reply.'

I am sorry for that,' observed Mr. Pierson,
in a manner that might have been taken either
as ironical or sympathetic, as his auditor chose
to interpret his tone.

Oh, I did not much expect an answer,' she
proceeded. ' I am told that you never take
the slightest notice of letters.'

Your informant must have some curious
ideas as to the mode in which we conduct our
business,' remarked Mr. Pierson, with unruffled
serenity.

I did not mean you in particular. I mean
all publishers.'

I assure you, madam, we reply to letters,'
protested Mr. Pierson.

Then why did you not reply to mine V

That I am quite unable to inform you,' he
answered. * A fortnight, however, is not a longtime

to give. If you only saw the number of
manuscripts which arrive each morning, instead
of wondering at a slight delay, you would
marvel they so soon receive consideration

I do not think I should,' she retorted. ' But
however, to leave the general and come to the
particular question, have you looked at the
papers I sent you ?'

If you will kindly tell me what they were,
I may be able to say. I am still, remember,
ignorant even of your name.'

My name is Yarlow — Miss Harlowe she
added, with emphasis — (' As if,' thought Mr.
Pierson, ' any human being could imagine you
were a married woman !') — * but as I do not
wish it to be published, I attached a idiom che
Illume to the manuscript.'

And what was the nature of the manuscript?'
asked Mr. Pierson.

Well, it was an attempt to reproduce in
popular and attractive form the life stories of
six French actresses. Such subjects, even
when treated in a more prolix style, have
generally been found to possess a great interest
for the mass of readers, and I am assured by
good judges that these biographies, dealt with

as I have done, only require to be well placed
before the public to secure a wide audience.
My knowledge of French literature is quite
exceptional, and my information has been
drawn from sources, I have reason to believe,
inaccessible to any other author.'

I fear, however,' ventured Mr. Pierson,
that the time for these sort of compilations
has rather gone by.'

Compilations !' repeated the lady ; ' my
manuscript is original — every word of it.'

Then it can't contain the biographies of
six French actresses, or even one of them,'
objected the reader.

It is perfectly evident you have not read a
line it contains,' said the author.

I have not, certainly ; but I do not see
how that fact can alter my contention.'

•' Has anyone looked through the work V
asked Miss Yarlow indignantly.

That is a question you ought to be able to
answer much better than I,' replied Mr. Pierson.
' You alone can tell how many publishers
have seen the manuscript, and you alone can
judge, from the nature of their comments, how
many have read it through.'

Miss Yarlow, though not much given to
blushing, coloured up to her eyes. He had
struck her in a vital part at last. There was
not a publisher in London of any standing to
whom she had not offered those memoirs, and
there was not a publisher of any standing in
London who had not refused to have anything
to do with them. Quite unconsciously, she
and Miss Westley had been traversing the
same round, with the same result. Glenarva
happened to have 'worked the trade' more
exhaustively ; but that only chanced because
she was younger, ignorant of many conventionalities
which bound and fettered Miss Yarlow,
and less careful of herself altogether than that
personally considerate lady.

I wonder of what use publishers really are !'
said ]\Iiss Yarlow, at last recovering from the
cruel blow Mr. Pierson had dealt her. She
did not address this pleasing remark to him,
but uttered it in a sort of involuntary soliloquy,
the expression of feeling being wrung from herby
actual stress of despair.

I really cannot inform you,' answered Mr.
Pierson, though he knew she had not spoken
to him. ' Probably, however, they are intended

to serve some purpose — whether good
or evil it is not for me to say — in the scheme
of creation.'

Miss Yarlow looked at him. She looked fora
moment as if she were at bay — as if she
would have liked to cross over to where he
sat and box his ears or pull his hair ; then,
apparently feeling how useless it was to fight
against a power such as that he possessed, she
said, in a more humble and conciliatory
manner than she had yet employed :

And you — you, I suppose, like the rest,
have not deigned to cast a glance on my poor
attempt V

I have seen the manuscript — that is about
all ; but if it is likely to prove any satisfaction
to you, I vriW have it read now. I fear, however,
whatever its merits may be, you would
stand no chance of persuading Mr. Vassett to
undertake the publication at present. His
lists are quite full for the season.'

And when do you suppose ' faltered

Miss Yarlow.

Next year, perhaps, he might be open to
consider a work of the kind you indicate. I
beg your pardon, did you speak '

No, I did not speak,' answered Miss Marlow
; and she sat and looked in dumb misery
at the leaping firelight. Next year ! Gracious
heavens I Were years, she thought, so plentiful
in a human life that any person could afford
to waste one in waiting ?

A year is a long time,' she said at last.

To look forward to,' suggested Mr. Pierson.


And you really will not help me V

I really cannot help you,' he amended.

And I heard Mr. Yassett was so exceptionally
kind and courteous.'

'He is exceptionally kind and courteous,'
argued Mr. Pierson, taking no notice of the
suggested comparison implied as regarded himself
; ' but though he might frame his refusal
more pleasantly than I have done, he would
refuse all the same.'

I wish I could have seen him,' she said.

*If he gets better you will, no doubt, be
able to see him some time during the course
of the spring.'

Miss Yarlow looked at the speaker as he
unfolded this hopeful prospect in such a way
that he felt compelled to add, ' But when you

have seen him, I do not think you will find
yourself much further forward. '

She did not reply. She only turned her
eyes again towards the fire.

Does she mean to stop till we accept her
manuscript V marvelled Mr. Pierson. He had
seen a great many authors and a great many
women, but he had never before come across
any author or any woman exactly resembling
Miss Yarlow. He was beginning to wonder
when she would go — what he should be obliged
to do to get rid of her — when the door opened,
and Muggins appeared to say : ' Mr. Dawton
has been waiting for some time. He wishes to
know if he shall call as he returns from Fleet
Street.'

No, no interrupted Mr. Pierson hurriedly ;
ask him to stop a few moments longer. I
want to see him particularly. Give him the
Morning Post to look at.'

'He has read it through, sir,' explained
Muggins, who took in the position at a glance.

Well, say I shall be disengaged directly.
Have you tried any of the magazines V asked
Mr. Pierson, turning to Miss Yarlow as Muggins
withdrew.

No,' she answered, still looking intently at
the fire.

I think you might find it worth your while
to do so.'

Probably their lists would be full also,'
remarked Miss Yarlow, with a fine irony.

There ensued a dead silence, which Mr.
Pierson at length essayed to break by rising
from his chair and making a feint of arranging
the papers scattered on the table ; but Miss
Yarlow took not the slightest notice of this
movement.

Was she going to beat him with his own
weapons ? Was he at last to find that saying-nothing
may, on the part of a woman, be even
more of a vice than a virtue ?

The best counsel I can osier you,' he began,
when he felt he could endure her rapt contemplation
of the fire no longer, ' is to try the
magazines. Even if editors should consider
your articles unsuitable, you would be in no
worse position than you are now ; while if by
any good chance you did secure acceptance,
papers of the description you indicate would
be just as available for publication after they
had appeared in a periodical as they are now.'

VOL. II. 26

Miss Yarlow removed her eyes from the
leaping flames, and looked at Mr. Pierson nth
considerable interest. Clearly here was a lady
who, though she could be dumb, did not
happen to be deaf.

I think you really will find that your best
plan,' went on Mr. Pierson, anxious to follow
up the impression he had made. * If you do
not know where the offices of the leading
magazines are situated, I ^^ write you down
the addresses with pleasure.'

Coming from the source it did, this offer
should have been regarded as extremely courteous
; but Miss Yarlow did not seem much
impressed by it.

Was there ever such a woman V thought
Mr. Pierson impatiently. Instead of taking
the blessings that the gods sent her, and going
out into the rain rejoicing, with a few useless
names and addresses written on them in a
hand so clear as to convey a tacit reproof to
careless caligraphers. Miss Yarlow simply took
no notice whatever of the civility proffered,
but, seizing upon the one point in Mr. Pierson's
previous sentence which had seemed to her
worthy of attention, asked :

Do I understand you to mean that hereafter,
whether these memoirs have appeared
in print or not, Mr. Vassett will entertain the
idea of publishing them V

I scarcely intended to say he would " entertain
the idea of publishing them," ' amended
Mr. Pierson, who felt he had to do with a lady
whom it might be inexpedient to mislead even
in the way of kindness, ' because so many extraneous
circumstances, entirely independent
of the merits of your productions, have to be
considered before a work by an as yet unknown
author can be produced with satisfaction
to all parties concerned.'

What did you intend to say, then V inquired
the lady, with a directness which might
have elicited some tangible statement even
from Mr. Vassett, who had a peculiarly happy
knack of combining ambiguity with courtesy.

That after your '* Six French Actresses "
have appeared in a magazine we shall be as
happy to read and consider them as at the
present moment,' answered mr. Pierson, driven
to bay, and not perceiving the mistake he had
made till reminded by a contemptuous exclamation
from Miss Yarlow of how very little

26—2

satisfaction his assurance was calculated to
give.

Well, you are a Jesuit !' remarked Miss
Yarlow, irritation tempered by admiration
struggling together in her tone for mastery.
Why can't you tell me at once you never
mean to read the manuscript ? What is the
good of all this beating about the bush V

You will misconceive me said Mr. Pierson
desperately. "If it is likely to prove any
satisfaction to you, the manuscript shall be
read immediately ; but I tell you candidly,
that let the report turn out as favourable as
report possibly can, there is not the slightest
likelihood of Mr. Vassett accepting the work
at present. He does not care to bring out
many books ; and his arrangements are made
for some time to come. If the author of
Nine Poems by V.," or Charlotte Bronze, or
even Miss Martineau herself, were to offer him
a manuscript at the present moment, I know
perfectly well he would say its appearance
must be deferred, otherwise he should reluctantly
be obliged to decline it.'

Oh, days that seem gone so long ! When
Jane Eyre ' and ' Paul Ferrol ' were titles as

familiar in men's mouths as * Lady Audley's
Secret ' and the ' Woman in White ' have been
since ; when Miss Martineau was still living,
and the 'Scenes of Clerical Life' were not
thought of; when no one had heard of George
Eliot, and publishers were still plodding slowly
and safely along familiar roads ; when all the
world had not begun to write, and there were
still left a small number of persons who
read !

On that particularly wet morning those
days now departed were present with Mr.
Pierson, and the names he invoked to convince
his visitor of the thorough honesty of
his assertions stood high on the glory-roll of
fame.

'Perhaps,' suggested Miss Yarlow, 'Mr.
Vassett is waiting for the reappearance of the
Queen of Sheba carrying a roll of manuscript
in her hand containing an account of her visit
to the court of King Solomon.'

He may be,' answered Mr. Pierson coolly ;
but he has not mentioned the fact to me.
And now, Miss Yarlow, to revert to your
matter. Will you leave your " Six Actresses "
to be read, or will you adopt mv advice, and

first submit them to one or other of the
magazines V

I think,' said the lady, ' as you are so
evidently anxious to get rid of my manuscript
and myself, I had better take it with me.
The next time T come I hope Mr. Vassett will
be well enough to attend to his business for
himself.'

It is gratifying to find there is at least one
point on which we are agreed,' answered Mr.
Pierson, as he opened the cabinet and took out
the despised 'Actresses.'

Mr. Dawton, sir,' here interrupted Muggins,
opening the door — and never surely was
the sight of Muggins' face more welcome —
wishes to know if you could speak to him
for one minute. He says he need not now
detain you longer, but he has an appointment
'

Ask Mr. Dawton to walk in,' said Mr.
Pierson ; ' and, see. Muggins, put up this
manuscript. Can we send it anywhere for
you V he asked, turning to Miss Yarlow.

No, thank you,' answered that lady.

We will with pleasure,' urged Mr. Pierson ;
it is a bulky parcel for you to take.'

A workman should not be above carrying
his tools said Miss Yaiiow, with a beautiful
humility.

Good ! Excellent T exclaimed a voice behind
her ; and, turning, she beheld a most
singular - looking person, who bowed and
smiled, and hoped she would ' excuse an old
man's appreciation of her ready wdt.'

It was Mr. Dawton. Mr. Dawton dressed
as if it where a hot July afternoon — in grey
trousers, a white waistcoat, a swallow-tailed
coat, a washing necktie. The only item inconsistent,
perhaps, with the idea of sultry
weather was a pair of Hessian boots ; but the
boots were beautifully made and highly
polished, and detracted in no way from the
astounding effect of the general get-up.

Why, Dawton 1' exclaimed Mr. Pierson,
where are you going ? What have you been
doing ? Getting married this fine sunshiny
morning, eh ?'

No, my friend ; 1 married once — more
years ago than I can remember.'

And found it once too often, eh V

Not so. My draw in the matrimonial
lottery proved singularly fortunate. liCt who

else will — but we must not talk treason in the
presence of so fair a representative of her sex,'
Mr. Dawton broke off to say, with a winning
smile, and his hand laid on his heart : ' Aise
you going, madam ? I trust my appearance
was not inopportune V

You had better put that question to Mr.
Pierson,' answered Miss Yarlow, with a Parthian
glance shot at that gentleman ; and
then, announcing her intention of waiting in
the outer office till Muggins had finished tying
up her manuscript, she bade her late adversary
good-morning, and walked out of the inner
room, followed by a look of profound admiration
from Mr. Dawton, to whom she bowed
stiffly, and who held the door wide and
watched her retreating figure as he might have
done had she been retiring down one of the
wings " from the gaze of thousands.

Ah !' he exclaimed, as he reluctantly closed
the portal between him and this vision of
loveliness, ' there's nothing like woman.'

That depends a good deal, I should say, on
what the woman is,' returned Mr. Pierson,
drawing a deep sigh of relief. ' Well, and
what can I do for you V he added, motioning

to the chair Miss Yarlow had just vacated, and
flinging himself into the depths of the sacred
armchair.

Yassett's laid up, your clerk tells me,'
observed Mr. Dawton, sitting well on the edge
of his seat, and holding his hat in his hand,
after the most approved traditions of how a
gentleman (on the stage) comports himself
when paying a morning visit.

Mr. Pierson inclined his head in indolent
acquiescence.

Nothing serious the matter, I trust V

No — a cold — this beastly weather has been
too much for him ; for beastly weather it is,
though you are arrayed as if the young lambs
were frisking about in the green meadows,
and you were intending to join their gambols.'

'You think I really look the character,
then V

What character, in the name of Heaven V
asked Mr. Pierson.

The country squire — the good old country
gentleman of ancient lineage, and possessed of
broad acres, antiquated and prejudiced it maybe,
but true to his principles. Conservative
even in his dress — up in town to see a friend

at court, with a view of obtaining a lucrative
appointment abroad for his prodigal son. His
appearance tells its own story. If you were
to meet him in an omnibus now '

I should think, if I met you in an
omnibus, dressed as you are now, you had
either escaped from Bedlam, or were a fit
candidate for it.'

Ah 1 I see you don't understand '

The fun of a man at your time of life turning
out on such a morning in a white waistcoat
and a frilled shirt — no, faith, I can't
understand that. However, if the costume
pleases you, I am sure it may please me.'

Wait a bit, my boy — fair and softly wins
the day — wait till I send you tickets.'

Oh, it is a play, then ? I thought as
much ! But you are not going to perform in
Craven Street ? Why the deuce do you
choose to roam about the town with no
clothing on your back to speak of V

I attribute most of the success I have
achieved in my life — and mine, Pierson, has

been an eventful life By-the-bye,' Mr.

Dawton broke off to say, ' I suppose you
have read the manuscript I sent here some

short time since, containing just a few sittings
of an experience which has not been unexciting'?

I only looked at a page or two ; Mr.
Yassett read it.'

And what did you think of it — now,
candidly V

I thought it very poor staff indeed,'
answered Mr. Pierson, with a frankness which
could be considered as nothing less than appalling,
' but Yassett imagines something can be
done with it.'

You see, you are scarcely a judge of matters
connected with the noble profession,' said Mr.
Dawton, much as if he merely substituted this
sentence for — ' You see, you are only an
ignorant fool.'

No ; I do not profess to know much about
the stage, but I fancy I comprehend something
about literature.'

Ah ! I sent the sheets to sou in the rough ;
they require a little correction, I am aware — a
mere matter of detail,' said Mr. Dawton.

And who is going to undertake that correction
V asked Mr. Pierson, who certainly did
not desire to undertake it himself.

'Well, as you know, I have sons — all capable,

all good men and true. The mere preparation
for press need present no difficulty. I should
have liked to see Mr. Vassett/ proceeded Mr.
Dawton, with a wandering expression in his
eyes and a furtive glance, the meaning of which
]mr. Pierson could read perfectly, 'because I
want the work brought out soon — now, in fact,
when all London will be ringing with my name
and you and I could not settle terms, I suppose
V

*No, certainly not,' answered Mr. Pierson,
with a prompt acquiescence which proved anything
but gratifying to Mr. Dawton.

I wish I could have seen Mr. Vassett,' he
said, as if he had not made the same statement
before.

Well, I have little doubt he will be able to
attend to business in a few days.'

Ah ! but I wanted to see him this day ' —
which fact he need not indeed have told Mr.
Pierson, who comprehended thoroughly not
merely that he wanted to see Mr. Yassett, but
also why he wanted to see him.

There was a pause. Mr. Pierson stirred the
hire, and Mr. Dawton looked at the blaze almost
as intently as Miss Yarlow had done.

'Well, they are a queer set !' considered Mr.
Pierson, referring, like Mr. Muggins, to authors
in general, and forgetting how extremely odd
he himself could be on occasion. ' I wonder
how long it will be before he speaks V

It was not long — silence could not be
reckoned amongst Mr. Dawton's failings.

Do you think,' he began in a subdued and
confidential tone, * Mr. Vassett is so ill that
reading a note — a very short note — would hurt
him

I don't suppose it would,' answered Mr.
Pierson ; but he spoke doubtfully, and not at
all as a man might have been expected to speak
who knew perfectly well his principal was able
to come downstairs to attend to his business
had it pleased him to do so. ' Should you like
to write him a note V

Thank you. Yes, I should ;' and Mr.
Dawton laid his hat down carefully, drew his
chair to the table, accepted with a Inland inclination
of his head the paper ]Mr. Pierson
placed before him, and took pen in hand, ashe
might have done had the eyes of pit,
stalls, boxes, and gallery been concentrated
upon his act.

Never a man existed so utterly permeated
by his profession as poor Mr. Dawton. When
he laid him down to sleep and drew the sheets
up under his elderly chin, there can be no
question he felt still before the footlights, and
in his last conscious waking moments posed
for the ' gods.'

Though he dipped the pen in the ink he did
not write, however. He sat considering what
he wanted to say, and how he had best say it ;
then, probably finding the task more difficult
than he expected, he said to Mr. Pierson :

I do not think I need trouble Mr. Vassett
with a note at all, if you would only be so kind
as to take a message to him. Could you do
this for me V

Mr. Pierson thought he could, but before
fully committing himself, intimated it might
be as well for him to know what the message
was.

Well, the fact is,' said Mr. Dawton, * I have
most unexpectedly and unaccountably forgotten
to bring any money out with me, and there is
something I wish particularly to pay this morning.
If you explain the difficulty in which I
am placed to Mr. Vassett, perhaps he would

be so good as to advance me a nominal sum,
say five pounds. I should feel infinitely
obliged to him ; I really should — and to
you also,' added Mr. Dawton as an afterthought.


I will ask him with pleasure,' replied Mr.
Pierson ; * but of course I can't say whether
he has any five-pound notes lying about,' with
which depressing observation the reader disappeared,
leaving Mr. Dawton to go through
the charm, ' He will, he will not ' — minus the
property ' flower.

Mr. Pierson was not long absent. He came
back almost directly, and saying, ' Yes, you
can have five pounds,' opened a drawer, from
which he took Mr. Vassett's cheque-book.

;mr. Dawton tried hard to hide the relief he
felt under the words,

I am infinitely obliged to him,' uttered ina
majestic tone and with a dignified composure ;
but Mr. Pierson saw his whole face change
its fashion for a moment with delight, and
laughed to himself as he went up the stairs
with the cheque-book.

He had not reached the first landing, however,
before his name was pronounced, and

looking back, he beheld Mr. Dawton making
mystical signs for him to return.

Mr. Pierson was the last man on earth todo
anything of the sort unless he knew exactly
what he was wanted for.

One moment !' exclaimed Mr. Dawton.

Yes,' said the reader, standing still.

Not crossed,' entreated Mr. Dawton ina
stage-whisper, putting his hand to the
side of his mouth, so that no breath of his
utterance might be wafted along the passage.
Open.'

All right,' answered Mr. Pierson ; and then
Mr. Davison walked back into the office on tiptoe,
and as if there were mortal sickness in
the house, to be suddenly confronted with an
unexpected apparition, which addressed him
sharply and imperatively with the words :

Where's Mr. Pierson V

Madam,' said Mr. Dawton, backing a step
or two, for he felt really frightened, ' the
gentleman will wait upon you directly.'

He had better 1' exclaimed the lady, walking
round the table ; and flinging herself into
Mr. Yassett's armchair, she commenced beating;
a tattoo on the floor with her little feet.

which she made no scruple of freely exhibiting
to Mr. Dawton.

Will you — may I offer you the newspaper
pending Mr. Pierson's return X he asked, timidly
(extending the Morning Post, which he had
brought in from the outer office.

No she snapped, and beat a louder tattoo
than before.

Mr. Dawton retreated as if he had got a slap
in the face, and stood looking in surprise, not
unmixed with terror, at this last specimen of
angelic woman.'

Now, is that man ever coming V she cried,
suddenly turning sharply round, and catching
Mr. Dawton staring at her with more curiosity
than good-breeding.

I assure you, madam, he will be back almost
immediately,' he stammered.

Go and fetch him at once.'

If she had told him in that tone to take off
his head, Mr. Dawton would have tried to obey
her ; and accordingly he again went out into
the passage, where he ran up against Mr. Pierson,
who had paused for a moment at sound
of the well-known voice.

Stormy weather impending,' he thought ;

VOL. II. 27

and then Mr. Dawton appeared as if he had
been blown out of the room, and said, with a
scared face and in a tremulous voice — * A lady
a — a lady '

I know,' interrupted Mr. Pierson. ' Here's
your cheque — put it up. You did not let out
1 was with Vassett, I hope, did you V

N — n — no,' answered Mr. Dawton, who at
the moment had not the slightest recollection
of anything he might have ' let out.' ' I have
left my hat in the room.'

Come and get it then,' advised Mr. Pierson.
Bless my soul, she won't eat you.'

Take her for all in all !' began Mr.

Dawton, but Mr. Pierson was by this time in
the room, and the storm had burst.

MR. Pierson ' EXPRESSES HIS SURPRISE.

Quarter of an hour passed : comparative
calm had succeeded to
tempest, and Mr. Pierson was
still alive. There were times during that
exceedingly bad fifteen minutes when he
held his head in both hands to make sure it
was still on his body. Like a hurricane, Lady
Hilda's passion threatened to carry everything
away before it. For once Mr. Dawton was
stricken dumb ; in the outer office the usually
phlegmatic Muggins stood listening, ready, ashe
afterwards stated, to * make a clean bolt of
it,' should flight become necessary. On the
first floor, with door ajar, Mr. Vassett
hearkened, appalled by her ladyship's torrent

27—2

of indignation, doubtful whether, in spite of
anything Mr. Pierson might have said on the
subject of his ailments, he ought not to
descend to his reader's assistance. Prudence,
however, overcame valour, and Mr. Yassett
decided that upon the whole he had better let
Pierson fight out the battle alone.

Bravely enough Mr. Pierson stood his
ground; though her ladyship's balls were
whistling round him, though he had to bear
the brunt of a hot and heavy cannonade, his
courage never really failed.

It was bad while it lasted,' he remarked
afterwards, * and it lasted a long time.'

Nevertheless, spite of the fury and violence
of the storm, he manage-ed now and then to
edge in a word. Notwithstanding the enemy's
fire, he stood firm to his own guns.

As Lady Hilda had altered her book, she
need never expect to find any good publisher
to stand godfather to it.' ' Her ladyship
could, of course, if she doubted the fact, take
it the round of the trade — to Hangman, Chapman
and Hall, Bentley, Hurst and Blackett, or
any other firm she could think of.' 'He felt
as satisfied as he could feel on any subject that

she would not get a respectable house to put
their imprint upon it

Then I will get a house that is not respectable
retorted her ladyship.

I don't think you will answered jVIr.
Pierson, ' unless your husband proves willing
to give a guarantee for damages

Don't talk to me about my husband !'
cried Lady Hilda, and then the storm,
which had lulled for a moment, burst forth
again.

But at last it really seemed as if the worst
were over, as if her irate ladyship had exhausted
her almost inexhaustible powers of
speech. She saw, in fact, there was nothing
to be done with j\Ir. Pierson ; and so, now
flinging herself once again into Mr. Vassett's
chair — she had stood during the controversy
so as to give greater effort to her threats
and denunciations — she said she meant to
remain there till Mr. Vassett was produced.

He undertook to bring out my novel,' she
said, ' and I must hear from his own lips why
he refuses to do so.'

I am afraid your ladyship will have to
wait some time, then,' said Mr. Pierson. * Vir.

Vassett is very ill indeed. I fear he will not
be able to come downstairs for some weeks.'

If that is all answered Lady Hilda, * I am
quite able to go upstairs this minute ;' and she
started from her seat, as if to carry her suggestion
into immediate effect.

Mr. Vassett is in bed,' explained Mr. Pierson,
with reckless mendacity. ' You would not
go to him there !'

I would go to him if he were in his coffin,
sir,' said Lady Hilda.

Ah, that would be quite another affair !'
remarked the reader, who could not have
withheld his tongue from an observation of
this sort if life itself had depended ujDon his
silence.

Lady Hilda looked at him. Could a glance
have killed, Mr. Pierson had never again
returned home to his wife and family. Her
eyes literally seemed to flash fire ; and as she
stood there, erect and indignant, waiting,
apparently, to swoop down and destroy her
quarry, Mr. Dawton thought he beheld before
him the very incarnation of a handsome
virago.

The storm, which had seemed passing away,

now gave signs of working round again. The
sky grew black, the atmosphere thick and
heavy, and there appeared no likelihood of
another thunderclap being averted, when, ' for
the first time on any stage,' Mr. Dawton quite
unconsciously played the part of ' special
Providence.'

Hitherto he had failed to get his hat. Fearing
to venture out into the open, and so draw
Lady Hilda's attention to himself, he remained
behind Mr. Pierson, and, under cover of that
gentleman's body, made several futile attempts
to secure his head covering. Now, however,
feeling satisfied another tempest was impending,
which might prove even worse than any
of its predecessors, he * dodged ' from side to
side of Mr. Pierson in a manner which must have
won the approval of his particular friends, the
gods ; and all his eyes fastened on his hat, and
his whole energies devoted to securing it, forgot
for a moment the awful presence in which
he stood.

Lady Hilda's attention was at last arrested
by his gestures.

What does that creature want V she asked
Mr. Pierson sharply. ' Is he mad ?'

'No — your ladyship — no,' stammered out
Mr. Dawton. ' I — I do not want to interrupt
I am sure — and I beg a thousand pardons —
but '

What is it ?' said Mr. Pierson, who had
for some time been oblivious of his presence.

He wants his hat. Can't you see V

And snatching up the extremely shiny
article in question, Lady Hilda was ' graciously'
pleased to thrust it towards Mr.
Dawton in the most rude and ungracious
manner possible.

I beg your pardon, I am sure,' apologized
Mr. Pierson ; ' I had quite forgotten. This
is a gentleman, Lady Hilda,' he added, thankful
for even a moment's diversion, ' with whose
name I have no doubt you are well acquainted
'

Lady Hilda looked at the actor curiously, as
she might at a chameleon, or a ]prairie dog, ora
kangaroo, or any other animal she did not
know familiarly.

He now came forward a step, as if to
the footlights, and, laying his hand on his
white waistcoat, and bowing profoundly, murmured
:

Dawton — Dawton, at your ladyship's service.'


What's his name V demanded Lady Hilda,
turning to Mr. Pierson.

Dawson said the reader.
Never heard it before,' observed her ladyship,
with contemptuous brevity.

A mere tyro in the arena where your
ladyship has won renown,' explained Mr.
Dawton, who had not the faintest idea even
of her ladyship's lawful name. ' The few
laurel leaves I have been permitted to gather,'
he added, touching his forehead, which was
adorned at that moment by a perfectly new
wig, ' have been culled by me in Thespian
groves. On the mimic stage the name of
Dawton has achieved distinction — three
generations have trodden the boards, and left,
if I may so express myself, an imprint on the
sands behind them. I have sons who will, I
think — in literature, in art, in the drama — keep
up the old traditions ; and, for myself, I am
your ladyship's most humble and admiring
servant.'

Lady Hilda laughed — actually laughed.
Like Mr. Donagh, she had a keen sense of

humour when the joke was not at her own
expense ; and the spectacle of Mr. Dawton,
dressed as he was and acting for the benefit of
herself and Mr. Pierson, might indeed have
moved the mirth of Mug-oins, who in the outer
office heard Lady Hilda's laugh, and wondered
how Pierson had managed to brings her to at
last.'

This is delicious,' she remarked, turning to
Mr. Pierson as the only appreciative individual
within reach ; and then she smiled sweetly on
Mr. Dawton, who, thawing; under the influence
of this unlooked-for condescension,
proceeded :

It is in the field of fiction, as I understand,
your ladyship's proudest triumphs have been
achieved ; and yet, if without impertinence I —
who do possess some knowledge of that which
is, after all, the noblest profession of all, the
living, breathing, moving presentment of our
actual existence — may venture such an observation,
I feel confident that could your ladyship
only be induced to represent before an
audience the indignation — righteous indignation,
I doubt not — it has been my privilege to
hear you enunciate in this room, you would

bring down the house. No, I never in all my
long experience heard anything so magnificent.
Siddons herself could not have done it,
madam.'

Because Siddons had never such cause for
righteous anger,' answered Lady Hilda. ' I
don't know, Mr. Dawton — that is your name,
is it not ? — what sort of treatment you may
meet with here, but I can only say Mr.
Vassett treats me shamefully. He keeps me
without money, and he desires also to prevent
my becoming famous. I have written a novel
oh, such a novel ! — one that must cause a
perfect furore, and now he says quite coolly —
or rather, Mr. Pierson says so for him — he
won't publish the book unless I cut out all
the finest passages, and reduce it to the dull
level of propriety and stupidity old ladies of
both sexes have set up as the standard of
literary perfection.'

Poor Mr. Dawton ! With Mr. Vassett's
cheque in his pocket, with the hope of more
cheques from Mr. Vassett in his heart, he felt
the publisher's side of the question was that
he ought to espouse ; the cause of propriety,
even if propriety involved stupidity, the

safest for him to champion. But, upon the
other hand, he was at close quarters with a
beautiful termagant, with ' angelic woman ' in
one of her most stormy moods, with a lady (of
title) who seemed capable of doing anything if
crossed, and yet who, in Mr. Dawton's then
opinion, only required, like all the rest of her
charming sex, a little discreet management to
be delightful.

For the latter reason, and also because Mr.
Vassett was absent and Lady Hilda present,
with a deprecating glance towards Mr. Pierson,
and feeling, as he pathetically put the matter
subsequently, as Naaman after he was cured of
his leprosy must when he bowed himself in the
house of Ripon, Mr. Dawton declared her
ladyship had good reason for complaint ; that
if any passages were excised from his poor
book, he should feel the operation acutely.
But he was certain there must be some mistake.
The matter only required explanation,
and Mr. Vassett would see it was put right at
once.

I have had the pleasure of Mr. Yassett's
acquaintance for over twenty years,' he said,
and during the whole of that time I have

never known him to do an ungentlemanly
or ungenerous action. Besides, he could
not treat your ladyship's slightest wish with
discourtesy ; he is kindness itself, most gallant
'

At this point Mr. Pierson interrupted the
proceedings.

Dawton,' he suggested, ' don't you want to
go to Fleet Street V

Yes, certainly. I have an appointment
there.'

Then hadn't you better keep it V

Mr. Dawton coloured up to the roots of his
wig ; but he had not lived his life, even such
as it was, for nothing. Though Mr. Pierson's
lack of politeness, as he told the reader afterwards,
' entered into his very soul,' he turned
with a very good affectation of indifference to
Lady Hilda, observing, ' There is scant ceremony
amongst friends, your ladyship will
perceive,' bowed profoundly to her, and saying,
* Good-morning, Pierson,' in a tone of hurt
dignity to that gentleman, retired from the
scene.

'Thank heaven observed Lady Hilda
piously, as the door closed behind him.

'one bore is disposed of! Well, Mr. Pierson
V

Well, Lady Hilda V

Is it to be peace or war?'

So far as I am concerned, peace always
towards your ladyship ; but you are aware I
have a duty towards my employer also.'

fiddle-de-dee!'

And he has a duty to discharge towards
himself.'

Meaning he won't publish my book V

Meaning he cannot publish your book as it
'stands.'

Then I must take it elsewhere ; and I have
been so ill, Mr. Pierson. I went to stay with a
friend in the country for a few days, and got
laid up there, and it was such a horrid house !
And then, when I came back to town, expecting
to find the book finished — no proofs, no
letters, no anything ! I wrote to the printers
at once ; they referred me to Mr. Vassett.
I went to the printers ; they referred me once
again to Mr. Yassett. Now I come here, and I
can't see Mr. Yassett, who I believe is keeping
out of the way. I feel quite satisfied he is
afraid or ashamed tg meet me.'

Whatever shame there may be in the
matter,' said Mr. Pierson boldly, ' certainly
does not attach itself to Mr. Yassett. To be
quite plain, Lady Hilda, you tried to play him
a most shabby trick, and one which, had it
succeeded, might have proved his ruin as a
publisher.'

But why ? Everyone would have read the
book !'

And said any man capable of sending out
such a work was not fit to remain in the
trade.'

Oh ! of course it is your interest to take
his part.'

There is such a thing in the world as
honesty, though you. Lady Hilda, do not seem
to believe in its existence,' remarked Mr. Pierson
in a tone of conscious virtue.

I do not think there is any audience,' suggested
her sceptical ladyship, ' and moral
sentiments of all kinds are quite thrown away
upon me.'

Indeed, I should imagine so,' replied the
reader with disconcerting readiness.

I wish I had never heard the name of
Vassett !' exclaimed Lady Hilda. ' If I had

only in the first instance gone to some good
publisher, I might have been a rich woman by
this time.'

It is not too late for you to take this book
to a good publisher.'

And how in the world could I account for
the novel being in print V

Mr. Pierson laughed outright as he answered
:

I should not presume to suggest to Lady
Hilda Hicks the particular excuse it might
seem most expedient to make use of. Your
ladyship's vi\dd imagination may be trusted
to find some way out of the difficulty.'

She did not speak for a moment ; but
then she broke out again with this plaint :

And I never in all my life wanted money
so much — wanted it so cruelly.'

If you had dealt fairly by Mr. Yassett, you
need not have wanted money,' returned Mr.
Pierson, who was getting too tired of the discussion
to waste his breath in what he called
figures of speech.'

And till I can find an accommodating and

o

sensible publisher, I shall not be able to get a
penny, I suppose ?'

I really do not know. Mr. Vassett will
not advance even that small sum, I am very
sure.'

'Come now, Mr. Pierson, could you not
persuade him to bring out my book as it
stands V

I could not if I would, and I would not if
I could,' answered Mr. Pierson, who was becoming
quite disagreeable in the strength of
his rectitude.

There is really not an atom of harm in
anything I have written,' she persisted.

We will not travel over all that ground
again, if you please. Lady Hilda.'

All I wanted was to shame my husband
into making me some decent allowance.'

Mr. Pierson maintained a discreet silence.

I am quite sure you could not guess
the pittance he has the conscience, or rather
the want of conscience, to dole out to his
wife.'

Your ladyship mentioned the amount when
you first came here,' answered Mr. Pierson.
Six hundred per annum. I remember at
the time thinking it was not actual starvation.'


VOL. II. 28

Perhaps it might not be to you.'

Perhaps it might not be to a great many
people answered the reader.

But to me such a sum means absolute
penury. And what makes the matter all the
worse is the knowledge that twelve hundred a
year would be no more to Mr. Hicks than —
than what shall I say ?'

Twelve pence to me supplied Mr. Pierson.


Thank you ; I do not know that I could find
a better simile.'

And Lady Hilda smiled sweetly, as if she
had paid Mr. Pierson's pecuniary position
some delicate compliment.

Yes, I believe he is enormously rich said
the reader, twisting and untwisting a piece of
paper as he spoke. ' I wonder how people
get to be so rich. Somebody was saying the
other day Mr. Hicks had bought an estate, and
paid — how much down for it 1 — quarter of a
million, I fancy — yes, I think it was a quarter
of a million

Lady Hilda leaned forward and listened with
parted lips and eager eyes. He had interested
her at last.

Where is the estate V she asked.

Let me see, did I hear ? — I must have
done — Stafford ? Field ? Dulwich ? — no ;
where on earth was it ? What's the place
out somewhere to the north of London — not
Horsey, or Highgate ; Southgate — that's it,
Southgate.'

The property that belonged to the Dundas
family — do you mean that V

^h. Pierson shook his head, and contrived
to look as if the subject had not contained the
smallest interest for him.

Some big man owned the place,' he said ;
that is about all I know, except — yes, by-the-bye,
I was nearly forgetting the most important
part of the business — the person who told
Mr. Yassett said it was currently reported
Mr. Hicks meant to entertain Loyalty this
summer.'

Lady Hilda jumped straight off her chair,
and then sat down again.

And pray,' she asked, ' who is going to do
the honours of this new house for Mr. Hicks
when he receives Royalty V

I can't say, I am sure. He has a sister,
hasn't he ? I feel almost positive I heard 



thing about a sister in connection with the
matter.'

If Mr. Dawton had seen her ladyship then,
he might have found something to say about
bringing down the house A look which
contained volumes swept over her expressive
face. She did not speak, but Mr. Pierson
understood. There was no need of words to
tell him the strife which had raged between
husband and wife was as nothing in comparison
to the war Lady Hilda felt she could
undertake against her sister-in-law.

At last Mr. Hicks's better-half broke the
silence.

That book must be published,' was her remark.
' She is in it.'

Mr. Pierson raised his eyebrows and shrugged
his shoulders.

I really do not think,' he said, ' a publisher
of any standing could be found to bring out
your novel ; and this I know, that nothing
would induce Mr. Vassett to do so.'

Oh ! that I clearly understand,' snapped
back Lady Hilda.

There ensued another pause, which Mr.
Pierson suddenly ended by unexpectedly

throwing out this remark : ' I suppose your
settlements are all right V

Lady Hilda looked at him in amazement.

What do you mean V she asked.

But of course they are,' continued Mr.
Pierson, as il' answering some doubt raised
by himself, ' considering the nature of the
policy which has been pursued.'

I do not understand. What are you talking
about 1' cried Lady Hilda. ' Of course he
is bound to pay me six hundred a year.'

I was not thinking of that,' answered Mr.
Pierson ; but he refrained from saying what
he was thinking of.

I wish you would explain !' exclaimed Lady
Hilda irritably. *You and Mr. Vassett are
both so extremely fond of dark utterances.'

I am not fond of dark utterances,' said
Mr. Pierson deprecatingly, ' but I am equally
averse to giving unnecessary offence. It was
foolish of me to speak ; only, as the idea
crossed my mind, I gave expression to it without
due consideration.'

Evidently you wish to drive me mad,' she
returned. ' Tell me instantly what your idea
was. I insist upon knowing.'

*You must not be angry with me, then,' he
pleaded ; ' I admit it was a very silly notion,
but it came into my head without rhyme or
reason. What I thought of was this : I wondered
if you were quite independent of Mr.
Hicks, and then I knew of course you must
be, or you would try to conciliate him a
little.'

I am independent of him so far as that
wretched six hundred a year goes.'

But was no other settlement made than
that r

I don't know what you mean.'

Was no settlement made before your
marriage T

*No ; there ought to have been, of course,
but there was not. I was dreadfully taken in,
Mr. Pierson.'

Mr. Pierson thought she was not the only
person taken in, but he refrained from saying
so.

Then,' he went on, ' if anything were to
happen to Mr. Hicks — supposing he died, ina
word — is that six hundred a year so settled
that you would continue to enjoy it as a
widow V

You ought to be sure, Lady Hilda,' said
Mr. Pierson impressively.

Why, the man couldn't let me starve.'

Men have left their widows to starve ; but
you can't be serious, Lady Hilda. If the
whole of your future had really been in Mr.
Hicks's power to make or mar, you would never
have so mercilessly ridiculed him and his
friends and relations.'

I only wish I had the chance of getting
what I have said about them all in this last
book published.'

Unless you are very certain as to your
position I do not think you are wise. Lady
Hilda ; but, I beg your ladyship's pardon, I
have no right to interfere in an affair which is
certainly no business of mine.'

It is only I who have to suffer,' she
answered, in accents of the deepest sincerity ;
and then, like Miss Yarlow, she sat for a
moment looking earnestly at the fire.

With at least equal earnestness Mr. Pierson
looked at her. * The spell is working,' he
thought.

Height !' said her ladyship, at last rising

and gathering her shawl in graceful folds
round her still beautiful figure. ' Height !
you men are all alike — you think of nothing
except yourselves. Well, I have not done
much good by coming out this wretched
day;

It is a wretched day,' agreed Mr. Pierson.
' Tell Mr. Vassett I consider he has treated
me shamefully, and that I shall advise every
person I know never to have anything to do
with him.'

I am very sorry to hear you say so.'

I do say so. Some day, perhaps, he will
regret having let me slip out of his hands ;
but that will not do me much good.'

She lingered a little longer, only in order
apparently to express the same idea again indifferent
words, but at last she took her departure,
and Mr. Pierson rushed upstairs to
give Mr. Vassett a full account of the interview
full, that is to say, so far as the novel was
concerned.

When Mr. Vassett dined at five o'clock, he
invited his reader to partake of that meal with
him, and during its progress they talked a
good deal about Lady Hilda and her book, and

the pity it seemed so good a selling author
should be lost to Craven Street.

Mr. Vassett was in the act of asking Mr.
Pierson if he would take a little more beef,
when Muggins appeared with a note, which he
said a special messenger had brought from 
Hicks. It was directed to the reader,
and ran as follows :

/ want to see you at once. Come without a
moment's delay.'

Mr. Pierson did not wait for that second
helping of meat.

Finish your dinner,' remonstrated Mr.
Vassett ; but Mr. Pierson, with a queer smile,
said Lady Hilda was of a great deal more importance
than dinner.

Now,' he went on, ' if I can get that book
on your own terms, have I carte blanche to
deal with her ?

Mr. Vassett did not like to be hurried, but
he answered, ' Yes ;' only adding, ' don't compromise
me.'

You may be sure I shall not do that,' answered
Mr. Pierson, and went off joyously.

Before he parted from her ladyship that

evening lie liacl promised to get Mr. Vassett
to publish what Lady Hilda called 'a mutilated
edition' of her novel, to effect a reconciliation
with Mr. Hicks, to so arrange matters that
Loyalty should be entertained by her ladyship
instead of Miss Hicks, and to endeavour
to procure a sum of money to rid the fair
authoress of some pressing duns.

They separated on the best of terms.

By-the-bye/ said her ladyship, after bidding
Mr. Pierson * good-night,' detaining him for a
moment, ' what has become of that girl I saw
at Craven Street one day V

I have not seen her for some time,' he
answered.

She has not set the Thames on fire, then V

Not yet,' amended Mr. Pierson ; 'not yet.'

MR. Facere.

R. LACEEE.'

That was all. Glen bowed, and
they became acquainted.

A minute previously and she had been unaware
such a person existed ; and now, quietly,
and as a mere matter of course, he walked
into her life to fashion and change the whole
of it.

Looking at the stranger by the leaping firelight,
she saw a tall, grave man, clad in deep
mourning, who to her young eyes seemed
cjuite elderly, and who, in fact, was nearly
double her own age.

Certainly not the ideal of male beauty, as
that beauty appears to a miss in her teens ;

certainly not the hero of Glen's imagination,
if an imagination constantly engaged in casting
about for heroes of all sorts and aspects and
degrees could be supposed to hold one especial
image in its innermost recesses.

Like no man, however, she had ever seen
before — and at that time Glen considered her
experience almost exhaustive, for since the
wide field of London was opened to view she
had kept an attentive watch both on her own
sex and the other, with the view of completely
furnishing a gallery of types of character for
future use or reference.

A pair of brown eyes glanced down on her
with a kindly yet quizzical expression — an expression
she learned later on indicated the
tenderest heart that ever throbbed, joined to a
sense of humour as subtle as it was quiet.
Glen was deadly tired, but she did not appear
to be so then. On the contrary, coming into
the warm room out of the cold evening air,
and meeting a visitor when she did not expect
to find anyone except her father — the ready
blood had rushed to her face — and at the
moment she might have stood for a picture of
girlish health and strength.

Such beauty as God had given her — and it
was not much — happened at the moment to be
well in evidence, but Mr. Lacere's calm and
inscrutable countenance expressed no admiration
as he looked at Mr. Westley's daughter.
She did not know then, and she never knew
afterwards, what his first impression of her
was. Perhaps he could not have told himself,
save that he saw the mould she was cast in
differed from the pattern of the conventional
young women he had hitherto been privileged
to meet.

Glen,' said Mr. Westley, ' Mr. Lacere will
have some tea. I had a fall to-day when I
was out, and he not merely assisted me to my
feet again, but insisted I should sit for a while
in his office, and actually accompanied me here.
He did not wish to stop, but I told him you
would not be long, and '

You had a fall, papa V interrupted Glen a
little anxiously, but less anxiously than Mr.
Lacere had expected. ' How did it happen ? —
where did you fall ?'

I do not know how it happened in the
least answered Mr. Westley. ' I found myself
down and I found myself up, thanks to Mr.

Lacere's strong arm and ready help. As to
the where, it was fortunately for me in Side
Lane, otherwise I might not have met with so
good an example of a modern Samaritan.'

I am very glad to have been of the slightest
use,' said Mr. Lacere. He had not spoken
since Glen came into the room, and involuntarily
she glanced at him once again.

A pleasant voice, but not the voice belonging
to that of any hero in Glen's mental
collection. A slight lisp, which, arising more
from shyness than any natural impediment,
disappeared as he grew mote at home with his
company ; a smile not exactly sad, yet that had
a look akin to sadness underlying it ; something
about the face, something in the tone,
something in the expression, an indefinable
something pervading the whole man which
arrested Glen's attention and puzzled her !

But she had no prevision that the time
would ever come, when even in memory's
glass she should be unable to see that face
because of a mist of blinding tears ; that the
days were to dawn when, in the morning and
at noon and at evening, she could not speak
aloud his name ; when to hear that voice once

more it would have seemed little to relinquish
fame which had grown valueless, life which
had lost its savour : no, she had no thought or
knowledge or fear of the trouble she was going
on to meet, and yet already she was standing
in the shadows cast by that so far-distant
future, then apparently as remote as the great
dim awful eternity itself.

Meanwhile !Mr. Lacere was surprised she
did not evince more concern about her father's
fail. All his life he had lived amongst people
who attached a considerable amount of importance
to slight accidents and small ailments,
who were extremely fond of the pastime which
is well known as making mountains out of
molehills, who bemoaned themselves over cut
fingers and burnt hands, and treasured such
accidents as things of great interest and value
in the family archives, and he could not consequently
understand an affection which was
not fussy, and fidgety, and foolish. Any one
of these three words he would have repudiated
as utterly inapplicable to the tender feminine
solicitude he had been accustomed to witness ;
but no other could express the useless and
maudlin sympathy some persons are fond of

showing on occasions of no importance, while
they regard with non-comprehending wonder
the wreck of a life — ruined hopes — a broken
heart.

As for Glen, truth to tell, she did not attach
much importance to the accident. When once
her father said nothing was broken or dislocated
or sprained, and that he felt no ill effects from
his fall, she dismissed the matter from her
mind. In her own London experience — short
though that experience might be considered by
some — she had herself made personal trial of
the hardness of the pavements too often to
regard a tumble — many tumbles, indeed — as
anything abnormal.

So far she had found the thoroughfares so
slippery that to keep up — not to go down —
seemed to her by far the most extraordinary
achievement.

She was now getting a little accustomed to
the ' greasy ' stones and the coal-gratings, and
the slippery basement lights ; and the boys'
slides and the orange peel, and the many other
traps which make London to a new-comer a
terror and a snare ; but in her early days of
metropolitan peregrination she had over andover

aofain measured her leno;tli on the side-paths,
and come down on her knees ignominiously,
and been greatly indebted for help
to chance passers-by, and become an object of
derision to the street Arabs, and been laughed
at, and been forced to laugh at herself, till it
had become an actual impossibility for her to
conceive of anyone walking day after day and
not at least occasionally ' coming to grief.'

*Let us have tea, dear, soon, will you 1'
said Mr. Westley, who, being by this time
pretty well accustomed to the usual lodging-house
delay in the apparently simple matter of
boiling a kettle, felt it necessary to remind
Glen they were not now at Ballyshane, where
no one need ever have waited two minutes for
hot water, where fires had no unhappy way
of ' getting black,' and servants were not in
the habit of turning sulky.

Yes, papa, I will take off my bonnet at
once;' and Glen turned and left the room and
ran upstairs, just pausing in the passage to ask
the small maid-of-all-work, who always looked
as if she had been blackening her face instead
of the grate, if she could bring up the
kettle.

VOL. II. 29

Yes, miss ; I'll make it boil,' was the encouraging
answer, an answer the exact meaning
of which Glen knew so well, that meeting the
landlady's daughter, who had just been bedizening
herself, on the first landing, she said
persuasively :

Papa wants his tea so much. Miss Dingwell.
Do you think wee could have it soon V

Law, yes !' replied Miss Dingwell, who
bore no malice ' to Glen, though that young
person had refused many well-meant offers to
take her about a bit.' ' I'll help to get it
ready myself; and you'll like some sort of cake,
won't you ? and if I was you I'd. send for a jar
of marmalade and potted beef. Nothing but
bread-and-butter does look so mean ; and
now your beau has come we must make as
much as we can of him.'

Glen turned almost rigid with indignation.

What are you talking about. Miss Ding-well
V she exclaimed. ' I never saw the
gentleman before in my life ; and if he does
not like to eat bread-and-butter he must do
without food, for I shall get nothing else for
him ' — after which ultimatum, and giving Miss
DingwelFs too-ready tongue no time for retort,

Glen entered her own room and banged the
door.

Well, I'm sure !' exclaimed Miss Dingwell,
surveying her own person over her left shoulder
with considerable approval ; ' I dare say she
won't change her dress, or smooth her hair, or
anything ;' in which surmise Miss Dingwell
proved to be both right and wrong.

Glen did smooth her hair, but she did not
change her dress. Her heart was very hot
within her, for she did not find it easy to forgive
or forget such a speech as that made
by the fascinating young person who to the
country girl's mind seemed the embodiment of
everything most hateful and offensive in
woman. She had heard of Miss Dingwell's
lovers ad nauseam — in that house she had
grown weary of the word ' man.' It was one
of the trials of her then life that their landlady's
daughter would persist in thinking she
was even such a one as herself. Hitherto Glen
had been happily exempt from experiences of
this sort. But for this fact her mind might
not have been left so free for the ' great work '
with which it was occupied; still, just then, even
as regarded her mighty enterprise of getting

29—2

lier writings placed before the British public,
Glen felt singularly disheartened, and perhaps
for this reason Miss Dingwell's blow struck
home with double force. At that moment she
felt as if doomed to those lodgings for life, as
though she would never again be able to get
a kettle boiled when she wanted it, or take herself
and her belongings beyond reach of people
who could scarcely speak, even with the best
intentions, without rubbing her sensitive fur
the wrong way.

If Miss Dingwell had simpered complaisantly
at her own reflection in the glass, not so
Glenarva Westley. Fagged and worn, and
pale and haggard was the face presented for
her consideration by a most unflattering mirror,
and she went down into the parlour feeling as
satisfied as Mr. Kelly had done 'she was
not much to look at.'

Mr. Lacere and her father seemed getting on
exceedingly well together, and as the tea-tray,
on which Miss Dingwell had considerately
placed the second best 'set,' generously adding
ma's electro pot,' very shortly made its appearance,
and the brass kettle followed in its wake
with marvellous and unprecedented speed, the

awkward pause which ensued upon Glen's
appearance proved of short duration.

Mr. Lacere ate bread-and-butter as if he
liked it, and the three, who were soon talking,
might have knowTi each other for years, so
frank and unembarrassed was their conversation.


Just at first Glen felt the' unwonted splendour
of Mrs. Dingle's second-best set and
the glitter of that electro-plated teapot weigh
down her soul ; but she soon took comfort
from the reflection that Mr. Lacere could not
possibly be acquainted with the pattern of the
delft deemed good enough for the everyday
use of Mrs. Dingle's 'parlours,' while his
intimacy with the battered Britannia-metal
pot was of a similarly negative description ;
and her mind being set at rest on these points,
she was able to lend an attentive ear to what
her father and his visitor were saying — nay,
even after a time to join in the talk herself

Mr. Lacere tells me, Glen,' observed Mr.
Westley, after he had asked his daughter for
another cup of tea, ' that we are unwise to remain
here — that it is not at all a healthy
neighbourhood.'

Quite the contrary said Mr. La cere.

'Why, I thought exclaimed Glen simply,
that all parts of London were alike. I don't
mean as regards fashion, of course,' she went
on, as both gentlemen laughed a little at the
innocence of her remark.

Where you are living now,' explained Mr.
Lacere, ' was once all a swamp, or rather a
lake. You might as well be at the bottom of a
well.'

Oh !' said Glen, not exactly understanding
all the jDains and penalties attaching to such a
position. At Ballyshane people had never
thought about healthy or unhealthy localities.
Their greatest anxiety was to keep themselves
from being blown away by the wild gales
which swept do^Ti upon them from the
Atlantic. A house in a hollow was considered
a residence to be desired ; and those few trees,
which Londoners seem never happy save when
they are lopping or grubbing up, were esteemed,
in a neighbourhood where it was difficult to get
anything except grass as hard as wire to grow,
possessions as precious as springs in the desert.

Not all the refuse fish left on the beach to
rot, not all the dirt and squalor of some of the

poor homes, was able to breed a pestilence.
The kindly sea flowed over the sands, and
deodorized them twice a day ; and the keen
salt breezes carried the poisonous smells far
inland from the Wretched huts down by the
Shame, which were the despair of Mr. Beattie,
and a matter of shame to many a sturdy
fisherman and his cleanly decent wife.

At that time of the world's history, on the

iron-bound, wave-beaten, tempest-tossed coast,

so far remote from England and ' civilization,'

sanitary arrangements did not possess much

interest for a thin, widely scattered population,

who had enough to do to earn their daily

bread without troubling themselves concerning

devices that might add a few years to the

length of lives passed in looking death straight

in the face — in wresting food for wives and

children, indeed, out of its very jaws. No

latter-day Solomon had then propounded the

theory that by a judicious attention to natural

laws people might be enabled to live almost

for ever, and for this and other reasons it had

not occurred either to Mr. Westley or his

daughter that the lodgings they had found

were not quite as good as any lodgings they

were likely to find at the price they could afford
to pay for them.

But now Mr. Lacere told them of localities
far pleasant and no dearer. He seemed to
know London by heart — indeed, he seemed to
understand something about every subject
Mr. Westley touched on.

Looking at their visitor while he was answering
a question addressed to him by her father,
Glen wondered vaguely, first, whether he was
in mourning for his wife ; and second, if just
by chance he knew anything concerning the
highways and byways of literature.

A few minutes later she was enlightened,
not indeed concerning his supposed widowhood,
but as regarded authorship. Mr. Westley,
it appeared, had mentioned to him before
she came in that ' his daughter wrote a little
and wished to get into print.' Now Mr.
Lacere reverted to this matter, and said he
was afraid she must find ' going about among
the publishers very discouraging work.'

Glen could have discoursed to some purpose
on this text, but she forbore. She was
getting to feel very doubtful as to whether she
ought ever to have intruded into a publisher's

office. She was losing, she had lost heart
altogether. She did not now believe in herself
or her fitness to become an author. She
had that day been on the pleasing errand of
recovering her ' rejected addresses ' from the
hands of various most unlikely persons, with
whom, in her determination to try ' everybody,'
it seemed to the girl in her young wisdom
well to leave them.

From place to place she trudged valiantly ;
taking the familiar ' no ' with apparently
stoical indifference, till at last across one
counter a manuscript on which many bright
hopes had once been built was handed back to
her without a word. Her heart was full, and
the trouble may have been evident in her face.
At all events she fancied the man looked sorry,
and that he did not speak because he knew of
no word likely to prove of comfort.

Afterwards Glen never could exactly remember
how she got out of the office, which
was situated on the first floor of a great
building in a back lane. She had reached it
by means of a wide staircase and a wide landing,
and now there was not a creature coming
up or going down, and she felt so fairly

beaten ' — no other word in the language fully
expresses the utter weariness which seemed to
oppress both soul and body — that, cowering on
one of the broad easy steps, she covered her
face with her hands, and cried as if her heart
would break, after which exercise she arose
refreshed, and went once more out into the
street to pursue her dreary task.

But Glen said nothing about this experience
then or for many a year afterwards, and in
answer to Mr. Lacere's remark, only replied :

It does seem very difficult to get a manuscript
accepted, but I suppose all authors have
to go through the same ordeal.'

Had Mr. Lacere spoken his mind at that
moment, there can be little doubt he would
have said Miss Westley had better dismiss all
thoughts of authorship from her mind. The
girl did not look as if the making of a writer
was in her — no fire of genius burnt in her
eyes — her expression was not that of a person
so full of imagination that Nature had deemed
well to set her lot apart from the realities of
life. In no solitary respect did Glenarva
Westley fulfil any of the traditional ideas
people have agreed to accept as typifying the

possession of talent — manner, voice, appearance
seemed more fitted to the quiet arena of home
existence than the mad fight and the fierce
Struggle for Fame. It was hard upon Glen-arva
that no human being ever believed she
was the right person in the right place. Not
when she was plodding amongst the London
publishers — not when she was making a little
money — not when she had gained a great reputation
— not when the time came no one
could deny she had achieved more than nine
hundred and ninety-nine women out of a thousand
ever do achieve — no, not even then did
any friend, or relation, or stranger realize it
was really Glenarva who had won success, and
not some quite independent power associated
with her in an unaccountable and uncanny sort
of alliance.

Mr. Kelly had thought nothing of her personal
appearance. Mr. Lacere, certainly, did
not regard Glenarva as a shrine in which it
seemed particularly probable genius had chosen
to take up an abode. He saw before him a
slight, young, underfed-looking girl, who appeared
to him deficient in physique, and still
more deficient in will. No two more in competent

individuals, he conceived, had ever
come to London on a wild-goose chase than
Miss Westley and her father. Had he heard
the words uttered by the steward of the Morecambe
steamer, ' God help them ; they are
no better nor a couple of children,' he would
have echoed them cordially.

But he felt heartily sorry for the poor
gentleman and his daughter. He knew what
a lonely wilderness London must seem to
them, and he did not believe it would be a
true kindness to disillusion the girl at once.

She would find in time she had no true
mission to become a writer ; he would not
cross her whim, he would not say what he
thought about the absurdity of her writing.
He would do what he could to help her.

Yes,' he said, ' all young authors find publishers
a little impracticable at first, but it is a
mere question of time. Sooner or later genius
must obtain a hearing.'

Ah ! but it is such a long time,' exclaimed
Glen, with involuntary sadness, ' and it is generally
so much later than sooner.'

Why,' exclaimed Mr. Lacere, ' you are
surely not beginning to despair yet ! You

have not, I think, been in London six
months 1'

No,' said Mr. Westley, answering for his
daughter, who did not seem inclined to do so for
herself ; ' we only left Ireland in October, and
of course, as you observe, she has all her life
before her in which to make her mark.'

Mr. Lacere had not adventured on any
observation of the sort, but, understanding
perfectly that • Glenarva's father was merely
putting into his visitor's mouth the idea with
which he sought to comfort and reassure himself,
he allowed the utterance to pass unnoticed,
and said to the girl, kindly :

Very probably that time seems like six
years to you.'

It seems a long time,' agreed Glenarva,
but she added no other syllable of explanation ;
she did not speak of the events, persons, disappointments,
bodily weariness, actual physical
hardships, which had caused the period of
their residence in London to lengthen itself
out so unduly.

Looks, however, occasionally can talk more
eloquently than tongues ; and Mr. Lacere
gathered from the expression of Glenarva's

me.

face at that moment some knowledge of what
the girl never could have spoken in words.

It then occurred to him to ask her if she
had seen all the sights, and which of them impressed
her most.

I have not seen any of them,' she answered,
except Westminster Abbey and St. Paul's.
We generally go to service at the Abbey on
Sunday afternoons.'

But do you not think it would prove an
agreeable change if you were to visit a few, at
all events, of the places strangers generally goto
see?'

Glen did not seem to know. She said sightseeing
would take up a great deal of time, and,
she might have added, money also, only she
was not likely to bring that question on the
tapis.

Have you been to any of the theatres V
persisted Mr. Lacere, talking to these people
as he would have talked to those amongst
whom his previous lot had chanced to be cast.

No,* answered the girl; 'papa does not care
for places of amusement, and neither do I.'

And Glen looked as if she and her father
were persons who, having run the whole

round of innocent dissipation and exhausted
its pleasures, had resolved to settle down forever
to a quiet, humdrum. Darby and Joan
sort of life.

In spite of himself, Mr. Lacere smiled. He
could not help it.

*And so,' he went on, 'since your arrival in
London you have done nothing except try to
make an impression upon the publishers, who
are so stony-hearted and so difficult to impress
V

I think I have been to them all,' answered
Glenarva, ' and it has taken me a long time,
because,' she added apologetically, ' places are
so far apart in London.'

They are, but you find the omnibuses very
convenient.'

I scarcely ever go in one,' said the girl.
I always walk.'

Always walk ! Why, you must get very
tired.'

I should not get tired if the streets were
not so slippery,' she replied.

My daughter is a capital walker,' explained
Mr. Westley.

*Yes. We hadn't many omnibuses at

Ballyshane,' Glen said, with a touch of merriment
Mr. Lacere had not heard in her voice
previously ; and then she went on to tell him
about Ballyshane — about its cliffs and its bogs,
and its magnificent views, and its loneliness,
and the wild tempests that washed the salt
spray so far inland, and the waves rippling in
on' the shore when the weather was fine and
calm, and the crested billows that came thundering
in from the Atlantic in the stormy
winter-time, billows pursued by other billows
that raced over the sunken rocks, and beat
themselves madly to death against the great
headlands that frowned above the ocean ; and
Mr. Lacere said he should like to see that
grand desolate coast, and Glenarva thought
she would too — but she did not say so. She
sat silent while Mr. Westley, taking up her
parable, spoke of the geological formation of
that part of Ireland, and told Mr. Lacere many
think's concerning the Giants' Cause wav, Fair-head,
and Carrick-a-rede, and the Cushendall
Caves, and the Salmon Leaps at Coleraine,
which were strange to that gentleman, and
impressed him with the same sense of unreality
as a fairy-tale might have done.

And all the time Glenarva was recalling
sadly the dream she had dreamed — looking
out over the sea, and wandering across the
cliffs, and traversing: the road leading to
Artinglass, and writing in her bedroom, with
the roses peeping in at the window to see
what she ■ was doing, or tapping against the
glass to win her out into the sunshine flooding
the whole landscape with a glamour of golden

light.

Then suddenly the past faded away utterly,
and she was back in dreary, shabby London
lodgings : all her hopes as dead as last year's
roses, the sunshine gone, stern reality around
instead of a golden glamour, and mr. Lacere
looking at her intently.

I think,' he said gently, reverting to the
one subject which at that time was of paramount
interest to Glenarva, ' you are expending
your strength uselessly in going about
among all the publishers. A vast number of
them can never be of the slightest benefit to
you. Why not confine yourself to a few good
houses V

AYhat is the use,' asked the girl, * when
they will not read what I take them V

VOL. II. 30

Why not try to write something they will
read V

I do not exactly understand what you
mean,' said Glen.

What I mean is this,' answered her new
friend, ' that writing, like everything else in
the world, requires pains and practice. I see
you have been at work at some pretty embroidery
' he suddenly added, with all a

man's deep appreciation of that purely feminine
art.

*Glen is very fond of work,' said Glen's
father ; and, indeed, this statement was true
in its widest sense.

At that time, whatever her hands found todo
the girl did with all her might. Idleness
seemed to her then an impossible condition of
existence. She would rather have hemmed
dusters for Mrs. Ding well than done nothing ;
and as she found the small amount of mending
required by her own and her father's wardrobe
insufficient to occupy her leisure-time, now
she found writing so difficult as to be impossible,
she had bought some designs stamped in
blue outlines on white muslin, and was embroidering
herself a pair of cuffs and a collar.

'Well, go back to the time when you first
began to learn to sew,' said Mr. Lacere, with
that look in his eyes that had already become
familiar to Glen. ' You could not have filled
in all this delicate tracery of leaf, and stem,
and flower then ;' and he took the fragile scrap
of work in his hand almost tenderly as he
spoke, and looked at it as he was never likely
to look at any manuscript with which she might
present him.

No, indeed,' said Glen, laughing in spite of
herself. ' I remember quite well my first essay
in that line. It was made with a pin, to which
my nurse securely tied a piece of strong thread;
and I had for material a strip of flannel, and
each time I dragged the pin through the
flannel I made a hole as large as that,' and she
touched one in the collar — called, as Mr.
Lacere heard from her subsequently, a ' wheel.'

Yet now see what you can do,' he remarked,
looking at the elaborate pattern
worked in by Glen's fine needle. ' And as
regards your writing,' he went on, ' it may be
that some day hereafter you weill think of your
present efforts as you do of the strip of flannel
disfigured with holes. I have known many

30—2

beginners, and the mistake they seem to make
is that they imagine writing comes by inspiration.
Of course, unless a person has a certain
aptitude — or genius, if you prefer the word —
no amount of time and patience can enable
him to produce a book worth reading ; but I
do not believe any genius, however great it
may be, will ever carry a man to success without
the help of dogged perseverance and determined
plodding on his own part.'

But I have plodded, and have persevered
pleaded Glen, with almost tearful earnestness.
For how long ? for a few weeks V suggested
Mr. Lacere.

No ; for years, and years, and years.'
You must have begun, then, before you
could walk, I should think.'

She did begin very early,' interposed Mr.
Westley ; ' and I do not see at all. Glen, why
you should feel so dissatisfied with your success.
I am sure since you came to London you have
had a vast amount of encouragement.'
In words, papa.'

What do the publishers say to you. Miss
"Westley V inquired Mr. Lacere, determined to
obtain some explicit answer.

Well, a few of them say I can write,' answered
Glenarva, maintaining a wise silence
concerning the many who said nothing at all ;.
but no one I have met with as yet will really
read a manuscript. I have only written Irish
stories, and they want English.'

Then why do you not write English stories
for them V naturally inquired Mr. Lacere.

Glen did not reply, so her father said. :

I fancy she has not felt much inclined for
writing lately.'

No V interrogated Mr. Lacere, with a sympathetic
expression of countenance, but in
reality pleased to hear this. There never yet
lived a wise man who wished women to turn
artists, or actresses, or authors ; and Mr. Lacere,
theoretically at least, was a wise man. By
some subtle intuition he knew Glen would be
far happier if she never gained a hearing — if
she laid aside her manuscripts as a child lays
aside its toys which have pleased it for a while,
and betook herself to the business of life, as
such business usually presents itself to her sex
taking her pleasure while she could, mixing
with other young people, going to places of
amusement ; then being loved and loving ;

then marrying and ruling her husband's household.


Mentally he went through all this catalogue
of recreations and duties while Mr. Westley
was saying :

She has not been quite well lately. I am
beginning to think, with you, this neighbourhood
does not suit either of us.'

It is most depressing,' observed Mr. Lacere.
I am sure you ought not to remain in it ;' and
he made this remark with such thorough conviction,
that when shortly afterwards he rose
to go Mr. Westley said :

*We will take your advice and look out for
other lodgings at once.'

But you will let me know where you decide
to settle,' answered Mr. Lacere quickly. ' I
may be able to prove of some assistance to
your daughter.'

I shall certainly keep you informed of our
address, since you are so good as to wish to
have it ;' and then the three shook hands cordially,
and quite like old acquaintances, and
when the door closed behind their visitor Mr.
Westley said :

What a kind man, Glen ! I really shall

begin to consider that a most fortunate fall of
mine which brought me into contact with him ;'
but Glenarva did not answer. She was thinking
at that moment of Mr. Lacere less as a
pleasant acquaintance than as a person who
might be able to help forward her great work.

"We will at once, dear, begin looking out
for different lodgings,' went on Mr. Westley,
not noticing his daughter's silence.

She woke up as though out of a dream.

If you remember, papa, I told you a little
time ago there were some rooms advertised
near Russell Square I thought seemed cheap ;
but you fancied nothing we could live in was
likely to be had in that neighbourhood at a
moderate price.'

But I find London has changed since I
knew anything about it,' he answered. 'What
a pity we did not inquire concerning them at
the time.'

I kept the address,' she said.

Then, Glen, you had better go and see what
the rooms are like tomorrow.'

Very well, papa,' she answered, more than
willing to take all the trouble she could off his
hands, and quite unconscious of what her

father's growing disposition to leave such burdens
for her to carry really meant. Looking
back afterwards she understood, and thanked
God earnestly her strength had been great and
her spirit willing ; that wind or weather, fog,
frost, or snow never kept her within doors
when there existed any need for her to be out ;
that it was she who usually faced the stinging
cold of that cruel winter, and who saw to
everything a girl might, and to many things
most girls never do.

Next day she came back radiant, looking as
Mr. AVestley had not seen her look since they
left Ballyshane. The rooms were still vacant,
and they were such pleasant, cosy rooms, but
very high up — two on the second floor and one
on the third. The people wanted to let them
to persons who would not require much attendance,
' so if we go there,' proceeded Glen, ' we
shall not have another Miss Dingwell dancing
in and out all day long.' For indeed that
young lady was somewhat apt to introduce her
presence uninvited and unwished-for, and she
had a knack of making a fresh scuttled of
coals an excuse for a long conversation, and the
removal of the tea-tray an opportunity for

gossip, which wore the thread of Glen's patience
almost to its last strand.

After some hesitation ]mr. Westley decided
to take the rooms of which his daughter spoke
so highly, and though the ground was covered
with snow and the sky was black and lowering
with the promise of more, they very shortly
transported themselves and their belongings
to that part of London called the Bloomsbury
district, where for the first time Glen began
really to enjoy her metropolitan experiences,
and to think some pleasure might be extracted
from life, even in a great town ' where one
knew nobody.'

Ere long she commenced writing again with
something of the frenzy and fervour of old.
She got through an enormous amount of work
such as it was — in the dull, dark days of
that most dreary winter. Her spirits revived.
She could still imagine and record her imaginings.
She had a story which was perfectly
true to tell, and she told it on page after page
of blotted foolscap. It was a story of sin and
sorrow and injustice, or what seemed to her
injustice. There had been a time when she
would have hesitated to present it in any form

to the public, but she had left Bally shame now
far behind her on the road of life ; no one there
knew she wrote ; she could utilize her experiences
without the fear of giving offence.

She brought all her Irish characters over to
England, and planted them on a wild portion
of the Yorkshire coast. She knew nothing in
the world about the coast she described, but
that was a matter of detail which troubled Glen
as little in those days as it seems to trouble many
authors in these. Had anyone hinted that
her English peasants were not true to Nature,
and her lords and ladies creations almost as
impossible, she would not have believed the
statement ; but no one did hint anything of
the sort, for which reason Glen's latest barque
glided swiftly over the sea of fiction, leaving a
trail of inky paper behind it, and the girl
pressed hopefully onward, feeling quite satisfied
she was at length producing something the
world would not willingly let die.

Poor Glen ! In the whole of London I doubt
if there was then a happier girl than she who
from that second floor beheld in fancy the
golden gates of Fame opening to admit her.

She had secured a publisher — found a man

at last who said if she liked to write him a
good novel of English life he would be at the
expense of bringing it out ; and he said more
also, namely, that he would give her thirty
pounds for another if her first book succeeded
as he believed it would.

He was a gentleman who seemed to have
less to do than any person she had yet come
across in London ; but he had published a great
many books, and known a great many authors,
and over the fire in his inner office the pair
held many long and delightful conversations.

He told her the amount he had paid this
person and that ; what a Times review was
worth ; how novel-publishing was going to the
dogs ; wondered what the end of it all would
prove ; waxed confidential concerning his own
domestic affairs ; and one day when Glen,
having contrived to cut her hand badly, appeared
with it bandaged and in a sling, advised
her as to her treatment of the wound with an
earnestness he could scarcely have surpassed
had her management of an intricate and exciting
plot been the theme.

But, notwithstanding the friendly relations
thus established between them, the ungrateful

young author decided she would not give him
that wonderful book with which she meant to
astonish the British public.

In the course of her peregrinations amongst
all sorts and conditions of men engaged in the
book trade, she found out that though the individual
in question was supposed to have ' made
a lot of money ' by ' working the libraries ' — -
an utterance which seemed Delphic in its obscurity
to the girl's then unenlightened mind —
he was not by any means at the 'top of the tree.'

Pedland is well enough in his way, but he
does not stand like Hurst and Blackett, or
Chapman and Hall, or the other great guns,'
explained one uncommonly common publisher
in the Eow^, while the next time she saw her
new friend she was privileged to hear from
him what he thought of the ' great guns.'
Had Glen only availed herself fully of the
educational advantages offered to her at that
time concerning the ways of publishers, she
might have been qualified to write an exhaustive
treatise on the race ; but the girl was
too much taken up with her own doings to pay
the attention she ought to have done to the
doings of other people.

A confused notion that she was ' getting on '
somehow ; that by some unintelligible means
she was pushing herself to the front, was all
she seemed thoroughly to grasp. Mr. Lacere
told her she was doing too much, but his words
of wisdom fell on heedless ears.

In those days Glen thought nothing of
writing a novel. She turned one out in a
month for the gentleman who ' worked the
libraries.' She herself thought of it as 'quite
good enough,' and really it was not so bad.

But, good or bad, Mr. Pedland seemed no
more ready to read her manuscript when completed
than anybody else. He said he ' had
not time ; that the season was past ; that he
would attend to her presently ; that she would
have to take her turn ; that really the number
of authors who wrote remarkably well was
getting so great he could not imagine how their
books were ever to be published ; that the
libraries were overstocked ; that he could get
novels with well-known names on the title-page
for a song, a mere song ; that he could
remember the time when he was glad to pay
so-and-so a hundred pounds down for any
manuscript he liked to bring, and now,' finished

this modern Jeremiah, ' I should think twice
before I gave him a hundred shillings.'

He told her rival houses were ruining the
trade, ' cutting each other's throats ;' and then,
having depressed her spirits to zero, he said if
she looked in again in a few weeks' time he
might be able to talk to her.

But Glen was not exactly made of the stuff
to bear this sort of thing with equanimity.

She said she would not look in again in a
few weeks' time, and that if he had not time
to read her manuscript she should like to take
it back with her.

Then he promised to look at it, and failed todo
so. He always found some good reason
for escaping from his duties — his wife had
been ill, or he had been ill himself ; or he was
called suddenly out of town ; or a man who
owed him a heavy account had gone into the
Gazette, and he was forced to rush off to the
Land's End in order to see if a dividend of a
penny in the pound could be rescued out of
the wreck.

He provoked Glen, and amused her too. In
the after-times she always retained a certain
grateful memory of that snug old publishing

establishment, where the office was so quiet,
and the fire so large, and the easy-chairs so
comfortable, and where she heard so much,
true and false, concerning the inner life of
literature, and the dealings of printers, and
publishers, and authors, and editors. Spite
even of herself she was learning a great deal,
and she never returned to those second floor
lodgings without a budget of news ready to be
unfolded for her father's benefit.

One afternoon in the early spring, when
barrows filled with flowers were just beginning
to appear in the streets, when the-winter
weather seemed gone, and the snow had at last
disappeared, and a blue sky stretched overhead,
and the sun shone occasionally for half
an hour or so at a time. Glen was making her
way back from the west when she ran up
against Mr. Pierson, who, greeting her with
the greatest cordiality, remarked she was quite
a stranger in Craven Street.

'You have deserted us totally,' he said.
Why don't you come and see Mr. Vassett V

mr. Vassett does not want to see me,'
Glen answered, a little saucily.

Oh ! but he does,' declared Mr. Pierson,

with that utter disregard of truth which was
one of his distinguishing qualities. ' We were
talking about you only the other day, and
wondering what had become of you. Now
that the fine weather is here, it is a thousand
pities you should not call and have a talk with
Vassett. You had better look in as soon as
you can ; tomorrow if you like. He is in
very good twist now, though I suppose you
don't know what I mean by that.'

Oh yes, I do,' said Glen, who had not
grown up on terms of familiar intimacy with
six graceless boys for nothing.

Well, then, step round tomorrow, and tellus
what you have been about for so long.'

Glen laughed, and said she would, and as
she pursued her onward way felt more and
more satisfied she was getting ' well to the
front.'

STRANDED.

T has been previously hinted that
when Mr. Westley arrived in England
he brought with him across
the Channel a project for improving ibis
worldly condition, but with the reticence
which was so marked a feature in his character
he did not consider it necessary to communicate
his idea to Glen.

Of himself he never would have summoned
up enough energy to travel to London with it ;
but as his daughter wished to put her fortunes
to the test at the headquarters of literature,
and as Mr. Merritt urged him strongly to
leave Ireland, and advanced enough money
for the purpose, Mr. Westley arrived in Baby-vol.

11. 31

Ion as has been chronicled ; and, stimulated
perhaps by the rush and movement all around,
and by a host of olden memories associated
with his pleasant youth, the poor gentleman
donned the best suit he had in his possession,
and started off one day to Bolton Row, Mayfair,
where resided the former friend to whom
he had once been mentor and companion, and
who had since those days become Marquis of
Thanet.

It was not till he stood on the very doorstep
that a doubt of how he might be received
crossed Mr. Westley's mind, but even this
passing cloud soon disappeared from his sky ;
he had been only after a fashion a dependent
then, and he was going to ask for nothing save
employment now. He had been rich and considered
since he parted with Lord Charles ;
but all the prosperity, and the greatness, and
the ruin wrought by his own folly, and the
gradual descent into the valley of poverty,
were matters quite independent of the life
which had been his when he mixed intimately
with lords and ladies, and the door of the
house before which he now stood was opened
wide for him to enter as a matter of course.

He had a tale to tell, a petition to prefer.
He did not much doubt the result. Too many
kindnesses had been showered upon him in
the past to permit him to fear repulse or coldness
now. All he regretted was not having
sooner thought of so excellent a plan for improving
his prospects. He had mooned away
years in idleness and vain regrets when he
might have been making money for his child.
Well, it was late in the day, certainly, but
better late than never ; and so with a courage
which had in it no trace of assurance, Mr.
Westley knocked at the once familiar door.

His knock was answered by a servant out of
livery, who said his lordship was not in, and
he did not exactly know any hour when he
could certainly be found. His lordship was
merely in town for a few days, en route from
Some to Brushwood, and was very rarely to
be found at Bolton Kow. No, he did not think
he could be met with at his club ; but ' if you
will leave your name, sir,' he added, with a
certain amount of doubt and hesitation Mr.
Westley did not at the moment understand,
and which vexed him unreasonably in consequence.


31—2

I will write to his lordship he said, taking
out his card and giving it to the man, who
exclaimed with a certain bewildered wonderment,
' Mr. Westley ! it is not, surely — and
yet I thought, sir, there was something about
you 1 remembered.'

Why, are you Harling V asked Mr. Westley.
' How you are changed ! You were buta
mere stripling when I saw you last.'

Yes, sir ; won't you walk in ? Pray do.
His lordship may return presently, though we
never know when to expect him. He would
be sorry, I am sure, to miss seeing you. Yes,
sir, as you observe, it is many years since that
day at Nice when the news came for you to goto
Ireland.'

Many years indeed ! yet as he looked once
more round the well-remembered room, they
seemed to Mr. Westley but as few and evil as
those of his pilgrimage appeared to the patriarch
of old.

The late Marquis often talked about you,
sir, and said over and over again if ever he
went to Dublin he would try and get up to
your place in the north.'

Which I have lost and left for ever, Harling,'

answered Mr. Westley. It was not his
nature to trade upon the feelings of his fellows
and seek for sympathy in his misfortunes ; but
neither could he pose as a man still possessed
of fortune before this servant, who knew that
when they last parted he left a life of obscurity
in order to take up a position amongst those
who, by virtue both of birth and wealth, rank
amongst the Upper Ten.

Indeed, sir ; I am very sorry to hear you
say so. I do not think the late Marquis knew
anything about that, or he would have mentioned
it to me ; for he often spoke about you,
he did indeed.'

Harling,' said Mr. Westley, looking at the
man with sudden anxiety, ' whom do you mean
when you talk about the " late " Marquis ?
surely not '

Lord Charles ? Yes, indeed, sir ; he died
quite suddenly. Is it possible you have not
heard V

Mr. Westley stopped the speaker with a
gesture of grief and dismay. Dead ! Then
all his hopes were dead too, and yet at that
moment it was not of himseK he was thinking ;
it was of the frank, generous nobleman stricken

down in his prime, of the face he remembered
flushed with boyish health, and the frame full
of youthful strength now cold and quiet in
death.

You did not notice the hatchment, then,
sir V asked Harling, after a pause.

No ; I walked on this side of the way.
And the present Marquis is V

His brother — Lord Louis, sir, you remember.
The late Marquis left no children. But
you will wait a few minutes longer, Mr. Westley,
will you not ? I am sure his lordship
would like to see you.'

No, oh no, thank you. I did not know, or
I should not have intruded. Tell the Marquis
how grieved I am to hear of his loss, and '

Here is his lordship,' interrupted Harling,
and he hurried away to inform the new Marquis
that Mr. Westley was in the library,
while Mr. Westley himself stood in the middle
of the room irresolute, not liking to go into
the hall for fear of encountering a person who
perhaps might not wish to see him, and liking
almost less to remain, lest it should seem as
though he did not mean to leave without compelling
an interview.

But his doubts were next moment laid at
rest by the Marquis himself, who, dressed in
the deepest mourning, entered the apartment,
and, addressing him most cordially, said how
heartily sorry he was his brother was not alive
to greet his old friend.

They had always loved each other tenderly,
those two sons of the old Marquis, and it
seemed a comfort to the one that was left to
talk about the dead man to a person who had
formerly been in daily and familiar companionship
with him.

Will you come and dine here quietly V
asked the Marquis. ' I am only in town on
my way to Brushwood, and everything is in
confusion — it was so sudden, so unexpected,
poor fellow ; but still, if you can spare an hour
or two *

Mr. Westley hastened to excuse himself as
the other paused, and then in a few sentences
he told why he had come, and what he had
wanted to ask.

Perhaps,* he added hesitatingly, ' you
might hear of something, and '

You may feel quite sure I shall do all that
lies in my power to forward your wishes,' said

the Marquis. ' Leave me your address, and
should any idea occur to my mind before I
see you again I will write at once. Come
to dinner, though. We shall be quite alone.
No ? Well, then, if it must be so, good-bye
for the present. I shall think over what you
have told me, and consider the best way to
serve your interests.'

Time is one quantity to those who wait, and
quite another to those who are not waiting.
The days and the weeks and the months
which slipped by after Mr. Westley's visit to
Bolton Kow may not have seemed long in
passing to the new Marquis, who had just succeeded
to a great property, who had to see
lawyers and stewards and friends and relations,
and whose time was occupied from morning
till night by the claims of Society and the
thousand details to which he was forced to
give his attention ; but to the ruined gentleman
in narrow lodgings, with most limited
means, with poor health, without society or
occupation, or anything pleasant to reflect
upon in the present or to look forward to in
the future — how did that period appear ?

Ah ! not Glen herself waiting for the ' No '

she said certainly must come, but wliicli for
all that she did not expect, experienced a
greater trouble and sickness at her heart than
her father, who kept his disappointment to
himself, and felt he was forgotten by fortune
.end forsaken by man.

It was the last straw his feeble hand strove
to clutch. He knew he could do nothing
more. He could not write and remind Lord
Thanet of his promise ; it was impossible for
him to go and knock again at the once familiar
door, and ask if the Marquis had heard of anything
s; to suit him.

There are persons who can lie down and
die and utter no complaint, or, sitting alone
beside a fireless hearth, will starve and make
no sign. Mr. Westley was one of these. For
his daughter's sake he, a shipwrecked castaway
on the world's wide ocean, hoisted that one
feeble signal of distress ; but he could not continue
holding out the flag. As help failed
to come to him he let this last hope drop
from his nerveless fingers, and resigned himself
to the conviction that if anything were to
be done for Glen, it must be done by Glen
herself.

The girl could not imagine why her father
was so anxious she should punctually fulfil the
promise she had made ]mr. Pierson.

Somehow she was not very desirous of keeping
her appointment in Craven Street, and
said that after all she did not think it was
worth while wasting the time it would take to
walk there.

I am quite certain Mr. Yassett will not
look at any one of my manuscripts,' she
declared ; but Mr. Westley told her she could
not tell what the publisher might do unless
she asked him.

I thought him most kind and courteous,'
said Mr. Westley ; hearing which, Glen laughingly
suggested he should go in her place.

You can go and talk to him, papa,' she
observed ; but her father did not see the beauty
of this proposition.

He had never been able to understand how
Glen could walk into shops and offices and ask
to see editors and publishers. He supposed,
as she did not seem to suffer either anguish or
shame, there was nothing T\Tong in her going
about as she did ; but he felt she must possessor
lack some quality which in his own nature

was either non-existent or else developed to an
undue excess.

Poor Mr. Westley ! He had never attempted
to analyze any character ; not even his own.
And yet sometimes, as he noted his daughter s
tireless energy and her dogged industry, the
idea occurred to him that, regarded as a soldier
in the battle of life, he was but a poor feeble
creature, and that the sensitiveness which made
him shrink from the noise and the bustle, the
clang of tongues and the call to arms, was less
a virtue than a vice.

What had his pride — which after all was not
an unworthy or an ignoble or a sinful pride —
done for him ? Now he was beginning dimly
to comprehend that even when the worst came
when he lost money and lands and home —
he might to a certain extent have retrieved
his error had he, instead of avoiding his fellows
and sinking into a melancholy recluse, turned
a brave face to the world, tried if there was
not something still left his hand could find todo,
and determined, in the face of blackest
fortune, to ' quit himself like a man.'

He could not understand his daughter, but
dimly he was coming to the comprehension

that what she found possible he ought to have
found possible also.

There is nothing much more sad or pitiful
than this awakening: in age to the knowledge
of a defect possible only for youth to remedy.
When the blood is growing cold and the pulse
slow, and the limbs feeble, and the heart
weary, how shall we take up a burden we
thought too heavy to carry in the noontide of
our strength, and bear it triumphantly home ?
At the eleventh hour it is possible for a man
to repent, but it is as a rule impossible for him
to repair the evil he has wrought.

The day of work is behind him — the night
of death, when no man can work, before ; and
what shall he who has permitted all the long
hours of light to glide away unimproved do in
those brief minutes when the evening gloom
is darkening down apace, and the long shadows
cast from that land which to us is all mystery,
are lying athwart the path his laggard feet
must tread ? God ! if it might only be as
some modern divines tell us, that in the world
where we are lonely journeying * we may undo
much that we have done here wrongly ; do
again with perfect grace that which we have

done imperfectly ; become what we have aimed
and wished to be ; achieve what we have
longed to achieve ; attain the wisdom, the
gifts, and powers to which we have aspired ;'
who is there that would not long to leave the
old and begin the new, and to enter on that
life which, as Dickens, apparently inspired by
the same idea, says, ' sets this one right' !

As is not unusual in cases where men have
left their own noontide hours unimproved, Mr.
Westley grew day by day more anxious that
his daughter, on whom the hopeful glory of
mornings still shone in all its brightness, should
make the most of her opportunities.

He did not talk to her of fame. Indeed, the
idea of Glen, his Glen, ever making for herself
a name and a position seemed to him inconceivable.
As we know, ' a man is not without
honour save in his own country and amongst
his own people,' and there are very good reasons
for this. It is hard to realize that which has
been with us in common achieving something
uncommon ; the child we have taught to walk,
climbing to heights our feet cannot scale ; the
girl we have hushed to rest wandering out of
the sweet home life to be greeted by the

world's applause ! After all, it is only what
we see we really believe, and therefore when
before our eyes the boy stands on the dizzy
height and the girl smiles back to us through
happy tears, with the laurel crown resting on
the sunny tresses of yore, we come dimly to
understand there was something in them we
wot not of. We cannot begin our day with a
forecast of its end ; and if we were wise —
which we are not, any one of us — we should
be able to comprehend that, though we may
bend over a child in its cradle, it is not given
to us to know the bed in which it will lie when
life's long dream is over. It may be Westminster
Abbey, a felon's grave, a hundred
fathoms of water, or the shallow hole hurriedly
dug on the field of battle where he gave up
his life for duty and his country !

So to come back. Though Mr. Westley
hoped and believed Glen would make a few
pounds a year by her pen — which implement
he spoke of as he might her needle — he never
really thought, save for a few wild moments,
his daughter had it in her to do great things.

He saw her writing, about which she set ina
prosaic, domestic sort of way that perplexed

him exceedingly. If Mr. Westley wished to
write an important letter, the decks had to be
cleared for the purpose. It was while Glen
was out of the way he indited those epistles to
his lawyer which that gentleman regarded, and
not without reason, as the embodiments of so
much time and labour lost. If, on the contrary.
Glen decided to commence a c[uite new
novel, which perhaps she did after five minutes'
consideration, she put on her bonnet, went out
and bought a few quires of foolscap, set to
work stitching the pages together into dozens,
and bes^an.

Yes, then and there, with an old pen, the
top of which she had bitten almost through
when struggling with the intricacies of an
involved sentence, or the difficulties of a farfetched
comparison. Writing seemed no
trouble to her at that period, and an outsider
might well be excused the argument
that what cost so little could not be worth
much.

Ah ! the day of her travail was then afar off
the hour when, in sorrow and in agony, she
produced a living, breathing book ; something
with the imprint of God u23on it, a coin

stamped with the superscription of that mint
which sends nothing into circulation except
the gold of genius.

Nevertheless, Mr. Westley believed she
would get on ; perhaps he was afraid to think
of the depths of poverty she might have to
sound otherwise — but that is beside the question.


Take that last tale of yours, dear, down
with you to Mr. Yassett,' he said. ' Who
knows what may happen V

I know, papa,' she answered. ' He will not
look at it.'

Still, I would take it, dear. You believe
yourself it is very good, don't you V

What do you believe, papa V she asked,
with a smile which told her own opinion of
the work.

Well, Glen, I can't say I profess to be a
judge, yet I think it ought to be liked. To
tell the truth, however, it seems to me you
never have surpassed, and you never will surpass,
that chapter you wrote at Bally shame
the evening you had been out on the cliffs.'

But that is so dreadfully Irish !' objected
Glen, quoting some of her critics.

And, in good earnest, tins was a difficulty
the girl happened then to be contending
against. She did not know enough of England
to write about it — no, not even the aspect of
nature in England. How could one accustomed
to that wild sea, to those tossing billows,
to the lonely rocks where the seagulls built,
the stretching moorlands, the desolate bogs,
and the sullen headlands frowning darkly on
the Atlantic — write of gliding streams and
flower-decked meadows, of the great, open,
red-tiled barns she had not yet seen, or straw-yards,
or cowslips, or any one of the thousand
sights which render an English landscape so
pre-eminently dear to all who love the English
word Home ?

She knew nothing about the homestead as
it appears to the eyes of the youngest English
child ; she was still an alien, though learning
to love and admire the country of her adoption.
She regarded everything as an Englishman
might the sights and sounds and customs
of a foreign city. So far, the land and the
people and the customs of the nation lay outside
her ; and it was not till they became soul
of her soul, and heart of her heart. Glen moved

VOL. II. 32

the souls and hearts of those she wrote for.
Till there were tears in the music she made,
till she sobbed out the words of her lay, and
felt the warmth herself of the sunshine she
bade others bask in, success did not come to
Glenarva "VVestley, spite of the fact that she
followed her father's advice, and took with her
to Craven Street the Benjamin of her life, the
last, best, sweetest, strongest book,' according
to her own estimate, she had as yet written to
astonish an ungrateful world.

When she arrived at the publisher s. Muggins,
who seemed plunged into a depth of gloom
which nothing save impending bankruptcy on
the part of his employer and an execution in
his own home could possibly have justified,
informed her Mr. Vassett was out, and Mr.
Pierson engaged three deep.

You can wait if you like, you know,' he
said ; but something in his tone induced Glen,
whose temper was rather of the hottest, to say
she should like to do nothing of the kind, and
she was turning to leave the outer office when
Mr. Yassett himself entered.

Oh ! and how do you do V he exclaimed, not
seeming, however, in the least degree glad to

see her, which fact Glen felt acutely as she
answered :

I am very well, thank you. No, I did not
want anything — only I told Mr. Pierson I
should call to-day.'

As you are here, come in,' suggested Mr.
Vassett. * Eh, what did you say V — this to
Muggins, who was making various telegraphic
signs to his employer.

Lady Hilda's there, and Mr. Pierson, and
the actor gentleman, and some one he has
brought with him.'

Well, just come in then, will you V said
Mr. Vassett, with a certain irritation in his
tone Glen did not fail to notice.

By this time she knew all about Lady
Hilda. Mr. Pedland had given her the full
story of the Hicks alliance, had told the girl
every scandal there was to tell on the subject
true and false. Miss Westley's six months*
term of study in the Metropolitan Academy
had taught her many things about authors and
authoresses LIr. Vassett did not know. Flitting
about from place to place, she heard every
piece of gossip worth hearing ; she was a good
listener, and often and often when pacing the

32—2

back streets homewards — for Glen's knowledge
of London within a certain radius was even
then almost exhaustive — she laughed softly to
herself over the stories she was carrying back
to that cheap second floor in Bloomsbury, while
the passers-by turned with a quick, sympathetic
look in their faces, wondering who the
girl could be, and what she was smiling at
with such thorough, though quiet, enjoyment
while she passed swiftly along.

Lady Hilda was more radiant than ever.
She was in the highest spirits, and greeted
Mr. Vassett with effusion. She playfully
called him a ' grumpy old dear and said, after
the success of her book, she expected to see
his face bright with smiles instead of gloomy asa
November day.

If you take my advice,' she said to Glen,
ydu won't have anything to do with him. I
never mean him to publish another book of
mine. '

One side of a story is good till another is
told,' remarked Mr. Pierson.

^ Now, don't you begin to be disagreeable,'
exclaimed the lady. ' Mr. Vassett, I wish you
had stayed away. We were all as comfortable

and pleasant as possible till you came in.
You might serve for the skeleton at a
feast — and that reminds me I want you to
come to my feast. The great day is at
hand. Blow the trumpets, sound the drums !
the noble building for Decayed Fishwives
is to be opened on the 20th by one of
the Blood Royal, whom we are afterwards
to have the honour to receive at luncheon,
and all the county people are expected inforce,
and everybody in the City who has a
million of money and upwards ; and I shall
not be happy unless you witness my triumph.
You won't refuse. Now do — do — do say I
may count on seeing you I'

But Mr. Vassett utterly refused to say anything
of the kind. She could not cajole or
scold him into compliance, so at last, saying
he was a horrid creature,' she turned in
despair to mr. Pierson, and entreated that heat
least would not desert her.

For a time she went on in this way, dealing
out invitations like a pack of cards, and receiving
for answer only murmured apologies
or amused smiles, till it occurred to her the
bread-and-butter ' girl, who was sitting a little

in the background, had not been included in
the game.

You can come too, if you like,' she said,
nodding to her over the barricade formed by
Mr. Dawton's right shoulder.

Glen was not stricken dumb with indignation
at this cavalier address, because she
answered it, but her voice sounded to herself
strange and unfamiliar as she said :

Thank you. You are very kind.'

Then you will come V observed Lady
Hilda, who did not really want one of the
party.

No, thank you,' replied Glen, beautifully
concise, for fear of beinor once more misunderstood.


Why not ? Probably you may never
have the chance of seeing a thing of the
sort again.'

This time Glen, who was getting up to ,
did not vouchsafe a word.

Say you will come, there's a good girl ;' and
Lady Hilda smiled across Mr. Dawton in a
manner which might, as that gentleman observed
subsequently, have vanquished a
monarch of the forest.'

Thank you, no !' persisted Glen.

But why won't you be good-natured V

We don t visit,' answered the girl, whose
cheeks were literally aflame T\'ith anger.

It was too much for Lady Hilda. She burst
into a peal of laughter, the sound of which
dried the tears that filled Glen's eyes.

Oh, Mr. Dawton ! Oh, Mr. Dawton and
Mr. "What-ever-is-your-name — Kelly — can't
you make something of this, " We dont visit f
Sweet seventeen, With the dignity of a dowager
and the pride of a queen. What a funny
child you are ! Have I offended you ? I did
not mean to do so. I am sorry Shake hands
and be friends.'

But Glen did not shake hands ; she only let
her hand lie passive, while Lady Hilda, who
had come round to where she sat, took the
girl's worn glove in her own dainty fingers, and
went through that ceremony of reconciliation
which probably meant as little on her side as
on Miss Westley's.

There was a raging fury in Glen's heart that
had never stirred it before — beyond speech,
beyond sign. She had but one thought — how
she should get out of the office — away — any

place where she should never meet this odious,
ill-bred woman again.

It was when the flood was at its highest
that Mr. Pierson, with the best intentions, remarked
:

*Mr. Kelly is a compatriot of yours, Miss
Westley, who has already won great distinction
in the character of the deaf gentleman in
How's Maria T '

Mr. Kelly, thus honourably mentioned,
bowed, and so did Glen. Then, as their eyes
met, she remembered his face, and where she
had seen it last.

As two strange cats might, the * compatriots'
stared at each other.

There had been but one drop wanting to
fill Glen s cup of mortification to overflowing,
and now that drop was supplied ; whilst on his
side Mr. Kelly — who, happening to have ' goton
' a good deal since that drizzling October
day, had hoped never again to behold any one
of his fellow-passengers on the journey to
London — felt when he recognised the girl, who
was not, even after so many months of
metropolitan experience, much ' to look at,' as
if he had suddenly gone back in the world —

as though he had sunk from the heights of the
Galaxy back into gauche, untrained, untravelled
Barney Kelly, fresh from Callinacoan, who had
amused,' forsooth ! his English audience by
using that remarkably strong expression which
in his belief embodied the feeling of the Saxon
towards his native land.

I have seen you before, I think,' said Glen,
steadying her voice as well as she could.

We crossed in the same boat together, I
believe, to Morecambe,' he answered, speaking
as unconcernedly as annoyance would let him.
I did not know,' he added, ' you were travelling
to London to try your fortune as an author.'

She has come to set the Thames on fire,'
observed Lady Hilda ; ' at least, so I gather
from her admirer, Mr. Pierson.*

I trust,' added Mr. Dawton, always restlessly
anxious to put an unnecessary oar in
the conversation, ' she will give us due notice
when the conflagration is likely to come off.'

I will,' said Mr. Yassett, with a decision
which took his hearers by surprise, while Glen
contented herself by hoping mentally Lady
Hilda might then be out on the river in a boat,
and determinedly rose to go.

Mr. Pierson walked by her side as far as the
street door.

You have got a manuscript for us, I see T
he remarked.

'No said Glen, whose feathers were still
ruffled.

'Yes,' persisted the reader, laying hold of
the end of the roll.

I won't leave it,' declared Glen ; * nothing
shall induce me. You would let Lady Hilda
Hicks see it !'

On my honour I will not I Muggins shall
take charge of it till they are all gone. Can't
you trust me, Miss "Westley V

If Miss Westley had spoken out her mind
she would have answered that she could not ;
but to this point of candour Glen's courage
refused to carry her.

Well,' she said reluctantly, ' as you promise
so faithfully ' — and she gave him the
manuscript as if it were some rare and precious
treasure — *it is my best, Mr. Pierson,' she
added, forgetting her anger for a moment, as
she remembered all the merits and all the
beauties and all the originality, all the fire and
passion and pathos of this her youngest born.

her Benjamin ; ' it is far and away stronger
than anything I have done yet. You won't
let that hateful Lady Hilda laugh over it, will
you V

No ; nobody shall see it but myself. Do
not be down-hearted, Miss Westley. We
will see your name printed in big capitals
yet;

Spite, however, of which hopeful assurance,,
before she was a fortnight older there came a
letter from Mr. Vassett, saying that, although
the report on the manuscript she had been
good enough to leave for consideration was in
many respects favourable, he did not feel disposed
to undertake its publication.'

*I still adhere,' finished Mr. Vassett, 'to
the opinion I first expressed — namely, that you
cannot yet have had sufficient experience of
life to enable you to produce a satisfactory
work. To write well, an author must have
thought much. Pardon me if my remarks
seem obtrusive. I trust you will believe they
are prompted solely by my interest in your
welfare and success.'

What is it. Glen V said Mr. Westley to his-daughter,
as she let her hand holding the open

letter drop with a despairing gesture to her
side. ' Another refusal V

Yes, papa, as I expected.'

Where does the refusal come from V asked
Mr. Lacere, who had called, as he explained,
in passing,' to see if Mr. Westley continued
to like the Bloomsbury lodgings. ' Do you
mind telling me V he went on, speaking in a
tone of kind sympathy.

For answer, Glen gave him iVIr. Vassett's
letter to read.

I think all these people give you great encouragement,
Miss AVestley,' he said.

And I think,' observed Glen, ' that they all
consider time to be of as little importance now
as it must have been in the days of the
patriarchs, when a few years less or more
of waiting could make but little difference.'


With which petulant retort she was turning
to leave the room, when Mr. Lacere noticed
an expression on her father's face he had
seen there and wondered at more than once
before.

Doubt, anxiety, trouble, were all written on
that melancholy, pensive countenance, and

something beyond — something Mr. Lacere
could not analyze or understand, but which
filled him with a pity, the cause of which he
would have felt puzzled to define.

It was then he took the first decided step
along a road the end of which he could not
see.

Miss Westley,' he said, almost involuntarily,
' give me your manuscript. Let me try
if I cannot find a purchaser for it.'

A STRANGE ENCOUNTER.

HOT, close evening in the summer of
1855. A thunderstorm brooding
over London. The streets dusty
and stifling ; scarce a breath of air stirring :
what Mr. Dawton, surveying the aspect of the
heavens from one of the front gates of The
Wigwam, described as ' a portentous stillness '
pervading the atmosphere.

You had far better stop at home, Will,'
he expostulated. ' Kelly, do not go yet ;
•do stay and have a morsel of supper —
the crisp lettuce and the cool lobster — and
we'll ice a bottle, of champagne — what say
you V

That I must go home,' said Mr. Kelly. ' I

have copy to finish that can't be put off even
for lettuce and lobster.'

And I promised to turn up at Afford's,
and I shall turn up,' added Will.

Well, young blood, young blood — it will
have its way, sirs,' commented Mr. Dawton.
Don't forget Friday, Kelly — just a friendly
party, you know — only a few old acquaintances
— a carpet-dance — sandwiches and a
glass of wine. Arty will never forgive you
if you slight her birthday — a spoiled child — a
spoiled child — sole daughter of my house and
name.'

Who rules the whole establishment,' said
Will, holding the gate open for his companion.
Now, Kelly, if you are ready ;' and the pair
strode off, walking together to Westminster
Bridge, where young Dawton hailed an Atlas
'bus to convey him to Haddington, while Mr.
Kelly thoughtfully wended his way along the
Belvedere Road towards Bermondsey. It was
his invariable practice when alone to select all
the narrower and meaner thoroughfares. He
got a great deal of his ' copy ' out of the less-frequented
streets ; some papers he had written
concerning Rotherhithe and Bermondsey were

about that period attracting a good deal of
attention. * Studies from Life in Pen and
Ink,' he called them ; and the editor of the
Galaxy having intimated he preferred these
sketches to stories, Mr. Kelly was considering
whether he could not take a few more in other
parts of the town.

It is an important element in worldly success
when a man proves capable of learning from
experience, and is not afraid to ask himself,
What am I best fitted to do V

So far Mr. Kelly had not been able to settle
this last point to his satisfaction, but he was
coming to understand the conditions under
which he displayed such talents as he possessed
to the least advantage.

For example, he found his genius did not
lie in the direction of story telling — he was
destitute of some faculty without which he
felt he could never really take what Mr. Daw-ton
described as * a grip ' of the public. The
best tale he could write would not, he felt,
bring down the house.' He had been rejected
by every magazine in London except the
Galaxy, and he knew the only reason why his
stories found admittance there was because

Jim Dawton polished them up. The younger
Dawtons all possessed the knack of turning out
a readable tale. In most of them there was
not, as a candid friend kindly told Will, ' a
mortal thing.' Nevertheless, they were airy,
sparkling, and vivacious, and ' took ' with the
public. Just as one woman out of the costliest
materials finds herself unable to construct a
bonnet ^ fit to be seen,' while another, the rich
possessor of a scrap of silk, a bit of net, a
morsel of ribbon, a few stray leaves and
flowers, will manufacture as coquettish and
ravishing; a head-ear as lover need desire to
see, so not all the narrative ' stock ' Mr.
Kelly undoubtedly possessed could be metamorphosed
by him into palatable literary
soup.

I can't tell what the deuce it is the fellow
wants,' said the editor of the Galaxy one day
to Jim Dawton, when that young gentleman,
thinking, as he expressed the matter, * Kelly
could surely now be trusted to walk alone,'
had handed two of Barney's tales in without
running his eye over them.'

It was quite by chance the editor glanced at
the manuscript, but when he had done so, he

VOL. III. 33

sent for Dawton, and taxed him with having
on previous occasions retouched and almost
rewritten ' that Irishman's copy.'

And I am sure I can't imagine why you
bother yourself about him,' finished the great
man, ' for he'll throw you over when you have
served his turn, see if he don't.'

I think he will,' answered Jim ; ' but, bless
you, we never expected he'd pay us in meal orin
malt for any little thing we were able to do
for him. It's a poor sort of way that, according
to my fancy, some folks have of gi^dng
with one hand and holding out the other to
take.'

You wil never learn sense, Dawton, I am
afraid,' observed the editor gravely, at which
remark Jim laughed, and said he did not know
who was to teach him ; and then he took
]mr. Kelly's rejected manuscripts and ' polished
them up a bit,' and subsequently remarked to
that individual :

I say, old boy, don't you think it is almost
time you learnt to pepper and salt your
stories for yourself? I'm about tired of
having all the work while you get the
halfpence.'

Very innocently, Mr. Kelly inquired what
this friend meant, though he knew perfectly
well. After he first began to write for the
Galaxy, a letter was directed to him at the
office of that paper, which proved to be from
the editor of the new opposition magazine,
started by an enterprising firm immediately
after the 'tremendous hit' made by the Galaxy
with the benevolent intention of knocking that
journal ' into a cocked hat.' In this epistle
the editor presented his compliments to Mr.
Kelly, and intimated that in case the author of
Tidford's Pet ' were disposed to contribute
some short tales to the Sceptre, he would be
glad, if possible, to meet Mr. Kelly's terms.
Now, as the price Mr. Kelly received from the
Galaxy, though about six times as much as
that brilliant writer would have felt thankful
to receive when he began to turn out copy for
his daily bread, was so much less than he
heard other men boasting they where paid,
he thought he would see whether he could
not do as well as they; and accordingly,
without committing himself about terms, he
dropped a couple of manuscripts into the
editorial box, together with a note, signifying

33—2

he would do himself the honour to call on
that gentleman during the course of the
ensuing week, when, he felt no doubt, they
would be able to come to some satisfactory
arrangement.

He refrained from saying a word to Mr.
Dawton about this letter and his own answer,
being well aware that between the Galaxy and
the Sceptre a feud was raging like unto the
Montagu and Capulet business of old, and
spite of all his lately acquired experience of
literary moods and morals, he did not yet quite
understand that so far from holding him back
from spoiling the Egyptians, the Dawtons
would simply have patted him on the back and
said, ' Go in and win or given him, in even
more forcible words, the advice vouchsafed by
the parish priest of Callinacoan, who, after
stating from the altar steps it had come to his
knowledge that gifts of food and clothing and
money were being distributed amongst his
flock by those who, like the Pharisees, hesitated
not 'to compass sea and land to make one
proselyte, and when he is become so, make him
twofold more a child of hell than themselves,'
went on to say, ' Take what ye can get from

the heretics, my poor people — everything they
are willing to give, for God knows ye have
need of it all.'

Mr. Kelly was unable to quite realize that
though honour among thieves may be possible,
chivalry as regards editors and publishers is
usually accounted among authors as worse than
folly, and for this reason he said nothing concerning
the Sceptre J a reticence he felt indeed
very thankful subsequently to remember he
had maintained.

All in due time he ' did himself the honour '
of calling on the editor, who was out ; but the
sub, who was in, sent a message that he should
like to speak to him.

Nothing doubting, Mr. Kelly entered the
editor's room — a well-furnished, well-carpeted,
well-appointed apartment, very different from
the den at the Galaxy.

Money no object,' thought Mr. Kelly complacently.
Afterwards he learned that it is
not from the best looking offices the largest
cheques issue.

From out of the depths of a great office-chair,
placed at the side of the table farthest
from the door, rose a small man with the palest

face and the darkest eyes and the blackest hair
Mr. Kelly had ever seen.

I sent some manuscripts here last week at
Mr. Hetley's request said the fortunate author,
after the exchange of a few words of ordinary
courtesy, with the assured smile and manner of
a man accustomed to acceptance ; ' I hoped to
have been fortunate enough to see him.'

He has gone away for a few days,' answered
the other, ' but I know all about the matter.
Pray be seated,' and with a wave of his hand
he indicated a chair.

Why, he never could tell afterwards, but at
that point Mr. Kelly began to feel vaguely uncomfortable.
This was his first interview with
an editor unblessed by the genial introduction
and cheerful presence of one or other of the
Dawtons.

Your manuscripts have been carefully considered,
Mr. Kelly,' said the sub, laying one
out quite flat on the table as he spoke, and
smoothing it gently over with the palm of his
hand, an action which somehow gave the author
the impression of erasing all the words, ' but I
regret to say '

Oh ! if you do not want them I can place

them elsewhere,' interposed Mr. Kelly, speaking
in such a hurry that his words almost tripped
each other up. ' I shouldn't have sent you anything
of mine if you had not asked me to dom'


Mr. Hetley was aware of that answered
the second in command, with unruffled composure,
' and begged me to offer his apologies
for the trouble he has given you. He regrets
very much indeed that he cannot make use
of either of your stories.'

Of course I bow to his decision,' observed
Mr. Kelly, with a fine irony perfectly thrown
away on the man he addressed — a man who
understood his business thoroughly, the best
sub' perhaps in London, ' but as a matter of
curiosity I should like to be informed of the
grounds on which sou reject my work after
having requested me to submit it.'

Yes, Mr. Hetley felt that even for his own
sake some explanation should be given. When
he wrote to you he had only read " Tidford's
Pet," and concluded the rest of your work
would be up to the same mark. Now, Mr.
Kelly, if I may say so without offence, these
stories are Riot up to the same mark.'

Mr. Kelly answered, with a beautiful
humility, that he was sorry his poor stories did
rot meet with approval. He confessed they
had not seemed to him so inferior, but then no
author could be considered a fair judge of his
own work; and, warming to his subject, Barney
threw out a general statement to the effect
that he presumed there were few writers able
uniformly to keep to the same standard of
excellence.

Mr. Kelly had advanced a good deal in his
ideas and manners since he came to London.
He now talked as one having authority ; who
had been nursed on printer's ink and weaned
on small ]mica ; who knew all about editors, and
authors, and copy, and ' trade ' jealousies and
old-fashioned officialism ; for whom the ' profession
' held no secret, and who knew his way
blindfold through all the ins and outs of
journalism.

But he was speaking to a man who for
twenty years had been walking the highways
and by-ways of literary life ; who, though he
might be little better than a machine, still,
like a machine, had come in contact with the
productions of some splendid workers ; who

understood his business if lie understood little
else ; and who was not to be diverted from his
argument by the great and mighty airs of even
a much more important person than the author
of ' Tidford's Pet;

No writer can make a greater mistake than
to play tricks with his reputation,' he remarked
sententiously, * and upon the strength of a
later success to try to float the immature productions
of an earlier period of his life. That
is what you have tried to do with us, Mr.
Kelly, and even in your own interest I am
bound to say I think you have committed an
error of judgment.'

In a moment Barney grasped the state of
the case. This man thought he had been trying
to foist off on the Sceptre some of the
crudest of his manuscripts — the very refuse of
his labours. It was gall and wormwood to the
author to find that, wanting the Dawton light
touch, minus the few bold strokes which gave
a finish to his work, stories which had cost him
labour enough, which were indeed the very
best he had ever produced, should be accounted
unfit for anything save swift burial without
funeral honours in the nearest waste-paper

basket. He lead cleverness eiioug;li to conceal
the cause of his chagrin, and answered, with a
sudden change of manner which a good deal
surprised Mr. Hetley's sub :

I dare say you are right ; and at any rate
I feel obliged for your candour. I did not
really think the tales bad myself; but, as I
said before, authors are not always the best
judges of their own work. Just at the present
time I am exceedingly busy ; but after a
while I hope to be able to bring you something
you will consider more satisfactory ;'
and then they had a little conversation on
general subjects, and Mr. KeUy smilingly took
his manuscripts, and they parted very good
friends.

That evening was spent by Bernard Kelly
in comparing his original manuscripts with
those manuscripts as they read in print,
after one of the Dawtons had ' run them
through.*

I can't make it out,' he at last exclaimed.
I can't tell how the deuce they do it,' for the
fact was, Barney had hitherto considered his
brain children marred and deformed by the
Dawton hacking, and dressing, and shortening.

and altering. He thought his finest passages
were ruthlessly deleted — that for all the beauty
and pathos he had read and re-read to himself
with never-failings delight to be cut out by
Dawton's remorseless pen, was an indignity he
could scarcely endure. Even his amusing-scenes
were curtailed ; and what he considered
his finest efforts of humour sometimes expunged
altogether, and the author had only held his
peace concerning these mutilations from prudence.


Now, however, he began to see it was to this
chopping and changing process he owed such
success as he had secured. He did not really
think his compositions improved by the merciless
action of the Dawton pruning-knife —
quite the contrary ; but Barney Alas not bigoted.
His firstborn in literature was dear to him, no
doubt ; but he would have sacrificed it or anything
else for bread-and-cheese.

I wish I could learn the knack of how they
do it,' he reflected, referring to the ease with
which any one of the Dawtons could ' touch
up,' or ' knock ofi",' or ' boil down ' an article.
I know twice as much as any one of them. I
have read ten times as many books — and i:!:ood

books too. What on earth can it be they
have that I want ?'

It was while this question still burned in his
mind he happened one Saturday night to be
passing through Horton while the usual market
was in full swing in Pitied Street. The sight
was new to him. He went home with a vivid
picture of the stalls, the flaring naphtha, the
eager sellers, the anxious buyers in his mind's
eye, with the quaint expressions, the curious
retorts, the elbowing, the jostling, the badinage,
the persuading, the huckstering, fresh in his
memory ; and before he lay down to sleep he
produced a graphic and taking pen-and-ink
sketch of the scene.

It is capital !' said Will Dawton. * It only
needs a dash of colour here and there. Hand
it over, Kelly; that's precisely the sort of
thing the Galaxy wants.'

In the pursuit, therefore, of that ' sort of
thing,' Mr. Kelly wandered south and east
through all sorts of disagreeable neighbourhoods,
but he liked them. Quite honestly he
said he preferred Whitechapel to Belgravia,
and Eatcliif Highway to Pall Mall.

There came a time when he tired of those

neighbourhoods, and, indeed, sometimes to hear
him talk now, anyone might imagine he had
spent his whole life amongst the Upper Ten.
For Mr. Bernard Kelly has done remarkably
well for himself, and if you, reader, chance to
be of those who go visiting at great houses, you
will certainly some evening have the pleasure
of meeting a gentleman who, from the first
hour of his literary life, laid himself out to
please the public'

After parting from, his friend he strolled idly
along Belvedere Road and Upper Ground
Street, got on to Bankside, and so, just as the
threatened thunderstorm besran, found himself
in that exceedingly old-world part of London
which is still existing, though probably it will
not exist much longer — Clink Street. It was
a place he often chose to pass through ; he liked
the passage round St. Saviour s Church, and the
queer little bit of covered way leading from
Clink Street to St. Mary's Overy Dock.

A genuine corner of ancient London it all
seemed to him as he often paused at the top
of the steps to look on the one hand down on
the water, and on the other to take a backward
and comprehensive view of Clink Street. Now

however, as heavy drops of rain began to fall
on the stones, he thought only of getting into
shelter, and hurried up the steps and under
the covered passage that to this day seems so
quaint a relic of times long gone by.

There were other persons there before him,
as others came after ; but not very many, for
Clink Street cannot be considered a leading
thoroughfare, and is certainly not largely
affected, save by those pedestrians who either
reside or have business in the neighbourhood.

Mr. Kelly, who had a long distance still to
traverse before he reached his lodgings, and
who did not feel the slightest desire to get
wet through, managed, after a few minutes, to
secure for himself a very comfortable corner,
in which he stood warm and dry, while the
rain poured down in torrents and the thunder
pealed and the lightning played about the
river and round the tower of St. Saviour's
Church, and women with their dresses tucked
up and shawls drawn over their" bonnets took
advantage of any lull in the tempest to scuttle
off through the passage, and men who had
waited till the worst of the storm was over
Inittoned their coats close, turned up their

collars and the bottoms of their trousers, and
set out, to be driven again to shelter when
they reached the other side of the market.

It was getting late ; the shades of evening
were closing down, and still there appeared
little chance of a storm which seemed always

working round,' ' blowing over,' dien Mr.
Kelly's attention was excited by the appearance
of two men, who, in one of the short lulls
of the rain and thunder, came running up the
steps, and took advantage of the best position
they found vacant at the top.

By George !' exclaimed the shorter of the
two, who took off his hat and mopped his forehead,
and wiped the perspiration from his face,

we are just in time, Noll. How it comes
down ! My luck all over ! Thin boots — no
overcoat, no umbrella !'

Well, you are no worse off than I am,'
replied the other, in an oily, unctuous, persuasive
voice, * and we are in very good quarters
here ; and the rain, doubtless, will soon give
over.'

And we'll see a rainbow in the sky, and an
angel will bring us changes of raiment, and
perhaps a carriage to convey us to our destination

— that's the sort of thing, ain't it ? —
your sort of thing, I mean.'

I wouldn't, you know — I wouldn't, really,
if I was you.'

Wouldn't you ? If you were me, you don't
know what you might do ;' and then, in a lilting
sort of monotone, the first speaker went on,
^ Suppose that you were I — suppose that you
were me— suppose we both were somebody
else — I wonder who it would be ? Middle
me, riddle me ree, Noll, can you tell me
that V

The rain was now falling fast and furious,
and the thunder making such a din, Mr.
Kelly could not have heard any more of the
conversation for some time, even if his attention
had not been distracted by the flashing
of the lightning and the noise made by the
rain as it plashed heavily into the dock
below.

For the time the corner was full, and even
the passage beyond, only partially protected
from the storm, held a fair number of people
who did not care to expose themselves to the
full violence of the tempest ; but whenever the
rain abated even a little, most of the persons

sheltering repeated the experiment of venturing
forth, and once again the place became
comparatively empty, though the drops still
pattered down and the thunder continued to
mutter angry threats from the distance, whither
it had temporarily departed.

That the talk had never really ceased between
the two men Mr. Kelly was aware, and
now, as they drew a little nearer to him, the
younger said, evidently in answer to some
previous remark of his more self-possessed and
decorous companion :

I suppose you have heard, however, that at
the corner of every street in London there is a
capitalist waiting to be taken in V

I have heard,' replied the other, ' what
comes much to the same thing — namely,
that every half-hour in the day a fool
crosses London Bridge with a rogue following
him.^

Well, and what do you make of that V
asked the younger man triumphantly.

Surely there is not much to make of anything
of the sort. We know there have been
rogues and fools, and dupes and knaves since
the beginning of time, and till our poor, im-vol.

II. ^4

perfect human nature is different from what it
is '

Now, drop that,' interrupted the serious
man's companion ; ' you know I can't stand
preaching.'

It was you began it '

Preaching ! I'll swear it wasn't,' cried the
other, in such an excited tone that those persons
who were still ' standing up ' involuntarily
turned and looked at the pair.

Mr. Kelly found it impossible to catch the
remonstrance addressed to the younger man
by the elder ; but his words produced an
effect for a short time — not for long, though ;
every woman who furled or unfurled her
umbrella was addressed with jocular familiarity
; every man had a remark of some
sort addressed to him. There were a few
who, being wet and sulky, did not take kindly
to this chaff; but upon the whole, pater and
mater families and the younger lads and lasses
only laughed at the outpouring of spirit of the
funny chap,' as Mr. Kelly mentally called
him ; and when Barney himself was addressed
as an * old cock,' and asked whether ' the
missus would give him a wigging when he got

home for stopping out without leave the
merriment of the audience culminated in
shouts of laughter.

Stimulated by these marks of approval, the
young man, with his hat pushed to the back
of his head, his hands deep in his pockets, his
back up against the woodwork, and his feet a
little inclined to slip away from under him on
their own account, proceeded to improve the
occasion still further by asking whether he
should ' go home first to make peace and
tuck up the young ones,' a question which so
delighted many ladies present that they were
fain to bury their faces in their handkerchiefs,
and put their hands to their sides, cast sidelong
glances of amusement at each other, and
giggle and otherwise encourage ' the gentleman
' to proceed to greater lengths.

Which indeed he did. He found many
things to say, and he said them ; he seemed in
the highest, maddest mood, and treated the
perpetually recurring * I wouldn't if I was
you — I wouldn't indeed,' of his mentor as a
capital joke. He even attacked one staid and
starched spinster with the question whether
she wanted a * nice good little boy to bring up,'

34—2

because personally lie felt he had ' great need
of a mother's care.'

You have great need of something, sir, I
think,' she retorted, and walked away with
great dignity, a handkerchief tied over her
bonnet and her silk dress uplifted sufficiently to
show a very neat foot and ankle, followed by
such a pantomime from the young fellow of
kisses wafted after her retreating form, and
heart-pressing and deep sighing, and a stave
of a song in admiration of ' charms he might
ne'er see again,' that even Bernard Kelly, who
was not easily moved to laughter, had to join
the chorus of merriment which rang out from
that harbour of refuge perched above the dock
of St. Mary Overy.

One thing, however, Mr. Kelly noticed —
that through all his folly the young man, who
was called by his grave companion Lance,
never seemed to lose hold of a certain thread
of dialogue, to which at intervals he returned
again and again. When he thus took up the
original subject — whatever it might be — his
face was serious enough ; then people might
come or people might go without eliciting any
remark save the most cursory and trivial. At

such times he forgot to look about him either,
though his companion did, as though uneasy
lest what he said might be overheard, or
anxious to get away and so end the discussion.


The author stole a glance at them both now
and then, and utterly failed to arrive at any
conclusion as to what they might be, till he
chanced to hear the elder say :

I can't — I assure you what you ask is not
within my power to do. I am only temporarily
associated with a religious society,
and '

Lord I' broke in the other ; * talk about
Saul among the prophets — what's that to
Noll Butterby V

Hold your tongue, do !' remonstrated
Noll angrily. ' Why will you talk so loud ?
People can hear all you say, and '

Here he dropped his voice so low that even
Bernard Kelly, who was standing near, could
not catch the remainder of the sentence, to
which Lance replied in a much less exalted
tone than that he usually employed.

He was but little over twenty, Mr. Kelly
decided ; so thin that he really looked as if he

had not an ounce of flesh on his bones — a restless,
electrical sort of being, * who could not
have kept still or silent had he been paid for
doing so, possessed of a temperament that
would never let him get even moderately fat.
He was wiry, but not muscular ; certainly no
athlete, Barney — who knew a good deal about
men who hunted, and boated, and walked, and
jumped, and fought, and played at cricket —
felt very sure. His thin, straight hair, which
he was constantly pushing upwards with nervous,
bony fingers, hovered between the confines
of bright yellow and dark red; his
complexion was muddy, his expression
anxious ; his eyes were small, and of a
greyish-blue, and as a rule ranged from
object to object with the same quick, jerky
uncertainty that characterized all his movements.


'Mad,' thought Mr. Kelly; and then he
amended his phrase, * drunk.' Yet for a man
not sober he was wonderfully fluent ; he never
stopped for a word ; he went right on with a
flow of language Barney had seldom heard
equalled except by a * Cheap Jack.'

On the whole, he more resembled a * Cheap

Jack' with a slight knowledge of literature
added to his other stock-in-trade than anything
else ; and as the rain, though still
coming down pretty steadily, was not nearly
so heavy as it had been, Mr. Kelly might have
gone away to Bermondsey satisfied the young
fellow followed the occupation in question, or
at all events one analogous to it, had he not,
to his astonishment, suddenly heard him break
out with this :

How did I first get to know the Dawtons ?
and why did I break with them ? I don't mind
telling you or any man. I have nothing to
be ashamed of in the matter, have I V

And he turned on Barney, who, in the excess
of his astonishment, was staring at him withall
his might.

Unless I knew what you were talking
about, I really could not venture to give an
opinion,' answered Mr. Kelly, with diplomatic
reticence.

You're Scotch, ain't you V cried out the
other. ^ I am sure you are. You are
Scotch !'

Something of that sort,' agreed Barney
carelessly.

I could have taken my affidavit of it. You
see, Noll, he won't reply straightforwardly even
to the simplest question. Never mind, I like
the look of you. Jew or Gentile, I can always
tell when a man is a good sort by one glance
in his face. My friend here wants to hear
how I fell in with a certain family, and why I
fell out with them. I don't mind telling him,
or you, or anybody. When a man hasn't done
anything wrong, though he is a bit down on
his luck '

I wouldn't, Lance — I wouldn't indeed, if I
were you.'

If you don't quit that parrot-cry I'll wring
your neck for you,' interposed Lance, with an
expression of the most perfect amiability, * or
chuck you into the sewer there — our noble
Thames is nothing but a common sewer. Here,
you, sir, why have you shrunk back into your
corner ? Come here ; or, better still, I'll edge
up to you.'

And, suiting his action to his word, he
moved close beside Mr. Kelly, and laid one
hand on that gentleman's shoulder, while with
the other he drew the reluctant Butterby into
conclave while he said :

Oh 1 you need not be making signs and
tokens to him about me. I know very well
what I am doing and sa}TLng. If you keep
as cool a head among your religious folks
as I have now, you'll get on, never fear.
Do you happen to know,' he added, addressing
Bernard Kelly, ' ivho stole the squires
apples T

No, I don't,' answered Barney, laughing ;
do you V

Yes, I know, bless you ! but never mind that
now ; we were not talking about apples or the
squire, but about me and the Dawtons. Did
you ever meet any of them V he stopped to
inquire.

I have heard of a Mr. Dawton, an actor, if
that's the man you mean.'

That's the man — does old fathers and
hesLYj swells ; awful muff on the stage, I
think, and a far greater bore in private life.
But that's nothing. You are not a friend of
his, are you V

1 1 How should I be a friend of his V

I didn't think you were ; you are out of
that sort of beat altogether ; but still, it is as
well to be carefuL No, I am not going to hold

my tongue, Noll. However, as I was saying,
Dawton's an awful bore, but he did not behave
half badly to me. He was good to me — 111
say that for him ; and so was his wife, so were
the sons, and so was everybody — only — well, I
was a fool ; you are not surprised to hear that,
are you V

Of course he is not,' remarked Mr. Butterby.
' Why should anybody be who hears
you talking about your private affairs in this
way V

I did not ask your opinion, and I am not
such a fool as I look, as some persons may find
out before they are much older. I do not say
I have done as well as you, Mr. Noll ; but the
end is not yet, and while you are still plodding
through the highways and byways, distributing
tracts, you need not be surprised to seeme
driving past in my carriage. Should you
like to hear how I came to London without a
shoe to my foot V

Well, I don't know,' answered Mr. Kelly,
thus once more appealed to ; ' this is scarcely a
place to pass the night, and '

Ah, you are laughing at me ! You mean
I'd keep you talking till morning. No, I

wouldn't. I wonder somebody doesn't start a
bar in this corner. What I'd give now just
for the least taste of Scotch whisky ! We'd
have that in compliment to you. Dawton was
the fellow to lap ; that's how he got himself
out of all his engagements. Couldn't keep his
nerves steady ; got maudlin, too, at times. If
drink hurts a man, he ought to take the pledge
" Taste not, touch not." What are you
grinning at ?' he asked suddenly. ' I suppose
you are thinking, "Physician, heal thyself;"
but you are out — quite wrong. Bless you, I
don't drink ! I haven't the chance. I only
wish I had ! You can't get drunk unless you
have money, or tick, or friends; and I have
neither money, nor tick, nor friends, and all
because of a young woman — such a trim little
craft, such a pretty, clever creature ! She might
have made a man of me ; but never mind,
when I am ridings in that carriage I was
telling you about,' and he nodded to Mr.
Butterby, ' she'll be sorry she's not sitting at
my side !'

Perhaps you may make up your quarrel,'
suggested Mr. Kelly.

Oh no ! I am not one of your forgiving

sort. I have no notion of huffing to-day and
kissing tomorrow. So far as I am concerned,
Miss Arty will have all her life to repent in.'

Who is Miss Arty V asked Mr. Kelly, as
innocently as though he had not seen a young
lady of that name a couple of hours previously.


Old Dawton's daughter. She does not
take after him, though.'

And she wouldn't have anything to do with,
you, Lance V said Mr. Butterby.

It was this way, you see. She did not seem
able to forget how poor I was when she first
set eyes on me — they had the bailiffs in at the
time for that matter, and so I reminded her.
I told her I meant to be a big fellow yet, that
1 knew I had it in me to ' make a splash,' that
all I wanted was a wife to keep me steady, that
I would win a fortune for her ; but she didn't
see it, or she wouldn't see it. She said she
thought we had better wait till I had got part
of the fortune, at any rate. I declared I
would do nothing of the kind, that if she liked
she could have me then, but that if she did
not choose to take me as I was, she might do
the other thing.'

And so V ventured Mr. Kelly, as the rejected
suitor paused.

She did the other thing,' explained Lance.
I put it quite plainly to her. T said, '' Remember,
I am not going to come begging and
praying to you to reconsider your decision. I
have made you a fair offer, but I will not
make it to you again. It must be now or
never."

" Then I am afraid it must be never," ' she
answered, as coolly as you please. That was a
way to treat a fellow who worshipped the
ground she walked on, who would have dressed
her in satins and velvets if he could, who
thought there was nobody like her in the
world. It's no matter, though ; I am not
going to break my heart because a woman's
false. When I think of the walks we used to

take over Battersea Fields, I But she'll be

sorry some day, won't she V

I dare say she is sorry now,' observed Mr.
Kelly soothingly.

No, she's not. She won't feel much sorrow
till she hears a great talk about me, and people
saying : " What a clever fellow that Lance
Felton must be ! Why, he came to London

with scarcely a shoe to his foot, and look at
him now — he's rolling in wealth !" '

There's some work cut out for you before
anybody can say that about Lance Felton with
any truth remarked i\Ir. Butterby, with a
saintly sneer.

And to enable him to do the work cut out
exclaimed Mr. Kelly, ' I propose, now the
rain is abating a little, that we adjourn to the
nearest tavern and drink to his success in the
best " Scotch" we can get.'

I knew you where the right sort,* cried
Lance with enthusiasm. * Oh yes, I can
always tell with the most cursory '

Never mind that now,' interrupted Bernard
Kelly. ' Come along !' and, thus exhorted,
Mr. Felton, as he expressed the matter,
toddled.'

The tide of improvement which has for the
last fifteen years been setting steadily through
modern Babylon and converting London from
the ugliest and most interesting city in the
world, into the handsomest and most hopelessly
commonplace, could not, of course, when it was
sweeping better things into the limbo of forgetfulness,
be expected to spare so insignificant

a tavern as the old-fashioned public-house to
which Mr. Kelly and his companions repaired
for that modicum of Scotch whisky which was,
so said Mr. Felton, to be ordered in honour of
his new acquaintance's nationality. To Bernard
Kelly his nationality had become a matter of
the most supreme indifference. He was not a
man likely to gush about 'old Ireland' and
Brian Boroihme. Erin's harp, and Erin's
shamrock, and Erin's wrongs, were mere
phrases which conveyed even less meaning to
his mind than they could possibly have done
to the ' falsest' Saxon in the whole of England.
If anyone had asked him then his views on
the vexed question of Irish policy, he would
have confessed to entertaining none. He was
not eager to flourish his native land in the face
of the tyrant. He had found a country full of
leeks and cucumbers, and fleshpots and money,
and he meant to adapt himself to its manners
and customs, as far as possible.

Supposing it pleased people to take him fora
Scotchman, well and good — he would not
undeceive them. He had learnt at a very
early period of his metropolitan experiences
that the native of any other land — Jew, Greek,

Pole — was more acceptable to the English
mind than an Irishman, and consequently he
did not now go about the world proclaiming
that he claimed Callinacoan as his birthplace,
as he might once have done. He had heard
quite enough of that sort of thing from Miss
Bridgettata Cavan to warn him off the subject
for ever. Bears in rao;s and tatters Mr.
Donagh's aunt was wont to greet with delight
as having been, like herself, born in the
Emerald Isle, and accustomed to potatoes
boiled in their jackets. Not a man, woman, or
child with whom she came in contact round and
about West Ham and Stratford did she suffer
to remain in ignorance of her Irish extraction.


When she haggled over the price of a fowl,
she told the dealer she could have got a ' far
better one ' for sixpence at Callinacoan ; and
the same information was vouchsafed concerning
every other necessary of life, were the
matter in hand a ' hank ' of worsted or the
smoothing ' of Mat's immaculate shirt-fronts.

With a considerable amount of ostentation
Mr. Lance Felton, producing a crown-piece,
which he loudly declared he would tell no man

how he became possessed of, insisted on ' standing
treat.'

Closely watching him, Mr. Kelly could see
that crown-pieces had not been plentiful in the
young man's pocket. From the way he flung
the coin down on the counter it almost seemed
as though he were challenging the resources
of the house to produce sufficient change.

Hem,' thought Mr. Kelly ; and when the
whisky was brought in a measure instead of in
the fair and simple shape of ' outs,' to which
the liberal-minded youth had evidently been
most accustomed, Barney — the liquor having
been first passed to him ' out of compliment ' —
poured into his glass a quantity which made
both his companions stare.

Come, I say — you know,' expostulated Mr.
Felton ; ' leave other fellows a chance, do. I
did not mean you to take quite all.'

Oh ! there's enough left for you,' answered
Barney carelessly. ' English heads are more
easily upset than ours. However, let us have
another measure. I don't care to drink my
grog as weak as tea.'

Well, you must be a seasoned vessel,'
exclaimed Mr. Felton, as, not without admira-vol.
II. 35

tioiijhe noted the exceedingly moderate quantity
of water Mr. KeUy mixed with his potations.
Why, if I was to take that '

Mr. Kelly smiled meaningly. He knew
very well why this youngster's hand was unsteady,
and his talk rambling, and his eye unsettled,
and his tongue indiscreet.

Yes,' he decided ; ' my lad, you began with
the bottle betimes. You have had a touch of
D. T. already, or I am much mistaken. Unless
you mind what you are about, things won't go
well with you.' But he spoke no word of this
aloud ; he only sipped his own fiery draught,
and laughed inwardly to see how young Felton
was aU unconsciously following Mat Donagh's
lead, and adopting the course people learned
in the ways and customs of drunkenness assert
conducts to swift and sure destruction, viz.,
adding spirit to the top of the tumbler, instead
of conscientiously depositing it in the bottom.

Few men living probably knew more about
the vice of intemperance than Bernard Kelly.
He had seen every form, he thought, of intoxication
before he set foot in England ; but
once in London, he found he had still a great
deal to learn.

He felt quite interested in watching his two
companions : Noll, who it seemed to him
could himself have drunk a quart and walked
away as steadily afterwards as if he had never
tasted a drop ; and Felton, who was, he felt
convinced, already a confirmed tippler, and to
whose nervous and excitable nature stimulants
were evidently a swift and sure poison.

Strange to say, Kelly had, since he quitted
Abbey Cottage, well-nigh become a practical,
though not professed teetotaler.

It needed no prophet to foretell the probable
result likely to ensue from the habits into
which Mat Donagh and Mr. Dawton had
fallen.

Nothing except a miracle, thought Barney,
could save either from eventual bankruptcy
and degradation. He knew what his father
had sunk into ; he had seen others well-off,
lose lands, and houses, and character, simply
because they lacked self-control, because the
demon of drink took possession of them and
turned every good angel that had hitherto
dwelt in their bosoms adrift. This was not a
form of temptation he had expected to find
waiting for him in London ; but as he did

35—2

meet it, he determined it should not ruin his
future.

He drank nothing at home, and no more out
than seemed to his mind necessary, unless he
had a purpose to serve in assuming the semblance
of good-fellowship. If Mr. Bernard
Kelly liked he could tell to-day of many a
noble craft, laden with the treasures of genius,
he has seen go down engulfed in seas of champagne
and burgundy — to say nothing of those
more prosaic destroyers, brandy, and rum, and
gin — but he would not. Mr. Kelly is now
above all things respectable, no man better
understands the wisdom of silence — the beauty
of accepting things as they seem to be rather
than as they are.

He would not amend the doctor's certificate
for any consideration — conventional phrases
are eternally on his lips. He has never written
a line posterity need desire to read, yet he sits
high above the clamour of struggling authorship
a successful man !

Standing in front of the bar of the old
public-house, Mr. Felton was kind enough to
enlighten all within hearing as to his own
opinions, talents, and antecedents. From the

period when he went to a dame school to have
the alphabet beaten into him, to that present
hour in which he had made the acquaintance
of his new friend, he spared no incident which
seemed for the moment important to his wandering
brain. He was as discursive as Barney
Judge, and to Mr. Kelly he did not seem much
wiser. True, his folly was dashed with a vein
of shrewdness, which shone occasionally across
his discourse like the flash of a lantern through
the darkness of night. But Barney had grown
very weary of him, utterly tired of his awful
egotism, and was just considering how he
could manage to slip him off, when Noll, whose
eyes were no brighter, and face no ruddier, and
tongue no looser for all the whisky he had
swallowed, said in that aggravating slow
voice of his :

Now, Lance, if I'm to see you home it is
time we were moving.'

I don't want you to see me home,' cried
Lance indignantly. ' I can see myself home
without any help.'

No, you can't,' was the calm reply ; ' you'll
get locked up, or you'll lie down on some doorstep
and catch your death of cold ; or '

You go home yourself ; go to Jericho, if
you like. You'll come with mee to my crib,
won't you V went on Lance, appealing to
Barney Kelly.

Well, I don't know,' answered the latter ;
it all depends upon where your crib
may be. For instance, I won't go back
with you to Hammersmith, or Tottenham,
or ^'

Oh ! I'm not particular,' interposed the
other ; * I'll take a shakedown wherever you
live, and welcome.'

Couldn't possibly oblige you in that way,'
said Mr. Kelly ; ' I reside with my grand-mamma,
a most particular old lady — bedroom
candlesticks brought in at half-past ten, all
lights out at eleven. She would disinherit me
on the spot if I introduced such a wild spirit
as you to her.'

'What's the matter with me?' asked Mr.
Plan ce Felton, a little thickly.

A good deal, I think. You had better
take your friend's advice, and get home as
soon as you can. I'll set you a good example,

and be off.'

But Lance would not have the knot thus

cut ; he bade Noll take a Brixton 'bus, and
said plainly :

It is no use your waiting for me
A very demon of contradiction seemed
raised within him, and while with one hand he
persistently pointed Noll to the door, with
the other he clung to Mr. Kelly, who at length,
in order to pacify his excitement and avoid a
scene the landlord's looks seemed in anticipation
to deprecate, promised to take care of
him.

It was quite fine when they all left the
tavern ; a delightful coolness had succeeded
to the heat of the earlier part of the evening ;
the stars were shining overhead ; and though
the pavement under foot was wet, the heavy
rain had so completely washed the thoroughfares,
that walking seemed what it rarely is
in London — an absolute pleasure.

Which way V asked Bernard Kelly, as they
stood waiting to know what it might please
Mr. Felton to do next.

Wait a minute,' answered the younger
man. * We'll see Noll into a 'bus first. I'm
not going to have you prowling after us,' he
added, rudely addressing his friend.

I wouldn't speak in that way if I were
you,' said Noll, resorting to his accustomed
formula.

I'll speak any way I like, without asking
your leave ; you may depend upon that,' retorted
Lance.

Then I may as well cross over,' remarked
his friend, with unruffled composure ; and suiting
the action to the word, he picked his way
deliberately to the other side, where he took
up his position, waiting for the Brixton omnibus
to make its appearance.

*We won't go till we see him fairly off,'
said Lance, who still, perhaps for prudential
reasons, kept a firm hold of Bernard Kelly's
arm. * He is as deep as a draw-well ; he would
follow us in a minute.'

"What would it matter if he did V asked
Barney, who was beginning to wish himself
well rid of his companion.

It oughtn't matter to you,' answered Lance,
but I don't choose him to know anything
about me. He is a mean, close, dangerous,
double-faced cur, that is what he is, if you
want to know, and he did steal the squire's
apples !'

Well, suppose he did; there was no great
sin in that, was there ? Most boys steal
squires' apples when they can get a chance

Ay ! but he wasn't a boy, and he let somebody
else get the blame of it.'

Oh !' said Mr. Kelly, beginning to see
light.

He's a cad ! that's what he is ; now, when
he could make a bit of amends, he won't. His
old aunt died awhile ago, and left him £600.
A clever fellow might make his fortune with a
quarter of that. There's the 'bus — full inside
oh ! he's getting up on the sideboard — see
him ? Now we may get along.'

I hope we haven't very far to go,' remarked
Barney, who felt his companion leant far too
heavily on his arm, and heard with dismay his
speech becoming thicker and less articulate.

Not far — don't be afraid, I know my way
stop a minute, and let's look at the lights in
the water.'

No, no ; come on, do !' entreated ]mr. Kelly.
It is getting late, and I want to get home.
You can look at the lights any other night.'

Never before had London Bridge seemed
so long to him ; never before did the City,

to his eye, wear so deserted and dreary an
aspect.

If I only knew where the drunken idiot
lived he considered, ' I should not so much
care ; but I doubt very much if he is in a
state to get safe there.'

He did not overrate the point of inebriation
at which Lance had arrived, but he greatly
underrated the clearness of that young gentleman's
mind, even at times when his limbs were
particularly unsteady. Though his talk was
rambling, a thread of connected sense ran
through it. The main facts Mr. Kelly gathered
from his desultory conversation were that he
had a special spite against ' Noll ;' that, indeed,
he had a spite against most people ; that
he felt a fervent admiration for, and envy of, a
large number of persons whom he vaguely designated
as ' swells ;' that he had the greatest
desire possible to * ride in his carriage ' and
splash ' those who had shown him ' the cold
shoulder ;' that he entertained unlimited confidence
in his own abilities ; that he had very
little belief in the cleverness of anybody else ;
that he hoped Miss Arty would live to regret
having turned up her nose at him ; that he

meant to marry very soon, if only to show he
had no notion of wearing the willow ; that he
knew a girl who worshipped the ground he
walked on, and was worth a thousand — aye, a
hundred thousand — of Dawton's daughter. Ho
was not always perfectly audible, and he was
very often wholly unintelligible, but the impression
he left on Bernard Kelly's mind was
that Miss Arty might consider herself well rid
of her lover, for that no weaker, gainer, more
vindictive, less reliable young fellow ever reeled
home to bed.

It may be said at once that the sight of this
extraordinary suitor — who, even according to
his own account, had sprung from the people —
increased the determination Mr. Kelly formed
at a very early stage of their acquaintance of
getting out of the Dawton set as soon as he
felt strong enough to do without their assistance.

He was fast getting into a maze of speculations
concerning the Dawtons' antecedents and
his own chances of success in the future, when
he felt himself suddenly pulled up, and Lance
came to a full stop at the door of an old house
in a narrow and dirty City lane.

Here we are said the young man, lurching

heavily against his companion as he began
searching for the latch-key.

What do you mean ? Is this where you
live V

It is where I lodge. Come in, and you'll
see how I'm treated — worse than any dog ;
enough to make a fellow with brains shoot
himself — or somebody else.'

Seeing that the shaking fingers could not
succeed in their search, Mr. Kelly coolly put
his own hand in Lance's pocket and extracted
the key. Throwing open the door, they
stepped into a wide hall, where a gas-jet was
burning.

Now, where are we to go V asked Barney,
who felt a weight lifted off his mind. ' Upstairs
V

For answer Lance only shook his head.

It's in here I stop,' he said, indicating a
room on the left hand, in which also there
seemed a light.

Well, this is a queer adventure, too,' decided
Mr. Kelly, as he stood inside a bare,
meagrely furnished office, which contained
little beyond two counters running at right
angles, a stool, a desk, and a chair.

Some maps were hanging on the walls, which
were likewise embellished with shipping bills
representing imposing-looking vessels in full
sail.

I may leave you now, I supposes said Mr.
Kelly, drawing a deep breath of relief.

What's the hurry ? Wait a minute, and
then you can turn out the gas for me.'

But you don't sleep here V looking round
in search of any possible couch and perceiving
none.

Don't I ! You'll soon see. I told you I
was treated worse than a dog, and I am. And
he makes a great merit of what he does forme,
too ; thinks, I suppose, I ought to be
grateful to him for his charity. Well, time,
they say, proves all things. Here's a nice,
comfortable bed for a man to turn into ;' and,
suiting the action to the word, Mr. Lance
Felton with much difficulty got down on his
knees, and then, without the ceremony of dismantling
himself of any article of dress — not
even his hat, which, however, tumbled off,,
apparently of its own accord, he rolled under
the counter and disappeared from Mr. Kelly's
sight.

In astonishment too great for words Barney
surveyed this proceeding ; then, peeping over
the counter, he beheld the youth's prostrate
fissure extended on some sacks, over which was
laid a piece of baize.

By-by,' murmured Lance. ' I'm dead beat,
I think. You'll come and look me up soon,
won't you V

Oh yes,' answered Bernard Kelly, who,
however, had not the faintest intention of
doing anything of the kind.

And turn down the gas, will you, and shut
the door, to keep out that old housekeeper
!'

All right,' replied Mr. Kelly. ' Good-night,
and pleasant dreams.'

Then he closed the door, as requested, but
paused for a moment in the hall to read the
names which were painted on the wall.

Second floor. — Buncombe and Co.

First floor. — M. Logan Lacere.

Ground floor. — Lacere Bros., Shipping
Agents.

It's a strange world,' thought Mr. Bernard
Kelly, as he retraced his steps across London
Bridge, and thence wended his way to Bermondsey



; and indeed it is, the strangest
thing about it being that, wide as the world
seems, we find it practically so small we are
always jostling and running up against each
other.

NED S LETTER.

OWN in the Valley of the Thames,
on the Middlesex side of the river,
but quite away from the water —
among the moors that give a character of such
peculiar loneliness to that little-known part of
the country — the Westleys had found for
themselves a small cottage ; and, remote from
London, Glenarva, in a silence that after the
hum of the busy streets made her ears ache,
and in a solitude by comparison with which
Ballyshane might have been accounted a
populous city, was trying to write another
novel.

At first she did not find it easy work ; the
absence of all mental excitement, the utter

stillness, broken only bv the sono-s of the
birds and the bleating of sheep, the flat and to
her most uninteresting landscape, the lack of
young companionship, depressed her for a time
beyond measure — bowed her spirit down to the
very earth. But this did not last for long.
After a few weeks her imagination took root
in this fresh soil, and wound itself round desolate
tracts of stretching; moorland intersected
by sluggish streams, and twined fanciful wreaths
about domains sphere the grounds were wild
and neglected, and startled deer bounded
across parks that there seemed no owner to
enjoy. Had she known all about these places,
the explanation of their unrewarded appearance
might have proved prosaic enough, but as
matters stood she found abundant scope for
fancy, and ignorant of everything connected
with the men and women who some day meant
to return and live in those great deserted
mansions, she made up stories for herself of
wrong and sorrow and sin and suffering. It
was about that time Glen began to find writing
harder work than she had ever previously conceived
it could become. She did not suffer
now from that trouble which had startled and
VOL. II. 36

perplexed her when she first arrived in London
the absence of ideas. Plots and characters
she soon found came almost unbidden ; but
her difficulty was to mould them into shape,
to fit the different pieces of her puzzle together,
so as to form an intelligible whole, to make
her people lifelike, to show them doing simple
things in a simple manner, and talking as men
and women do talk in real life, and not as they
so often talk in books.

Sometimes the girl lost heart altogether ;
her thoughts were so vast, her power of expressing
them so small ! It cost her more trouble
to write a single chapter of that book than it
had done previously to produce a whole
volume. Quite unconsciously to herself she
was passing out of the mere rudimentary stage
of authorship into its higher branches, and no
one stood beside her desk to explain she was
not retrograding but progressing, that the
reason she found writing now so hard was not
because any virtue of genius had departed from
her, but because the discipline which alone could
make her writings worth reading had begun.

The sadness of the landscape also sometimes
oppressed her very soul. It lacked all life and

animation and cheerfulness — flat fields, stretching
commons destitute of gorse and heather,
slowly flowing water, more like dykes than
rivulets, bordered by mournful pollards, and
only enlivened by the occasional presence of
a party of ducks ; farmhouses at distant
intervals, a few cottages scattered here and
there, wide roads where once coaches passed
constantly, now totally deserted ; no station
within three miles, and only about four trains a
day to town ; few inhabitants above the rank of
labourers, and those there were perfectly unable
to comprehend why Mr. AYestley and his
daughter should have selected such an out-of-the-way
corner of the world to live in — a nonresident
rector, a curate and his wife, who
where very kind and friendly, but who e\'i-
plenty could not quite understand the position
of these new parishioners — altogether a strange
experience for Glenarva, who did not perhaps
take very kindly to the place or the people,
and who was regarded by them as a perfect
enigma, keeping herself to herself as she did,
taking long solitary walks, and generally maintaining
a dignified seclusion from which she
never willingly emerged.

36—2

For some reason best known to the local
wisdom of the village, popular opinion soon
decided that Mr. "Westley was engaged in a
lawsuit which had brought him over from
Ireland, and kept him till it was settled chained
near London. The many letters and the large
packets of papers were thus satisfactorily
accounted for, and even the few journeys Glen
took to town were assigned to the same cause
Mr. Westley, poor gentleman ! being in weak
health, of course his daughter had to see to
the business for him.'

Mr. Westley was in weak health, and his
daughter, as is usual in such cases, seemed the
only person who failed to realize the fact ;
indeed, it might have been hard enough for a
much older individual who had always lived
with the once owner of Glenarva to comprehend
he was less strong than usual.

Always delicate, always, save by fits and
starts, limp mentally, from the day he saw his
grand castle begin to totter, Mr. Westley sank
into the condition of an invalid. He had at
first nothing whatever in a physical sense
Wrong with him. The mournful tone of his
voice, the languor of his movements, his dislike

to anything which brought him into contact
with his fellows, arose not from illness,
but the utter collapse of hope. Had he been
a stronger man, he must either have died or
gone out and fought fortune again — again,
perhaps, to lose ; but in any case he would
have made another bid for success.

As matters were, he simply sank without a
struggle — unless, indeed, the feeble effort he
made on first returning to London to recall
the fact of his existence to one former friend
could be termed a struggle. His worldly
affairs got gradually worse and worse, while he
himself, with, as has been said, nothing really
wrong; as regarded his health, sank into the
condition of a confirmed invalid.

He did not walk, or work, or ride, or boat,
or Admit. People accepted the fact of his illness
and incapacity without troubling themselves
to consider what was the matter with him.

He had no intention of posing for a martyr,
or crying ' Wolf;' and yet in effect it was owing
to his constant depression and gentle inactivity
that Glen, when disease really laid its hand
upon him, failed utterly to see what was
happening.

Mr. Westley knew, however. With the
silence of love, he kept his knowledge to himself,
but he was perfectly well aware that at
last a mortal ailment had fastened upon him,
and that though the course it pursued might
be slow, the end would prove fatally sure.

Then it was at the eleventh hour he began
to reproach himself, to consider what he might
have done, if he had but possessed sufficient
energy. During the long summer days, when.
Glen was writing or out walking, when she
was thinking, planning, hoping for the future,
he sat, with the scent of the simple flowers
growing; about their little dwelling; filling; the
humble sitting-room, anxiously considering his
daughter's life, which ere many years he knew
would have to be lived without him, and reproaching
himself for not having in the past
done something which it was absolutely impossible
a person of his temperament ever
could at any time have accomplished.

To say that a man might have done this or
that had he been more energetic seems about
as sensible as to suggest he might have written
an opera or an epic poem, or painted a picture,
or built St. Paul's, or tunnelled the Alps,

without the genius for compassing any one of
these feats being conferred upon him by
nature.

To have asked Mr. "Westley to go out into
the world and fight among the rank-and-file
was like asking a lame man to run, or a deaf
man to hear, or a blind man to see ! After he first
left Glenarva he had thought to insure his life,
but, perhaps without any sufficient reason, the
doctor gave so doubtful a report of his constitution
that the money asked in the way of
premium could not be considered other than
prohibitory.

Then he strove to put by a little, and in
effect did manage, by dint of the most painful
economy and beautiful self-denial, to fill a
small purse for a rainy day — or for Glen,
when days with him were past for ever.

On this amount he had tried not to encroach,
keeping it in a bank where he got low interest,
but felt his small store safe. The money Mr.
Merritt had contrived to get him before he
left Ballyshane was pretty well expended.

He and Glen had lived close — painfully
close — but as it was impossible for them to
limit their expenses to the trifling sum which

sufficed at Ballyshane, somehow pence had
gone, and then shillings, and then pounds, and
the sovereigns laid aside for ' extras ' dwindled
down, till at length but few remained to give
a sense of strength and security to the regular
income, which was far — far too limited.

Nevertheless, Mr. Westley was not uneasy
not very uneasy, that is to say. As the
guineas went, his conviction on the subject of
Glen's ability to earn money grew. He had
substantial reasons for this belief. Mr. Pedant's
mind was at length made up to bring
out Miss AYestley's novel in the autumn, while
through Mr. Lacere's intervention one of the
best publishing houses had been induced to
accept the great work Mr. Vassett felt it
would be inexpedient for him to produce,'
and Mr. Lacere believed she was to receive
some small sum for the copyright.

If these good things had come to Glenarva
at Ballyshane, if a five-pound note had
dropped out of a publisher's letter while she
was within sound of the wash of the Atlantic
waves, the girl would have gone mad with joy ;
but now, though she was glad and thankful,
she did not feel elated, as might once have

been the case. The first meagre course of
success was announced, but its advent had
been so long delayed the girl's eager appetite
was gone. She had been trying to reach the
grapes for such a time that she felt too weary
and jaded to cat now she was assured they were
within her grasp. She was strangely cjuiet
about the matter, her father considered. Even
Mr. Lacere, who did not know her nature so
well, felt surprised she failed to evince more
pleasure when he cautiously broke the news of
victory to her.

He and she talked about it all one evening
as they paced slowly back from evening service
at an old-world church to which Mr. Westley
had said his daughter would accompany Mr.
Lacere if that gentlemen wished to see a
quaint building. The AVestleys' new friend
found his way sometimes down to the remote
corner of the world where they were living ;
he discovered charms in the neighbourhood
and beauties in the cottage Glen had never
done ; he partook of the tea she poured out
as though it were some rare and expensive
beverage the like of which he had never tasted
except under ]mr. Westley's roof ; he watched

Glen as she Fitted about the room, and listened
to her father's conversation as if the whole
world could hold for him no higher delight
than the society of a young girl and a man
whose name was writ large in the black books
of Fortune.

Mr. Westley liked him greatly ; he looked
forward to his sits with as much pleasure as
anything in those summer days could afford
him ; he had a vague intention of sooner or
later taking Mr. Lacere into his confidence,,
telling him how utterly alone Glen must stand
when she lost her father, and entreating on her
behalf the good offices of this grave, shy man,
who under an apparently stern manner hid a
warm heart, for the daughter he would, ere she
was very much older, have to leave.

But precipitancy, except when he ought to
have been cautious, had never proved one of
Mr. Westley's besetting sins, and so he deferred
and deferred the confidence till there
was no necessity to make it.

All this time Glenarva herself was not very
well, while Mr. Westley had often of late
caught what he called a chill. If he had
styled these attacks by any other name, his

daughter might have felt more uneasy than
she did, but an illness which can be attributed
to cold, and yields apparently to a day's rest
in bed and a few simple remedies, is not one
calculated to arouse keen apprehension.

It never certainly occurred to Glen to feel
uneasy, though she was often depressed.

Even when Death knocks at the door, there
is nothing much more difficult to realize than
that one who has been with us always will talk
with us no more ; that we shall never again —
never till we ourselves have passed to that
land which is to us now all silence and all
mystery — hear the familiar voice, see the
familiar face, touch the familiar hand ; that
solitary and desolate, we, who never thought
the word 'loneliness' could for us have practical
meaning, must labour till the evening, work till
the gathering shadows tell us the day is well
nigh spent and the night close at hand.

And Glenarva Westley found it just as difficult
then to conceive of mortal sickness crossing
their threshold as she did afterwards to
realize the coming of that one visitor who may
not be denied admittance.

Once, indeed, when she had sat up very late

beside the fire which that * chill ' necessitated
being lighted in her father's room, a terror for
which she could in nowise account seized her ;
and moved by some secret instinct, she crossed
the room softly, and stood beside the bedside,
listening to the regular breathing which told
that sleep had at last come brooding gently
down on Mr. Westley's eyelids. She looked
at him as he lay, his features in utter repose,
his arm thrown out over the coverlet, his hand
half closed and still as possible. Unbidden
tears rolled down her cheeks as she gazed ; the
whole of his wrecked life, the sadness and
pathos and misery of it all, seemed for a moment
more than she could endure, and when
she went back to her seat and watched the
leaping firelight, she wondered, with no triumphant
feeling of success, but a trembling
marvel, whether such blessing might be hers,
she should indeed be able to make his future
better than his past had been, to get all those
good things for him in the days to come he
had been forced to do without through the
many long days that were past.

Upon another night, too, when she could not
get to sleep till the early dawn of the summer's

morning stole into her room, the same unreasoning
terror shook the girl's very soul : it
was no tangible fear which came and laid its
cold hand upon her heart, which drew her out
of bed and caused her to throw wide her
window, and, leaning over the sash, try to find
solace in the voices of the night.

How weird, and solemn, and strange they
sounded as she stood in the silence and 
all alone. If there be any truth
in the idea that the trouble we shall have to-pass
through is faintly indicated in our imaginations,
as it is said the shape of the fern is
seen in miniature if we cut across its stem.
Glen then beheld as in a glass darkly the form
of the spectre she was going forward to meet.

But with the sun and the morning light, and
the thousand happy sounds of day, the horror
faded away, and Glen did not think much
more of it than she might of a bad dream.

Nevertheless she sometimes marvelled,
'Why is it I do not feel more elated at my
success ? Why do I not dance and sing with
delight ? Why am I not inclined to ask all
the world to share my joy V

The reason, if she could have known it, perhaps

was that lie did not herself believe in
the success which had come. Like David
when he told Ahimaaz to ' turn aside,' and
waited for the tidings Cush was bearing to
him, she had a trembling presentiment that
there was news to follow the announcement of
her victory which should quench the shout of
-exultation with the bitter cry of mourning.


And for her, then, there was not even to be
more than that gleam of hope which her own
hand darkened. As a rule, when youth sees,
'Or thinks it sees, the winning-post just ahead,
some friend or foe walking across the course
destroys the chances of success that had seemed
absolute certainties. Later on, circumstances
soften perform this act of fouling ; but in the
outset of life it is generally a human being
who, from a love of marring and meddling and
proffering unasked-for advice, and gossiping
about matters which concern no person save
the racer pushing onward to the goal, affects
the results of the struggle, and sometimes
changes the whole course of existence.

It was an apparently slight cause that prevented
the great house bringing out Glen's

novel; the check came suddenly, and in the
form of a letter from Ned Beattie.

As was her usual practice, the girl, always
an early riser, had walked across the fields to
meet the postman. No more lovely morning
ever dawned. In the woods the doves were
cooing; • hio-h above head the larks sand; loud
and clear ; over the distant moor hung a
purple haze — a sure sign of heat ; down by
the watercourses the cattle were standing knee-deep
in the stream, or lying amongst the rich
rank grass luxuriously chewing the cud ; on all
sides arose the bleating of sheep ; the fields
where dotted with snow-white lambs ; from the
farmhouses came the occasional bark of a dog,
the quacking of ducks, the clucking of fussy
hens escorting their active broods to favourite
corners where insects were to be found in
plenty ; there was a great peace about the
landscape, and standing still in the midst of
waving grass and growing corn, Ellen, looking
to right and left, felt satisfied there was something
in all this rich and bounteous country
she did not thoroughly understand or appreciate
; but which, if things continued to go
well with her, she might learn to value, as

wiser and older and cleverer people than herself
had done before she was thought of.

She waited for the post at a point where the
man made a detour ere coming straight on ta
their cottage, which cottage lay indeed at the
extreme limit of his beat.

She expected — what ? A letter from Mr.
Yassett, or Mr. Pedland, or one of the many
editors she had written to, or Mr. Lacere, or
perhaps even proof. If once she could see
anything of hers in proof, she felt she should
take fresh heart, and go on with a braver spirit.
Afar off she could hear the rush of one of the
early morning trains as it swept through the
tranquil valley to London. A collie with
whom she was on intimate terms came and
licked her hand. The air was full of pleasant
sounds and grateful scents, and there was the
postman, who, seeing her, paused and took out
a letter.

Only one this morning, miss,' he said ; and
then, turning down the lane, went to deliver
his good and evil tidings to farmhouse and hall
and rectory and hovel.

Only one — from Ned.' Glen sat down on
the lowest step of the stile and opened the

envelope. As she did this, there came wafted
in imagination the familiar sound of the
waves — the glitter of the sun upon the
sea — the smell of the iodine — the smoke
of the kelp fire — the plash of oars — and
even the taste of the salt brine upon her
lips.

That had been her past — the wild, grand
coast — the raving billows — the strip of yellow

sand — the frowning; headlands — the screaming;
culls — the stretching' boots and the treeless

expanse of desolate country — and now

She looked around and smiled half sadly, and
drew out Ned's letter.

Ned's letters were of the nature of manuscripts.
They were the produce of many
hours, in many weeks. They proposed to convey
an epitome of the news of the district, and
it may at once be said they fulfilled their
promise.

There was nothing; too great or too little for
Ned's pen to exercise itself upon, and Glen's
conscience had often reproached her when she
remembered how scanty were the tidings she
returned in exchange — how closely she kept
the secret of what she was doing, hoping,

VOL. II. - 37

expecting, from this friend of the dear old
happy careless days gone by.

As she pulled the enclosure out of the
envelope these were the words on which her
eyes fell :

It was mean of you, Glen ; I could not have
believed it. All the same, though, we wish you
success — every one of us. Write soon. — Ned.'

What did this astounding conclusion mean ?
She turned the letter over, and found the gist
of the whole lay in a postscript hurriedly
added, much smeared and blotted, and written
evidently in much perturbation of mind. The
cat was out of the bag at last. Every soul in
Ballyshane, every inhabitant of Artinglass,
knew now why Mr. and Miss Westley had
gone ois in such a hurry to London. Her old
admirer, Mr. Dufford, had come down to take
the duty at Artingiass while the Rector was
ill, and, as chance would have it, he lodged at
the Berlin-wool and fancy shop, the owner of
which likewise kept the local post-office.

To him came one day a book parcel of
manuscript, which, happening to elicit from
the postmistress a remark to the effect that
*few of such thing-s came now to Antinomians

since Miss "Westley was gone from Ballyshane/
led to further inquiries, and to a perfect conviction
on the part of the whole countryside
that the girl was making her fortune.

Miss Grumble had brought the news to the
Vicarage, believing Glen's old friends would
be only too delighted to hear she was doing so
well. * They say you are writing for the
Penny Rambler' added Ned, mentioning a
publication which in those days was relegated
to the kitchen, and deemed too poor and silly
to find favour in the eyes of mothers of families,
whatever that may be. Miss Grumble has
heard the people who own it pay well. I am
sure I hope they do. But, oh, Glen ! why
could you not have told us ? mother is quite
hurt. You know if you had been her own
daughter she could not have loved you more.
No wonder your letters were short, and had
nothing in them worth reading. It is only
surprising you could write to us at all, knowing
what you were keeping back ;' and then he
added the words previously quoted.

The letter dropped from Glen's fingers.
She had not read, she never did read the first
part of it ; she sat for a little while stunned ;

37—2

she did not feel the sunshine, or hear the birds,
or smell the meadowsweet, or see the stretching
fields dotted with sheep and lambs. The
first think' that roused her attention was the
collie licking her hand.

Oh, Nell !' she exclaimed. ' Oh, Nell, I
am miserable !' and laying her cheek on the
dog's grizzled head, she cried as if her heart
would break.

She was not crying because Ned called her
mean and close, though that hurt her sorely,
but because her secret had become known to
those she wished to keep it from ; and all
comfort and security and freedom in writing
was over.

The very book Mr. Lacere had sold for her
could not now be published ; it told a story
she never would have ventured to have put on
paper had she not felt secure under the shelter
of the assumed name selected after much
thought and mature deliberation. In the
work she had introduced her own relations,
Lady Emily and others, who seemed to Glen
equally objectionable. Her pen had run freely,
unrestrained by the slightest fear of consequences
while she was writing. It never

once occurred to Iter anyone would ever know
who was the author of this remarkable novel ;
but now in a moment the whole position was
changed, and in despair Glen dried her eyes
and tried to consider what she had better do.

Before she reached home her mind was
made up. She must get back the manuscript ;
no matter what the consequence, that novel
must not appear. It was dreadful, it was
heart-rending; • but still she could think of no
other course. Naturally, ]mr. Lacere would be
deeply offended ; well, even the forfeiture of
his friendship was a result which must be
risked. She talked the matter over with her
father, who, though more doubtful than his
daughter as to the course which ouo'ht to be

o o

adopted, still did not think it would do to
publish the book.

You had better go to town, Glen,' he said,
and explain the whole matter to Mr. Lacere.
To a certain extent you might be guided by
his advice,' added Mr. Westley, who most
earnestly desired to shift the burden of this
new and sudden responsibility on to the
shoulders of some other person.

I am afraid,' answered Glen, ' there is

nothing to be done, except get back the manuscript.
Mr. Lacere ^vill be terribly annoyed.
After all his kindness and the trouble he took,
too '

It was mid-day before the girl got into
London, and hot, tired, and dusty, reached
the welcome shade of the City lanes. To turn
into Mr. Lacere's office after the stifling heat
of the carriages on the South Western line, and
the glare of the streets that led from the terminus
into the heart of the Lord Mayor's
kingdom, was like entering some cool grot in
the midst of a parched and sandy desert. Fora
moment she paused in the hall to read the
names painted there. Mr. Logan Lacere was
the person she wanted, and she wended her
way slowly up stairs, thinking as she went
how she should begin to say what was in her
mind.

She knocked at the panel of the first door
she came to, turned the handle, and went in.
A gentleman stood behind a desk, and looked
across it at her as she walked shyly forward.

He was not her friend ; she had never seen
him before, and he seemed perfectly amazed at
sight of her.

Is Mr. Lacere within V she asked, feeling;
as she put the question strangely flurried and
uncomfortable.

/ am Mr. Lacere,' was the unexpected
reply.

Glen stared at the speaker for a moment,
and then made this extraordinary statement,
But you are not my Mr. Lacere !'

The stranger smiled. His smile was what
most persons would have considered mild,
tolerant, reassuring, and benignant, yet in the
midst of all her hurry and confusion Glen
found time to feel she neither liked it nor
him.

She could not have told what the something
was which repelled her. She only
knew she wished she had not come into the
office, and that she was well out of it again
and walking back to the station.

Yet the gentleman was well favoured, his
manner courteous, and the voice in which he
said, ' It is Mr. Logan Lacere you wish to see,
I presume V gentle and by no means unpleasant.


Yes,' said Glen ; ' I did not know — that is,
I mean "

Probably it would have been extremely
difficult for her to explain what she did mean
at all events she did not try, but stopped at
this point.

He is out at present,' remarked the other
Mr. Lacere, coming to her assistance, ' but I do
not think it will be long before he returns. If
you would like to wait,' and he pulled forward
a chair, and with a polite gesture of his hand
invited her to be seated.

Glen hesitated — perhaps in all the few years
of her life she had never before so hesitated.
She glanced round the office, she looked for
one swift second in the face of the man who
was looking at her : she thought of the hot
dusty pavements ; that she was very tired ;
that she had no other place to call at unless she
turned back to the west and paid Mr. Vassett
or Mr. Pedland a visit — for which, perhaps,
neither gentleman would be especially grateful
; that she must see Mr. Logan Lacere or
else return home with her mission unfulfilled ;
that the room was cool and pleasant after the
glare of the streets. Nevertheless

He is almost certain to be back shortly,'
said this strange Mr. Lacere, noticing her

hesitation and understanding the cause of it as
little as she did.

If I shall not be intruding; ' Glen

murmured.

^ Not in the least was the reply. ' You will
have the office to yourself, for I am going out.
Should you like to look at the newspaper V
and he handed her the Times, which she took
mechanically.

There was a clock on the mantelshelf ; after
Mr. Lacere's departure, it seemed to Glen that
she and the timepiece were alone in the world
together. She might have been in a far-off
desert for any sound of human life which
reached her. How silent the whole house
seemed — how loud the clock ticked ! Glen's
heart and the pendulum appeared racing
together, but her heart won. Its throbbing
distanced the regular beat of the clock, till
growing weary of the conflict, the girl rose,
and began pacing the limits of the narrow
room. Her life since she came to London had
told upon a nervous system never before really
put upon its trial ; and Glen, who in the
days not yet a whole year gone by rode
shaggy ponies, and climbed dizzy cliffs, and

walked at the very edge of precipices that looked
sheer do^ii into three hundred fathoms of water,
and stepped without a thought of fear into a
crazy old boat, now found danger in the sudden
stoppage of a train, almost dreaded to cross a
crowded thoroughfare, could not bear the sound
of a clock ticking, and was unable to possess
her soul in patience for half an hour, even
with an office quite to herself, and a whole
copy of the Times, advertisement sheet included,
for companionship !

Suddenly, as in her restless walk she had
reached a row of bookshelves that lined a
recess opposite the window, and was trying
for the twentieth time to fix her attention
upon the volumes and read their odd-looking
titles, a step sounded on the stairs, and before
she could regain her seat the door of the office
opened, and Mr. Lacere entered.

At sight of the girl, his face, which had previously
worn a look of heavy care, lighted up
and brightened instantly.

Why !' he said, and held out one hand,
while he took off his hat with the other. * Why !'
and for a moment it seemed as if that were
the only word in the whole of his vocabulary.

I hive come about that book, Mr. Facere
Open explained. She did not feel afraid now
of his being vexed ; she only felt a great
trouble because of what she had to say.

You got my letter, I hope V This was interrogative.


Oh yes, and I was so happy and thankful ;
but now that is all over ; it can't be published.'


Indeed ! why not ? Sit down and tell me
what you mean ;' and thus entreated, Glen resumed
her chair, while Mr. Lacere stood leaning
against his desk, and with one foot resting
on the rail of an office stool, waited to hear
her explanation.

There was a rest and a strength about the
man, in his voice, his look, his manner, which
soothed Glen's unquiet spirit — as a mother's
fool hand laid on a child's feverish brow seems
to ease the pain in the throbbing temples. At
last the ticking of the clock did not distress
her. Now her heart beat calmly and evenly
as was its wont. Almost before she knew
she had begun her story, it was half told.
Z>Ir. Lacere did not move or speak or interrupt
her till she had quite finished. Even

then he remained silent for a moment ere he
said :

It seems a great pity

Pity ! Glen knew more about that than he
did, or at least she thought so ; but she held
lier peace while he proceeded :

It is such an opportunity as may not occur
again for some time.'

Never,' agreed Glen vehemently ; ' such a
chance is not likely to come to anybody twice
in a lifetime.'

I would not go quite so far as that,' said
Mr. Lacere, with a smile — oh I so unlike
the smile of that other Mr. Lacere Glen
felt she mistrusted — ' but still, I think you
ought to consider the matter well before you
finally decide on adopting any course.
You must recollect how difficult it is to
get publishers to accept a manuscript at
all.'

Yes, Glen was aware of the fact ; but still
this manuscript must not be printed. She
went over the ground once more, explaining-with
greater emphasis than before how dreadful
a thing it would be if, now it was known
she wrote, the book were read by any of the

persons who had all unconsciously sat for their
portraits in it.

But why should anyone imagine you to bethe
author of this particular work V asked Mr.
Lacere.

Glen thought him dense for patting such a
question. She did not say so, but feeling,
since Ned's letter, as if she went about with
the word Author branded on her forehead, her
manner implied that secrecy now was out of
the question ; besides, the work itself bore internal
evidence she had produced it.

People would know,' she declared, ' and besides
— Have you read the story, Mr. Lacere V
she inquired abruptly.

Mr. Lacere confessed he had not — he had
glanced at the first page ; but ' I have not
much leisure,' he explained, ' and a manuscript
is really a formidable affair.'

Glen sighed, but could not controvert a
statement which she had heard too often reseated
to feel any doubt concerning its accuracy.
Experience — even her experience —
had taught the truth that a manuscript is the
point where humanity draws the line. A
man might risk his life for a friend ; bub

where, oh ! where is the person to be found
who would, unless compelled, plunge into the
depths of inky * copy ' to please or benefit the
nearest and dearest belonging; to him ? Glen-arva
had still to meet that Curtis upon the
summer's afternoon when she sat in Mr.
Lacere's office, and it may be added she has-not
met him yet.

As she remembered how hard she had found
it to get anyone to read through even the
shortest tale, she happened to look up, and
found Mr. Lacere's eyes fixed on her with an
expression which showed he knew of what she
was thinking.

And as we have got a book accepted,' he
said, as if in amplification of the idea that
had been passing through her mind, * I do
not want you to lose the advantage gained
without weighing carefully the probable consequences.'


For answer, Glen assured her adviser she
had weighed everything — thought of everything
— considered all consequences — and forgotten
no possible contingency.

*It is already partly set up,' urged Mr.
Lacere.

The author was willing to pay for any loss-that
mig-ht have been incurred.

And I had great hopes of being able to get
you twenty jDounds/ he said, plapng the court
card he had kept back for the last trick.

Glen drew a long gasping breath — twenty
pounds ! AVhat a fortune it seemed to reject
then she answered valiantly.

I must give up even that, Mr. Lacere ;' and
he understood the case seemed urgent to her,
whether it was urgent in reality or not.

Nevertheless, he asked her to think the matter
over for a few days, which suggestion the girl
negatived, stating, as neither days nor years
could make any difference in her sentiments, it
would only prolong her misery to defer deciding
the affair at once.

Well, if you think it best,' he remarked,
at last, ' I will write to my friend. Yet
stm '

Perhaps he was all the more pertinacious
in entreating delay, because in his heart he
wished she would abandon authorship altogether.
He did not feel so sure now as had
once been the case that Glen would never
make her mark. Some words the reader in

that great publishing firm dropped when
speaking of the novel impressed him with the
idea there might be more in this young
person than appeared on the surface.

But she did not look like an author ! Like
many another, mr. Lacere possibly associated
authorship in ladies with middle age and
spectacles.

That he certainly could have understood,
but Glen with her young face and the soft
curves of her girlish figure, and her hair which
glistened in the sunlight, and her eyes that
then held no shadow of the sorrow they were
to look on, and her voice with the sound of no
tears as yet prisoned in its cadences — was
quite another matter.

Here seemed a life to be lived, an existence
to be enjoyed, not a battle to be waged or
struggle won. Deep within him lay the almost
forlorn hope that she would turn back
ere it was too late, and abandon a strife he did
not believe could conduce to her happiness.

And possibly he was right. It might have
been better for Glen and those nearest and
dearest to her if she had never written another
line.

There are some women for whom even one
leaf of the laurel crown proves too heavy a
burden, even the faint echo of the world's applause
too loud a sound, to whom genius seems
but a demon driving its possessor out into dry
and stony places, where is no tender grass for
the weary feet to tread, and no trickling rills
to refresh the tired and parched heart, nay, to
whom fame itself becomes a mere mockery to
the spirit searching vainly for something it
shall never attain on earth.

Yet still ' that was what he said; but

he said no more, for Glen stopped him.

I must begin all over again, I suppose, but
it cannot be helped. I will never write another
book founded on fact, so long as I live —
never.'

Hearing which statement, Mr. Lacere only
looked at the girl more dreamily and speculatively
than ever, and hoped with silent
earnestness she might never write another book
at all.

I am ashamed,' said Glen, rising, ' to have
taken up so much of your time.'

As she spoke she glanced at the clock, and
felt really shocked to see how long the inter-vol.

II. 38

view had lasted ; and then she added some
words about feeling grateful for all his kindness,
which indeed she found hard to utter,
not because her heart was empty, but because
it was at that moment too full.

He did not answer directly; he only observed,
a little coldly as it seemed to Glen, he
wished he could have been of more use ; and
she was going to take her leave, with the consciousness
of feeling rebuffed and chilled, when
he said he meant to see her to the station.

Oh, I could not think of giving you so
much trouble !' exclaimed Green.

And I could not think of allowing you to
walk back there alone,' he declared decisively.

So through the long, busy streets, where the
weltering sun was streaming, they paced slowly
side by side. It was a happy walk for one of
them — perhaps the happiest walk he ever had
in all his life. On his arm rested the hand he
would have liked to take and hold for ever in
his own ; the voice he had learned to love
best in all the world murmured in his ear ; the
glamour he had escaped hitherto held him
captive then. It was an enchanted river that
glided away that evening beneath the bridges

to the far away ocean he could not see. Vane
and dome and pinnacle were lit with the glory
which streams upon every earthly landscape
but once in a human life, and then — then it
was all over, and she did not know that he had
been walking through a Paradise, the gates of
which closed behind him as the train glided
out of the station.

No, she did not know; and he strode back
along streets whence sunshine seemed to have
departed, to his office, where he worked hard
and late, perhaps to finish some allotted task,
perhaps to drown thought.
- A man Hope had ever hitherto kept even
step with in his darkest hours, but who for
once heard only the rustle of her trailing garments,
as slowly and reluctantly the angel that
had upheld him in the worst troubles he was
ever yet called upon to encounter left him at
this crisis alone, and with uplifted hands covering
the radiance of her face departed through
the night, which was but little blacker than
his worldly prospects.

38— -2

YES.

Year had come and gone since that
October morning when the Irish
steamer entered Morecambe Bay.
The summer, which always, no matter how
long and how fine it may be, seems so short a
space, was over. London was looking its worst
and dullest in damp autumnal weather, and
Mr. Westley and his daughter were back in
town, having decided their country cottage was
too far from everywhere, and that the great
literary battle could only be properly fought
out within the metropolitan bills of mortality.
It was a wretched season — worse, far worse.
Glen decided, than that which inaugurated
lier search for a publisher. A green winter.

which always and ever makes such fat churchyards
; dull, damp, warm, depressing ; terribly
trying to a girl accustomed to Atlantic breezes,
to pure mountain air, to a climate which,
though often mild through the worst months
of the year, was never enervating.

The weather, however, in London, or the
medicine he was taking, seemed to suit Mr.
Westley better than the lonely moors in Middlesex,
the glorious summer sunshine, the
simple remedies he had before experimented
with. apparently the course of his malady
was stayed ; those cruel ' chills ' ceased to shake
his frame ; his appetite, which had in the
country rebelled against the simple food they
were there at least able to obtain fresh and
pure, accepted in town anything provided for
it. So far as her father was concerned, Glen
felt happier ; but her own prospects were far
from bright.

•' I am going back,' she thought — ' back —
back — back.'

In the lives of most authors there occurs, I
imagine, a crisis when they stop disgusted, or
else go on in sheer despair. They either turn
to something else, or otherwise persevere not

from any real hope they feel of ultimate success,
but because they know they must ' seethe
thing out.'

Such a crisis had come to Glenarva Westley.
If at that juncture she could have seen her way
to adding twenty or five-and-twenty pounds a
year to their income, she would have put the
cover on her ink-bottle, laid her pen in the
stand, and said, 'swell, I have tried that, and
it has failed. I was mistaken in thinking I
could write.'

As matters stood, she did rack her brain
considering whether she could not make
money by any means ; but, alas ! save for
needlework the girl seemed then to have no gift.

She was fairly educated, but she did not
know enough to teach ; and if she had, would
rather have swept a crossing. She played well,
but was nothing of a musician ; her drawing
was of the usual commonplace character ; for
languages she had no more aptitude than for
arithmetic. No one could have affirmed with
truth that Glenarva Westley was a dunce,
yet in most branches of learning a schoolmistress
would have said she was ' singularly
backward.' She had not even a speaking acquaintance

with any 'ology. Such gifts as she
possessed — and they were not many — did not
lie in the direction of money-making.

I am fit for nothing,' she thought one night
in a frenzy of self-depreciation, and sobbed
herself to sleep.

Things were not going well with her. The
novel Mr. Pedland published turned out, sofar
as she was concerned, a hopeless failure.
The papers had not a good word to say for it ;
the critics were beautifully unanimous in
making merry over her finest passages — in
exposing the absurdity of her plot, the faults
in her grammar, the solecisms of which she
was guilty, the meagreness of her ideas, the
poverty of her invention, the tallness of her
talk, and the impossibility of many things
which were literal facts ever having happened.

The very fierceness of the attack caused
Glen to gird on her armour. She was disappointed,
but not beaten ; disheartened, but not
driven back.

The non-success of ' Tyrrel's Son, by G. B. W.
Shame,' did not send her crying to bed ; it was
the weary, weary waiting of the days and weeks
and months which came after.

Though even ' Tyrrel's Son ' held a cruel and
terrible disappointment for the girl — the particulars
of which it may not be totally unprofitable
to summarize here for the benefit of
those young authors who think the way to
fame lies along a well-turfed alley bordered
with flowers and shaded by trees, in which the
nightingale jug-jugs ceaselessly.

Amongst many other things not so nice as
herself, Mrs. Beattie possessed a maiden aunt
who, leaving; as teat a craze for travel as
Madame Pfeiffer, spent all her small fortune in
marching from pillar to post, from city to city,
and from land to land.

As good or evil fortune would have it, just
about the time Glen's novel was published, this
lady arrived in London from some twentieth-rate
Spa in Germany ; whither she had repaired
to test the virtues of the waters and the
merits of a certain local physician concerning
an ' affection of the ear ' she had contracted
while residing, for economy's sake, in uncomfortable
lodgings where she was obliged to sleep
exposed to the draughts from window, chimney,
and door.

Her first act was to look up the Westleys —

her next to merge her very identity in Glen's
novel.

Knocking about the world as she had done,
it was her fortune to have come in contact
with all sorts and conditions of authors — except
good. She had met and discoursed with
Miss This and Mrs. That and Mr. The Other,
who each and all vied in telling ' travellers'
tales ' concerning that land, the mysteries of
which can never be fully known, save to those
who have carried the burden and passed
through the trouble, and felt the heat and the
cold of the long, long years filled with disappointment,
and trial, and success.

All enthusiasm, she carried off Miss Glen's
first venture. She read it — she approved.
She said the girl had a ' great future ' before
her. She wrote that by the most curious coincidence
she had formed an acquaintance in her
then lodgings with a gentleman who could, she
found, influence the young author's future most
materially.

He is on the Times, ^ she explained. * He
scan get you a review. The moment you receive
this letter, send me another copy of
*' Tyrrel's Son," or, if you have not one, go to

your publisher and procure the novel without
delay. If Mr. Elphin has it at once he will
put you a good notice in the Times, which
ought to be worth ever so much money tcK
you.'

On the strength of this letter Glen repaired
to Mr. Pedland, who smiled and said he had
heard so much of ' that sort of thing ' he did
not attach the slightest importance to it ;
Which observation rather nettled Miss Wesley
for, as she told him, her friend would not have
promised her a review unless she felt certain of
being able to get it.

Word led to word, and answer to answer,,
till at length Mr. Pedland 'backed his opinions
as the lower orders are so fond of phrasing the
matter, with a memorandum to the effect that
if a review of ' Tyrrel's Son ' appeared in the
Times — not as an advertisement (those were the
days when advertisements in extremely small
type, and the charge for which was very high,
were inserted in the body of the paper) — within
a month, he would give her seventy pounds.

Placing this document, about which she had
happily sufficient common sense to keep silence
during the impending interview, securely in

her pocket, Glen, with the three volumes filled
by the doings of 'Tyrrel's Son,' and other
people, tied up in a neat brown-paper parcel
wended her way to Miss Stanuel's lodgings,,
where that lady, who if not saving was nothing,
received her in a dingy bedchamber,,
having only, as she explained, the occasional
nse of a sitting-room for which she did not pay.

It is fortunate,' she exclaimed, ' that you
happened to come at this particular time, for
Mr. Elphin has not gone out yet. I will introduce
you to him ; and mind, you must be on
your best and prettiest behaviour, for he is a
person Who can either make or mar you.*^
Having finished which sentence, so admirably
calculated to set the young author at her ease
and render her manners natural and pleasing.
Miss Stanuel left her visitor alone for a moment,
while she herself went and apprised the
great man of the impending interview.

Glen had already passed through some
curious experiences, and seen some strange
sights in the course of her London life ; but
she certainly considered this ' power on the
Times ' not the least singular person who had
come across her path.

He was a short, dark, dirty-looking individual,
who rose and bowed as she entered,
and then sat down again beside a table
strewed with papers. He had been writing,
mind, for greater convenience, doing it with coat
sleeves pulled up, and wristbands — not over-clean
— turned back. He did not look as if he
had washed himself for a long time, or as if
the Times paid handsomely for the work he
did. His manner was curt, not to say rude,
but Miss Stanuel followed his utterances with
the rapt and earnest gaze of admiring belief.

Are you paying attention, young lady V she
would say to Glen, after the delivery of some
truism as old and hackneyed as that water
finds its level. ' Now, don't forget this — be
sure you remember every word Mr. Elphin
speaks. It is not often it falls to the lot of beginners,
more especially to a chit like you, to
g-et advice from the fountain-head.' To an

o

outsider the whole affair would have seemed
inexpressibly ludicrous. The brazen self-assurance
of the gentleman without whom the
Times must have sunk into oblivion ; Glen's
amazed contemplation of the celebrated writer ;
and ]Miss Stanuel's almost worshipping regard.

composed a spectacle wliicli indeed it seemed
a pity should have been so entirely destitute of
an audience. Afterwards Glen felt too much
provoked to laugh about the matter. It was
the first time she had been made a fool of,
though it may here be remarked it was not the
last.

Now, shall I cut this book for you T suggested
Miss Stanuel, when the distinguished
Titter seemed inclined to intimate that the
interview had lasted quite long enough.

No, thank you said Mr. Elj^hin loftily ;
I always like to cut for myself as I go on.'

Miss Stanuel looked triumphantly at Glen
as he made this statement.

Well, we will not take up any more of your
valuable time,' she remarked.

'I am going out,' he answered — as one who
should say, ' I'll take very good care you
don't.'

And I am sure Miss AVestley can never feel
sufficiently grateful to you.'

Oh ! that's nothing,' exclaimed Mr. Elphin,
but whether his words referred to Miss Westley's
gratitude or his own good offices it was
difficult to conjecture.

The days went by — the weeks — a month —
and still no review appeared ; instead there
came a note from Miss Stanuel, saying she felt
dreadfully angry with Glen.

Mr. Elphin tells me " Tyrrel's Son " is very
poor indeed, that you could not have taken
any pains with it, and that you never will succeed
unless you produce something a great deal
better than that. Of course, even in your own
interests, it was impossible for him to insert a
review of such a book. He assures me he has
done the very kindest thing possible in taking
no notice whatever of it.'

I am not surprised,' observed Mr. Pedland,
ivhen Glen repeated some of these encouraging
remarks to him. ' I have seen and heard too
much of that sort of thing to believe it. If
your friend had been as good as his word, I
should have felt very much surprised indeed.'

Had the author of ' Tyrrel's Son ' thought
■of telling Mr. Pedland of Miss Stanuel's
obliging offer to cut the pages, and Mr. Elphin's
refusal, he could have formed a shrewd conjecture
as to what the gentleman on the Times
had done with her book, and how he spent the
few shillings he got for it !

This was all bad and disappointing, but it
did not seem to Glen so bad and utterly disheartening
as the fact that when Mr. Lacere
took her latest manuscript to the great publishing
house from which she felt obliged to
withdraw her former book, it was ' declined
with thanks,' the reader telling him afterwards
he did not consider it nearly so good as the
first.

mr. Vassett also made no si2;n of entertaining
any mad desire to secure a book by the ' gifted
young author.' He was very kind and very
friendly, but he did not seem to ' see his way '
any more clearly than had been the case the
first day he saw her. Glen felt that ' getting
into print,' on which she had so pinned her faith,
was a mere mockery and delusion — more particularly
after one of the partners in a very
well-known firm told her kindly she had better
for the future not mention the fact of Mr. Pedant
having published anything of hers.

His works do not stand well,' explained this
gentleman ; ' they are regarded in the same
liorht as the " minerva Press " novels were
formerly.'

Mr. Vassett laughed when Glen told him

this. She went to him for comfort, but he
could not deny the soft impeachment brought
against poor Mr. Pedland.

I dare say he does a business which he
makes satisfactory to himself,' he said ; ' but
he has not brought out anything remarkable.'


Except in the way of badness, I am told,^
added Glen. ' I hear if his name is on a book
it is at once stamped as feeble, poor, and
trashy.'

Well,' answered Mr. Yassett, ' he has not
the monopoly of dull novels ; the fact is, there
are very few written worth publishing at all.'

I wonder — I wonder,' cried Glen, ^ if ever
I shall write anything worth publishing.'

She would have felt immensely obliged to
Mr. Yassett had he replied he was certain of it ;
but he made no reply of the kind.

He only hazarded a vague statement to the
effect that out of all the authors he had known,
scarcely one had achieved what he should calla
great success ; but at the same time he implied
he thought it not totally impossible that
after a few years, when his visitor had seen
more, and thought more, and read more, she

might be able to produce a book he would
feel justified in considering.

Meantime, however, as Glen had no intention
of .waiting a moment longer than she could
help, she went occasionally to one or other of
the new publishers, who then, as now, were
constantly springing up like mushrooms.

If they did not determine, however, to have
nothing to do vdth Miss Westley within the
first five minutes,, they were sure to want a
portion of the expenses paid, or a certain
number of subscribers guaranteed, or a known
name on the title-page as editor.

It was weary work, more especially as Glen
often took a most intense dislike to some of
these gentry. She said something about this
one day to Mr. Yassett when Mr. Pierson was
present, and the latter made a laughing remark,
to the effect that her instinctive aversions
seemed to be wonderfully accurate.

Why do you dislike Mr. Blank so much V
he asked.

*I am sure I can't tell,' answered Glen; 'I
always either like or do not like people at
once.'

And do you never find occasion to change

VOL. II. 39

your opinion, Miss AYestley V asked Mi
Yassett.

I have not yet,' she said.

Instinct,' suggested Mr. Pierson.

I suppose,' observed Mr. Vassett didactically,
* that Providence, having denied women
reason, gives them instinct as a compensation
And then they all laughed, and Glen declared
she thought a little reason had been given to
her, and Mr. Yassett answered, ' No, it had not;
why should she be an exception to the rest of
her sex V

You trust to your instinct,' he advised ;
that won't deceive you.'

There came a time in Glenarva's life when
in anguish and bitterness she remembered
those lightly spoken words, when she understood
from sad experience a woman's best
reason is but a will-o'-the-wisp, leading her on
over marsh and brake and quagmire ; while one
swift intuition will, if followed in dumb, unquestioning
faith, take her safely to the end of
whatever road — darksome or light — she maybe
travelling.

During all that period of doubt and gloom,
the Westleys were cheered on their way by the

kindly advice and the staunch friendship of
Glen's ]mr. Lacere. Like Glen herself, he had
his troubles, which assumed the prosaic form
of pecuniary losses. He talked a good deal to
Mr. Westley on the subject of his own reverses
and disappointments, and for so reserved a
man was extraordinarily frank in stating the
extent to which he found himself embarrassed.
Mr. Westley, who had forgotten the few days
of his own experience during which he was not
harassed, listened to these revelations with
sympathy, but without alarm. Mr. Lacere had
a business of some sort — a profitable business ;
he would soon be able to make more money.
Anyone almost ought to be able to make
money in London. AYhat opportunities there
were in the modern Babylon ; what riches,
what marvellous chances — ah I if he had come
to London when first he left Glenarva, they
would never have been poor. He was strong
then, comparatively, and younger, and more
active ; but now he lay back in his chair and
thought of his wasted life, and the hill he was
descending, and listened while Mr. Lacere
talked about his own prospects, and trials, and
hopes ; and what he trusted to do, and what

39—2

he expected to achieve, with the small amount
of attention he was able to spare from the contemplation
of his personal affairs. Mr. Westley
marvelled a little at these confidences till one
evening, when a glimmer of the state of the
case dawned upon his mind.

He shrank back involuntarily from the light,
and closed his eyes against it ; but when he
looked again the light was still there, growing
clearer and clearer as he gazed.

Mr. Lacere was in love with Glen — his Glen
he did not feel a doubt on the subject; he
could not be mistaken. He would ask him for
her ; and when this request came, what answer
should be given ?

For hours that night he lay wide awake
thinking, considering, doubting, deciding.
Glen, his motherless daughter ; Glen, who
would be left all alone in the world if, or
rather when, Death should call for him, and
say, ' Now I want you ; come ;' Glen, who on
the face of the wide earth did not possess a
relation for whom she cared or that would be
likely to care for her ; Glen, who would have
little or no money ; Glen, who could never, he
felt, return to the old life she had, drowned in

tears, left that October day which seemed to
her so far back in the mystic past ; Glen, who
had never been, so far as he knew, in love with
anybody, and to whom he believed it would
be a terrible surprise and shock to find that
Mr. Lacere was in love with her.

She must decide,' thought Mr. Westley ere
he fell into a troubled sleep, from which he
awoke with a start and that sense of impending
trouble which it is so hard to exorcise.
And ' Glen must decide for herself' was the
answer he gave Mr. Lacere when that gentleman
asked if he would trust the girl's happiness
to him.

With the memory of Mr. Dufford's rejection
in his recollection, ]\[r. "Westley felt doubtful as
to what Glen might say, and his manner indicated
this doubt so strongly that Mr. Lacere
would have deferred the evil hour had Glen's
father not remarked :

If she says " Yes," I shall not make any
objection. I wish, of course, your means had
been better ; but money, though much, is not
everything, and I believe you would try to
make her happy.'

Glen did not, however, say ' Yes' — she said

No' — not as she had spoken the word to Mr.
DufFord, but rather after the manner of one
on whom the proposal came too suddenly, and
who did not exactly know her own mind.
She had not thought about marriage
'She was not disposed to marry anyone.' *She
was very sorry — she liked Mr. Lacere very
much — she liked him better than anyone she
had ever seen, except her father and the boys.*
No ; she liked him ' better than the boys, because
he was older and wiser,' and knew ^ more
about everything.' * Still, she could not marry
him.' She * hoped they would remain good
friends.' 'It would grieve her greatly if he
ceased to come and talk with her papa,' and
she felt ' very grateful,' and ' truly grieved ;*
and Mr. Lacere, who was not a bold wooer,
and had not frittered away his affections on a
dozen pretty women, quitted the house a good
deal disheartened, and Glen went to her own
room and had a little cry, after which she sat
gravely and quietly down to needlework, and
did not speak till Mr. Westley broke the ice,
and asked her plainly what answer she had
given a very honest gentleman.

Then Glen told him her mind so far as she

knew it herself, and Mr. Westley saw clearly
enough that there stood in Mr. Lacere's way
no real obstacle.

Glen had her own notions about love and
lovers, gathered from hearsay, gleaned from
books, evolved, perhaps, out of her internal
consciousness ; and it is only fair to say that
neither Mr. Lacere's love-making nor Mr.
Lacere himself realized even the poorest of her
ideals on the subject. For one thing, the affair
was to her feeling all far too serious and commonplace.
The glamour of wooing should
preface a proposal. She wished she could
have known what was in his heart during those
long walks and talks which took place among
the Middlesex moors.

Vaguely she understood she had lost something
that could never be given to her again.
She was not old enough, or wise enough,
though she had written books, and thought the
whole experience of life was plain reading before
her eyes, to put in words to herself the
truth that the lover should always precede the
possible husband, that the two characters
should not come suddenly on the stage of a
girl's life together ; the prosaicism of marriage.

me.

the thought of ways and means, the fifty practical
considerations which must obtrude themselves
when the whole future of existence is
concerned, are matters that ought to be led upto
gradually — wandered into through fanciful
alleys carpeted with moss, bordered with
flowers, arched over with roses, within sight
and sound of sparkling fountains — alleys where
it is always summer, where the birds never
cease singing, and to which, amid the thousand
sordid cares and petty troubles of dull
wedded experience, memory can revert as to a
bright holiday — so bright, so beautiful, that
even the bare recollection of its sunshine, its
birds, its songs, can light up the whole of the
dull after-days of existence with gleams of that
golden glory.

Years afterwards Glen knew this was what
she had missed, but it took years and years
and years for her to understand it was the
accursed money-troubles which dogged every
step of his way — that tied the man's tongue,
and froze the words trembling on his lips, and
kept him silent when speech had been the
truest wisdom, and made him, when he did
make up his mind, taking his future in his

hand, to ask lier to share it, receive her doubtful
' No ' almost as a final answer, and say tolas
own soul, * It is best so. What right have
I, with my poor fortunes, to '' expect " any
woman to marry me V

And yet — he did not knov\^ ; he could not
receive his rejection as absolute ; he would try
again, and, if her answer was still the same,,
never see her more. There were other places.
on earth besides London. He would go
abroad.

He had thought of leaving England when he
sustained the loss that had during the course
of the previous summer thrown him so far
back in the world, and now he decided, that
in case Glen refused him a second time, he
would bid her and all his friends good-bye,
and try whether in another country fate might
hold a better fortune for him than had been
the case hitherto.

But when he repeated his question Glen
did not say ' No.' She had thought the
matter out by herself She talked a little to
her father.

My dear,' said Mr. AVestley, ' you have
drawn many a hero after your own pattern

out of your own fancy ; but you will never, so
long as you live, meet with a better man or
truer gentleman than Mr. Lacere.'

I believe that, papa,' she answered, and
yet still she hesitated.

She did not tell her father why — perhaps
she could not have told herself. Some of
those heroes of romance were, it might be,
stopping the way, or, as is more than probable,
glen felt there were greater practical objections
in the way of marrying Mr. Lacere than
Mr. Westley seemed to realize.

One thing, however, was quite certain — she
must now either say ' Yes,' or ' No,' without
xmy future possibility of reconsidering her
decision. When this calm, quiet, earnest
suitor came for the second time, she understood
he would not ask her again if she
refused him. They would part, and part for
ever. Could she let him go ? She felt it
would be impossible. Very patiently — far too
patiently to accord with any romantic ideas —
he waited for her answer. Glen looked about
the room, at the worn carpet, at the old-fashioned
chairs, the pembroke table, the glass
over the mantelpiece — everywhere, anywhere

have at those wistful brown eyes, at the
yearning expression on that grave, worn
face.

Will you not speak V he said at last.
Tell me, if you can, the best — or — the —
worst.'

Then she did look at him with the anxious,
questioning look a child's face wears when it
trustfully turns to its mother for a solution of
all perplexing doubts and difficulties.

I don't want to say " Yes," and I don't
want to say " No," ' she explained.

His heart gave a wild leap, but he asked
quietly, ' Cant you say " Yes " V

Yes, then,' she answered. The words
were spoken almost in a whisper, yet they
sounded to his ears like the crash of joy-bells
smiting: the stillness of a summer's noon.

Oh, my darling 1' and for a moment she
felt frightened at the vehemence of his tone ;
the revulsion of feeling — the knowledge that
doubt was ended and security begun was
almost more than he could bear ; then : ' May
God do so to me, and more, if ever I give you
cause to repent your consent I'

It was but a young thing — a young, slight

thing, though possessed of a grand courage
and a big soul — he gathered to his heart and
kissed as he had never kissed woman born of
woman before.

If she had knowTi, if she had only known
that in the whole of his life she was the first
creature he felt he could take in his arms and
call wholly his own — something to care for ;
something to live for ; something to work for ;
something to die for !

Is it well or ill, I wonder, that we, each
and all of us, have so little real comprehension
of past, present, and future ? Well, possibly
— or we should for ever in our uncertainty
stand shivering on the brink of life's wide
tideless river. As for Glen, just as she was
wont at Bally shame to step into the old crazy
boat that generally scudded to its destination
with one gunwale under water — so she now
tripped into her place in the barque which
was to convey her across life's heaviest seas.
"Whilst, as regards Mr. Lacere, he had but the
faintest notion of the sort of passenger he was
taking on board.

He loved her — that was enough for him.
He did not think then or afterwards how

perilous an experiment it is for experience to
undertake the guidance of ignorance ; for
Middle Age to say, *I will pilot Youth, and
Enthusiasm, and Impatience, and Hope " to
the harbour where it would be." '

SUCCESS.

OR once father and lover were of the
same mind. Mr. Lacere wished fora
speedy marriage. Mr. Westley
raised no objection. He did not see the good,
he said, of long engagements. 'After a
short time he added, 'when I have got
accustomed to the idea of Glen being
your wife, as well as my daughter, I will
give her to you with a feeling of perfect
reliance.' And so it came to be understood
that during the course of the autumn Miss
Westley was to be transformed into Mrs.
Lacere.

So far, diplomatic arrangements between the
two families had been friendly. Their limited

intercourse partook of the nature of state
visits. Mr. Westley, always somewhat of a
recluse, sliowecl, Glen could not but observe
even less than his usual disposition to cultivate
close and intimate social relations with the
members comprising Mr. Lacere's household.
He said little about them, and the little he
did say was in their praise ; but Glen knew
perfectly well her father did not take to the
ladies of the Lacere family, and that, as if, by
common consent, the fact of their existence
was usually ignored.

I hope. Glen,' he remarked on one occasion,.
you will always be good friends with your
husband's family.'

I hope so too,' answered Glen, stitching at
a piece of work she held in her hand. When
not writing she was generally sewing.

He has no idea of our living with them, I
trust V

Good gracious, no, papa !'

Because, dear, I should not like to give
you up altogether ; and I do not think — indeed
I am sure it would not be desirable for
what one may describe as three families to
reside under one roof.'

You may be very sure, papa, I am going
to live with you, and not with Miss Humphries.'


Now Miss Humphries was the name of the
lady who was supposed to preside over the
domestic arrangements at Kentish Town,
where the Laceres resided, and Glen managed
to impart such an amount of decision into the
manner of her reply that Mr. Westley paused
and looked at her for a moment in doubt
before he made any further observation. He
had often before wondered whether it would
not be wise for him to draw out some charts
for his daughter's future guidance through the
Lacere country, as, for instance, ' I should not
be too intimate with them, Glen ;' ' It is always
competent to increase the amount of
intimacy, but ungracious to lessen it ;* ' Their
ideas may not be yours, still, that is no reason
why you and they should not remain excellent
friends.' But he never expressed one of these
axioms in words, and now all he said was :

So long as that is clearly understood, my
dear '

Oh, there shan't be any misconception on
that point 1' Glen assured him ; and once again

Mr. Westley took refuge in silence, feeling
that, while tie could not define where it
was, a hitch had arisen in some place, and
that, although no one gave open expression to
the fact, things were not going quite so
smoothly as they ought.

He entertained no doubt matters would
right themselves after a little time. Meanwhile
he and Glen seemed tacitly to have
arrived at the conclusion that * least said even
between themselves, 'would be the soonest
mended.'

The consciousness that his daughter had nota
sixpence to her fortune, that she was indeed
a beggar maid, tied his tongue. A not unnatural
reticence about expressing her sentiments
concerning the family she was about
to enter kept Glenarva herself silent, whilst
Mr. Lacere, who would only have felt too
thankful had anyone planned his future
course for him, held his peace, because, although
he was aware the Westleys were poor,
he did not in the least know how modest and
moderate were the expectations of both father
and child ; that they would have been perfectly
content to set up house on the most

VOL. II. 40

humble scale, and confine the domestic expenditure
to a point far below any on which he
had hitherto supposed respectable establishments
could be kept going.

As for Glen herself, her first introduction to
the ladies of Mr. Lacere's family had proved a
most bitter disappointment. She was privileged
to make their acquaintance before any
question arose of lovers and marriage, and she
brought accordingly a perfectly unprejudiced
mind to bear upon the subject. With that
fatal desire to bespeak a favourable judgment
which generally impresses the hearer falsely,
Mr. Lacere had spoken in such terms of his
womenkind as had led Glen to believe they
must indeed be little, if at all, lower than the
angels. They were possessed of every possible
virtue. They were unselfish, devoted, amiable,
clever, industrious, forbearing, charitable in
word and deed, thoughtful for others and
forgetful of themselves. Like Lady O'Loony,
in a word, they were ' bland, passionate,
religious.' One of them painted in watercolours
with delicacy, fancy, and skill ; another
understood everything in music there was
to understand ; while a third was a poetess of

no mean order ; and Miss Humphries posed
alternately as a house brownie and an excellent
cook, a sick nurse without compeer, and
a manager such as is not often met in this
wasteful, ill-regulated world.

Unhappily for herself, instead of following
Charles Lamb's admirable example. Glen idealized
all the persons thus presented for her
admiration. Mr. Lacere believed he was
giving her merely rough outlines of forms
he had from childhood been accustomed to
admire, and the girl set herself at work to
finish each portrait off with a delicacy the
lady who painted miniatures most exquisitely
on ivory might have tried to emulate in vain.

If they had been saints, and heroines, and
martyrs, they could not have realized her
fancy sketch, and as they were nothing of the
sort, the disappointment she experienced
proved proportionately severe.

Poor Glen ! with all the will in the world
she could not rush into friendship with anyone
of the four. She was quite content to
believe they were most admirable people —
possessed of every quality with which she had
heard them credited, but at the same time she

40—2

felt very sure — she never felt more sure of
anything — she never could have much to do
with them ; that her way and their way lay
in quite opposite directions, and that while
Mr. Lacere seemed everything that was pleasant,
she could not really like any one of the
ladies, who, according to his account, had a
monopoly of earthly virtues.

And if this were the case before she was
engaged, it grew to be ten times more the
case afterwards.

All in vain the Misses Lacere embraced and
welcomed her 'as a sister.' In vain Miss
Humphries said, * Now you will have all of
us to love you, darling !' In vain they repeated
singly and in chorus that ' though they
had never thought a wife could be found good
enough for the best man that ever lived, they
were more than satisfied with his choice.*

Glen could not get up any enthusiasm on
her own side. She could not adopt as sisters
women old enough to be her mother, but who
were far more gushing than she had ever been
even at five years of age. She could not say
she loved one of them, for she did not. She
failed to feel that the fact of meeting with

their approval filled her with the delight and
astonishment it perhaps ought to have done ;
and lastly, there is little doubt that even then
she believed in her heart every word they
spoke lacked the ring of truth.

When a man has kept unmarried till middle
life, his womankind must indeed be more
than human to look upon the designing person
who has ensnared him with approval, more
especially when that person presents herself
in the guise of a * chit of a girl,' a ' motherless
lass,' a stranger, an author, and, worse than
all, a native of Ireland.

The Misses Lacere were narrow-minded, prejudiced,
selfish. They had lived in themselves and
among themselves, till they lost all knowledge, if
they ever possessed any, of a world outside their
own petty aims, hopes, fears, interests. Instead
of being glad the man was at last going to try
to make a Kettle happiness for himself in life,
they were heartily sorry. They talked the
matter over with bated breath, with solemn
shakes of the head, with many * Ais T and
Yes, indeed !' and ' We never thoughts,'
and ' It is to be hoped it will turn out better
than we expects ;' and all the time Mr. Lacere

believed they were perfectly sincere in their
praise of Glen ; and Glen, though she felt they
did not like her, and knew she did not like
them, hoped she would outgrow her prejudices
in time, and that, after all, if Mr. Latere was
pleased and satisfied, and her father felt
content and happy, it did not much matter
what anybody else thought on the subject.

Mr. Lacere and the Misses Lacere and Miss
Hum23hries were especially careful at a very
early period of the engagement to tell Glen the
exact state of their pecuniary relations.

The ladies of the family were utterly without
fortune.

'Well, so am I,' said Glen, which fact, if
she could only have realized the truth, did not
tend to render the position easier.

She was only laudably anxious to make her
relations who were to be, feel that as she
was in precisely the same condition as themselves,
they need not be uncomfortable about
their own impecuniosity.

The wisdom of adding * another pauper to
the domestic difficulty,' to quote the Mr.
Lacere who was not hers, might be questionable
; but this view of things had not then

occurred to Glenarva Westley. She did not
come of a stock remarkable for worldly
prudence. The drain thus indicated upon a
man's income failed to strike even Mr.
Westley with dismay. He regarded it as he
might a jointure, a settlement, or a mortgage
on an estate ; that it was optional with Mr.
Lacere to continue or discontinue it, was an
idea which failed to strike either father or
daughter. Neither was made of the material
which would take from another what he had.
None of the Laceres need have felt any uneasiness
on that score. Poor though they were,
the Westleys had not, to quote an Irish
phrase, ' a mean drop of blood in their
bodies.'

No fear of the young vdfe in this case
coming in and sweeping the decks clean for
her own benefit, her father aiding and abetting.
Glen was prepared to do with limited
means married, as she had done with limited
means single ; only she would have preferred
to make the trial without the gushing
endearments of her future relations. Words
cannot express the disfavour with which Glen
beheld middle-aged women comporting themselves

as if in their first teens ; heard her
future husband called, ' Mordy, my treasure !'
or, ' My precious Mordy !' or, ' Mordy,
dearest darling !' when not addressed by
some ridiculous pet name, which it is not too
much to say made the girl — who was somewhat
disposed to exalt her future husband
into a hero, and worship him accordingly —
shiver.

It was over this matter Glen became
possessed of a curious involvement of family
history.

Said Mr. Lacere :

I have never yet, dear, heard you speak
my Christian name ;' and he looked at her a
little anxiously.

Glen fidgeted with the object nearest her
ere she answered :

Your first name is long, and I do not like
to hear it shortened. May I call you by your
second — Logan ? I think that is so beautiful V

It is a surname. Glen,' he explained ; * my
father's people were Logans, till one of them
intermarried with a Miss Lacere, an heiress.
He took her name and got her money, and
that was the beginning of all our misfortunes.'

Glen thought this over at great length, and
took an early opportunity of referring the
question to Miss Lacere.

*You don't sign yourself Logan-facere ?'
she suggested.

Oh dear no ! ive are not Logan-acres,
I am happy to say — we have nothing to do
with the Logans.'

^ How does that happen V asked Glen,
mystified.

Don't you know ? Why, when Mordy's
father died, after a time his mother married
our dear papa, Owen Lacere.'

But you are older than he is,' interrupted
Glen, thoroughly mystified.

Of course we are ; we had lost our darling
mamma three years when papa married again.'

Wait a moment, wait a moment,' entreated
Glen ; * then what relation are you to — to —
Logan V

What do you mean ? We are his sisters,
of course.'

'That's impossible,' said Glen, with an
energy which proved how exceedingly anxious
she was to sever the Logan-Laccre connection.

'My dear, we have been always just the

same in love as though we were the closest
blood relations. Poor papa always said,
Whatever you do, never forsake Mordy ;"
and we haven't. We have from the first felt
the same to him as if he had been our own,
own brother, and I am sure when darling
Claudine died, if she had been aunt's very own
niece she couldn't have fretted more about
her.'

I am getting lost,' observed Glen. * Where
does Claudine come f

Claudine was dear Philip's wife.'

I give it up,' cried the future Mrs. Logan-facere.
' I can't follow the matter at all.'

And yet it is as simple as ABC. Our
dear papa was Owen Lacere, who married for
his second wife the widow of Logan-facere —
the father of our precious Mordy and his
sister Claudine. Claudine married our darling
papa's nephew, and so '

You are not one of you a drop's blood, as
we say in Ireland, to Logan V

If you like to put it that way, of course ;'
and Miss Lacere drew herself up offended.
Though as for what you call a " drop's blood,"
we were all cousins, and we all love one

another, oh, so dearly ! and this question of
relationship never was raised till '

Till somebody cared to raise it, I suppose,*
said Glen wearily.

She thought during those days she should
have lost her senses. What Sith trying to
unravel the mystery of the Lacere connection ;
with holinshed tongue concerning; them to
her father ; with practising reticence about his
relations to a man she felt she could not bear
to wound ; with her own non-success ; with
something about her father she could not
understand ; and with an attack of neuralgia
which for months never left her, which drove
her out of bed at four o'clock in the morning,
and kept her pacing her room till after twelve
at night ; which seemed as if, like a dog, it took
her in its teeth and worried her ; which starved
her almost, because the moment a meal was
spread the inexorable pain came to table also
and prevented her eating. She went and had
a tooth out, and as she returned from the
doctor's, met with that dreadful sympathy
which was the curse of her new life.

That poor little girl has got the face-ache,'
said one City ' swell ' to another as she passed

the pair, holding a handkerchief to her mouth,
suffering literally agonies.

Yet upon the whole, if she could have known
it, both the City and the West-end swell was
very good to her in those days, very good
indeed. He troubled her a little, as was only
to be expected considering how fresh she was
from the wild seashore, and the solitary moor,
and the lonely hillside ; but he certainly did,
upon the whole, respect her ignorance and her
innocence, and left her as free to traverse the
London streets as though her unaccustomed
feet were traversing some lonely path in the
domain which might still have been her
father's, had she never been.

That awful pain — that maddening, racking
pain, which through the whole of the long
summer never completely left Glen an hour's
physical ease, rendered her almost indifferent
to the shortcomings of the Lacere family, and
blinded her — oh, poor Glen ! — to a mysterious
change in her father.

Other people saw he was getting to look
very old and frail ; but Glen though it was
only the hot weather that tried him, and went
out on wonderful quests after new-laid eggs and

milk fresh from the cow, the only procurable
luxuries that his fitful appetite affected.

My darling, when are we to be married V
asked Mr. Lacere, in the beginning of that
brilliant August.

Oh ! any time,' she answered indifferently.
Next month, if papa and I are both better.'

Both better,' he thought. ' Oh, Glen — my
Glen !'

The first hint of the tempest came shortly
after. Glen and her father had been out
together, and as, on their return, he went up
the stairs, he staggered, and would have fallen
but for her swift protecting hand.

I think I have over-tired myself,' he said ;
and still Glen looked forward to a future
when, in the pretty house at Sydenham which
her husband who was to be, talked of taking,
she would be able to surround her father with
every comfort, perhaps hire a phaeton, occasionally
to drive him out ; get him soup, wine,
grapes, something in addition to the milk and
eggs and their ordinary bare diet.

But the next morning; he did not seem
inclined to get up, and when Mr. Lacere came
he went for a doctor.

The doctor asked a few questions, which
Glen answered, though she did not exactly
understand, and went away, saying he would
send something round.

After that the girl never could exactly
remember the sequence of events. Her whole
time was taken up in nursing, and in learning
how to cook for the sick. The hours passed,
the days, the wrecks, the months. It was the
dead of winter. To herself she never seemed
to have slept, or eaten, or rested during all
that period. She was fighting death ; but
death wins in the long-run, do what we will.

Mr. Lacere lokoed on the struggle appalled.
This was a catastrophe the near probability of
which had never occurred to him.

Glen, dear,' he entreated, ' marry me now.
Give me the right to be near you, no matter
what happens.'

But Glen laughed him to scorn. Nothing
should happen. She would save her father.
How could he ask her to leave that sick-room
to go and be married to him ?

My love, my darling, I only want to be
able to call you my wife. I won't ask you to
steal even one second from him to give to me.'

But she would not listen to his pleading.
She was fighting — fighting every step of the
way to the grave — and she could spare no
time or thought for anything save that terrible
campaign.

For which, as is the case in most campaigns,
money was absolutely necessary, and her store
was getting very low. She went down to Mr.
Vassett and offered him the book written
amongst the Middlesex moors for the modest
sum of fifty pounds. She was quite in earnest,
she explained — and indeed the publisher, looking
at her, could not doubt that fact — she
wanted fifty pounds for it.

As might have been expected, Mr. Vassett
did not see his way to complying with her
request ; so then and there she took the
manuscript on to a great house, where she
managed to obtain an interview with the
reader. He was very courteous, and, though
he did not hold out much hope of acceptance
under any circumstances — for he knew Miss
Westley's writings of old — still he promised to
look at the book ; and having done all she
could for that day, Glen went back to her
post.

Miss Lacere was with her, and shared some
of those awful vigils the girl must otherwise
have passed alone. Most of them she did so
pass ; God only knew — God and herself — the
misery of those nights when she watched
beside one who scarcely recognised her ; when
she moistened the lips that had forgotten to
smile on her ; when she raised the head that
had grown a dead weight ; when she replenished
the fire which was burning low,
and watched for the grey light of morning
and prayed for dawn, and wrestled with the
mystery of existence as Jacob did with his
Maker.

But through all she failed to understand
what the end must be. She never believed
she was merely tending the slow flicker of an
expiring lamp ; hour by hour she clung to the
hope the feeble flame would grow stronger,
and that her father would come back out of
the depths of that terrible illness to life,
strength, and his daughter. Even the doctors
had not the heart to tell her there was no
hope whatever ; if they had, she would not
have believed them. They warned her of
danger, but they never spoke of death. She

was the only person that entered the sickroom
who failed to realize there was but one
change possible. And so the days went by,
and the weeks, and Glen afterwards wondered
as we all do mercifully, only afterwards —
how she found strength to pass through such
an ordeal.

There came at last one evening a change
which made her fear he was worse, and in hot
haste she despatched a messenger for a great
physician who had been a friend of her father's
in the days before he was Westley of Glenarva,
or married or ruined, or thought he should die
in London lodgings with a daughter beside
him almost distraught by grief.

This doctor had come to see him more than
once, and in this crisis Glen felt sure the
wisdom of the faculty was centred in him,
and that he alone could tell her what she
ought to do, and how her father was to be
restored to health. She wrote a note, and bade
the servant take a cab and tell the man to
drive fast.

While she waited the post brought a letter,
and mechanically almost — for she was in the
state of mind when it seems as though

VOL. II. 41

nothing in the world could prove of interest
save one absorbing subject — she tore open
the envelope and carelessly took out the
enclosure.

It was from the reader of the great publishing
firm where she had left her manuscript —
and contained an acceptance of the novel !

For a minute she could not exactly understand
this — the words seemed blurred, and the
letters danced before her eyes — but at last
she made out her book was thought highly of;
and that if she would call and sign an agreement
a cheque for twenty pounds would be
handed to her in exchange.

Great heaven ! she had waited all these
years for this — and it came then !

She crossed the room, and kneeling down
beside her father, said, ' Papa, can you understand
me ? they have taken my book, and are
to give me twenty pounds for it.'

She fancied — but it could only have been
fancy — that his eyes turned towards her for a
moment with a gleam of pleasure in them.
Oh !' she cried passionately, ' if you would
only get well now, papa — only get strong and
well — how happy we might be !' And then

her thoughts reverted to the great physician,
and she marvelled how much more time would
elapse before he came.

There was a dinner-party at his house, so
the servant said when she returned, ' but the
butler took the note to him, and he sent out
word he would be round early tomorrow
morning.'

Go for another doctor,' that was all Glen
said ; ' any doctor, only don't come back
without one.'

Meanwhile at that dinner-table, of which
the servant's eyes had caught through the
open door one bewildering glance, the celebrated
physician had remarked to a gentleman
who sat near him :

I don't know whether you remember
Westley, who was with Lord Thanet's cousin
at Some. That note was from his daughter.
Poor fellow ! the sands of his life are almost
run out.'

Westley !' repeated the other ; ' why, Lord
Thanet tried to find him everywhere more
than a year ago. He got him an appointment,
and I wrote myself saying how glad the Earl
felt. The letter was returned by the posts—
2

office people, and we have never heard a word
from him since

*Well, it is quite certain you will never
hear from him now. He consulted me some
months ago, and I then saw the case was
hopeless. Still, I did not expect he would go
off quite so soon. He is dying ; there can't
be a doubt of that.'

This was how it happened, that next morning,
when the physician drove up to the house
where Mr. Westley lodged, he found Lord
Thanet turning away from the door.

It is all over,' said the Earl.

Ah ! I thought the end could not be far
off. I'll just go in and speak to the daughter.'

I asked for her, but she cannot see anyone.
A gentleman came down and told me so.'

MARRIED.

BRIGHT summer's day in the August
following Mr. Westley's death ;
high water in the river ; the
Thames looking its very best — no sign of
mud-banks or bleak black shore — white sails
dotting the wide expanse of rippling blue, a
pleasant breeze blowing off the German Ocean,
and on the rising ground above Leigh, at the
foot of which that village nestles, Glenarva
Westley and Ned Beattie seated on the grass,
their eyes idly wandering over the landscape,
and their hearts almost too full for words,
busy with the past which had been theirs once
but which could belong to them again no
more for ever.

Glen was visiting the curate and his wife,
whose acquaintance she had made amongst
the Middlesex moors. He was now rector of
a scattered parish lying back in the lonely-country,
away from the river ; and it was a
pleasure in that desolate place to receive even
so quiet a guest as the girl who, dressed in
her deep mourning, sat often on Sundays in
the great square pew belonging to the rector,
looking with eyes that seemed drawn to it by
some sort of fascination at the east window,
which was the glory of the church, which
people came from far and near to see, and
which was, in its way, at once a triumph of
art and a specimen of splendid colouring, such
as modern mediocrity contemplated with despairing
envy. The subject was the woman
washing our Lord's feet with her tears, and
often, as she gazed upon it, Glen found her
own starting in sorrow for the sinner who,
more than eighteen centuries before, stood in
an agony behind her Saviour — weeping.

In the fine summer weather, Ned, coming
from London to see his old companion, was
invited to remain for a day or two ; and thus
it came to pass Glen had walked across

country to show him the river and the ruins
of Harleigh Castle, and now they were resting
on the heights above Leigh, and thinking of
other days and far different scenes.

It was Ned who broke the silence. Stretching
himself at full length on the grass, putting
his hands under his head, and tilting his straw
hat a little over his eyes, he said, evidently
in resumption o^ some previous conversation :

Glen, do you really mean to tell me none
of your people ever did a single thing for you
after your father's death V

Glen turned a thoughtful face in his direction
as she answered :

Lady Emily wrote me word she had some
black things, " almost as good as new," she
could have packed up for me if I knew anyone
who would bring them over ; and Mrs.
Westley '

Stop a minute,' entreated Ned, raising his
head a little and bursting into a hearty fit of
laughter. ' Kindly repeat that sentence ; it
sounds almost too funny to be true.'

It is perfectly true,' answered Glen ; ' and
Mrs. Westley sent me a letter stating she
supposed I had long before given up the disreputable

idea of earning my living by writing
mischievous and frivolous books, and that if I
thought of qualifying myself to be a governess
she was willing to let me try and teach her
two little girls, and as I was a relative, would
make me a present of ten pounds. I had committed
a great sin, it seemed, in wanting to
have my father buried at home, but she would
overlook my folly," she said, " knowing how
badly I was brought up." '

You must be inventing this, Glen, as you
go on.'

I should invent something pleasant if I
was inventing at all, you may be very sure of
that. I'd say, for example, Lady Emily enclosed
a cheque for a hundred pounds, and
that my cousins asked me to pay a visit to
Glenarva, and stay as long as I liked — as
your mother invited me, Ned, to Bally-shame.'


And why did you not come to us ?'

For several reasons — one because I thought
it would break my heart ; another that I could
not spare the money ; and the third that I
found I must stop near London. The publishers
are worse than any lejjrechann, Ned.

If you take your eyes off them for a minute
they are lost'

Or, rather, the author is, I suppose,'
answered Ned. ' And so it is a fact accomplished
that you are an author, my dear.'

Even so, Ned.'

And is the game worth the candle V

It is generally admitted that one must

live, and I have-made enough to live on this

year.'

Have you really ? Well, I suppose that is
better than governesses, even at Glenarva V

A good deal, I should say.'

They have cut the trees down in front of
the house to open up a view of the Bay, and
thinned the branches so as to let daylight in
along the avenue. It is an improvement, I
dare say, but I liked the look of the old place
aj8 it was best.'

I never talk nor think about Glenarva,
Ned, now, if I can help it.'

And silence reigned once more.

I read that book of yours, Glen, ' Tyrrel's
Son.' It was again young Beattie who broke
the stillness. * Aunt Stanuel brought it over
with her. I did not think it so bad, at all.'

Did you not ? That's consolatory,' observed
the author.

No ; I considered it good on the whole —
good, that is, for a girl. Of course, women
can't be expected ever to know anything of
life.'

For a second Glen remained speechless with
indignation ; then she retorted :

If you mean the very disreputable sort of
life you are best acquainted with, I am thankful
to say I do not ; but of a better kind I
know far more than Mr. Edward Beattie.'

Mr. Edward Beattie raised himself lazily on
one elbow, and looked at her in amazement.

Why, Glen,' he exclaimed, 'do you imagine
I am leading a disreputable life ? It strikes
me, young lady, your temper has got shorter
even than it used to be at BaUyshane ; but
don't let us quarrel, and for mercy's sake
don't imply things you know are untrue.'

Well, Ned, you must confess it is not true
to say I know less of life than you.'

I shall confess nothing of the sort. What
can a woman know of life 1 How is she to
get to know it ? I'U be bound I have seen
more of London since I came over last month

than you during; all the time you have lived
in it.'

Perhaps so answered Glen, with a smile
of contempt.

What are you writing now ?'

A little story suited to the comprehension
of children about five years of age with
withering irony.

Ah, then, it won't suit me,' said Ned
resignedly, and he laid his head down again.

Glen contemplated her old companion
stretched thus at his ease on the grass. He
was not much changed, yet he had changed.
It seemed to her he had grown strangely tall
and manly since they were boy and girl
together. There was a down on his upper
lip, which she remembered smooth as her own.
He had developed physically in a way which
she thought little less than extraordinary,
whilst his manner, never lacking in force and
decision, had now a something of masculine
strength and power added that struck Glen as
almost unpleasant in its careless determination.

Nevertheless, young or old, tall or short,
masterful or standing on an equality with
herself, he was the dear Ned of the happy,

vanished long ago, the Ned she had ridden
with, walked with, climbed with, boated
with, read with, quarrelled with, faced danger
with, nursed, tended, loved.

As she looked, as fond memory laid its
gentle hand on her heart, which had been so
cruelly torn by time and circumstance. Glen's
thoughts softened, and she felt sorry for
having spoken even one sharp word to Ned,
who she knew quite well never could mean to
vex her. Already, as was usual with Glenarva
Westley, the process of repentance had begun
immediately. In the years then stretching
before her, when Ned had forgotten all about
her little temper, she knew she would suddenly
remember that on the heights above
Leigh she had been cross with her earliest
friend.

Surreptitiously Ned, from under the sheltering
brim of his straw hat, was out of the
corner of one shrewd blue eye watching
her.

He knew — none better — Glen's every mood
and tense ; he understood her, not with a
comprehension born of any great power of
mental analysis, but with a lore caused by a

power of perception in which few Irish men and
women are deficient he was perfectly aware that,
sooner even than usual, she was ready figuratively
to kiss and be friends ; that was all
riorht — but he could not fail to see something
else about Glenarva which puzzled and perplexed
him. She had no down on her upper
lip ; she was not a bit taller or fatter or older-looking
than of yore ; her manner had not
changed in the least ; her little trumpery
success had not made or marred her, and
yet

Glen,' he said at last, ' is it at all likely
you will be in London before I leave V

With a start Glen returned to the questions
of everyday life, and answered, 'Certain.'

Where shall I be able to find you V

At the Laceres'.'

Oh ! you've spent a good deal of time with
them since — since last winter.'

Yes, Ned.'

Are they a pleasant family V

They are exceedingly good-natured.*

It seems to me you have formed a great
many acquaintances since you came to London.'

I have met with a great deal of kindness,

if that is what you mean answered Glenarva
gravely. Often in London she had not felt
very grateful for the exceptional kindness
which had been extended to her; but now,
when she was well out of the toil and turmoil
of the gigantic city — the noise and bustle of
the busy streets — and found time to think,
she could not help but be thankful for the
genial words which had been spoken, and the
kindly hands held out in greeting. Youth is
all too apt to take such words and help for
granted, but Glen, who was getting old — quite
old — though still not out of her teens, could,
when she found adequate leisure, afford to
consider them.

For Glenarva came of a grateful stock. It
was not in the nature of those from whom
she drew life to forget the gift even of a cup
of cold water, or a morsel of bread.

Glen ! did my mother tell you Aunt
Louisa had left me a thousand pounds V It
was Ned who, from under cover of his straw-brimmed
hat, put this question.

In reply Glen shook her head ; though she
gazed with quite a new and wondering interest
at lier old playfellow.

Why don't you ask me what I am going todo
with it V

What are you going to do with it V
I think of emigrating, or of taking a farm
at home. Which course shouki you recommend
V

If I were you, I should emigrate.'
Ned paused and considered this reply ere
he remarked :

I should want a wife to take out with me.'

A wife !' screamed Glen. * A boy like
you with a wife !'

'Do you think I am too young to be
married, then V asked Ned. ' I am fourteen
months older than you.'

Of course you are.'

And do you imagine you are too young to
be married V

No. If you remember I told you once I
met at Lady Emily's a Mrs. Atheling, who
was a wife, a mother, and a widow before her
seventeenth birthday.'

She married again, I suppose, immediately.'
No, she did not marry again at all.'
Had enough, even in so short a time, of
the holy state,' suggested Ned.

^ I know nothing about that.'
At all events yon think a girl may marry
before she is out of her teens V

Of course I do ; don't you V

'The sooner a girl marries the better, I
should say

I feel very glad to hear that is your
opinion, Ned, because I am going to be married


You are going to be what V He was
sitting bolt upright now, his hat lying on the
grass beside him — the wind tossing his hair —
looking straight at Glen.

Married next month.*
Oh ! indeed 1'

I should have been married nearly a year
ago — only '

*Is it indiscreet to ask the name of the
happy man V

No, Ned ; he is called Mordaunt Logan-facere.'


Lacere ! By Jove ! I thought there must
be something in it. And ink and paper were
so scarce, I suppose, and postage so dear, you
could not have told us this sooner.'

I do not know why I have told you now.^

It has slipped out just by accident ! But
for a mere chance we should have heard
nothing about it till we read the announcement
in the Times of Mordaunt Logan-facere
being united in the bonds of. matrimony to
Glenarva, only daughter, etc., etc. !'

I don't see,' retorted ' Glenarva, only
daughter, etc,' 'what there is in being married
to make a song about, as old Betty used to
say.'

Faith, in some cases a dirge might be
more fitting,' returned Ned, as he gathered
his long length up from the turf and walked
away from Glen to a distant point, where he
stood for a while, his hands deep in the
pockets of his loose grey suit, apparently contemplating
the view.

Stretching out her arm, Glen took up Ned's
hat, which he had left unheeded on the grass,
and beg-an to smooth out the dark blue ribbon
which encircled it, the time her thoughts went
back to the many, many days she had seen
just such another hat encircled by just such
another ribbon shading a boy's honest sunburnt
fcice as he shouted out her name on
shore, on sea, on cliff, on bog, at Bally shame.

VOL. II. 42

As she passed her fingers over and over the
narrow silken band, tears rose unbidden to her
eyes, and coursed one by one slowly down
her cheeks. Had she been looking at the
river she could riot have seen it for that mist
of inexplicable trouble. She had gone a
long, long journey back into what seemed
to her a far-distant past, and in spirit she
was travelling the well-remembered paths once
more, when a tall figure threw its shadow
on the sward, and Ned again stood beside
her.

Glen,' he said, and all bitterness had died
out of his voice, in which, however, there was
a ring of pain, * what is there in this marriage
that you never told your best friends a word
about it V

My best friend knew all about it,' she
answered.

You mean your father. Did he then approve
the match V

Fully.'

And how long have you known — a — Mr.
Lacere V

*Ever since the first winter we were in
London.'

So that all the time we were pitying
poor Glen," and thinking how lonely she
must be, Glen had got plenty of friends, and
was enjoying herself very much indeed V

Glen sat silent. The false indictment was
nothing, but had she opened her lips in
defence, the memory of all she passed through
during the period Ned thus lightly described
as one of unalloyed enjoyment must have
broken her down.

I suppose he is disgustingly rich,' went on
her tormentor, after he had for a moment
waited in vain for a reply.

No, he is not rich '

'That is, not rich for England, but still
what we in Ireland should account a sort of
millionnaire V

*Have it your way, Ned,' answered Glen
quietly.

How old is he V

I don't exactly know.'

Oh ! come, Glen — that is too good. Give
me an idea — is he older than I am V

Yes ; he is older than you.'
How much V

Ever so much.'

42—2

Do you remember telling us all how you
never would marry anybody V

Yes ; but it's a free country, and besides,
one knows what one is — but '

*You certainly did not know what you
might be,' finished Ned, with relentless decision.
' I told you once, if you recollect, you
would marry your grandfather.'

Yes, Glen recollected, though she did not
say so. Across the years there came to hera
whiff of sweetbread, and the scent of a
lavender-bush growing within the Vicarage
garden, where she and the boys stood talking
about the grey-haired hero who had lunched
that day with Mr. Beattie.

We ought to be thinking about going
home,' she said, after a pause.

*Not just yet,' he objected. 'When did
you tell me the great event was to come off V

Next month. I don't exactly yet know
which day.'

Is our friend of the parsonage to act as
chaplain at the gallows V

*No.'

Who is to tie the knot, then V

I haven't an idea — anybody.'

Well, you are a funny girl — I don't believe
you care a bit for the man you are going to
marry.'

Don't you, Ned V There was something
unutterably sad and weary in her voice as she
spoke.

See, Glen ' — he had thrown himself once
more on the grass, and was now leaning towards
his companion — ' give me your hand, and say
this after me, then I won't trouble you anymore
: " I'm so fond of the person I have
chosen, I would take him if he had not a penny,
and I feel I can trust the whole of my future
life to his keeping." '

God knows I can !' she added, when she
had repeated this strange formula ; and then,
as Ned slowly released her hand, she covered
her face for a minute ere, rising, she said : ' Now
we had better go home.'

Come down to the river,' he amended, ' and
jet us see if we can "get a boat. It may be
many a long day before I shall have a chance
of rowing you again.'

Along the grass and down the steep hill
they went, silently, side by^vside, together, and
it was not till they were standing at a little

shelving landing-place, waiting for a boat to
be brought round, that Ned spoke again.

wouldn't it be better, Glen, for you to
come back with me to Ballyshane, and let my
father do all that is necessary under the circumstances
V

She shook her head, and answered, ' I would
rather be married in London.'

A minute more and they were on the river
water all around them — the outward-bound
ships making their way slowly against wind
and tide, the Thames like a sheet of molten
gold — the August sun westering over London,
where the man Ned imagined to be * disgustingly
rich' was sitting in his quiet office, pondering
' ways and means.'

Do you remember, Glen, the time I fell
and broke my leg V asked Ned, holding his
sculls suspended for the moment as he asked
the question.

Of course I do,' she answered, watching
the pearly drops falling like summer rain into
the water.

And that afternoon I bade you good-bye
on board the Morecambe steamer ?'

Yes, Ned.'

And when the years have come and gone,
you will not forget to-day, and how everything
looked from the heights yonder, and the way
the sun shone on the water, and the shadows
stealing round the church tower V

I shall not forget,' and she turned her head
aside while he rowed steadily on.

K I call I suppose I may be allowed to see
you in London V he said, as an hour and more
later they walked in the evening light across
the lonely wolds almost in utter silence.

Of course ! They will make any friend of
mine welcome.'

^ Where did you say Mr. Lacere has his office,
Glen V

In Sise Lane.'

August was past, and September had come
ere Ned, still wearing that unconventional
straw hat and loose grey suit, on both of
which Miss Humphries looked with distinct
disfavour, paid his promised visit to the future
Mrs. Lacere. When he called it was afternoon,
and all the existing ladies of the Lacere
family were in evidence. Glen had long ceased
to count how many were dead as a vain and
profitless calculation.

Looking round the quartet — to each one of
whom he was duly and specially introduced —
Ned irreverently summed them up in the same
terms as a deceased Lord Abercorn is stated to
have stigmatized two distinguished authoresses
of his period, while it is only fair to say that
the impression produced by Mr. Beattie was
as little favourable as that made on him by
Mr. Lacere's female relations.

He was asked to partake of tea, and, accepting
the invitation, endeavoured to talk on such
subjects as he supposed might prove agreeable
to ladies, all of whom were old enough to be
his mother, while one of them might, as he subsequently
expressed the matter, ' have counted
years, and won, with Miss Stanuel herself.'

It was after Miss Humphries had said
solemnly, 'Will you allow me to give you
another cup of tea, Mr. Beauties?' and Mr.
Beattie, who was accustomed to take a great
many cups of tea, had answered, * Yes, thank
you,' that he proceeded to scandalize all the
ideas of the Lacere connection by remarking
across the table :

Well, Glen, I took Sise Lane on my way
here, and saw your man.'

Glen felt the startled chill which for a
moment froze the bftod of her relatives who
were to be, at Ned's free-and-easy designation
of Mordaunt Logan-facere, but she answered :

Did you ? I hope you were pleased with
each other

I was pleased with him said Ned, taking
no notice of the stony looks of disapproval with
which his utterances were received ; ' we had
a long talk. I dare say I stopped there an
hour. I told him I hoped he would not let
you get your head.'

Glen smiled. ' And what is his notion on
the subject ?'

The usual thing, of course,' replied Ned.
Thinks you would be sure to go right — without
bit, bridle, or curb. " Very well'' I said,
do as you like ; but remember I knew her
before ever you did, and the very best
thing for both of you will be to keep her
well in hand." '

It seems to me, Mr. Beattie, your advice,
however admirable, has the great drawback of
being somewhat obscure,' remarked Miss Lacere,
with great dignity.

Oh ! he knew well enough what I meant,

and so does Glen returned Ned, as if it were
of no consequence whatever whether Miss
Lacere were similarly fortunate or not.

I suppose the old girls will be kind to you
he said, as he and Glen strolled together towards
the Regent's Park. He had suggested
she should put on her bonnet and walk part of
the way back with him. * They seem inclined
to make a great fuss over their new sister-inlaw


'Yes, they have been very kind to me,"
answered Glen.

That other Lacere is a very velvety-spoken
sort of individual. He thinks, I fancy, he has
got a monopoly of all the virtues, as well as all
the talents.'

*I can't tell, I am sure.'

Meantime there was quite a flutter going on
in the Lacere dovecote.

I don't approve of that young man's manners
at all, Glen observed Miss Lacere when
Glen, looking a little pale, returned home and
took a seat as far distant from the chandelier
as possible.

Don't you ?' asked the girl.

No, indeed ! Fancy him talking of our

precious blessing as " your man," and hoping he
would not let you " get your head !" '

Poor Ned !'

Already Glen had a feeling no friend of hers
would meet with much favour in that household.
' But it does not much matter she
thought. She felt strangely tired and peaceably
minded.

I wish I had married a year ago she
decided ; and undoubtedly it would have been
much better, as no one knew more certainly
than Mr. Los^an-Lacere himself.

Though late, however, the wedding-day
dawned at last, a dull morning, obscured by a
damp mist which resolved itself before the appointed
hour into a wretched drizzling rain.

Unless they had walked into church alone
together, no pair could have been married more
quietly.

One of the Misses Lacere for bridesmaid,
Mr. Lacere for best-man, a gentleman who was
a stranger to Ned for father — that was all the
wedding-party.

In a half-hearted sort of way Glen had asked
young Mr. Beattie to be present, but he refused
on the ground that he was leaving London.

Nevertheless, though she did not see him,
her old friend was there, and as he walked from
the church to Euston Square Station he shook
his head once or twice mournfully.

It was as sad a ceremony as I ever need
desire to witness he thought ; ' yet if they
are unhappy I am sure the fault will not be
his.'

END OF VOL. II.

BILLING AND Sors, PRI^-TER3, GUILDFORD AND LONDON.

G., C. t(- 0>.

ILLINOiS Library

/Vr URBANA-CHAMPAIGN

BOOKSTACKS

Jl dodd.

BY

MRS. J. H. Liddell,

AUTHOR OF

THF: mystery in palace gardens,' ' GEORGE Leith OF FEN

COURT,' ETC.

IN THREE VOLUMES.
VOL. in.

LONDON :
RICHARD BENTLEY AND SON,

f nblishcrs in ©riinnrjD io err ^-Aiesh} i\\c (Qtitrn.
1883,

[A// Rights Reserved. ]

CONTENTS OF VOL. III.

tMAPlEH PAL

I. ONE ROAD TO SUCCESS - - . . 1

11. THE NEW STORY 40

III. barney's luck - - - - - - 73

IV. THE Near FIRM OS

y. MR. LOGAN-facere IS Amazes) - - - 14*^

VI. MR. Kelly's advice - - - - - 194

VII. MR Felon CRITICIZES . - - 228

VIII. A GREAT WINDFALL - - - - - 24.')

IX. BOUND TO COME - - - - - - 270

X. WHAT HAPPENED - - - - - 292

XI. EVIL DAYS - - - - - - - 314

XII. CONCLUSION - - - - - - 347

Chapter I.

ONE ROAD TO SUCCESS.

[OAV's Maria?' had long been played
out ; ' less observed Mr. Dawton,
from any want of life or animation
in the fair Maria herself, than in consequence
of a curious and to bim (Mr. Dawton)
inexplicable lack of enthusiasm on the part of
the principal performer.'

If I may be allowed the expression,' proceeded
Mr. Dawton, 'he always acted the part
under protest. Give you my honour, sir, he
seemed as if he took it only out of compliment
to me, and during the whole time he had his full
share of the profits. Full share, ay, and more.
VOL. III. 43

From the first I told you he was a *' cad,"
father said Ted, which opinion, indeed, the
elder son of the house had freely expressed
soon after forming the acquaintance of Mr.
Bernard Kelly. ' He only went into the matter
with you because he was short of cash. He
was deadly ashamed of the whole business,
and took the earliest possible opportunity of
getting out of it.'

Incredible as this statement sounded to Mr.
Dawton, it happened to be perfectly true.
For anyone to be ' ashamed ' of the stage, and
despise the ' noblest profession man ever entered,'
seemed to the poor old actor a theory
too wild for acceptance. But Ted had read
his man accurately. If he had descended into
the pit of Mr. KeUy's mind, and gone with a
light through aU the workings of that intricate
mine, he could not have arrived at a more
correct conclusion than was the case.

Mr. Kelly had loathed ' How's Maria ?' and
felt each time the name of that mythical female
was placarded about the towns in the Home
Counties, beyond which distance Mr. Dawton
did not think it prudent to travel, as if a date
were fixed for his o^ti execution.

You see, he never forgets Bernard Kelly,'
explained Ted to his brother ; ' and for this
reason, if for no other, he will never, let my
father say what he likes, do a bit of good as
an actor.'

And I'm very sure he won't as an author,'
capped Will. 'From the minute I stopped
touching up his stories, not an editor would
take one of them.'

But Mr. William Dawton proved to be
wrong in his idea that the Irishman would fail
to make his way as a writer.

He lacked genius, it is true ; but he made up for
the want of a gift which does not always enable
its possessor to compass worldly success, by indomitable
perseverance and a determination to
try all the gates of fortune till he found one
that yielded to his hand. Nothing except that
shortness of cash mentioned — a not uncommon
want among aU sorts and conditions of men —
could ever have induced Mr. Kelly to appear
in the little play Mr. William Dawton had
knocked up' out of the omnibus incident
which introduced Bernard to his uncle ; but
he was so poor at the time, he agreed to whatever
Mr. Dawton proposed ; and, as a natural

43—2

'^\

consequence, found himself carried, much
against his own goodwill, to Croydon, Kingston,
Hertford, and such-like towns, as well as
to places more properly to be regarded as outlying
suburbs of London.

Amongst others to Stratford, where, although
he saw them not, Miss Bridgettata and her niece
saw him.

I don't know what you'll think about Barney
going the round of the country with a
parcel of strolling players,' wrote Miss Cavan
to Mrs. Kelly. ' It seems a great come-down
for a man reared in decency — and I am truly
sorry for you — respected and respectable as
you always were and kept yourself. Me and
Hetty paid our shilling apiece, and went into
the back seats to get a look at him ; and we
felt it was money wasted. It was a pity
you could not keep him at home, or get him
off to America. Maybe your brother in Derry
could give a helping hand to get him out there
yet. He's in the middle of a gang of actors,
Mat says ; and, indeed, I think it's only my
duty and a kindness to write and let you
know how he's going on.'

Which was a very weak, foolish letter for

poor Miss Cavan to indite, though she sent it
to Callinacoan only with the laudable idea of
taking the sting out of whatever Barney might
have said about Mat.

Now, Barney had hitherto said nothing to
the good people at home on the subject, and
might possibly have held his peace for ever, if
Miss Bridgettata had refrained her pen. As
matters stood, however, he returned a short
but incisive epistle to the letter of maternal
lamentation which arrived in due course at
Bermondsey.

He told his mother not to be fretting about
him — that he was doing very well, and meant
to do better ; that Miss Cavan was an old
idiot ; that Mat was only a common tout for
advertisements; and that if he made five hundred
a year, he was drinking six ; that it was a
pure waste of Irish produce to send hampers
to West Ham ; and that, if she found she had
at any time more than she knew what to do
with, she had better send it to him than to a
house where there were two slanderous old
maids, and a man who had grudged him even
the poor shelter their contemptible cottage
afforded. Bernard was very angry indeed.

and when lie was angry, he knew, as his mother
said, ' where to lay on the whip.'

Nevertheless, this little incident confirmed
his previous resolution of severing his slight
connection with the stage.

It does not matter,' he considered, 'what
a man does or leaves undone, so long as he
can keep it quiet ; but you can't keep things
quiet if you give any fool able to pay twelve-pence
leave to learn to know all you are
about.'

So Mr. Kelly, looking around, saw there was
a great field in London open for any man who
liked to push his way steadily and unpretentiously.


It's the horse that steals along wins the
race,' he thought ; ' that makes no great show,
but just creeps on, and on, and was never
thought of perhaps at all in the betting. Sofar
as I have seen, it's the talk and the drink
spoils a man's chances here.' And he vowed
to himself that neither drink nor talk should
destroy the chance of Mr. Bernard Kelly.

Brought up as he had been, the amount of
money which sifted through the fingers of the
people he came in contact with literally appalled

him. Snow in June could not have disappeared
quicker than sovereigns did out of the
possession of Will and Jim Dawton. No one
ever seemed to him to put by a halfpenny.
What his friends got they spent, and then they
were short till they got more. It was either
a feast or a famine ' — either debt or profusion.


It is a sort of life that would not suit me,'
Mr. Kelly said in after-years, referring to life
in Bohemia — but what perhaps he really meant
was, it would not have suited him to pay for
it. So long as somebody else found what the
young Dawtons called ' the shot,' he said nothing
in dispraise of Bohemian practices. Nay,
most undoubtedly he liked them, always at
another person's expense hen entendu — the
snug supper-parties — the Blackwell dinners —
the trips up the river — the picnics — the dances
the play-goings — the luncheons — he took
them aU just as he took good wine, when he
could get that good thing ; but they did not
turn his head any more than wine. After the
pleasantness party he could go home and instantly
buckle to his work. So far from unfitting
him for his daily labour, society only

seemed to supply some stimulus his nature
needed.

He never forgot Bernard Kelly to quote
Ted Dawton's words ; and for that very reason,
the life which might have over-excited and
undermined a more sensitive and sympathetic
nature really only proved a favouring wind
which blew him onward to success.

Ere he had been eighteen months in London
the DawtoDS felt that though he was among,
he was not of them. He had got a literary
connection quite outside their own, and a
visiting acquaintance into which his literary
position never entered. How he had managed
this was a question frequently mooted amongst
the first friends whose kindness helped him
over the difficulties of his earlier metropolitan
experience. Mr. Bernard Kelly knew, but he
did not mean to enlighten them, parrying all
inquisitive inquiries with, to quote Jim Daw-ton,
* a wisdom beyond his years.'

The Dawtons could not make the matter out.
Mr. Donagh had darkly hinted to them that
Kelly was a low fellow,' ' born in the ranks ;
that ' Mr. Balmoy himself came from the
dregs of the people.' ' Fellows,' proceeded

Mat loftily, ' my grandfather would not have
spoken to, except from the back of his
thoroughbred, while they were running barefoot
through the bogs ;' and, indeed, when he
first arrived in London, there was nothing so
particularly refined or aristocratic about Mr.
Kelly's appearance, manners, and modes of
thought as to induce a belief that he had been
what Mr. Donagh called ' cradled amid the
purple.' They knew that when Mr. Dawton,
senior, first beheld him gazing darkly down
into the water in St. James's Park, he was as
destitute of friends as of money ; and now,
behold, he had the entree to good houses ;
and by Jove, sir,' added Will, ' he can planta
book with a publisher almost when and
where he likes.'

All of which was true, but the apparent
miracle of Bernard Kelly's success had its
origin in two extremely simple causes. First,
he started in the race unweighted. He had
no wife, father, or child to consider ; it was
not necessary for him to keep up appearances
beyond dressing fairly well ; he could lodge
where he pleased, live as cheaply as he liked ;
put the width of London between himself and

those who might have intruded upon his time
and distracted him from his work ; what he
made he could keep, he might save or spend,
whichever pleased him best. In the second
place, circumstances before he came to London
so placed his lot, that he had splendid opportunity
for reading books not generally resorted
to for purposes of study. As a pigeon wheels
round in the air, uncertain apparently at first
in what direction to bend its flight — as a dog
often first scents three roads out of four where
that number meet, ere certainly electing to
choose the last — so Mr. Kelly tried his hand
at many things before he finally found out
what he was best fitted for, and stuck to it.

Almost by accident — at least, if a conversation
with Mr. Vassett could be deemed accident
he found he could utilize his almost exhaustive
acquaintance with the works of those
dramatists the present age has decided to
shelve. Bernard Kelly knew them by heart.
He read them at a time when he had no
thought of coming to London and only the
vaguest idea of ever publishing anything had
entered his mind, and therefore started with
the enormous advantage of not having to goto

the British Museum to ' read up ' his subject.
When he did enter that building, it
was merely to verify a quotation or refer to
some work the gist of which was already
known to him. At that time he chanced to
be earning enough by those London sketches
to which allusion has already been made —
to keep his modest pot boiling, and he could
therefore write the book he had in his mind
at leisure, and afford to spend time in giving
it an amount of local colour which delighted
Mr. Vassett, himself an antiquarian and a
lover of the study of that long-ago time, when
gallants ruffled it in doublets and plumed
hats, when 'prentice boys fought, when grave
citizens had to keep strict watch over fair
wives and pretty daughters, when the Fleet
afforded splendid opportunities for romance
and scoundrelism and comedy and tragedy,
when jolly young watermen pulled gay
cavaliers to London Bridge, and down the
stairs at York Gate — then lapped at high tide
by the water, and not lying stranded back ina
garden as it does now — ladies with hoops,
and fans, and patches, and powdered hair, and
looped-up dresses, and high-heeled shoes, were

handed by lords wearing swords at their sides
in order to take an airing on the river.

It was concerning the dramatists of this
time ]mr. Kelly wrote what Mr. Vassett termed
*an important work.' He went into it with
love, and he finished it with honour. He
knew what he was about ; knew the plays the
authors he spoke of had written, not merely byname,
but line by line and sentence by sentence;
he understood their spirit ; he saw the tendency
of their times reflected in the loose
morality of their plots and characters ; but
beneath the grossness and the levity and
the scoffs at decency and dulness and religion,
he found a wealth of genius which
surprised and delighted the Craven Street
publisher.

More than this, he haunted the localities
described, the places where these men had
lived, made his way into wretched tenements
where genius and wit and beauty had once
held high court, and weaving into his narrative
the very stones of the street, and the aspect of
the rooms, and the carving of the mantelpieces,
and the paintings on the ceilings, and the
pattern of the balustrades, produced a series of

pictures, so said the reviewers, as well as a
brilliant and accurate history of the period he
described.

The book stamped Mr. Kelly as a man worth
cultivating ; but even before it appeared, he
had made his way into houses where people
are not usually asked merely because they have
written a book or flashed some artistic fireworks
in the face of the multitude. He achieved
this social feat by the kindness of a friend at
whose hands he scarcely deserved such consideration.


Not then, but years after, he stated, in
what reviewers termed a singularly graceful
dedication, that to this lady — for his friend
was of the better sex — he owed every good
thing he possessed in life. And yet before
he left Ireland he served her what a less
forgiving and confiding nature might have
regarded as a scurvy trick. He had professed
to be deeply in love with her ; he had given
her to understand that life destitute of her
presence would be valueless ; he had been on
the very eve of marrying her — indeed, without
doubt he would have married her, but that at
the eleventh hour her brother, getting wind of

the matter, sent for Barney, as he was called
in the easy vernacular of the neighbourhood,
and said :

Now, look here ! you think my sister has
three hundred a year V

And hasn't she V asked Barney, ' simple asa
baby,' to quote his mother's somewhat incorrect
statement.

'As long as she remains single f answered
Mr. Fortescue, for the gentleman's name was
Fortescue, and the lady was Miss Fortescue —
generally referred to among the Kelly connection
as the * old woman.'

How's that V inquired Barney, naturally
anxious to obtain all the information he could
on so important a question.

Well,' said Mr. Fortescue in a friendly confidential
sort of manner, for at this stage he
felt affairs were in his own hand, ' you see —
pray take a glass of wine, Mr. Kelly' — Barney
had been ushered into the dining-room after
the departure of youth and beauty as personified
by Miss Fortescue, and Mr. Fortescue now
pushed the decanter over to him. ' You see,
my father made his will when my sister was a
young girl. He never altered it ; there were

reasons, as you will allow, why it was wise lie
never did.'

Mr. Kelly sipped his wine and remained
silent ; there were reasons why he did not wish
to answer ' Yes,' and he felt he certainly could
not answer ' No ' till he knew more.

So,' proceeded Mr. Fortescue, ' to cut a
long story short, when my father died and his
will was read, we found that everything was
left to me except three hundred a year to my
sister so long as she remained single — the
amount to cease totally on her marriage unless
she wedded with my consent.'

Mr. Kelly finished his wine. He felt matters
had reached a climax.

And, Mr. Kelly,' proceeded Mr. Fortescue —
pray take some more wine,' which Barney did,
fearing he might never get anything else out
of the Fortescue connection — 'to be quite
plain, I have no intention of giving my consent
to her marrying you ; still, as I have no desire
to act unhandsomely towards a person who I
think may have been led very much astray in
his ideas '

He paused, but strong in the virtue of
silence, Barney declined to compromise himself

with any statement as to whether he had been
the deceiver or the deceived.

I am willing said Mr. Fortescue, after an
almost imperceptible pause, ' to — to — do something
for you. If you like to leave the
neighbourhood and — go — anywhere — you can
have fifty pounds.'

Fifty pounds and no Miss Fortescue ! At
that moment, if possessed of fifty pounds in
hard cash, all things seemed possible to Mr.
Bernard Kelly ; so he closed with the offer on
the spot.

Ye didn't know your own worth, Barney
dear,' commented his mother, when she heard
of the transaction. * With your wonderful
brown eyes and that soft melting voice of
yours, ye might wile a bird off" her nest. We'd
have doubled that fifty if you'd only stuck
out a bit. And now where at all d'ye think
yell go V

Mr. Kelly did not know — he thought of
America, and of Australia, and of Africa and
New Zealand ; and then, feeling he lacked the
spirit either of a pioneer or adventurer, said,
I'll go to London.'

London was not so far off as Mr. Fortescue

could have desired ; still, in those days it was
a long way. A man who wished to return
might, were he so inclined, get back almost as
easily from America as from London; and
besides, he well knew that after the first cold
plunge into the swift stream of metropolitan
life had been taken, men did not often desire
to return to the turf and the pigs, and the
dead-alive existence of a place like Callinacoan.

Mr. Balmoy was communicated with, and
expressed his willingness to assist a relative
represented as so extremely clever as far as lay
in his power; the outfit was procured, and
Barney left what Mr. Donagh would have
called his ' natal bogs.'

The letter in which he bade farewell to
Miss Fortescue was a masterpiece of falsehood
and diplomacy ; but what he said, knowing
the writer, may be safely left to the imagination
of the reader.

The lady, sho, though not young, was
tender, wept bitterly over the desertion of her
devoted swain : he wanted ' faith,' she said
sadly — took, indeed, to her bed when her
brother told her how he and Kelly had talked
the matter over, and decided it was better for

VOL. III. 44

Barney to go to London ; but after a time she
tired of tears and solitude — got up, went
down stairs, and in pursuance of her domestic
avocations discovered the new pad-groom
was an extremely handsome young man,
and decided that he must be a hero in
disguise.

The end of that romance is written in the
chronicles of the house of Fortescue.

Wiser than his predecessor, the handsome
young man wasted no time over his wooing
or his wedding either ; and on this occasion
the first hint Mr. Fortescue received of what
had been going on, arrived in the form of an
intimation that mr. Robert Underwood had
that day wedded Dorothea, only daughter of
the late Thomas Fortescue, of Manchester
Square, London. If a shell had exploded at
Sulby Park it would have caused less confusion.


Married — and to a groom !' gasped Mr.
Fortescue. ' Why, Kelly was nothing to
this !'

'Serve him right,' thought Mrs. Kelly,
turning up his impudent English nose at my
Earned.'

Something might have been made of
Kelly,' considered Mr. Fortescue, which judgment
Barney, as soon as he heard the news,
immediately justified by despatching a letter
to the bride full of earnest hopes for her happiness,
touching expressions of gratitude for her
kindness to himself in the days gone by, and
assurances that almost every hour he found
occasion to recall some of her excellent advice
and necessity to use the information she had
given him.

It was a sprat thrown to catch a very vague
herring, but still Mr. Kelly decided the chance
must be worth the postage-stamp and the
time which it cost. By return of mail came
an answer from Mrs. Underwood. She did
not say much about her husband, but she said
a great deal concerning Barney — remarked
how thankful she felt to know her poor
advice had proved of the slightest service;
begged him to tell her if she could not be of
some real use to him in London ; entreated
that he would confide all his hopes and fears
to her as of old. She had always prophesied he
would rise, and rise high, and as a true, though
humble friend, she desired from the remote

44—2

spot where her lot was cast to be able to
follow the course of his upward progress.

It is almost unnecessary to say Mr. Bernard
Kelly was not at all backward in availing himself
of the chance thus offered. He told her
he was writing — getting on in the world
wonderfully, all things considered; that merely
to provide the ' sinews of war ' he had temporarily
joined fortunes with a family named
Dawton, well known in the theatrical world,
and acted in their, company a little play
called ' How's Maria V — founded on the incident
which had destroyed his hopes of assistance
from Mr. Balmoy — at various country
towns. Having thus drawn the venom from
Miss Donagh's sting, he went on to say that
he had met with many curious persons and
passed through many strange vicissitudes since
they parted, and that he often wished he was
near enough to resume the charming companionship
he had been privileged to enjoy at
Callinacoan.

Then,' he added, ' it was you who were
wont to amuse and instruct me with stories of
a world of which I knew nothing. If we met
now, I am vain enough to think, short as has

been my London experience, I could relate
many things which would interest you.'

The correspondence prospered ; Mr. Underwood,
holding out, got his five hundred pounds
and went to America, where popular rumour
stated he immediately took to himself another
and younger wife. He was quite firm in the
matter of not subjecting Mrs. Underwood to
the inconveniences of a sea voyage and uncertain
prospects when she got on the other side,
so the lady returned to her brother's roof —
where, as it was clearly impossible she could
marry again, a great peace began to reign. The
correspondence with Barney supplied all the
elements of romance, lacking which, as Miss
Fortescue used to say, life lacked everything.
Existence,' she wrote plaintively, ' is ended
for me, but in your success I sometimes feel
like one raised again from the dead.' She
gave him letters of introduction ; she ' worked
her friends,' to use a phrase of the Dawtons',
for his benefit ; she opened doors for him he
never could have opened for himself; in a
word, Mr. Kelly was doing very well indeed,
yet he did not feel quite satisfied. He knew
now he could make a certain sum per annum

for several years — perhaps for life — but he
could only do this by continuous work on the
literary treadmill. A thousand miles in a
thousand hours seems a vast pedestrian feat
to those who are little given to such exercise ;
but the life of an author without private
fortune, or the fortune of getting into some
good thing, just means "what is equivalent to
walking a mile every working hour of his life.
The task is never done — even when he is
lying on his death-bed the hack leaves some
copy ' unfinished. The simile of the crutch
and the walking-stick is almost too trite to be
repeated here — yet it is so true, use can scarcely
render it stale — and Mr. Kelly, who, for all
his commonsense and industry and patience
and perseverance, was thoroughly Irish in his
love of pleasure and hatred of routine, felt
sometimes he hated authorship, and wished he
could get into another groove where at least
some little variety might compensate for inadequate
remuneration.

Leader writing had not at that time got to
be the money-making business it has since
become, and at all events Mr. Kelly was not
on any newspaper. Literary men would

have looked round their fourth-floor chambers
in incredulous astonishment had they then
been told they need only borrow enough
money for the railway fare to some remote
borough, in order to write M.P. after their
names. The honours conferred by a seat in
the House of Commons were not in those days
as easy to be obtained as foreign titles and
diplomas ; there were fewer prizes in authorship
than there are now, but as a balance
there were not quite so many blanks. The
monotony and the drudgery, however, even
of an assured success, appalled Mr. Kelly. He
felt thankful for what he had been able to do ;
but he wanted something more — something
that would, as he phrased the matter to himself,
be going on like rent or interest while a
fellow was sleeping. He desired, in brief, a
salary — an editorship — anything which would
not necessitate the eternal turning out of
copy.' He even fixed the amount of that
salary, if he could get it, at precisely the same
annual sum as that maiden lady, whose relations
were not as kind as she thought they
might have been, prayed for. 'And lest,
Lord 1 Thou shouldest not know what I mean,

I mean three hundred a year, paid quarterly
Three hundred a year would have suited
Mr. Kelly to a nicety ; but though he was a
great deal about London, editorship were
things he did not seem to hear about, in time
at any rate ; and the Dawtons, who did hear,
were not in any hurry to tell him.

Perhaps they thought, and with good reason,
that once this ' chief butler ' got comfortably
placed himself, he would forget all about the
struggling Joseph of his former prison-house.


At all events, he was washing very much
for what he did not seem likely soon to get,
and was pondering how other people appeared
to fall into ' excellent berths,' when one day —
the very same day, in fact, when Glen and
Ned Beattie sat on the heights above Leigh
looking down upon the Thames — he took boat
to go to Lambeth. It had dawned upon him
it might not have been quite wise on his part
to cut the Dawton connection even so far ashe
had done. True, the Dawtons and the
rank to which he wished to belong, and with
which he was in fact privileged to associate,
were social ingredients so different as to be

well-nigh incompatible. But bankers and
clergymen, and old dowagers with assured
positions, and prim maiden ladies distantly-related
to the nobility, put nothing tangible
in his pocket ; while the pleasant Bohemians,
whose ways and doings and conversation seemed
to him so pleasant, but whom latterly he had
grown somewhat to look down upon, could
tell when and where every new venture on
which for a time money would be spent freely
was to be started. He could not afford, he
decided, to get ' out of the swim ;' not at all
events till he met with a rich wife to be had
for the asking. Mr. Kelly's preferences certainly
lay in the direction of a rich wife rather
than that of any magazine, new or old ; but
spite of his brown eyes and melting voice, no
lady with a handsome fortune had, as yet,
shown him the slightest favour.

Faith, there are more after them here even
than in Ireland,' thought Mr. Kelly. ' Lords,
and baronets, and parsons, and barristers, and
judges, and princes too, for aught I know.*
Fact is, ' Barney dear ' had been much against
his will forced to the conclusion that there is
no spot on earth where a rich woman, no

matter how old she may be, is not worth more
than an impecunious young man.

Talk about Miss Fortescue !' soliloquized
Mr. Kelly. 'Why, she was a mere girl in
comparison to some I have seen married to
fellows no older than myself. There could not
have been more than two or three and twenty
years between us ; and I am sure that old
woman Reason went to church with last
week was seventy if she was a day.'

From all of which it will be seen, Mr. Kelly,
spite of the success he had won, was still feeling
his way after further fortune. It is impossible
for a man to live for nearly three years
in a great city and feel the same modest sum
he then considered absolute wealth, satisfy his
desires. Money in a large town goes literally
no way. The bare necessaries of existence
may certainly be procured at as cheap a rate,
if not at a cheaper, than in the country ; but
Mr. Kelly soon found '. the minute you set
your foot over the doorstep you've to put
your hand in your pocket.'

A satisfactory income is a point upon which
no human being was ever able to come to an
exact conclusion. It always means more thana

person possesses. As a rule, wants grow in
precise proportion to the means of gratifying
them ; and though Mr. Kelly was far too
astute and careful to outrun the constable or
even spend anything like the whole amount
he was making, still he could not avoid casting
anxious glances ahead, and wondering if he
ever should be rich enough to take a house and
keep servants, and ' live like anybody else.'

He was extremely fond of riding, and when
he went into the Park his very soul grew sick
with envy at the sight of the splendid animals
bestridden for the most part by grooms. At
Callinacoan a capital horse could have been
iDOUght for about the sixth part of his price in
London, while his feed scarcely needed to
be reckoned ; and here, once again to quote
Mr. Kelly, ' his keep costs as much as a
man's.'

Musing on these things and many others of
a like nature, wondering more particularly if
the Dawtons knew any of the staff on a newly
started paper which had taken a higher literary
position sooner than paper was ever known to
have done before in so short a time, Mr. Kelly
stepped on board the steamer on the Surrey

side. He had prefaced his intended visit with
a present of a two-gallon jar of Bushels,
procured for and sent to him by his uncle at
Derry — who wrote, between jest and earnest :

I only hope, Barney, you don't drink all I
get for you without help.'

In those days the duty was not equalized,
and how his uncle managed to smuggle over
so much whisky puzzled his nephew a good
deal. As for the young Dawtons, when the
present arrived they only laughed and wondered
' What Kelly wants now V

Don't let us look a gift-horse in the mouth,*
entreated ]mr. Dawton, whose love for good
liquor was undiminished, though every day that
had gone by since Barney first met him decreased
his ability to indulge in it with impunity.
' Upon the whole, he is not a bad
fellow, Kelly. I have known worse — far
worse.'

So have I,' said Ted ; ' but I have also
known better.'

Well, you never tasted finer whisky, at
any rate,' answered his father, who had been
testing the quality of the Bushels by pouring
small quantities into a wine-glass, and

taking them off at a gulp as lie might
medicine.

All unconscious of the criticisms passed on
himself and his national beverage, Mr. Kelly,
smoking a cigar, left the Surrey side boat at St.
Paul's pier, and walking across the gangway
of the Chelsea vessel, made his way forward.
As he did so he caught sight of a face which
seemed familiar to him, and on which impulse,
for it certainly was not at the moment memory,
at once induced him to turn his back. Where
had he seen that face before ? He stood looking
down into the water asking himself that
question ; and then he suddenly remembered
he had seen it first in the little covered passage
overlooking St. Mary Overy's Dock, and that
he had beheld it last as it sank away from
sight under a counter in Sise Lane. That was
more than two years ago, and his eyes had
never rested on it since ; but the face was not
one to be easily forgotten. Its owner did not
look a day older — or very much soberer. He
was a man who possessed the doubtful advantage
of always appearing to be the worse,
or the better — precisely as an observer might
choose to consider — for drink. Yes, Mr. Kelly

remembered him perfectly — remembered the
light wiry frame without an ounce of superfluous
flesh upon it; the hat pushed as far
back from the forehead as was compatible with
keeping it on at all ; the hands plunged deep
in the pockets ; the nervous, fidgety, excitable
manner ; the shrewd yet wandering eye ; the
sharp expression of the countenance ; the
curiously, muddily pale complexion — that certainly
was not an acquaintance he desired to
renew, so he kept his back steadily to the passengers,
and endeavoured to look with an air
of attention and interest at the various wharves,
and warehouses, and coal sheds, and ale-stores,
and stranded barges, and black mud, which at
that time fringed the Middlesex side of the
river, where the Embankment now runs.

How d'ye do ?' said a voice at his elbow.

Mr. Kelly turned at the words, and saw his
questionable friend smiling up at him in the
most affectionate manner possible.

I am very well, thank you,' he answered,
with an excellent assumption of surprise, and
utter want of recognition.

You don't seem to remember me,' remarked
the other, in a tone of disappointment.

Now I look at you more closely, your face
does appear familiar,' observed Mr. Kelly, who
saw it was of no use fencing any longer with
the difficulty ; but '

You can't exactly call to mind where last
you had the pleasure of seeing it,' supplied
Lance quickly. 'Now that's odd. I knew
you again in a minute, and I wasn't quite as
sober as you — but I never forget. I am never
so far gone that I can't recollect distinctly next
morning what happened overnight. My
memory never gets drunk ; let me help yours a
bit. One confoundedly wet evening in the
summer of 1855, three persons — and a good
many more — might have been seen sheltering
in an alcove at the eastern extremity of Clink
Street, Southwark. There, I see you know now
where we met, and how tenderly we parted ;
good commencement that, by the way, for a
novel after the style of " George Prince Regent
James, Esq." '

Well, and how have you been getting on
since that wet evening in 1855 ?' asked Mr.
Kelly, with an agreeable affability, making a
virtue of necessity now that he found his

assumed want of recollection could serve him
no further.

'Oh! middling; slouching along

Still sleeping in the queer bedstead where
I left you tucking yourself up ?'

No ! had to turn out. The choice was
given to me whether I'd walk out or be kicked
out, so I elected to walk. I shan't forget it,
to my gentleman. Only let me have the
chance, and he'll wish, perhaps, he had kept a
civilly tongue in his head. It was nothing to
him — it was not his office — there was no harm
that I know of in sitting on the stairs for a few
minutes after business hours, considering how
soon I'd turn in. Should you say there was T

'Well, you see, that depends on a good
many things — on the time you had been sitting
upon the stairs deciding upon your future
movements — the state you were in while you
were so sitting — also whether anyone wanted
to go upstairs. I confess I think if you had
drunk as much as on the night when I escorted
you home, your better course would have
been to retire at once under the counter ; but
of course, that is only my opinion.'

Look here,' answered Lance, ' I like you —

there's a good lot of fun in you, I'll swear —
and if it had been you told me to clear off the
steps, I shouldn't have taken it so much amiss
but as for that Logan-facere, blank him — a
proud, stuck-up, noli me tangere' (which phrase
Mr. Lance gave as 'folly me tangier ') ' sort of
fellow, I wouldn't walk on the same side of the
road if I could help it.'

It is a pity, then, you sat on his stairs.'

Pity for him, you mean, I suppose — none
for me. I was glad we came to high words.
I had long been trying to make up my mind
to cut myself clear of his precious brother-in-law,
but I'd never have done it but for his
impudence. However, we won't talk any more
about that lot. Where are you bound for V

I am going to Chelsea,' answered Mr. Kelly,
in whom the instinct of self-preservation was
strong.

I'm bound for Lambeth,' explained the
other. ' Old Dawton has not been well, and I
thought I'd just go and have a squint at him.
He drinks too much — can't stand it — it is a
bad habit for anyone to get into.'

Mr. Kelly looked at the speaker in amazement,
as he remarked :

VOL. III. 45

Well, really, I should scarcely have thought
you were the fittest person in the world to
throw stones.'

Oh ! I know what's what, though I mayn't
always do or care to do the right thing. Besides,
there's a great difference in our ages ;
a young fellow can drink, when an old fellow
gets knocked over. Drink is cumulative, you
know, like most poisons.'

That is a theory I never heard advanced
before,' observed Barney, looking with a certain
curiosity at an Englishman younger than
himself whose knowledge of the great liquor
question seemed even more exhaustive than
his own.

It is not a theory, it is a fact ; and many
a man pulls up when he gets to fifty or thereabouts
just because he can't go on.'

Is that about the age you intend to turnover
a new leaf?' asked Mr. Kelly, striving
vainly to make a hurried calculation as to the
amount of sterling coin of the realm his wise
friend would have consumed at the expiration
of five and twenty years or thereabouts.

I !' said Lance. ' Oh ! I shall be dead
long before that.'

'You'll be what!' exclaimed Mr. Kelly,
amazed — for indeed, the matter-of-fact way in
which the words were spoken was enough to
astound any one.

Dead !' repeated ]mr. Felton, as though he
had lightly mentioned the possibility of being
bankrupt, or the certainty of succeeding to
some good reversion.

Why, have you any disease ? Do you
come of a short-lived family V asked Mr.
Kelly, for the moment feeling his sympathy
aroused and his interest excited.

Lord, no,' answered Lance Felton. ' My
people have a bad habit of living to ninety ora
hundred, emulating the example set by
Adam, Noah, and the rest of that old-world
lot. And I have nothing killing the matter
with me that I know of — indeed, I have
nothing at all — only I shan't live, and that's
enough ; and I've a deal of work to get
through first, and Fm just about starting
on it.'

Going to ask that fair damsel you spoke
about two years ago to reconsider her refusal,'
suggested Mr. Kelly, relieved to know his
companion's pessimist views as regarded his

45 — 2

own length of days had no better foundation
than a cracked and wandering brain.

No, indeed. AYhat the deuce does a man
who intends to get on in the world want with
a wife ? Besides, I am married.'

Oh ! you are.'

Yes, worse luck ; not, mind you, that I've
a word to say against my wife. She is as
good a soul as ever drew breath. Managing —
contrasting — all that. Bless you, there is
nothing pleases her better than to consider
how she can re-trim an old dress or jacket,
and make it look as good as new. But that is
a sort of thing I can't stand ; and besides, it's
hard enough work for a fellow to pull himself
uphill, without having to drag a wife and
child after him.'

So I should say, indeed.'

I'd bet something you are not married.'

No ; as I told you, I live with my grandmother.'


'That you told me two years ago — you
might have married a couple or three wives in
the time.'

I might, but I have not ; the same arrangement
still continues,' said Mr. Kelly ; who

afterwards, thinking the conversation over,
could not imagine what made him tell so
many falsehoods to his companion.

If he had exhausted the matter, he would
have found it was because he was afraid of
speaking the truth.

Your grandmother can't be a chicken now,'
remarked Mr. Felton.

She is eighty-threes answered Barney, on
the principle of * in for a penny, in for a
pound

And warm, doubtless.'

She has enough to live on.'

Which will come to you, I dare say V

'That depends on how I behave myself,
and other things.'

And what are you doing till the dear old
lady retires to the family vault V

'Eating my dinners,' said Mr. Kelly tenaciously.


What ! Are you a barrister V
Something of the sort.'
'Well, I'm '

What did you think I was, then V

I don't know. I was divided between
something in the brewery line, and Guy's.

Butterby thought you travelled for lead
pencils.'

Evidently I carry letters of credit in my
face said Mr. Kelly bitterly.

Don't be huffed, old fellow,' entreated Mr.
Felton. ' "We don't pretend to be judges — we
can't be. We know a swell when we see him
and we can tell a potboy ; but we've a lotto
learn as regards the intermediate stages.'

Lambeth,' said Mr. Kelly with a great
sense of relief, echoing the word which rang
out from the gangway. 'This is your pier,
I think, is it not V

*Yes, I shall get out here. 'Won't you
come along too ? I can take anybody I like
to Dawtons', and there's always something
going. They'll be delighted to see any friend
of mine. Say yes — like a good fellow, do !'

Couldn't possibly, thank you,' answered
Mr. Kelly with the gravest composure —
mustn't throw my people at Chelsea over for
anybody.'

Good-bye, then, till our next merry meeting.'
And after a shake of the hand which
made every bone in Barney's fingers tingle,
Mr. Felton betook himself amidships and leapt

ashore, scorning the aid of the gangway, and
exchanging as he passed light pleasantries
with the pierian and the takers of the
tickets.

So extremely anxious did Mr. Bernard
Kelly feel to defer the date of that next merry
meeting indicated by his festive friend that
on stepping ashore at Millbank Pier, which he
did, he immediately took 'bus for the City,
where, going to a modest tavern in the very
heart of Stock Exchange land, he ordered a
chop and modest potation of bitter, after
which he betook himself by means of that
cheerful Thames Tunnel Route which will
never more be explored by any adventurous
pedestrian, back to his lodgings in Bermondsey,
where he at once penned an extremely
neat and telling little paper, entitled ' Undesirable
Acquaintances,' for which he received
the sum of two guineas.

<"i7r^

CHAPTER 11.

THE New Story

N those lonely wolds where since her
father's death Glenarva Westley
spent a good deal of time, an
idea had taken root in her mind which
shortly after she was married began to grow
rapidly. She had wandered over the sparsely
inhabited country, which for all signs of life
and activity it presented might have been
thousands of miles from London, till its
desolation entered into her spirit, became a
part and parcel of her very soul. There was
one especially solitary farmhouse lying in a
hollow surrounded by some elder-bushes and
ash-trees which Glen never wearied of contemplating.
From a little knoll on the side

of the low hill beneath which this house
nestled she could see the almost empty farmyard,
the horse pond shaded by a great weeping
willow, the neglected orchard, the plot of
ground that had once been a garden, but
was now a mere mass of tangled weeds ; the
house with its small windows and steep
red-tiled roof, the walnut-tree shading
the front door, and the tiny stream which
ran so slowly it scarcely seemed to flow
at all.

In this spot dwelt a mother and son. She
was a widow. The son was reported to be
studious, or in the words of the neighbourhood,
' over-fond of his book ;' he was a tall,
earnest-looking fellow, with deep-set eyes and
overhanging brows ; a stern mouth which
could. Glen knew, relax into a beautiful smile ;
a sad expression of countenance, and the voice
of a man who thought many times before he
spoke once. The mother was a small, thin
woman, who had apparently seen better days.
The aspect of the farm itself was starved, and
people said it was a shame to serve good land
as that was served, , and that young Blandford
either ought to put his shoulder to the wheel,

or give up the place, and let somebody take it
who could get something out of the ground.

Ash trees,' which was the name of the
farm, lay in another parish to that of which
Glen's friend was rector. So the widow and
her son did not attend the church which
boasted the beautiful painted window, and
there was no further acquaintance between the
parsonage and the lonely house in the hollow
than a mere greeting in passing, or the exchange
of a few words, if the dwellers chanced
to meet at the railway-station, or in the High
Street of the nearest town.

It was, perhaps, because she knew so very
little of the pair that Glen's fancy never
wearied in imagining what their inner life
must be. She pictured to herself the long
winter nights in the quaint old house ; the
glorious summer days, when the fruit ripened
in the orchard almost unheeded, and a few
flowers struggled into bloom beside the moss-covered
walks in the weed-groT\Ti garden — she
thought of the mother not perhaps understanding
her son, and wishing him more
practical and commonplace — the son struggling
with a sense of undeveloped genius and

sickening of the monotonous life — the dreary
round of common duties — eager to leave the
place, and yet tied to it by tender memories,
and by the affection he bore the woman who
loved him more than all the world.

Possibly Glen was quite wrong in all her
ideas concerning both Mrs. Blandford and her
son ; but if she were she never knew the fact,
and long before the story of which the seed
was sown one stormy day in early spring, had
grown to its full stature, the personnel of
mother and son had utterly changed in her
mind. She imagined a youth looking at
the painted window Sunday after Sunday,
till it became a part and parcel of his
nature. She thought of him wandering over
the bare, unbeautiful country dreaming of
sculpture and painting — living mentally with
the monks of old, and returning ever unwillingly
to the constant routine, to the common
drudgery of his daily life.

So far she had got when she married, but
no further — and as two of her books were then
about to appear almost immediately, both
under assumed names, the idea seemed to
drift away and become lost amongst the

practical matters with which she was at the
time occupied. Since her father's death she
had written a new novel, which Mr. Yassett
published almost before the ink was dry, and
sold another to one of the great West End
houses ; this latter work, indeed, being no
other than the manuscript she formerly besought
Mr. Lacere to take out of the hands
of the firm that had bought it. When she
told him of this proceeding he smiled quietly,
but he spoke no word of comment on her inconsistency.
' I told you so,' or ' I am not
surprised,' or ' I thought you would do it,*
were words she never heard from his lips.

If Lady Emily were to know I had written
every line of the book, I should not care now,'
she said, in feeble explanation. ' I only wish
I had taken the same view of matters two
years ago that I do now, and I might have
been doing well by this time.' The fact
being that Glen by sheer force of audacity
had got fifty pounds for a novel which
would have been dear at five. She wanted
money so badly and she was so determined to
have it, that she extracted an acceptance of the
work and cheque in payment from a publisher

who otherwise might have coquetted with the
matter for a long time, and then ' declined the
story with thanks.' Till the last day of her life
Glenarva will always remember two cheques
she received; and that fifty pounds was one
of them.

I had not the least idea I should get it,'
she added — ' in fact, till I went to the bank
and received the notes over the counter I did
not believe the transaction real.' Later on
she had another cheque and another transaction
she did not at the time believe real either.
History repeats itself, even in the lives of
human beings.

And now she was married — the mistress of
a house — the wife of a man who thought she
was without spot or blemish ; who did not
want her to write ; who knew perhaps it
would be better for her and happier for him
if she never wrote another line ; who really
had not the faintest idea of the power she
possessed ; who said to her :

Eemember, dear, that I never wish you to
think of publishing except for your own
pleasure. Do not trouble yourself now about
money or money-making ; leave all that tome

' — an injunction it is only fair to add Glen
obeyed most literally for a time. Her life
had been hard and anxious ever since she
came to London — she had done a great deal of
work ; the trouble of her father's death was
as yet scarcely dulled. Her bodily health was
not good — her mind was weary — her energy
seemed to have departed ; and it is just possible
if she had not happened about this time to
make the acquaintance of a man who saw
more clearly than anyone had yet done what
was in the girl, she might have laid aside her
pen and never written the book which made
her name. As for her new friend, he treated
her fancies and prejudices with even less
ceremony than Ned Beattie. He laughed at
her whims and tempers, at her ' tall ' writing,
at her little displays of knowledge, was severe
on her sins of omission and commission, but
still said, * I know I am not mistaken ; you
have a great gift, but you must learn to use
it properly.' He reviewed her books, or got
them reviewed, in a manner which made Glen
sometimes feel that she wished she had never
written a line. She was lashed, she was
ridiculed, she was accused of plagiarism, but

then there came some word of praise which
atoned for all that had gone before. Upon
the whole, she wondered at the amount of
commendation bestowed. Already she was
beginning to show one sign of improvement ;
she now understood how extremely bad her
best efforts really were. Her grandest passages
no longer filled her with delight ; faintly
the beauty of simplicity was dating upon
her. She could at last see serious faults in
her books, and certainly the quality of modesty
appeared in her estimate of them.

If I cannot do any better work than I
have done,' she considered, ' I may as well
cease writing altogether.' Not a happy mood
for an author, perhaps ; but a most fortunate
one for the reader ! Meantime the reviews
had actually stimulated Mr. Vassett's appreciation
to such an extent, that he sent to know
if Mrs. Lacere felt disposed to enter into an
engagement to let him have another book.

Glen said ' Yes ;' but she failed to add when
he might expect to receive the manuscript.
She thought she had no plot on which to found
a story. Vaguely the lonely wolds, the solitary
farmhouse, kept recurring to her memory;

but she did not see her way to raise any
superstructure upon such meagre foundations,
till one evening, when her husband and a
friend of his were talking about the rich deep
permanent colours to be seen in old church
windows, which modern art sought in vain to
reproduce, she looked across the table to her
husband, and said : ' I shall write a novel
about stained glass.'

They all laughed at the idea. ' Not a very
likely subject,' remarked the visitor; while Mr.
Logan-facere's brother-in-law smiled the quiet,
tolerant smile Glenarva had long learnt to
detest.

'We shall see,' answered Mrs. Lacere determinedly,
and though she did not, like
Charlotte, ' go on cutting more bread and
butter,' she proceeded to pour out more tea,
while the talk she had interrupted flowed back
into its former channel, and Glen took refuge
in silence — an asylum she latterly somewhat
affected.

Day by day the story grew in her mind.
She never perhaps afterwards wrote a book
which through so many months was such a
companion. Busy with various other matters,

she could not write much at a time, and, as a
consequence perhaps, what she did write, read
very close. No human being who glanced at
a work the reviewers criticized not only mercifully
but most favourably, imagined the clear,
nervous sentences born of sorrow, experience,
love, disappointment, were penned by the
same author who had given to the world a
novel it did not in the least want, called
Tyrrel's Son.'

It was a curious book to take the fancy of
the public. Often during its progress, Mr.
Vassett, after reading some of the chapters
which set utterly at naught all established
precedents, all foregone traditions, felt it his
duty to write and remonstrate with the
author on the failure she was about to achieve
for herself, and the loss such a novel must
ensure to him.

Actually he read the manuscript as it proceeded
— Glen gave him abundant leisure for
doing so — and differences of opinion were of
such constant occurrence between the two,
that at length the publisher, resigning himself
to making the best of a bad business, determined
to print as small an edition as possible,

VOL. III. 46

and decided, if ever he accepted another book
from Mrs. Lacere, to stipulate the whole of it
should be placed in his hands before any-definite
arrangement was arrived at.

The book experienced many difficulties ere
it was bound. In the first place, Glen did not
find it easy to write, and she kept it * dawdling
about,' as Mr. Pierson said, for eighteen
months ; in the second, Mr. Vassett insisted on
one chapter being expunged altogether. Mrs.
Lacere naturally objected to Mr. Vassett's
dictum. The incident described, she insisted,
happened to be absolutely necessary to the
plot, and she could not expunge it. Mr.
Vassett thereupon said he would prefer not
publishing the book. He had already paid for
it, and he therefore must have been very much
in earnest. Glen felt this, though not so
acutely as she might have done subsequently ;
and after a long and friendly interview, a compromise
was effected. IVIrs. Lacere, whom Mr.
Basset declared to be 'for a woman and an
author most reasonable,' agreed to find some
other road by which the desired end could be
reached ; while the publisher, on his side,
stated that though he thought the whole book

a complete mistake, lie would do his best
with it.

The ' mistake ' was finished — the book was
complete — the ' hand that had written it laid
it aside ;' and Glen for a time went lonely
and desolate about the duties of her daily
life.

The people she described had grown to be
heart of her heart ; they had walked with her
in hope, and joy, and sorrow ; their interests
had been hers — their fears hers. She had
turned to them for companionship when she
felt sad and low-spirited — their troubles had
beguiled her from the contemplation of her
own. And now they were dead and gone —
they could never walk the City streets with
her again — she should never cross the Essex
wolds in the wild March weather, or February
sleet, or summer's sunshine with them anymore
— she should not see them sitting in
church or listen to their sobs or behold their
smiles ever, ever in the future. The manuscript
was ' set up ' — the tale told — ' the end '
printed on the final page. The world would
read — the reviewers blame, perhaps — some
readers scoff — a few, a very few possibly, 



IIIIWi:f?<fTYOC"nWOW

understand ; but they, the men and the women
who had been more real to her than the men
and women she came in bodily contact with,
were gone — never to return — never any more,
for ever !

Then came a lull. The book was advertised,
subscribed. The subscription was fairly good —
quite as good as Mr. Vassett expected ; for he
still anticipated loss.

Ah !' he said to Mr. Pierson, ' if she had
only taken my advice and followed beaten
paths, something might now have been done
with a book of hers.'

Why did you not advise her to try strange
roads V suggested Mr. Pierson ; ' then she
might have gone the way you wished — women
and pigs, you know.'

*True,' answered Mr. Vassett, 'if scarcely
polite. It is too late, however,' he added.

I have a notion myself the novel will go,'
said Mr. Pierson. ' Somebody must sometimes
strike out a new line.'

Mr. Vassett smiled a smile which meant
Glen had much better have abided by the
wisdom of her elders.

I think there is stuff in the book,' repeated

Mr. Pierson doggedly, varying his words but
not his meaning.

I think there might have been amended
Mr. Vassett.

It strikes me, you know, people must tire
occasionally of the love and twaddle business.'


Not so long as love and twaddle form the
principal business and conversation of so many
persons' lives.'

But do they ? Candidly now, doesn't
there come a time when a man gets tired of all
that sort of thing V

Not till he has done with everything, I
imagine,' answered Mr. Vassett, under all
whose hope of profit, and dread of loss, and
caution and worldly prudence, and desire to
make money, and wish to stand A 1 as a
publisher, and delight in the old streets, and
interest in the houses where noted men had
lived, a little sweet, sad, tender romantic
strain was ever wailing, which bore for its
burden some words about a time of roses and
a day of pain, of some never-to-be-forgotten
love-passages in the fair, fresh springtime of
existence, and hours and hours of agony ere its

autumn, when all things worth having or
thinking about in life were hid away for ever,
so far as this world is concerned, in Clipperton
Churchyard, hard by which the Thames
flows calmly, past dipping willow and fairy
ait, mansion and church and hamlet, beside
green pastures, bordered by reeds and rushes,
decked Tvdth water-lilies, onward to the great
unknown city, and beyond it to the unseen
mysterious sea.

And in truth at that time Glen had done a
very daring thing — taken a very doubtful
course in making love merely occupy the same
position in her story that it does apparently
in the lives of most of those with whom we
come in contact.

It was an innovation sure to be unpopular
with her own sex, who are, after all, the
public for whom a novelist has to cater.
Ladies and boys were then the audience to
whom all authors, who wished either for
praise or pudding,' or both, felt it wise to
appeal. Times in that respect are not much
changed ; even to this present day the novelist
who rings but the changes of one eternal song
the loves of lovely woman — the beauty of

lovely woman — the unselfishness of lovely
woman — the dress of lovely woman — the lovers
of lovely woman — will be the most popular.
Where, for example, George Eliot counted her
thousands, the Family Herald counts its tens
of thousands !

Thus Mr. Vassett was, in one sense, quite
right when he accounted Glen's book a mistake
; but the greed for gain or applause was
not on her when she began her task, and she
finished it, not for the sake of writing, but
because she had something to say, and could
know no real rest till it was said.

As has been stated, the desolation of the part
of Essex where she had been staying entered
into her very soul, and the vision she conjured
up was that of a young man looking Sunday
after Sunday on the painted window, which
was at once so sad, so solemn, and so beautiful,
till an overmastering ambition seized him
to discover the secret of colour, which seemed
to have died out with the monks of old.
Though not an artist, he was possessed of
keen artistic tastes, and the walls of that
wainscoted parlour in the farmhouse which
he owned were decorated with weird drawings

faithfully representing the wild, lonely country
amid which he lived, as seen under summer's
suns and winter's snows — fast bound with
frost, and smiling when the golden grain was
cut and gathered into bundles, ready for carrying
under the glorious autumn skies. And
amid and through all these landscapes one fair
form constantly reappeared — now standing
beside a stream — now mingling with the
reapers — now tossing the newly-mown grass —
again tripping across the lea — and anon,
through buds and branches peeping.'

She was his love, his life, his inspiration ;
for her he told himself he desired wealth and
fame — for her sake he desired to emulate the
blues, and the yellows, and the greens, and
the reds, which, all exquisitely softened and
blended together, made up the perfect whole
of that picture, even to see which, told the soul a
little of the lesson our Saviour came to teach.

She was fair, young, merry. All the gloom
of that gloomy house had failed to cast one
shadow over her. She loved everything about
the farm — the pigeons, the cats, the horses,
the grim old grumbling bailiff, every tile on
its roof, every single brick in its walls ; but

for the sake of the man she loved beyond all
men, she was willing — more than willing — to
leave the pleasantness of the only home she
had ever known, and go away with him to
London, where he felt certain he should be
able to reduce many theories to practice, and
find the colours modern humanity had so long
wished for, and wished in vain.

It is not necessary to tell how the story
ended — how the author worked it out is all
which concerns this tale. Painfully, surely,
slowly, she gathered all her parts together,
wove into the narrative the trials, the sorrows,
the self-denials, the successes of trade — explained
processes of manufacture unknown
utterly to the reading public — took the outside
world due east in London, and asked it to
walk into dreadful little manufactories, and
listen to ' shop ' talk, and take an interest in
the doings and sayings of men who had probably
never been to a dinner-party in their
lives, and knew nothing of Sir Bernard Burke,
and were not acquainted with lords or baronets ;
but who were yet some of them gentlemen and
some of them cads, following the nature of their
kind.

A book certain never to be popular amongst
the many, that goes without saying ; a book,
nevertheless, which was talked about, and
made a mark.

Who is the author V everyone asked, and
many people answered, * Oh ! I know him
very well indeed ;' and then he was drawn
respectively as a barrister, a gambler, a man
who had neglected his wife, a man whose wife
had run away from him, a man who was about
town, a man who had been about town, but
who now represented her Majesty as consul
somewhere at the world's end ; and, lastly, he
was represented to Glen's husband, by a
chatty individual who professed to know
everyone, as * a devilish good fellow, sir — and
clever too !'

It may have been about this time some
doubts entered Mr. Lacere's mind as to what
he had married, while for eighteen months a
dreadful question had been agitating Glen :

^ There must be some mistake,' she thought.
It is not Mordaunt Logan-facere I have
taken for better or worse, but the whole family,
and I am a nobody in it.'

Which was all quite true ; she and Mor-daunt

Logan-facere were now one, and as he
certainly had ever been a mere cipher among
his relations, it followed as a matter of course
that the woman who was supposed to be in
subjection to him counted as nothing. From
the first good care was taken to teach Glen
her proper position, and since she promised to
be a somewhat difficult subject, Mr. Lacere,
the cousin-brother-in-law, adopted the admirable
course of ignoring her. He had always
led Mr. Logan-facere by the nose, and he did
not mean any wife on earth to weaken his
influence in that quarter.

Almost unconsciously he had read that Glen
was not to be humbugged, but he felt, with
her hot, impulsive temper, she might be driven
off the field ; and finding, much to his dissatisfaction,
that, spite of many delays, the
marriage really was a fact accomplished, the
moment Glenarva Westley became Mrs.
Lacere, he commenced his tactics. They
were beautifully simple. It was easy to
make a girl whose life had been spent amongst
loving and frank friends feel she was not
wanted in a family sufficient to themselves ;
and Glen did feel this bitterly. If he wished

to tell her husband it was a fine day, for
example, he made the communication either
with closed doors, or at the other end of the
room in a subdued and confidential voice;
and finding that this treatment only roused
Mrs. Logan-facere's ire against himself, he
began in conversation with her dexterously to
exalt his own abilities and good qualities, and
try to make her think the man she had married
was, after all, a poor sort of creature. But
Glen's eyes had long been open to this little
failing on the part of her new male relative.
She was well aware that not only to herself,
but to others, Mr. Lacere was in the habit of
glorifying himself and depreciating Logan-facere.
She tried to make her husband
understand this, but he resolutely declined to
attach the slightest importance to her representations
; and Glen, after madly beating her
spirit and bruising her heart, and shedding
passionate tears of sorrow and anger, battling
against the cruelty of circumstances she found
herself powerless to alter, suddenly abandoned
the hopeless contest.

If he likes his brother-in-law better than
he does me, let him,' she thought, in an access

of bitter loneliness. ' I have no father or
mother to talk to — I have no home to go to,
or I would go. I must bear it just as I
can.'

Possibly 'it' was one of the very worst
experiences which could have come to such a
temperament.

Shortness of money she did not care for —
she had served a long apprenticeship to that ;
but to live amongst people who were reserved,
with whom she knew now she never could have
any sympathy, who stood perpetually between
her husband and herself, who were a burden to
him pecuniarily and a drawback socially, were
matters Glen felt something too hard to bear ;
and yet, so great was her antagonism to this
opponent, that she firmly made up her mind
he should never crush her.

Perhaps he knew something of all this. If
he did not, it was certainly from no reticence
on the part of Glenarva. Fierce passages of
arms had occurred between them, in which
both sides went so far they found it expedient
at length to withdraw their forces by tacit
consent. It was a miserable experience, one
bad for soul and body, which left ineradicable

traces on Glen's face and mind. For ever the
calm, peaceful look of youth left her brow, and
though her character strengthened, there grew
at the same time a mental irritability as well
as a weary unrest, foreign to her original
nature. To anyone who had known her at
Ballyshane, the change would have seemed
most marked ; indeed, when, after the lapse of
two long years, Edward Beattie saw his old
friend again, he asked himself in astonishment
if this grave, cynical, self-contained woman
could ever have been light-hearted, frank-spoken
Glen Westley. ' ". ' .

For a time he watched her in siLence — he
was staying at Mr. Lacere's— but the third day
after his arrival he asked :

What has altered you so much ? You

are not in the least like the Glen you used

to be.'

Getting old,' answered IVIrs. Logan-facere

laconically.

It was noticeable she did not deny the truth

of his remark, or fence with it.

It is not that,' he said. ' What is it,

dear?' he went on; 'won't you tell nef

Glen,' he said, as she shook her head, ' you

must tell me — me, your brother Ned — the
Ned of the old days when we didn't think
much, either of us, of death, or trouble, or
sickness, or anything but amusement. Aren't
you happy V

Most unhappy,' she answered slowly. The
words seemed wrung from the very depths of
some dark despair, and then she turned aside
to hide the tears now coursing down her
cheeks.

For a minute Edward Beattie looked at her
in utter amazement ; then he said, ' Glen, you
must be mad : why in the world should you
be unhappy, married to a man you love — and
who simply adores you ?'

He doesn't do anything of the kind,'
she answered, with the manner which was new
to her.

Ned laughed, relieved. ' Oh ; that's it, is
it ! and Mrs. Glen, for all her strength of mind,
finds she is not superior to the little feminine
complaint of jealousy ! Alio is she f

Glen flashed round upon him indignantly.

It isn't a " she " at all, and I am not
jealous.'

That you are, my dear,' he retorted ; ' and

now you have taken a notion of that sort it
can't be easy lines for your husband. I
always was afraid he would let you get your
head. Fact is, Glen, you are too well off.
As the mothers say to their children in Ireland,
you want something to cry for. You have
married a man who thinks you perfection ; who
worships the ground you walk on ; who if you
expressed a wish to have the top brick of the
chimney, would at once send for a ladder to
humour your fancy.'

Glen did not answer. Perhaps in her heart
she knew every word Ned spoke to be true.
But there was something he did not know —
something he wanted to find out.

Yes, it must be hard for your husband,'
he went on provokingly ; ' but it serves him
right for marrying a clever woman, or rather,
a woman who is considered clever. When I
choose a wife I'll take very good care that if
she can read she can't write.'

Perhaps you may find something at the
Asylum for Idiots to suit you,' remarked
Glen.

I think I should like a mute best,' said
Mr. Edward Beattie. ' By the way, Glen,

what induced you to favour the world with
that last book ? you had much better never
have published it. I wonder Lacere allowed
you. If you had been my wife I would have
made you burn it.'

What is your particular objection to a work
which has not been wholly unsuccessful f asked
JVIrs. Lacere, with a fine scorn.

My objection is general as well as particular.
It is a morbid, unhealthy book.'

If you think of any other bad quality
the novel possesses, pray do not forget to
mention it.'

Supposing you found you were unable to
exist without writing something,' persisted
Ned, ' why did you not give us a story calculated
to make us aU happier and brighter
and better — a womanly sort of tale about
flowers and children and happy lovers T

She made no answer ; the old pain was
tuo-o-ing; at her heart-strings. She could have
told him the sweet folly, the hopes and fears,
the dreams, the pangs, the trembling doubts of
happy lovers had never been for her — might
never be for her while the sun rose and set.
She understood now what a loss had been hers.

VOL. III. 47

Her past lacked one great good, for which no
future, however fortunate, could ever atone.
Out of her very capability for wretchedness
she was beginning to estimate what her capability
for happiness might have been. Was
the life she had once thought would prove so
beautiful, so prosperous, so complete, to be
after all but one long series of disasters and
disappointments ? She had longed for success,
and when it came it was with death close
following on its heels ; her wounded heart
craved for an absorbing love, but when it had
lavished its full store of warm, passionate affection,
found for return it was but one love
amongst many. That a man should leave his
father and mother and cleave unto his wife
was an article of faith which found small
favour in the Lacere connection. One of the
very few funny things which Miss Lacere
ever said, quite unconsciously — for like most
persons of the same grim category she was
utterly destitute of all sense of humour —
chanced to be that we were only told two
things about heaven, namely : There was a
great deal of love, and no marriage !

A sort of heavenly Agamemnon,' observed

Glen sarcastically. But that flippant remark
did not exactly contain the gist of Miss Lacere's
meaning — it was a brotherly and sisterly love
she dreamed of, in which the mad craze for a
wife should have no place !

Wives always cause disunion in families
said another of Mr. Logan-facere's female relations,
from which statement alone, the
pleasant and unselfish spirit animating his
belongings may be conjectured.

And finally, to put the case in a nutshell,
Glen being a woman who had never before in
the whole of her short life known what it
might be like not to stand first in the love of
those by whom she was surrounded — found
herself married to a man who conceived it to
be his duty as well as his pleasure to let his
relations feel wedlock had not made any difference
in his sentiments towards them ; who
refused utterly to hear with Glen's ears —
see with Glen's eyes — to notice with Glen's
perceptions — to judge with Glen's sense ; who
let himself be made a mere shuttlecock, for all
these battledores to play with ; who, although,
as Ned would have said with that terrible
candour of his, fifty times cleverer than his

47—2

wife, she knew never had, and never could
compass any worldly good for himself, burdened
as he was with the opinions, prejudices,
and traditions of these terrible Old Men of
the Sea.

All these things and fifty more passed
through Glen's mind as Ned finished his agreeable
sentence, and leaning her head against
the lattice work of the arbour in which they
sat, she answered him never a word ; then she
rose, and would have gone away quietly without
letting him guess the anguish she felt,
had not one uncontrollable sob broken the
spell.

Glen, sit down,' he said, almost sternly ;
and after she obeyed there ensued a silence
rent by no sound save that of bitter weeping.

At last Ned spoke. ' Look here, Glen,' he
began, ' whatever your trouble may be, crying
won't mend it. In most lives, I suppose, there
is something not quite right ; but I am very
sure we don't improve our lot by moaning over
it. So far as I can see, you ought to be a very
happy woman ; but if you are not, if you have
any real sorrow, don't let it conquer you. If
my poor father could speak to you now, he

would say, " Glen, take my advice and go and
weed in the garden for a couple of hours every
morning ; or find out some one who has a
mangle, and ask them to let you turn it ; do
anything rather than sit idle nursing a real or
imaginary grievance." Now,' finished Mr.
Edward Beattie on his own account, ' put on
your bonnet, and come out for a walk.'

It was good, honest, wholesome advice ; but
he did not know the depressing nature of the
influences by which Glen was surrounded. She
saw the evil, but she could not alter it ; she
felt, at last, she could not try to alter it ; her
health was bad ; she had got into a low state
of mind ; she saw everything through darkened
spectacles. Saying no further word to her
about the change wrought since her father's
death, Ned, keeping his eyes wide open, soon
arrived at a pretty accurate idea of the state
of affairs.

It was towards the close of his visit he one
evening over tea exploded a shell in the midst
of the whole Lacere connection.

'Why don't you persuade your husband,
Glen, to leave England V he said. ' I am not
particular where I go. Suppose we all start

together for Canada. Plenty of shooting, fishing,
boating. It would set you both up in
health ; and I am sure clear blue skies would
be an agreeable change after the smoke of
London. What do you say, Mr. Lacere ? Will
you consider my proposition V

To describe the faces of the ladies of the
Lacere family as Mr. Beattie rattled out these
words would be simply impossible.

Oh ! we could not part with either of
them,' declared Miss Lacere, as spokeswoman,
and a murmur of assent followed from the
others.

'The best friends must part sometimes,'
answered Ned carelessly ; and so the talk went
on till a very pretty spirit of hatred and antagonism
was established between Glen, Glen's
friend, and Glen's relatives.

Possibly it was during Mr. Beattie's visit
the idea first dawned upon Mr. Logan-facere
that his female relations were not quite perfect.


He was too loyal to admit even to himself
they were prejudiced, yet he could not but
feel it was a pity they had, for some reason
best known "to themselves, conceived such a

prejudice against everything Irish — 'dear' Glen
of course excepted.

Mr. Edward Beattie had a store of capital
stories, which he told remarkably well, but the
Misses Lacere could ' see nothing in them.*
Mr. Edward Beattie had braced up his old
comrade Mrs. Lacere, and benefited her mentally,
morally, and physically ; nevertheless
the Lacere connection heard with pursed-up
mouths and silent tongues their ' darling Mor-daunt's'
encomiums on his wife's friend.

It is aU very well,' said Miss Humphries,
in the privacy of that awful and secret family
inquisition which was for ever sitting upon
Glen, Glen's ways and waywardness, Glen's
antecedents. Glen's former friends, and Glen's
present misguided and led-by-the-nose husband—'
but ah ! '

Whereupon 'ah I' was echoed by the whole
family with the solemnity of a curse.

Mr. Logan-facere, however, always retained
a pleasant memory of the cheery young fellow,
and said most truly he felt very sorry he could
not stay longer with them.

You have done my wife a great deal of
good,' he said.

You ought both to start with me for New
Zealand, or Australia, or Canada,' answered
Ned ; while to Glen he spoke with grave conviction
:

Your husband will never do a day's good
while he stays among his own people. Get
him away from them ; they would sink a man-of-war.
And as for you, my dear, spite of all
the loves, and darlings, and flattery, and all
the rest of it, they only care for what they
think they can coax out of you.*

Certainly no one could accuse Mr. Edward
Beattie of unduly flattering anybody.

Barnes LUCK.

IME went on, and Mr. Bernard Kelly
was doing remarkably well indeed.
He chanced to be the sort of man
success makes, but does not mar. With only
half-a-crown between himself and nothing, he
might have felt inclined to play a reckless
game, but possessed of a sovereign, he turned
the coin over and over, and decided it was
too valuable to risk losing in any mad or
careless fashion. He worked hard — he lived
frugally — he adventured carefully ; his barque
carried no passenger save himself, and bore no
freight save his own fortunes. Why should
he not have got on ? Why should a man who
regards himself alone, fail to succeed ? Fame

to Bernard Kelly meant so much hard cash.
The reputation of a Shakespeare or a Milton
would in his eyes have seemed valueless, unless
it had brought for dowry a good house, a
possible carriage and pair, and the certainty
of never again being short of a ten-pound
note.

He had advanced considerably in his ideas
since he stood drearily contemplating the
swans in St. James's Park. No human being
ever exactly knew how he had managed to do
so remarkably well, and it is quite possible he
could not have told himself. The Galaxy was
dead and buried. Its short and brilliant life
may have been a merry one to the contributors,
but the proprietors groaned in spirit when
they reckoned up the amount they had to pay
for its peculiarly unprosperous career.

There is always, however — so says the old
proverb — one door open when another is shut ;
and wherever Mr. Kelly found a door open he
had a knack of walking in, and having obtained
a footing, keeping it. Formerly, as has already
been mentioned, he was asked to submit some
manuscripts to the editor of the opposition
magazine, on which occasion he received that

figurative slap in the face which caused him
very seriously to consider the demerits of his
own productions. Months went by, and again
he received a polite note, this time begging to
know if he was disposed to contribute some
short papers to the journal in question. Mr.
Kelly had, long before this epistle reached him,
ceased to be a novice in literary matters ; so,
without writing, he called to see the editor,
who turned out to be the inquisitive gentleman
he travelled with up to London when he
first came to seek his fortune in the great
metropolis.

The recognition was not mutual. Bernard
knew him again in a moment, but the confident,
well-dressed, easy-spoken author, who
talked so glibly about manuscripts, and
journals, and publishers, and men on the
press, and all the rest of it, bore small resemblance
to that gauche, half-civilized Barney
who had vexed the pharisaical soul of righteous
Mat Donagh and disturbed the whole economy
of Abbey Cottage.

The former sub-editor was gone. When
Mr. Kelly explained how his previous stories
had been treated with contumely, the chief

\

expressed his extreme regret, and trusted * the
unhappy accident, which must have arisen
through some gross misapprehension, would
not deprive their magazine of services he felt
only too anxious to secure.' Barney permitted
himself to be appeased ; he was willing, he
said, to ' contribute,' but he must decline to
submit.' The editor declared he never should
have thought of asking him to do anything
of the sort, and begged to know his terms.

It was all very well and all very nice, and
Mr. Kelly thought he had really no reason to
complain ; nevertheless, he could not blind
himself to the utterly precarious nature of a
literary profession. Manuscript did not grow
while a man slept ; it failed to put fat on his
ribs unless the author was always at work.
Though he had proved himself capable of hard
and prolonged labour, it would be folly to say
that to an Irishman the prospect of grinding
out ' copy ' during the term of his natural life
seemed agreeable. He wanted an appointment
of some sort — an editorship, if nothing better
offered — and at last he managed to, what his
mother would have called * put his foot in the
jamb and keep it there.'

/

His new friend, who said ' he had really conceived
a very high opinion of Mr. Kelly's
abilities,' chanced one day to be expressing his
regret at the impossibility of getting out of
town even for a week. ' I have not a soul
now to help me,' he went on, ' except the
clerk, and he really is worse than no one

It was then Bernard offered to look in for a
few hours each day to correct proofs and look
over manuscripts.

I want something to amuse me and occupy
my time,' he explained ; speaking like a person
who had the wealth of Rothschild at his back,
and the length of days of the patriarchs
stretching in front ; ' and I should really be
delighted if you would make use of me — supposing
you think me capable,' modestly added
Barney, who had taken the measure of his man
pretty accurately.

The offer was instantly accepted, and though
IMr. Kelly received no salary, so many things
were * put in his way,' correcting, re writing,
touching up, and softening down, that this
nominally unremunerative post proved really a
valuable addition to his income. Further, it
brought him in contact with quite a new set of

Literary people ; amongst others he met Miss
Yarlow, who often looked at him very curiously
and said, ' I can't think where I have
seen you before.'

Upon these occasions Mr. Kelly was wont
to remark he thought he must have met her
somewhere, and then the two would go over a
list of the houses they had perhaps entered
once, and the people who had happened to
send them an ' At Home ' card ; and so, airing
their intimate acquaintanceship with and knowledge
of the aristocracy and gentry, mutually
humbugged each other.

For in truth Miss Yarlow and Mr. Kelly
had conceived as strong a mutual liking as
such natures ever seem capable of developing.
They were both selfish, both prudent, both
capable, both determined to achieve success if
success were to be gained by perseverance and
pushing ; but Miss Yarlow thought Bernard
had means, and he imagined the lady possessed
a pretty fortune and was highly connected.
When he found out, as he did in some marvellous
manner from Mr. Pierson, that she had
been a ' nursery governess,' or something of the
sort, it was wonderful how Mr. Kelly's ' warm

Irish heart ' cooled towards her. His criticism
of her next manuscript proved somewhat
severe ; and when she went again to the office
it was only to find he no longer occupied his
accustomed chair. Barney had at last got
something good. He was editor of a quite
new weekly journal, which had for its capitalists
one of those fools mentioned by Mr. Lance
Felton, who stand at the corners of the
streets waiting eagerly for some one to take
them in.

Mr. Kelly did not, however, intend to take
his man in, as he honestly meant trying to
make a success of an impossible venture, and
he certainly felt very well satisfied with himself
and his principal when he looked around
the newly furnished room sacred to him, and
gave audience to authors who hung trembling
on his answers — as he even had listened in
agony for the inevitable No, which, spoken in
all sorts of tones, in all manners of offices,
greeted his arrival in London.

One morning, he had just taken possession
of his editorial chair ; just laid a sheet of
headed note-paper on his blotting pad before
him, just dipped a new pen in the freshly

filled ink-bottle, when the clerk told off for his
especial use, entering the room, presented him
with a letter. It was from his mother ; in the
pride of his heart he had been unable to resist
the temptation of letting the good folks at
Callinacoan know the Barney whom they had
regarded as a good deal lower than themselves,
was now ' a power ' in London ; and as he cut
open the envelope with the editorial paperknife,
he wondered what she would find to say
about his rise ; while his thoughts flew back to
the time when she had told him 'to put his
shoulder to the wheel, for it was of no use
asking her to send any more money to keep
him in idleness

But since it is always the unexpected which
happens, so, instead of any triumphant rejoicing
over her Barney's ' great future,' Mrs.
Kelly's epistle proved rather to be a Jeremiad
over what he had ' let slip past him.'

Oh ! Barney dear, what d'ye think,' were
the words with which the letter led off. ' Mr.
Fortescue's dead, and hasn't left behind him as
much of a will as you could light a candle
with. So the old woman, they say, '11 have all

the property, or rather Robert Underwood will
ay, that's what they tell me. The whole of
Sulby Park, and the grand furniture, and the
horses, and the carriages, and the cows, and
the pigs, and the gold, and the silver, and all
the big houses the Fortescue own in London,
and the money in the bank, and the Three per
Cents., and everything that could be named
almost. Barney, Barney, and you let all this
slip past you for the sake of a dirty fifty
pounds — why, you might have been as big a
man as the Duke of Leinster ! My heart feels
bursting when I remember if you'd had the
spirit of a mouse you'd have taken her to
church, and then gone up bold like a man
and made your terms with the brother. Oh !
Barney, you're just another Esau, and all I
hope is you won't come to the same bad end
You're mighty set up with that mess of pottage
you call an editorship ; but only think of
the farms and demesnes, the river and the
yearly income you've lost ! And sure, though
she wasn't young, she had the good blood in her
veins, and she's not a bad sort, and has lived
quietly and respectably since that thief of the
world took himself ofi" to America. But there
VOL. III. 48

it's no use lamenting ; a peck of care won't
cure an ounce of trouble. I hope you'll let
this be a warning to you not to think so much
of yourself.

Your heart-broken Mother.'

The note which Mr. Bernard Kelly had been
about to write was not even begun on the
morning when he read his * heart-broken
mother's ' communication. He sat in the
editorial chair for a time like one stupefied ;
then, taking his hat, he walked round into
Essex Street, and sought the office of a solicitor
with whom recent circumstances had made him
acquainted.

This interview with the lawyer was upon the
whole unsatisfactory ; nevertheless, that authority
conceded there were some points in the
Underwood case worth fighting — points Mr.
Kelly did not believe the ex-groom would
care to fight. He felt perfectly satisfied in his
own mind that if the whole of the property
could not be secured to the wife, a compromise
of some sort might be made with Mr. Underwood,
who would want to finger the money
immediately, and prove possibly willing to

listen to reason rather than wait the result of
a Chancery suit and an application for a
divorce. Mr. Kelly had asked the solicitor
questions that gentleman candidly confessed
himself unable to answer off-hand. He said
he should like to consult various authorities,
and refer the matter to counsel. He fancied
something might be done — at all events, he
agreed with Bernard Kelly it would be a thousand
pities for the lady to let everything go
without a struggle.

If there were a single precedent in her
favour, or if her case could be made a precedent,
he did not believe any judge in the
land would hand over an estate to the scoundrel
Mr. Kelly described. He * would think
the case over and take the opinion of his
partner, who was more up in that sort of
thing than himself.'

You might look in the day after tomorrow,
Mr. Kelly,' he said, and Mr. Kelly told him he
would do so ; but scarcely was he out of the
office before a more excellent plan suggested
itself. He decided to start for Ireland that
night, full of which resolve he turned into the
Strand, and was making his way hastily 



wards Temple Bar, when he ran across Mat
Donagh and another congenial spirit standing
at the door of the George. The pair had been
lunching presumably — drinking certainly.
Mat's usual austerity of manner was relaxed ;
the starch in his immaculate collar and shirt-front
did not seem quite so stiff as Barney remembered
it ; the bow of his white cravat had
got somewhat twisted and crumpled. On his
waistcoat were vestiges of crumbs ; in his
cheeks was a pinky colour attributable to wine,
sound and old. He had evidently just finished
the narration of a good story, for his friend
was laughing loudly and, Mat himself did not
disdain to evince some signs of merriment.

By Gad, sir,' he was saying, backing across
the pavement as he spoke, when Bernard Kelly,
who had tried to avoid the encounter, came
into collision with him.

I beg your pardon,' apologized the new
editor Mr. Donagh was in the habit of casually
referring to as that ' sneaking upstart.'

Your servant, sir /' answered Mat, wheeling
round, taking off his hat and making a bow
so low, so ironical, it almost collected a crowd.
There goes the most unmitigated cad in

London he added, looking after the retreating
figure, ' a fellow who came over here from his
native bogs with scarcely a shoe to his foot.'

If Mr. Kelly had been superstitious, the
sight of his old enemy, whom he had not come
athwart for months, almost years previously,
might have struck him as unlucky, as the sight
of a red-haired man, or a hare, or anything
else of that sort did in the days when people
turned back from a journey if any such evil
omen crossed their path ; but Bernard was not
superstitious, and accordingly, though his
chance encounter irritated him a good deal, he
went back to his office and got through the
day's work well, and arranged everything for
the time he must be absent ; and feeling a very
different person from the stranger who had
with dazed and dazzled eyes looked upon the
crescent of lamps at Euston long enough agone,
crossed the platform rug on arm, followed by a
porter carrying a small portmanteau, and took
his seat in the * Wild Irishman,' bound to reach
Holyhead about one a.m. or a little after.

This game is worth the candle,' he thought,
as he pushed a five-pound note through the
pigeon-hole of the booking-office. Only

imagine the change of times and position when
the once impecunious Barney could afford and
venture to throw sovereigns down in this
fashion !

As the train whirled through the night he
thought long and anxiously concerning the
destiny of Mr. Fortescue's estate. If Mrs.
Underwood could get a divorce ; if the lapse
of time proved no bar to her ultimate freedom ;
if an arrangement were possible with the
former pad-groom ; if Mrs. Underwood were
Miss Fortescue once more, and in possession of,
say, a clear ten thousand pounds — what then ?
Why then Bernard Kelly, Esquire, could lead
her to the hymeneal altar, and literature and
the Three per Cents, might contract a highly
eligible alliance.

Ten thousand pounds was Mr. Kelly's figure ;
he decided the lady would not be too dear or
himself too cheap at that sum. Anyone who
knew how to manage could do a great deal
with ten thousand pounds, and Bernard fancied
few were better able to cut his coat according
to his cloth than himself. Yes, if ten thousand
pounds were forthcoming he would marry
her ; and accordingly, on the wings of prudence

if not of love, Mr. Kelly sped across England,
and shipping his precious person at Holyhead
on board the fine steamship Munster next
morning about seven, after years of absence,
once again set foot on his native soil. No
Saxon could have thought less of that native
soil than did Bernard Kelly. It was with the
most supreme disgust and contempt he surveyed
his countrymen and women from the
ignoble eminence of a rickety jaunting-car,
which conveyed himself and his fortunes from
the Westward Road Station to the Imperial
Hotel in Sackville Street. At Kingstown,
leisure, if not occasion, had been wanting to
enable him to study the humours of a land he
had forsworn ; but as they rattled through the
streets of ' dear dirty Dublin,' as he looked at
the capital of Ireland in her morning apparel,
he felt he could not wonder at anything
Englishmen said about that island, from which,
about the time he exterminated toads and
snakes, St. Patrick seems to have banished
order and external cleanliness as well. It was
not that Barney loved England more, but he
liked Ireland less. He felt he had left civilization
behind, and returned to a sort of modified

barbarism. He understood now what had once
seemed a dark utterance, the remark of a lady,
who said she always, on returning from Scotland,
thanked Heaven when the name of the
first station was called out south of the
Border.

Think,' she said, ' what it is to feel free atone
blow — of Scotch coal and the Scottish accent!
' Judge what it was to Barney Kelly to
plunge back into the abyss from which he had
emerged, and consider, ' Such as these barbarians
are, I, even I, might have remained I'

He did not remain very long at the Imperial,
where he partook of breakfast and consulted
a time-table. A long cross-country journey
lay before him, and he wanted to time his
movements so as to reach Sulby Park in the
gloaming. He knew Callinacoan and Mrs.
Underwood : he desired to elude the curiosity
of the one and arouse the interest of the other,
and accordingly fixed upon a town a few miles
distant from his birthplace, from whence he
proposed to drive over to what in the ^ dreadful
phraseology' — to quote Mat Donagh — of
the neighbourhood would have been called
his calf-ground.'

Arrived at Sulby Park, he delivered a letter
to the sedate butler, and said :

Perhaps Mrs. Underwood may wish to send
an answer.'

No human being, no detective, not the
mother who bore him, could have recognised
the * just-caught ' Barney of the commencement
of this story, in the fashionably dressed,
self-possessed, handsome man who was at once
ushered into the library, on the shelves of
which were ranged some of those books that
had helped to gain him the five pounds wherewith
he paid his fare.

Altogether a most curious experience. For
my own part, I marvel those who have so
wonderfully risen never seem able to reproduce
intelligibly the impressions such a total change
of circumstances must have produced. Perhaps
they do not care to recall even to themselves
the past an outsider would imagine must
have held some pleasant hours. Yet it all
seems such a mistake. Bad as we account the
world — I am sure I do not know why — it yet
honours a man true and faithful enough to say
from what he has risen and how ! There
seemed a fascination for Bernard Kelly in the

brown gilt-letter binding of those old books of
plays, for he stood looking at them while his
mind took a swift but comprehensive review of
the years that had passed since he sat beside
the river reading for hours together.

It all came back to him : the rush and
hurry of the water flowing over the gravel,
fretting against the stones ; the dipping
branches swaying with the current ; the sun
streaming through the trees upon his book,
casting a tracery of leaves across the page ;
Miss Fortescue coming to meet him, and

The door of the library opened at that moment
— a soft muffled swish of paramatta and
crape sounded in his ear — two white hands
were extended towards him, and Mrs. Underwood's
remembered voice was saying :

Oh, Mr. Kelly ! oh, Mr. Kelly !— this is
kindness and friendship indeed !'

He took both her hands in his ; for a moment
there was utter silence. She could not
see him for the tears which blinded her, but he
could see her ; and he availed himself of the
opportunity to take a comprehensive survey of
a lady he meant, if all things worked favourably,
should one dav be his wife. The result was

satisfactory. She did not look much older,
and black suited her — yes, she must always
wear black. She had never been handsome,
but, comparing her with many of her sex, she
was really not plain. Her figure, always elegant,
struck Barney with quite a new surprise ;
yes, she would do very well indeed. He could
not, it is true, make her younger ; but then if
she were younger he might have stood a poor
chance of marrying her.

Dear Mrs. Underwood,' he said at last, ' I
feel truly sorry for you — I thought you might
want a friend ; and so the moment I heard the
sad tidings I decided to come and ask in person
if I could be of any assistance. I trust you
do not consider this visit an intrusion.'

No — no — most grateful — such kindness is
I shall be more composed presently.'

He led her to a seat, and leaning over the
back of the chair, began at once to open the
business that had brought him in such a hurry
across the Channel. He knew her of old, and
was perfectly well aware, although it suited
her to seem absorbed in grief, she could listen
to what he said, and understand it too. He
advised that she should at once travel to

London, and obtain the best opinion on her
case. If she were not to be left utterly at the
mercy of a man who had proved himself undeserving
her generous trust, action of some
sort should be taken immediately.

He did not pay much attention to her broken
utterances, which told him ' she deserved her
fate,' ' it was a fitting punishment,' and so
forth ; he kept steadily to the main question,
and said plainly if she did not wish to be left
a pauper, she ought to put her affairs into the
hands of some firm of solicitors and do exactly
as they advised. As a large part of the
Fortescue property was situated in London, he
thought she had better direct her attack from
that capital. ' Besides which,' added Mr.
Kelly, ' I shall always be at hand to help and
consult. I could not help and direct you here
people will talk, and a woman situated as
you are cannot be too careful of appearances.'
He had been so careful of appearances, he
meant to keep this visit a secret even from his
own relations. He told her how he had come
and where he was going ; he would not partake
of any refreshment or make any lengthened
stay ; he wanted to catch a late train

back to Dublin, and must cross to Holyhead
en roicte for London next morning. If she
wrote to him he would secure suitable lodgings
and meet her at Euston.

Mrs. Underwood said she need not write :
she would do exactly what he told her. ' It
is so sweet she went on, ' to feel one has a
friend in whom one can trust entirely ; I feel
that with you, ]mr. Kelly ; I am able to put my
hand in yours, and say, 'wherever you lead
me I will go, for I know you will find some
means of extricating me from this labyrinth of
doubt and misery into which I have blindly
and foolishly strayed." '

So it was settled that Mrs. Underwood
should follow Mr. Kelly to London, and that
no time must be lost in declaring war against
the recreant husband. Everything Barney
advised was done. Lawyers were found who
'saw no difficulty about the matter.' A
divorce was to be sought for, evidence from
America procured ; Mr. Underwood's hands
kept off the property pending the result of
whatever suit or suits it might be found expedient
to institute ; and Mr. Kelly was beginning
to think he had perhaps under-estimated the

probable amount the future Mrs. Kelly might
bring him for dowry, when, one day, calling to
know the result of an interview she had been
summoned to at her solicitors', Mrs. Underwood
met him with a radiant countenance and
the words :

Congratulate me !'

Certainly,' agreed Mr. Kelly, surprised.
What has happened ? — have they heard from
him ?'

Of him,' amended the lady.

And does he propose a compromise V

She shook her head.

Any fresh evidence V

He will never trouble me any more.'

What do you mean V asked Mr. Kelly, a
little impatiently. * He does not, I suppose,
give up all claim to the property V

He can never make a claim,' she answered.
He is dead.'

Dead T repeated Mr. Kelly, really stunned
for a moment, not only by the intelligence, but
by the way the widow communicated it. Then,
as his senses returned to him, he began to consider
that so far from cutting the knot of the
difficulty, Mr. Underwood's decease might actually

make it harder to undo. ' When did
he die V he asked.

Just ten days before my hr other* said Mrs.
Underwood, with an exultation even her training
could not enable her to repress.

Well !' exclaimed Barney, ' well — I am
amazed !' but in his heart he did not feel
pleased.

Foolish and weak though he knew her to be,
he could not think Mrs. Underwood would
fling herself and her fortune at the head of a
man who had nothing to offer save himself and
a literary reputation by no means of the
highest order.

But he need not have been uneasy. Mrs.
Underwood was only too glad to give her
former admirer to understand she would gladly
bestow upon him everything she possessed, and
accordingly, in due course of time, Mrs. Kelly,
making a ' convenient ' hamper serve as an excuse,
indited the following epistle to Miss
Bridgettata Cavan, Abbey Cottage :

As ye, maybe, haven't heard the great news
about Barney, I write to tell you he's a made
man at last — married to Miss Fortescue that

was of Sulby Park. She has thousands a year,
besides gold and silver and jewels, and furniture
and house linen, and lands and mansions,
and I couldn't tell you what all. And he'll be in
Parliament soon, and maybe a lord or a marquis,
before we know where we are. It's me's
the proud woman this day ; I don't know how
to contain myself for the joy. They've sent
fifty pounds a piece to the priest and the
Church minister for the poor of Callinacoan,
which will buy a mountain of blankets and
flannel petticoats ; and they do say the
minister's own children have new clothes on
them already out of it. Barney told the priest
if he'd get his father to keep from the drink,
he might ask what he liked in reason ; but indeed,
it's neither priest nor pope either will
wean him from the whisky bottle. Sulby Park
is to be let, and the happy pair have taken a
grand house in London all among the quality.
I'm in such a tremble of happiness I can't
write more.'

And /,' said Mr. Donagh, when he heard
the news — and in his tone there was the
dignity of an anathema on a state of society

in which such things could be — ' And /, with
fifty times his talent, and ten thousand times
his heart, am a mere drudge, a hack at the beck
and call of any ruffian who cares to secure my
services for a paltry twenty per cent. Many a
man would turn atheist, but I think and believe
there is a world where these things will
all be set right;' and then he wept, and Miss
Bridgettata wept, and so did her niece ; and Miss
Cavan murmured something about the ' devil's
luck,' and a distinguished character who 'takes
care of his own,' and they were all much comforted
by the hope that Barney might find a
thorn in his foot yet.'

If they had only known it, Barney had a
thorn there already. He was dissatisfied.
Having almost all other good, he desired yet
one thing more — to excel as a novelist !

VOL. III. 49

THE NEW FIRM.

AD anyone told Mr. Bernard Kelly
on that evening when they were
storm-stayed together hard by St.
Saviour's Church that the eccentric Mr. Felton he
a few hours later had the privilege of beholding
retiring rest under a counter in Sise Lane was
destined to change the whole aspect of publishing,
and to set every Miss throughout the
country who had learned to write scribbling
stories under the idea there was nothing to do
save send in her slipshod manuscript, and
receive a handsome cheque in return, it is
doubtful, conversant as his metropolitan experiences
had rendered him with strange vicissitudes,
whether he would not have laughed

the idea scornfully aside as preposterous in the
extreme.

And yet duly and truly this all came to pass
not from the slightest desire on the part of
Lance Felton that any but what he would in
his simple language have called ' crack authors'
should receive due reward for their labour —
but owing to the mere force of the machinery
he himself set in motion.

Mr. Kelly had been nearly eight years in
London. The wonder of his marriage was
more than a twelvemonth old ; he had dropped
into a humdrum, wealthy, respectable, wearisome
society, which he was wise enough to
know meant social and pecuniary safety ; after
a gallant struggle the impossible venture had
gone down in a sea of debt— all hands, however,
being saved except the capitalist, printers,
and paper-makers, who in such cases, for some
inscrutable reason, never seem to count — and
the now wealthy author, having nothing at
the moment on the stocks specially calculated
to feed his own literary ambition and the
vanity of a wife whose pride in and greed of
praise for him were insatiable, bethought him
of collecting his series of street sketches from

49—2

the various journals and magazines in which
they had appeared, and getting Mr. Yassett to
publish them. Knowing how utterly Mr.
Kelly's worldly circumstances had altered, ]\lr.
Vassett tried hard to induce that worthy to
run a portion of the risk ; but, as Mrs. Kelly
never wearied of telling her Callinacoan gossips,
' Barney wasn't born yesterday,' and
altogether pooh-poohed the suggestion.

Accordingly the matter ended as might
have been expected — the astute Englishman
proved no match for the astute Irishman —
more especially when that Irishman appeared in
Craven Street with thousands a year at his back.

It was ' take it or leave it ;' and little as Mr.
Yassett felt disposed in those days to take anything,
he could not cjuite reconcile himself to
letting a good book on a just then taking subject,
smitten moreover by a man who kept his
carriage and pair, and had menservants and
maidservants, and visited great people, be
brought out by another house, perhaps even
by that detested new house in Burleigh Street
which was, to quote the exact words concerning
the matter generally in use at that period,
playing the * devil with the trade.'

While Mr. Kelly's ' gutter fictions' — as one
envious critic ill-naturedly re christened his
book — were in the earliest stage of publication,
Mr. Vassett one day ventured to show him a
little of his mind concerning the men who were
ruining everything, and could not by possibility
benefit themselves. '

I had a novel here,' proceeded Mr. Vassett,
waxing confidential, for this was a grievance
about which he really felt he could not hold
his peace any longer, ' that with judicious management
I thought might be made to return
the author a satisfactory amount — two hundred
and fifty pounds ; and though I am not in the
habit of offering such sums in theirs instance —
not, in fact, till I see how the subscription goes
still, I did in this case write to say I would
pay it. I got no answer for a few days — then
down came the author for his MS. He had
sold it for five hundred pounds, and was to
get more if the sale proved good. I see the
work advertised this morning in the Times, at
the head of the Burleigh Street list — which,
by the way, occupies half a column.'

Who are they V asked the successful man
negligently — authorship and the things appertaining

thereto did not seem to him matters
of quite such vital importance as they had
once done.

Felton and Laplash — men without a sixpence
of their own — they are the talk and
wonder of the trade. Surely you must have
heard of them.'

I dare say I have answered Barney ; ' yes,
I m sure I have. Who is Felton ? — that name
at all events seems familiar — ah ! now I remember.'


He is a friend of the Dawtons, whom you
used to know said Mr. Yassett, not perhaps
sorry to give the prosperous author this
sly dig.

Whom I know still, Mr. Yassett,' amended
Barney, with a graceful inclination of his head,
which caused the publisher to consider what a
difference the possession of a large income
makes in a man's manner.

'Oh! I beg your pardon, I am sure he
answered nervously ; ' I only thought from
something Mr. Dawton said you were not
exactly '

Mr. Kelly laughed, and asked whether if
Mr. Yassett were left fifty thousand pounds,

he should at once consider it necessary to disembarrass
himself of half in order to oblige
various persons with whom he might have
once dined. 'Honestly,' proceeded Barney,
I was and am quite willing to help my friends
in any moderate way, but unhappily their
expectations have grown with my means,
which after all are not mis means ; they are
my wife's.'

Barney was always very careful to make
this point quite clear. He had nothing save
what he could earn — the carriage he drove in,
the horses that drew it, the coachman on the
box, the footman in attendance, were all Mrs.
Kelly's. He had the use of the carriage, he
lived in the great West End house on sufferance,
he ate and drank of the best on the same
terms. Of course, this was the most enormous
fiction, for in his marriage, as in everything
else, Mr. Kelly had taken sufficient care of
Number One.

Still this was not sufficient reason why a
man who was quite willing to give a five, or
ten, or even under extraordinary compulsion a
twenty-pound note to Dawton pere should be
branded as ungrateful when he refused him,

say, five hundred pounds to spend in some
utter foolery.

Mr. Vassett was not insensible to the suggested
parable. He had never much liked
either Mr. Dawton or Mr. Kelly, and consequently
he felt able fairly to judge between
them. No doubt old Dawton had thought to
swoop down on his prey, and no doubt Mr.
Kelly had repelled him. No doubt, also, Mr.
Kelly was quite right ; and yet Mr. Vassett, a
most prudent man himself, felt he would have
admired Barney more had that gentleman
proved a little less prudent.

These are the troublesome inconsistencies
in the world which must for ever lead people
astray. And yet to anyone acquainted with
the ups and downs of life, how far preferable
it seems to have to do with the man who is all
worldly than with him who has a thousand
pleasant impulses leading him, and enticing
you to follow where is no fruit (for you) worth
gathering — nothing but the deceptive greenness
of the barren fig-tree. To Barney's credit be
it said, he never led anybody astray ; he did
not promise great deeds and leave other
people to fulfil them. I declare solemnly,

when I remember the things I have known
done in London, as it might seem in the mere
wantonness of sport ; the offers of help made
help which was not asked for, and never
would have been thought of being asked for,
that of course ended in nothing ; the cruel
stabs of disappointment inflicted quite unnecessarily
upon hearts whose only failings were
distrust of self and too much trust in others ;
the hopes deferred from day to day and week
to week, it could not have been intended from
the first should result in anything — I feel I like
Bernard Kelly, for at least no word of his ever
lost a woman an hour of her honest work, ora
man his 'bus fare through any even implied
promise he failed to keep.

From Mr. Vassett's upon the day in question
he Tv^ent straight to his club ; and searching
the Times, soon found Messrs. Felton and
Laplash's list.

He was amazed — the list comprised the
names of authors any of the great houses
might have been glad to secure. Could this
Felton be identical with the man who wanted
to stop and look at the lights in the river — the
thing seemed not merely improbable but impossible.

* It must be a brother, or some
more distant relative he considered. 'No
doubt the Dawtons know the whole connection.'
Mr. Kelly was aware the Dawton circle
of acquaintances, though amusing, could
scarcely be called select. Yes; no doubt
whatever it was quite another Felton, and not
Lance and his friend Noll. What had
become of them both"? he wondered — a singular
pair — truly as singular a pair as even he had
ever met.

Spite of a few ill-natured criticisms, the
sketches proved a great success. In the main
they were extremely well reviewed, and Mrs.
Bernard Kelly went among her friends in
jubilant mood — wearying a great many of
them, to tell the truth, by the manner in
which she sang with different words one
eternal tune — ' My husband.'

In society, however, people are so accustomed
to be bored, that, providing the operation be
performed by some one sufficiently rich and
fashionable, complaints are rarely heard. Mr.
Kelly's acquaintances laughed a little sometimes,
it is true — but immediately recollecting
what was ' due to their order,' said, ' Her affection

is very beautiful,' and ' What a model of
a husband he must be I' — with various other
original remarks of the same nature, all commendatory
of the happy pair. One night, after
a more than usually laudatory notice of the
sketches had appeared in a morning paper,
the last post brought this note to Barney.

Dear Sir,

If you have any MSS. by you of which
you wish to dispose, we shall be happy to meet
you on your own terms.

Yours faithfully,

'Feltox and Laplash.*

Now this was certainly not such a letter as
Mr. Lance Felton might have been supposed
likely to indite ; and after thinking the matter
over for some time, Mr. Kelly decided to
answer it in person. Since Mr. Vassett had
broached the subject of the new firm, many
persons had spoken to him about the ' wonderful
splash' it was making. Twelve months
previously the names of the persons composing
it were unknown ; now they were the dread
and detestation of all the old publishers.

It can't last, you know people said ; but
still, while it did last, authors naturally thought
they might as well have share of whatever was
going. Messrs. Felton and Co's mode of
doing business seemed eminently simple — it
consisted in looking out for names and trying
to bag them. Powder and shot apparently
were regarded as merely trifles in the transaction.
An author of any celebrity had only to
mention his own price, and somehow the money
was forthcoming. In the history of literature
nothing like the doings of Felton and Laplash
had ever been known before, and it is earnestly
to be hoped nothing resembling such doings
ever may be known again. Had the business
been hand fide, a good deal might here be said
in its favour, but it was rotten from the first as
the South Sea Swindle. If a sufficient number
of books could have been sold even to cover
the mere outlay, leaving the barest profit
to the partners, the house had never comedown
with the crash it did ; but, as a matter
of fact, taking the works they brought
out as a whole, enough copies never were
sold (legitimately) to warrant the prices
offered to writers.

When an almost unknown author who had
only received twenty pounds for his previous
production was run up by Messrs. Felton and
Laplash to two hundred, the climax of absurdity
seemed to be reached. If he had been
old china he could scarcely have fetched more,
and instead of china of any sort he was often
only most inferior clay. His book was frequently
not worth even twenty pounds. Talk
of Tom Tiddler's Ground, why, here it was in
Burleigh Street, the only marvel being that
the Duke of Bedford did not put in his claim
for treasure-trove and so sweep the literary
decks.

Unknown authors had not the faintest
chance. Genuine worth was at a greater discount
in Burleigh Street than it had ever
before sunk to in any publishing office in
London.

We can't be bothered reading manuscripts
here,' said the head of the firm ; ' but bring us
anything with a good name at top, and it
goes straight to the printers,' which was indeed
literally the case ; and at the printers, as
everywhere else the house went, expense
seemed no object. Sober men of business

rubbed their eyes, and, prophesying ruin and
disaster, held for a time aloof ; but while they
were expecting the deluge it did not come, and
so, after a short delay, persuading themselves
^ times were a good deal changed even within
their memory,' and feeling satisfied somebody
with a lot of money ' must be in the background,'
they approached Burleigh Street with
cautious steps, and were soon drawn into that
mad current, the strength and velocity of
which were becoming famous throughout all
England.

The feeling dominant in Barney's mind
while wending his way towards Covent Garden
was curiosity ; and as he walked down Burleigh
Street he looked around, almost expecting to
see some publishing palace meet his eye. In
this he was, however, disappointed ; the premises
of the great firm consisted simply of
two small shops, between which a door of communication
had been broken — the walls were
■of the roughest — the floor of the oldest —
the fittings of the rudest and scantiest description.


Any plank serves,' said the chief one day,
when an officious friend suggested the desirability

of having things a little more elegant,
or even comfortable — ' across which you can
sell two thousand sounds' worth of books
a day — and that is what I have done over that
old counter. No, you won't persuade me into
your French polish and your lacquer and all
that sort of humbug. I am not going to
change my luck for any man living. What d'ye
say about ladies ? — Lord love you, much you
know on that subject. If I liked to set up
shop in a cellar I'd soon have enough of them
trooping down the steps. They come here in
their silks and satins and furs, and trailing;
dresses and all the rest of it ; and you should
just have a chance of listening to how they goon.
It's " What a quaint, delightful place !" —
and " Oh, how charming !" — " So perfectly unconventional
" — *• So snuor and homelike " — and
'* You'll dine with us, won't you, on Thursday ?
just a few friends — Portland Place — eight
o'clock." Then I say, " I'll dine with you if
you like, but I won't take your manuscript ;"
and then they laugh, and don't believe me. But
it is true, for all that — one is obliged to draw
the line somewhere.'

From which specimen of the new publisher's

style of conversation, the reader will instantly
perceive it was Mr. Lance Felton, who, having
at last achieved greatness, had all unconsciously
set himself to work that social revolution, the
result of which he could not with all his sharpness
foresee — and the end of which it would,
even now, be extremely imprudent for any man
to predicate.

Yes, it was indeed Mr. Lance Felton, and
no other man of the same name, who, when
Barney entered the shop, chanced to be in
evidence on the other side of the ' fortunate
plank.'

Hill r cried the great publisher, as he
beheld his St. Mary Overy acquaintance ;
what wind has blown you here V

Your letter,' answered Barney.

I never wrote you any letter, though I
should have written to you long ago if I had
known your address.'

Well, somebody, at any rate, sent a letter.
Here it is ;' and Barney handed the missive over
the counter.

But this is to Mr. Kelly — the author of
*' Street Sketches"'
I am Mr. Kelly.'

God bless me ! Why, I thought he was
some great swell.'

Did you V said Barney. He could not
have prevented the blood rushing into his
face at this unexpected slap if he had died
for it.

Oh ! I didn't intend any offence exclaimed
Mr. Felton quickly. ' What I meant was a
tip-topper, regular out-and-outer, aw-awing
sort of fellow. You understand, don't you V

Yes,' agreed Barney, * I understand.'

And everybody was in the same story ;
I can't imagine how they got hold of the
idea,' proceeded Mr. Felton, with such evident
ignorance of there being anything in his words
at which Mr. Kelly could take offence,
that the original sin of his first remark became
deadlier with each later utterance. 'The
street you live in though, I dare say, may have
given rise to the notion. You lodge there, I
suppose.'

Yes, I'm only a lodger,' answered Barney.
*You don't reside with your grandmother,

then, now V

No, with my wife.'

Oh I you're booked also, are you ? I can't
VOL. III. 50

help thinking marrying is a great mistake — at
least till a man knows what he is going to be

and do. If I had waited now ' and here

Mr. Felton paused, perhaps in order to give
himself an opportunity of considering how
many duchesses and marchionesses might have
suggested alliances vdih him in exchange for
the publication of books of travels, poems, reminiscences,
and so on.

How's your friend V asked Barney, anxious
to lead the publisher away from purely personal
matters — ' Noll, you called him.'

He's all right ; he has got into a first-rate
berth now

In the philanthropic line V

No ; something better by far. He is
manager of the Westminster and Publico Circulating
Library Co., Limited.'

Stealing the shareholders' apples now perhaps,
instead of the squire's,' suggested Barney
quietly.

The flush which had a few moments previously
overspread his own face was now
reflected in a deeper tint on that of Mr.
Lance Felton.

Oh, come, I say,' entreated the publisher,

don't be too hard on a fellow. That was one of
my mistakes — unfortunately it always is one
of my mistakes when I take half a teaspoonful
too much — I must have been awfully drunk
that night to mention the matter. Fact is, it
was all a bit of fun that I used to delight in
repeating to tease poor old Noll. We have
now, however, made an agreement, that as
amongst strangers such remarks are liable to
misconstruction, I am always to choke myself
off, or let myself be choked off when I begin.
There never was a word of truth in the whole
story — there couldn't have been, for the squire
had no apples.'

Perhaps there was not even a squire,' said
Barney.

You are right, there was not,' answered Mr.
Felton eagerly ; ' there was only his widow the
squires, and it was because her children got so
many aches and pains in the fruit season she
had the orchard cut down.'

What a very curious thing to do,' remarked
Barney ; ' I suppose that happened almost
before your friend was born.'

While he was still in arms — and as there
was not another orchard to speak of within

50—2

ten miles, he could not have stolen the apples,
could he ?*

It would have been difficult for him, certainly.'


At this juncture the outer door opened again,
giving admission to a stiff-built man, \Yho,
slouching lazily in, with both hands in his
pockets, let the door slam behind him. Lance
put both his hands to his ears and ground his
teeth at the noise.

Now, why could you not have shut that
door, instead of allowing it to bang T he
asked.

A muttered and wholly unintelligible reply
was the only answer vouchsafed, as the indolent
gentleman walked round the counter, and took
up a position from which he could dissect
Barney's features at his leisure.

*\yhat do you think, Zack?' asked Mr.
Felton, recovering his good-humour as speedily
as he had lost it. ' This is the Mr. Kelly we all
imagined to be such a heavy swell. We have
just been laughing over the idea — why, he
turns out to be an old friend of mine T

h !' said Zack, turning away, while he

drawled out this monosyllable in a manner

which seemed to Barney little less than superhuman,
as though the contemplation of Mr.
Kelly's face had suddenly lost all charm for
him.

Come into my sanctum, won t you V entreated
Mr. Felton. ' Now Laplash is here, I
can go off duty.'

Judging from appearances, Mr. Laplash
thought he could go off duty too, for he
followed them into the triangle styled an
office, where, taking up a position with his
back against the wall, he stood silently
surveying his partner and the successful
author.

Now we'd better get to business,' suggested
Mr. Felton ; * what have you to offer us,
Kelly r

Barney winced a little — he had not been
prepared for such an amount of familiarity,
but, nevertheless, answered the question with
tolerable composure.

Nothing, except what has appeared before V
said Mr. Felton. ' That's bad, Zack, eh V

Zack, replying to this interrogatory with a
grunt of acquiescence, Barney ventured to
observe Mr. Vassett had never found that the

fact of previous publication in a magazine
interfered with the sale of a volume.

Oh, Vassett !' exclaimed Mr. Felton, with a
lofty scorn ; * don't talk to us of Vassett — what
he does, or finds, or says, or thinks, is no rule
for us ; at which utterance Mr. Laplash
lashed a dose's lauo;h — his face remaining
all the time perfectly grave in its expression
; the right-hand corner of the upper
lip alone showing the slightest sign of movement.


No, no,' went on Mr. Felton, encouraged
by this sign of approval, almost imperceptible
though it was ; ' we don't want any Asserts
held up here for our example. We've shown
that good gentleman a thing or two already,
and before we've done with him we'll show him
and others a thing or two more. But now to
settle with you. How much do you want for
the lot V

Really Mr. Lance Felton's way of putting
things was too dreadful ! Never since that
memorable day when he got his rejection from
the sub-editor of the Galaxy opposition had
Mr. KeUy felt himself of so little account.
What did he want for the lot, indeed !

as though he were selling old clothes or the
ilotsam and jetsam of rubbish left at the tail
end of an auction.

I have no particular desire to sell,' he said
at last, ' but if you wish to buy you had better
make me a bid.'

In a minute Mr. Felton's pencil went to
work; then, pushing the paper across the narrow
table, he observed, ' I think that's about all I
can do.'

Mr. Kelly looked at the figures, returned
the paper, smiled, rose, and took his hat.

'As a matter of curiosity,' he began, 'I
should like to know what you meant by saying
you would meet me on my own terms. Do
you suppose for a moment,' Barney went on,
waxing virtuously irate, ' I have been accustomed
to write for such a pittance as you have
the assurance to offer V

'Don't you think it enough, then?' asked
Mr. Felton ; ' I assure you — Laplash, just look
here, will you?' and he thrust the paper
towards his partner, who, having altered the
figures, and again added up the sum total, returned
it to the vivacious Lance with the
merest but most significant nod.

Will that do r said Mr. Felton.
Yes, that is something nearer the mark
replied Barney.

Very well, then, we will send you on the
agreement.'

Thank you.*

And " rush " one book, at all events, as soon
as possible.'

"Will that not be somewhat imprudent, considering
how recently a work of mine has been
brought out V

Exploded nonsense !' commented Mr. Felton ;
there are some authors I only wish I could
get a book from every week in the year.*

The wisdom of the ages, then, seems foolishness
to you V

I should think so, indeed. I am my own
wisdom, and my own age, and my own everything
; and if you can show me any other man
who could have done as much as I have done
out of the same material, I'll give you leave to
call me what you like.'

Dear me !' I have no desire to call you
by any other name than that of Felton,'
said Barney deprecatingly. ' I only imagined
I might venture to make a suggestion

concerning the time of publication of my own
work.'

'Then you were mistaken,' retorted the
genial publisher. ' No, sir. I allow no interference
here. I bring out my books when I
think I will, and I don't bring them out when
I think I won't. If I once allowed that sort
of thing,' he added viciously, ' I might soon
give up command of the ship. See who that
is, Zack ; and mind, unless it's somebody worth
seeing;, I'm engao-ed. I have about a hundred
letters to write before post.'

*I won't detain you longer, then,' said
Barney, taking his hat.

Oh ! I didn't mean that as a hint, believe
me. It is only that Zack will not keep out
bores. He knows well enough who to let in
and who to keep out, but he allows himself to
be talked over.'

Does he never talk himself V asked Barney
demurely.

Talk ? I wish he didn't !'— and Mr. Felton
tossed some of the papers on the table about
angrily, as if unpleasant memories had been
aroused by even the mention of his partner's,
powers of speech. 'There was something I

wanted to ask you, I know — you have put it out
of my head — oh ! I remember : Did you ever
happen to hear who wrote " Ashtree Manor" ?'

Some one of the name of Lely, wasn't it V

That's a mere nom de guerre''

Barney stared a little at the speaker, and
then answered, ' I know" nothing more about
the matter, then.'

Look here,' went on Mr. Felton, 'I wouldn't
mind tipping a five-pound note to anyone able
to give me the right name and address. Lots
of people say they knew who wrote the book,
but then it turns out they don't. Now I want
that author.'

Why don't you ask Mr. Yassett, then V

'Have — he declines to give the slightest
clue.'

Why not send a letter to the author through
him V

No ; rU not do that either. You've read
the book, I suppose — wonderful I I'd give anything
to know who wrote it.'

Barney admitted the work so enthusiastically
spoken of was clever ; and considering he had
at home a novel of his own in manuscript
which he thought a great deal more wonderful

than 'Ashtree Manor,' this modified praise
was perhaps quite as much as could be expected
from him.

Clever — I believe you !' cried Mr. Felton,
and then there is another by the same fellow,
Due East." And to think of Vassett having
had two such books ! Lacere'was in here the
other day ; you remember him V

I remember his office said Barney, a place
which indeed he was never likely to forget. * I
never saw him.'

He's not much of a see,' observed Mr.
Felton ; * came here dunning. AVhat do you
think of that V

Do you owe him any money V

Well, I had some from him in the old days,
and he said he called thinking I should like
to repay it — as if anybody ever wanted to
repay money or to be reminded of a debt :
besides, it is not always convenient — but, as I
was saying,' Mr. Felton added hurriedly, and
with some confusion, ' I asked him, as I ask
everybody, about the author. " Had he ever
heard his name T "Yes." " What was it ?"
Declined to tell me." " Did he know him ?"
'* Very well indeed." " Did he ever see him"

*' Occasionally." " Would he give a message
to him V " Yes'' So then I sent word that
whatever amount Yassett was giving him, I'd
treble ; but I've never heard another word on
the subject. It was aU brag, I've no doubt :
he is as much acquainted with him as I am.'

'Don't you think,' suggested Mr. Kelly,
that as a proof of the bond fides of your offer
it might have been wise to give your former
landlord a cheque for whatever amount you
may have owed him V

No ; and I am not going to pay him — at
least, not till I choose. I don't see, because I
have got a bit of meat for myself, every vulture
in the kingdom is to have a share of it.'

But really, when you talk so recklessly of
doubling and trebling the amount of authors'
remuneration '

Look here,' interrupted Lance, ' I like you,
and I don't want to quarrel with you ; but take
a bit of advice — let me and my authors alone.
I can manage my business without any help of
yours. Bring the agreement about those books
along with you, and you can have the money
that's all concerns you, isn't it V

I am thankful at last to hear you make one

remark with which I can perfectly agree ;' and
lest this happy state of things should come
immediately to an end, Mr. Kelly took leave
of Mr. Felton forthwith, and walked out into
Burleigh Street literally stupid with surprise.

Spite of the lordly manner in which the
versatile Mr. Felton referred to pecuniary
matters, when Mr. Kelly carried his reprints
round to Burleigh Street, a difficulty he had
certainly not anticipated arose about that
trifling matter of payment. The outer shop
he found full of people, some of whom he
knew, most of whom he did not. Conspicuous
amongst the crowd was poor Mr. Dawton,
with hand more shaky, eye more watery,
speech more wearisome than of old. At once
he fastened upon Barney, reminding that
worthy of the ' pleasant days gone by,' when
they were ' young together ;' when they travelled
the country and ' drew crowded houses '
to hear ' How's Maria V

Lord ! Lord ! those were times !' cried Mr.
Dawton, wiping his eyes. ' How the sovereigns
used to tumble in ! I can hear their musical
jingle now.'

Yes, and you used to pocket them,'

thought Barney ; which indeed was too truly
the case.

Mr. Dawton had not dealt quite fairly by
his ' young friend ' in the matter of that
clever entertainment, but his only mistake was
in having professed to do so. ' When beginning
his London life, Barney would have been as
willing to accept an actual fourth as a nominal
half. He could not have made a half or even
a fourth for himself, and he knew it, only Mr.
Dawton need not have lied to him ; as a rule,
however, people give themselves an enormous
amount of unnecessary trouble in inventing
falsehoods when the truth would serve much
better.

You know him said Mr. Dawton, turning
an uncertain thumb over his left shoulder in
the direction of Mr. Felton's office.

Only in the slightest manner.'

Ah, wonderful ! When I first knew him —
but 'tis a tale to be whispered in thine ear anon.
Hist ! — the door opens.'

Which indeed the inner door did, to afford
egress to a lady dressed in deep mourning,
whom Lance escorted to her carriage bareheaded,
with a respect which in so red a

Republican could be regarded as nothing short
of marvellous.

Who is she V ran in a sort of buzz round
the shop.

Don't you know?' said somebody, in an
unmistakable Irish accent. ^ It's the Hicks
derelict.'

Mr. Kelly, please walk this way,' cried Mr.
Laplash ; and Mr. Kelly, working his way
into the triangular room, found himself alone
with the senior partner, who asked him to be
seated.

I've just made a bargain with the lady
you may have noticed going out,' said Mr.
Felton, looking up from his writing. * She is a
great person — a very great person indeed.'
' She's Lady Hilda Hicks, isn't she V
'Yes, an earl's daughter — and she piles-everything
of that sort on the top of her book.
My word, she does open her mouth, and she
won't shut it again till filled. I only hope I'll
ever see my money back again. She can't
write a bit, in my opinion — but she sells.
Here's the manuscript ;' and Lance patted a
goodly pile of square ruled paper.

Take care you don't offend her, or she'll

put you and your partner in her next
book

Let her — I don't care. She has asked me
to go and see her one evening next week.*

And are you going V

Don't know, I am sure. The fact is, I'm
getting tired of standing about doorways, and
ices and negus, and a sandwich perhaps. I'm
due to-night at a very swell party at Shepherd's
Bush — tip-top — all the ladies velvet
and lace, and all the gentlemen with their hair
parted down the middle, and eye-glasses, and
patent boots. I must rig myself up a little, I
suppose ;' and here Mr. Lance Felton, with a
self-satisfied smile which almost upset Mr.
Kelly's powers of self-control, pulled forward
the lajDcl of his new frock-coat — took a side
glance over his left shoulder at the unexceptionable
quality of the broadcloth in which he
was clad — pulled down his white waistcoat —
contemplated his nether garments and natty
boots — and then glanced at Barney as one who
felt tempted to say, * See what money and
fashion conjoined have achieved for the once
unrewarded and impecunious Lance !'

He so evidently considered his attire the

correct thing even for evening wear amongst
ladies clad in velvet and lace, and 'swells
who wore their hair parted do^^Ti the middle,*
that Barney felt it would be most unkind to
dissipate his illusion. Had there not been a
time when he, Bernard, spite of all his quickness
of perception and extraordinary power of
adapting himself to circumstances, blossomed
out in the matter of fancy vests and cornelian
buttons and glittering studs — all of which
vanities he soon learnt to eschew, replacing
them with a Quakerish simplicity of attire
which quite deceived Mr. Lance Felton, who,
deciding ' Kelly has enough to do to make
the two ends meet,' and would be duly impressed
with anything in the way of swagger,
proceeded — fingering his watch-chain — to remark
: ' I'll have to get something different
from this, of course — something more up to the
mark, eh V

I don't think you could buy any guard that
would look better,' said Barney, who had
indeed been admiring the article in question,
and wondering where in the world Mr. Felton
had picked up a piece of jewellery so quaint
and in such excellent taste.

VOL. III. 51

It does well enough in the office,' answered
Lance carelessly, ' but I must wear
something more like money when I go among
the grandees. They do take such stock of a
fellow. But now to get to business. Have
you brought the agreement signed ? Thanks —
that's all right. Here's the duplicate ' — and
Lance dashed off an impetuous ' Felton and
Laplash ' — ' and this you'll find quite correct.'

Perhaps he expected Barney to pocket
both documents without opening them ; but
if so, he was disappointed. Mr. Kelly first
read the agreement quite through, and then
unfolded the slip of paper Mr. Felton had
handed him.

At the latter he looked for a moment most
curiously; then he said :

May I ask what this is V

'Why, our acceptance at three months,'
answered Lance glibly. * The amount is all
right, isn't it V

Yes,' answered Barney, ' the amount is all
right ; but I'm not going to take a bill for my
work. Don't entertain any delusion on that
subject.'

Why not ? everybody does ; usual thing.

How do you suppose we are to can on our
business if we pay months and months before
we get our returns V

I'm sure I don't know, and I'm very sure
I don't care ; only I'm not going to find you
capital either in meal or malt. If at the end of
three months you could not or did not meet
your bill, where should I be ? No ; if that's
your way of doing business, hand me back
my agreement, and we will consider the matter
at an end

During the course of this agreeable address,
Mr. Lance Felton's face had changed in colour
from red to purple, and from purple to white ;
till finally, so great was his pallor that his very
lips seemed bloodless.

Well, you must be hard up,' he managed
at last to say. ' If you had told me cash
was such an object, the money should have
been waiting for you. Come back in an hour,
and I'll be ready for you. Will that do V

Certainly,' agreed Barney, * and meantime
we may as well exchange agreements ;' which
suggestion was accordingly carried into effect,
with a running commentary from Mr. Felton,
that ' thank God there was no suspicion

51—2

about him ;' * his fault lay in quite an opposite
direction ;' * he believed every man to be
honest till he proved himself a rogue, and
even then he found it almost impossible to
credit any actual cheating had been intended \
sooner than imagine everyone he shook
hands with to be a liar and a thief, he would
hang himself or cut his throat ' — with a good
deal to the same effect, which was interrupted
by the opening of the door and the appearance
of mr. Dawton's wig.

Now, shut that door, will you V shouted
Mr. Felton viciously. ' Can't you see Tm
engaged ? Won't you take no for an answer V
and then, as the poor old actor, appalled by
the violence of this address, meekly withdrew
his battered and wrinkled face, the publisher
stigmatized him as an ' old fool,' and said he
wouldn't — no, blanked if he would — have a
parcel of drivelling antediluvians making a
common louise of his offices.'

Soft-heartiness could certainly not be reckoned
amongst the weaknesses of Mrs. Kelly's
Barney, and he felt no wild desire to make Mr.
Dawton's cause his own. Nevertheless, when
he passed out amongst the crowd waiting for

audience, and saw the collapsed figure of the
world-renowned actor,' he took him by the
arm, and leading him down Burleigh Street,
pressed a couple of sovereigns into his hand,
and bade him forget the roughness with which
he had been treated.

" Sharper than a serpent's tooth," ' sobbed
poor Mr. Dawton ; ' and I made him, sir ;
when I knew him first he was ragged and
hungry, and I may say homeless ; and I
took him to my house, and fed him, and
clothed him ; and Ted taught him, and — and
you see how he treats me, Mr. Kelly — as if I
were a dog, sir — a dog.'

Never mind him,' entreated Barney ; ' put
a beggar on horseback and you know where he
rides to. How is Mrs. Dawton ?'

Then and there in the Strand Mr. Dawton
came to a standstill, and poured forth his tale
of woe. His wife was ill ; Ted had married
and gone abroad; Will, having met with
an accident, kept his bed; Jim was trying
his fiercest to prevent the ship sinking
; the youngest son had in despair accepted
an engagement with some wandering
minstrels.

A scattered household,' finished Mr. Daw-ton
; * The Wigwam will soon be deserted save
by the squaw and the grizzled old Indian. Ah
me ! who would wish for length of days when
he sees how they destroy the noblest trees in
the forest? Had anyone told me twenty years
back '

I must bid you good-bye now, Mr,
Dawton,' interposed Barney, finding an appreciative
crowd was collecting, ' but I'll see you
soon again. I will make a point of going to
The Wigwam ;' and cutting; short Mr.
Dawton's effusive and maundering farewell,
he crossed the street and walked rapidly westward.
He could not refrain, however, from
once looking back, and beheld, as he expected,
Mr. Dawton eagerly making his way to the
nearest tavern. ' Poor old chap !' thought the
well-to-do author, and something very much
like an earnest thanksgiving to God for having
enabled him to steer clear of the rock on which
he had seen so many a gallant barque founder,
silently passed his lips.

Ere returning to Burleigh Street he went
home, had his luncheon, took a turn in the
Park with his wife, and finally got that lady

close upon five o'clock to set him clown near
his destination.

In the outer office he found only Mr.
Laplash and * Noll ;' but the door of the
inner apartment stood wide, and, as he appeared,
the Voice of Mr. Lance Felton was
heard in greeting.

^ Oh ! so here you are at last. And now
you are here, what have you got to say for
yourself V

I have come for my money.'

Good heavens 1' shouted Mr. Felton,
screaming with laughter; 'only hear this, Noll —
he has come for his money ! and he says it just
as if he was a super going up for his screw on
a Saturday. Oh ! you'll be the death of me,'
he went on. ' Poor fellow poor fellow ! now I
dare say this amount is all you have between
you and Slocum's.'

I am not quite so badly off as that,'
answered Barney, who scarcely understood
and utterly failed to appreciate this delicate
badinage. ' But still, I have no doubt I shall
manage to find a use for your cheque.'

Here it is, then,' said Mr. Felton ; ' look
that there is no mistake this time — do, pray I

And now, sir, just tell me what you mean by
coming here with your false pretences and
your poverty pleas, and looking as if you
had never seen a ten-pound note in your life,
and your lodger story, and all the rest of it —
you, who have your horses and your carriages,
and your livery servants, and your grand acquaintances,
and a house in Grosvenor Street,
where you can hang up your hat for the rest
of your days V

Thus reproved, Mr. Kelly took refuge in
his usual formula. Everything belonged to
his wife — he had nothing but what he could
make. Her friends were good enough to ask
him to their houses, but he could never forget
he was only a poor author — with many more
statements to the same effect, which were received
with derision, and various ironical and
objectionable remarks which made him wish he
had never sold his reprints to the great firm
which meant, so Mr. Felton explained, to ' lead
the trade a dance.'

We'll waken them up a little,' he said. * If
Vassett and the rest of the slow-coaches never
footed it before, they'll have to foot it now, or
make up their minds to stay behind for ever.

Here's a list,' he added, thrusting the just
issued Athenaeum into Mr. Kelly's hand ;
did you ever see anything like that. There's
scarcely a known author we haven't bagged.
There — leave me all of you for a minute; I
must just finish this letter before post. It's to
that Lord with the hard name who went to
Rome and back again, and wrote his soul's
experiences both ways.'

Oh ! then you are going in for theology,
are you ?'

I don't care what the I go in for,' retorted
Mr. Felton, with cheerful profanity, * so
long as it pays ; if Tom Paine were only alive
again, I'd advertise him and the Archbishop of
Canterbury in the same column. But now, clear
out, please ; time's getting on.'

Thus exhorted, Messrs. Zack, Barney, and
Noll retreated into the outer office, where they
soon fell into easy and confidential chat.

I am glad to hear you have dropped into a
good berth,' observed Mr. Kelly to Nol.

Well, I can't say it's a berth exactly to my
mind,' answered that gentleman. ' I'd have
liked something where I could feel of use to my
fellow-creatures.'

Yes, that's what he's always on about,' observed
Mr. Laplash, with admiring appreciation.
He's just as eager to be doing good as many
a one is to be doing harm. If he picked up a
half-crown in the gutter he'd know no rest till
he had found the poorest and the dirtiest old
woman he could benefit with it. That's Noil,
Mr. Kelly ;' and Mr. Laplash, humming an unmelodious
tune, fell to whittling a bit of stick
after this unexpected testimony to Noll's perfections.


Barney looked at Noll and formed his own
opinions, which he wisely refrained from expressing.


You see, Mr. Kelly,' said Noll, addressing the
rich man, and edging up to him with unctuous
perseverance, ' I do feel it on my mind and
conscience that light literature is no sort of
proper reading for immortal souls destined for
heaven, or it may be doomed to hell. The
novel mania oppresses me like a nightmare.
They come to us hot pressed and gaudily bound.
Soul-traps I can't but consider them. But the
bulk of our customers won't look at anything
else. I'd like to be out of the business, I
would indeed. If you should hear of a nice

secretaryship now, Mr. Kelly, to some Christian
association, or even a vacant post as collector
to a worthy charity, I feel I could devote my
energies to congenial work of that sort.'

No one could accuse Mr. Kelly of raising unfounded
hopes merely to level them with the
ground, wherefore he immediately answered
that though Mrs. Kelly of course contributed
liberally to religious societies and charitable
institutions, she had no influence — none whatever.


And so far as I am concerned I don't even
subscribe,' added Barney, with a touching
modesty which might have affected anyone
susceptible to the softer emotions.

Indeed I shouldn't mind,' proceeded Mr.
Noll, in a monotonous sort of whine, serviceable,
no doubt, for the purposes of Scripture-reading
and street-preaching, ' taking charge of
a compact estate composed of weekly tenants.
I believe in such a position I might effect much
good. I could enclose a tract suitable to the
circumstances of each household in the rent-book,
and say a word in season to the mothers ;
don't you agree with me, Mr. Kelly V

I dare say,' answered Barney ; 'but my

wife has no property of the sort you indicate.
If I should hear of anything likely to suit you
I will let you know ; but it is not at all probable
'

At this juncture the outer door was pushed
timidly open, and a bonnet, veil, jacket, and
something inside these articles of apparel came
slowly up to the counter.

Mr. Laplash, leaving his bit of stick, lounged
forward to meet the new-comer, who addressed
to him some remark which was perfectly inaudible,
as at that moment a van came thundering
down the street, shaking every pane of
glass in the old edifice in which the new firm
had established itself.

"What d'ye want V asked Mr. Laplash, as
soon as he could make himself heard, addressing
the lady with the gruff'ness that seemed
to do duty in Burleigh Street for ordinary
civility.

Can I see either Mr. Felton or Mr. Laplash
?' she inquired nervously.

My name is Laplash,' returned the second
in command, T\dth aggressive distinctness.

I — I — really don't know that I ought to
trouble you, but a long time ago you sent mea

message — and — as I — assassin — I thought
I might call— but I feel— I '

What's your name V inquired Mr. Laplash,
as if she were deaf, and he catechizing her.

You would not know my name if I told it
you she answered, scared apparently out of
what few wits she possessed ; * but I once
wrote a book called " Ashtree Manor." '

Open Sesame ' never produced a more
magical effect than those two words. The
flap on the counter was lifted and banged back
on its hinges.

Come in,' said Mr. Laplash, leading the
way to the inner apartment, when, saying,
Lance, here's ** Ashtree Manor," ' he stepped
aside to let the lady cross the charmed circle.

God bless me !' cried Lance, looking up
from his writing ; ' why, I've done everything
short of advertising for you in the Times J

Have you V she answered, a little faintly.

Yes ; sit down for a minute, will you V
And so she sat and looked at the great publisher
finishing his correspondence, and at
Zack pasted up against the wall staring at her
with all his might, and out into the dim office
beyond, where the gas was not yet lighted.

A Struggle for Fame.

amonor

toland

two figures stood hazily
shadows, and she wished she had not turned
into Burleigh Street, and longed with all the
veins of her heart to be safe at home.

MPw. LOGAX-LACERE IS AMAZED.

^^^^^^HOUGH the world— their poor little
world — remained ignorant of the
fact, since the appearance of ' Ash-tree
Manor ' things had been going very badly"
indeed with the Logan-acres. Day by day,
week by week, month by month, they drifted
hopelessly astern. Ostensibly doing a good
business — in reality doing a very fair business
Mr. Lacere's incoming and outgoings failed
utterly to meet. At the end of each half-year
there was an ever increasing deficit, which
one memorable spring arrived at such proportions
that Mr. Logan-facere at last, opening
his mind to his wife, said, ' I think, dear, I
must stop.'

By this time Glen had learned a great deal
about her husband's business and himself.
Nevertheless, her knowledge of both was still
superficial. Unless a man engaged in commerce
is doing extremely well, he rarely cares
to examine his debit and credit with the
attention his liabilities at all events deserve ;
while, unless a woman goes down into the
thick of the conflict, she is far too apt to take
the man's representations as facts.

I could make at least fifteen hundred a
year,' says the struggling merchant, ' if I had
only a thousand pounds capital.'

Find me the wife who, when the husband
she loves and believes in tells her this pleasant
tale, will not eagerly swallow the captivating
bait, and I shall say you have discovered
a new Eve.

Poor Glen — poor Mordaunt Logan-facere !
had the wand of some enchanter gifted you
with ten thousand pounds instead of the usual
ten hundred everyone wants, you would have
found yourselves at the end of twelve months
precisely where you were at the beginning.

For the man did not live, or the woman
either, who could have made head against the

Lacere connection. Ned Beattie was quite
right when he said they would sink a man-of-war.
Not merely were their pecuniary demands
unceasing, but after a time — a short
time indeed — Glen found their ideas weigh
her down to the earth.

There are some people, perhaps because
they do nothing themselves, who exercise a
depressing, almost stultifying, effect on workers.
It is doubtful whether even Mr. Logan-facere
himself could have resisted the enervating
effect of the home atmosphere, had he been
exposed to it ; but in his bachelor days he
adopted the singularly wise course of rarely
returning to the domestic hearth except to
sleep, and since his marriage, being busier
than ever, he seldom saw his female relations
except upon those high days and holidays,
when Glen usually made herself excessively
disagreeable, and by the mere force of contrast
must have made her husband consider his own
relations paragons of amiability. Glen knew
what all this semblance of genial good-humour
was worth, but she had crushed and bruised
herself so cruelly iri trying to make the man
they all regarded as a fortress to flee to in time

VOL. i;i. 52

of trouble understand the position, that, abandoning
open warfare, she resorted to a provoking
sort of antagonism during the time she was
forced to listen to reminiscences of the Lacere
greatness and disparagement of the Logans, to
gush about ' dearest Mordaunt,' to lamentations
over a cut finger, to complaints anent
the impertinence of her own servants, and
general statements that all domestics were
very different from what they used to be ;'
that kindness and consideration toward those
in an inferior station of life were errors certain
eventually to lead to disastrous results ; that
tradespeople were little, if at all, better than
thieves ; that the only human beings worth
knowing, or considering, or remembering, were
the Laceres ; that all foreigners where treacherous,
Americans detestable, the Irish more
treacherous and detestable perhaps than either ;
that Glen herself was making a woeful mistake
in refusing to adopt the Laqere code for her
own guidance ; that some day she would
repent having rejected the love they so
earnestly desired to lavish upon her, and find
the friends she thought so much of would
desert her totally.

To all this, and a great deal of the same
interesting and improving sort of conversation.
Glen found she could only — successfully — oppose
one weapon — sarcasm.

Argument she soon found useless with
people destitute of the faculty of reasoning;
who were puffed up with exaggerated ideas of
their own importance, and who, never having
adventured out into general society, which
they regarded as a howling wilderness, had
not been, and where never likely to be, taught
their level. But they had one weak spot in
their armour. There existed a vulnerable
spot, and Glen knew it. They could not
endure ridicule ; the barbed arrow of satire
penetrated between the joints of their harness
and inflicted lacerating wounds. If she were
strong, Mrs. Logan-facere was not merciful,
and she knew who came worst off the field
after any particularly bitter struggle. About
money her tongue was tied, but there remained
a wide range of subjects on which to
exercise her talents. It is not too much to
say she studied and perfected a particularly
annoying and incisive style of repartee which
rarely missed its mark, and proved almost as

52—2

fatal to lier foes, the Laceres, as did the
smooth pebble David selected from the brook
and hurled from his sling into the forehead of
the braggart Philistine.

One of the opposition ladies, who had for a
considerable number of years read her Bible,
with the satisfactory result that she felt she
at all events need be under no apprehension
about her place of abode in the next world,
occasionally tried the effect of flinging at
Glen one of those texts in general use when
family matters come on the carpet, but she
had better have left it alone. Ned Beattie's.
remark that he could in either the Old or
New Testament beat Glen in a canter, was
quite correct ; but Mrs. Logan-facere's Scriptural
knowledge was by no means to be despised.
It was general as well as particular,
and Miss Lacere, though she never confessed
the fact even to herself, found she had made a
blunder when she tried a wrestle with one ta
idiom Biblical phrases and Biblical references
were familiar as household words.

Glen not merely could correct a misquotation,
but she did. She swooped down on an
error like an eagle on its prey, and she was

able further to prove the strength of her
position, not by any reference to Crude, but
by producing straightway chapter and verse.
Small marvel she engendered a fine feeling of
hatred towards herself! If she could have
induced * the family ' to say in so many words
they disliked her cordially, she would have
felt perfectly happy, and perhaps relaxed
some of those acts of annoyance in which she
was becoming an adept. But no, they would
not quarrel with her ; they stated plainly it
took two to make a quarrel, and they were
determined not to quarrel with her — a remark
Glen felt to be maddening, since a sensation
of utter helplessness must supervene when
you find, if you ask a man to walk out of the
front door, that he immediately walks in at
the back, smiling as if nothing had happened.
Between her husband's brother-in-law, as
Mrs. Logan-facere always carefully defined
the relationship, and herself, she had managed
to establish at one time an open feud. If
they met, their conversation was one of the
most distant ; if they wrote, their notes were
of the coldest ; and their epistolary mode of
addressing each other was beautifully dignified

and formal. Glen had, opportunity offering,
undertaken to teach Mr. Lacere what was due
to her in the triple character of wife, author,
and Irishwoman ; and as the gentleman in
question did not think much of her in any
capacity, he naturally resented the instruction,
which was perhaps not very courteously conveyed.


Glen carried her point, however, in so far
that he declined to visit the house over which
she was nominally mistress ; but this victory
proved, after all, to be a barren one. Her
husband would not make her quarrels his ; sofar
as his relations were concerned, he was in
the matter of fighting a very Quaker. He
thought his wife wrong, and he told her so as
decidedly as the extreme gentleness of his
disposition permitted him to say anything
disagreeable ; while to make up for her shortcomings
he showed greater kindness than ever
to his brother-in-law, and showered on him
those favours which Glen knew would keep
them poor for the whole of their lives.

In comparison to the drain Mr. Lacere was
upon the good business which ought to
have prospered, the Misses Lacere could only

be regarded as light and agreeable encumbrances
; while the faith with which Mr. Logan-facere
continued to believe in his kinsman's
rotten ventures, savoured not merely of
infatuation, but folly.

There were not wanting those who warned
Glen of what the result must prove. If
advice could have saved the ship of their
fortunes, it would have never gone down ; but
Glen was not in command, and resolutely refusing
to believe the cry of ' breakers ahead,' her
husband sailed calmly onwards to destruction.

He had a good business ; but where is the
struggling business which does not require
careful nursing ? what trade could have borne
the daily drain demanded by two families and a
speculative brother-inlaw ? Twice already in
Glen's married experience had Mr. Philip Lacere
been compelled to meet his creditors, and on
each occasion her husband was * let in ' for an
amount which caused wise people to express a
not unreasonable astonishment.

During these periods of bitter trial and
anxiety, the husband and wife came very
near each other ; and perhaps Glen was never
happier than in those days when doing her

poor best to help a sadly over weighted man.
She could not do very much, for it took her
three hours to add up correctly a column of
fissures, while her knowledge of arithmetic was
of the crudest description ; she could somehow
work out a sum, but she utterly failed to
explain how she did it. Not much of a help
certainly — but she could take one trouble off
his hands ; she could write his letters, she
could get through a mass of correspondence
that might well have appalled a man : and
though occasionally Mr. Logan-facere received
irritable epistles urging him to instruct his
clerk to Write legibly, still, considering Glen s
wretched telegraphy, there were very few
complaints, which caused her husband to consider
that there must be scattered throughout
the country a much larger number of persons
capable of deciphering hieroglyphics than he
had imagined.

Glen did not care how heartily her husband
laughed at her. She was only too delighted
to know that he had the keenest sense of
humour, and that spite of all his anxieties and
troubles he could make merry over some trifle
which tickled his fancy or excited his risibility.

He came in contact with so many odd
people, he encountered so many strange incidents,
that now, when at last he found an
intelligent and appreciative auditor, his overtaxed
mind sought relief in speaking of things
no other human being belonging to him could
have understood. Often late in the afternoon
Glen repaired to his office, which he had
removed from Sise to Creed Lane ; and while
her husband was busy with journal and ledger
and cash book, steadily worked her way
through piles of unanswered letters. Bit by bit
she had learned enough of his business to know
what to say without troubling him on the
subject ; and then as they walked home together
through the silent streets they laughed
over the events of the day — though God
knows both their hearts were often heavy and
anxious enough. As a wife, Glen was greatly
improved. She had laid Edward Beattie's
advice to heart in many ways : she did not
now cry over the irremediable ; she did not
sit and brood about troubles she was powerless
to alter. Gradually she had formed a small
but pleasant circle of acquaintances who made
home cheerful for her husband, and but for the

eternal drag and drain of money, which could
not be got in, and money which had very
surely to be paid, Logan-facere might have
been accounted a very happy man. At all
events he was a happy man. His was not
the temper which goes out to meet trouble
half-way — no day's work was too long for
him — no toil too hard ; and, as Ned Beattie
said, he adored his wife.

About this period of her life all matters
were going pretty well with Glen, except
pecuniary. She felt the shoe pinch very
often ; literature had not, so far, proved a gold
mine to her. When she finished ' Due East,'
for the first and only time in her life she
wrote a preface with which she proposed to
enrich that work ; but unhappily it never saw
the light. In it she stated her determination
to retire from the field, since she had found
authorship was the only profession in which a
labourer was not considered worthy of his
hire. She went into figures, a most unwonted
mental exercise for her, and stated that in so
many years she had only made so much
money ; from which amount the cost of pens,
ink, paper, postage (and she might have added

shoe-leather) ought to be deducted. She proceeded
also to draw comparisons between the
literary and other professions, and wound up
with a general sort of commination of an unappreciative
world. As has been said, however,
this expression of opinions and feelings
was never printed, for the sufficient reason
that Mr. Yassett, when she sent him her
manuscript, intimated she might reasonably
reckon upon receiving a hundred and fifty
pounds for this novel. A hundred and fifty
pounds seemed a great deal of money to
Glenarva, till she found how very short a
way that amount went ; but her soul revived
within her when the reviewers expressed
themselves in terms of such almost unanimous
approval that Mr. Yassett said if she carefully
thought out another work he would give her
two hundred and fifty pounds, and if the
book went well would deal with her as liberally
as possible.

So far as authorship was concerned, Mrs.
Lacere, since she became a successful author,
had become the slowest of slow writers ;
further, she got into the habit of doing her
work by fits and starts ; weeks and weeks

elapsed without a single line being added to
the novel ; she allowed every social, domestic,
and business matter to take precedence of her
own legitimate employment.

To some extent all this arose from the want
of ready money, which caused her to spend
her strength in effecting petty economies
instead of concentrating her energies on the
exercise of her profession; but the source of
the evil lay deeper than this. Fame had been
so long deferred, she wearied of the struggle
before she touched the prize. The author of
Amelia Wyndham ' has given to the world
an excellent piece of advice, namely, * to beware
of the faults of one's own family.' If
she had added the caution to ' beware of the
faults of one's own nation,' the additional
warning would not have been misplaced. The
hatred of monotony — the detestation of waiting
till the corn ripens — the impatience of
watching the slow progress of fruition — the
belief that the grapes which cannot be
gathered at once will never be worth eating,
which are all integral parts of the warp and
woof of that strange web the Irish temperament,

were at the bottom of Glen's lack of
systematic industry.

The opinion of those days also militated
against the rapid production of books of any
sort. A novel in two years was thought the
proper course of procedure ; that a time should
ever come when a popular author could find a
market and an audience for a work of fiction
every six months, was an idea which never
entered into the mind of man at that period of
the world's history to conceive. The insatiable
cry for something new, which can now only
be gratified by the publication of the veriest
trash, had not then arisen. Books brought
out in the spring were still being read in the
autumn ; the novels even of a previous year
were asked for at the libraries — in effect, publishers
and authors and readers were going
on much as they had been doing for a quarter
of a century previously, and nobody dreamt a
literary revolution was at hand — during the
course of which the biggest houses in the
trade would come to grief, and great firms as
well as mushroom adventurers fall together in
one general crash.

It was about the time Mr. Vassett proposed

those liberal terms named for Glen's third novel
for she now eschewed all mention of her
-early failures, and dated her career from the
publication of * Ashtree Manor' — that Mr.
Philip Lacere, having for the second time passed
through the insolvent court without paying
anyone sixpence, thought he ought to embrace
this favourable opportunity of again
entering into the state of holy matrimony.
What had ever happened before to the Misses
Lacere in comparison to this ? They did not
believe it ; for a long time they would not
believe it — they stood out against conviction
till further doubt became impossible — they
expected some miracle to intervene to prevent
this slight to their darling Claudine's memory
they would have prayed for fire from
heaven, or the sun to stand still, or the stars to
drop from the firmament, if they had felt in
u mental condition to pray for anything — they
refused to call on the lady, and declined
to allow her to be brought to their house —
they were most indignant because Mrs. Logan-facere
paid a visit to the woman happy
enough to have won the approval of the
pensive and soft-spoken widower, and felt

more angry still when poor Claudine's own
brother allowed her to be invited to dinner,
and said plainly he did not see why his
brother-in-law shouldn't marry again if he
wished to do so.

It was dreadful. Glen had been bad enough,
but Glen was nothing to this. They fought
the question as long as fight was possible, and
then the moment the marriage became an
accomplished fact they all turned round and
formed an alliance with the new wife, offensive
and defensive, against Mrs. Logan-facere,
whom they spoke of to her face as the ' .'


But it did not then signify to Mrs. Logan-facere
what they called her. The last failure
of her husband's brother-in-law had, she fondly
hoped, wrought such ruin that no opportunity
would again be afforded that ingenious gentleman
of entangling their affairs with his own. Mr.
Logan-facere professed, and probably believed,
his eyes were at length opened to the perilous
consequences of going surety for his relative,
getting his bills discounted, and otherwise
assisting a man who preferred the road to
destruction to all other thoroughfares. When

he spoke to Glen about ' stopping,' he was very
nmch in earnest : lie did not see, he said, how
in the world he was to go on ; still, it was a
great pity, because with the trade he had
worked up he surely could pull through if
time were given in which to recover from the
losses he had sustained.

Long and anxious were the discussions between
husband and wife. If he stopped. Glen
did not exactly see how the domestic pot was
to be kept boiling — so long as fuel had also to
be provided for the due boiling of the Misses
Laceres's pot, which would, she knew, have to
be kept filled as of yore. It was a curious
thing, that in this extremity it never occurred
either to Glen or Mr. Logan-facere that the
ladies of his family might with advantage try
whether they could not contribute something
towards their own support. It was an idea
which would have met with a prompt negative
from the Misses Lacere, who, if they believed
themselves incompetent in no other particular,
were beautifully decided that it was quite impossible
for them to earn any money. Long
previously. Glen, by dint of diligent research,
had discovered the portraits on ivory were

mere copies touched up by the hand of some
forgotten drawing-master, and her own ears
told her the songs so belated lacked the great
merit of originality. She knew, if nobody else
did, that not one of the family was clever except
her husband, and that all these hangers-on
lacked the will to exert themselves in any
common useful way to earn their bread ; but
she did not mean to trouble herself on that
score.

If only her husband would sever all business
connection with his brother - in - law,
she believed they might still ' win through \
keep their pretty cottage — their lovely garden
their furniture which had been collected so
slowly — and the good business which promised
an ever-increasing return. Mr. Logan-facere
was vexed with his brother-in-law, and fully
determined that plausible individual should
never compromise him again ; he decided their
intercourse should be confined to the home-circle,
and not be permitted to encroach on
the precincts sacred to business ; a hollow
peace was patched up between Glen and her
particular aversion, and her husband devoted
his attention to considering; how that terrible

VOL. III. 53

impending evil of bankruptcy might be
averted.

He had but one important creditor — the
firm for whose specialities he was working up
the trade he believed, and rightly, had an
enormous future before it. If this firm gave
him time, he thought he could retrieve his
position ; at all events, before taking any
decisive step he determined to refer the matter
to those most interested in his success or
failure. It is not often that the rio;ht course
seems the pleasantness, but in this case duty
and inclination appeared to clasp hands, and
Mr. Logan-facere put the position before his
principals. There can be no question, humanly
speaking, it was the worst day's work he ever
did for himself in his life. When a man feels
he has sot to the end of his tether, his wisest
policy is to break it, and start at once in the
direction of new pastures. There are matters
one human being is mad to refer to the judgment
of any other human being. Mr. Logan-facere
had spent time, money, health, industry,
energy, in solidly laying the foundations of a
business he hoped would eventually recompense
him for his toil and trouble. He had

advertised freely and judiciously — his advertisements
and circulars, the result of much
thought, attracted attention and eventually
inspired belief. Except on the subject of
quack medicines, the British public is notoriously
difficult to persuade ; and taking this
idiosyncrasy as the basis of her theme. Glen
in one happy moment of unamiable inspiration
produced a little pamphlet, which, given away
by thousands, caused such a division in families
as pamphlet probably never did before.
Husband ranged himself against wife ; sisters
refused belief in brothers ; servants gave
notice ; and masters loudly declared their
intention of being paramount in their own
houses. In omnibuses the oldest travelling-companions
fell foul of each other, some declaring
the pamphlet to be ' a mere bundle of
lies.'

When Glen wrote it, which she did more
out of despair and annoyance than from actual
hope of effecting any good, she had not
the slightest idea of creating such a clamour.
Never one of her books was read, criticized,
praised, and pooh-poohed like that three-page
bill. Some persons regarded it as a personal

53—2

insult ; but at any rate the arrow found its
mark.

Who the deuce is Lely V men who never
had read, and never were likely to read a
novel, inquired.

Some impudent scoundrel !' ' A most
pestilent ruffians old-fashioned gentlemen,
well accounted of in the City, with noses
artistically tinted with sound port, would indignantly
reply. Be sure they were not
spared in the Logan-facere manifesto, copies
of which at last came to be eagerly asked
for, and were finally only given away as a
favour.

Well, all this had been done for the
benefit of the speciality manufactured by the
provincial firm to whom a considerable amount
was owing.

They had never imagined such a trade
could have been worked up, and they were
steadily purposed that when it suited their
own convenience they would step into Mr.
Logan-facere's shoes and tell him calmly to
walk barefoot out of the business he himself
had made. They knew perfectly well he
was a poor man, also that he was an over-weighted

man, and that when once they
established a London house he would not
have a ghost of a chance against their capital
and their facilities of production. But they
kept their intention within their own heart —
they professed a desire to act most liberally
towards Mr. Logan-facere, and accordingly
the iron pot and the earthenware continued
to keep company apparently on the best terms
possible.

At the time Glen's husband felt he could
not go on, there was nothing more certain
than that it would have proved especially inconvenient
for the great firm to let the
London business stop, or take it over ; and
accordingly when the state of the case was
laid before them, they professed their willingness
to enter into an arrangement which on
the face of it seemed actually generous. Cash
was to be paid at certain short intervals for
all goods supplied, but the payment of the
old indebtedness was to be thrown over a
period extending beyond two years.

Without another liability, perfectly unencumbered
as regarded domestic expenses
beyond his own household, the man might

have fulfilled the conditions imposed ; but as
matters stood, he and Glen saw the months
glide away without the slightest apparent
chance of being able to pay anything off the
arrears. The business was still not strong
enough to stand alone.

If advertising ceased, trade fell off — yet advertising
was an expense which properly ought
only to have been taken out of a large capital,
and the repayment thrown over many successful
years. How her husband worked perhaps
no human being but Glen ever knew. He
started for his office at seven, and rarely got
home before ten. Often Glen bore him
company in those long evening vigils after
office hours were over. If * Elia's ' real works
were, as he said, to be found on the shelves of
a certain great building, now demolished, in
Leadenhall Street, so the bulk of Mrs. Logan-facere's
manuscripts commencing * Sir,' and
ending' ' Your obedient Servant were at that
time scattered over all lands. She wrote acres
of letters — unwitting the seed she planted was
destined to be reaped by others — that for herself
and husband there should ripen no harvest
but disappointment !

She had commenced her new book before
the arrangement mentioned was come to, and
went on writing by fits and starts till she
completed rather more than two thirds of the
novel. Mr. Vassett unhappily was not pressing
her to complete it. He evinced no undue
anxiety to receive the conclusion — quite the
contrary. Several things had of late occurred
to damp the ardour of a publisher in his most
enterprising days somevvdiat prone to operation.


Had Mr. Pierson been still in Craven Street
the encouraging statement he would certainly
have made, that 'though the trade seemed

going to the he felt no doubt it would

come right in the end,' might have helped
to restore Mr. Vassett's confidence ; but Mr.
Pierson was not in Craven Street. He had
departed to that bourne as Mat Donagh
would have said, ' from whence no traveller '
(even a publisher's reader or advertisement
canvasser) ' returns.'

He had gone, not in a brisk and businesslike
sort of way, but lingeringly, as though
loth to leave the greasy London pavements
and the familiar fog-s and the accustomed

small-talk — gone after evoking a great deal of
sympathy from, and costing a large sum of
money to, Mr. Vassett, who took his reader's
death seriously to heart — so seriously indeed
that he never even tried to replace his loss.
The * circumstance,' as Mr. Vassett delicately
styled Mr. Pierson's reluctant step from this
world to the next, undoubtedly preyed on
the publisher's mind. When for years one
has been accustomed to a familiar voice, the
daily routine seems silent and lonely without
it.

The long, dreary illness — the dragging journey
from life to death — the pinched features
the yellow skin — the wasted hands — the
weak accents of the man he had kept so long
out of the workhouse, undoubtedly left an
impression on Mr. Vassett's mind too deep for
words.

You'll miss me, Vassett, more than you
think,' said Mr. Pierson one afternoon in the
mournful winter twilight. That was the last
sentence Mr. Vassett ever heard him speak,
for it was uttered after the accustomed martin
»•. Next morning it was only that which had
been Pierson, Mr. Vassett beheld fantastically

arrayed, lying in a shell of the publisher's providing,
the while a weeping widow and several
children took perfectly practical views of the
sad event,' and wondered what the deadman's
friend would do for them.

Mr. Vassett did a great deal — he was practical,
but generous ; if he did not assist Mrs.
Pierson to the extent that lady perhaps anticipated,
she yet found him in her time of need
more liberal than she had the slightest reason
to expect. He paid the doctor and the funeral
expenses (during the illness his purse was
always open) ; he provided plain though decent
mourning ; he wrote a cheque for a moderate
sum to enable the widow to get her head
above water again ; and then he figuratively
shook hands with the Pierson connection and
cut their acquaintance.

In consequence they said many hard things
of the Craven Street publisher which were
extremely ungrateful, and vexed the soul of
that kind-hearted man greatly when repeated
to him, as they were duly and truly by some
of his various excellent friends.

On the top of Pierson's death came many
(and sad) changes in the literary world. For

example — the gradual extinction of all small
libraries, the birth of monopolies, the growth
of great enterprises in connection with railway
extension ; and last, but by no means
least, the sudden springing of the Burleigh
Street house. Trade is a doctor which needs
no minute or second hand in its watch to
feel the public pulse. One day when Mr.
Yassett went out to subscribe a book, he
knew some awful change was impending. At
Mudie's, he met that engaging young gentleman,
Mr. Lance Felton. As a rich old
dowager, with Heaven only knows how many
quarterings, would avoid an introduction to,
say, an ex-Lady Mayoress, so Mr. Yassett
desired to decline the acquaintance of the
irrepressible Lance ; but Lance refused to be
repulsed. That dreadful Bohemian, risen
from the people, who, as Mr. Yassett knew,
owed even his ability to read and write to the
(mistaken) kindness of the Dawton family,
sidled up to him, and with a terrible impudence,
after presenting his own unattractive
person by name to the eminently respectable
and old-established publisher of Craven Street,
showed him the subscription list of a work

Mr. Vassett had declined to purchase, which
turned the elder man green with envy.

I candidly confess I don't know how you
manage,' said Mr. Vassett, who, though mortified,
was too wise and truthful to deny facts,
when thrust in his very face.

Ah !' answered Lance sententiously, ' there
are more ways of killing a dog than hanging
him,' which utterance, though undoubtedly
true, did not much help Mr. Vassett in his-endeavour
to get the libraries up to the point
he wanted to reach in his own subscription
lists.

That afternoon a particularly nice turkey,
stuffed, boiled, and served with celery sauce,
greeted Mr. Vassett's return to Craven Street.
An apple tart and custard followed the turkey.
Stilton cheese supervened ; and then he was
finally left to himself and his own reflections,
with some sound Madeira which a friend had
sent him, and the usual meagre and mortified-looking
dessert. To not one of the items,
composing that dinner could Mr. Vassett, asa
rule, be considered indifferent ; but on the
day in question he sent the turkey down
almost untasted, refused to cut into the apple-tart,

said he wanted no cheese, and declining
Madeira, rang the bell for hot water, and
mixed himself a tumbler of punch.

That apparently was the beginning of his
illness, one which for years chronically affected
every plan and purpose of his life. Truth is,
he had arrived at an age when if a man takes
little . exercise in London, and goes into the
country not at all, and has his meals regularly
and the means to provide them without undue
anxiety as to the how and the wherewithal,
dyspepsia in some one of its many forms is
pretty sure to fasten upon him. This proved
the case with Mr. Yassett — to quote his own
phrase, his ' nerves where not what they used
to be,' his appetite became capricious, he could
not tell ' what the deuce ailed his stomach,*
and whenever he called upon his head to make
an effort, his head flatly refused to do anything
of the sort.

Mr. Yassett had never been famous for reading
manuscripts, and now he simply declined
to read them at all. He felt no desire to enter
into competition with men like Felton and
Laplash. His business was rapidly becoming
distasteful to him. He began to turn his

mind to stocks and shares and good investments
in freehold land and ground-rents
rather than to the immature works of rising
genius. If a man takes to rather disliking
authors, it is not long before he begins to hate
them. There is nothing particularly attractive
about the appearance of a manuscript, say
three volumes long. Mr. Vassett found manuscripts
so extremely unattractive that he at
last said to himself :

Confound it, why should I peddle away my
time reading all this stuff ? I can put both
time and money to much better use.'

This was the precise state of mind he had
arrived at when, one dreary day towards the
end of a peculiarly unpleasant November,
Glen walked westward, meaning to confer with
him on the subject of her new novel.

In the matter of advances Mr. Vassett had
been very liberal ; whenever Glen required a
few pounds those pounds had been forthcoming.
But now she not merely wanted a good
deal of money, but also some positive assurance
as to the time when, if she finished her
novel immediately, she might expect it to
appear. In her own domestic province a deadlock

seemed imminent. She had never been
one of those persons who could make a single
sovereign do the work of two. So far as she
was concerned, nothing seemed easier than to
forego any luxury or even necessary — but the
expenses of a house cease not by day or night.
The indebtedness of the most moderate establishment,
like the grass, grows in the dark, and
as Glen did not mean to trouble her husband
about such details, she felt, as she expressed
the matter to herself, it was 'time to do
something.'

Probably on the face of this earth there
never existed a woman who so cordially detested
asking for money as Glenarva ; and it
was for this very reason she always seemed to
Mr. Yassett to be needing it. She could not
bring herself to name a sufficient sum at once,
and so the publisher fell into the habit of
thinking, ' I wonder what Mrs. Lacere can do
with all the money she has from me,' forge t-
tin* how small an amount the ' all ' came to
at the end of the year.

However, on this especial afternoon. Glen,
as she walked westward, decided that she
would say out all that she felt and wanted.

She chalked out the plan of her intended campaign
— she determined to put her affairs on
some tangible footing; — she would ask Mr.
Vassett whether he thought he could publish
one novel a year from her pen ; in which case
she meant to give an amount of time and
attention to authorship she had never before
attempted.

She considered what she would say ; she
felt very strong in this new determination. If,
for example, she could make enough to pay for
household expenses — take rent, taxes, tradesmen's
bills, servants' wages off her husband's
shoulders — what a comfort it would prove.
She meant to be confidential with Mr. Yassett.
He had known her so long, he had always
treated her so kindly, he could not think it
strange if she did lay bare before him some of
her pecuniary anxieties. Glen had quite made
up her mind ; she would get affairs put upon
a- more regular and business footing; — she
would hurry on her work — she would begin to
regard authorship really as a profession — she
would not for the future attend to her writing
last, and to every other little trumpery affair
first. She longed for mental rest ; to be delivered

from the thraldom of considering half-crowns
and sixpences. ' Yes, Mr. Yassett was
at home,' Muggins told her ; Muggins was
also good enough to intimate she might seek
the publisher in his office.

He's not engaged,' said Muggins ; to whom
the author of ' Due East' and ' Ashtree Manor'
did not appear in the slightest degree a more
important person than the girl who used to
bring her manuscripts in Mr. Pierson's time
in order to have them rejected.

'There's nobody with him,' added Muggins,
thinking Mrs. Lacere had not quite grasped
his meaning. Truth was, Glen's courage was
already oozing out at her fingers' ends. Her
well-arranged sentences seemed to be o-ettino;
a little confused ; nevertheless, at Mr. Muggins's
last intimation, which was conveyed ina
somewhat querulous tone, she took her
heart in her hand ' and entered Mr. Yassett 's
private office.

An hour later she emerged from it, having
said no single word she intended to utter. If
she had spoken out that afternoon, the end of
her Struggle for Fame might have been very
different ; but then that simply means that

another than Glenarva must have stood in her
shoes, and talked with another tongue and
been altogether another person from the
woman Glenarva was or ever grew to be.

She lacked a quality.

So did her husband.

Lacking it, neither of them ever achieved
success. Lacking it, the man was never born
nor the woman ever breathed capable of making
any considerable amount of money.

At all events, finding Mr. Vassett indisposed
to discuss business, in a mood indeed .to
discuss any other subject in preference ta
business, Glen sat on, listening to his utterances
dismayed. She had not courage to ask
for money, and inquire when her book would
be published if she finished it at once, or even
to say, * Do you like it V

The light of the winter day waned — she
felt she could stay no longer — she desired to
petition for even ten pounds, but she felt she
could not do it. The curse of Glen's life was
on her in full force that afternoon. She could
not bear asking for money. Had her husband,
who was unable by any means possible to give
her a fixed allowance; failed continually ta

vo L III. 54

say, ' My dear, I am sure you cannot have
sixpence in the world,' Glen could not have
troubled him even for a shilling.

Pity the contrast between his wife and the
Misses Lacere never struck the man in those
days ! They certainly wanted nothing which
could be had for the begging !

Father than go away empty,' sighed Glen
they would strip the garden ;' and the remark
was true. Locusts never left a land
barer than the women who, not loving * dear
Mordaunt's wife,' still called her ' darling Glen '
and ' our wonderful sister.'

Sick at heart and worn and weary, sour
wonderful sister ' said good-bye to Mr. Yassett,
and passed out into Craven Street. She did
not turn in the direction of the Strand ;
instead, she walked slowly to the bottom of
the street. In her soul she felt she was a
very coward, and that in the battle of life she
never should do much good. She would have
made a fine private, if only some different
spirit than herself had led. Take comfort,
ladies, however ; after all, there are not many
among you so constituted. Glen was only a
poor simpleton, spite her occasional glib tongue

and poor power of slowly producing a decent
book, and gift of plodding. She divined
then what she clearly understood afterwards,
that there was not much in her ; certainly not
enough to do a great deal of good for herself
or anyone else.

She walked to the bottom of Craven Street,
and stood there for a time, looking at the
Thames and reviewing her position. At the
time, if Mr. Yassett had only known how
horribly short of money she was, he would
have written out a cheque at once. Then she
paced slowly up the street again, and began
to make her way eastward via the Delphi.
She had got to Adam Street before she exactly
knew what was in her mind ; then she stood
quite still. Something was urging her on at
the moment she never afterwards understood
despair, perhaps.

I can do nothing with this book she
thought; * but as regards the next, I will try
to get something more decided.' And so,
with that indifference to externals and dress,
the darkening twilight, and what may be
called the feeble instinct of a feeble sex, which
characterized most of her proceedings, Glen,

54—2

totally unarmed for conquest, turned her
weary steps in the direction of Burleigh Street.
It was then Lance said :

God bless me ! I have done everything
but advertise for you in the Times; and Glen,
answered :

Have you ?' the while she felt strongly she
did not like Mr. Felton or Mr. Laplash, or the
appearance of the ]place generally.

Now, what have you got V asked Lance,
when he had despatched Noll to the postoffice.


Glen replied she had nothing. Mr. Vassett
was to publish her next book. No — it
wasn't finished ; two volumes were done. But
next year, perhaps

Next year ? Nonsense !' interrupted
Lance. ' Now, look here — what's your
name V He had been critically examining
the personnel of the successful author, and
felt sure she was no swell — no lace-ands velvet
no diamond-and-ruby young woman.

'Mrs. Logan-facere,' answered Glen, unwitting
that the name stank in Mr. Felton's
nostrils.

'Logan-facere!' he repeated in amazement.

God bless me !' he exclaimed for the second
time in their short interview, though, indeed,
there was nothing in that establishment less
believed in than the Almighty. 'How the

did he get hold of you ? Oh, I beg your

pardon,' he hurriedly added, as she made an
almost involuntary movement of disapproval
and departure ; ' 1 only meant it seemed so
strange. I have been hunting the world over
for you, and you were just here to my hand
all the while. Besides, you know, we thought
you were a man — and that book of yours,
"Due East" — by Jove! I read it through
three times ! And I used to know your
husband ; but that was long before your time,
no doubt. I suppose you never heard him
speak of me V

Oh yes, I have,' answered Glen promptly ;

since you began to publish, that is, I have
often heard him speak of how clever you
were, and of how hard you read at the British
Museum.'

Bravo !' thought Lance, looking straight
in ' Ashtree Manor's ' face, which bore the
most truthful expression ; as it might well,
since, indeed, that was nearly all she had

heard her husband say on the Felton question.
Come, Mordaunt, you are not half such a
sneak as I thought you ; the minute a fellow
gets on a suit of new clothes you don't want
to tear them off his back

•' And I knew his brother, too,' added Mr.
Felton aloud.

His brother-in-law,' amended Glen ; and
in a minute the publisher, to use his own
expression, ' knew how the land lay there

I sent you a message by him,' Mr. Felton
said tentatively ; ' but I suppose he forgot to
deliver it.'

No,' answered Glen, and she flushed a
little. *He delivered it to my husband, and
my husband told me.'

Then why the deuce — excuse my swearing,
but it's enough to make anybody swear — why
didn't you come to me months ago V

Glen looked at Mr. Felton, then glanced
round the office, then let her eyes rest for a
moment on Mr. Laplash ere she answered. In
her heart she was wondering why she had
come there then ; but as it would have been
scarcely courteous to say so, she contented herself
with remarking Mr. Vassett had made her

name, and she did not care to take tier books
elsewhere.

Oh, that sort of thing is all nonsense,'
retorted Lance ; ' business is business, and
sentiment is quite out of place in an office. I
am very sure Vassett never gave you anything
like the sum I am willing to pay.'

Glen answered she was very well satisfied with
the prices Mr. Vassett paid. She was thinking as
she spoke of what she had heard pass between
her husband and brother-in-law on the subject
of Mr. Felton's worldly position.

He is a clever fellow,' remarked the first ;
but unless he has some one with a large
capital at his back, I do not see how he can
stand his ground.'

Who would have anything to do with
him V returned the other. * He has no
capital except impudence.'

About Mr. Felton himself, or his place of
business, or his partner, there was certainly
nothing to suggest the idea of money; and
perhaps for this reason Mrs. Lacere did not
rise to the bait, as the publisher expected.

Well,' he exclaimed, ' I have often heard
of the difference between authors and their

books, but the difference between you and
your books is something almost incredible.
I said to myself when I read " Ashtree Manor,"
This is written by some fellow who has
knocked about the world and knows a thing
or two, a sharp hand at a bargain ; it wouldn't
be easy to take him in." And now it turns
out the author is a woman, who talks more
foolishly than I ever heard any woman, even
my own wife, talk before, and who does not seem
to have enough spirit to say *^ Bo " to a goose

Glen laughed out. It is unnecessary to say
she did not entirely recognise the truth of
Mr. Felons unflattering portrait, but it
amused her all the more perhaps for that very
reason.

Come,' cried Lance, ' that's better. And
now, to waste no more time — let's get to
business. I'll give you eight hundred pounds
for your novel. "Will you take it ? If you
won't, what will you take ?'

Eight hundred pounds — good heavens ! At
the words Glen's head seemed to turn round.
Eight hundred pounds ! Why, the mines of
Golconda could yield no more ! But she did
not feel the whole affair real ; she thought she

must be dreaming, and that she would waken
presently to the reality of a life which lacked
many necessaries and possessed no solitary
superfluity.

I am beginning to imagine you must be
dumb, Mrs. Lacere,' said Mr. Felton impatiently.


He was fast working himself up into a rage.
He thought she was not satisfied with his
offer, and he knew Mr. Laplash was most dissatisfied.
From his position against the waltham
gentleman had been making a series of
signs which were perfectly intelligible to Lance,
and not wholly mysterious to Glen herself,
who, in answer to the publisher's last observation,
said :

I beg your pardon ; I was considering.
The book I am writing now is sold to Mr.
Vassett, but I shall be very glad indeed to
make an arrangement with you for my next
novel. I must not intrude on your time
longer now. It will be better for me to call
upon you again in the spring ; and Glen was
calmly rising to depart when ]mr. Felton interposed.


Don't go,' he exclaimed. * Now I have

got you I mean to keep you. I have had
trouble enough with you, and intend to advertise
you next week in my list.'

But what are you going to advertise V
inquired Mrs. Lacere, with come natural astonishment.


The book Yassett has got.'

That is quite impossible said Glen.

What is impossible ? All you have to dois,
go to Vassett and get to know the sum he
wants for his bargain.'

I am sure Mr. Vassett would not stand in
my way, but I could not ask him to release
me from my engagement.'

Why couldn't you ? Gracious goodness,
would anybody believe you wrote your own
books ? The thing is simple as ABC. In
the first place, where is the manuscript V

At Craven Street.'

Well then, you run along to Craven Street
and get the first volume, and bring it here.
You tell Vassett you can sell it for far more
money than he'll ever give you ; and just say
in so many plain words — " How much will
you take to cancel our agreement T '

It is said that all the events of a lifetime

have been known to pass through the mind
of a drowning man — that in one supreme
moment the whole panorama of existence, from
boyhood to age, has flashed across his mental
sight; and it certainly is true that as Mr.
Felton spoke, all the many kindly words Mr.
Vassett had uttered, all the hopes and fears
and despair and rejoicing experienced in the
familiar office, recurred to Glenarva's memory,
and urged her to refuse this new publisher s
suggestion. And yet the money ! She did
not believe he would or could ever pay her
such a sum. Nevertheless, the very dream
seemed for the time being pleasant ; and besides,
she thought Mr. Vassett really did not
want her book, or to be troubled any more
with her. There were two volumes completed,
and not a definite word yet said about commencing
to print.

'If I go to Mr. Basset ' she began

slowly.

Of course you will go ; that is quite
settled,' interrupted Lance, with a decision
really refreshing.

I shall want some money,' proceeded Glen ;
*I owe him money.'

Very well ; you can have whatever you
require.'

And I should like some for myself,' she
added desperately.

All right ; you have only to say what you
need. Now go and get the manuscript ; we
shall soon be closing here.'

Oh, I could not possibly go back to Craven
Street this evening ; I have only just come
from there. Mr. Yassett would think I must
have had some idea of this kind while I was
in his ofi&ce, and '

Look here,' exclaimed Lance ; * you'll drive
me mad. Kelly — I say, Kelly, step this way a
minute, will you ? Now listen to the position,
and as a man of sense and experience give
this lady a word of advice.' And then, almost
without drawing his breath, Mr. Felton explained
how matters stood, and asked if Mrs.
Lacere ought not to go that hour, that instant,
and rescue her manuscript from the Parliamentary
train, as he called Mr. Yassett, and
shove it into the Burleigh Street express.'

Glen had glanced at Mr. Kelly as he entered,
and remembered that they had met
before, but she made no sign of recognition.

She wanted to hear what he had to say. Perhaps
she was longing to be urged to adopt a
course she knew perfectly well she should
afterwards repent. She always did repent
every course she adopted, so after all it seemed
to signify little which road she selected to
travel.

What is your opinion V repeated Mr.
Felton, addressing Mr. Kelly, who, hat in
hand, stood within the doorway, a contrast to
Mr. Laplash, who, with his hat on, leaned
against the wall, and Noll, who, similarly
covered, hovered just outside.

It all depends,' answered Mr. Kelly ; and
as he spoke, standing where the light of the
gas fell full upon him. Glen could but consider
how greatly the years had improved him.
What ! was this the gauche fellow-traveller in
the slow and never-to-be-forgotten journey to
London ? — this the man who had been introduced
to Lady Hilda's notice as the clever
actor in 'How's Maria?' Though the same,
he was altogether different. Glen had heard
something about his marriage from Mr. Vassett,
and could not deny matrimony had produced
a wonderfully beneficial effect on his outward

appearance. * It all depends,' he said, ' on
whether it is of importance to Mrs. Lacere to
receive the additional sum you offer.'

I imagine there is not much doubt about
that,' answered Mr. Felton, quite unconscious
that his remark could scarcely be considered
agreeable.

For a second Glen only gave consent by
silence ; at last she said, straightforwardly,
Mr. Felton is quite right. Money is of
importance to me.'

Then I think you would do wisely to go
and talk matters over with Mr. Yassett,'
decided Barney.

The successful author took one reluctant
step towards the door, while Lance cried out,
All I want her to do is to get her manuscript.
I entreat of you to go at once. Do,
for heaven's sake, put a little of the spirit into
yourself you have put into your books. If I
could find an old shoe I'd throw it after you,
but everything is so confoundedly new here.'

I am going,' said Glen calmly ; ' but remember,
I don't like it;' and, with a slight
bow to Mr. Kelly, she went through the outer
office and passed into the street.

Did you ever see such a duffer V was Mr.
Felton's flattering criticism, the moment lie
disappeared.

Do you think she is the author V asked
Mr. Kelly.

Certain sure. Now I wonder how long:
she'll stay discussing the matter with Yassett V

He need not have troubled himself on that
point. Muggins was closing the offices as she
got there, and it was almost in the dark she
held her brief interview with Mr. Vassett.
He said he would not stand in her way — perhaps
for the reason that it never occurred to
him she knew anything of Felton or La^Dlash, or
even the benignant Noll. Nobody' was aware
who the author of ' Ashtree Manor' might be,
and he did not feel inclined to go back into
his own office and hold another lengthy conversation
with her.

He gave her the first volume of the new
book, and when she said she would see him the
next day, he answered, a little shortly, ' Very
well ;' then Glen bade him good-night, and
the interview was over, and she was hurrying
through the darkness back to Burleigh Street,
having taken the first step along a road which

led her afterwards into the blackness of a
niorht that seemed at one time without even
one star to lighten its terrible gloom.

So you have come back at last commented
her husband, as she walked into his office and
passed round his desk and came and stood
silently beside him. He could not bear her
being out after dusk, and had passed through
every possible phase of anxiety on her account.

And where do you think you have been V

I have been selling a book she answered.

Look I' And she took out of her purse —
which only held sixpence besides — a cheque
for fifty pounds.

Why, where did you get this?' he asked in
utter amazement, looking only at the amount
and not at the signature.

And there is seven hundred and fifty more
to follow some time,' proceeded Glen, without
the slightest elation of tone or manner.

Her husband looked at her. He did not
know whether she was in earnest or not, or if
she had suddenly taken leave of her senses.

She returned his look very steadily, and
then made this remark, which in the often
future he recalled with a vague wonder :

I only hope it may not turn out I have
done a bad evening's work.'

^ My dear he said — ' my dear I* for he
could not comprehend the presentiment which
seemed weighing on her, and the relief to him
was something simply beyond the power of
expression.

VOL. III. 55

MR. KELLY S ADVICE.

ND, pray, who is Mr, Logan-facere
1' It was at Mr. Kelly's
hospitable table this question
happened to be put. During the course of
the six months following Glen's visit to
Burleigh Street it had been asked a good
many times by various persons in different
places.

Something in the City answered a gentleman
seated opposite.

Greengrocer or millionnaire V which of
course, as was only right and proper, produced
a laugh at the expense of the City.

I am sure he is not a green grocer, and I do
not think he is a millionnaire,' interposed Mr.

Kelly; while at the other end of the table
a little running fire was going on of * Only to
think, after all, of those books being written
by a lady ;' * I wonder what she is like ;'
'Must be a very masculine sort of person,
I should think ;' ' It is perfectly dreadful the
way she speaks of her sex ;' * The general
opinion is, her husband writes her books ;
I have heard he is very nice ;' * Really ! do
you know what he is V and then everyone
paused for a moment to listen, as a man very
like a sharp, cross terrier — whom, had he been
a dog, one would have instantly set down asa
'good ratter,' with a aimless glass well screwed
in his right eye — said in the tone of one
having authority, ' I can tell you all about
Mr. Logan-facere

'Why, you don't mean to say you ever
where in the City !' observed the gentleman
who had made the hit about green grocer or
millionnaire.

Wasn't I ? — went down once among the
hosts of the Philistines, and came back sorely
wounded.'

Poor innocent !' murmured his friend.

However, it wasn't then I knew the fortunate

55—2

husband of our distinguished author. It was
in the happy days of childhood. I have the
pleasantness recollections connected with the
name of Mordaunt Logan-facere. AVe fought
together, robbed orchards together, birds-rested,
went nutting, rode by turns an old
but extremely vicious pony that generally
finished by throwing me into the nearest and
dirtiest ditch, or what was far worse, the
middle of a quickset hedge. Yes, his uncle
had a jolly little place down in our part of
the world, and till I went to Eton we were
close friends. When I returned home the
next time his uncle was dead and he gone to
London ; and except once, I never heard of him
since till I saw in the columns of the Times —
*' Heron's Nest " (which I may remark was the
name of his uncle's house), " by Mrs. B.
Logan-facere." '

How romantic, how interesting !' sighed
a middle-aged spinster sitting by his side ;
and do you know anything of her V

No ; out of mere curiosity, for I need
scarcely tel you I am not a novel-reader,
I got the book from Mudie's, and the description
of Heron's Nest and the country roundabout

is so accurate, I thought Lacere must
have married some girl from the old neighbourhood
; but I understand I was mistaken.
She is Welsh, or Scotch, or '

No — Irish,' interrupted Mr. Kelly.

We shall get at something presently,' said
a portly dowager seated beside the host.
What between Mr. Hibbs, who knows all
about the husband, and Mr. Kelly, who can
tell us all about the wife, it will be our own
fault if we are not soon the best-informed
persons in London concerning this long vexed
question.'

I fear all I can tell you about the wife will
not add greatly to your store of knowledge,'
answered Barney, who had made it the rule of
his married life to profess total ignorance of
the existence of all ladies except those to
whom his wife introduced him. ' I certainly
have seen her. She came into Mr. Felton's
office once when I was there.'

Do satisfy our curiosity about her,' implored
a lady who had previously expressed
her conviction Mrs. Lacere ' must be the
sweetest of the sweet — a delightfully melancholy
and unhappy sort of creature, you know.'

I don't think there is much to say about
her answered Mr. Kelly, who would have
made the same reply had Glen been beautiful
as Venus. ' She certainly doesn't look clever,
or like a person capable of writing a successful
book, but the race is not always to the swift
or the battle to the strong,' added Barney,
thinking of his own unappreciated novel,
which had gone the round of nearly every
London publisher, and been rejected by all.

Judging from her books I should say they
are a miserable pair observed a lady, who
entertained the conviction that some of Glen's
bitterest utterances had been directed against
herself personally.

If they are I am sure it is not Lacere's
fault,' spoke up Mr. Hibbs briskly; ' but they
are poor, I understand, so of course they
must be unhappy. He was cruelly imposed
upon by his step-father. He is just the sort
of fellow people could not resist cheating. He
has got such a lot of brains it seems an equal
fight, but it is not ; intellect is no match for
trade " sharpness." '

Depend upon it lie whites the books,' said
the dowager, sotto voce, to her neighbour.

Just then, Mrs. Kelly with a gracious smile
inclining her head towards the dowager, there
ensued a general movement and flutter, and
rustling of stiff silks, and sweep of velvets,
and frou-frou of trailing skirts ; and since, for
most of the men present, literature in any
shape did not offer the slightest attraction,
conversation drifted into other channels, and
it was some weeks later ere Mr. Kelly,
meeting Mr. Hibbs at a lawn-party, where
they were both bored to death, asked him for
some further particulars concerning Glen's
husband.

Yes, it was from the Lacere union all the
misfortunes of the Logans began,' explained
Mr. Hibbs. ' There were two sisters co-heiresses
— one died unmarried, and her portion
went to some far-away relations in Durham,
I think ; the other married Logan, who had
a small patrimony of his own, and who, so far
as birth was concerned, stood far above the
Laceres. He was the great-grandfather of our
friend ; so, you see, it has not taken long for
the family to get to the bottom of the hill.
The father was a very good, quiet sort of man,
I believe, who died when his son was two

years of age — and his daughter still unborn.
He left a cousin of his own, guardian and
executor — a widower with a large family —
a needy man, and dishonest into the bargain.
The widow seems to have been a poor creature,
and soon married him ; and the boy, who
happened to be delicate, and no doubt in the
way to boot, was sent to Heron's Nest. After
his uncle's death, it seems, he went back to
the step-paternal roof, where he was taught to
regard Lacere as his benefactor, his best friend,
and so forth.

Actually, he was twenty five before it came
to his knowledge, quite by accident, that he
had not been a pauper living on his stepfather's
bounty. That good gentleman had
quietly appropriated every sixpence of his
money, and, having died in the odour of
sanctity, left his whole family to the care of
the youth he had defrauded. It is a beautiful
connection into which your countrywoman
has married. I know a solicitor who is pretty
well acquainted with the Laceres, root and
branch, and his opinion is that whatever income
the lady makes, or her husband earns,
will be eugulphed in the family quagmire.

He has lost a lot of money, I am told, through
becoming surety and that sort of ridiculous
thing. I believe his business is a good one,
but I have reason to know he is not in easy
circumstances.'

This was the first-fruits of Glen's visit to
Burleigh Street. Never saying ' By your
leave,' or ' With your leave,' Messrs. Felton
and Laplash, considering the mystery concerning
her had lasted long enough, advertised
her name throughout the kingdom, and
everyone was consequently free to discuss her
husband's affairs, and both their antecedents,
to speculate concerning ,their home-life, to
repeat any story, true or false, about what
they were and had been.

The charming privacy of anonymous authorship
could be Glen's no longer. Thanks to
Messrs. Felton and Co., she was now common
property. Hitherto she had shrunk morbidly
from publicity ; now she was placed well in a
strong light for everyone who pleased to stare
at and criticize. Mr. Yassett had stood well
between her and the world. No one ever
elicited a syllable of information concerning
the new author from him ; but with ]\lr. Felton

and his partner the case was widely different,
and almost to her terror, and certainly to her
annoyance, Mrs. Logan-facere found people
were talking about her by name, and that the
still safe haven of a quiet life was exchanged
for that wide sea of notoriety where authors
make more enemies than friends — where very
bad weather has often to be encountered, and
where the build of the vessel, and the canvas
she carries, and the flag she hoists, are far
more considered and discussed than the freight
with which she is laden.

Not all the solid benefits she derived from
Burleigh Street ever reconciled her to Mr.
Felton's place of business, which was constantly
full of loungers, who called each other by their
Christian names (abbreviated), who chaffed and
laughed at and about nothing, the while the
senior partner discoursed, generally with his
hat on and his legs dangling from the counter,
concerning; the habits of hio;h life and those
things which it was correct, as well as those
things which it was not correct to do.

Nevertheless, through a period of very hardwork,
Glen soon began to feel it was a golden
stream down which the barque with Their fortunes

was then smoothly gliding. Xo shortness
of money at that time ; no need to consider
sixpences or shillings either, to stint in
housekeeping, to pause ere buying a dress.
So long as she chose to sign an agreement and
take bills for the amount, she could have what
she wanted in the way of money from Burleigh
Street ; and the more she spent, so as to ' look
as if she was well paid,' to quote Mr. Felton's
OT\'n expression, the better that gentleman was
pleased.

He had exactly the same feeling about his
authors that some mistresses have about their
servants. He wanted the writers on his list
to *cut a greater dash' than the writers on the
list of any other publisher.

He desired, in fact, not merely to be a
swell * himself, but to make ^ swells ' of
others. He would have liked to see a string
of carriages in Burleigh Street, and nothing
annoyed him more about Mr. Kelly than that
gentleman's persistent refusal to bring his
wife's bays to help advertise the Felton and
Laplash establishment, or to grace in his own
person, or allow Mrs. Kelly grace, any of the
banquets to which the adventurous Lance was

in the habit of hospitably bidding all his 'great
guns and some of his ' little guns ' too, if they
chanced to be favourites.

For some time Glen and her husband
managed to elude these festivities, but at
length it seemed to them both that to persist
in this refusal would be to vex a man who
seemed to mean very kindly towards them,
and who, throughout the whole of their business
relations, never varied in one respect —
namely, his belief in Mrs. Logan-facere's
power as a Totter, and his admiration for her
books.

He praised her till her very name became
abhorrent to the loungers in Burleigh Street,
till men longed to pull her work to pieces, and
tell Mr. Felton how utterly sick and weary
they felt of what he called his ' crack author.*

Felton used to bully us about you,' a well-known
essayist, with whom Glen became great
friends in after-years, once laughingly told her.
I believe we all hated you then,' he said ; and
Glen answered she was not in the least surprised.
If it had fallen to her lot to be wise beforehand,
and understand how little she was loved by
the Burleigh Street fraternity, she would probably

have elected at first, as she did at last,
to decline meeting any of them under Mr.
Felton's roof, where that excitable individual
almost worked himself into a frenzy, lest each
guest should not get what he liked, or be
properly attended to.

Poor Lance Felton ! Whatever his other
faults might be, he was the soul of hospitality,
and it hurt Glen to see, what he never saw
himself, how little those who came to the feast
thought of the giver of it — how much more
ready they were to note little solecisms in
social etiquette, and to remark on the ignorance
evinced in the neglect of small details,
than to recognise the generous desire to promote
their comfort — the nervously-anxious
wish that they should all feel thoroughly at
home and enjoy themselves.

Yet certainly the host was irresistible ; no
man or woman, with the slightest sense of
humour, could have helped laughing at him,
and there was not much harm in that, had the
laughter been all good-natured, for he laughed
loud and often at himself. He was forever
taking the whole company into his confidence
about matters concerning which anyone else

would have maintained a pleasing reticence.
He could not hold his tongue. He preferred
to tell the world of his shortcomings. It was
extremely funny to hear him talk about what
he did not know, but extremely sad to notice
the cruel sneers with which many of these
utterances were greeted.

Long as Glen had been writing, this was her
first experience of social life in Bohemia.

She had seen authors on their best behaviour
in Mr. Yassett's office, and somewhat inclined
to be a little wild in Burleigh Street, but the
dinner at Mr. Felton's place down Hampton
way was quite another matter. The decorous
slowness and solemnity with which the evening
commenced formed an extraordinary contrast
to the frantic hilarity that heralded its
close. Curiously enough, there were not many
of the guests who knew each other except byname.
A few men talked together in the
drawing-room, and spoke to some of the ladies
as though they had met them before, but at
first it seemed-impossible that from such
diverse materials any pleasure could ever be
extracted. The best jokes of the best joker fell
utterly flat — even Lady Hilda, who was present,

failed to strike a spark of fire. The truth
is, her ladyship infinitely preferred a small
audience, where she could keep attention to
herself exclusively. Stage asides, little snatches
of conversation — such as, ' So Jennings has
gone r * Yes ; saw him off.' ' What do you
think of Carew's comedy 1' 'Did you read
that savage review of Tompkins s work in the
Saturday? — drove her to the verge of distraction.
Glen had recognised her lively ladyship
at once, and shrinking from too close a
proximity to Hicks's derelict, found herself at
Mr. Felton's elbow.

I say,' he whispered eagerly, ' I am going
to take you in to dinner.'

You must not do that,' cried Glen.

Why not V

Because Lady Hilda '

Oh Lady Hilda 1' retorted Mr. Felton,

while Glen murmured, ' H — sh ! h — sh !' soothingly
following up this hint with a series of
entreaties, which in due time produced the
desired result.

The dinner-hour came, the dinner-hour
passed ; there were messages from the kitchen,
there were hurried retreats of Mr. Felton to,

as Glen suspected, the dining-room, to fortify
his courage — since on each occasion he returned
a little more excited and a good deal less
inclined to endure contradiction. At last he
put the position to the company. Dinner had
already been kept waiting half an hour for the
great Mr. Gossage and the greater Mrs.
Gossage — (' Who is,' confided the publisher
to Glen, 'such a sixty-gunners). Should they
wait any longer for these illustrious personages
? Lance only ' wanted to know,' so he
proposed that the question should be put to
the vote.

Then, as with one voice, every man in the
room answered ' No ;' and the Mercury, who
had been waiting at the door for final orders,
flew with them to the impatient cook.

Fact is, you know,' confessed Lance to Mrs.
Lacere, * it's deucedly awkward. She promised
to come early and put us a bit in the way of
things — also to bring some damask and silver
we were short of; and now, how we shall manage
with such a lot of people I'm sure I can't
imagine.'

I do not fancy anyone will know you are
short if you don't tell them,' returned Glen, in

the same tone. ' No — no, Mr. Felton ; I
cannot go in before Lady Gildas she added
hurriedly, as ' dinner ' was proclaimed from
the doorway; and thus compelled. Lance
offered his arm to Lady Hicks, as he sometimes
called her, taking good care to tell her
ladyship, in the short passage across the hall,
that he wanted to escort ' Heron's Nest,' but
she refused to have anything to do with him.

She is here, then, is she V said Lady Hilda.
I looked about, but I could not see her.'

I don't know where she has got to
answered Mr. Felton, glancing back over his
left shoulder — and, indeed, at that moment
it would have been hard to tell where anyone
had got to — amongst the tightly packed
crowd who, at last, having somehow pushed
and fought their way into the dining-room,
found there were not seats for much more
than half their number. It was of no use standing
on ceremony in that house, so some of the
gentlemen, forming themselves into a volunteer
corps, marched backwards and forwards
between the rooms, carrying chairs, seats, and
every portable article of such-like furniture.

That's all right !' exclaimed Lance, blandly

VOL. III. 56

surveying results ; ' sit as close as you can —
we'll all shake down presently. Where's Mr.
Lacere? Thank you, Gervais/ as a meek-looking
gentleman in spectacles, who seemed
as if he hadn't a joke in his whole body, and
yet who was, in Mr. Felton's opinion, the
greatest humorist that ever lived, landed
Glen safely three seats from Mr. Felton's
right hand, and consequently next but one to
Lady Hilda, whom the publisher, in an access
of friendliness, had just addressed as * My dear
soul.' He was relating to her the Gossage
misadventure — how Mrs. Gossage had offered
to show them what was what. ' Because, you
know,' he added, ' we don't pretend to be upto
all the ways of grand society.'

Why did you not ask me V remarked Lady
Hilda ; ' I should have been only too delighted
had you deigned to make use of my poor
services. But perhaps,' she added, with an
engaging modesty, * you thought I might not
be exactly — capable V

Greatly shocked at this suggestion, Mr.
Felton assured her he could not have dreamed
of taking such a liberty. ' And besides, there
was the plate — and the damask '

I fancy I could have managed even that,'
said her ladyship ; and then, as the work of
dinner began, she leaned a little towards Mr.
Felton, and inquired in a low voice, * Now, tell
me which is Mrs. Lacere.'

Next but one — Mrs. ' he was proceeding
to call out, when Lady Hilda, laying*
her hand firmly on his, stopped the words in
mid air.

I want to see her, that's all,' she explained ;
and leaning a little forward, so as to get the
humorist's person out of the way, she stared
hard at Glen, who at length, as if subtly conscious
of this scrutiny, turned her head to the
foot of the table.

Lady Hilda nodded pleasantly.

How d'ye do V she said. ' So you have set
the Thames on fire.'

Mrs. Lacere was about to answer, when the
noise of a fresh arrival caused Mr. Felton to
spring from his chair, and, exclaiming ' It's
the Passages !' rush excitedly from the room.
There was a pause, during the continuance of
which the company looked at each other,
and listened to the sound of eao;er talking; in
the hall ; then the door was flung wide, and

56—2

Lady Hilda, looking calmly up from her
plate, which she had been regarding with a
good deal of interest, beheld a figm^e in trailing
black velvet sweep into the room. She
had so little clothing on the upper part of her
person, and there lay such a mass of wasted
material on the carpet, that Lady Hilda might
almost be excused her astonished exclamation
of ' Good heavens !'

This was Mrs. Gossage, who had promised
to come and do the prunes and prism business
for the hostess, who did not sit at the
head of her own table, and whom nobody but
Lady Hilda seemed to know. This was Mrs.
Gossage, whose face was of an unearthly
pallor, and whose neck, against the deep black
of her bodice, appeared the colour of driven
snow. She came in coughing plaintively, and
she sank, with a faint, thankful smile, into a
seat vacated for her benefit, leaving about
half a dozen yards of velvet on the floor
for the servants to trip over, which they did,
till one man, possessed of considerable presence
of mind, tucked the bundle under the
lady's chair.

She's a stunner, isn't she V said Mr. Felton

to Lady Hilda, proud to think here at length
was something worthy the attention even of
an earl's daughter.

She has stunned me,' answered Lady
Hilda demurely. The soup, of which she
partook of one spoonful, was brought back for
Mrs. Gossage ; then she had fish, eating about
as much as would have covered a shilling ; at
intervals she coughed and was very languishing,
and people paid court to her for her
husband's sake, and a general frost seemed
to set in over the whole of the company, that
had been about to thaw before the arrival of
the Passages, till champagne appeared, which
Mr. Felton told his guests he hoped they
would find good — for that his wine merchant
had assured him it was the very vintage
for literary men.

Whatever the merits of the wine might be,
it unloosened the tongues of some of the
talkers present — Babel itself could not have
been noisier than that dining-room. Mr.
Felton laughed and applauded to the echo.
There were good things said, had anyone
across the table been able to hear them. The
heat grew oppressive — the din more furious.

and Glen was wondering how much longer
the ladies would be expected to sit at table,
when Mr. Felton's right-hand neighbour, after
looking vainly at the hostess for the usual
signal, and seeing Mrs. Felton did not seem
to have the faintest idea of giving it, took the
initiative upon herself, and, glancing at Mrs.
Lacere, said, ' Had we not better go V and
rising as she sjDoke, walked out of the room,
greatly to the relief of the males, who had been
inwardly wondering when on earth ' those
women meant to move !'

Dear me !' exclaimed Lady Hilda, standing
in the middle of the drawing-room, and
fetching a deep breath ; * Dear me !' and then
she crossed over to the mantelpiece and looked
at herself in the mirror, and afterwards strolled
leisurely round the apartment, examining everything
in it — undeterred by any supervision on
the part of Mrs. Felton, who had gone, as one
lady suggested, to the nursery to see her dear
children.

Kitchen most likely,' amended Lady Hilda,
with calm insolence ; then, turning her attention
to Glen, she observed, * You are rather
bread-and-buttery still. Oh ! I see you do

not understand — that dear, delightful Vassett
never told tales out of school. Never, never,
never, so long as I live, shall I forget the
solemn face with which he told me the first
time we met, ** You had as much to learn as
I to unlearn." You don't look as if you had
learnt much, but " still water runs deep," etcetera
; I suppose you know the end of the
proverb.*

Yes Glen confessed she did ; and as Lady
Hilda spoke Mrs. Lacere's memory took a long
flight backward to that breezy hillside, where
she had first heard one of the * boys ' delivering
himself of the objectionable sentence in its
entirety.

'1 thought so,' commented her ladyship.
Ah ! I see we shall suit each other admirably.
Well, and how is our old friend in Craven
Street V and marching Glen slowly about the
room, perfectly regardless of and indifferent to
the looks of surprise and indignation which
followed them, Lady Hilda found herself once
more on the hearth rug, and again gazing in
the mirror.

Won't your ladyship sit down V asked

an elderly dame, who had prayed to be
allowed to come in just for an hour — that
she might say she had seen all ' those wonderful
writers ' — rising and offering Lady Hilda
a corner of a sofa, otherwise well filled by the
wives of two men great in the opinion of
Lance Felton.

Her ladyship ' surveyed the speaker for a
moment in amazement ; then, ' I never sit
down,' she answered.

Lor' !' exclaimed the other.

I never voluntarily doom myself to the
chance of being bored,' kindly explained Lady
Hilda. And then she would have swept on
her travels round the room for the second
time, had a low, tremulous voice, murmuring,

Oh, Mrs. Lacere !' not arrested her progress.

I have so longed to make your acquaintance,'
proceeded Mrs. Gossage — for it was she. * I
hope you will allow me to introduce myself —
my name is Gossage. Of course you have
heard Mr. Felton speak of my husband ?
We are both enthusiastic admirers of your
books ; indeed, I may say it was only the
hope of meeting you brought me here this
evening. It was madness, I know, to venture ;

but I told my husband, whatever the consequences,
I could not miss the chance of
seeing you.'

And she smiled sweetly up at Lady Hilda,
who was staring stonily at her, while Glen
stammered out some reply to the barefaced
compliment, looking as she spoke certainly as
though she had never written a line of manuscript
in her life.

I ought not to have come,' continued Mrs.
Gossage. * My doctor said if I did it would be
simple suicide, and that he could not answer
for the consequences. I have been very ill
with inflammation of the lungs, and my chest
is naturally delicate '

Then why in the world, if you have been
so ill, and are so delicate, did you not put
on some clothes before undertaking such a
journey ? Here,' and at this juncture Lady
Hilda pulled a striped woollen antimacassar
from behind the highly proper dame who had
offered her a seat — threw it over Mrs. Gossage 's
white shoulders — wrapped it round her neck
drew it tight up under her chin, where she
fastened it close with a hairpin extracted from
her ladyship's chignon — and then, remarking

That's better took Glen by the hand and
led her away, unmindful of the extraordinary
figure she left standing on the hearth rug, and
the looks of blank dismay with which all the
ladies present regarded her proceedings.

Let's go into the conservatory,' suggested
Lady Hilda, ' and get a breath of air. Funny
sort of place this, isn't it ? By-the-bye, don't
you have anything to do with that woman —
Mrs. Gossage, I mean.'

'Why not r asked Glen.

Never you mind — be a good child, and do
as you are told. Well, and what do you
think of the Felton menage ? Dear me, you
need not be so cautious,' she went on, when
Glen said she had not seen much of it as
yet. ' I never told you my first experience of
the establishment, did I V

It would have been difficult for her to have
done so, as she had not exchanged a dozen
words with Mrs. Lacere before in her life ;
but, speaking as if Glen were an old acquaintance,
she added :

'When our publisher asked me to comedown
and stay at his " place in the country,"
and I accepted his invitation, I thought 1

should see some great mansion ; so to do
honour to Mr. and Mrs. Felton — who I felt
sure would have heaps of servants and were
living in grand style — I borrowed a friend's
carriage, and drove down one afternoon with
my maid. It was dark when we arrived. The
gas was lighted in the hall, and, as no one appeared
in answer to my summons, I walked
straight in through the door, which usually
stands wide open.

At that moment Mrs. Felton, whom I had
never seen, was coming out of the dining-room,
arrayed in a black skirt and a white garibaldi.
I mistook her for a servant, and asked
her to send some one to carry in my boxes,
which she did ; never telling me who she was,
or enlightening me when I begged her to show
my maid my rooms.

Meantime, seeing a fire in the apartment
Wee have just left, I thought I would warm myself
a little till somebody came to me, and was
about stirring the coals into a good blaze, when
Parkins — that's my maid — rushed downstairs,
at a pace quite unprecedented.

" If you please, m' lady," she began, quite
in a temper, " where am I to sleep ?"

" How, in Heaven's name, should I know,
Parkins !" I answered.

*' Because Mrs. Felton — that, if you please,
m* lady, was the mistress of the house you
saw in the hall — says if I don't sleep in your
apartment, she doesn't know where she can
possibly put me up, except in Mr. Felton s
dressing-room ! And so T/ve come down, if you
please, m' lady, to say "

" Don't say it. Parkins !" I entreated.
The best thing you can do is to go straight
back to town. The carriage is still here, I
think. Tell the coachman to wait for you."

I dressed myself for dinner that evening
by the light of one solitary dip with a long
snuff in a flat candlestick, and the children
partook of the meal with us, and messed their
food about ; and Mr. Felton was sulky because
something had gone wrong in Burleigh Street,
and he told me Laplash was a " stupid beast,"
and that there was not a soul in his office he
could trust to make out an invoice — whatever
an invoice may be — and '

" Oh ! see, there is Mrs. Felton at last 1"
interrupted Glen ; " I must go and speak to
her. I have never been introduced, or — or

anything. Pray excuse me and, leaving the
conservatory, she found the hostess, and sat
down beside her, and talked as much as she
could ; for which heroic effort she was rewarded
by IVlrs. Felton telling Mr. Felton next day,
for her part she could see nothing in that
Mrs. Lacere, who talked 'just like anybody
else. In her opinion, Lady Hilda Hicks was
worth fifty of her.'

The gentlemen by this time were dropping
in slowly, and Lady Hilda, having got hold of
a great traveller, was gravely asking him what
he thought of the British Lion ?

'**I prefer the African," he replied, both
question and answer being Greek to the old
lady who was waiting for pearls and diamonds
and emeralds to drop from the mouths of Mr.
Felton's guests.

It was at this moment Lady Hilda, whose
eyes were everywhere and on everyone, saw a
glance pass between Glen and her husband,
which told her a certain grave-looking individual
was IVIr. Lacere. Leaving the distinguished
traveller, of whom she had already
wearied, and who felt extremely glad to be
rid of her, she sidled round to this new object

of her curiosity, to whom, without the slightest
preface, she remarked :

Your wife is a wonderful woman.'

Mr. Lacere only bowed in reply, but as he
bowed he smiled.

Humph r thought Lady Hilda, * spoony
on her still.' And though her own literary
career had been one long glorification of
women, and a series of essays on the general
hatefulness of men, illustrated by examples
drawn from personal experience, she yet felt
so angry at this unexpected folly on the part
of Glen's husband that she would have liked
to slap Mr. Lacere on the instant.

For there is something in him,' she decided,
and there's nothing in his stupid idiot of a
wife.'

You must be very proud,' went on Lady
Hilda sweetly, * of what she has done.'

I am more proud of what she is,' he
answered ; and then he let his eyes rove off
again in search of Glen, who this time, her
attention being otherwise engaged, was not
looking; at him.

Good heavens ! what a simpleton a wiseman
may be I' considered Mr. Hicks's widow ;

and she was proceeding to say some pleasant
things about Mrs. Lacere's ' extraordinary
book when Mr. Felton, making his way
across to where she stood, hoped her ladyship
would kindly * sing them a song.'

One comfort answered Lady Hilda, * if I
do, nobody will listen.' And she walked off
to the piano, taking Mr. Lacere for her escort,
and asking him as they went if his wife played
and sang, and whether it was true that he
wrote many parts of her books, and wondering
he had not been afraid to marry such a clever
creature, — ' because,' she added, ' I know as a
rule men detest clever women ' — and beo-sinQ:
him to say what he would like her to sing,
and stating, solo voce, she felt it would belike
lifting up her voice in the Zoological
Gardens. And then at last she began a simple
little ballad, into which she flung such taste
and feeling and soul, a dead silence fell on
the room, and there was an involuntary movement
towards the vocalist.

And now I'll sing you something merry
after that !' exclaimed her versatile ladyship ;
and striking a few chords, she broke into a
catching, mocking little German song, which

made her audience laugh without exactly
understanding why, and caused Mr. Felton
to applaud so loudly, and call for an encore
with such vehemence, that, under cover of the
noise. Glen managed to get beside her husband
and suggest they should steal away as
soon as possible. They were in the hall and
bidding good-night to the hostess, whom they
encountered there, ere Mr. Felton missed them.
When he did, however, he was on their track
in a moment.

'You're not going yet!' he exclaimed. ' Why,
the evening's scarce begun. Last week there
were a lot of fellows here, and when they got
down to the station they found there was no
train till seven o'clock in the morning. So
they came back again, and we sat up all night
and had a jolly time of it.'

Mr. Lacere, at this juncture, stated very
positively he did not intend to miss the next
train or to sit up all night ; and, laughing.
Glen shook hands with Mr, Felton, who followed
her to the door, exclaiming; :

Now, are you sure you have enjoyed yourself
? — have you had a good time ? — did you
have everything you wanted ? Lacere, do

take a glass of brandy — do, before you go out
into the night air I And you'll come again,
won't you ? We don't profess to know what's
what ; but if our friends will only say what

they would like Well, if you must go —

good-night, good-night ! and thank you for
coming.'

Mrs. Lacere could not have told anyone
what it was about this address that touched
and somehow seemed to hurt her ; but when
she got out under the stars, she could not see
them for a mist of tears, and she felt she was
very sorry for Lance Felton, and that, so far
as she herself was concerned, she wished — ah !
most heartily ! — she had never turned out of
the Strand that evening and walked up Burleigh
Street, and passed through the oJSice of
Felton and Laplash into a new world !

The next afternoon she had an appointment
to see Mr. Felton, and discuss some business
arrangements. According to custom, the principal
in the firm was not alone — Mr. Kelly
chanced on that occasion to be the welcome
visitor, and to him Lance was pouring out an
account of the delights of the previous evening
— reciting the names of the celebrities that

VOL. III. b7

had been present — recounting the episode of
Mrs. Gossage, who left them in the lurch ' for
linen, silver, and manners ; not but what we
did very well without all !' — and giving Barney
a rapid sketch of the doings and sayings of
the company.

That's what she wants, you know,' proceeded
Mr. Felton, referring to Glen, who did
not dare to look at her former travelling-companion,
as Lance took up his parable. * It
will do her all the good in the world to see a
little of life, and mix in society, and know
what's oroing on amongst her fellow-creatures.
We were never intended for hermits ; and fora
writer in particular to lock the door against
everybody is the greatest mistake possible.
New ideas — new ideas are the things, Kelly ;
what do you say V

That I hope Mrs. Lacere will not abandon
her old ideas till she is very sure the new are
better. If she take my advice she will stay
Quietly at home, and leave general society to
those who do not need time for thought, or
leisure in which to produce original books.'

There's a compliment wrapped up somewhere
in that sentence, if we could only

find it,' observed Mr. Felton, a little puzzled.


There's a warning, at any rate,' said
Barney. ' I trope I have not offended you,
Mrs. Lacere.'

'No — oh no!' she answered; and then
their eyes met, and Glen knew she and Mr.
Kelly did not differ greatly in opinion concerning
the demerits of the clique with
which, against her better judgment, she had
become associated.

And so Time, which never stops, went on
very rapidly, and Mrs. Logan-facere, who had
once lived the quietest of lives, got acquainted
with many sorts and conditions of men, and
found herself, as Mr. Lance Felton felicitously
expressed the matter, * before she knew
where she was, in the full swing of general
Society.'

57—2

MR. Felon CRITICIZES.

gM^« CANNOT imagine, KeUy, low it is

5^ St yo^i get so near nature, and yet

^iU;^ never manage to toueli it.'

This agreeable speech was, of course, made

by Mr. Felt on, and the matter under criticism

chanced, unhappily, to be that novel which

Barney had fondly believed would prove, in

comparison to all other modern novels, as

sine unto water.'

He had kept the manuscript by him (compulsorily),
if not quite for seven, at least for a
good many years ; and during the whole of
that time his greatest pleasure was to correct
and re-write a work he considered only required
a pushing publisher to make a mark in

literature not likely soon to be obliterated. It
was a book constructed, as he fondly believed,
on quite new principles, combining the advantages
while avoiding the faults of every style
of narrative which had yet appeared.

It possessed aU the merits of Godwin's play
as slily enumerated by Charles Lamb, and fell
quite as flat. It was * too clever, too rich, too
full of plums, too refined, too epigrammatic ;
its sarcasm was too delicate — its humour too
subtle — to find favour with a public whose
taste had been vitiated by a course of modern
fiction,' said Mr. Kelly's friends.

It's heavy as lead,' was the shorter commentary
passed upon it by the Felton clique ;
while the ' outside barbarians' — the subscribers
to Mudie's — sent the book back as if the plague
were in it.

A dead failure,' was ]mr. Felton's summing
up of the matter. ' Well, there is nobody to
blame but myself ;' for he had, in spite of Mr.
Kelly's coy protests, and shy ' I don't really
think it will suit you,' insisted on publishing
the novel — which certainly did not owe its ill-success
to any want of advertising, pushing, or
puffing. Preliminary paragraphs in the literary

papers hinted that a rich treat was in store for
the readers of fiction ; that such a book as that
advertised by Messrs. Felton and Laplash, the
work of Mr. Kelly, the well-known essayist, had
not been produced since the days of Fielding.

Lance himself had blown its trumpet till
listeners were almost fain to stop their ears ;
and now the three volumes were to be had at
the libraries for the asking, nobody wanted
them. The worst novel of the season went
better than Barney's masterpiece, which he
had been improving and expanding and curtailing
and interweaving for years, which was,
in fact, an epitome of his Hibernian and London
experiences — a treasury full of all the good
stories he had heard — a mine of wisdom — a
storehouse of knowledge — dramatic, pathetic,
sensational, objective, subjective, and Heaven
only knows what besides. Barney had felt going
over the proof-sheets a labour of love. The
printing, the paper, the binding, were all matters
of anxiety and solicitude to him. No title, he
fondly believed, ever before looked so well in
an advertisement. He read all, and indeed
wrote many, of the preliminary puffs, and
believed everything they stated ; and this was

the end — a dead failure and Mr. Felton' s criticisms
!

Ignoring that pleasing remark concerning
his inability to draw from life as beneath contempt,
Mr. Kelly stated his willingness to
repay his publishers any loss they might have
sustained through the book. It was a proposition
with which the junior, or 'silent' partner,
as Glen called him, would have closed on
the spot, but Mr. Felton pooh-poohed the
idea, as if he had the Bank of England at his
back.

That's not the way we do things here,' he
said. ' If we make a good bargain, we take
the profit ; if we make a bad one, we put up
with the loss. We'll pull through your deficit
over Mrs. Lacere's book — now, there's nature
if you like !'

We can't all be Mrs. Laceres,' remarked
Barney, with a fine irony perfectly thrown
away upon Mr. Felton, who answered :

No, faith ! — I only wish you could. In that
case publishing would be more of a money-making
game than it is. By Jove ! I didn't
think she could have beaten "Heron's Nest," but
she has. There's go — there's sparkle — there's

wit — there's life. I declare, when I was reading-over
that book in proof I had often to stop and
ask myself, " Can a woman have written this *?
How the deuce does she come to know all
about these things ?" And such a woman, too
skim-milk and colourless, and still ,
as Lady Hilda says. To quote
Hicks, " You would swear she had passed her
whole life mending stockings and reading
tracts, and cutting out flannel petticoats for
Dorcas societies." '

As he paced the London pavements that day
after leasing Burleigh Street, Mr. Kelly
thought more about Mrs. Lacere than he had
ever done before. Always he felt a certain,
though possibly unconscious, antipathy to her.
From their first meeting on board the Morecambe
boat, she failed utterly to attract him
in any way — quite the reverse. ' Has beens,'
to repeat a remark made in a very early
chapter, possessed no charm for the then unfledged
Barney. The class from which he had
sprung, and the class to which he aspired,
seemed tangible and intelligible ; but people
who were going down in the world, instead of
struggling up the social ladder, seemed to Mr.

Kelly's common-sense, anomalies that had no
business on the earth at all. And now the
shabbily dressed young girl, grown into womanhood,
presented herself as a rival in the field
of literature — further, it was impossible for him
to guess what she might not have said concerning
her travelling companion on that gloomy
October day !

He had always entertained his doubts about
her. When they met at Mr. Yassett's he
marvelled whether she would remember and
repeat that slip of his concerning the English
nation and his Satanic Majesty ; but from
no sign or word of either the Craven Street
publisher or Mr. Pierson could he conjecture
she ever mentioned him at all. Still, when
Mr. Felton got hold of her, a deeper anxiety
took possession of Barney's mind.

From fifty little trifles he knew, whatever
else she lacked — and, according to Mr. Felton,
outside her books she was deficient in most
things — Mrs. Lacere did not fail in the faculty
of observation. Was it likely, therefore, she had
omitted to photograph him in her memory as he
once had been — draw, gauche, practically utterly
ignorant of the manners and habits of good

society, and clad, moreover, in a brown coat
made by the Callinacoan tailor — the very
memory of which made Mr. Kelly's blood
tinoie as he recalled the fig-ure he must have
presented in it.

When he met Glen on that memorable
evening at Burleigh Street, something in her
weary look, the indecision of her manner, her
senseless loyalty,' as Mr. Felton said, to Mr.
Vassett, the reluctance with which she went to
make hay surely any other woman on earth
would have eagerly sprung to stack, inspired
him with a certain chivalrous sympathy and
conviction she had never confided to anyone
the circumstances of their first meeting ; but,
without knowing Lady Hilda's expressed
opinion, he had long been coming round to
the idea that still waters do flow deep.

She's a deuce of a " take ofi*," I'm sure,'
confided Mr. Laplash once, in a special burst
of irritation against the successful authoress.
She may think I'm blind and deaf, but
I can both hear and see. She scarcely ever
opens her lips without a sort of sneer.'

But what is there to sneer at V

Ah ! you oughtn't find anything, because

you haven't much sense of humour, as it's
called ;' Barney stood rigid with indignation
he who believed his own perception of the
ridiculous to be the finest and most prominent
trait in his literary character ! ' but others
know what she is after. There's Noll, now,
he can't bear her ; and for all he is so
pious and quiet, he is able to read character
well.'

It was of these things and many more Mr.
Kelly thought as he bent his steps to New
Oxford Street. He had declined Mr. Felton's
eager offer of the Lacere new book, on the
ground that he had little time for reading;.
Nevertheless, he was going straight to Mudie's
to get the novel so disgustingly be-praised,
and find out if he could what made it sell,
while his own much better work hung fire.

That evening; and the next morning; he
devoted to Mrs. Lacere's lengthy three volumes.
When he came to the last page, he smiled —
not pleasantly.

Very shortly after there appeared in a then
noted journal a savage attack on the work of
'a greatly over-rated author.' This review
was written by Barney, and many were the

guesses — all erroneous — made as to the personality
of the reviewer. If Barney's own
book had been heavy, the same fault certainly
could not be found with his critique. It was
airy and amusing. He used the whip judiciously,
and touched up every raw to be found
in the author's style. He ridiculed the passages
other reviewers had praised ; he was
severe on grammatical mistakes, on erroneous
quotations ; he extolled the productions of
other novelists in order that he might the
better contrast their excellences with Mrs.
Lacere's defects ; he said the book lacked consistency,
probability, and interest ; that her
villains were impossible, and her virtuous characters
tame and mawkish ; that she wrote concerning
a state of society of which she knew
nothing ; and, that in effect, she placed her
heroes and heroines in a world the like of
which no eye had ever beheld, and no mind
would ever be able to understand.

In Burleigh Street this review fell with the
force of a thunderbolt. It was the first really
bad notice Glen had met with since she ' made
her name.* Coming from the source it did,
the review made a great impression, and one

that was unfavourable to the author. People
felt ashamed to have admired passages they
were now told were only calculated to cause
wonder and mirth in cultivated minds ; to have
been touched by pathos, they were credibly
informed could not be considered other than
utter bathos ; to have been amused by poor
and twaddling anecdotes, and to have considered
a story wonderfully original, the plot
of which the reviewer conclusively proved had
been taken bodily from one of the trashiest
novels ever issued by the Minerva Press.

The number of persons who called in at
Burleigh Street to ask Mr. Felton if he had
seen the review in the Independent was astonishing.


You have got a jolly slating at last,' said
Lance to Mrs. Lacere, who laughed till Mr.
Laplash observed it was no laughing matter —
for them, at least.

Well, Mrs. Lacere,' exclaimed some of the
Burleigh Street loungers, ' and what do you
say to the notice of your book in the Independent
r

Oh ! I don't mind,' she answered. ' I suppose
the person who wrote it has to earn his

living as I have, and it must be far easier to
write a bad notice than a good one.*

I am so sorry said Mrs. Kelly to her husband,
' to see that shockingly ill-natured
criticism on Mrs. Lacere's book in the Independent
I consider it absolutely cruel to
write about a lady in that bitter way. In my
opinion it is most unmanly.'

Barney looked up from the Times, which he
was reading, and answered, ' I dare say the
review will make the book sell all the better ;
and as to the lack of chivalry about the
notice, when women choose to enter the lists
with men they must not complain if they
occasionally get hurt — sex is neither recognised
nor respected in criticism.'

Well, I do not think the review fair, and
Mrs. Lacere is really so nice it makes the
matter far worse. As I told you, I was introduced
to her last night, and when we were
talking about your novel, she said, " She
thought the heroine the sweetest female
character she had ever met with in fiction ;"
it was such delightful praise.' And Mrs.
Kelly bridled a little, and toyed with her
toast, and looked conscious as sweet seventeen

might have done ; while Barney, his eyes
only that instant opened to the truth, thought,
in utter astonishment, 'Why, she imagines
she sat for the portrait ! Good heavens !'

Who was with Mrs. Lacere V he asked
aloud.

Her husband ; quiet, gentlemanly, but to
my fancy somewhat reserved and cold. He
took me down to supper, and I happened
incidentally to mention Mrs. Lacere's pretty
compliment to your novel.

" Yes," he said, '•' my wife is charmed with
the book."

" Have you read it ?" I inquired.

" No," he replied. " Unfortunately, I have
little time to spare now for reading of any
kind."

" But no doubt," I suggested, "you have
pored over every line Mrs. Lacere has written."

He actually smiled as he answered, " I am
sorry I have not even read all her books." '

Sensible man,' commented Barney.

My dear, I call it horrid. Fancy my saying
I had not read your books — fancy missing
a single word you ever wrote ! And then, besides,
she really is very clever. I assured him

she possessed great talent, and he said, " Yes,
he thought so too," but quietly, without the
slightest enthusiasm, as if he had been remarking
that it was a fine night.'

Really, it is quite a comfort to hear Mr.
Lacere is so discreet a person. His wife li^dng
in such an atmosphere of flattery out of doors,
he does right to teach her she is not regarded
quite as a prophet at home.'

But surely you think she is clever — for a
woman T asked Mrs. Kelly.

I think she is clever, decidedly,' he
answered, * and she has made a certain mark
in the world ; but she is going the fair way
to lose all the advantage she has gained. She
ought to stop at home and write her books
and mind her house, and see her husband's
slippers are warmed, instead of going about to
parties and listening to foolish compliments,
and frittering away such talents as God has
given her in small-talk and company babble.'

How you talk, Bernard ! Would you permit
a woman to have no mental relaxation in
bright society ? No '

My dear,' he interrupted, * circumstances
alter cases. That which is quite proper for you

is improper for Mrs. Lacere. Her husband has
no private means, and is only in a modest
way of business. She had not any fortune,
and though she may have made some considerable
sum by her writings, you must remember
when she ceases to write she will
cease to make money. All this modern
business of society making lions of authors,
and authoresses rushing frantically into society,
is a complete mistake. Not so did the great
men, whose names will live as long as the
English language is spoken, conduct themselves.
Routs, and balls, and dinners three hours
long, and garden-parties, knew them not. To
the outside public they were only known by
their works. Now the outside public is so
constantly given the opportunity of seeing
men who are thought great, at play, that it
will soon begin to doubt if they ever do any
work at all.'

That is very true, no doubt,' answered
Mrs. Kelly ; ' but still Mrs. Lacere is a
woman, and it is only natural, poor thing, she
should like to visit, and hear people praising
her books, and — '

Well, all I mean to say,' interrupted
VOL. III. 58

Barney, who had no desire for the Lacere
question to haunt him even at breakfast, * is,
Mrs. Lacere cannot have her cake and eat it
too. To turn to another subject. I have
determined to start a review of my own,
conducted on new and equitable principles.
It seems to me there is an opening for a really
good critical paper, written by men who have
not got into a groove, and do not belong to a
clique. I shall call it The Dragon, and think
it will prove a great success. What do you
think V

Why, of course, Bernard, if you commence
a review it must be successful. The idea
strikes me as delightful. I wonder it has
never occurred to you before.'

It has often,' replied Barney ; * but I did
not see my way till lately.'

Shall you have Mrs. Lacere on the staff V
asked JVIrs. Kelly ; and her tone warned the
fortunate husband that if he was not careful
fifty little green-eyed monsters might rise to
trouble his domestic peace.

*Not a woman,' he answered emphatically
' maid, wife, or widow — shall write a line for
it. As deep-sea fishermen object to push off

with a parson on board, so I should feel my
venture doomed to shipwreck if a lady were
one of the "hands." No,' he added, ' except
yourself, no woman shall have a say in the
matter. My review will be the sainted isle,
and I — Senatus.'

Ah ! but remember,' said Mrs. Kelly,
'Moore's song implies that if the lady had
waited till there was light enough for the
saint to see her, she had ' never left the
isle.'

I can solemnly assure you no lady shall
get the chance of seeing me in my double
capacity of proprietor and editor,' observed
Barney, smiling.

To hear you speak about my sex,' exclaimed
]airs. Kelly, ' anyone might think
you were most unhappy in your matrimonial
relations.'

It is because I am so happy,' returned
Barney gallantly ; ' I feel I must have made
the one lucky draw out of the bag of
snakes.'

Oh ! fie, fie !' said Mrs. Kelly rebuking ;
but she was delighted nevertheless, and would
still go on praising Glen for her talent, and

58—2

A Struggle for Fame.

the 'delicate comi3limeiit ' about Barney's
heroine, and pitying her concerning that
wretched review in the Independent, without
any stalking figure of jealousy casting its
shadow before.

A GREAT WINDFALL.

T is not given to many men to pass
one whole year into which no
pecuniary trouble enters, and yet
it was just such a reprieve Glen had brought
her husband.

Never before — never — in all his struggling
youth and his hard worked manhood could he
remember such a time of blissful ease and
prosperity. It was only too good, too free
from anxiety ; but Mr. Lacere's was not a temperament
to question concerning the blessings
Heaven sent him. He could only thank God,
not aloud — not for the world to hear — but
silently, sincerely, amazedly, for the relief
compassed for him by the only woman he had
ever loved.

It astonished him. He felt it was impossible
he could sufficiently prove the gratitude
he felt to her and his Maker. Prosperity
flowed in upon him like a tide. The seed he
had sown Y\'as bearing fruit ; the business he
had made and watched and tended had
grown bio' enough to shelter him and his
household. Looking back, he could scarcely
believe that in so comparatively short a time
it had been possible to build up such a trade.
Money ! it came in that year like water ; and
though it may have been spent as freely, it
was honestly, if not judiciously, spent in paying
old debts, in still extending his trade, and
in adapting the household to changed conditions
and altered circumstances.

For him it was the first year of plenty since
he had taken the cares of manhood on his
young shoulders, and the Almighty alone
knew what the burden of the nearly three
times seven barren years preceding must
have proved. Years of labour ; years of hope
deferred ; years during the course of which
what he made was wrested from him almost
ere he could count his winnings ; years the
light of love had not brightened or friendship

strengthened. The life of a horse in a mill it
might have seemed to some, and yet it was a
beautiful life in its total self-abnegation, in its
utter unselfishness — its toil for those who
were most ungrateful, but who seemed to him,
viewed through the glamour of a deluded
affection, possessed of all virtues.

The pleasure of conferring kindnesses, of
being able to feed, clothe, and house the members
of his family, had ever seemed to this man
worth all the work, anxiety, and toil the burden
entailed ; and now, when he was easy as regarded
money matters — happy in his home
and his wife — it seemed to him as though
he were floating in a dream down a golden
river towards a golden sea.

What a year that was in which every day
might have been marked with a white pebble !
If only Glen would have liked and understood
his relations, he felt life could hold nothing-more
to ask for ; but she never had liked, and
he was convinced never understood them,
and the change wrought by success in his
circumstances of necessity produced an apparent
estrangement between him and his
family, which he strove by every means in his

power to prove was wrought by no alteration
in his feeling for them.

To him, success in business meant an increase
of work which might well have appalled
a different man ; but he never complained.
The close of the long day never found him
fagged, or cross, or weary ; no matter how late
he went to rest, he was always astir early.
What ! should he idle now, when, for the
first time, fortune seemed tired of persecuting
when everything was going well with him
and his ?

A whole year without sickness, or sorrow, or
loss, or anxiety ! A year, during which Time's
footsteps, shod with velvet, slipped so swiftly
and silently by, it was gone ere half its
blessedness was felt or comprehended — gone
like a radiant summer, which has scarcely
served to warm hearts chilled and numbed by
the snows and frosts of winter before the
autumn leaves are falling and the moaning
wind is singing their requiem. During the
year, opportunities such as had never before
come in his way presented themselves ;
offers were made — agencies pressed upon
him. But, believing that by entering on any

fresh undertaking he would be unable to
devote all his energies to the old, he held
blindly on, strong in the faith that he had
established a trade which would eventually
make him practically independent of the world.

His cousin also had ceased to be, a drag upon
his resources. He was at length established
in a business which promised solvency and
respectability. Everything was going well. To
such a temper happiness can never come ' too
late;' indeed, to one who, without any pretence,
or ostentation, or outward and visible
signs of his inward belief, save what may be
gathered from his life, walks silently on earth
with God — that phrase, ' Too late,' is one
utterly destitute of meaning. Though she
had been brought up in the straightest sect of the
Pharisees, Glen, by comparison with her husband,
was an outer heathen. Her life in those
days could be regarded but as a long unrest.

She does not know what she wants,' said
Lady Hilda, freely discussing Mrs. Lacere
amongst her friends. ' Success has turned her
brain ; and if Mr. Lacere were other than the
most devoted of husbands, he would not have
patience with her.'

Making all allowance for the fact that Lady
Hilda herself was a woman and a novelist, it
must be confessed there was too much truth
in her summary of Mrs. Lacere. The outer
world might and did think that lady pleasant
and agreeable ; but, nevertheless, success had
somewhat 'turned her brain,' and she persisted
in refusing; to listen to the ' still, small voice'
of common-sense which kept for ever crying
to her in those days : ' You are mad. Glen.
Alas it for this you had such a chance given
you as does not fall to the lot of one woman
in a million ? Look back to the humble home
and the modest aspirations of your girlhood,
and say whether you believe your present life
is fitting or unfitting you for the career in
which you have already achieved a success as
astonishing to yourself as to those who never
thought there was much in you.'

Often in the middle of the whirl of society
in which she had no right to live, Ned
Beattie's words, long forgotten, recurred to
her : ' I only hope he won't let you get your
head.' She had 'got her head' now with a
vengeance, and was going a pace which could
not by any possibility last.

Well, there was this much to be said in her
excuse — her early youth had never known
gaiety. With her temperament, with her
nationality, she must have been more than
human to turn her back to the lights and the
music and the glamour of Society — to sit
apart whilst others were dancing, to seclude
herself from praise, which was to her the very
breath of life — to decline invitations such as
anyone might have felt gratified to receive —
to thrust back proffered friendship and pleasant
acquaintanceship, and to say in that time of
triumphant hope and — fame, shall we call it ?
'All is vanity.'

Still, most undoubtedly she was wrong, and
she knew it ; as a man cannot serve two
masters, so an author cannot work and play.

She was doing herself no good, morally,
physically, or intellectually. She took her
pleasure then, but she had to pay for it afterwards.
She was spending her strength, her
time, her substance, for naught. At the end
of a year, what was left for all those wasted
hours, in which she ought to have been building
up and fortifying her literary reputation,
save a confused memory of luxury and perfume,

and amazing extravagance, and rich
dresses and rare wines and costly food, and
the recollection of thousands of strange faces
and unfamiliar voices, and the knowledge she
had brought no single great thought, or
original idea, or high aspiration out of the
turmoil ?

But she did not pause either to reflect or
repent while leading a life which left her no
time for quiet thought. As she imagined, she
had almost touched the highest peak of fame to
which she could ever hope to climb. Sought
after, flattered, caressed, made much of — ah
me ! — did there come no moment when she
dared to ask herself what the end would
prove '? Even in dreams was no warning
vouchsafed of the hour when for her the lamps
would be extinguished and the flowers fade
and perish, and the sound of music be heard
no more, and the footsteps of the dancers be
silent — when she should know in all its bitterness
what it is to be forgotten — understand
the applause she had delighted in was not
Fame, and, proclaiming her name and what she
had done, receive for answer, ' We never even
heard of you ' ?

She had read of such things happening to
other people, but for her, of course, they could
have no application. When the woods are
green and the hanks bright with blossoms,
who realizes the coming; time when the trees
will stand brown and bare, and not even a
daisy appear to gladden the eyes of the weary
wayfarer ? When the prima donna stands
half buried in bouquets, listening to the wild
applause of a delighted audience, does it ever
occiu' to her that the fate which has befallen
others may yet prove hers, and that she will
in the future be hissed off the boards now
deemed honoured by her tread ? In like
manner Glenarv^a Lacere, then able almost to
command her own prices, could not foretell
that evil days were coming when she
should be able to command no price at
aU.

Yet she ought to have knoTVTi. The three
warnings given by Death were never plainer
than the signs vouchsafed to Mrs. Lacere.
If no other human beings knew Mr. Lance
Felton's resources were not exhaustless, she
did. By a score of tokens she was perfectly
well aware the great business in Burleigh

Street was not built upon a rock ; further,
she should have remembered the period of
scarcity during which her husband had been
barely able to hold his own, and devoted herself
to saving what money she could ; improving
her mind, laying in fresh stores of knowledge,
and strengthening her body, which she
was doing her very best to enfeeble.

And yet still she would not listen to the
evidence of her own eyes and ears. Plainly
almost as a man could speak, Mr. Felton told
her the harvest authors were then gathering
could not last.

So far I have been going in for fame ;
after a while I mean to go in for money,*
he would say. And again, * You know I
can't afford these prices. It's all very fine
having a lot of crack authors on my lists,
but I want to see some margin for myself.'
Or else, ' You mustn't take these bills to my
bankers ; they have as much paper as they
will stand ' — a most ominous declaration, and
one certainly not to be explained away by the
fact that Mr. Felton was not quite sober when
he made it.

Mrs. Lacere had long previously discovered

that ' Lance ' was very rarely sober ; indeed,
so rarely as to be never.

It was over ' the bid ' he made her for the
two books honourably mentioned to Mr.
Kelly she arrived at this fact, and also at
the other fact likewise patent to Barney,
that whatever Mr. F el ton's physical condition
might be, his business faculty never got
drunk.

For, sitting on one side of the ofEce-table,
and Mrs. Lacere on the other, he managed on
the occasion in question to knock just six
hundred pounds off the sum ' Heron's Nest *
had expected to receive.

He told her all his struggles, or at least as
many of them as he thought would serve his
purpose ; again said how badly he had been
treated by some persons, concerning whose
identity he was discreetly reticent, but whom
he earnestly longed to ' splash ' when he drove
past them in the carriage he meant hereafter
to set up ; he explained that he and Mr.
Laplash did not 'hit it off' — which, indeed,
everyone who entered the office could not fail
to see. He was very contemptuous in his
references to his partner, whom he described

as a ' slow coach and even dropped various
hints disparaging to saintly ' Noll.'

'Neither of them like you he said, with
unnecessary frankness. ' But never you mind
that ; I'm the head man, and I mean to keep
the lead, but you must help me. You stick
to me, and I'll stick to you. I can't give you
what I thought I should be able for those two
books ; but if you don't hold out for terms
now — and you won't get such good terms as I
offer anywhere else — when things are a little
smoother you won't find me forget you.
Don't you believe me ? Don't you think I
have done well by you ? Don't you know I'm
your friend V

The end of it all being; that Glen consented
to the proposed reduction, and that Mr.
Felton wished to shake hands over the bargain
; but, finding himself unequal to the
feat of standing on his legs, wisely abandoned
the effort and took refuge in tears. He recited
his troubles over again, and said most of his

authors were a ungrateful set ; that all

they wanted was to ' suck a man's blood,' after
which they would leave him ' as a spider
leaves a dead fly.' He declared he meant todo

great things, and that with Glen's help he
would do them ; that she need not trouble
herself aloout money ; that Mrs. Lacere
would never find cause to repent trusting
him.

I've just got into a bit of a corner,' he
went on ; ' but that will come all right. My
bankers would advance me any sum I wanted
thirty thousand, if need be — but I don't like
to ask them ; it looks bad, you know — deuced
bad. And now you'll get on with your work,
won't you ? and we'll rattle a book out as soon
as ever you can let me have it; and put
plenty of life and anecdote and " go " in
every chapter, and we'll carry the town by
storm yet.'

Which was all very well, and very encouraging
; but when the time came for Mr. Felton to
fulfil his part of the bargain, Mrs. Lacere found
he did not evince the same alacrity in offering
to increase her payment as he had in lowering
it.

Quite the contrary, indeed. Not merely did
the diplomatic Lance volunteer no suggestion
of ' sticking to Mrs. Lacere as she had stuck
to him,' but he actually remarked that he

VOL. III. 59

thought it would be good for lier to take
a holiday, and give her brain a little
rest.

They say, you know,' he proceeded, ' you've
been overdoing it ; and then that review in
the Independent — not that I mind reviews ;
know too much about who writes them, and
where they are written, and why they are
written. Still, the public believe in them ;
and, after all, there was a great deal of truth
in that notice. You'd better take care what
you are about. Suppose you lie by altogether
for a few months. There is no reason why
you should always have a novel on the stocks.
At any rate, I'm not in a position — I have not
the time to go into the matter of a new book
from you now.'

And so, professing to be in a great bustle
and hurry, having to go to the West to see a
tremendous swell,' who wanted him to bring
out a book of travels, son of the Earl of That,
and nephew of the Duke of Something Else,
and married to a Russian princess — Mr. Felton
beo-g-ed Glen to excuse him, and rushed out of

CO ^

the office, leaving her to confide her sorrows
and grievances, if she pleased, to Mr. Laplash.

But Glen did not please to do this. Following
Mr. Fe] ton's example, she departed from the
office, after exchanging a few words with the
two men who ' didn't like her,' wondering
This was the first real check she had
met with in Burleigh Street, and she did not
like it. She felt she had been badly treated.
While writing those two books, she had been
urged on by both partners. If life and death
had hung on her copy, they could not more
earnestly have implored her to supply good
batches ' to the printer. She did not spare
herself in the matter. It was real honest work
she turned out, even at high-pressure speed ;
and she finished one book, under the compulsion
of incessant entreaty, in so short a time
that even Mr. Laplash was moved to admiration,
and wrote, ' I can say nothing but bless
you,' from which the intelligent reader wall
gather there was indeed urgent need the
book should be completed.

And now, when she wanted money, to be
told to take a holiday ! Why, for those two
books she had not got more than she hoped,
after the success of * Heron's Rest,' to receive
for one. She felt she had spent herself in

59—2

vain. She was dreadfully hurt and mortified
and disappointed, and returned home so utterly
coldhearted, that if her husband had then
returned from business, he would not have
known what to make of her. But before he
returned, a wonderful thing happened — Glen
got the great pecuniary windfall of her literary
career. It came from an editor, and it came
in this wise.

^\^hen from any cause the circulation of a
magazine, which has once been satisfactory,
begins to drop, and goes on dropping till it
really seems as if it could not drop much more,
proprietors instantly begin to look out for
names.' As a rule, the aid of authors possessed
of names is invoked too late. The
greatest physician is powerless to save a patient
already moribund, and the writer is not inexistence
who could resuscitate a journal which
has been permitted to sink into dotage. However,
the persons connected with a then well-known
magazine thought the time had come
to spend a great deal of money to prevent the
total loss of a larger sum still, and, casting
about for suitable authors, they selected as
likely resurrectionists the author of ' Heron's

Nest' and a male writer of great eminence,
who had ' not produced too many books and
who, it was well known, ' carried a large
portion of the fashionable world with him.'
Both authors were on the Burleigh Street list ;
to Burleigh Street, as if it were some sort of
literary agency, application was made, and it
occurred to the astute mind of Mr. Lancelot
Felton that if he could ' place ' a book by
Lady Hilda Hilton instead of one by Mrs.
Lacere, he might make a considerable pecuniary
profit.

Had the firm owning the magazine alone
been to deal with, Mr. Felton would have
carried his point. He told them Mrs. Lacere
was * knocked up ;' that she had done ^ such a
lot of work,' she wanted to ' have her shoes
taken off and to be turned out for a while ;' that
his advice to her was ' not to write another line
for a twelvemonth. Besides which,' he added,
her books require to be read as a whole ; the
minute you begin to chop them up into portions,
they lose all interest. No, take my
word for it. Lady Hilda's your best card.
She reads ; Lord, how she reads ! You'll have
all the West-enters waiting for your magazine,

wondering who her ladyship's going to ** pitch
into " next. If I had a journal I would secure
her at any price.'

But isn't she a little — doubtful V modestly
suggested one of the firm. ' The press took
exception to her last book, if I remember right,
on the score of propriety.'

*As for that, she oughtn't exactly satisfy
the requirements of the Religious Tract Society
or the Saturday Review,' returned Lance ;
but for all ordinary people and purposes she's
right enough. You be advised by me — that
is, if you want to send up your circulation.
Run the pair I hare chosen ; they'll go well in
harness — both showy, high stepping, credit to
any establishment. Come, now, say Lady
Hilda for the second novel, and we'll sign the
agreement, and I'll send over the manuscripts.'

I can't say ** Yes " off-hand,' answered the
gentleman who had on this occasion come to
Burleigh Street, ' but I'll talk the matter over
with my partners, and you shall hear from us
very shortly.'

'Well?' queried Mr. Laplash, lounging
into the office when the outer door closed after
his visitor.

It's as good as done.'

Thank God !' murmured Zack piously.

But ere long Lance found experimentally
the truth of that time-worn adage which
declares ' there's many a slip 'twixt the cup
and the lip,' and Zack, spite of the liberal
religious education vouchsafed him by Noll,
decided he had uttered his thanksgiving prematurely.
Indeed, when the news reached
Burleigh Street of * Lacere ' having been ^ tampered
with ' by that blank, blanked editor of
that blanked magazine, Mr. Laplash felt there
was very little left in this world to thank God
for.

For, so far from saying she was ' knocked
up,' Mrs. Lacere declared she would be only
too glad to contribute the serial asked for ; and
to keep the matter in his own hands, and prevent
a total loss to Burleigh Street as regarded
the second novel required, Mr. Felt on had to
come out with the astounding offer of one
thousand pounds for a new work from ' Heron's
Nest,' all rights to remain with him for the
space of three years.

The sunshine of such success might well
have dazzled the eyes of a man. As for Glen,

it simply blinded her. She did not see how
nearly she had missed getting sixpence ; she
failed to understand she had then reached her
pecuniary zenith, and that for many a day
afterwards her road would be all downhill.

And in actual life the downhill road is not
an easy one, especially when the path nears
the valley. Patience, reader ! the pace
quickens then — towards the last the descent is
very rapid !

But it has been said the brilliant sunshine
of that enormous success utterly blinded Glen-arva
Lacere. It is not adversity which is the
test of character, but prosperity ; and in the
hour of her prosperity my heroine forgot the
bitter past, and fancied of her own strength
she had done this great thing — that for ever,
hundreds and thousands of pounds would lie
at her feet, only waiting her pleasure to stoop
and pick them up ! Not for her the calculating
wisdom which should stop to count sixpences
and shillings — grudge pence to ragged lads
who opened a carriage-door for her — shillings
to cabman — gratuities to servants.

Ah, Glen ! what a sorry fool you were to
give so lavishly to those who could never pay

you back ! And yet I know not — perhaps
you had the return somehow — in the friends
who stood by you in time of trouble — in the
memory that you had in your day helped the
poor and needy ; that your charity was indeed
without stint ; in the knowledge that in your
darkest hour God did not leave you comfortless,
but taught you moreover that while the day
lasts there is work to be done in it ; that while
life endures there is some one, whether sick orwell,
rich or poor, sorry or glad, to be made
the happier because you were born.

For, after all, what is kindness but a coin ?

The great mistake some people make is that
they regard it as an investment. They expect
it back direct from the borrower with interest ;
and when they fail to get it, talk of ingratitude.


What an error ! Speak a kind word, perform
a kindly action, out of the abundant
goodness of your heart, instead of the cool
calculation of your head, and both are returned,
not tomorrow by the recipients, but after
many many morrows by some once far-away
fellow-creature whom the kindly word has
travelled on to touch, or the kindly action

benefited in a manner you can never trace, and
who thus brings you back your own long-forgotten
coin — not indeed with fair interest
added, but multiplied a thousandfold I

We'll advertise you on every hoarding in
London,' said one of the partners of the great
house, meeting Glen in Burleigh Street, when
a solemn interview was appointed to arrange
about the title of her new book.

Think of it— only think of it !

Let the reader cast a backward glance along
the course of this story to the night when
Glenarva Westley traced her future career
upon the track of the moonbeams she saw
reflected in a moonlit sea, and say if this were
not success, what should be required to compass
it ?

In her very early days of authorship — long
before she travelled in company with Mr.
Bernard Kelly to London — writing in that
room which overlooked billows tossing down
from the wild Atlantic, Glen in an oft-rejected
manuscript asked one of these questions at
which publishers and editors, when they saw
her, were apt to smile irreverently ; namely,
What is Fame V

An exceedingly difficult question even for
maturity to answer ; but Glen, rushing in
with the fearless and intemperate ardour
which characterizes young people as well as
fools, at once proceeded to solve the problem
for herself. Fame, she declared, was a bubble,
a breath, and so forth.

Pity she had not in her hour of triumph
looked up some of the old-faded writing, and
asked herself if she believed there was a word
of truth in the lines traced so carefully in the
ink that had turned so brown ; and if there
were, laid it to heart.

It was about this time Mr. Kelly, whose
Review was now an established success, and a
great power in literature, stopped to read one
of the huge posters on which Mrs. Logan-facere's
name was placarded in the face of
London.

Humph !' thought Barney, and he proceeded
thoughtfully on his way. When he
returned home, he sat down and wrote a
stinging article, entitled ' Fame and Notoriety.'
His contention was that the moment an
author came prominently before the public he

compassed Notoriety — that the author s work
alone was capable of securing Fame.

From out of the treasure-house of the past
he produced name after name to prove his
point. The books of men considered great in
their day, he said, were forgotten ; while the
works of men who had been thought of
small account, little regarded by their contemporaries,
unknown to fashion, disregarded
by society, were, though the men themselves
had smouldered into dust, quick and living
still.

It was an excellent paper, to which Barney
brought all the resources of his extraordinary
range of reading — his caustic powers of perception
— his epigrammatic style.

The week it appeared, everybody went about
asking everybody else : ' Have you read
'fame and Notoriety" in The Dragon?
Capital, isn't it V

Mrs. Lacere read it, of course, and was not
much convinced.

Those that win may laugh,' she said to
Mr. Edward Beattie, who, having arrived on a
visit to England from Canada, was literally
stricken dumb to find what ]airs Lacere had

done — the strides she had made — how rich,
prosperous, almost fashionable, she had
grown !

Ned was taken to parties of all sorts, till he
craved piteously for rest.

My dear Glen,' he remarked, ' it has constantly
been dinned into me that women are
stronger than men ; but I never believed that
statement till now. There is no man who
could do what you do. Let us stop quietly at
home, just for variety.'

And again he said before he left :

I hope, Glen, you are not spending all your
money, but putting something by.'

I am patting most of it into the business,'
she answered.

And that is all right, I suppose V

Oh yes,' she said easily ; though, indeed,
she knew as little about how the business was
going, as of what she was spending.

BOUND TO COME.

ELL, Kelly, I hope you approve of
your portrait in The Wasjj f
Though still early in the forenoon,
Mr. Felt on, who put the foregoing question,
had evidently already partaken of what
he called a ' pick-up,' and Barney accordingly
scarcely knew how to take his inquiry.

I have not seen it,' he answered.

Ah ! then you have a treat in store.
There were half a dozen copies lying about
the office, but they've all been carried off.
Noll, just run round the corner and see if you
can get one.'

I wouldn't, Lance, if I was you,' expostulated
Noll, resorting to his favourite formula ;

while Zack, with a saturnine grin, muttered
it was * too bad ;' adding, upon his conscience,
Lance was a good sort of fellow to help a
lame dog over a style.'

It's something not very complimentary
then, I presume,' said Mr. Kelly, who felt
these various remarks did not augur a flattering
likeness.

Oh ! that's just as you choose to take it,'
answered Lance airily, ' but perhaps you
won't be able to get a copy. I know the
paper is selling as fast as it can be machine.'

*rd better try to secure one then, before
the proprietors stop printing,' suggested
Barney ironically, for it was well known
the sale of The Wasp was not equal to its
merits.

All right ; I'm sure you'll be pleased,' was
Mr. Felton's comforting remark, as he beheld
Mr. Kelly depart. ' He'll not let grass grow
under his feet, I warrant,' added the publisher,
speaking to his partner and the ever-present
Noll, whereupon the three laughed in
concert.

I wish there had been a copy here,' said
Mr. Laplash ; * I'd have given a sovereign to

see his face when he saw the " young man in
his native bogs"'

Oh ! the wife's the thing,' exclaimed ^Iv.
Felton.

It is a shame, though,' remarked Toll ; ' I
don't think such personal matters should be
permitted.'

^Yhy, hang it, man !' cried Lance, ' The
Wasps no more personal than The Dragon.
What are you dreaming about V

Meanwhile Barney was speeding along the
Strand to get a copy of the paper in which he
guessed he was to form the staple of amusement
for that week, and as he went he
anathematized the whole race of authors,
editors, publishers, ay, and even readers.
Hitherto matters had gone sith him so
smoothly ! His paper was the great success of
the period. Since the Saturday Review
nothing had appeared which took the public
so utterly by storm. ' Kill and spare not '
mio'ht have been his motto. Wherever there
was sin, wherever there was folly, wherever
there was even amiable weakness, he went down
and slew. About him he had gathered a
small but brilliant staff of unknown writers —

writers indeed so utterly unknown that they
were not merely unfamiliar to the world, but
would have been strange to each other had the
men happened to meet.

From the early and best days of the
Saturday mr. Kelly had taken a leaf. The
outsiders, the dark horses, he brought into
win. The Dragon represented, indeed, a
new Cave of Adullam : for ' everyone [with
brains] who was in distress, and everyone
that was in debt, and everyone that was discontented,
gathered themselves unto him, and
he was a captain over them.'

Only consider the possible result — capital
to pay — a mind to direct — the element of
secrecy ! From chambers, the occupants of
which had never been gladdened with a brief ;
from parsonages preferment seemed to shun ;
from men who only looked at the great world
afar off, in whose mirrors were not stuck the
cards of milord and milady ; from ' medical
practitioners,' who had sufficient brains to question
the wisdom of the great guns of the profession,
and could hit off neatly all the humbug
of the craft — Barney gathered together
his weekly instalments, heretofore without a

VOL. III. 60

word being said in his disparagement ; but
now — good heavens ! now what had come ?
As he rushed on his career he saw at a news-vendor's
a copy of The Wasp prominently displayed.


He went in and bought it. One glance
was enough. His enemy had found him.
His turn had come, and alas ! Mr. Bernard
Kelly could not face ridicule and criticism
with the unmoved front displayed by ' Heron's
Nest.' To quote Mr. Lance Felton, she * had
not winked an eyelid ' over the most adverse
criticism ; but she — she — what was anything
Mrs. Lacere ever faced in comparison with this
awful thing Mr. Kelly carried in his pocket ashe
ascended the editorial stairs in Paternoster
Kow?

Mr. Kelly's paper was far too strong and too
respectable to be illustrated. The Wasp was
so disreputable that it felt pen and ink weak
unless aided by pencil. Conjoined, literature
and art might have done anything, had not
the manager, moved one night by some
singular freak, gone off with everything he
could lay hands on, except his wife. He took
all the cash, though he did not take her.

When he departed, many thousand pounds
departed too.^ Really, the whole affair was
touching. To quote Mr. Donagh :

The miscreant proved himself a ruffian of
the deepest dye.*

But this catastrophe happened long after
the appearance of that awful representation of
Barney's career. There he was first in his
native bogs ' — finally in the editorial chair.
He saw himself turned out of Sulby Park
with fifty pounds in his pocket — arriving,
carpet-bag in hand, at the gate of Mat
Donagh's house, or, as the letterpress in old
English letters described the scene :

Ye goode yonge mann is received by hys
friend.'

The brown coat, uncut hair, generally unkempt
appearance of Mr. Bernard Kelly's
earliest London days were reproduced to a
nicety. No need of any wizard to tell Barney
who had supplied the materials for these
sketches. There was but one man in the
whole of the metropolis competent to instruct
an artist as to the former personnel of the
now successful editor — Matthew Donagh.
He had kept his pebble ready in the sling all

60—2

these years, and now he slang it with such
unerring aim that Barney, social giant though
he might be, felt the stone enter his forehead,
and strike his pride and vanity to the earth.

At that moment there was murder in Mr.
Kelly's heart. Had the irrepressible Mat
stood before him in the flesh, he could have
killed him with pleasure — ay, and have faced
the certainty of hanging afterwards.

There was no part of his career in which
that wretched print failed to hold him up to
ridicule. Receiving his rejected addresses
from the hands of supercilious clerks ; standing
disconsolate in St. James's Park ; ' liquorice
up ' with the younger Dawtons ; acting
with the father of that clever family in 'How's
Maria V — the veteran wearing an impossible
wig, the traditional hessians, a white waistcoat,
and a swallow-tailed coat — no single
incident he could have wished forgotten but
was recalled to memory. And, worst and
cruellest of all, his wife was pressed into the
service, and in one deliciously airy illustration
was depicted as seated on a sack stuffed
full of bank-notes ; while Barney, standing
before her with hand pressed to his heart.

watched out of the corner of one eye a group
of young girls vanishing in the background,
some crying, some laughing as they left him
alone with an old hag who bore a terrible
likeness to the widow of Robert Underwood,
groom.

In the very last scene he was depicted in
the editorial chair, haughtily waving away
would-be contributors.

He laid down the paper. He could have
wept with rage and mortification. He had
known no mercy ; he had smote hip and
thigh. He had spared no man, he had been
tender to no woman. Success only rendered
him pitiless ; and now his enemy had found
and taken him by the beard and thrust a
spear under his fifth rib, and inflicted a wound
which, if not unto death, would never, he
knew, heal while life lasted.

Yes ; he had better have made terms with
Mat.

Politeness,' observed that gentleman to him
on the occasion of their last interview — when
Mr. Donagh offered his services in the way of
conciliating advertisers for a mere nominal
sum ' — ' costs little, and may, upon the whole.

ane.

be regarded as a remarkably good investment.
You, Bernard Kelly, Esquire — ha ! it really
makes one laugh when one recalls the bog-trotting
Barney, of Callinacoan — have been
pleased to despise the proffered services of a
man who, at least, never forfeited his self-esteem
by catering for the lowest tastes of the
lowest public J and marrying an old woman
for the sake of lucre. You have also — as if
Matthew Donagh, the descendant of Irish
kings, were a dog ! — flung me a twenty-pound
note in settlement of all claims upon you. I
take your twenty-pound note, sir, in settlement
; but there is a debt I owe you which
shall be paid, never fear. " I wait," is my
motto ; and I can wait. The doomed hour
may be deferred, but it will strike ; when it
does, remember Matthew Donagh.'

Yes, he had waited, and the hour was striking
even then. There was nothing clumsy in
the blow; it went straight home. The sketches
and the letterpress must have been the work
of time and of cool deliberation. Barney
writhed as he thought of the shrieks of
laughter amidst which the narrative of * Ye
Goode Yonge Mann's Progress toe Success '

must have been written, and the way in which
his wife's peculiarities were noted, possibly at
some party where she thought she was exciting-admiration.


If tearing his hair out by the roots
could have done him any good, he would have
torn it ; if thrashing Donagh within an inch
of his life could have remedied the evil. Mat
had earned no commissions for many a month
to come ; if law, or money, or courage, or
diplomacy could have availed to remedy the
evil, Barney had not been heart-broken. But
he was wise enough to know his best chance
lay in laughing the matter off; and it is not
easy to laugh when a man's soul is wrung by
ridicule, when he fails to see any fun in
caricature, when he feels he has not on
earth a real friend who will be sorry for his
downfall.

Curiously enough, there recurred to him at
that moment the image of Glenarva, as in her
poor second-best attire she sat opposite to him
in the railway carriage. He had not been
generous to her — would she be delighted with
this attack?

He did not think it. He had heard enough.

at all events, of Mr. Lacere to know lie would
feel indignant at the introduction of a woman's
name in such a connection.

The blame of men like Messrs. Felton and
Laplash is the truest praise ; and he felt sure
that even if Glen, like most of her sex, lacked
chivalry, she could not have been the wife of
so true a man without at all events acquiring
some of that lore which does not seem to
benefit its possessor much here, but which,
perhaps for that very reason, we may fain hope
will prove of inestimable use hereafter.

She could not help learning some good
from her father and husband,' he considered ;
I wish I had not been so hard upon her, and
yet she wanted a lesson.'

So had he, for that matter ; but now it was
given he did not feel grateful.

Supposing his wife saw The Wasp, Good
heavens ! She was so quick, that even without
any friendly instruction she would understand
the whole story at a glance. It was
most unlikely she should chance to see the
paper, but still, to guard against contingencies,
Mr. Kelly felt he had better at once take
her out of town. Nevertheless, he hesitated ;

and, hesitating, lie turned over the leaves of
The Wasp.

Then, what was the first thing that met his
eye, under the heading ' Literature ' ! A sweet
likeness of Mrs. Lacere, looking prettier than
any human being had ever beheld her, handing
in a manuscript, labelled with the name of
the journal to which she was contributing. A
minute previously his heart had felt softened
towards ' Heron's Nest,' but now, with a muttered
curse, he closed the page, and feeling it
better he should be seen out that day, walked
westward.

For those money-bags and the girls vanishing
in the distance would play the very deuce,'
he considered ; as, indeed, when he got home
he found they had played. Some devoted
friend, not to be behind-hand when a good
work was in progress, had kindly sent Mrs.
Kelly The Wasp, with the objectionable
article marked ; the consequence being an
attack of hysterics, the doctor, retirement to
her own room, and a scene with Barney,
the details of which he never cared subsequently
to recall.

Mr. Matthew Donagh had waited to some

purpose, but his laugh cost him first and last
a larger sum than he could possibly have
anticipated.

After all, revenge is not a cheap luxury,
more particularly when a man who has to
earn his living pits himself against a person
pecuniarily independent of the world. There
came a day when he wanted to * borrow ' five
shillings from Barney, and did not succeed in
the endeavour.

You'd better have let him alone, Mat
dear,' said Miss Cavan ; ' ye know well enough
there never was a Kelly yet but could sting
like a nettle.'

It was about this time Mrs. Lacere began to
understand Mr. Felton was in some difficulty.
He had always been somewhat communicative
to her about his troubles, and she now gathered,
from the constant repetition of a remark to
the effect that ' money was tight, deuced
tight,' the publisher found pecuniary pressure
uncomfortable. On his table he kept
a basket of unpaid accounts, which seemed to
grow fuller and fuller.

I never look at one of them,' he said
frankly, 'till I have the cash to pay, and

then I just take the first that turns up or is
asked for.'

'It is a orreat trouble examining; and adding;
up bills,' sighed Glen, whose arithmetical acquirements
were no greater than those usually
possessed by her sex.

It is such a trouble it would never pay me
to do either one or the other,' retorted Lance.
Time is far too precious to be wasted in totting
up pence and halfpence.'

Mrs. Lacere did not say anything, but she
thought a great deal. Like most persons
incapable of wrestling successfully with figures,
she had immense faith in ' keeping accounts. '

I wonder how in the world he manages
his business,' she marvelled — a wonder which
was not decreased by a subsequent statement
of Mr. Felton's to the effect that * his bankbook
told him how much money he received,
and he knew his creditors would take precious
good care to tell him how much he owed.'

Nevertheless, spite of the extreme simplicity
of his book-keeping arrangements. Lance was
certainly beginning to find the shoe pinch,
and, so far as she was able, Glen felt sorry for
him.

Just about that period she often felt as
though her brain refused to answer to the calls
she made upon it — as though there were some
closed door between her thoughts and the
power which enabled her to give expression to
them. She was not ill — oh no ! not in the
least. Nevertheless, she could not but be
conscious now and then of a curious cloud
which seemed to envelop her understanding.
Words slipped away from memory ; ideas, if
not instantly written down, were difficult to
reproduce ; unless she took her mind firmly in
hand, and shook it, she failed to arouse the
faculty of attention. She suffered from a continual
headache, not severe, ' but strange ; if
she tried to recall the events of yesterday,
they seemed to loom upon her from a distance
through a fog. How then was she to see that
there was something amiss with her husband ?
Poring over her own work, which now occupied
her about three times as honors it ought to
have done, how could she be expected to take
note of his work and his hours, when days full
of labour were becoming blank to her ?

All this time she looked well and seemed
strong. No one, not even Mr. Lacere, suspected

there was anything wrong with her
health.

Curiously enough, Mr. Kelly was the first
person who noticed how exceedingly strange
Mrs. Lacere was looking. At the special request
of Mr. Felton, she had driven over to a
party, * likely,' in Lance's phrase, ' to do her
good.'

Afterwards, Glen could not have told for a
certainty whether she entered the room in the
ordinary way, or on her head. The lights
seemed dim, the cloud grew darker, her disinclination
to talk increased — it was an effort to
her to speak the few words she uttered — the
Society conversation appeared to her meaningless.


One treat reviewer said he never recollected
to have seen a bouquet so exquisitely
arranged as that she carried, and, in a sort of
dream. Glen remembered she had walked
through the greenhouse, and culled and
arranged the blossoms for herself. A noted
editor asked if she could contribute some papers,
and begged her to appoint a time for an interview
; but afterwards she could not recollect
what she said in answer, and knew if she had

met him in the street she would have failed to
recognise his features.

She heard great singers — singing as if they
stood afar off ; women and men she knew were
all around her, yet they did not seem near.
Suddenly there came upon her a yearning desire
to get away from it all, to rid herself of
the sound of voices; and pushing aside a
curtain, she found herself in a little anteroom,
which chanced at that moment to be quite
empty. It was cooler there. Through a
second door leading into the hall there came
every now and then a rush of fresh night air,
and with a sigh of relief, Glen dropped into
an easy chair beside the table, and tried to
gather together her wandering; wits.

These long distances and hot rooms do not
suit me,' she considered dreamily. ' I wish I
had not come ;' and in a feeble, purposeless sort
of fashion she was wondering how she could
best retire from the scene, when some one just
at her elbow asked :

Are you not well, Mrs. Lacere V
Lifting her eyes, she beheld Mr. Kelly.
Quite well, thank you, but tired.'
Then why on earth don't you go home V

That is precisely what I am thinking,' she
answered ; and then, ceasing to fan herself,
with a weary gesture she leaned her head back,
while her glance roamed over the pattern of
the carpet, as though it held the solution of
the enigma.

Barney looked at her doubtfully.

May I speak a few very plain words to
you V he asked.

If you like.'

Why do you drag about to these places ?
Why do you let Felton persuade you to accept
invitations I am sure you would much rather
refuse ? You are killing yourself; and what is
perhaps of more consequence, you are killing
such genius as God gave you. In Heaven's
name — when you find no pleasure in society,
and it is impossible to look in your face and
imagine you do — why don't you stays at home
and write your books, or else rest body and
mind, that you may write better hereafter V

I am sure I don't know,' she answered, a
little surprised at the force and bluntness of
his address. ' People say it is better not to
shut one's self up, but to mix with the world.'

People say !' he repeated contemptuously,

who are the people that talk such nonsense ?
Idle people, foolish people, rich people, strong
people

I come under the second category, I suppose,'
she smiled.

If I said I thought you were wise, I should
be more polite than truthful,' he replied,
smiling too. ' But seriously, Mrs. Lacere, is
it not a pity for you to allow yourself to be
led so far out of the direct road by that mere
abstraction ' they say '? When you can't
write any more, do you suppose Society will
settle a fixed income on you ? When your
health is broken, will it find a physician able
to cure V

But why,' demanded Glen, recovering her
spirits a little, and, under the surprise of this
unexpected attack, rallying her scattered energies
to do battle against the immaculate
Barney, ' should visiting — and I now visit
very little — unfit me for writing ? Why should
an hour or two of social intercourse ruin my
health ? Others go out night after night and
day after day — why not I ? Others find mixing
with their fellows stimulate their energies
and give them fresh ideas. What is there so

exceptional in my organization that where
others lead I may not follow V

Have you a headache V asked Barney, instead
of replying to this series of questions.
As she spoke he noticed she passed her hand
across her brow, a habit which had latterly
become involuntary.

I have always a headache,' she answered
pettishly ; * but that is of no consequence.
Tell me why I alone should stay at home
while all the rest of the world goes gadding?'


I could give you some very good reasons,
Mrs. Lacere,' said Barney, ' but this is neither
the time nor place for stating them. Let me
instead get you something to eat ; you
look quite worn out.'

Thank you ; I do not want anything,
except to get home. I wonder what the
time is.'

I dare say your coachman is somewhere
about the house. Shall I tell him you wish
to leave V

Oh, if you would I' exclaimed Glen. And
the mist seemed to close around her once
more, and the cloud to come nearer and

VOL. III. 61

nearer; for the short-lived excitement had died
out, like a ray of winter sunshine, leaving all
things darker than before.

I will explain matters to our hostess,' said
Barney, as he handed Mrs. Lacere to her carriage,
' and we will resume our discussion on
some future occasion.'

But it so chanced the discussion was never
resumed. For a short time Glen fought
bravely against the mist which stupefied and
the cloud that blinded her ; but there came at
length a morning when she was forced to
return to bed and stop there. Then after a
few days she got up and set to work turning
out copy once more. She could not go on,
however ; hand and head both refused their
office.

It is but a step from Fame to Failure — as
it is sometimes, according to medical testimony,
but the ' sixteenth of an inch ' from life
to death.

The same hoardings, the same blank walls
which had been placarded with the bills announcing
in huge letters : ' New Novel, by the
author of " Heron's Nest," ' now told all the
world and his wife that ' in consequence of

Mrs. Lacere's dangerous illness her new serial
was suspended.'

I knew it must come,' said Mr. Kelly to
Mr. Vassett ; ' I felt as certain she would
break down as I do that Felton will go
smash

61—2

WHAT HAPPENED.

*R. Felon was one of those persons
concerning whom it is eminently
unsafe to venture prophecies.
"While Glen was lying in enforced idleness
looking with a great horror death straight in
the face, and Mr. Kelly in confidential talk
with Mr. Yassett expressing his conviction
that the Burleigh Street bubble would soon
burst, Lance, on his own account and quite
independent of Mr. Laplash, was negotiating
for the purchase of one of the largest publishing
businesses in London. His intentions
were as simple as his book-keeping. He
meant to leave * Zack ' in Burleigh Street, and
to take all his best authors with him. All

trumpery pecuniary details ' he left to the
consideration of those who were going to find
the wherewithal for the great experiment.
Whether Mr. Laplash was pleased or angry
seemed to him a matter of indifference.

If you think he said, ' I am going to be
hampered in a big concern, as I have been ina
little, with your petty notions, you are very
much mistaken.'

But you can't throw me over in a
minute this way,' cried his partner, almost
weeping.

No ; but I'll just get rid of you as soon as
ever I can,' retorted Lance.

Eemember whose money it was started the
firm.'

Pooh !' said Mr. Felton, ' what is the good of
talking about that, when you know when we
started we had but eight pounds ten between
us V

And eight pounds five of that was mine.*
And all the brains mine,' added Lance.
Come, now, I wouldn't, if I were you,
either of you,' suggested Mr. Butterby, thinking
the period had arrived when he might put
in his oar with advantage. ' Least said about

that, by either of you, soonest mended. I
don't hold with bounce and lies and that sort
of thing, but still there is no need to tell the
whole of your affairs in the street. Don't
fret yourself, Zack ; if an equitable arrangement
is come to, you'll be far safer and more
comfortable here doing a quiet little profitable
trade by yourself ; and as for Lance, let him
take his great swells and big authors, and much
good may they do him 1'

There's one thing I'll not take, I'll swear 1'
exclaimed Lance, pale with passion — ' and that's
you ; and if I catch you hanging about the
other office as you have been hanging about
this, I'll give you in charge, that's aU.'

Only hark to him !' said Noll, with saintly
composure. ^ There's gratitude ! Who'd think
he owes everything he possesses on earth
to me V

I owe nothing to you,' shouted Lance, in
rejoinder, * except a debt I'll take precious

good care to pay you in meal or in malt. I)

your impudence ! do you think I'm such a
simpleton as not to know you thought to use
me as a tool — that you imagined I was so
hard up that I'd go touching my hat to you

for the chance of earning a few shillings a
week ? You never meant me to get on —
never. You'd have kept my nose to the
grindstone for the term of my natural life, if
you'd had your way. And where would you
have been but for me, I'd like to know ?
Where would you have got your roomy house
at Pelham, and that terrace up at Kentish
Town, and the freehold cottages out Modesty
way ? Faith, if every rogue had his deserts,
you'd be living rent free in a plainer and more
substantial residence than Garden Villa, and
have to put up with more frugal fare than you
sit down to now.'

I wouldn't. Lance,' said Mr. Butterby,
who had with blanched face kept turning his
head round during the progress of this remarkable
address to see if anyone entered the
outer office, while Mr. Laplash averted his
countenance to hide the smile with which he
could not help greeting Lance's utterances.
Now I wouldn't really, if I were you.'

If you don't quit that parrot-cry I'll brain
you !' declared Mr. Felton ; and as he laid his
hand on the inkstand he looked so exceedingly
like carrying his threat into execution without

waiting for further provocation, that ' more in
sorrow than in anger Mr. Butterby sauntered
out of the office and into the street.

If you can't keep him from drink he'll cut
all our throats one of these days observed
Noll to Laplash, when subsequently talking
the interview over with him ; whereupon Mr.
Laplash, with a mighty oath, affirmed he
didn't care whose throat Lance cut as long as
he'd give him (Zack) a share in the new
business.

'Now don't you take to swearing also
remonstrated Mr. Butterby : ' it's a wrong,
and a foolish, and an — an unnecessary habit,'
finished Noll, who, in addition to his other
accomplishments, being an open-air preacher,
sometimes indulged in a little redundance of
expression.

It may be,' said Mr. Laplash, * but I fancy
if you'd much to do with Lance, you would
find ordinary language quite incapable of conveying
your feelings. To think, after how I've
worked, that I should be pitched over in this
fashion !' and he relieved his overcharged heart
by uttering another malediction, which caused
Noll to shake his sleek head in horror.

As Mr. Felton knew money belonging to
other people would have to pay for the privilege
of ' securing ' Mrs. Lacere for the new business,
it goes almost without saying that overtures
were in due time made to Glen for a new
book.

Still ill, still finding the completion of the
novel abbacy in hand a weary labour, Mr.
Felton's pet novelist did not greet the prospect
of getting hard to work again with that delight
he could have wished to see.

Come,' he urged, ' you must not give way,
you know. What will become of us all if you
are laid on the shelf? You ought to have
been guided by me, and not undertaken this
serial; and I am beginning to think Kelly's
right, and a quiet life is the thing to suit a
woman who goes in for your line of writing.
I don't mean to say this last thing is not very
good, and has not taken, for if I did, I should
be stating an untruth ; but still it is not you.
Now, sit down and write me a book like " Ash
Tree" or 'due East," and we'll not quarrel
about terms.'

It had come to this. After all the trouble
and turmoil and hurry, the mad haste to turnout

copy, and the wild and expensive chase
after fresh ideas and new pastures, she was
asked to return to the modest plan and simple
style which had won her early success, and
out of the solid, if apparently unattractive
materials of old, build up a story which, by
its utter absence of all art, should again rivet
the public, and inspire the eager interest and
keen curiosity of old.

Mr. Felt on mio;ht as well tell me to go back
and be a girl again,' thought Glen ; but she had
either learnt enough wisdom not to contradict
the publisher's fancy, or else felt too tired to
argue the matter with him. So she agreed todo
all she could to produce a satisfactory work,
mentioning at the same time it was impossible
for her to commence anything fresh till she
got strong again.

But now you've turned your corner you will
soon be strong,' he said eagerly; ' and don't let
yourself down and think you are worse than
you are. Look at me. Bless you, if I was to
begin to consider finger-aches and not feeling
up to the mark, and the rest of it, I might
never show in Burleigh Street at all. Get
away for a few weeks. Take your writing

with you. Why, down in some quiet place
by the sea you ought to get a lot of inspiration.
Margate, now — that's not very quiet, to
be sure ; but you needn't ever feel dull there.
It's all nonsense your moping about home.
Tell your maid to put up your things and
start off — that's the plan ; and if you want
money, let Lacere come up to me. I dare say
between us we'll manage enough to pay your
lodging. Very likely I'll take a run down and
see how you are getting on myself.'

With which cheering assurance Mr. Felton
took his leave.

In aU her life there had never been a time
when Mrs. Lacere felt less inclined to ' go somewhere
for a change.' She had lain still and
looked at death ; in the watches of the night
she had reviewed her life, and found small
satisfaction in the retrospect. This was her
first pause in the race since that evening when
she turned her steps toward Burleigh Street,
and she was as reluctant now to enter the
course again as she had been then to wend her
way back to Mr. Yassett to ask him for the
manuscript of ' Heron's Nest.'

What better was she for all the prizes she

had won — all the money she had earned — all
the people she had seen — all the flattery, all
the praise which once seemed so sweet ?

How much better — nay, rather, how much
worse ! If no one knew the fact. Glen was
fully aware she had not done herself justice,
that she owned higher capabilities than, so far
as it now seemed, the world was ever likely
to wot of.

The old, old story over again — acting in
haste, repenting at leisure ! AVhat a good
thing she might have made of life for herself
and other people if she had only been wise, she
thought, as night after night she lay watching
with tired eyes for the grey dawn of another
weary day ; and now life seemed over. Even
if she got better, she felt there was little worth
living for. As Ned Beattie would have said
plainly, she wanted something to cry for ;
and it was not long ere that something came.
So far, events had moved but slowly ; now
they followed swift one on the heels of another.


Don't you think it strange,' she said to her
husband on a certain night, nearly three weeks
after the day when she promised to write a book

as nearly on the old pattern as she could, ' that
Mr. Felton does not send on the agreement 1
He seemed in such haste when he was here,
and I never remember his being so long in
what he calls " clinching " an affair before.'

He has been ill answered Mr. Lacere,
after an almost imperceptible pause.

111 ? When did you hear V

To-day — this evening. Just before I left
town.'

What has been the matter V

I don't know.'

Is he better V

Yes — no — the truth is, Glen '

What is the truth, dear ? Why don't you
go on ? Is there any danger V And then,
without waiting for an answer, she cried out,
He is dead !' and sat silent— stunned.

Are you sure V she inquired at last.

Quite. I went down to Burleigh Street
to inquire. Poor fellow ! with aU his faults,
there was a great deal of good about him.'

What a dreadful thing 1' said Glen, still
almost stupefied.

I did not intend to tell you anything
about it to-night,' said Mr. Lacere.

I am thankful you did she declared. ' It
would have been terrible to hear me going on
talking about the agreement when you know
he could never send it. Do you remember
how often he used to say he would not livelong
V

It is the unexpected which always happens
commented Barney, when he heard the news.
I certainly did not think this was what would
occur / and so in all manner of ways the
changes were rung throughout London on
Lance Felton's death. Even before the man
was buried, the literary world seemed to proceed
much on its way as usual. He did not
appear to be missed by a certain set, as might
have been expected. Save that he was not to
be seen there, things in Burleigh Street went
on apparently as heretofore. The postman
delivered letters, which Mr. Laplash opened ;
people paid money, which Mr. Laplash banked ;
collectors called for books, and got them, just
as though the busy brain which had built up
so astonishing a business was not at rest. Noll
lounged in and out as formerly. Except that
Mr. Laplash now sat in Lance's special armchair,
and devoted himself to correspondence.

and saw authors, and answered questions as
one having authority, there was nothing to
show the mainspring of the concern was
broken, that Lancelot Felton would never
again make a bargain, or crow over other
publishers, or blow a trumpet about his ' big '
authors, or thrust his subscription list under
Mr. Yassett's unwilling nose, or point to the
long string of good names in the Athenaeum,
which had filled the souls of ' slow-going old
coaches ' with envy and dismay.

It had been a short life, but in reality not a
merry one. The steam was always at high-pressure
; but perhaps nobody, save Mr.
Felton himself, knew the cargo of care he
carried adown the stream with such apparent
ease and jauntiness, and at such an express
speed.

In a word, Lancelot Felton having, as his
partner expressed the matter, died of ' drought '
(there were those who said his sudden exit was
due to quite an opposite cause), Mr. Laplash
remained, so far as pecuniary matters permitted,
master of the position. He inaugurated
his reign by serving writs on all those authors
who were not * up to time ' with their manuscripts.

' Lance had made advances and
received no equivalent,' so the new head of the
firm stated, ' and he was determined to put
things on a different footing ' — which, indeed,
he very soon did.

The process was simple, but effectual. He
drove away almost every writer of reputation,
and he found himself the possessor of perhaps
a number of the worst manuscripts
which were ever at one time showered in upon
a publisher.

As it is not easy to procure good ' copy,'
even if all the conditions for producing it
are favourable, the quality turned out under
pressure of a writ may be imagined.

Nevertheless, it was copy capable of being
printed, with a good name on the title-page ;
and Mr. Laplash, having thus ' got in his
debts ' and ' weeded ' his lists, turned his
attention to doing what he called a safe trade.
He began this safe trade by cutting down
authors' prices, and economizing in advertising.
AVhen he published a work by a known writer,
he trusted to the name of the writer selling the
edition.

It was a suicidal policy for himself, and one

which would have been death to authors had
they stayed long enough with the Burleigh
Street Solomon to be killed by this novel
treatment ; but, as a rule, they were sufficiently
wise speedily to betake themselves elsewhere.


For a while Mr. Lap lash garnered golden
grain. He reaped that which others had
planted ; his barns were full to overflowing ;
he felt jubilant ; he extolled his own tactics,
and regarded the wisdom of all the great
publishers as folly.

But a day came when he perceived there
was not much of a harvest ripening for him.
Little seed had been cast into the ground
since Lance Felton's death, and he could now
count the stalks of wheat in his field, so few
were they. Then he and * Noll ' laid their
heads together, and initiated the plan since
successfully followed by so many 'strictly
conscientious ' firms, of making amateurs pay
for their whistle.

Why shouldn't they V said Mr. Butterby.
If a man wants to learn a trade, he has to
pay a premium.'

Which was all very well, only in his zeal

VOL. III. 62

for his friend's interest Mr. Butterby forgot
that the wealth of Rothschild could not confer
genius or even talent. And if he had
remembered this, it would not have much
mattered, since it was rather pecuniary profit
to Mr. Laplash than success to would-be
authors which was desired.

Be very sure that in Burleigh Street the
bitter pill was smothered in jam instead of
being thrust nakedly before the sight in the
honest practical way wherewith Mr. Vassett
still chills the enthusiasm of rising; genius.

If you want a brougham,' he observes,
with a candour that is not cruel, though it
may seem so, ' you have to pay for it. If
you wish to appear in print, you must find
the money. I fail to see sufficient merit in
your manuscript to justify my spending
capital upon it ; and, indeed, to be quite
candid, I should prefer you to take your novel
elsewhere. '

Which was exactly what 'rising genius clid,^
though now, judging from the many, many
failures in the book trade, *' lords and ladies,
widows and orphans, clergymen and others
are beginning to pause ere sending cheques

or handing; over their careful savings, their
little all, to any Dick, Tom, or Harry who
chooses to add the magic word ' publisher '
after his name.

The glamour of success with which Mr.
Felton had invested his firm still enveloped
Burleigh Street, and it proved no difficult
matter to change the whole order of things,
and get authors willing to pay for having
their books brought out instead of being paid
for writing them. Mr. Laplash felt delighted.

Ah !' he said to Mr. Butterby, whom he
liked to have hanging about his office, on the
same principle that a devotee believes in the
efficacy of any relic which once belonged to
some sinful old saint, ' if poor Lance had only
thought less of his authors and more of himself,
he might have been living now, and a
rich man, too.'

Mr. Butterby shook his head, as if in grave
and mournful assent ; but he thought had
Lance's brains been of no better quality than
his partner's there would have been no
business to talk of, and no authors worth
mentioning.

Felton had some appreciation of literature

62—2

observed one irate individual, in whose breast
that invitation of ' Victoria by the grace of
God ' was still rankling, ' but this fellow is a
mere tradesman. He looks on a book as a
baker would on a roll

No, he doesn't answered a friend, ' for a
baker would like his roll to be of a good
quality, and it is perfectly immaterial to
Laplash what the book is, so long as it puts
money in his pocket

mr. Felton's authors felt very sore indeed
at the doings of the new potentate, and
quoted in a bitter and satirical way the words
of Rehoboam, and applied the retort of the
Children of Israel to Mr. Laplash, most of
them at the same time leaving Burleigh
Street.

But ]mr. Laplash did not care. He said he
was very glad to get rid of them, that the
firm had ' lost lots of money ' over their
books ; and that for his part, from the first he
entered an earnest though unavailing protest
against the ridiculous sums paid for ' mere
names.'

AAYell, that was how Felton made the business,
at any rate,' remarked Mr. Kelly, who

felt somewhat indignant at the sudden change
of policy, and the mud so freely thrown
on Lance's memory.

Humph ! a nice business grunted Mr.
Laplash.

You ought not to disparage it, at any rate
urged Barney. ' You had your share of the
profits, no doubt.'

There never were any profits.'

AAYell, then, your share of the " debts " ' retorted
the other.

Mr. Laplash stared at him for a moment.
Before turning on his heel he said shortly, and
with a sort of snarl :

I don't know what you mean.'

The sole partner was now a great man.
People toadied and tried to propitiate him.
He was asked out to dinner and to fashionable
parties. If little Miss Green wanted to add
to her income, she asked her dear aunt or
cousin, Lady So-and-so, to show Mr. Laplash
some attention ; and Mr. Laplash, laughing at
them all in his sleeve, was good enough to accept
their attentions, and tell in his * delightfully
brusque way' the sums of money his
firm had paid authors, and the * great hit '

such and such books had been. Then the
family resources were tried, ' and little Miss
Green paid down a given amount, and forthwith
expected to make her fortune.

Anybody might have thought in those days
literature was a lottery in which there were no
blanks, so eagerly did people flock to take
tickets for fame in Burleigh Street.

Intoxicated by the rush of moneyed amateurs
knocking, with lordly cheques in their hands,
at the door of his temple, Mr. Laplash suffered
himself to become captious and somewhat insolent
to the unfortunate persons he 'employed'
who expected money for ' their work.' It was
necessary to keep a few good names on his lists
in order to * draw ' amateurs, but he took care
to ' teach them their true position ' and ' take
down their notions of their own importance.'

Things ain't as they used to be,' he was
wont to say. * Authors "will never get what
they did again. There are such a deuce of a
lot of you, the market's spoiled. A publisher
can't bring out more than a certain number of
books ;' and then he would offer some ridiculous
sum, finishing off with the civil remark :

I never read one of you. I don't know

whether your book is good or bad. I only
know that you'll sell — that is all concerns me.'

In a moment of forgetfulness he said something
of this sort to Mr. Kelly, who answered,
he thought authors had better turn their
attention to some way of earning an honest
penny.

I am sure I wish most of them would replied
Mr. Laplash, lounging easily down the
outer office after Barney : ' as for your matter,
I am willing to give you what I said, though
I don't know if I shall ever see my money
back again.'

You are very kind, I am surest replied the
author, in a white heat of rage, which quite
escaped Mr. Laplash 's observation, as he proceeded
to ask in a friendly way :

How's your old woman V

Sir f said Barney.

How's your young woman, then V persisted
Mr. Laplash, who regarded this mode of asking
after a wife as a delightful pleasantry.

Mr. Kelly did not answer. Without speaking
a word, he strode out into the street, Mr.
Laplash staring after his retreating figure in
amazement.

You've gone and done it this time observed
Mr. Butterby. ' I told you before I
wouldn't, if I was you.'

Next day a messenger arrived with Mr.
Kelly's compliments, and he should be obliged
by the return of his manuscript. Now it
happened that Mr. Laplash did not want to
quarrel with the great man, so ' Noll ' was despatched
as a dove of peace, bearing any
number of olive-leaves T\'ith him. But Mr.
Kelly would have none of them.

I blame myself greatly,' he said, * for
having ever endured for a moment the rude
buffoonery of your office.'

Not my office, if you please,' amended Mr.
Butterby.

You found the capital to start it.'

Certainly not.'

Certainly yes ; but not out of your own
money,' retorted Barney.

Your words are actionable, sir.'
Commence an action, then.'

But IVIr. Butterby did not commence an
action. He thought over matters, and decided
for the future to deprive Burleigh Street of the
pleasure of his society.

I am not going to come here for a longtime,'
he declared.

All right,' retorted Mr. Laplash. * I daresay
I can manage my own affairs for myself.'


Kelly said Lance was a very courtier in
comparison to you.'

Glad Lance's manners pleased His Highness.'


Before I go I'll give you a bit of advice.
Mind what you're about with Mrs. Lacere. If
she goes you'll never get such another horse
in the Burleigh Street stable.'

Much obliged ; only she'll not go.'
Oh ! she won't, won't she V

*No,' retorted Mr. Laplash, *and it is na
business of yours why.'

EVIL DAYS.

N common with other authors, more
or less known than herself, Glen
had, after Mr. Felton's death,
suffered a curtailment in her prices, which,
after a time, began to affect her seriously.

At first Mr. Laplash exhibited a considerable
amount of diplomacy in his management.

When he came to look into affairs he found
them, so he told her, in such a confounded
mess he could not afford to give her within
two hundred pounds of the amount named by
his late partner.

She submitted to that reduction, so losing
her first and best chance of resistance.

Then her husband was taken ill, and Mr.

Laplash said, ' she had been so long out of the
market, her next book would take ever so
much more advertising, and he really could
not afford to give her above five hundred
pounds.'

Glen said nothing, but she thought a great
deal.

Mr. Lacere had been very ill, consequently
about the same time two facts began to dawn
upon her mind — namely, that the ' big business '
had gone, and that her own large income was
going.

The great house down in the provinces,
after biding its time, decided on sending one
of its junior partners round the world to
enlarge his mind. Concurrently with that
enlargement all shipping orders ceased, and
thenceforward not one single cheque worth
having came to Mr. Logan-facere.

Yet the laro;e firm mio;ht have left him the
small home and continental fish, to catch
which he had advertised so long, angled so
sedulously, and spent so much time and
money. But no — Europe out of England,
and England out of London, vanished simultaneously.


London was still left, but London alone
could not possibly pay ; further, at this crisis
Mr. Lacere's cousin s excellent business collapsed.
Of course, Mr. Lacere was once again
involved in the failure of his relation, and
after that the downfall of Mordaunt Logan-facere
became a mere question of time.

It took about as many months to compass
his destruction as it has taken minutes ta
exhibit the tactics of the great firm. There
was the usual long;-drawn-out torture, then the
fierce fight, the mad attempt to stave off the
inevitable.

After that, ruin, utter and complete, without
a penny wherewith to commence a fresh
fight ; while everyone said, ' Oh ! Mrs. Lacere,
able as you are to make a large income, you'll
be so much better without business of any
kind.'

Then, as if failure and bankruptcy meant a
sort of jubilee, invitations poured in, and the
Laceres, had they been made of the stuff out
of which genteel paupers are moulded, might
have lodged and boarded for a year free of
cost. The world — their social world — was good
to them beyond telling ; the "world — his business

world — was cruel to Mr. Logan-facere as
Mr. Laplash to Glen.

Your wife's income must pay your debts
said his creditors.

You are not selling as you did. People
are beginning to say you'll have to mind what
you're about said Mr. Laplash ; so if ever
there was a literary woman who paced the
London pavements in a fine frenzy of despair,
that woman was Glenarva Logan-facere.

Further, Mr. Laplash's manners, never, even
in Glen's most prosperous days, remarkable
for respect or appreciation, now dropped into
such easy familiarity, that Lance's ' crack
author ' felt at times almost beside herself
with indignation. It would only have made
matters worse to show she was offended ;
further. Glen knew perfectly well her first
serious quarrel with Mr. Laplash would be
their last. Till she should be prepared to
leave him as a publisher, she bit back the words
that often sprang to her lips, answering only
by silence or some cutting retort, the full
meaning of which Mr. Laplash apparently did
not wish to comprehend.

Sitting with his hat on (in which Mrs.

Lacere once asked him if he slept), this light
among modern publishers would greet her
with — ' How's Mordaunt ? Got any work yet V
or, * I can't speak to you to-day. Look in
to-morrow ;' or, ' You're a nice sort of young
woman. Where's the rest of that manuscript V
or, ' I had your note, but it's of no use asking
me for any money — we ain't got none here ;'
or, ' That last reprint of yours was a bad business
for me ; I wish it had been at the

before I ever was such a fool as to take it ;'
and all the time while he was insulting her
position, and depreciating her work, and grinding
her down to the last penny, he was, as
she found out afterwards, making a good income
from her books, and finding her, as
Mr. Butterby truly said, ' the best steed in
his stable.'

Which, from a literary point of view, was
perhaps not saying much, for the Laplash
stable was fast going to be synonymous
with a knacker's yard. To be quite fair, however,
there was this much in Mr. Laplash's
favour — he had never liked Mrs. Lacere or her
books. So far as he possessed any literary
taste whatever, it inclined to the 'penny

dreadful ' style of novel. He believed she had
been totally overpaid in his partner s lifetime,
and he felt it a true labour of love to recoup
himself a portion of what she had over-received
from the firm. Further, he did not know how
he hurt her. Glen came of a race that could
bear any amount of pain and make no sign,
and she was not going to show him how his
words cut into her heart, and the lash of his
tongue touched the most sensitive part of her
nature.

Burdened with the burdens of old, crushed
to the earth with new burdens such as even a
man might have found hard to carry, still
Glenarva's soul would have rejoiced in her
labour had one single appreciative word rewarded
her endeavours.

Beyond anything, she was an honest worker.
Not for the morning's meal or the day's bread
could she have turned out a pot-boiler. Circumstances
might be against her, the conditions
of her life unfavourable for producing
good copy, but the books she sent Mr.
Laplash were the best she had ever written.
They were poorly paid; they were accepted
with apparent reluctance; yet had any man

offered her ten thousand pounds for her
manuscript, she could have given him nothing
better then.

In return, Mr. Laplash flouted and disparaged
her novels, sent barely half a dozen
to the reviewers, advertised them at last scarce
at all.

He's killing your books,' said one who was
behind the scenes.

Mr. Laplash was doing worse. He was
killing her powers. Taking such genius as
she possessed by the throat, he had simply
commenced to strangle it, and ere long would
have done so, but that there came a time when
matters between him and Glen arrived at a
climax.

She had gone to Burleigh Street to ask for
money — no uncommon petition, unhappily. On
the occasion in question it was needed to avert
impending legal proceedings, and Mrs. Lacere
was silly enough to tell Mr. Laplash the fact.
In total silence Mr. Laplash heard all she had to
say ; then he answered that if she would come
to his office on the next day at the same
hour, he should be able to tell her what he
could do.

When the next day came, Glen, on calling,
found Mr. Laplash absent. But he had left a
note, which she tore open eagerly, expecting to
find the desired cheque enclosed.

Instead of this, she drew out a large sheet of
ruled paper, on which appeared something
which purported to be a true account of the
pecuniary result of her last book. In her long
literary experience she had never received such
a document before, but she knew enough of
business to understand the figures which met
her eyes. So much for printing so many
copies — a very great number of copies — so
much for paper, binding, advertising — the
total cost amounting on the one side to a large
sum.

On the other, so many copies sold to the

trade at per dozen, thirteen as twelve ;

so much to author ; reviewers, ^yq copies ;
left in stock, five hundred copies — the result
being that Mr. Laplash represented he was
a loser to the extent of twenty-four pounds
nine and sentence halfpenny over the transaction.


As she folded up this extraordinary document,
Glen noticed a half-sheet of note-paper,

VOL. III. 63

which had dropped from the envelope to the
floor.

Feeling nothing more could amaze her, she
lifted it, and read :

You will see from the enclosed that you are
no such catch after all.'

There and then the fortunate author would
like to have done battle with Mr. Laplash,
but she knew enough of his habits to be
aware he had gone away to avoid her, and
did not mean to return to Burleigh Street that
day.

'Tell Mr. Laplash,' she said to the clerk,
pausing for a moment in the outer office,
that I shall come here tomorrow at three
o'clock, and wait till I see him. Do not
forget, if you please, to deliver my message.'


The young man was very earnest in his
assurances that he would certainly do so.

Glen thought that as he spoke he was
struggling to suppress a smile, but if he
had laughed in her face she would not have
cared.

She knew he had, under the direction of his

chief, prepared that precious balance-sheet,
and was perfectly aware Mr. Laplash did
not want to see her ; and the tone of her voice
was so full of this conviction, that, after he
had given his principal Mrs. Lacere's message,
he added on his own account the information
:

You may as well see her, for she means to
have the matter out.'

Accordingly, when next day Glen, true to
her appointment, arrived, she was, with that
charming absence of undue ceremony which
prevailed at Burleigh Street, told, ' You'll find
him inside.'

Inside ' she found ' him ' seated, with his
hat on, at the familiar table, apparently
engrossed in writing a letter. There had
been a time when she would have taken a
chair without being invited to do so ; but now
she stood till she should compel his attention.


Sit down, can't you V he said at last, still
busy with his writing.

Glen sat down, and waited, watching Mr.
Laplash, and losing herself in a perfect maze
of speculation, till, suddenly throwing down

63—2

his pen, and blotting off the sheet, and thrusting
the letter into an envelope, he turned his
head half round and said :

Now, what is it V

I will wait till you are quite at leisure she
suggested. ^

I'm as much at leisure now as I'm ever
likely to be,' he answered. * You got my note
yesterday V

Yes ; that is what I have come to talk about.'
You see just how the thing stands. I

thought it better to show you the figures.
What can't speak can't lie, you know.'

I am not so sure of that,' she replied.
'Well, you can examine my books if you

like. I can't say fairer than that, can I ?

'I don't want to examine your books,' said
Glen. ' I may be very foolish, but I am
not so foolish as to fail to know books can
be kept to show anything. However, we
need not go into that question. ^\^iat I do
wish to know is this. You say you have lost
money by my last novel. How does it
happen V

Why, you don't sell.'

Why don't I sell V

Because, in the first place, you're not what
you were

My books are no worse, if that is what you
mean ; and in the second V

People have got sick of that sort of thing.
They want something pleasant and genial.
None of that cynicism and realism you're so
fond of. I really think I might do a little
good with a book of yours if you would turn
your attention to the subjects novel-readers
care about.'

What do they care about V

Now, that just shows your deficiency.
As an author, you ought to know. Love and
beauty and children, and dress and jewels,
and parties and pleasure, and everything
coming right at the end, is the sort of novel
there's a rush for at Mudie's. You think what
I say over, and bring me a genial book with a
good plot and a sympathetic heroine, and I'll
see what I can do for you.'

Mr. Laplash paused, and Glen kept silence
for a moment. Then she said :

And suppose I brought you a genial book
with a good plot and a sympathetic heroine —
not that at present I exactly understand what

a sympathetic heroine is — how much could you
offer me for such a triumph of art V

'Come, don't sneer,' cried Mr. Laplash ;
that's an awful fault of yours. What could I
offer you ? Well, you see how matters are.
But I would try to give you half of what you
had for your last.'

And may I ask how you expect me to
live T

Oh, that's your affair, not mine. You'll
never live out of three volume novels, that's
very clear. You'll have to run your stories
through the country newspapers ; that's what
they all do now — Collins, and Brandon, and
the rest. And why not you ? I've no objection.
Then there are the magazines ; so long
as I've the book in time to publish three
months before it finishes in serial form, you
may do what you like with it. I'll not stand
in your way.' With which generous declaration
Mr. Laplash took another sheet of paper,
and would have commenced writing again, but
that Glen stopped him.

One moment, please,' she said ; ' I will not
detain you long. Do you recollect when I
sold you the book, over which you say you

have lost so much, I asked you to try and get
me an engagement to run a serial through one
of the magazines ? There are at least three
editors to whom you would have had but to
speak to ensure its acceptance.'

Now you mention it, I do remember your
saying something of the kind,' answered Mr.
Laplash, wisely ignoring the last part of Glen's
sentence.

And when I spoke to you again, and reminded
you of your promise — for you did promise
— you said you had forgotten.'

So I had — I have my own affairs to occupy
my attention.'

'And the next thing I saw,' proceeded
Glen, * was that Lady Hilda Hicks and Miss
Yarlow, and the author you have recently
discovered *^ greater than Thackeray," " more
genial than Dickens," were announced as appearing
in each of the three magazines.'

And the same chance was open to you ; it
you have no push, don't blame me.'

Mr. Laplash, I had not the same chance,
and you know it. You can put just what
you please into those magazines ; as I heard a
person say the other day, you are *' hand-and-glove

" with the proprietors. And as for the
other magazines, you are perfectly well aware
how I am situated, and how impossible it is
for me, with illness in my home, either to wait
for engagements or to be running about from
office to office.'

'Well, that's no fault of mine. You had
your chance. Why didn't you save your
money when we were paying you those enormous
sums ? If you'd been wise you might
have now capitalized enough to live on the
interest for life.'

If I had been wise,' retorted Glen, ' I
should never have sold a book to your firm
after " Heron's Nest." '

That's too good,' exclaimed Mr. Laplash.

Osiers came to me then,' she went on,
but I would not take advantage of them. I
thought Mr. Felton had acted generously by
me, and that I would act fairly by him. The
same feeling kept me with you ; but it was a
mistake. You have always been my enemy.
God alone knows why, for I do not. But we
will end the mistake now '

What's the use of all this talk V he interrupted.


I have not troubled you with much talk
during the eleven years I have known this
office, and I shall never trouble you with any
talk again

What are you going to do, then V he
asked.

See if in London there is not a publisher
who believes in me she answered boldly.

I wish you luck,' he said. ' Now, look
here. You have told me a lot of things today;
in reply, I have only one remark to make
to you. Novel writing's not a gold mine, and,
if it were, you're not the woman to dig out
the gold. I can see very plainly what the result
of your career will be. You'll have to
apply to the Royal Literary Fund, and then
you'll see whether you like their terms better
than mine.'

There is another alternative,' said Glen.

What's that V

The parish,' she answered, ' the mercies of
which I should prefer to working any longer
for you.'

Ah ! you're angry now,' he said, as she
rose ; ' you'll be glad enough to come back in a
day or two.'

Shall I ? Good-evening, Mr. Laplash.'

By tills time he had fairly got the sheet of
paper before him, and was writing away like a
maniac.

She looked around the remembered office,
and a thousand old associations laid their
tender, softening hands upon her.

I am going, Mr. Laplash ; good-evenings
she repeated — even after what had passed she
could not bear to part in malice.

He did not speak in reply ; he did not look
at the woman who had worked for his firm so
hard, and out of whom he had made so much
money ; but he half lifted his head, and nodded
farewell over his shoulder.

She stopped for a moment to speak to the
clerk as she passed his desk, then, drawing
down her veil, she went out into the gathering
night, shaking the dust of Burleigh Street off
her feet for ever.

Of the months that followed, Glenarva never
cared to speak. Safely it may be said, no
woman who had climbed to the height where
she once stood ever knew a similar experience.

They were months illumined by success,
in which, had she never written a line, she

might have fared letter. But seven years
since she stood almost at the top of the literary-tree,
and for all the good that fame had done
her, she had better have endured failure than
scored success. She walked publishing London
through — she toiled up flights and flights of
stairs — she saw editors — she talked to the principals
of great houses — and yet, but for the
kindness of two men she had known in more
prosperous days, during the course of those
months her earnings would have been literally
nil.

I don't remember your name,' said one
editor to her. ' What have you done V

" Ashtree Manor," " Due East," " Heron's
Nest," ' answered Glen glibly enough, looking
at her interlocutor by the light of his shaded
lamp.

/ never heard of one of them' he said.

It was then the iron entered into Glenarva's
soul. Eip Van Winkle himself was not so
strange after twenty years' absence to the inhabitants
of his village, as Glen to the new
literary world of London. The children's
children had, at least, heard of him ; little
more than a lustre, during most of which

she was hard at work, sufficed to wipe all
memory even of her name off public remembrance.


Given sickness in her home ; poverty ; persons
dependent on her who had never even
thought of trying to be useful, and an utter
impossibility of procuring work — and how, it
may be asked, did this once successful author
manage to live ?

Well, during that awful time she found
friends, tradespeople, servants, and landlord
different from the stereotyped examples depicted
in books. Shoulder to shoulder, friends
stood by her ; tradesmen had faith, her servants
love, the landlord patience. It was only Glen
herself who sometimes failed, who thought, ' It
is impossible I can ever fight through this ;'
and yet she did.

"What Mr. Felton said about her having no
go ' was utterly true. Mr. Laplash's remark
concerning her Tant of ' push ' could not on
the score of truth be quarrelled with ; but she
had one quality for which few gave her credit
dogged perseverance.

It was this which had carried her through
the earlier part of her career; it was this

which enabled her day after day to support
fresh disappointment and cruel rebuff.

For even where her name was known she
met merely with tolerance or scant civility.
The days when she could sit down on a flight
of stairs and cry were gone and past ; but a
worse bitterness than that which occasioned
those tears now rankled in her heart.

What have I done, or left undone,' she one
day asked her husband, ' to be treated as the
worst of impostors V

The evil comes from Burleigh Street,' he
answered. ' But have patience, dear; the right
must win in the end.'

I do not know,' she said sadly ; ' but I feel
as if I had lost my position for ever.'

That was precisely what Mr. Laplash trusted
she would feel ; knowing how she was situated,
he hoped to starve her out. In his calculation,
however, he made one great mistake. She
would have preferred to starve to returning
to the Burleigh Street servitude. More, she
would have done menial work, or begged for
those dependent on her, sooner than again
take service under the Laplash banner.

What's become of Mrs. Lacere ?' inquired

Mr. Kelly one evening, meeting Lady Hilda
at a party. He saw she was heading the
Burleigh Street list, and felt sure she must
have some knowledge of the Laplash tactics.

Mrs. Lacere !' replied Lady Hilda. * Oh !
don't you know ? She's quite used up. Can't
write at all ; her last books were awful failures.
Didn't sell at all.'

Indeed !' said Barney, interested.

Yes, and she was dreadfully insolent to
Mr. Laplash, who acted most kindly to her.
I couldn't have believed any woman could
have been so ungrateful.'

And to such a benefactor !' observed Barney.

Yes, he kept her on even at a loss to himself
; but at last she made herself so disagreeable
he was obliged to get rid of her, and she
and her husband now are in absolute want.
Serve her right. I went over to see her —
just to find out how things were, you know,
and you wouldn't believe the impertinence
with which she treated me. Said I was
an emissary from the Laplash camp — come
to spy out the land, and all that sort of
thing.'

And perhaps she was right, Lady Hilda,'

hinted Barney ; whereupon her ladyship made
some remarks about Ireland and the Irish
that subsequently did her no good.

Now thought jMr. Kelly, ' I'll just find
out what the meaning of aU this is ; and if, as
I shrewdly suspect, our friend has been trying
to damn the woman, we'll see whether two
people can't play at a game

He did not care for Mrs. Lacere, but, hating
Mr. Laplash, he determined to wound him
through her"; and therefore, T\dthin a fortnight
Burleigh Street and the world which had
forgotten Glen were utterly astonished with a
long article in The Dragon concerning her
books.

Why, here's the author I've been wanting
cried an editor. ' Where on earth has my
memory been !'

Before the day was out, he had called on
Mrs. Lacere and arranged with her for a
serial.

You'll do your best for me V he said, as
they shook hands at parting.

I'll do the best I ever did for anyone in
my life,' she answered, and she was faithful
to her word.

They are going to pay me in twelve equal
instalments,' Glen said to her husband, whom
she astonished with her news. * So we can
now take a little place out of town.'

That had for some time past been the
dream of husband and wife. So far as he
was concerned, he knew that in the busy
haunts of men his place had long been filled
up, and that the only chance of future work
and usefulness lay down in the country ;
while for Glen, all she wanted was to get
away from London for ever, to rest heart and
brain and body in some remote region where
she had not suffered and spent her strength
for nought.

But to do this till the blessed 'certainty
of regular work was ensured would have been
utter madness. Even then she felt any
residence they took could only be regarded as
temporary.

^ What we had better do, dear,' she said —
for, alas ! during that time of serious illness
it had become necessary for her to take the
helm — * is to look out a house for the winter
in some neighbourhood not too far from
London you think you would like. Then

when the spring comes we can perhaps find a
place to suit us for a permanency.'

So said, so done. A small house was found
and taken ; just so many things were unpacked
as they absolutely wanted ; Mr. Lacere
set himself to get well ; Glen bought some
manuscript paper, and turned fiercely to work.

She had never been so happy before, never
not in her youngest days — not when hope
reigned triumphant — not when fruition succeeded
to hope. What though they were
poor beyond relief ? She had all her husband
needed. What though the day's work seemed
never ended ? It was a work of love, into
which Glenarva put her whole strength and
soul and spirit. The hunger of her nature
was at last satisfied. She had her husband
to herself ; she was all in all to him, in theory
and in fact. Through devious and thorny
paths God Almighty was leading her to the
peace He alone can give, and at the same
time teaching her the worth and truth of the
great heart, the patience of which her fitful
nature must so often have tried.

It was to outward appearance but a mean,

VOL. III. 64

poor house in which the Laceres lived, yet to
Glenarva it seemed a palace.

With the outer door closed between themselves
and the world and its troubles, husband
and wife talked as they had never talked before
during all their married life. Through her
OTVTL suffering she began to understand the
story of his ; by reason of the strong compression
she put on her feelings she at last
comprehended the apparent reticence of a
nature far nobler and grander than her own.

Overweighted ! undervalued ! misunderstood!
God,' she used to think, ' what might
my husband not have done with different surroundings
r and she would stand under the
starlight with tears streaming; do^Ti her cheeks,
wrung from the divinest compassion a woman's
heart can know.

For at last she felt fully aware everything
in her books the world thought great and
true and useful was due to the husband who
had never been able to make his mark. "Without
him she could have done nothing — nothing
and in return she had not half loved him as
she ought.

There came a niojht when, casting herself

on her knees, she told him something of what
was in her mind.

Why, my darling 1' he said, in amazement,
my dearest Glen, you are the only blessing I
ever knew

Do you mean that ? Have I been a
blessing T

So then he told her ; he recited his life ; he
touched on what he had done for others, and
how he had been repaid.

I think I had it in me to achieve something
once,' he finished ; * but situated as I
was, how could I do much ? and besides '

Besides what, love V she asked, twining
her arms round him.

I cannot lament any road which led me to
you. Oh, Glen, how could I think any path
stony, which in the end gave me such love as
yours ! You where right and I was wrong,'
he added, after a moment ; ' but what I did
was all, as I thought, for the best. Now those
for whom I sacrificed my best years leave me
for you. They are right. My day to help
anyone is over.'

It was the first cry of pain, loneliness and

despair she had ever heard him utter — he,

64—2

whose life had been spent for others — and she
could not answer him for tears.

With her arms clasped round his neck —
with her head buried in his bosom — she wept
as she had not done since she lost her father.

Still, even in sorrow there is infinite happiness,
and all through that dreary winter
Glenarva was most happy. Save for her
husband's health, she did not know a care,
except one which would occasionally obtrude :

Suppose I died !'

This idea she kept for a long time to herself
; but at last, when one day she was totally
prostrate, she could not (womanlike) restrain
its expression.

Don't go out to meet trouble half-way,'
said her husband. ' Have not means hitherto
been given to us, and health to you V

So she wrote on steadily, with a vigour, a
determination, and a happy spirit of cheerfulness
that it may be her labours had hitherto
lacked. Throwing sentiment behind her, together
with Mr. Laplash's advice, she went on
producing chapter after chapter of a. book
which charmed the public, and delighted those
for whom she worked. At first, though

greatly marvelling at the chapters she turned
out, they only said they were satisfied ; but
that expression of opinion, when accompanied
with regular cash payments, seemed sufficient
praise to a woman who had lived for years in
the depressing atmosphere of eternal grumbling.
All Mr. Laplash had found fault with
was now accounted a virtue.

Ke viewers soon discerned that Mrs. Lacere
did not profess to write for children and girls,
but for men and women. Each month The
Dragon inserted a long notice of her serial, a
marked copy being duly and truly sent to
Burleigh Street, as though it were supposed
Mr. Laplash, who was travelling fast the road
that leads to Ruin, still published her works;
but of all this Glen knew nothing.

At last she personally was out of all worlds,
save that bounded by her small domestic
horizon. Except for the daily papers, she
knew nothing of how society was going on.
The springing grass, the snowdrops peeping
above the ground, the sobbing cry and rustling
stir of the early spring-time, were more
to her than the latest literary review or the
biojo;est ' book on the New Year's lists.

She was happy — oh, how happy ! God and
herself only knew. If she could but become
once more re-established in popular favour —
and she thought she could — what a future lay
before her — of fame, and peace, and love !

She valued fame merely for the sake of the
only man, besides her father, she had ever
cared for ; she wished for money for nothing
save to purchase him the poor luxuries he
never even thought of desiring. For years
after, Glen could not look at the shop-windows
save with a sickening heart. She had wished
for this, that, and the other to take to him ;
when her means sufficed she turned in and
bought some article, trifling enough in value,
yet such as wrung her very soul to see in the
days to come. Self had then no existence for
the once somewhat exacting woman. Save as
regards work, she had forgotten the meaning
of the word.

Yes, she was happy at last, most happy — ■
spite of the mean house, and the sordid surroundings,
and the daily labour for such little
pay. Shall I leave her thus ? No ; it would
be a most unfinished picture. Let us go onto
the end with Glenarva Lacere.

There came a day when, in the pursuit of
something connected with her work, walking
across the park, she met Mr. Kelly. Ever
their acquaintance had been of the slightest —
so slight, indeed, that feeling at once conscious
of her own changed position, and the
utter absence of style and fashion in her dress,
she would have passed him by had Barney
elected to be so treated.

Why, Mrs. Lacere,' he said, ' what an age
it is since I have seen you !' and then without
more to do he plunged head first into the
Laplash question. Glen had not much to say
likely to add to his knowledge ; nevertheless,
it sufficed.

I suppose you have the ball at your foot

again V

I am doing my best,' she answered
humbly.

And that best is very good,' he said.
Indeed, I did not think you had it in you.'

She turned aside, and looked over the railings,
for she could not answer him.

You were very wise,' he went on, * to leave
Laplash. Now I know you will make your
way.'

I never could have made it to any purpose
in Burleigh Street she laughed.

No ; we all made a mistake in leaving Mr.
Vassett,' he remarked ; and then they walked
on together a little way, talking as they went.

Barney made many particular inquiries concerning
Mr. Lacere, who, Glen said, was gaining
strength rapidly. ' He must not try to
live in town, though,' she added. ' He has
found a place we think of taking — such a
tiny dot of a house in the middle of a small
farm. He is delighted at the idea of settling
down there.' And then she went on to speak of
the garden and the fruit trees, and what her
husband proposed to do, and the stock he
meant to keep ; and Barney asked if some
day in the summer he might run down and
call — 'For I feel quite proud of you as a
countrywoman,' he said, which pride must
have been of remarkably recent date. But
Glen did not think of that — indeed, it is never
prudent to analyze compliments or motives
too closely.

Is there anything I can do for you V he
asked at parting.

You have done a great deal for me,' she

replied. * I was always very fond of being
praised ; and the worst of an author's life is,
one so seldom hears the applause.'

Though one does the hissing,' said Barney.
It was a very proud, happy woman who
returned home that day to tell her husband
all the pleasant things which had happened to
her in town ; and the evening's post brought
a letter still more delightful than Mr.
Kelly's encouraging words. It came from her
then editor, who stated he thought it but right
to tel her the mark her serial was making.
There were those,' he went on, * who said,
Mrs. Lacere is played out," " Her day is
over." "Wait," I answered; "you don't
know her staying-powers ;" and now they see
I was right. I have not the slightest hesitation
in saying you will do better work than
you have ever turned out yet. You have
made a gallant fight. Keep up your spirits a
little longer. Money must follow fame.'

Oh, with what a light heart Glen rose the
next morning to her work 1 She wrote nearly
the whole day, only breaking off occasionally
to listen to her husband's remarks about the
new residence.

If the agreement is signed tomorrow,
can we move in a week V he asked. ' I long
to be there.'

To-morrow, if you like,' she laughed, for
she had never known him so eager and anxious
about anything before.

Then came the twilight, and the evening
closed in and night drew on ; and Glen, saying
There is a passage in this book I want to
read you,' sat down beside the table, and
turned over the pages in order to find what
she wanted.

As she was doing so she heard a slight
noise, and looking up, in one moment started
to her feet. 'You are not well!' she cried.
Lord ! what was this ? She knew — she
knew ! Once again Fame had crossed the
threshold hand-in-hand with Death !

Where had the hopes and the dreams, so
bright and fair but a few minutes previously,
departed ? They were gone ! withered and
faded like gathered flowers — the glory of the
morning light was shrouded in darkness.
She was alone — alone — for evermore. Alone
with her dead and God.

CONCLUSION.

Piety months had come and gone
since that night when Glenarva
Lacere was left to make what she
could of life alone. How those thirty months
were passed it would have been impossible
for her to tell, for she did not know herself.
When we have fought with some great
temptation, battled for our lives against death
and disease, struggled to prevent an almost
overwhelming grief, killing our reason or
destroying our soul — who can analyze that
process by which deliverance was compassed
and salvation wrought ?

All Mrs. Lacere ever knew was that the
time had somehow passed — that she had

worked hard, that she had suffered horribly,
and that she thanked God !

One August day in the year which came
thirty months after that trouble which changed
Glenarva and her life, !Need Beattie crossed
Lowborn in order to call on his old friend.

But recently arrived in England, his first
care had been to ascertain her address and
to write a few words of sympathy which
touched Glen to her very soul. He had heard
of her loss, he said, just on the eve of leaving
San Francisco for Australia; he wanted to see
her — he would go into Hampshire, where she
was living, any day she liked to name.

In reply, she told him she was in London
for a short time ; and this was how it chanced
he was crossing Lowborn on his way to Queen
Square. How should he find her, after the
long, long years — after her struggle, her
success, her trouble ? Would the Glen he had
known be dead ? How would she be dressed ?
how would she look ? what would she say ?
how would she greet him ? Since the morning
when he lay on the beach at Bally shame, with
his head resting on her lap, he had been half
over the world — made a large fortune ; and

she — she He walked twice round the

Square before he could make up his mind to
knock at the door of the house where she was
lodging ; the tones of his own voice sounded
strange to him as he inquired for Mrs. Lacere.
A minute after, he was upstairs and standing
alone in a large drawing-room. Then, though
he could not see her quite distinctly, he knew
Glen had entered the apartment, that her
hand lay clasped in his, that she was welcoming
him back with tears ; and the meeting,
after long separation, which is sometimes so
cruel and terrible, was over.

Now the mist had passed from before his
eyes, and he could see her clearly, he did not
think her so much changed. She was more
like the Glen of his earlier remembrance
than she had seemed when last they met.
Ere a quarter of an hour was gone he felt as
though he had never been away at all — as if
they had but resumed the broken conversation
of a previous day.

So, after he had crossed the actual mountains
and oceans of earth, and she scaled
heights of labour and passed through seas of
trouble, they resumed the friendly intimacy of

their youth, and spoke together freely on all
subjects save one.

He tried to get her to speak of her husband,
and failed.

As day succeeded to day. and he saw her
constantly, she told him all about her home,
her life, her books, her interests, her means,,
her friends, but so far as her sorrow was
concerned, she might never have been wife or
widow for all the mention she made of it.

I wish she would talk about him,' thought
Ned — but wishing was vain ; and at the end
of a month, during the course of which no day
had passed without his seeing her, this old
friend knew just as little of what was in her
mind as the hour they first met. She was
about returning home.

'And you must come 'and see my cottage,'
she said. ' It is not really very far from
London, you know.'

Yes ; you may be very sure I shall come,'
he answered ; and so they parted. He did not
immediately avail himself of her invitation,
but at last wrote to say he meant to run
down on the following Wednesday, and take
the express back to London in the evening

It was late on Thursday when another letter
arrived from Ned :

I hope he is not writing to put off his visit
thought Glen ; but as she read the first few
lines the paper dropped from her hands, and
with an exclamation of dismay she rose and
paced the room. Then she picked up the
letter again, and read it to the end.

He imagined I should not have time to
answer it before he came,' she said, going to
her writing-table.

Dear, foolish Ned,' she began,

You know you do not want to marry
me, and it is very certain I am not going to
marry you or anyone else. I write at once, so
that our holiday may not be spoiled by any
fancied necessity on your part to mar your
own life by trying to mend mine. My dear,
kind, faithful, generous Ned, I am sorry you
have forced me to say this.

Ever your attached old friend,

Glen.'

She went over to the station to meet him
the next day, and they walked through the
woods and winding field-paths to her home.

It was a fair, fair home — built on a slight
eminence above the Wey, surrounded on three
sides by dark, solemn pines ; not the home
she had once thought to inhabit with another,
but a quiet, dreamy place where her bruised
heart had found rest, and her tossed spirit
peace. There had been a time when she could
not bear to look on the face of nature, when
the sunshine wrung her soul, and the budding
leaves, and the springing grass, and the song
of birds, and the ripple of water seemed all so
many piercing swords ; but that time was
past, and her eyes now reflected the calm
light of a better and happier world.

In her pleasant house the long French
windows opened on to a terrace, beneath
which turf, green and velvety, sloped gently
to the river s brink. Will Ned Beattie, so long
as he lives, ever forget that soft grass, that
wealth of flowers, the white curtains swaying
in the light breeze, the late roses twining
round the pillars of the veranda, the clematis,
the myrtles, and the fuchsias she had forced
herself to plant and tend at a time when she
misjht have watered them with her tears ?

That time was gone, and Glen — his Glen

also — Ned felt, as he stood looking upon her ;
but he loved this Glen better, who had no
love to give him in return.

They rowed up the stream, coming back intime
for early dinner ; and then she showed
him her little farm yard, and, side by side,
they passed the limits of her small domain.

After that they sat on the grass close by the
water, and talked of the old days departed,
till Glen could almost feel the air of the hills
fanning her forehead and see the waves breaking
on the shore. It was a sad, tender afternoon
for them both, though no cloud flecked
the azure of the sky, and the September sun
touched the shafts of the pines with golden
light.

Come inland have some tea, Ned,' she said
at last.

Not yet,' he answered. ' Glen, before I
go I must speak to you. I got your note.'

Yes.'

And I can't live without you any longer.
I don't know how I have lived so long, for I
can remember no day since my boyhood in
which 1 have not loved you.'

VOL. III. Qb

She looked at him with pitying tenderness
as she answered steadily :

There was lout one man in the world for me,
and I married him

But, Glen, you are surely not going to live
your life here, and alone ? Why not be happy
yourself, and make me so V

I could not make you happy, Ned ; and
for myself, I am content — utterly. If I
could, I would not bring my dead back to
life.'

Oh ! Glen— my Glen !'

She laid her hand upon his softly.

We cannot choose our lot,' she said, ' and
we are never happy till we feel it is appointed
for us. Mine has been most happy.'

And yet,' he said, with sudden bitterness,
I remember you telling me once you were
most unhappy. Do you think there is a word
you ever spoke I forgot V

I teas unhappy,' she answered ; ' for I did
not understand my husband then, or for many
an after year. I do not know, indeed, that I
ever did till I saw him in sickness and poverty
supported by a faith which never failed him —
brio-ht with a thankful cheerfulness that adversity

never destroyed. When I think of
what a life his was — full of toil and trouble,
disappointment and failure ! He had nothing,
Ned — nothing the world accounts of value.'

He had you !' said Ned hoarsely.

Yes, he had me,' she agreed dreamily ;
and I am thankful to remember that, though
I must have tried that patient heart often, he
loved me to the end.'

You are talking nonsense, Glen !' exclaimed
Ned. ' What more could a man desire than
such a wife as you ? Let me take you away
from this lonely place and your morbid
thoughts. I do not ask your love now. I
only ask you to marry me. I will make you
love me in time. 1 believe if your husband
could speak to you now, he would bid you do
what I want.'

Let us end this,' she said sadly. * I cannot
bear much more. It breaks my heart to talk
of him or myself. I shall never marry again.
Rank could not tempt, or wealth buy, or genius
dazzle, or love wen me. These are my last
words on the subject.'

There was that in her tone and in her
expression which killed all hope. It was

65—2

a dead and broken heart he had tried to
warm into life. And Edward Beattie, after
one long, steadfast look at the rippling
river, rose and went with the woman he
had loved so long and hopelessly into the
house.

He dreamily accepted a cup of tea, and then,
perhaps not sorry to find the minutes had
crept on fast while they were talking, said he
must be off ; he had barely time to catch his
train.

Take the boat across the river,' she advised.
You will save half a mile and more.'

For a moment he stood on the lawn, in
which were beds gorgeous with autumn
flowers — stood bareheaded, holding her hand
in his.

Good-bye — good-bye, dear Glen !' he said ;
and then, stooping, he kissed her for the first
time since, boy and girl, they parted on board
the Morecambe steamer.

She knew they would never meet again —
that the words he had spoken must needs
separate them as friends, and she stood, as his
hand left hers, watching his retreating figure,

tmd feeling almost as though she were looking
on one dead.

Without glancing towards her, he pulled
across the river, sprang out, and fastened
the boat securely ; then strode along the
field-path till he came to a stile, where his
onward road dipped down among some
trees.

There he stopped for a moment and looked
back. Standing just as he had left her, he
saw his brave, lonely Glen, who never for ever
might be wife of his.

He will always think of her thus. When he
reads notices of her books, he remembers nota
girl in her first youth, among a group of
boys, ready to share their maddest sports ;
not a daughter seated beside a cultured gentleman,
striving to read his thoughts ; not a
struggling woman trying to trace a pencil-mark
on the tablets of time ; not a wife whose very
faults were loved by a husband who adored her ;
but simply the Glen he knew and would have
married — Glen in her trailing black garments,
with the sluggish river to her left hand and

the darksome pine-woods to the right, with
the sun westering behind the spot where she
stood calmly waiting, with knowledge, but
without fear, for the coming of that night
which must preface the dawning of God's
Eternal Day.

THE END.

ini.LlXG AND Sons, PRINTERS, Guildford AND LOM ON.

<?., C. db Co.

3 0112 063022740

m^'
