% iffbd.

BY

ADELINE SERGEANT,

AUTHOR OF "JACOBI'S WIFE," "NO SAINT," ETC.

IN THREE VOLUMES.
VOL. I.

EDINBURGH:
OLIPHANT, ANDERSON & Farrier.

LONDON : HAMILTON, ADAMS & CO.

18 8 8.

Printed lii LORIMER AND GILLIES,

31 ST. ANDREW SQUARE.

^
5S'

fv

a

CONTENTS OF YOL. I.

Chapter

I. THE WEDDING (lest,

II. MISS mack worth's story,

III. IN SUSPENSE,

IV. "l LOVED YOU Once"' .
V. MISS ESHEr's INTENTIONS,

VI. A NEW HOME,

II. LENORE,

VIII. "a HOUSE DIVIDED AGAINST ITSELF,"

IX. THE FIRST MEETING,

X. A lover's THREAT,

XI. THE HAND OF FATE,

XII. Magdalen's guest,

XIII. HIS SISTERS,

XIV. MARRYING AND GIVING IN MARRIAGE,

XV. Cecil's explanation, .

PAGE































in 2010 with funding from

University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign

http://www.archive.org/details/seventytimesseve01serg

CHAPTER L

THE WEDDING GUEST.

It was a pretty scene. The sky was deep
blue overhead, flecked here and there with
snow-white films of cloud : the sun shone
brilliantly upon the old grey church in its
green environment of stately trees and velvet
turf, upon the dark red roofs of the cottages,
upon the glowing faces of the villagers
gathered about the churchyard gate. Village
people, men, women,. and children, all in their
Sunday best," with smiles on their faces, and
flowers in their hands. They had a festive
look, and a glance at the triumphal arches
with which the roadway and the gate were

decked would have told a stranger that some
joyful event was about to be celebrated.

The church stood on a hill, and from its
western door the gravelled path sloped rather
steeply towards the gate. The village lay ina
hollow, the church rising above it like a
giant guardian, all in grey and green. The
houses were mostly built of red brick, and the
roofs were of a still deeper hue : they had an
air of warm picturesqueness, standing back
from the road, in their own gardens, where
the June roses were now in bloom. There
was certainly no want of fl owners in the little
Kentish village of Riversmead : the gardens
were still gay with blossoms, although so
many had been gathered that morning to
make wreaths and to fill baskets, and to
be tied into posies for the school children.
There were few persons present who did
not carry flowers to strew under the feet of
the beautiful bride, who was that day to go
from amongst them and be known by another
name.

Weddings were not very common occurrences
in the little Eiversmead Chiircli, and
the village people always flocked into the
church and the churchyard to see the marriage
party. On this occasion it seemed as though
only the sick and the infirm could have been
left at home. Such a gathering had seldom
been seen at Eiversmead : the people had
flocked from far and near ; for the wedding
was that of Magdalen Lingered, the Squire's
only daughter, and was therefore a great
event. Not that the Squire was a rich or
powerful man : his estates had dwindled away
almost to nothing, and the big house in which
he lived was comfortless and poverty-stricken.
But Miss Lingered's bright smile and kindly
words had made her dear to the hearts of the
Eiversmead people, and many of them were
deeply grieved to think that they were going
to lose her.

It '11 be a bad day for us when she 's gone,
pretty creature," sighed one old dame to the
other, as they stood in the green churchyard.

'* Many and many 's the pound of tea she 's
brought to me, though little enough money
she 's had to call her own, as everybody
knows ; and the woollen things she 's knitted,
and the stockings and the petticoats — she 's
the kindest 'art and the quickest fingers of
any lady in the country side."

She '11 be a grand lady now," said her
friend, in reply. "The gentleman she's a-
going to marry has got plenty o' money and a
fine place near Scarsfield — one o' them manufacturing
towns i' the North, I 'm told. She 11
be a great lady up there, no doubt."

The Lord '11 bless her wherever she goes,"
said the first speaker.

"Maybe," said the second — evidently a
more worldly-minded person than her friend
" but He won't spare her trouble and sorrow
any more than He spares other folk. To my
mind, she '11 have a peck o' trouble with her
husband's relations ; they seem all to live up
Scarsfield way: and I never yet knew a young
married pair get on well if they lived amongst

their own folk. One or t'other 's sure to breed
mischief."

"They'll all love Miss Magdalen," answered
the other woman, confidently. " And as for
relations. Captain Esher has only two sets of
them at Scarsfield ; and one 's Mr. and Mrs.
St. Aidan, that she's so fond of already,
and the other's a maiden lady, Miss Esher,
who 's going to leave the Captain all her
money."

Much he needs it ! He 's as rich now as
Cresses," said her friend, rather viciously.

At this moment some children, near the
gate, set up a shout: "They're coming!
they're coming! I hear the wheels." Every
head was forthwith turned towards the road.
But the wheels belonged only to a dilapidated
old cab, drawn by a dejected looking horse in
the direction leading from the nearest railway
station. One or two of the children narrowly
escaped a cuff for giving false news, but,
luckily for them, public attention was diverted
from their misdeeds to the new arrival. The

cab stopped at the gate ; and the red-faced
driver got down from his seat, whip in hand,
and opened the creaking door. " It be one
of the visitors come from London to the
wedding," respectfully murmured a woman to
her neighbour. " I heard tell they expected a
sight o' folks ; but, bless me, she ain't much to
look at, is she ? "

In a black gown ! " commented her friend,
eyeing the new-comer with much disfavour.
'* I thought it weren't lucky to come to a
wedding in black. They 're nice little children,
ain't they ? if they didn't look so white and
peaked."

Meanwhile the woman paid the driver and
dismissed him, then turned her face towards
the church, and also, of course, towards the
waiting crowd. The gaze of the village folk
seemed to disconcert her. She started, flushed
deeply, and then grew very pale. With
shaking fingers she drew down her veil, took
a hand of the two children who accompanied
her, in each of her own ; and, thus leading

them, passed up the gravelled walk into the
church.

In the absence of any other object of interest,
the people watched her as she went. She
was not very young — probably between thirty
and forty years of age ; her face was worn and
lined like that of an aged person, or one wIk ►
has known much sorrow ; the cheeks were
thin and pale, the veins on the temples painfully
prominent. Her blue eyes had a strange,
haggard expression ; and the fair hair that
strayed over her forehead gave her a wild, dishevelled
look. Her dress was plain and even
poor ; coarse in texture and sombre in hue.
The two child-en — little girls of three or four
years old — were, however, dressed in white,
daintily decked with embroidery and blue
ribbons. It was suggested by the watchers
that they were children of some friends of the
bride or bridegroom, and that the woman was
their nurse. But a quick-eared school-child
deposed to having heard one of them call her
"auntie" as they walked up the churchyard

path. Inside the building, the woman went
deliberately to the front pew. It was still
unoccupied, being reserved for certain members
of the wedding-party; and the old pew-opener
hurried up, with an anxious and important
face, to turn the ill-advised new-comers out
of the prominent place that they had chosen
for themselves. The children looked up at
him with frightened, imploring eyes, but did
not stir. The woman seated herself beside
them, and took no notice of the old man's
remonstrance.

Don't ye hear what I say ? " he grumbled,
in a still louder tone. " These 'ere seats is for
the wedding-party, I tells ye : come out o' that
pew, ma'am, for goodness' sake, or I '11 call the
Vicar."

Call him," said the woman, lifting her veil
and fixing her weird blue eyes upon the little
withered man in his black gown, as he stood
by the pew and actually shook the door in his
agitation of mind. '' Call him, by all means.
I wish to speak to him."

*' I '11 put you into quite as good a pew,
ma'am. This 'ere place is reserved for them
as belongs to the wedding-party "

/ belong to the wedding-party," said the
stranger, coldly. Then she dropped her veil
and said no more.

The old man, whose name was Binns, turned
away in despair. The Vicar, Mr. Kirton, was
already in the vestry, and Binns thought of
asking him to come and dislodge the unwelcome
visitor, but he was a little afraid
that the good clergyman would pooh-pooh his
complaint, and say that people must seat
themselves in their own way. Binns was uneasy.
Visitors kept arriving every moment,
and were shown to their places by the Vicar's
son — visitors in silks and satins, velvet and
broadcloth, resplendent with jewels and flowers
and perfume — and this strange woman, poorly
clad in rusty black, had taken the best place
of all, the place reserved for the most distinguished
of the guests ! A\'liat could he do ?

Carriages rolled up to the gate : the bridesmaids

were standing at the door in readiness
for the bride : the distinguished guest had
found some other seat, and a general move of
expectation showed that the most important
personages were about to arrive upon the
scene. A little buzz of voices told of the
bride's approach. Mr. Kirton and Mr. St.
Aidan, the bridegroom's clerical cousin, had
taken u-p their position in the middle of the
church, where the earlier part of the service
was to be conducted. This fact seemed to
puzzle the stranger, who had expected the
wedding-party to come up to the Communion
rails at once, in the old ecclesiastical fashion,
and had therefore kept her eyes steadily fixed
on the east end of the church. Thus she
missed the entrance of the clergymen, and
also of the bridegroom with his best man.
She now turned hastily round, and, seeing her
mistake, rose up. The bride was entering the
church at that very moment, nth her attendant
maidens, dressed in white. Children
threw flowers on her path ; the organ pealed

out a joyful strain, the sunshine fell through
the coloured windows in rosy and purple
patches on her satin gown as she passed up
the church upon her father's arm.

At that moment, the woman in black left
her seat and walked do^vn the aisle towards the
clergymen who awaited the bride's approach.
Her movements were scarcely noticed, except
by those in her immediate vicinity, for the
eyes of nearly all were fixed upon the wedding-party.
Perhaps only old Binns was scandalised
by the sight of that black figure, edging its
way with steady purpose through the gaily
decked feminine crowd of guests. Behind the
woman came the two children, grasping each
other by the hand, evidently frightened at the
scene in which they found themselves, but not
daring to stay behind. And, as it happened
the woman reached the clergyman before the
bride was more than half-way up the church ;
and when she had reached him, she quietly
laid her hand upon his arm.

Mr. Kirton started violently. He looked in

amaze at the intruder, then glanced round
hurriedly in search of Binns, who Alas seen in
the background, Working with arms and
shoulders through a crowd of stragglers in a
vain endeavour to get to his master's side.

What do you want ? Go back, go back ! "
said the Vicar in a low reproving tone.

The little group at the foot of the chancel
steps looked round inquiringly. The curate
laid his hand on the woman's shoulder.
*' What do you want here ? " he asked.

I have brought Philip Esher's children to
see his marriage," she replied, in so distinct a
tone that her words were clearly heard by
every one within a radius of half-a-dozen yards,
and therefore by the whole of the wedding-party
; '^ and to ask him what has become of
the woman who ought to have stood in Miss
Lingered's place."

There was a momentary hush. The
stranger had again thrown back her veil ;
her thin cheeks were touched with a hectic
flush, and there was an unnatural brilliance

in her wild blue eyes. Before lier the marriage
procession came to a sudden stop ; fora
moment the two women who were more
deeply interested than any other in the ceremony
about to be performed looked straight
into each other's eyes.

What Miss Lingered saw, we know. What
the stranger had already seen was the conventional
bride, in white satin and white lace,
leaning upon her father's arm : pearls, orange-blossom,
a diamond clasp, a snowy film of
tulle, the tip of a satin shoe — of all these
details the unbidden guest was conscious.
But suddenly the bride also threw back her
veil, and then the wild-eyed, black-robed
woman saw something more.

Magdalen's figm-e was tall and slender, but
exquisitely proportioned ; the features of her
face were finely cut and full of expression.
Her complexion was not rosy, but neither was
it usually very pale : the slightest emotion
called up a carnation hue to the fair oval of
her cheek, just as it made her eyes gleam and

her mouth ripple over with smiles or tremble
with tenderest feeling. But what rendered
her face more striking was a certain contradiction
between this frequent change of
colour and expression and some of its most
characteristic lines. A peculiarly tranquil
look was given by the almost level line of the
dark eyebrows beneath the smooth white
forehead : the well-developed chin spoke
of a strong will, and the firmly closed lips
of determination. It might be inferred
that the quickly changing colour and the
varying expressions were the outcome of
youth, inexperience, and keen sensibility ;
but that behind these were to be found the
resolute will, the clear judgment, the unfailing
capacity for action, that would make of her intime
what the world often calls " a woman
of character."

Close to her stood Philip Esher, the bride -
groonl-elect. He was just Magdalen's height,
not very tall for a man : lithe, lean, and
sinewy ; more singularly handsome than even

the bride herself, partly because of the rather
unusual contrast between the colour of his
hair and eyes. The closely-cropped head and
heavy moustache were golden brown ; his
face, though bronzed now, had once been fair,
but his eyes were dark, remarkably restless
and brilliant, and set in long almond-shaped
sockets, like those of an Eastern girl. The
forehead was broad and low ; the nose
aquiline, with thin nostrils ; the lips also
thin, and very much curved. It was curious
that with all the physical beauty of this
man's face, the first impression produced by
it was rarely pleasant. There was a subtle
suggestion of possible cruelty, of scorn and
hatred, in the curves of that fine mouth,
apt to make a psychological student recoil.
But as most of his friends and Magdalen's
friends had known him for many years, they
perhaps scarcely noticed the stereotyped sneer
upon his face. Only here and there one or
two, more keen-witted than the rest, wondered
how Magdalen Lingered, with her high instincts,

her noble aspirations, could tie herself for life
to a man like Philip Esher.

Magdalen had been leaning on her father's
arm. He was a tall, upright man, with a
white moustache, and something of a soldierly
air. "When the sound of the stranger's words
fell upon his ear, his eyes flashed fire, he
made an involuntary movement forward, then
checked himself and put his arm round the
girl's slender waist, as if he feared that she
would fall. But Magdalen showed no symptoms
of uncertain balance. She turned pale,
it is true, and her eyes grew large with
astonishment and dismay, but she kept her
confident bearing, and looked the woman
steadfastly in the face.

There was a much more startling change in
Philip Esher's appearance. His face grew
absolutely livid — more, as it seemed, from
rage than fear : he clenched his fist and
uttered a word which, profane in itself, was
particularly unsuitable at such a time and in
such a place. Even Magdalen's brow contracted

as she heard it, and Mr. St. Widen,
his cousin, immediately uttered a short,
stern reproof. But Captain Esher did not
heed.

Turn her out ! " he said, in a voice hoarse
with passion. " Turn her out, I say ! — what
does she come for ? "

'' To confront you with the memory of your
own evil deeds," said the woman, with the
peculiarly distinct utterance which made the
words penetrate far into the depths of the
listening crowd. " To call your past life to
your mind : to "

This is a most unseemly interruption,"
said the Vicar, who had meanwhile beckoned
to one of his sons and the parish constable,
and felt more confident of his position when
they W'Cre at his side. " If there is any reason
why the service should not proceed, adjourn
with me to the vestry ; if not, be silent, or
I must have you removed. Do you allege
any obstacle to Captain Esher s marriage with
Miss Lingered ? "

The woman folded her arms and looked at
Captain Esher with a malicious smile, but
made no answer.

I swear there is no obstacle," said Esher,
who was evidently much agitated. " I know
of none ; and she knows of none either."

*' Not even if Alice Mackworth were alive ? "
asked the woman, in a lower tone.

The change in Captain Esher's face was
almost answer enough. For a moment he
looked sick with dread. And the grey pallor
of his lips startled those who had hitherto
believed most fully in his innocence.

Sir," said Mr. Lingered, sternly, " I must
have an explanation of this charge."

We had better go back to the vestry,"
said Mr. St. Aidan to his brother clergyman.
''A few minutes' conversation may put the
thing right. Don't you think it would be
better ? "

There is absolutely no need," said Captain
Esher, hurriedly. His tones were lowered, as
befitted the place in which he stood ; but he

moved to Magdalen's side and tried to take
her hand, " Magdalen, you believe me, do
you not ? "

She lifted her eyes to his face : a beautiful
trust and love shone in their liquid depths.

"Yes, Philip," she answered, gently.

Then why should we delay ? Go on, sir,"
said the young man, turning triumphantly to
the clergyman with his bride's hand clasped in
his own. " There is no obstacle, I repeat :
have the goodness to go on with the service."

Wait, sir," Mr. Lingered interposed, in his
impressive voice. "My daughter is underage.
I forbid her to give herself to this man
until we have inquired into the accusation
brought against him. Magdalen, come with
me."

She did not resist, though her face turned
pale and the tears rose to her beautiful dark
eyes. Mr. Lingered went with her towards the
vestry, and the wedding-party broke up in
confusion.

The vestry was a spacious but gloomy room,
panelled in oak, with small pointed windows
high in the wall. Oak chests were ranged
round the walls, and an oak table stood in the
middle of the room. Half-a-dozen surplices
and cassocks hung upon pegs on one of the
walls, and the table held a few books and a
carafe of water. A carved high-backed chair
and some wooden forms completed the furniture
of the place.

Into this room came the persons chiefly
interested in the scene which had just
occurred. The two clergymen followed JMr.
Lingered and his daughter : then came the
woman in black, escorted by the vicar's son,

with the two children clinging to her dress.



After them walked Captain Esher, reluctantly
yet desperately, like a man going to certain
destruction. And, last of all, an old lady with
silvery hair and a rugged, hard-featured face,
rose up from the pew in which she had
hitherto been sitting, and stalked solemnly upto
the vestry door. She was at once admitted,
as having a right to be present at the
conference. She was Philip Esher 's aunt, the
lady of whom the village gossips had spoken
as likely to leave him all her money when she
died.

As soon as the door closed Philip Esher
burst out passionately.

There is no charge against me of any
kind. This woman has made none. Are you
not prepared to take my word of honour as a
gentleman "

"Excuse me," said Mr. Lingered, politely
but coldly. " I think that a charge has
certainly been made. This lady speaks of
some one who should stand in my daughter's
place. I claim a right to defer the marriage

until this extraordinary allegation has been
disproved. When it is disproved we will
beg your pardon for seeming to doubt you ;
but with my daughter's welfare at stake I
should not be justified in proceeding otherwise."


Philip Esher turned away his face to mutter
an impatient " Tedious old fool ! " in his
uncle's ear. Mr. Lingered was a man of the
old school : a man of laboured courtesies and
studied phrases, and he had never liked
Captain Esher.

Come to the point," said Mr. St. Aidan,
not unkindly, though with a reproving
glance at Philip. 'shave you anything to
say, my good woman ? What reason have
you to give for interrupting the marriage
service ? "

The scene was curiously like that of a
justice-room. Mr. Kirton had taken the
chair at the head of the table, while Mr. St.
Aidan stood beside him and put questions
or made suggestions with a judicial air. At

the other end of the table stood the woman in
black, with James Kirton on one side, and the
children on the other. She looked at that
moment like the accused, not the accuser.
Miss Esher, Mr. Lingered, and Magdalen
formed a little group apart, midway between
the table and the door ; and Philip Esher
stood beside his uncle, with his eyes fixed on
Magdalen. He had tried to get close to her,
to put his arm round her and take her hand,
but her father and his own aunt had waved
him off. One or two questions must be asked
and answered before he could be allowed to
treat her as his promised wife.

What reason had you for interrupting the
marriage service ? " asked Mr. St. Aidan.

This reason ; he is not fit to be the
husband of a girl like that."

He is not married, then ? " said Mr.
Kirton, quickly.

The woman looked sullenly at Captain
Esher, and then at the two clergymen in
turn. "Yes," she said, slowly, after what

seemed a long and terrible pause; "he is
married — he has been married — and these are
his two children."

'' It 's a lie ! " thundered Esher, his eyes
glittering, the veins on his forehead standing
out like whipcord. 'rit's a lie — an infernal
lie ! She can't prove it. 1 defy her to prove
it. I was never married."

Perhaps you will say next that these are
not your children," said the woman, coldly.
Her excitement had died out as that of
Philip Esher rose ; her voice was low, her
eye dull, her face colourless. But there was
a quiet resolution in her air which made the
listeners fear for the result. "Perhaps you
will say that you did not desert your wife
and her two babies at Wingfield three years
ago ? Perhaps you will deny that you ever
courted Alice Mackworth ? I can get plenty
of witnesses as to that point ; and I don't
doubt that I can prove the desertion and the
cruelty too. You reckoned without your
host, Philip Esher, when you forget me

Are you his wife, then ? " asked Miss
Esher, in a horrified tone. Philip seemed
unable to speak; his face expressed an
anguish of despair.

The woman turned to the speaker with
a quick gesture of repulsion. ''Me, his
wife!" she cried. ''No, thank God. I
haven't fallen so low as that. I 'm his wife's
sister. I am Louisa Mackworth, and it was
Alice that he married."

I never married her ! " came from Captain
Esher's white lips in a sort of gasp. An
evil and malignant look shot from his long
dark eyes. And Magdalen, glancing at him
then, shivered and drew back.

You had better hold your tongue, Philip,"
said old ]\Iiss Esher, sharply. "You will
only make bad worse. Can you prove what
you are saying, or can you not ? " she added,
turning abruptly to the accuser.

"Do you think I should come here if
I could not prove it ? " said Lousia Mack-worth.
" I have the papers with me."

^' Philip ! "

It was Magdalen who spoke. The name
fell from her lips in a low, agonised wail of
entreaty. For the last few moments no one
had looked at her ; they had all been absorbed
in the words and movements of accuser and
accused; but now every eye was turned
upon her. She was deadly white ; her eyes
were dilated, her lips parted, her hands
clasped before her ; her head was slightly
turned over her shoulder, as if she were
listening to some unexpected sound.

They knew what it was. The church clock
was striking twelve.

Mr. St. Aidan moved aside with a grey
look upon his usually florid countenance, and
beo'an with a trembling; hand to take off the
surplice that he had donned that morning
with such a joyful heart. " There can be no
wedding this morning," he said, as he flung it
across one of the oaken chests. He did not
mean any one save Mr. Kirton and his nephew
to hear him. But Magdalen also heard.

She had always been a girl of great outward
calmness, great self-control. She had
made no outcry, shed no tear during all these
bitter moments. But the strain was too
much. From the arm that her father had
placed around her, she slid quietly, helplessly
to the floor, where she lay in a dead swoon,
white as her wedding gown, lifeless as the
orange blossoms that were crushed in her
dark hair.

They were all beside her in a moment ;
one with smelling-salts, and one with water,
one raising her head, another chafing her
hands. Only Louisa Mackworth and the
children held aloof She looked on with
cold composure, as if Magdalen's sorrow could
be no business of hers. The children,
frightened and crying, were hiding their faces
in her black gown, and imploring her to take
them away. But she made no response.

Miss Esher took matters into her own hands.

Stand back, all of you ! " she said, peremptorily.
•' Get up, Philip Esher, and don't

make a fool of yourself!" For Philip had
grasped the poor cold hand, and was kissing
it and calling upon Magdalen to hear him.
He had entirely lost his self-possession — he
who was generally so self-possessed — and
nobody who saw him at that moment could
doubt that he loved with his whole heart the
woman whom, to all appearance, he had so
shamefully deceived. " No, I won't have you
here," said the old lady ; and in a still more
positive tone, "Go farther off; do you wish to
kill her ? Give her air ! "

"My God! is she dead?" cried old Mr.
Lingered, wringing his hands. Then he turned
fiercely upon Captain Esher, who had retired
a few paces, and stood looking down upon
Magdalen's prostrate form with an expression
of utter misery. " This is your work, sir.
God reward you for what you have done ! "

Esher shuddered involuntarily. Then an
angry light leapt into his eyes.

I have done nothing — nothing to hurt
her," he declared. " Why are you such fools

as to listen to that woman's lies ! I tell you
I can explain it all in five minutes."

Don't tell me ! I don't believe you'
said Miss Eslier, as she sprinkled water on
Magdalen's face. " James Kirton, are you
there ? See if there isn't a doctor in the
church. And send the people away as soon
as you can, and bring the carriage round to
the vestry door. We had better get the child
home as soon as possible."

The carriage is at the door already,"
said James Kirton, reappearing after a few
moments' absence. " Here is Dr. Symonds.
The people are all crowding up to the vestry
door now," he said, turning to his father,
will you come out and speak to them, sir ?
And the guests — what are they to do ? "

My house is at their service," said Mr.
Lingered, catching the words, and spreading
out his trembling fingers with a slight deprecatory
bow. " They will excuse my presence,
and that of my daughter — but the house is
open — let them eat and drink — and go ! "

He turned away and put his hands before his
eyes : the shock had unnerved him, and he
was shaking from head to foot.

My dear Mr. Lingered, don't take the
thing too seriously," said the Vicar in an
undertone, as he also divested himself of his
surplice, and prepared to make his way into
the lay world without. " There will be,
I trust, only a temporary delay. From what
Captain Esher says, I feel sure that he is
not so much to blame ^ — that there is some
mistake ; we shall have the wedding tomorrow,
never fear."

I am afraid that I know better," said Mr.
Lingered, sternly. He moved away from the
Vicar, as if he could not bear another word.
Mr. Kirton hurried back into the church,
where he spoke to some of the guests, who
were still standing about the aisles or sitting
in the pews, full of dire consternation and
dismay. The pretty bridesmaids were especially
to be pitied. Two of them had already
been indignantly borne away by their parents,

who were scandalised at the interruption
of the ceremony ; one, Mr. Kirton's own
daughter, was in tears ; the other three had
come from London, and were staying at the
Lingers', to whose house they did not like to
return until something definite was known.
Mr. Kirton went from one to another,
murmuring soft words of explanation that
explained nothing, offering the hospitality of
his own house to some of the guests, and
putting every facility for departure in the way
of others. Binns and one or two faithful
assistants cleared the church, and, to a large
extent, the churchyard, of village people ; the
choir-boys disrobed in the porch, as the vestry
was occupied ; the organist locked up his
organ ; the ringers went sadly home without
the beer which they had been led to expect.
One by one carriages drove away, laden with
excited occupants : the village women loitered
back to their cottages, and the children,
to whom a holiday from school had been
given, got into mischief far and wide. For

what would become of the tea that had
been provided for them; and the presents
for their mothers ; and the games in Mr.
Lingered's field? These were "treats" that
had been expected on the occasion of Miss
Magdalen's marriage, and as Miss Magdalen
was not married, of course there could be no
treats. And at first there was lamentation
and mourning and woe amongst the boys and
girls ; but afterwards an evil spirit entered
into them, and caused them to wish to visit
their disappointment on somebody else's head
no matter whose. Therefore, they got
into mischief; and there were more panes of
glass broken, more gardens trampled down,
more field-gates left open so that the cattle
might get out, more poultry chased, more
cats worried, and more devilment generally
amongst the small fry of Kiversmead village
on the day fixed for Magdalen's wedding than
there had been in all the previous six months.
Nevertheless, they had their tea, and their
presents, and their games, that afternoon — at

least, those of them did who had not been
sent to bed by their mothers, nor were being-thrashed
by their fathers, nor were in custody
of the village constable, nor were sulking in
woods and fields miles away from home. But
no work was done in the cottages that day ;
for the women were all standing at each
others doors, comparing notes and telling
stories of fine gentlemen and their wicked
ways ; so that, when the labouring man came
home at night, there was no evening meal
ready for him, and a good deal of unpleasantness
followed. After which, the labouring
man resorted to the nearest public-house, and
drank and smoked until it was time for him to
stumble home to bed, and to that sleep which
Solomon tells us is so particularly sweet. And
his wife had a black eye in the morning, or a
bruise which she did not like to show.

Such were some of the dire results of poor
Magdalen's interrupted wedding.

When j\lr. Kirton had seen the coast clear,

D

he came back to the vestry and helped to
carry Magdalen to the carriage. She was
half-conscious by this time, but not able to
walk or speak. Miss Esher followed her into
the carriage, and put her arm round her.

Let me speak to her — just a word," cried
Philip, as the girl was borne away. But
Mr. Lingered interposed with a stern word of
refusal ; Mr. St. Aidan laid his hand restraining
on the young man's arm, and Magdalen
Magdalen would not look. She hid her
face on Miss Esher's shoulder as soon as she
was placed in the carriage, and seemed neither
to see nor hear. Philip Esher stamped with
fury, and muttered words which his uncle
thought it better not to notice, unsuitable
though they were. And then the four men
for Mr. Lingered had not accompanied
his daughter — went back to the gloomy
oak-panelled room, where Louisa Mackworth
patiently awaited their return.

Philip Esher's face had by this time
assumed a very dogged and sullen expression.

j\lr. St. Aidan knew the look — there was a
peculiar whiteness about his lips and nostrils
and knew that it boded nothing good.
Philip had said that he could " explain ; " his
uncle began to doubt whether explanation
were possible. Certainly the young man
began by carrying matters with a high
hand.

"Now," he said, as he advanced to the
table beside which Miss Mackworth was sitting,
with a dark and threatening brow,
*what is the meaning of this trumped-up
story, this farrago of lying nonsense ? I suppose
I need not remind you that we can
prosecute you if you fail to substantiate your
charges ? — ivhich you cannot do''

His piercing eyes looked straight into hers
for a moment. She read a menace in them :
she also read a fear. She smiled slightly as
she replied :

'' You were married to Alice Mackworth on
the 7th of February, 1874, at the Registry
Office in B Street, Bloomsbury, London.

I have here a copy of the entry in the
register. The gentlemen may see it if they
please." She pushed a paper across the table
to Mr. St. Aidan, who knitted his brow sadly
over its contents. " You settled Alice in
lodgings, first in London, and then at a
country place — Wingfield, in Warwickshire :
her twin children were born there, in May,
1875 — three years ago. You visited her from
time to time, but as she was ill and weak you
tired of her ; and at last you wrote her a
letter saying that you did not mean to come
back, but that you enclosed a cheque for
twenty pounds, and that she mustn't expect
you to do any more for her. Cruel desertion
is what the Law calls that sort of conduct,
isn't it, sir ? She stayed on at Wingfield for
some weeks, till the money was all spent, and
then she tried to get work to do, but there
was little work to be found for her weak

hands "

"Philip! Philip!" said Mr. St. Aidan
getting up and pushing back his chair.

"for God's sake say that this story is not
true ! "

I have said so all along," answered Philip,
keeping his eyes fixed on the table, however,
*' and you would not believe me."

'' How much of it is untrue ? " asked Louisa
Mackworth, in a voice of hard sarcasm. "It is
certainly true that she came back to me, her
elder sister, twelve months ago, ill, starving,
almost beside herself with misery. What else
is untrue ? I have your letter to her in my
pocket. Here's the registrar's certificate
copied. If any one likes to go to the
registrar's clerk in Bloomsbury, or to the
lodging-house keeper at Wingfield, either of
them will identify Alice's husband, though he
did call himself Philip Ash to the landlady.
What untruth is there in all that ? "

The three men who were, so to speak, judging
the case, looked sternly, anxiously, at
Philip Esher. He was still very white about
the lips, and his hands had begun to tremble.
For the first time he stammered when he

spoke, lifted his eyes for a moment to Mr,
Lingered s face, and then dropped them hastily,
as if ashamed to look.

I — I did not say that I had never known
the girl of whom you speak," he faltered ;
your details are falsified — not the main fact,
perhaps — but I thought — I thought — that she
was — dead."

"And there you were not wrong," said
Louisa Mackworth, composedly. 'your wife
is dead."

IN SUSPENSE.

When Magdalen fully recovered consciousness,
she was lying in her own little white bed
in the room that had been hers since childhood.
As her eyes opened they rested dreamily
on the simple furniture — the chintz curtains,
the cane-seated chairs, the great blue bowl of
joot-pourri, the engravings on the walls — and
a sense of utter bewilderment stole over her.
Where was she ? These things were familiar
to her, and yet she felt like a stranger amongst
them all. Ah, the bitter truth then came to
her mind : it was she who had changed ; it
was she who could never be again the bright,
light-hearted girl that she had been when she
awoke in the early morning hours of that

eventful day. No wonder that her world
^ 39

looked different when seen with such altered
eyes ! The sun shone, but its shining would
henceforth bring no joy : the roses were
blossoming as of old, but their fragrance sickened
her. And as she thought in this way,
she turned her face to the pillow and shed
some hot, silent tears of veriest misery.

She thought that she was alone and unobserved,
but such was not the case. There
was a lady in the room — an old lady in a
brown silk brocade that would have stood
alone for richness and stiffness, a high brown
bonnet with an aigrette of feathers of very
military appearance, and a lace shawl of almost
priceless value disposed round her stiff, gaunt
shoulders. She had been sitting bolt upright
in a high chair for more than two hours, with
her hands clasped tightly before her ; but as
soon as Magdalen moved she came over to the
girl's bedside and laid her withered hand upon
the bowed dark head.

How are you now, child ? " she said.

Her voice was naturally rough and harsh ;

but there was nothing but kindness in its
tones. There was nothing but kindness in the
lines of the rugged face, the gleam of the keen
grey eyes. And Magdalen felt the kindness,
although at that moment it was impossible for
her to respond to it.

Better, thank you," she said, mechanically.
Then she wiped away her tears and lay very
still. " How long have I been here ? " she asked.

"More than two hours, my dear. You
fainted, you know ; and then you have been
sleeping." It had been a stupor rather than a
natural sleep, but Miss Esher did not like to
say so.

Then," said Magdalen, after a long pause,
"it must be after two o'clock. I begin to
remember it all now. . I wish I had not
fainted. Philip was just going to — to —
explain, he said. I did not hear."

She waited for a moment, thinking that
Miss Esher would interpose with the "explanation,"
which she had not heard. But Miss
Esher kept an ominous silence.

You came away with me," Magdalen went
on slowly, " and so perhaps you have not
heard. But of course I know that it will be all
right. I never really distrusted Philip, though
for a moment, it was a great shock, and
I could not bear it. . It was so very unfortunate,
you see," she said, more eagerly,
her beautiful eyes filling with tears, and the
colour coming back to her face as she spoke.
So unfortunate that an interruption of that
kind should occur, when the party was so
large and there were so very many people in
the church. It is sure to be misunderstood,
and people will think badly of Philip — and
father will not like it : all this was quite
enough to upset me, was it not ? You will
not think me very weak and childish because
I fainted at the slightest hint of bad news,
will you ? "

"My dear!" exclaimed Miss Esher. She
did not know what to say.

"But I feel better now," said Magdalen.
You must tell Philip, will you not ? that

I shall never be so silly again. And please
make him understand that I did not distrust
him : I am quite sure that he can explain the
whole matter, and if I had not fainted I should
have known all about it by this time. It was
very foolish ! " Her voice took a slightly
vexed tone : the flush on her cheek grew
deeper, and her eyes began to glitter. Miss
Esher could not help wondering whether this
outspoken confidence in Philip were genuine
or assumed for the occasion. But she was
wise enough not to seem to disagree nth the
girl — for the present, at any rate — and therefore
turned her attention towards the question
of food, for the doctor had ordered that his
patient should be fed as soon as she awoke.
Miss Esher was not surprised that Magdalen
would accept only a cup of black coffee and a
biscuit : the plainest fare was all that she
needed, and she shrank sensitively from any
mention of the dainties which had been provided
so abundantly for the wedding breakfast.
It was difficult to her to take even the

coffee and biscuit : every mouthful seemed at
first to choke her, and had she not been determined
to do what would l^rino- back her
strength and health she would not have
touched a morsel. But she had great resolution
and great spirit ; and she knew very well,
whether she confessed it or no, that a struggle
lay before her. She thoroughly understood
her father's nature. His pride would be
deeply wounded by the occurrence of that
morning ; and even if Philip Esher could
explain it satisfactorily away, Magdalen was
aware that Mr. Lino-ard mio-ht declare that
the engagement should forthwith come to
an end. That this proceeding would be
manifestly unjust both to herself and to
Philip, Magdalen did not stay to consider.
It was what her father would probably do ;
and she must be prepared to fight for her
love and happiness. To give Philip up
tamely, without a struggle, would, to her
thinking, be impossible.

And supposing Philip could not explain

away the charge that had been brought against
him ? Ah, she would not think of that ; it
would be too terrible. She had gone through
some frightfully black moments of doubt and
despair on awakening from her stupor in her
own little white bed ; but she was strong-er
now. Every mouthful of food gave her
courage : every moment's respite from bad
news gave her hope. If anything very terrible
had happened, surely by this time Miss Esher
would know.

When she had eaten and drunk, her head
felt clearer. She became conscious that Miss
Esher, was glancing towards her from time to
time with an expression of vague uneasiness.
The furtive looks quickened Magdalen's pulses.
She beo:an to longford decisive action, for
knowledge — whether of weal or woe.

Has my father come in ? " she asked of
Miss Esher, who still sat by her bedside.

Yes, my dear ; he came in about an hour

ago."

And did not come to see me ? " Her

breath began to grow short, the colour to
fluctuate in her cheeks.

He stood beside you for a few minutes,
but you were still asleep."

And he said — nothing ? "

'nothing definite."

Magdalen kept her eyes on the speaker.
*' Will you please tell me what you mean ?
Did he say that Philip had — had — set things
straight *? "

'ewe were afraid of disturbing you," said
Miss Esher, with an embarrassed look ; " and
so we did not speak much. Your father
seemed distressed — and that's all I can tell
you."

"Did Philip— is Philip "

Miss Esher would not wait for the end *of
that halting, timorous question. "My dear,"
she said, bluntly, "it's no use asking me
anything about it. You'll hear quite soon
enough. I 'm afraid — I 'm very much afraid
that it's a bad business, and that Philip
does not come out of it with clean hands."

Magdalen lifted her head from the pillow.
*' Do you mean that he has done wrong ? "

All men are selfish," said Miss Esher,
deliberately. " I don't suppose that Philip is
any better than the rest of them. He is my
o^Ti great-nephew and I have been very fond
of him ; but I 'm not prepared to uphold him
through thick and thin."

''Oh, Miss Esher! Then you don't love
him?"

The old lady put up her gold eye-glasses
and looked Magdalen steadily in the face.
*' My dear," she^said at last, " what are you
thinking of ? Will love make white, black ?
Will love make Wrong, right ? You are
talking nonsense, and you know that you are.
All the love in the world won't make a badman
good if he is bad to begin with."

But Philip is not bad ! " pleaded the girl.

]\Iiss Esher sighed. " I hope not," she said,
rather doubtfully. "He was a selfish lad — I
have told you so before ; I can only hope that
he is not so black a^ he has been painted. If

a tithe of that woman's story is true, Magdalen,
I shall never acknowledge Philip Esher
as a relation of mine again." There was a
touch of grimness in her manner as she concluded.
Magdalen was silent ; she knew what
the threat implied. Philip was looked upon
as the old lady's heir, and Miss Esher was a
wealthy woman.

I must know," she said, half-aloud, at last.
Miss Esher, I must see my father at once.
Would you be so kind as to send for him '? I
can't bear this suspense any longer."

Your father has gone out. I don't think
he will be in for some little time."

"Gone out! Where?"

Miss Esher hesitated. Then she said in a
very low tone, " My dear, he has gone to
London. So much I know. He and Gervas
St. Aidan have gone together to see about
some entry in a register. They will be back
to-night."

What entry ? "

'^ My dear . . . of Philip's marriage. "

A white change came over Magdalen's face.
He said he was not married — he could
explain " she faltered.

He told a lie," said the old lady, curtly.
Then she turned to the window and pretended
to look out, although her eyes were dim, but
she could not bear to see the girl's pale,
quivering lips and pathetic eyes. Presently,
she came back to the bedside. " Look here,
Magdalen," she said, in her harsh tones (Magdalen
knew that the harshness meant nothing,
and covered the kindliest of hearts), " I '11 tell
you one thing — perhaps for your comfort,
perhaps for the reverse. The woman is dead —
the woman that was his wife, or so we are told :
we may fairly hope that Philip did not mean todo
you a grievous wrong, and that he thought
it no orreat harm to conceal a foolish marriage.
That 's as far as I can go. I don't believe that
there is any legal obstacle to your marriage :
there may be a moral one — that will be for
you and your father to decide. You '11 want
all your strength and all your wisdom, Mage



(laden, and more. If ever you prayed for a
right judgment in all your life, my dear, you
may pray now ; for your whole earthly life
will depend upon it — and perhaps your soul's
life as well"

The tears were running down Miss Esher's
rugged features before she had finished : they
fell upon Magdalen's forehead as she stooped
to kiss the oriel. But Magdalen did not crv.
She looked white and stunned ; she drew the
coverlet a little closer alDout her mouth.
After a little silence, she spoke.

I think I understand. I will try to
remember. Will you kindly leave me alone
for a little time ? And, oh, there is one
thing I must not forget. Please let the old
women and the school-children have their
treat just as if nothing had happened. I wish
it. Everything is quite ready for them, and
it would be a pity if the things were wasted."

As thoughtful for others as ever," reflected
Miss Esher, in descending the stair from
Magdalen's room to give her orders. " Remembering

the old women and children in the
very midst of her sorrow ! She 's a fine
creature. I always thought her too o;ood for
Philip — far too good."

And that was how it came to pass that the
school-children had their promised feast.

Magdalen was left alone for more than
an hour. What passed in that time she never
told. Some agony of grief, of rebellion, of
wounded pride, had surely to be gone through
in that quiet hour — but nobody knew of it ;
nobody listening at that closed door could
have heard the sound of a word, a sob, a
moan. In after years Magdalen used to think
wistfully, pitifully, of herself, as of a child
whom she was sorry for — a motherless girl,
fighting her battle by herself face downward
on the floor in that lonely room, reconciling
herself, as she once said, with a quiet reverence
which removed the words from all taint
of commonplaceness, to what was for her " the
will of God."

She was peculiarly friendless at this important

period of lier life. Lie had no living
relations except lier father, and with him she
was not in deep sympathy, although she was
the apple of his eye, the pride of his life. A
former governess of hers, a Miss Jessop, a
gentle old lady with very little to say for herself,
was at the head of the domestic affairs of
the household. Magdalen had felt justified
in leaving her father in Miss Jessop's care, and
did not know how they would have managed
without her ; but at the same time she felt
that Miss Jessop was not a person on idiom
she could rely for help during hours of grief
or mental turmoil. Among the guests, of
whom the house had been full, there was not
one, except Miss Esher, to whom Magdalen
could turn. Hitherto she had known Miss
Esher very slightly ; but she knew now that
the stiff old lady was as a tower of strength to
her, and that her love, her steadfastness, could
be depended on in any emergency. Of course
Magdalen had friends in the neighbourhood —
the Vicar's wife, Mrs. Kir ton, was one — but

she shrank from the thought of asking any of
them to come to her. As yet she could
hardly bear to see her own humiliation
reflected in their curious eyes.

She wished that Mrs. St. Aidan could have
come. Aunt Emilia, as Magdalen had already
begun to call her, was a loving and lovable
woman ; but she was an invalid, and had
not thought it advisable to take the long
journey from Scarsfield to Eiversmead for
the purpose of being present at the wedding.
*' I shall see you when you come here in all
your magnificence," she had written to the
girl, in the bright, half-jesting strain which
was very characteristic of the woman. " You
know that Malton, your future home, is only
three miles from our Eectory, so we expect to
see much of you. In the meantime, we sun
ourselves beforehand in your splendour, and
hope that you will not rob us of our reflected
glory by being one whit less magnificent than
we have given you out to be." Poor Aunt
Emilia ! She was very fond of Philip. This

catastrophe would be a great blow to her.
Magdalen wished that she could have been
with her now.

Between four and five o'clock she put on an
old black dress and went into her sitting-room
which opened out of her bedroom. Here
Miss Esher found her a little later, sitting
quietly in a low chair, doing nothing, only
toying listlessly with the great diamond ring
that she had slipped off the third finger of her
left hand, and which flashed in the sunlight
as it lay upon her lap. Miss Esher looked
at her pitifully. There were black shadows
round the girl's eyes ; her lips were pale, and
her cheeks had a positively sunken look. She
spoke, however, with perfect calmness.

'' Will you tell me what is happening ?
My father has gone to London ? "

'eyes."

** Without a word to me ! " Her lips
quivered for a moment. '' Does nobody know
anything ? I think — I — I ought to be told."

"Have patience, my dear."

I am trying to have patience. But it is
very hard. What has become of that — that
person — the woman ? " Magdalene voice
sank to a whisper as she spoke.

She is being detained at the vicarage."

Detained ! What do you mean ? "

'' The Vicar will not let her go until your
father and Mr. St. Aidan come back. They
have gone to prove the truth or falsehood of
part of her story ; if it is false, they say they
will prosecute her."

Oh, they must not do that ! " cried the
girl, with a ring of pain in her broken tones.
That would only make things worse."

Mr. Kirton seems to think that she ought
to be taken into custody for making a disturbance
in church, whether her story is true or
not. For, you see, my dear, she had no
motive except the wish to punish Philip and
make you unhappy ; there is apparently no
legal obstacle to your marriage "

"No," said Magdalen, mechanically, as if
she were repeating a lesson of which she was

very weary ; "no legal obstacle — only a moral
one." Then she caught herself up and
resumed a more natural tone. "Dear Miss*
Esher, you have been so kind, will you do
one more kind thing? Will you let Mr.
Kirton and Mr. St. Aidan know that I shall
be extremely grieved if this poor woman is
prosecuted or punished in any way I It was
right that I should know the truth ; perhaps
her conscience was not satisfied without telling
me. At any rate, I shall be extremely sorry
if she is punished. And at such a time — at
this time — I think that they should be guided
a little by what I wish."

"I think they will be," said Miss Esher,
very much struck by the dignity with which
she uttered the last few words. This was
evidently no weak girl, utterly overwhelmed
by the first stroke of sorrow, and ready to
despair because she had lost her love. No,
Magdalen Lingered was made of sterner stuff ;
and while the older woman marvelled at her
strength she also admired.

She went away to write a note to Mr.
Kirton ; and in her absence Mr. Lingered and
Mr. St. Aidan arrived from London. Mr.
Lingered asked at once for his daughter, and
on learning that she was up and dressed, he
went without hesitation to her room.

I LOVED YOU ONCE."

My poor child ! " said the father, taking her
into his arms as she rose to meet him. " ]\Iy
poor darling ! "

He held her close to him, expecting a shower
of tears. But no tears came, and the girl's
voice, though stifled, was calm, as she said —

"What news have you for me, father ? "

'* News, my darling ? You must give him
up, Magdalen ; he is a bad man — not a fit
husband for you, my child."

His wife is dead ? " He felt her trembling
as she asked the question.

Yes. But, my dear child — it is a hard
thing to tell you, yet it must be told — he did
not know that she was dead dien he first

asked you to marry him."



There was no answer. Mr. Lingered held
her closer to him, and kissed her cold brow ;
then, quite suddenly, the storm broke. " Oh,
father, father ! " she cried, and burst into bitter
weeping — the weeping of one who suffers
irreparable loss.

No more could be said just then. But later
in the evening, when twilight was falling,
Mr. St. Aidan was asked to go to Miss
Lingered's room. The poor father met him
at the door. " Yotc go to her — you tell her
the story : I can't," said Mr. Lingered, seizing
the clergyman by the arm and drawing him
forward. Even in that dim light Mr. St.
Aidan could see that there were beads of
perspiration on the old man's brow. " I have
tried — I Ve done my best," he went on,
desperately, " but I can't do it ; I only breakdown
and denounce him — and then she won't
believe me. Do you go in and tell her the
story quietly, there 's a good fellow ; she '11
believe you, because she knows that you will
not make him out worse than he is."

"I will do my best," said Mr. St. Aidan,
much moved by this entire collapse of
Mr. Lingered's usual stateliness. The two
men grasped each other's hands. Then the
Squire moved away, covering his face with a
great red handkerchief as he walked on.
Mr. St. Aidan knocked at the door of
Magdalen's sitting-room and entered.

It was a hard task for him. He had loved
Philip Esher almost as a son, and the story he
had to tell was not to Philip's credit. He was
ashamed of his own kith and kin, and he had
never been ashamed before. It was his duty
to tell the story, and he would do his duty
manfully. But he hung his head as he came
into Magdalen's room.

He could scarcely see her at first. She was
half lost in the depths of a great arm-chair,
with its back to the light. Perhaps she did
not wish him to see her face. She laid her cold,
nerveless fingers in his hand for a moment, and
then spoke in low, restrained tones, as if all the
strength and energy had gone out of her voice.

My father said you would tell me about
it. It was too much for him. Will you
please go on ? "

I have a sad tale to tell," said Mr. St.
Aidan, feelingly. " You must forgive me if it
is painful. It seems, my dear, that in 1874
Philip's regiment was stationed at Manchester,
and here he made the acquaintance of the
Miss Mackworths. The elder sister, whom
you saw to-day, was a dressmaker ; the
younger, Alice, assisted her. She was an
attractive-looking girl, and Philip became — er
attached to her. He persuaded her to leave
her home with him ; he took her to London
'and married her at a registrar's office. We
have been there to-day, and seen the entry of
their marriage."

A little sigh escaped Magdalen's lips; it
sounded almost like a sigh of relief; but in
the gathering darkness the Rector of Scarsfield
could not see the girl's bent face.

So far," he went on slowly, " there was
nothing actually wrong in Philip's conduct.

But there is more to come. He soon tired of
his wife. I suppose that, although beautiful,
she was ignorant, underbred, perhaps foolish.
He took her to a quiet village in Warwickshire,
and there she gave birth to twins — the
two little girls who accompanied their aunt
to-day. Then — when the infants were only a
few weeks old — Philip deserted them and
their mother altogether."

It can't be true ! it can't be true ! " came
in a muffled but passionate voice from the
depths of the great arm-chair.

"My dear, I wish it were otherwise. Miss
Mackworth brought us a letter from Philip to
his wife, in which he told her that she would
never see him again, and that — this is almost
the worst of it — that she had been imposed
upon by the ceremony at the registrar's, that
she was not legally his wife at all. This was
a lie, and he knew it to be a lie. Some
money — a few pounds for pressing necessities
was enclosed, and this was the last she ever
heard of her husband, Philip Esher."

The Eector's indignation disturbed the
mellow accents of his fine voice ; he cleared
his throat, and paused for a little while.

Wliy did she not seek him out and try to
prove the truth ? " asked Magdalen.

Think what she was, my dear ; a poor, ill-educated
girl, who firmly believed every word
he said to her. She thought that she had
been duped, that she was disgraced for ever,
and apparently she never held up her head
again. She fell into great poverty, and not
until she was nearly dying of grief and
.starvation did she apply to her sister in
Manchester. The sister came to her aid,
found her almost out of her mind, took charge
of her until she died, and has hitherto cared
for the children."
• " She is dead, then ? "

*miss Mack worth says that she died six
weeks after her return to Manchester. Her
loss seems entirely to have embittered the
mind of this poor woman, Louisa Mack worth.
She could not find out for some time what

had become of Philip Esher, but she devoted
her life to schemes of revenge upon him.
She searched the papers diligently every day
for his name, but she found nothing until
last night, when chance — or, shall we say,
Providence ? — threw in her way an old copy
of a Society paper, in which your engagement
to Captain Esher was announced. She set
off by the earliest morning train, and arrived
in Kiversmead Church in time — only just intime
— to interrupt the wedding ceremony.
She acted very wrongly ; she was actuated
by motives of resentment and revenge ; and
yet, Magdalen, although Philip is my nephew,
I cannot but feel that you have perhaps been
saved life-long misery by the intervention of
Louisa Mackworth."

There was a silence. Magdalen had covered
her face with her hands. At last she said,
tremblingly —

Is there nothing on the other side ? Has
Philip nothing to say ? "

Philip," said Mr. St. Aidan, gravely, '' has

done his best to disavow his own actions. He
strove vigorously to make us believe that
Alice Mackworth never became his wife at
all. The register proves that he lied. He
pretends to think that the children do not
belong' to him. I asked him what he thought
had become of the twins which, as he well
knew, were born at Wingfield, and he had the
insolence to tell me that he advised the poor
woman now dead to send them to the workhouse
! But I ought not to give you all these
details," he added, hearing her breathe hard
as she listened. "You have enough to bear."

No. I want to hear all," said Magdalen,
gently. Then, after a little pause. " Where
is he now ? "

Philip, my dear ? I do not know. At the
village inn, I believe."

'' I should like to see him."

That is hardly necessary, I think. Your
father would not like it."

I think he would consent. I must see
Philip."

My dear child, is it worth while ? "
I must see him," she repeated, sitting up,
and folding her hands resolutely before her.
After a little pause, she went on in a choked,
unnatural voice : " You all seem to think that
I must give him up — at once — without letting
him have a chance of pleading for himself
You have always taught me that no one was
beyond forgiveness if he were sorry. If Philip

were sorry "

The Eector stood up. He was touched by
this proof of the faithfulness of her woman's
nature, but he was also half angry, half scandalised.
He spoke out freely, not sparing
Philip this time, not sparing Magdalen herself.
He talked of the heinousness of Philip's
offence, of the insult to all womanhood as well
as to Magdalen in his presuming to offer
himself to her, of the fact that Philip had
not even ascertained whether Alice were alive
or dead before making love to Magdalen. He
spoke of Philip's cruelty to his wife and
children, this lease desertion of them, his denial

of the story when Louisa Mackworth appeared.
He was even anxious to make me believe,"
said Mr. St. Aidan, bitterly, '' that there had
l)een no real marriage — that he had acted
only, he said, as nine men out of ten would
have done. Magdalen, can you pardon him
for that?"

She faltered out her secret thought. " perhaps
he would not acknowledge his repentance
to you : perhaps he was ashamed of his wrongdoing,
and could not bear to confess it "

Oh, child, child ! I did not think that you
would be so weak," cried the Rector.

Magdalen covered her face with her hands.
'' I cannot help it," she said, almost inaudibly.
*' I loved him — with all my heart."

Mr. St. Aidan was silent. He leaned back
in his chair with the air of a man who had
said all that he had to say. He saw that the
girl was crying ; he grieved with her in his*
inmost soul, and yet he was angry at her grief.

Presently Magdalen withdrew her hands
from her face, and rose. She walked to the

window and looked out for a few moments
before she spoke again. "Mr. St. Aidan,"
she said, at last, " I must see Philip for myself.
I want to see him to-night."

Once more the Eector tried his powers of
persuasion, and once more in vain. Magdalen's
quiet determination was proof against
all his arguments. He went at last to seek
her father, hoping that Mr. Lingered would
forbid Philip the house. But J\Ir. Lingered
came to Magdalen's room, and, after a few
words with her, told her to do exactly as
she pleased. "I cannot say that I approve
of your decision," said Mr. St. Aidan, gravely,
when Mr. Lingered asked him where Captain
Esher could be found. " I can trust Maoxla-
len," the father responded, and of course the
Rector could say no more.

Captain Esher was at the village inn. He

-had demanded and been refused an interview

with Magdalen ; and when, a little after nine

o'clock, he received a message of invitation

from her, he triumphed in his heart. ''I

knew that she would not give me up," he
said to himself. " She is a brave girl ; she
won't be trampled upon. My uncle is really
insufferable." He finished the little glass of
brandy and water which he had been drinking,
tossed away his cigar, and followed the
messenger decorously to the Manor House. .

He was conducted to Magdalen's own
sitting-room, which he knew well. But, as
the first glance told him, he was not to see
her quite alone. A door into the next room
was open, and his great-aunt's grim figure was
in full sight. She was sitting erect in a high-backed
chair, beside a small table, on which
stood a lighted candle and an open book.
Evidently she was there to keep guard.

The curtains of Magdalen's sitting-room
were drawn, and a shaded lamp had been
placed upon the table. The light was dim,
but it showed him Magdalen's face and figure
as she rose from the chair in which she had
been sitting, and stood before him. What a
change had passed over her since the morning

! Then she had been radiant in satin and
lace and precious stones ; now she was dressed
in a long, plain, black gown, against which
her face and hands showed almost deadly
white. " A little theatrical," said Captain
Esher to himself, with the glimmer of a sneer
in his fine dark eyes. '' She has disposed herself
for tragedy, I see ; and, by Jove, she does
it well ! "

But it was not his rule to appear conscious
of the change in her demeanour. He advanced
towards her, stretching out his hand
with an eager air.

My dearest Magdalen, I knew it ! I
knew that you would send for me, I was
certain that you would not fail me —
novo ! ''

His confident, even joyous, air took Magdalen
by surprise. She did not accept his
proffered hand : she simply looked him in
the face with grave, searching eyes, which
disconcerted him a little. He resolved, however,
not to show that he was taken aback.

There was no reason for that interruption
: you know that, do you not, Magdalen !
There will be no obstacle to our marriage
when it takes place — and you will not keep
me waiting long, will you, my darling ! You
will forgive me for anything that I have done
to displease you, will you not ? " He thought
it well to adopt a suppliant tone in the last
few words.

Magdalen struggled to interrupt him, but
found it difficult to speak.

1 do not understand," she said at length,
rather faintly. " Have you nothing else to
say to me — nothing to confess "

Captain Esher shrugged his shoulders
slightly. " You are a sensible woman,
Madge," he said. " Don't you remember that
I told you some months ago that I had had
a — an — affair with a girl in Manchester ? I
assure you I was perfectly open about it, and
you declared that you understood "

You did not tell me that you had married
that poor girl and then deserted her," said

Magdalen. Her calmness had come back ;
her lips were colourless, and her eyes were
fixed immovably on the young man's face.
He winced under the gaze ; but he had made
up his mind to show no emotion, to acknowledge
nothing, to carry matters with a high
hand. "It was the only way to deal with
women," he had said to himself. But it was
not the way in which he should have dealt
with Magdalen.

He uttered a light laugh, which jarred terribly
on her nerves.

My dear Madge," he said, '' I did what
any other man would have done under the
circumstances. My regiment was ordered to
Ireland : I had to go with it. Do you call
that desertion ? I don't."

She drew a paper from her pocket and held
it towards him. " Do you deny your own
handwriting ? " she said.

He glanced at the paper. It was his letter
to Alice, telling her that he meant never to
come back, never to see her face again.

Philip Esher lost self-command for a few
moments. He stamped his foot angrily, and
uttered a word which smote Magdalen with
dismay. The colour came back to her face
as she heard it, and then receded, leaving it
white as snow. But Captain Esher did not
care for these tell-tale signs. He snatched
the letter from her hand and tore it violently
across, then scattered the pieces at her feet.

Magdalen drew back from him a few paces,
and sat down beside the table, resting her
cheek upon her hand. She turned sick and
faint. Some inner conviction of Philip's
worthlessness had come home to her. She
was beginning to believe in Mr. St. Aidan s
words.

** Madge, Madge," said her lover, coming
close to her and laying his arm half round her
neck, " why do you listen to their nonsense ?
You make me forget myself, you see. T did
not mean to frighten you. Come, forgive me ;
take me as I am ; I am not different from the
man I was yesterday, when you said you loved

me better than all the world beside. Come,
Madge, my darling, don't bear malice. I
never cared for her; not half as much as
I care for you. Why, I never thought that
you could be so jealous ! "

'' I am not jealous," said Magdalen, coldly.

"AVhat are you, then? You are silent,
cold — will you not kiss me once, Madge? — you
look at me as if you did not love me any
longer ! How is this, Magdalen ? "

He slipped down on his knees to a footstool
beside her, and knelt there, with one hand on
her shoulder and the other clasping her cold
fingers. It struck him with a momentary
dread to find that she did not return the
pressure, or bend her face to meet his lips.
Was it possible that she was serious'
offended? He flung the question from him
with scorn. He could " bring; her round "
by a few coaxing words — of that he was well
assured ; he had never failed to win a woman
yet when he had set his heart upon winning
her. Only he saw that he must adopt a

rather different tone with her : hitherto he
had been too brusque, too offhand ; now he
must temporise.

'dearest," he said, in the mellow, musical
tones into which he could let his voice fall
when he chose, " I know what a shock this
morning's interruption must have given you.
Believe me, I would have spared it you if
I could. It was because I did not want to
pain you that I told you nothing about my
marriage. I was wrong; : I will never hide
anything from you again. Forgive me my
want of confidence in you. It was only that
I could not bear that you should think for
one moment that I had ever loved another
woman, however slightly, beside yourself.
Magdalen, it was a venial error ; it came only
fi'om my love for you."

She moved a little, withdrawing her hand
fi'om his before she spoke. " I was not thinking
of that," she said, faintly. " I wanted something
else. I wanted AVill you answer

me a question or two frankly, Philip ? "

Anything, Magdalen ! " — but his eye grew
watchful as he replied.

Did — did your wife Jove you ? " she asked.

'' Love me ! " — Philip had not the sense at
that moment to answer without complacency
" indeed she did, poor little thing ! "

"And yet you wrote her that letter ! And
the children; you knew that they were
living ? "

Hm — not exactly ; I — I thought they had
died, in fact."

You did not ascertain ? "

Well, really, Magdalen "

You left their mother to die in want, and
your children to go to the workhouse ? Oh,
my God ! " cried the girl, her voice breaking
into a kind of wail, " I never believed it
before ! What are men made of that they can
do these things ? "

She pushed back her chair and rose, wringing
her hands together. Philip rose too ; the
gravity of the situation was apparent to him
now.

'* That was no folly : that was a crime," she
said, turning to him passionately, with a
strange light in her dark eyes. " And it is all
the worse that you speak of it so easily — that
you call it a ' mistake.' I thought you a goodman,
Philip ; I was wrong — I was wrong.
God forgive you — and God help me ! "

She staggered as she moved ; he sprang to
help her, but she refused his help with a silent
shake of the head, and supported herself by
the back of the heavy chair in which she had
been sitting.

'' Good-bye, Philip," she said, after a short
pause, during which he stood frowning, sullen,
impatient, yet with never a word to say.
Good-bye, Philip ; I can never be your wife
now. No, do not speak ; do not touch me ; I

can't bear it. I can only ask you to go away.
It is all over between ns."

"You cannot mean it, Madge? You are
not so hard — so unforgiving ? "

"I do not think that I am unforgiving,"
said Magdalen, slowly. " It does not seem tome
to be a matter for my forgiveness. I can
never forget ; that is all."

Magdalen, do you not love me ? "

She faced him again, with that strange light
in her eyes.

I scarcely know," she answered, simply ;
'' but I think — I think that my love for you is
killed, Philip, and that it will never live again."

He caught at her dress with a wild imploring
gesture. There was misery enough in his
face now — misery, humiliation, despair.

Madge, forgive me ! " he cried again.

She had turned towards the door of the
inner room, and Miss Esher had come forward
and was already at her side. She looked at
the man's white face for one moment, and a
great regret came into her eyes.

Oh, Philip, Philip ! " she wailed, stretching
out her hands towards him, " oh, Philip, I
loved you once ! "

And then she fell, as she had fallen that
morning, to the ground in a death-like swoon,
and for a time it seemed as though she would
never wake again.

MISS esher's intentions.

For days Magdalen's life and reason hung in

the balance. She lay unconscious — either

quite silent or moaning in delirium that was

not wild, but inexpressibly pathetic, calling

upon Philip to come to her and to take away

"the woman who stood between them."

Thus she spoke, meaning evidently the dead

wife, who formed as great an obstacle between

Magdalen and Philip in death as she had done

in life. It was strange how the sick girl

seemed to be haunted by that visionary

presence : Alice's name was constantly on

her lips, and her form hovered ever before

those fever-stricken eyes. Her delirium grew

so painful to the hearers at last that the

doctor proposed to send for Captain Esher, in


the hope that his appearance would quiet her ;
but, even if Mr. Lingered would have yielded
to his request, it would have been in vain :
Captain Esher had left England, and was
supposed to be at some German or Italian
watering-place, nobody quite knew where.
It would have been almost impossible to track
him and bring him back to Riversmead before
the crisis of Magdalen's illness took place.
And when this was passed, and she began
slowly but surely to amend, there was no
more talk of sending for Captain Esher.

Old ]\Iiss Esher had been the mainstay of
the Lingered household during Magdalen's illness.
She was a clever, energetic woman,
kindly, although a trifle brusque in manner,
and she had from the first identified herself
with Magdalen's interests in a remarkable
way. Philip had always been considered her
heir, but she now openly declared that she
would have nothing more to do with him ; he
was a scamp, and she would never see his face
again. She did not say as openly what she

intended to do with her fortune ; but it was
conjectured that she would divide it, leaving
part of it to the St. Aidanss, and possibly part
of it to Philip Esher's little children, or to
Magdalen Lingered. On this subject, however,
she never opened her lips. Her keen eyes
took note of everything, no doubt : of the
Lingered's comparative poverty, of the small
economies in which Miss Jessop seemed to bean
adept, of poor Mr. Lingered's vain attempt
to appear as well-off as his neighbours.
Doubtless she saw all these things, though she
never appeared to see them. She accommodated
herself to the customs of the house ;
but she lived mostly in Magdalen's rooms,
and nursed her like a mother.

It was fortunate for the girl that Miss
Esher was with her at that time ; for good,
gentle Miss Jessop, the ex-governess, was apt
to lose her head in seasons of emergency, and
had neither tact, decision, nor forethought.
She would have flown to Magdalen with every
little domestic trouble as soon as Magdalen

was able to understand what was said, and
probably worried her into another fever, if
Miss Eslier had not been by to keep her out
of the sick room or (when she did enter) to
regulate the subjects of conversation and the
length of the visit. I am afraid that Miss
Jessop never forgave Miss Esher in her heart
for interfering in this manner between herself
and her much-loved Magdalen. Certainly
she^xould not speak of her without a kind of
tightening of the lines of her mousey little
face, which betokened displeasure if not dislike.


The period of convalescence was the most
miserable experience that Magdalen had ever
passed through. The sickness of heart, the
languor, the bodily weakness, were such as
she never forgot ; they taught her lessons
which she could have learnt in no other
way. The spring seemed to be gone out
of her life ; in her sick weariness she
cared for nothing, she loathed the sunshine
that had once been sweet to her ; nothing

fair or good was left. But she never
expressed these feelings in words. She had
put a seal upon her lips. Her father would
have been terribly distressed if he had known
the depth of her despair, and he had been
grieved enough already. Deep down in
Magdalen's heart was the resolve that, if
she could help it, no one should ever suffer
pain or injury through her.

She had seen what life could come to,
if spent without love of man or God ;
how hearts could be Wrecked, souls lost
through selfishness ; and her whole being:
cried out to a higher Power to be saved
from this curse of evil-doing. Vaguely at
first, then more definitely, the path of her
future life became plain to her. She had
lost her hopes of personal joy ; her life was
all the more dedicated to the joy of others ;
for others she would spend herself and be
spent. It was natural in the reaction
of the shock she had experienced that
she should feel as if all happiness were

henceforth dead to Iter ; she thoroughly
believed this, and threw herself into the work
of self-renunciation with the earnestness, the
fervour, which characterised all her doings.
It was also natural that when she began
to carry out her plans — wearing only her
plainest dresses, and declining amusement
in rather an ascetic fashion, — Mr. Lino-ard
should become seriously alarmed. He saw
that Magdalen was fast recovering bodily
strength, but he could not understand her
gravity, her half-concealed sadness, the lassitude
of her gait ; and he began to fear
that her mind was unhinged by the trouble
that had come upon her.

Miss Esher reassured him.

Don't be alarmed," she said. " With her
splendid constitution, recovery is only a
matter of time. She is a young woman, and
a handsome woman, too ; don't be afraid.
We shall see her married to somebody
whom she loves with her whole heart by
and bv."

Not in my time, I am afraid," Mr.
Lingered sighed.

'' Oh, there 's no telling," said Miss Eshei\
cheerfully. " She has had a great blow
there 's no denying ; and all through that
scamp, Philip Esher, whom I will not own
as a relation of mine ; but I think that she
will get over it."

"It will take years," said Mr. Lingered
gloomily.

"All years come to an end some time,"
replied Miss Esher, in a philosophic tone.

She comforted Mr. Lingered, but she herself
was perplexed. Magdalen was strangely
silent, even with her ; she did not mention
Philip, she did not mention the St. Aidanss ;
it seemed as if she wished the very memory
of the past to die away. But the silence
was broken at last.

It was September. Miss Esher had stayed
on at the Manor House at Mr. Lingered's
most earnest request, but she was determined
to stay no longer. She sought out Magdalen

one day with a face of grim decision, and
told her that she must go.

Magdalen was sitting in the garden, under
a great beech tree. She still looked fragile
and wan ; and the crimson cushions that
were piled behind her head only threw into
relief the startling pallor of her face. Health
was certainly returning, but it brought no
tinge of colour to those sunken cheeks. Her
brilliant yet delicate bloom seemed to have
gone for ever.

'why must you go, Aunt Isabel?" she
asked. Miss Esher had insisted on Magdalen's
giving her this title. " We want you here
so much."

"You forget, my dear," said Miss Esher,
briskly, "that I have a house and a garden,
and men-servants, and maid-servants, and
birds, and beasts, and pets of all sorts to
look after. What have they been doing
without me all this time I can't imagine.
The whole place will have gone to rack and
ruin, I expect."

I am selfish — I had forgotten," said
Magdalen, her eyes filling with tears. " Don't
let me keep you, dear auntie. You have
been too good to me already."

Nobody could be too good to you, child,"
said the old lady, sitting down beside her
favourite, and putting her white, blue-veined
hand on Magdalen's knee. " I wish I could
take you with me ; but I suppose you won't
come f

'' Thank you, T could not leave my father."

Hm, yes, I know. But by and by — tell
me honestly, Madge, my dear, would you
mind very much coming to Scarsfield fora
little time, if I asked you ? Would it be
painful to you ? "

Magdalen winced a little, but answered
very quietly,

I do not think that it need be painful
to me, Aunt Isabel, if you want me. I have
heard a great deal about Scarsfield" — here
her voice trembled for a moment, — " and
I always wanted to see it — especially your

house." Her eyes looked sorrowfully into
the distance as if she were picturing to herself
another house which she had also hoped to
see. Miss Esher saw the look, and answered
it rather too appropriately.

"My house — the Priory, you knows — is
four miles from Malton. You would not
feel that you were in the same neighbourhood.
Philip Esher is abroad ; the house
is shut up, not likely to be open for sometime."


Magdalen turned away her head.

But I don't mean to ask you just yet,"
said Miss Esher, in a livelier tone. " I only
wanted to know whether you would think it
impossible by and by. I 'm an old woman, you
know, Madge, and if I fall ill I shall not be
able to come down here. Would you come to
the Priory if I wanted you for a little time ? "

The tears stood in Magdalen's eyes. She
took Miss Esher's hand in hers, and pressed it
affectionately. " If ever you want me, I will
come," she said.

That 's a bargain' said the old lady, in her
quaint, curt way. " I shall hold you to it.
Don't forget. And now, I must tell you why
I am going home. Emilia is ill."

Mrs. St. Aidan ? "

"Yes, Mrs. St. Aidan. She has overdone
herself again. It 's perfectly ridiculous. She
ought never to have undertaken the care of
those children."

"What children?" asked Magdalen, quickly.

Miss Esher stopped, confounded. She had
forgotten for the moment to whom she was
speaking. She tried to explain her words
away.

Oh, only some children who have been
staying with her — children of a friend — a
relation "

Miss Esher grew confused. Magdalen's
eyes, serious and calm, were fixed upon her
face. She could not go on.

Philip Esher's children ? " said Magdalen.

"Well — yes, my dear; Philip Esher's
child-en — if you lull have the truth."

But why are they there ? Why are they
in Mrs. St. Aidan's charge ? " asked the girl,
quickly. She seemed to have roused herself
completely : she sat erect, and a faint flush
showed itself in her cheeks. " There must bea
great deal that I have not heard," she said,
as IVliss Esher still hesitated. " I know
nothing; — I have not dared to ask. Aunt
Isabel, tell me."

"There is really very little to tell," said
Miss Esher, almost impatiently.

"Where is Captain Esher ? "

The question was very gently asked ; but
the older woman dared not look at the
questioner, as she replied —

"At Monaco. Gambling, I believe."

Ah ! " The exclamation was almost like
a moan. Then, in the same tranquil voice :
What became of Bliss Mackworth ? "

That is exactly what we do not know ! "
cried Miss Esher, dropping all pretence of
reserve, and at once embarking, as she had
often wished to do, upon the story. " When

Philip left the house, after you had fainted,
Magdalen, it seems that he was in a
terrible state of excitement. He went to
the Vicarage, where Miss Mackworth and the
children had been taken in for the night —
partly in order to keep the woman secure, you
know — and he asked to see her. There was
SO violent a scene of recrimination and abuse,
that Mr. Kirton, hearing the noise, had to
interfere. In his presence, Philip vowed that
he would have nothing to do with the children
he did not care whether they were his own
or not — said that he would not be responsible
for them, and that she might bring them upas
she pleased, and so on. He must have lost
his head completely, for, of course, he knew
that the law would compel him to provide for
their maintenance whether he wished or no.
But the Mackworth woman must have taken
him at his word. She evidently did not want
the children any more than he did, and was
afraid that the whole burden of supporting
them would fall upon her. So, early next

morning, before the house was astir, she went
away, no one knows whither, and left the
children behind."

'' Poor little creatures," Magdalen murmured
to herself.

Yes, indeed. Nobody seemed to want
them, poor little souls. Philip sobered
down by the morning, and retracted what he
had said — not that he was ashamed of it,
judging by his demeanour, but that a little
common-sense had returned to him. He said
that he would pay her for taking care of them,
and wrote and telegraphed to her old address
in Manchester ; but she never went back to it.
She could not be traced in any direction ; and
it 's my belief," said Miss Esher, emphatically,
that she made away with herself."

Magdalen shrank a little. " Oh, Aunt
Isabel, do not say so ! "

"I must say so, my dear, if I believe it.
That 's another sin which Philip Esher has
upon his soul. At any rate, she could not be
found. Then the question arose. What was

to become of the children ? Philip said that
he would send them to school — two mites of
three years old ! Then Gervas St. Aidan
interposed — you know what a soft heart he
has ! — and offered to take them to his wife
for a little time, ' until he said, * a suitable
home could be found for them.' But everybody
was certain that Emilia would never let
them go, if she once got hold of them !
Gervas took them home, and she was only too
glad to have them, although they were Philip
Esher's children, and had had such an unfortunate
history ; but she has worried over them
and over Philip until she is laid up, and now
I suppose I must go and nurse her."

'show good you are. Aunt Isabel I The
poor little children ! What will become of
them ? "

'*I think I shall take them to the Priory
for a time. It's a great shame," said Miss
Esher, candidly. '' There 's that scamp Philip,
he makes a low marriage, breaks his wife's
heart, behaves scandalously to every one,

and yet we must all needs put ourselves about
to look after his children ! It would have
been much better to find a good school for
them and let them stay there."

Oh, no ! " exclaimed Magdalen, almost
involuntarily.

Instead of which, they are to be petted by
Emilia — who insists upon it that we are a little
hard on ' poor Philip,' as she calls him — and
brought up in luxury at the Eectory and the
Priory, with every one saying that I shall leave
them money ! I shall do nothing of the kind.
Philip may provide for his own family. Does
he think that I shall install a milliner's
daughters at the Priory ? "

'the children are not to blame," said
Magdalen.

Of course I know that, my dear. I trust
that I shall show them every kindness in my
power. But it would make my father, the
late General Esher, turn in his grave if he
knew that a little dressmaker's children were
to inherit the Priory. No, no : they will be

provided for otherwise ; and I shall do with
the Priory what I choose."

Magdalen was too weak and weary to appreciate
the significance with which these words
were spoken. Long afterwards she remembered
them, and knew what had been meant.
Miss Esher's next sentence drove the matter
from her mind.

"Besides," said that good lady, looking
before her stolidly, as if she were saying a
thing of no importance to any one, " when
Philip marries again you may be sure that he
will marry for money."

Magdalen caught her breath.

"Do you care for him still, then?" said
Aunt Isabel, turning upon her sharply, as
though she had spoken aloud.

Oh, Aunt Isabel, spare me ! " cried Magdalen,
suddenly bending her face upon her
hands to hide her tears. "I cannot tear him
out of my heart just yet ! "

The old lady smoothed the girl's hair with
her wrinkled hand. '^ God help you to do it.

my poor child," she murmured, " for that
man 's not worth the love of any honest heart.
I fear sometimes that he 11 bring misery upon
you yet."

I shall never see him again," said Magdalen,
between her sobs.

I 'm not so sure of that. And beware of
his tongue, child, if ever you do meet him.
He has a violent temper and a vindictive one ;
but when it is under control he has also a
silver tongue. Fair and false — that's Philip
Esher's character ; though we were late in
finding it out — the worse for us ! "

He will never try to speak to me
again ! " exclaimed the girl, raising her head
with a look of wounded pride. " He would
not dare "

He has no want of courage," said Miss
Esher, warningly. " I would not trust him to

keep away, if he thought It's an old

woman's cowardice, perhaps, my dear, but I
wish you would give me your solemn promise
never to marry Philip Esher ! "

Magdalen shivered from head to foot. " Is
any promise necessary ? '' she said.

I think it is," answered Miss Esher, looking
at her keenly. " However, I won't press
it. I thought that perhaps, some day, you
might feel such a promise to be a sort of safeguard.
But it 's no matter."

She sat silent a little time, as if hoping
that Magdalen would offer to promise what
she had asked ; but Magdalen said never a
word.

A NEW HOME.

So Miss Esher went away to Scarsfield, and
Magdalen was left alone with her father.

It seemed very strange to her to take up
her old life in the old way, and her spirit at
first revolted at it. The old routine : visits
to the village people, who had once come to
see her married, services in the church where
she had stood as a bride at the chancel steps,
meetings with old friends who could not keep
the pity out of their eyes even if they restrained
their tongues ; all these things were
hard to bear. She did not encourage the
expression of sympathy. Few persons found
it easy to accost her on the subject of her
great sorrow, though many tried to say

some " appropriate " words. The outspoken



sympathy of the village wives was easier to
bear. 'eh, Miss Magdalen," one old cottager
said, without the least idea of giving
her pain, " eh, my dear, what an escape
you 've had ! You should surely ha' been
very thankful ! " A view of the case which
had never occurred to Magdalen.

Mr. Lingered tried to persuade her to spend
the autumn with friends in Scotland, the
winter at Cannes or Nice ; and for a little
time she did go away from home to try
the effect of change of scene. But before
long she was again in her old place. It
seemed to her a mere shirking of difficulties
to leave home at that time. Mr. Lingered
was feeble, and wanted her company, and his
finances were so encumbered that the strictest
economy in housekeeping was necessary. So
Magdalen thought that it was right to stay
at Eiversmead ; and here, month after month,
her life slipped on, varpng little, coloured
only by the seasons, brightened only by the
sense of duty done. Time brought peace to

her brow, but it did not bring back her girlish
bloom ; she was a woman who had known
sorrow now, and not a child.

A year passed thus in comparative peace
and quietness, and then Mr. Lingered was
struck down by paralysis. He grew worse
from day to day, and had at last to be fed and
soothed like an ailing child. This was a
dreary time ; the house was half shut up ; no
visitors came, and the paralysed and nearly
imbecile old father would scarcely let his
darling out of his sight. What secret agonies
of impatience, what doubt and fear and
weariness she then went through no one
would ever know. Magdalen never told.
But those dark hours surely had their fruit in
the rare power of sympathy that developed
within her, in the mingled sweetness and
strength with which she seemed to be afterwards
endowed. She had what has been called
"a genius for religion." Her nature could
not have expanded in an atmosphere of
unbelief The fibres of her heart had been so

bruised and beaten down from earthly things
that she found her only relief from pain in
turning to things spiritual and Divine.
Whether she was in quite a healthy and
natural state she did not stop to inquire.
The things of this world seemed sometimes to
have lost their interest for her ; she had no
part or lot in them. And if you had told her
that their zest and flavour would all come
back to her one day, she would have been
horrified and dismayed.

After two years of this kind of life, Mr.
Lingered died. It was then found that his
affairs were in a very involved condition, that
the house and estate must be sold in order to
satisfy importunate creditors, and that
Magdalen's sole income consisted of two
hundred a year, inherited from her mother.
She went through a time of loneliness
and desolation, but her tranquillity was not
now easily disturbed. And just when she
was thinking of taking a quiet lodging in
London, where she had some thoughts of

working amongst the poor, a summons came
which she could not disregard.

'' My dear Magdalen," Miss Esher wrote to
her, in a shaky hand, " I am growing very
feeble. Will you come to me for a little
while ? You promised to do so when I
wanted you. I want you now. Your old
friend, Isabel Esher."

Magdalen did not hesitate. She packed up
her boxes, took a sorrowful farewell of her
friends in Riversmead, and started as soon as
possible for Scarsfield.

She knew from description what to expect
in Scarsfield. Fifty years ago the place had
been a mere village, picturesquely situated on
a river-bank, with a rising background of
wooded hills. Since then a number of
chemical works had been built, and the
atmosphere was poisoned by the gases that
issued from their chimneys ; gases which
were said to be not injurious to health,
although they destroyed vegetation, corroded
metals, and gave to the streets an aspect

of extreme old age. It was a busy place,
but would never be a very important one,
for the river on which it stood was partially
choked by sand-banks, which rendered navigation
difficult even to small vessels, and
impossible to larger ships. Miss Esher s
house stood on the high ground that overlooked
the town. The hills and moorlands
had not yet been built over, nor had their
beauty been quite destroyed by the smoke
which blackened vegetation in the valley. At
a stone's throw from the Priory there was
still a delightful stretch of heather-covered
common and sandstone heights, commanding
a magnificent view of the river as it
wound through green flats on its way to the
Irish Sea. The Priory grounds were extensive,
but the house itself was not as ancient as its
name implied. It was built on the site of an
old Priory, and had inherited its name ;
but there was nothing monastic about its
appearance. It was a comfortable-looking
red-brick building, of the Tudor period,

almost hidden from the high-road, which
passed its gates, by trees.

It was a wet night in autumn when
Magdalen arrived. Miss Esher had sent a
brougham and a maid to meet her, but the
train was late, and Magdalen felt chilled to
the bone as she was driven through the busy
gas-lit streets, and up the steep road that led
to the Priory. She looked through the
carriage windows, blurred as they were by
rain, with an odd feeling. The murky streets
seemed strangely familiar to her ; it was as if
she saw something for which she had been
waiting all her life. She put the sensation
down to her many fancies about Scar si eld
when Captain Esher used to describe it to her
years ago ; and yet the explanation scarcely
seemed satisfactory. 'rit is like coming
home," said Magdalen to herself, with a
curious thrill of wonder — almost of superstitious
fear. For how could Scarsfield ever
be her home ?

The carriage turned in at the great iron

gate. The hall door opened, and a flood of
light poured out upon the broad stone steps.
Magdalen, half-blinded by the glow, felt herself
drawn into the house by kindly hands,
and kissed again and again ; then, as her eyes
became accustomed to the light, she saw that
she was standing in a spacious hall, and that
Miss Esher was holding her by the hands, and
saying, " Welcome, my dear ! " And Magdalen
felt that she was welcome indeed.

The hall was floored with oak, on which
rugs and sheep-skins had been thrown ; a great
fire burned in the wide old-fashioned grate,
and its flames were reflected from the shining
boards, the carvings on the great oak chests,
the crossed sabres and shields and porcelain
upon the walls. The scene was more than
picturesque ; it was so home-like and so comfortable
that Magdalen loved the place from
that moment. And it was well that she
loved it, for that house was fated to be her
home for many a day.

Miss Esher looked old and feeble. Her hair

was snow-white ; she stooped very much, and
walked with a gold-headed cane, but her eyes
were keen as ever. She saw that Magdalen
was cold and weary and dispirited, and she
led her upstairs at once to take off her cloak
assuring her that she must make haste and
come do^TL to dinner-tea as soon as possible
and that she should not allow her to speak a
word until she had been warmed and fed. And
then she hurried away, telling her guest that
she would expect her downstairs in ten minutes.
Magdalen was soon ready. She opened her
door, wondering a little whether she could
find her way to the dining-room, and if the
maid, with whose services she had dispensed,
woukl be in waiting. No, the maid was not
there ; but crouched on the step which led
from her door to the landing were two little
figures all in white. Two lovely blonde heads
caught the gleam of Magdalen's lifted candle ;
two angel faces were turned half-timidly
towards her as she looked. Whose children,
then, were these ?

We Ve come to show you the way
downstairs," said one of them in clear
treble tones. " Im Dolly and she's Daisy."
And then they held their faces up to be
kissed.

'' Dolly who ? Daisy who ? " said Magdalen,
kissing them. But her voice trembled as she
spoke.

Dorothy Philippa Esher." Need she have
asked ? " And we 're six years old to-day.
And auntie said that we might fetch you
down to tea."

Magdalen sank down on one knee and drew
them close to her.

Do you live here, darlings "? " she asked
tenderly.

Yes, we live with Aunt Isabel. She says
that you call her Aunt Isabel, too, so may we
call you ' cousin ' ? She says we may if you
don't mind."

I shall like it very much," said Magdalen.
She was looking into the little faces with
curiously yearning eyes. Was she seeking fora

likeness to their father ? It was easy
enough to find.

Dolly had inherited Philip Esher's brilliancy
of colouring and exquisite modelling of feature.
Her long dark eyes were singularly
brilliant, her hair was of the brightest golden,
her face as delicately tinted as eggshell china.
Daisy was softer and paler ; her hair was more
flaxen, and her eyes were blue. Magdalen
noticed almost immediately that she had
clinging caressing ways which Dolly did not
possess ; but that Dolly was the talker, the
self-reliant leader of the two.

She went downstairs with the little girls,
who led her into the dining-room in triumph.
Miss Esher gave her one sharp look as she
entered, and distinguished the tear that
trembled upon her eyelashes, but appeared to
take no notice of it. Even when the children
had gone to bed. Miss Esher made no allusion
to them ; she talked quietly of many things,
asked questions concerning Magdalen's affairs,
but said nothing about her own. It was

with perfect ease of manner, however, that
Magdalen said at length :

The children must be a great comfort to
you."

"They are nice little things," said ffiss
Esher.

I did not know that they were still T\ith
you."

Yes. Emilia was too ill to have them in
the house. You don't object, I suppose?"
and Miss Esher bent her heavy eyebrows
anxiously as she glanced at her younger
friend.

I am glad to see them," said Magdalen.
*'l have often wondered about them, but
never liked to ask."

"Philip Esher is still abroad," Miss Esher
went on, abruptly.

Does he take no interest in his children ? "

Apparently not. He remits money for
them sometimes — which I don't use. They
may need it some day. — And now, my dear, I
hope you will stay with me for a long time.

for I am growing very old and am lonely.
You must not leave me again, Madge, as long
as I live."

Magdalen made no promise ; she had an
objection to promises. Besides, it did not
seem to her just then very likely that she
should stay for more than a few weeks at the
Priory. She certainly felt the need of rest,
and was glad to take it ; but when she was
strong again — strong and well and vigorous —
she would go out into the world.

She changed her mind, however. The
Priory was a charming old place ; the rooms
were luxurious and picturesque ; the gardens
were beautifully kept ; there was pleasant
society in the neighbourhood ; but none of
these good points would have kept Magdalen
in Scarsfield if she had not found that, in a
sense, she was necessary in Miss Esher's
house. The reins of government were falling
from the old lady's hands, the children were
running wild, the servants were unruly.
Before long, Magdalen was ruling, as she had

learnt by years of obedience and service how
to rule : it was felt throughout the household
that she must never be allowed to go away.
She had a firm hand, but she won hearts
as well. The children, especially, adored her ;
and, in seeing them about her, Magdalen
became aware that they filled up a void in
her heart of which she had scarcely been conscious
before. All the sweet motherliness of
her nature expended itself on them. In a few
weeks she sighed at the thought of ever leaving
them ; in the course of months she gave
up that thought altogether. It seemed to her
as if, from her lonely womanhood, she had
become a daughter and a mother all at once.
Tender cares for old Miss Esher and for the
children filled up nearly all her time.

One summer morning she went into Miss
Esher's room at an early hour, as was her
custom, and drew aside the window curtains,
letting the sunbeams strike gently upon the
sleeping face. Miss Esher liked to be awakened
in this way. But on that summer morning

there was no awakening for her. The
kind old face was grey and rigid in the
morning' lio-ht ; the active hands were stiff
and cold. She had passed away gently in
sleep ; and Magdalen, in the midst of her
grief, awoke to the consciousness that fresh
changes awaited her. For a moment she
murmured at the prospect. " Am I to have
no rest — no tranquillity ? " she said to herself,
a little bitterly, as she sat alone that evening,
with her hands tightly clasped upon her
lap. Then her heart smote her. She di^ew
a devotional book towards her and tried to
read. The pages opened at a j)l^ce where
Miss Esher had marked a few lines. " Here
we have no continuing city." . . . Ah, that
was the word of comfort that Magdalen
wanted. She read and prayed, like the
sweet saint that she was, and felt that she
was prepared for all that Providence might
send.

Then came the funeral, and then the reading
of the will.

Miss Esher's will had been drawn up a
few months after her return from Rivers
She left ten thousand pounds to
each of the children, to be paid on their
majority. To her natural heir, Philip Esher,
she left the sum of one shilling. There
were a few trifling bequests to friends and
servants ; but the rest of her property, the
Priory itself, and an income of six thousand
a-year, were bequeathed to Magdalen Lingered.

And in case Magdalen Lingered should try
to hand over this property to anybody else
(the Esher were evidently meant), it was
especially provided that if she did not accept
it, the whole, including the children's legacies,
should go to various wealthy charities in
London.

By this ingenious device. Miss Esher
secured the fulfilment of her wishes. If
she had not made that proviso about the
children's legacies, it was quite possible that
Magdalen would have handed over the property
to the London charities. Certainly, if

it had been practicable, she would have
transferred it all to Philip Esher's children.
But Miss Esher had left her no loophole of
escape : she ^Yas obliged to take the house and
the money, although, as she said, she could
not help feeling that neither rightfully belonged
to her.

In a private letter addressed to Magdalen,
found in an old bureau drawer, Miss Esher
begged her, however, to do all that she could
for little Dorothy and Margaret Esher. ''I do
not want them to be rich," she said ; '' but
I want them to have the training that their
father lacked. For my sake, Madge, keep
them with you as long as you can."

Magdalen did not need to be asked. The
dearest wish of her heart was to keep the
children with her. She went to Mr. St. Aidan
and made a formal proposition, which she
desired that he would lay before Captain Esher.
She offered to educate the children, and
provide for them until they were twenty-one,
if only they might be left with her. " My

dear Magdalen," said Mr. St. Aidan (lie
treated her as a relation of his own now-a-days),
^' it will never do. You had better let the
children go to school."

They would be miserable," said Magdalen.

Think what you are undertaking, my
dear. You will expose yourself to misunderstanding."


'' Of what kind ? " she asked.

'forgive me if I say it openly : people will
think that you wish to re-open friendly relations
with their father. He may think so
himself."

Magdalen's eye flashed, but she paused, and
then answered quietly,

'' They are now nearly seven years old, and
he has seen them once, I believe, since they
were babies. To any one who knows the
facts "

But people do not know the facts, my
dear. However, I will write to Philip if you
have made up your mind. You must expect
some unfriendly comments."

"I do not mind comments," said Magdalen.
But she did mind a letter from Philip Esher
which came to her shortly afterwards. He
thanked her for her kindness to his poor
children (this poor children ! " echoed Magdalen,
in amaze, as she read the letter) ; he
expressed himself as only too grateful for the
very timely help she offered, now that he had
lost all chance of the wealth which had once
been promised him (there was a sting in that
sentence for Magdalen), and he trusted that
he was not presuming too much if he dared to
hope that her affection for his children might
some day — lead to forgiveness for himself.

'soh, Daisy, Dolly!" cried Magdalen,
throwing the letter from her, and rising to
her feet with tightly-clasped hands and stormy
brow, "if I did not love you so much, my
children, I would send you away from me
tomorrow ! So this is what Philip Esher
thinks ! He will have to learn his mistake."

She did not answer the letter, but she
kept the children with her at the Priory.

Gradually forming new ties, acquiring new
interests, and doing work of lier own devising
in her own way, lie soon found her life so full
that she had no time for idle dreaming or
regret. Even the memory of Philip Esher
seemed to her like a vision of the past.

LENORE.

Miss Lingered and the St. Aidanss were well
known, of course, in the 'best society" that
Scarsfield could furnish. In fact, they were
County " people. But there were other
circles in Scarsfield which were not " County'*
and of which Miss Lingered and the St. Aidanss
knew next to nothing. The Rector was well
acquainted with all the members of his flock,
tooth rich and poor, but his wife visited few persons,
being an invalid; and Miss Lingered of
the Priory, as people generally called her, was
understood to have given up society. She had
lived in Scarsfield now for three years or
more ; she was a woman of twenty-five, and
looked older : and she was a woman who,

most emphatically, went her own way. The



poor and the sick knew her well, but in the
houses of her so-called equals she was rarely
to be found. And it would have seemed to her
friends the most unlikely thing in the world
that she should ever be brought into close and
intimate contact with the tradesfolk of the
town, even with the richer manufacturers of
soaps and drugs, who made their living on the
banks of the river Scar. The St. Aidanss were
fastidious and aristocratic in their tastes ;
Magdalen had delicate instincts which caused
her to shrink from unrefined or commonplace
society. x4nd yet there were persons in Scars-field,
not at all of the highest classes, whom
Miss Lingered was destined one day to know
exceedingly well.

The High Street of Scarsfield was irregularly
built, and ran a devious course through the
very centre of the town, widening in the
market - place, losing itself in a maze of
small streets at one end, and melting into a
country-road at the other. The houses at the
country-road end, as it may be called, were

cletaclied or semi-detached, and differed greatly
from each other in character. For instance,
the great, solid-looking mansion of grey stone,
which belonged to Richard Brendon, the rich
soap-boiler, stood next to a modest little house
of red brick, tenanted by an old widowed lady,
of very limited means, and her grand-children.
The inmates of the two houses were old
acquaintances, but their circumstances, and
perhaps their dispositions, were as different as
the houses in which they lived.

It was nearly six o'clock on a bright August
evening: when Lenore Chaloner sat in the
window-seat of her grandmother's little diningroom,
and glanced down the street from time
to time with an air of quiet expectation. The
window was separated by a very narrow strip
of garden from the road, and she could see the
passers-by for some distance. Her brother
would be home to tea at six o'clock, but I am
afraid I must record the fact that Lenore was
not watching for his appearance. She had
other ends in view.

Lenore Chaloner was not generally spoken
of as a beautiful girl in Scarsfield, where popular
taste inclined to plenty of size and colour.
In some people's opinion a great charm lay
in her hazel eyes, her fair and delicately
moulded features, the wave of her nut-brown
hair. She was slender, and rather under the
middle height, but erect as a dart, and she
had remarkably pretty hands and feet. Her
sister Kate, a plump, blue-eyed girl of twelve,
lounged idly beside her, also gazing out into
the street.

There 's Bobby," said Kate, as the garden-gate
was heard to click.

Lenore looked up, a dainty pair of eyeglasses
perched upon her nose. She scarcely
glanced at her seventeen-year-old brother,
then opening the front-door. Her eyes
wandered uneasily down the road. There
was some one else to see : when would he
come ?

there's Mr. Max," said Bobby, from
behind her chair. " He 's a-going; home to his

dinner. Oh, my ! hasn't he been working us
like blacks to-day ! "

Are you very busy, then ? "

We 're always busy," rejoined Bob >}',
grandly. " It isn't play in our office, let me
assure you. Old Dick" — this was his polite
name for Mr. Brendon, the head of the firm —
has been dictating letters to half-a-dozen of
us, more or less, all at once ; and little Jimmy
Raffles lost one in going to the post, and there 's
been an awful shindy. There 's the governor
and Mr. Cecil ! Oh, what a beautiful bow ! "

One of the figures passing the window was
that of a stout, tall man, apparently about
fifty-five : he had a reddish face, grizzled hair
and whiskers, and keen dark eyes. He was
accompanied by his son, a young man who
looked eagerly towards the window where
Lenore was sitting, and raised his hat with an
elaborate flourish. The elder man's eyes
followed those of his son. Mr. Brendon
nodded, in a friendly but unceremonious way.
Lenore flushed and smiled, but drew back into

the shadow of the curtains, so that she might
not be seen as she watched the two men turn
in at the gates of the large grey house. The
second son, Max, had gone on before.

Lenore turned with a happy light in her
eyes, to the tea-table. She had seen all she
cared for : she had given the signal tacitly
agreed upon by herself and Cecil Brendon.
It was understood between them that if she
appeared at the window when Cecil was
walking home with his father or brother, Cecil
mio^ht be sure of finisher diseno'ag-ed later
in the evening. The understanding had never
l)een put into words, but it existed nevertheless.


Lenore's dead father had been one of Mr.
Brendon's earliest friends. It seemed natural
to both families that the children should befriends
also. Only Mrs. Brendon had of late
begun to remark uneasily that the visits of
her sons to the little red house were much
more frequent than they need be.

Before tea was over, a visitor was announced ;

but to Lenore's disappointment it was the
younger brother, Max, not Cecil. He had
a book in his hand.

''I ought not to come in now," he said,
"but I thought I wouhi leave this book for
Lenore. I heard that she wanted to read it."

He smiled as he spoke, and with the smile
the whole character of his face seemed to
change. Seen in repose it was inexpressive
as a mask ; at times it could be stern, and
even obstinate ; but when he lifted his somewhat
heavy eyelids, and when his brown eyes
lighted up, the face was as pleasant as it was
powerful. One saw a big nose, a well-shaped
mouth, shaded by a thick, dark moustache,
square jaws, and a broad, overhanging forehead,
with straight eyebrows, and a mass of
unruly dark hair. The features were rugged
rather than handsome ; but the fire in those
dark eyes, the determination expressed in
every line, made his face one to be remembered.


Cecil wanted me to read it," said Lenore,

colouring. " He said that he would bring mea
copy from the library."

He had to send it back. You can have
this copy."

Oh, thank you, Max. But you will want
it."

No. I never read poetry. Keep it, if you
like. I must go. We are particularly busy
to-day."

How is that ? " asked Mrs. Chaloner, a
mild, grey-haired, old lady, who took a great
interest in the doings of the Brendon firm.
Lenore was turning over the leaves of her
little green volume of poetry, and did not
seem to attend to the reply. Yet Max
glanced at her as if he wished her to hear.

One of the clerks — a fellow called Lloyd
has broken his leg, and won't be able to
work for some time. Cecil and I must do his
work for him ; unless we put it all on Bob's
shoulders," he said, striking the lad in a
friendly manner on the arm. " It 's an unfortunate
thing for us."

And for the clerk too, I suppose," said
Mrs. Chaloner.

Lloyd ? Well, I don't know. He is a
good Churchman, you see, so Miss Lingered of
the Priory has taken him up."

Max spoke with the faintest possible indication
of a sneer.

Miss Lingered seems to be very charitable."


I suppose so. I don't know her."

And don't want to know her ? " said
Lenore, shutting up her book with a
smile.

Well — perhaps not," Max answered,
slightly shrugging his broad shoulders. " I
don't like women who make themselves remarkable.
They should be pretty and amiable
and quiet — that's my ideal of a nice
woman." He looked at Lenore as if she fulfilled
his ideal completely.

She is very good" said Lenore, accenting
the word as if beings good were something
objectionable. " Mrs. Harte, the curate's wife,

you know, says that she is kind, but rather
unapproachable. "

"Miss Lingered's a stuck-up old skinflint,
and as mad as a hatter," interposed Bobby,
decidedly. " Mr. Cecil says so."

You can ask him for his opinion : I see
him coming in at the gate," said Max, rising
from his chair. " Good-bye."

Must you go ? " asked Lenore, with polite
regret.

We don't hunt in couples. When my
senior comes, I retire," he answered, gravely.

She went to the door ^^'ith him — just intime
to admit Cecil Brendon as Max went out.
You here ? " said the elder brother, not too
pleasantly, while Max stood for a moment on
the door-step lighting his cigar.

"Looked in," replied Max, in his most
indifferent tone. Then he sauntered away
with rather a slouching gait — his hands in his
pockets, his cigar in his mouth— and Lenore
turned her attention to Cecil.

Cecil Brendon was said to be the handsomest

man in Scarsfield. He was tall,
slightly built, and pale ; and this pallor and
slightness of build gave him a look of fragility
which romantic ladies termed " interesting."
He was dark, as were all the
Brendons : his features were regular, his
moustache and pointed beard cried and
silky ; but the chief attraction of his appearance
lay in his remarkably beautiful eyes.
They were large, long-lashed, and soft, with a
trick of wistfulness in their expression, such
as one sees sometimes in the brown eyes of a
great Newfoundland dog. Lenore was not the
only girl who had come under the influence of
those pathetic eyes.

She opened the door of the little drawing-room
at the back of the house. Cecil did not
like dining-rooms — there were a great many
things that Cecil did not like. He took her
hand in his with a caressing gesture, and held
it fast as they went in. No definite words
had yet been spoken, and yet Lenore, simple
and confiding as a child, believed that Cecil

K

loved her. Certainly lie never lost an opportunity
of making her think so.

'' You knew that I would come to-night ? "
he said, softly.

I did not know. . I thought that
you might bring those poems ; but Max has
brought them now."

'' He has a wonderful memory for trifles,"
said Cecil, in almost a complaining tone.
I mentioned in his hearing that I was
obliged to send the book back to the library,
and that you wanted it — I meant to send you
a copy myself, Lenore, but he has anticipated
me. But no doubt you will like it better
from him than from me."

Oh, no, no ! " said Lenore, half shyly, half
eagerly.

Cecil sat down in an easy chair and shaded
his eyes with his long delicate fingers. " It is
this wretched business that makes me forget
everything ! " he groaned. " I can think of
nothing else : it takes the heart out of my
life."

You like your work no better '? "
No better ! I hate it : I loathe it. I was
not destined to be a mere man of business —
a money-grubber. If only I could have got to
Sandhurst ! "

Cecil's career had been hitherto not very
brilliant. After leaving school, he spent sometime
at a tutor's, meaning to enter one of the
military colleges, but he had qualified for
neither, and had been obliged to relinquish
this prospect. A severe illness had then prostrated
him for some months, and one or two
further attempts to enter a profession had
failed, chiefly on account of his own indolence
and extravagance. He was now six-and-twenty,
and had done nothing in the world.
His own view of the matter, in which he was
supported by his mother, was that he need
never do anything, that his father ought to
give him an ample allowance, and let him live
the life of an idle man. With his constitutional
delicacy of throat and chest, the proper
thing would be to let him spend his winters in

Algiers or Egypt, his springs at Cannes or
Biarritz, his summers in Paris, London, or
Berlin, and his autumns in Norway and Scotland.
In this way he considered that he
could support life with comfort. But Mr.
Brendon would not hear of any such thing.
He maintained that Cecil was much stronger
than he looked, and could do a very good
day's work when he chose. Exasperated by
Cecil's repeated failures, he had at length
given his son the alternative of taking a light
post in the Scarsfield office, or of ceasing to
receive any allowance at all, and quitting his
father's house at once and for ever. Cecil
sulkily submitted to work rather than find
himself penniless, and was therefore installed
in his father's office. This arrangement fell
hardly upon Max, who had always taken a foremost
place under his father, but now found
himself nominally second, with all his old
work to do, and innumerable blunders of
Cecil's to correct. Nobody heard Max
complain, but it was the opinion of his

friends that his position was well-nigh unendurable.
Cecil had now been in Scarsfield
for ten or twelve months, hating his occupation,
constantly vexing his father's righteous
soul, and thinking himself the victim of an
unkind fate. And he turned to Lenore —
amongst others — for comfort and condolence.

Perhaps you would not have liked Sandhurst
or Woolwich ? " she suggested, rather
timidly.

I should have been with men of my own
calibre — my own standing — and that in itself
would be inspiriting," he returned. " I know
that I am not clever ; but I should have been
of some use in active service — food for powder,
at any rate — whereas I am of no use to anybody
here."

Has anything gone wrong to-day '? "

'' Everything is wrong. Nothing I can door
say pleases my father. Of "course, it is
often my own fault. I think I '11 enlist."

Oh, Cecil, Cecil ! "

Dear little woman, you would be sorry at

any rate, if I went away, would you not ? "
said Cecil, holding out his hand, and turning
the melancholy light of his soft eyes upon her.
She laid her fingers timidly upon his for a
moment, and then drew them away.

If you worked hard, Cecil," she said,
hesitatingly, " and tried to please your father
in every way, would he not then — by and bye
allow you to go abroad and live your own
life ? "

Could any one work harder than I do 1 "
cried Cecil, irritably. '' I 'm sure I lead the
life of a galley-slave."

Lenore's manner was always gentle, and her
heart was as soft as Cecil's eyes, but she was
(as Cecil sometimes felt) uncomfortably clear-sighted
and inconveniently direct. "Do you
think you work as hard as Max ? " she asked,
with a naive earnestness which annoyed Cecil
not a little.

Oh— Max ! " he said, slightingly. " Max !
He 's never happy unless he 's at his treadmill"


There was a little silence, which he broke
at last by a heavy sigh. " I 'm a worthless
fellow," he said, his voice sinking into a
dejected key. " I 'm not to be compared with
poor old Max. But my father would never
believe in me, say or do what I might.
There's always one unlucky member of a
family : one scape-goat ; one black sheep. I m
the scape-goat : I 'm the black sheep. I wish
to heaven that I had never been born."

Lenore was almost sobbing. '' Oh, Cecil,
don't say these things : you make me so miserable,"
she faltered.

*' But if they are true ? " said Cecil, in a half
humorous, half tragic tone. Then he rose,
walked over to her side, and began smoothing
her pretty brown waves of hair. " I should
not like to leave you behind if I went away,"
he murmured; *you would have to come with
me, would you not, Lenore ? "

She turned a wonderfully bright face towards
him, and smiled through her tears. He smiled
at her in reply, but he said no more. It was

on such fragmentary fare that her love had
learned to live.

Can you come out with me for a walk ? "
he asked. " I want an excuse for not going to
the Eoslyns'. Will you come ? "

She bit her lip.

"I am so sorry, Cecil, I can't come this
evening. Grannie is going out, and I said
I would keep house."

But that is not necessary ? There are
others in the house. Let me tell Mrs.
Chaloner "

Grannie will not like it ; and I promised,"
said the girl, steadily. " You must not tempt
me, Cecil."

'* Oh, very well." He picked up his hat
and made a step towards the door. " Then
I must look in at Eoslyn's. Miss Eoslyn
challenged me to a game at billiards : it 's
a great bore, but I think that I must

go."

The sensitive change in her face was not

lost upon him.

Is ]\iiss Eoslyii at home ? " she asked,
soberly.

"Yes, Kuby's at home," said he, with a
short laugh. " As blooming as ever. What a
handsome girl she is ! . . . Well " — after a
pause — "will you come out sith me, Lenore?"

Thank you, Cecil. I am sorry, but I must
not go."

No ! I am sorry. Then you throw me
back on the Eoslyns ? Well, good-bye."

He held her hand a trifle longer than usual,
perhaps because something in her clear eyes
told him that she was not well pleased. The
Eoslyns did not bear a good reputation in
Scarsfield, and Mr. Brendon had almost forbidden
his son to frequent their house. Of
this Lenore was aware, but shrank from openly
remonstrating. Cecil felt quite a thrill of
new interest in the thought that she might be
just a trifle — jealous of Ruby Eoslyn.
Poor little girl ! " he said to himself, as he
betook himself slowly to the Eoslyn's pretentious
house •; " poor little Lenore ! she

would marry me tomorrow if I chose to ask
her."

Meanwhile Lenore was saying to herself how
much there was good and noble in Cecil
Brendon, and how great a work it would be to
rouse him from sloth and self-abasement and
lead him to a higher life.

So women dream of men; and so do men
think of the women who dream of them.

"a house divided against itself."

Me. and Mrs. Brendon had gone out to
dinner. Their three daughters were sitting
in the library, with the governess, Miss
Quittenden, when Cecil entered the house
about half-past nine. He had not found his
companions to his taste that evening, and
therefore returned home early. Finding no
one in the drawing-room, he wandered listlessly
into the library, and settled himself in
the easiest chair.

bliss Quittenden was a woman of fifty, of
the grim and forbidding type. Mrs. Brendon
abhorred pretty governesses. Gertrude Bren-don
was a nondescript, colourless sort of
person, two years Cecil's senior. Between

Max, who was five-and-twenty, and Ursula,



the next in the family, came a gap of nine
years ; and Bessie was only twelve years old.
Ursula was the handsomest and the most high-spirited
of the three girls, and she was
devoted heart and soul to her brother Max.

Adhere is Max ? " she asked, looking up
from her books as Cecil came in.

Don't know. Am I my brother's keeper?"
muttered Cecil, under his breath.

That 's what Cain said ! " exclaimed
Bessie, an inconvenient child with a shrill
voice. '' Isn't it. Miss Quittenden ? Now,
isn't it what Cain said ? "

Speak in a lower tone, if you please,
Bessie."

But isn't it what Cain said ? And ought
Cecil to say what Cain said, Gertrude ? Isn't
it wicked ? ''

"Do hold your tongue, child," said Cecil,
with a worried look. "Where's the book
I was reading to-day ? One of Rhoda
Broughton's novels."

"I sent it back to the library," said

Gertrude, primly. The children had got hold
of it, and I did not consider it a proper book
for them to read. Besides, I wanted ' Roscoe's
Chemistry' for myself"

Gertrude dabbled in science in a neat, ladylike,
ineffective way.

No one has the slightest consideration for
my wishes in this house, it seems to me," said
Cecil moodily. '' Ask me next time whether
I have finished with a book, if you please,
before you send it away."

*' You had it three weeks," remarked
Ursula. "Max said you must have finished
with it."

"Max needn't have interfered."

Max never interferes," began Ursula indignantly
; but she was not allowed to proceed.

Good heavens ! can't this wrangling be
stopped ? " said Cecil, with an angry look
directed towards ]\Iiss Quittenden. " Isn't it
time for these children to go to bed ? "

Certainly," said Miss Quittenden. '' Goodnight,
Ursula. Good night, Bessie. If you

are so quarrelsome, you had better go at
once."

Ursula rose and shut her book with a bang.
Bessie dissolved into tears. And at this
moment the door opened to admit Max.

What 's all this about ? " he said, raising
his eyebrows at the sight of Bessie's distress.

Ursula, looking like a handsome boy with
her short, curly hair and defiant face, answered
curtly,

Oh, we are to go to bed half-an-hour
earlier than usual, to please Cecil."

Cecil began an irritated rejoinder, but Max's
calm tones drowned it, much to the advantage
of all parties.

I have not seen the girls all day. Miss
Quittenden. Let them stay a little while, will
you not ? "

Miss Quittenden demurred at first, but
finally yielded the point. Silence was
restored : Bessie left off* crying and clung
fondly to Max, who suffered rather than
returned her caresses ; Cecil leaned back in

his chair, commons of his own graciousness ;
Ursula disappeared without another word.
In a few moments Max shook off Bessie's
grasp, and went in search of Ins missing
sister.

He met her crossing the hall, and contrived
to look as though he had found her quite hy
accident.

Where are yon going ? " he asked.

"To bed."

I won't leg yon off another time."

"Yon dear boy! Max, don't you think
that as a femilv. vre have a demon of a
temper ? "

A devil of a temper," said Max, soberly.

And which of ns is the worst ? "

On the whole, I think I am."

Yon 're nothing to boast o^" said Ursula,
frankly. "Cecil is milk and water to yon
when yon do lose your temper ; but then you
lose it so seldom ! Oh, I wish C^dl were not
my brother, and then I should be free to hate
hin cordially ! " ,

"Don't talk in that way, Ursa. It isn't
the proper thing for a girl, you know."

"You are so particular about what girls
should do and should not do ! " said Ursula,
pouting, but putting her arm fondly round his
neck. "You are never satisfied, and you
never will be ! Well, to please you, I won't
go to bed yet."

Don't stay up on my account," said Max,
quaintly; and then the brother and sister
laughed as they retraced their steps to the
library.

Mr. and Mrs. Brendon arrived soon afterwards,
and came to the room where the others
were sitting. Mr. Brendon found a letter
waiting for him, and read it while his wife
slowly drew off her gloves and answered
Gertrude's questions about the dinner-party.
Mrs. Brendon had been a beauty, and was
still a handsome woman, with fine eyes and
hair, but a haughty, dissatisfied expression of
countenance. She came of a good Welsh
family, and was disposed to look down upon

all tidings savouring of commerce. Had Mr.
Brendon been of a yielding instead of a very
obstinate disposition, he would have had to
leave Scarsfield long ago, for his wife detested
the town. But he had a fixed determination
to be master in his own house and in his
own family, and she had almost given up
protesting.

"Why did you not come in during the
evening, Cecil ? " she began, discontentedly.
You might have done that, even if you
could not dine."

There was no need for me to go. I don't
care for the During."

'^ They were disappointed at seeing neither
of you."

"Max might have gone," said Cecil.
Why didn't you ? " turning to his brother.

"Never knew I was asked."

Did I not tell you ? " said his mother,
carelessly. "I knew you would not care to
go. I don't suppose they were very anxious
for your society."

The remark was so disparaging in tone that
it created a slight sensation. Gertrude looked
up deprecatingly, and Ursula flushed scarlet
with anger. Max himself thrust his hands
a little deeper into his pockets and smiled
serenely. It was only Ursula who suspected
that this peculiarly tranquil, half-satirical
smile usually covered annoyance or disappointment.


Max miorht like to hear of his own invitations,"
she said, being always ready to fight
his battles with more zeal than discretion.

You can go to bed, Ursula," said her
mother, coldly. " I don't want your comments
on my proceedings. Your manners
and those of your brother Max are about on
a par."

Ursula took her departure with burning
cheeks. She tried to manifest her sympathy
by an extra hug of affection when she bade
Max good-night, but as he was not fond of
such demonstrations, she only made him look
a trifle more bored than usual.

Mr. Brendon, who had finished his letters,
now entered the room, took up a position on
the hearth rug, and spoke to Max. " What
are you going to do tomorrow ? "

My work, as usual, I suppose."
- " Who is going to Hartpool, then ? "

You said Jackson had better go."

Mr. Brendon nodded.

Then you two will be at the office all day.
One of you can do something for me after
business. You know all about Lloyd's circumstances."


"Yes," said Max. Cecil shrugged his
shoulders and looked down. Mr. Brendon
took out a pocket-book, and his eyes gleamed
a little beneath his grizzled eyebrows.

You know Lloyd, I suppose, Cecil ? "

Not in the least. Am I expected to know
him ? "

Certainly, if you pretend to any share in
my business affairs, sir. A master ought to
be well acquainted with all his employed,
with their capabilities, positions, and habits.

Such knowledge is not thought necessary by
every master, but I have always taken an
interest in my men, and accordingly have
been well served. As your grandfather used
to say — remembering the time when he swept
out Hare k Empson's office — a little kindness
from the principal of a firm goes further
than the best wages."

Cecil did not appreciate a reminder of
the fact that his grandfather had been an
errand-boy, and therefore made no response.
Mr. Brendon addressed himself to his younger
son.

What do you know about Lloyd ? "

'' One of our fellows at the office ; a sharp
lad, at twenty shillings a- week ; broke his leg
and stove in two ribs by a fall, as the men
were unloading slate at the wharf last Friday."

Mr. Brendon nodded, well pleased. " Useful
lad, I think ? "

Yes ; deserves a better situation. Knows
French pretty well, and is good at bookkeeping.
Helps to support his mother — a

widow with three small children," said Max,
with a twinkle of amusement in his eyes at
his own statistical accuracy.

"You see what it is to be a thorough
business man," said Mr. Brendon, looking at
Cecil with reprehension. "Max, you see,
knows all about this young fellow, and could
give you an equally clear account of all the
men we employ. Now you — you take no
more interest in them than — than Bessie
would. Max ! "

"Yes, sir."

Call at the Eectory tomorrow afternoon,
to give Mrs. St. Aidan the information she
requires."

Information ! At the Rectory ! "

The Rectory."

Never spoke to Mrs. St. Aidan in my life,"
said Max, with an air of reluctance.

Tut ! it 's merely a matter of business.
Besides, I know her. We dined there last
Christmas. It seems she drove down to the
office when we were all out, and left word

with Jackson what she wanted. Lloyd's
mother had been to her cr}T.ng and complaining
as usual, and she wishes to know
whether we mean to take the lad on again, or
to help him at all. She wrote to me about it.
I '11 give you the note before you go, though
it is hardly necessary, as I have told you
about it."

'' What shall I say ? " asked Max.

Say," answered his father, checking off the
points on his fingers, " say that we will give
him work, with an increase of wages, when he
is better — allow him for the present half-wages
— and pay the doctor's bill."

I think you are too liberal," said Mrs.
Brendon. " If the St. Aidanss have taken
him up, there is no fear about his doing well."

Their kindness hardly releases us from
our duty," observed Max.

"Miss Lingered visits the Lloyds, I hear,"
Cecil interposed, " and she is reputed to keep
hei proteges in the very lap of luxury."

I hope you do not mean to emulate Miss

Lingered in her indiscriminate charity," said
]airs. Brendon disagreeably.

She holds such extreme views," remarked
Gertrude.

"The ^dctim of a misguided enthusiasm, I
call her," continued the mother. " A flighty,
foolish, young woman."

Is she young ? " asked Cecil.

Seven or eight and twenty, if not more.
She looks thirty, — don't you think so, Miss
Quittenden?"

'' I should conclude so from her appearance.
A most unhealthy-looking person."

Is she not a relation of the St. Aidanss ? "
asked Gertrude.

No, only a friend. She was once engaged
to Mrs. St. Aidan's nephew, but the engagement
was broken off. I don't wonder at it, I

am sure."

*' 1 11 go instead of you, if you like," said
Cecil to Max in a low voice. His curiosity
was aroused.

'*A much better arrangement," said Mrs.

Brendon. " Cecil had far better go ; I would
rather Mrs. St. Aidan had an interview with a
presentable member of the family."

It 's a mercy Ursula is not here," thought
Max to himself with his slight, careless smile ;
but this time Mr. Brendon roused himself to
take up the cudgels in his younger son's behalf.

You don't know what you are sang,
Cecilia. Max knows far more about business
than Cecil. I like my affairs to be managed
by a fellow who understands what he is about,
which is more than can be said for Cecil."

** 1 'm willing enough to leave it to Max,
sir. I would wash my hands of the whole
concern very gladly."

I daresay you would. You think to play
the fine gentleman here as you did in London,
and despise honest work for daily bread,
which you have neither the industry nor the
brains to earn for yourself."

Cecil has no need to earn it for himself,"
Mrs. Brendon put in, sharply. '' I am very
sorry indeed to see him spending the best days

of his life in drudgery. He has more refined
tastes than some members of the family, and
ought to be able to indulge them."

Yes, on ray money ! " ejaculated Mr.
Brendon.

Some of it will be his one day, I presume,"
said his wife, with marvellous coolness.

'* Not unless he behaves himself. He has
done nothing in the world hitherto but idle
away his time, spend my money, and disgrace
my name. He must put his shoulder to the
wheel now if he wants to stay in this house.
Refined tastes, indeed ! Confound his tastes !
All that his refined tastes have taught him is
to handle business like a baby, and speak of
it like a fool ! "

Mr. Brendon had been walking to the door
during the utterance of this speech; he now
opened it and left the room, where for some
minutes perfect silence prevailed. Cecil had
flushed deeply, then turned rather pale; but
neither spoke nor moved. His mother ]3ut out
her hand and took his: an unusual demonstration

of affection from Mrs. Brendon. At last
G-ertrucle made some trivial remark about the
lateness of the hour, and her voice roused the
other members of the family to action. Cecil
left them without a word to anybody ; they
heard him bang the door of his own room
angrily. Mrs. Brendon and Gertrude said
good-night and separated. Max stayed alone
for a few minutes to meditate before he turned
out the gas. " Certainly we are an ill-tempered
family, as Ursula says," he thought
to himself; " and a selfish one to boot, as
far as I am concerned. Else I should have
stood up for Cecil at the risk of a row with
my father — which I hate. But Cecil is such
a confounded ass ! " And with a slightly
bitter expression of countenance. Max put
out the lights and went to bed.

It was a typical evening. There was little
peace or harmony in the Brendon family, and
the constant bickering was almost more than
Max knew how to bear. He loved tranquillity
dearly, but he seldom got it in his own home.

He sometimes thought that his mother positively
disliked him ; her strictures upon his
manners and appearance were so severe that
they seemed to proceed from deeper sources
than mere motherly anxiety. The fact was
that she resented Cecil's want of success in
life, and visited her disappointment upon
Max. Cecil had always been her favourite
son, and it was inexplicable to her that he
should turn out such a failure in her husband's
eyes. Max had never counted for much in
her scheme of life. When he was a child he
had been plain, sickly, and apparently dull ;
she had never got over her early distaste for
his rough manner and unprepossessing appearance.
She was not often openly uncivil or
unkind to him ; but she was always cold and
careless, even scornful, when Max's indifference
irritated her temper.

To Cecil and Bessie, who were much alike
in disposition, and who, therefore, constantly
quarrelled when they were together, she was
remarkably indulgent. Gertrude was a useful

ally, whom she treated as a friend ; but
Ursula puzzled her. The girl was too handsome,
too clever, too satirical, to be simply set
aside and snubbed; she did not plod like
Gertrude, she did not yearn for affection like
Bessie and Cecil, she did not exhibit Max's
capacity for endurance. Mrs. Brendon tried in
vain to control her — firm as was her will, it
could be resisted, with at least partial success,
by Ursula's resolute vivacity. Miss Quittenden
had been engaged chiefly on account of her
reputation as a queller of unruly girls ; but
even her rigid discipline had hitherto proved
ineffectual. Yet Ursula could be led by a
word from Max or from her father, both
of whom she loved devotedly. She and
Max were much together, feeling themselves
somewhat isolated in the midst of this very
divided family.

Such was the Brendon household ; and
perhaps it may be inferred that it was not the
best possible school for rising manhood and
womanhood.

THE FIRST MEETING.

The dull autumnal day was passing into an
evening of steady rain. The wind was chill,
and, although the hand of the clock pointed
only to the hour of six, daylight was already
fading. Two ladies, sitting over a protracted
afternoon tea in the Rectory drawing-room,
found the bright blaze of a fire very
pleasant, and had lingered beside it for upwards
of an hour. The room in which they
sat was neither large nor richly furnished, butin
all its appointments it gave evidence of the
owner's care and taste. Everything in it was
fresh and delicate in colour, graceful in form.
Plants, pictures, statuettes, rare china, wonderful
Venetian glass, were so arranged as to

give the brightest possible effects of colour,



and the result, without being garish, vas
cheerful in the extreme.

The lady who reclined in a chaise longue
before the brightly-burning wood fire was Mrs.
St. Aidan, the Eector's wife. She had been
an invalid for many years, but her face bore
few traces of ill-health. Her quick dark eyes
were keen and bright beneath the delicate
arched eyebrows ; her hair, still brown and
soft, would not lie straight beneath her
coquettish cap of dainty lace and satin ; her
mouth was smiling and sympathetic, her complexion
almost undimmed in freshness. It was
easy to see that she had never made a trouble
of her delicate health.

Her companion was in every way a contrast
to her. Her dress was of rich material, but
made with scrupulous plainness. Her tall
figure, exquisitely proportioned, was perhaps
a little too slender, but graceful in all its
movements. The fault of her face was its
want of colour; the clear, transparent paleness
of her complexion, perfect in itself, was

more beautiful when heightened by an
occasional flush of faint rose-colour. A
noble, thoughtful air, something fine and
spiritual about the calm features, a bright,
benignant expression in the large brown
eyes, a tranquil look, given perhaps by
the dark level eyebrows and smooth
white forehead shaded by magnificently
thick dark hair — these were traits so little
appreciated by the many that Magdalen
Lingered in her six and twentieth year was
often described as positively plain. Some
people, too, said that her manners were repelling
and severe ; but then they did not know
how sweet could be her smile upon those
she loved.

For some time the two women had been
talking over trivial e very-day affairs, and it
was after an interval of silence that Magdalen
laid down her cup and asked . whether anything
had been heard about James Lloyd from
Mr. Brendon, his employer.

No ; I am hourly expecting a note or a

visit from him. I heard something about the
Brendons themselves to-day, Madge, which is
quite as interesting. That handsome son of
Mr. Brendon's gives his family great anxiety.
Father and son, I am told, are constantly
quarrelling, and people say the young man
will soon leave the place in disgust."

Indeed ! I fear that piece of information
sounds to me like a bit of the Scarsfield gossip
that you — despise."

There 's a great want of human interest
in other people perceptible in you, Madge,"
said Mrs. St. Aidan, with mock severity,
contradicted by the lurking smile about her
mouth ; " a want of that sympathetic care for
others which softens the hard work of the
world so much."

Miss lingered laughed ; • a pleasant, silvery
laugh, which came evidently from the heart.
That Mrs. St. Aidan was not in earnest she
knew well enough. The Eector's wife was
simply quoting words that had fallen from
Magdalen's lips not long before.

'' A want of interest in other people's business,
in fact," she added.

Well, yes. I must say I like to have
some idea about the state of my neighbours*
hearts and lives. If one comes into contact
with them, such knowledge gives a certain
amount of power."

Do you think T despise such knowledge,
then ? " said Miss Lingered, speaking in a
deeper, softer key. " My interest in their
minds and souls is surely as deep as yours,
Aunt Emilia. In that lies the chief joy of
my life."

She had caught the habit of saying '' Aunt
Emilia" from Mrs. St. Aidan's nieces, but
sometimes she dropped the prefixed title
altogether.

Oh," said Mrs. St. Aidan, with a slight
deprecatory wave of her hands outward, " I
never pretended to high and mystical motives
like yours. I care to study common human
life ; I concern myself with the dais life of
men and women ; you, with their devotional,

M

transcendental side. And I don't think my
intermeddling hurts anybody."

While mine may. That is true," answered
Miss Lingered, rather sadly. " But take comfort
to yourself," she went on to say, with anarch
smile ; " your work must be good, for it
concerns the welfare of people's bodies, if not
of their souls. "

I am a gossiping old woman," said Mrs.
St. Aidan, "with a finger in everybody's pie."

A beneficent finger," said Magdalen. " I
don't know what half Scarsfield would do
without you. What did you say to Mr. Bren-don
yesterday ? "

Asked him whether he would keep
James Lloyd's place open for him until he
recovered."

I wonder whether he will. He is said to
be a just man, but hard."

I should rather like to know him. He
married well — a Grenvil of Stowe-grenville —
but they don't go much into society. Ah,
here comes a visitor. Don't go, Madge."

The visitor proved to be Max Brendon. It
suited his convenience to come at this hour ;
when, he had also reflected, he was almost
certain to find Mr. or Mrs. St. Aidan at home.
He came in coolly enough, though, as a
matter of fact, he was really feeling rather
shy. His mother's remarks on his awkwardness
always recurred to him when he met
strangers, and he was apt to disguise a little
nervousness under a manner of perfect
indifference amounting to hrusquerie. The
gleaming, flower scented room, so different
from any of the rooms at his own home ;
Mrs. St. Aidan' s bright, resolute eyes and
high-bred manner ; the presence of that tall,
graceful figure which he knew was that of Miss
Lingered, of whom he had heard so much (her
back was to the light, and he could not see
her face) — all these things contributed to a
certain confusion of mind, which made his
message difficult to deliver. But he soon
recovered himself, and answered the queries
that Mrs. St. Aidan addressed to him with

precision and conciseness. The Eector's wife
lead a pocket-book, in which she entered the
particulars he gave her with a business-like
air which amused Max almost as much as his
glib answers were secretly diverting her.

'' I am much obliged to 'you," she said at
last, as she closed her pocket-book. " There
is one other question I should like to put to
you, although it may seem somewhat wide of
the mark."

I shall be pleased if I can answer it, Mrs.
St. Aidan."

Don't think me rude," said Mrs. St.
Aidan, gently enough, yet with a keen look
at her auditor, as though she wanted to
gauge his capacities ; "I am anxious to
assure myself of a point on which you are
doubtless well informed. Does the kind
thoughtfulness which Mr. Brendon exhibits
towards this poor young man exist generally
among masters and principals of great houses
such as your own ? Is it a common thing for
them to look after their disabled servants ?

or are you and your father unusually considerate
? "

The subtle flattery of this speech, which
proceeded in perfect sincerity from Mrs. St.
Aidan, had the effect of putting Max out of
temper. There were difficulties in the way of
a reply. His father was seldom so careful for
the welfare of the persons he employed as he
had been in this case ; and Max surmised
that Mrs. St. Aidan's own interest in young-lloyd
had stimulated Mr. Brendon to his
present though fulness. Moreover, several
of the merchants, shipbuilders, and manufacturers
near Scarsfield were known to have
behaved very hardly to such of their
servants as had become disabled through
age or accident ; and Max was not fond of
publishing his neighbours' strong-doings. So
he answered crustily, while his mouth assumed
the hard expression that it could sometimes
wear :

I don't know where the consideration and
kindness lie. We simply repair useful machinery

when it gets out of gear. It pays in
the long run."

Oh, I see. You do it for your own
interest ? "

Certainly. Don't suspect us of weak
benevolence."

What do you do when your servants grow
old ? If you pensioned them off, it would not
be a matter of repairing machinery, I suppose
? " Mrs. St. Aidan spoke lightly, but
she felt curious as to his reply.

'' Unproductive expenditure. Sheer waste,"
said Max, grimly.

Then — don't think me inquisitive ; but if
you were in your father's place you would
not have acted in the same way to young-lloyd
? "

"No," said Max, tranquilly, but with the
glimmer of a smile. " I should have acted
quite differently; yes, differently indeed."

He was thinking to himself of the days that
Lloyd's mother had passed in doubt and suspense,
of the absence of comforts from her

home, and the refusal that he had met with
when he had suggested to his mother, a few
days ago, that soup and jelly should be sent
down from her kitchen to the disabled lad.
But as he sat with his arms folded, and that
curiously stern expression stamped upon his
face, Mrs. St. Aidan thought that she had
never seen such an example of thorough and
uncompromising self-seeking in one so young.
But she would not give up interest in him yet.

Won't you take a cup of tea, Mr. Brendon ?
It is rather cold, I am afraid ; but we will
have some more made. Magdalen, will you
ring the bell ? "

"Not any for me, thank you," said Max.
Magdalen? A strange name. He glanced
at Miss Lingered with some interest as she
accidentally turned her profile towards the
lioiit. A distinojuished-lookino' woman, certainly
; stately, calm, grave — probably not an
easy person to live with, thought the irreverent
young man, and thirty years old at the very
least.

He rose to go, but Mrs. St. Aidan still
detained him.

I am afraid we have greatly trespassed on
your time. With the views that you hold " —
there was a delicate inflection of good-humoured
sarcasm in her voice — " you must have found
it very troublesome to ascertain all the facts
that you have kindly given me to-night.
An unproductive expenditure of time, was
it not ? ''

Magdalen turned her head and smiled. " I
should suppose," she said, " that Mr. Brendon
got his facts second-hand. Aunt Emilia. He
would probably depute one of his employed to
ascertain them for him ; in saying which I do
not mean to depreciate his kindness in coming
to repeat them to us to-night."

'* I came at my father's wish," said Max,
bluntly.

Mrs. St. Aidan laughed. There was an
evident antagonism, in which she delighted,
between Magdalen and the visitor.

Oh, clear your character, Mr. Brendon,"

she cried, gaily. 'don't let Miss Lingered
have things all her own way. Confess that
you deputed nobody — that when your father
told you of my inquiries, you went to Lloyd's
house yourself."

To tell the truth, Max began to look very
black. ''No," he said, almost gruflSiy; "you
are quite wrong. I did not go — after you had
written to my father."

Nobody attached any importance to the
concluding clause. Mrs. St. Aidan felt baffled,
but would not show her disappointment. '' At
any rate," she said, "I am much obliged to you
for calling, ]mr. Brendon, and for the dexterity
with which your messenger, or deputy, elicited
all the facts that I wanted to know. Was he
one of your men ? "

"One of my father's men," said Max,
recovering his wonted serenity.

"I wish you would let me see him too.
I should like to see some one who knew James
Lloyd personally."

I '11 ask about him," said Max, with

gravity. " But I must forewarn you that he
may be unable to come. My father "

'■'But you have influence with your father T'

"Not an atom, Mrs. St. Aidan," he
answered, with a smile so irrepressible that
it seemed to overflow the whole of his dark
face and transform it utterly. *' But I '11
inquire."

And with these words he took his leave.

When he was gone, there was a silence.
Magdalen rose and came forward to the fire,
where she stood for a moment or two looking
down into the glowing embers. Then she
said, abruptly, —

"I don't like him."

My dear Madge ! "

1 don't like him," she repeated. "He is
hard and cold and bent on getting money.
These are the men that are the curse of the
land."

Don't be so tragic, my dear child. I don't
think he meant all that he said. And after
all, he said very little."

*' He said very little," said Magdalen, almost
passionately, " but he meant every word. Do
you not see ? — lie is out of sympathy with any
kind of good work for the poor ; he thinks
only of grinding down his men and getting
gain for himself ! It is too plain ! "

The colour had come into her face : she
turned and walked across the room and back
again, then breathed a deep sigh.

I may be mistaken," she said, " I trust
I am ; but it is these hard, cold, unsympathetic
natures that do so much harm in the
world, and there is enough sorrow and grief in
it already. No," she added, shaking her head
resolutely, " I am afraid that I do not like
Mr. Max Brendon, and I am almost sure that
I never shall."

Meanwhile the subject of this discussion
had walked rapidly away from the Rectory,
and was during into a shabby-looking little
street at right-angles to the High Street of
Scarsfield. The houses were so much alike
that he had some difficulty in distinguishing

the one which he wished to find : it was
Number 44, Dobell Terrace, and, like all the
other houses, it had a tiny scrap of garden in
front, a narrow green door, and a shallow bow
window. It was a place much frequented by
clerks and ladies of very limited income, and
was as ugly and monotonous-looking a street
as could well be found, even in gloomy
Scarsfield.

Max was surprised to see a lady standing at
the little iron gate of the house that he was
about to visit. She was evidently just coming
out, and as she saw Max she started violently,
and then laughed, as if to cover some confusion.
As for him, he lifted his hat and his eyebrows
at the same time.

"You here, Miss Eoslyn ?"

Well, why not ? " she said.

She was a wonderfully handsome creature,
he thought, as she stood at the gate, giving
him one of the defiant looks which were supposed
to constitute part of her charm. She
was tall, vigorous-looking, even muscular, with

a wild, natural grace which came from the
perfect development of every limb : her dark
complexion was relieved by a glow of crimson
on cheek and lip ; her eyes and hair were
raven-black ; her features a trifle coarse and
heavy. She was wearing a dark ulster and
plain black hat : unusually quiet attire for
Miss Ruby Eoslyn, but it became her exceedingly
well, showing off the fine contour of her
figure and the vivid glow of her complexion.

Why shouldn't I be here ? " she said, ina
tone rather louder than Max thought
becoming;.

Oh, for no reason," he answered, politely.
'' Do you know how James Lloyd is tonight?"


"No, I don't," she said, in a pettish tone.
Do you think I came to see him f I had — 1
had — a — a message — for his mother."

I don't see why you should not have come
to see him too," said Max, half smiling at her
defensive attitude. "He would have been
glad of a visitor."

"Oh," she returned, her face softening a
little, *' because he 's ill, you mean ? Oh, well
yes. I did see him. Are you going in ? "

*eyes."

*then good-bye. I'm to meet Teddy
Buller up here at half-past six. And I
say "

"What is it?" asked Max, struck by the
unwonted hesitation.

*' I say," she repeated, lowering her voice,
*' don't tell anybody that I 've been here, will
you ? It was just a freak of mine. I hadn't
any message really ; I just ran out."

All right ; I won't mention it, if you wish."

Not to any one," said the girl eagerly.
*'If you told anybody I should be sure to
hear; so mind you don't say a word." She
bit her red lip savagely with lier white teeth,
and looked at Max with angry, gleaming eyes.
I never thought of finding yoii here," she
exclaimed, half resentfully. '' But there ! I
know you '11 keep your promise. You won't
tell any one ? "

"Not any one."

Not your nearest relation, or your dearest
friend. For instance, done tell Cecil

The change in her voice betrayed more than
she knew. It suddenly dawned on Max that
he might tell anybody in the world if only the
matter were kept from Cecil's ears. It was
Cecil whom Ruby was anxious about — his
brother Cecil.

I promise," he said, more gravely than
before. She nodded, as if well satisfied, and
then strode away at a swinging pace, without
any word of farewell. Max paused, his hand
upon the gate, and looked after her with an
inscrutable expression. " Cecil ! " he repeated,
in a tone almost of dismay. " Don't tell
Cecil ! What has Cecil to do with her ! or
what has she to do with Cecil ? "

A lover's threat.

The door was opened for him by Mrs. Lloyd,
a thin, careworn woman in a black gown and
a widow's cap. She had been crying, and
carried in her hand the handkerchief with
which she was wiping her tears away.

I hope nothing is wrong ! " said Max,
not trying to hide the fact that he saw her
tears.

"Please come in, Mr. Max," said Mrs.
Lloyd, half sobbing, ,as he followed her into
the little parlour, where the gas had just been
lighted and the blinds drawn down. " I
should just like a word with you before you go
upstairs. If you would but speak to Jim 1 "

What has Jim been doing ? "

"It's that girl," said Mrs. Lloyd, with more


virulence than she was in the habit of displaying,
'that girl, Ruby Roslyn. She'll be the
death of him some day yet."

Max stood silent and impassive : secretly
astonished. The Lloyds were respectable
people, and James Lloyd was a remarkably
intelligent young man ; but the Eoslyns were
wealthy folk, and had lately been trying
steadily to get into a better class of society
than that from which they had risen. How
did it come then that Mrs. Lloyd spoke of
Ruby so familiarly ? Max had not been aware
that she even knew the girl by sight. Her
next words did not explain the mystery. " If
you 're going up to see Jim, Mr. Max, I do wish
you would tell him what a worldly-minded,
designing, bold-faced thing she is ! You know
it as well as I do ; and he — he doesn't. She '11
break his heart, and he '11 break mine, and
that will be the end of it, and what's to
become of those blessed children the Lord
only knows ! " And then she wept anew.

I '11 go up to Jim and see if I can do auy-

N

thing for him," said Max. '' Don't come : sit
here quietly and rest. I '11 talk to him for his
good, don't fear." And then he closed the
door quietly upon her and went upstairs.

The bedroom into which he made his way
was like the rest of the house, poor, but
scrupulously clean. James Lloyd was supported
in his bed by a framework of curious construction
: it was evident that he had been
seriously hurt and was in much pain, but Max
noted ^dth some surprise that his eye was
bright and his cheek flushed as if from excitement.
He had naturally a pale face, with
rather long and delicate features ; his silky
brown hair and blue eyes were like his
mother's, but there was an intelligence in his
broad brow, a refinement of expression, which
she did not possess. He smiled on Max's
entrance as if he were glad to see him ; and
Max's dark brow and rugged features cleared
and brightened until he scarcely looked like
the man who had replied so curtly to Mrs. St.
Aidan's questions in the Rectory drawing-room.

On the coverlet, before the young man, were
spread out a number of incongruous trifles,
which he touched from time to time vdth his
long, delicate fingers, as if he liked to feel
them near. There was a broken fan, a pencil-case,
a bon-bon box, a scent-bottle, a trumpery
little ring, a pile of letters tied round with
a pink ribbon — valueless each and all, but
seemingly of great importance in Jim Lloyd's
eyes.

That 's a curious collection," said Max,
looking down at it.

Jim gave a faint little laugh. " Not worth
much, are they ? " he said. He was evidently
on very friendly terms with his employer's
son. "They were presents. They've just
been given back to me."

Oh ? " Max did not know what else to
say.

"Yes," said Jim, his face flushing sensitively,
like a girl's ; " she brought them back
herself to-night. You know who I mean ? "

I suppose T do."

My father and her father began life in
the same office," said the young man, slowly.
Her father succeeded, and mine failed : that
was the difference between us. We once lived
in the same street and played together. We
were sweethearts ever since we could speak,
almost. Ruby and I. But she 's changed
lately. She came to-night and told me not
to write to her again — and brought me back
my poor little presents. She is fond of somebody
else."

Max frowned. " Did she promise to marry
you "? " he said.

We never talked about marriage. She
wasn't ever exactly engaged to me. She 's
been quite fair and above-board," said James
Lloyd, with a brave and steady look, " and
I don't like to hear her run down, as mother
is apt to do. If she can't care for me, why
the sooner she tells me so the better." And
he laid his head back on the pillow with a
sigh.

She needn't have taken the time when

you were ill for telling you so," said Max,
bluntly.

It was my fault, Mr. Max. I got mother
to write to her, saying that I had had this
accident, and asking her to come here. She
came, but she told me that she mustn't come
again. It seems that he — he whom she 's fond
of — doesn't like her to know me."

Who is he 1 " Max asked, with his eyes
on the young fellow's face. Lloyd looked up
astonished at the sharp tone.

She didn't tell me. I don't know."

But Max, with the girl's words ringing in
his ears, "Don't tell Cecil," thought that
he knew too well.

Is she engaged to him ? "

Jim's eyelids fell. " I 'm afraid not, from
what she said. She seemed to think that he
loved her ; but she said that nobody knew
about it yet."

"Hm! That looks bad."

Jim was silent for a time. Then a new fire
came into his eyes, a new depth to his voice.

If I thought' he said, " if I thought that
any man was playing fast and loose with my
Ruby, that any man was going to break her
heart, I tell you, Mr. Max, I 'd shoot that man
down as if he were a dog."

''No, you wouldn't, Jim," said Max, more
gently than he was wont to speak. He laid
his rough brown hand for a moment on the
young fellow's hot, trembling fingers, and
pressed them close. '' Leave Miss Roslyn to
manage her own affairs. She would love you
none the better if you took it upon yourself to
assault another man for her sake. Besides, it 's
all nonsense. She is not a girl to break her
heart over any man, my dear boy. Put these
things away, and don't brood over them any
longer. What 's the use ? Don't you know the
old song —

Shall I, wanting in despair
Die because a woman ^sfair?
If site he not fair to me
What care I how fair she he V

Come, old fellow, sing that and forget your
troubles."

The kindly tone brought a smile to Jim's
lips, but he shook his head. " It 's easy to see
that you don't know much about the subject,
Mr. Max," he said, half shrewdly, half sadly.

No, I don't, and don't want to," said Max,
as he bade him good-night.

'* What fools love makes of men ! " he
thought to himself, on his way home. " That
fellow was as bright and cheery as he could
well be a few months ago, and now he 's down
in the dumps. And Cecil too — I hope that
Cecil 's acting on the square with Lenore and
this Eoslyn girl. ' Don't tell Cecil ! ' What
upon earth has Cecil got to do with it, I
wonder ? "

He had business in the town which occupied
him until nearly ten o'clock. When at last
he turned homewards the rain had ceased, and
the moon was shining in a tranquil sky. Ashe
approached his father s house, he remarked
with some surprise that a figure was moving
in the garden, under the shade of the wet
evergreens, and he was still more surprised

as he drew near to find that it belonged to
Ursula,

'' "What are you doing here ? " he. asked, in
an elder-brotherly tone of authority.

But Ursula was not easily daunted.

Watching for you," she said. " It has
been a horrid evening. Mamma has gone to
bed with a headache ; Miss Quittenden thinks
that I ni in bed too. Papa and Cecil had one
of their — shall we call them arguments f "

Max shrugged his shoulders.

What can / do ? "

I don't know. It 's partly about you.
Papa says you do all the work, and Cecil does
none."

*' The old story ! How did that topic
arise f

Oh, I don't know. There was a lot of
letters to write and send ofi", and Cecil said he
hadn't done them. Then jDapa was angry."

What a fool Cecil is ! " said the younger
brother, in no amiable tone. " What is he
thinking of? I had better go in, I suppose."

He threw away his cigar, and opened the
front door just as Cecil, with a very hang-dog
expression on his handsome face, emerged from
the dining-room.

Ursula says there 's some row about the
letters," Max began, with his usual deliberation.
" Didn't you know they were done ? "
Cecil stared at him and said nothing. " They
are all in my room upstairs, ready to go by
the early post tomorrow. If you 're doubtful
about it you might go and get them."

For once Cecil obeyed, and Max walked
into the dining-room, where Ursula heard him
making sober explanations to his father concerning
the ^vork that Mr. Brendon had
thought to be left undone. Ursula drew
near to listen : she was curious about the
result.

"It's a mistake," Max was saying. "He
thought there were more to do, I suppose.
I assure you they are all written. I looked
them over myself before I went out."

Mr. Brendon seemed confounded.

Why couldn't the fellow say so, then ? "
he ejaculated.

Max smiled.

Cecil never defends himself I wish he
did sometimes."

It was at that moment that Cecil re-entered
the room with a bundle of sealed envelopes
in his hand. He laid them on the table before
his father, saying, " I did not know that they
were so nearly finished."

Ursula did not see the glance of intelligence
exchanged between the brothers, but she heard
Mr. Brendon's sharp response,

"Then you ought to have known, sir. You
should do your work thoroughly. However,
as they are done "

And he turned over the envelopes with an
unsatisfied sort of grunt, and cast a keen
glance at Max, as if he were somewhat suspicious
of that young man's unmoved demeanour.
Whether he thought or did not think that the
explanations given him were meant to be
misleading, he seemed to find it inexpedient

to investigate further, and this sons waited
patiently for his next remark, knowing well
enough that he was settling himself into good
temper again.

Well," he said at last, " did you verify
these, Max ? Averse they correct ? "

They are quite correct."

Let them go by tomorrow's post. Henceforward
be more regular in attending to your
duties, Cecil. Perhaps you have been more
so than I gave you credit for — I don't know.
Well, good-nights''

He held out his hand to Cecil, patted Max's
shoulder in passing, and betook himself to his
own room. Ursula advanced from the hall
into the dining-room, expecting to hear more
about the matter in hand ; but, instead of
that. Max walked to the table where the
remains of some one's late meal — probably
supper — were still lying, and asked coolly,
Is this cheese good ? "

Decent," answered Cecil, lifting his eyes
for a moment. Whereupon Max began to

eat some with great relish, and Cecil moved
away from the table, saying merely, " Ring
the bell for Perkins when you 've finished."

All right."

Cecil walked towards the door, his head
slightly bent, and his eyes abstractedly fixed
on the carpet ; but at the door he looked up
and noted the scene before him — Ursula leaning
with her elbows on the back of a chair —
Max standing at the head of the table composedly
eating bread and cheese. Something
comical in the situation seemed to strike his
volatile fancy ; he turned round, burst out
laughing, and laughed till he was tired.

AVhat amuses you '? " asked Max, a piece
of bread half-way between his plate and
mouth.

How much supper are you going to eat in
that uncomfortable position ? " retorted Cecil,
recovering himself

Indeed," said Max, " I had no dinner."
And he helped himself to more cheese.

Cecil was silent, but stood with his back

against the door, as though he were waiting
for something else. It came presently.

Look here," said the younger brother,
speaking with great deliberation as he continued
his evening meal, " I wish another
time you 'd do your o^\ti — pious frauds —
yourself."

What do you mean ? "

'•' You know well enough."

Cecil shot an uneasy glance at Ursula, which
Max interpreted. " Ursula's safe enough,"
he said, with a touch of contemptuous rebuke,
which brought the colour to Cecil's face.
She won't tell your secrets."

I '11 go away if you like," said the girl,
promptly.

*' There's no need for you to go ; stay here,
I want you. I should like to know, as a
matter of curiosity merely, why you hadn't
already said out like a man that you did not
write those letters, but had asked me to do
them for you ? "

'' Why didn't you say so yourself? "

*' Because I didn't choose. If lie had asked
me, I suppose I should. What on earth made
you say they were not done ? You spoke tome
about them yesterday ! ''

*' You said you couldn't do my work as well
as your own," said Cecil, with a sort of sulky
meekness.

/'Hang it! I said I oughtn't to," Max
answered with an odd twist of his mouth,
which might have been a smile had not his
brows gloomed so persistently. " Didn't you
leave that piece of work with the understanding
that I would see it done ? "

I suppose so."

Well, please to remember then that I
don't generally leave the governor's business
in the lurch to be done or undone as the
chance may be. You might have had the
sense to know that I shouldn't shirk what
I had undertaken to do. You should have
trusted to me. There would not have been all
this shindy, I presume, if you had had the wit
to be sure that those letters were done."

"You're rather hard on a fellow," said Cecil,
in an injured tone. " How could I be certain
that you had done them ? "

Because I generally keep my word," said
Max, drily. '' If you leave your work to
chance, you know I won't do it for you. But
when you kindly inform me that you have left
it to me, and I don't object, of course I take
it as a bit of my own work. I should have
objected if the case had been less urgent, by
the bye. And I hope yoa '11 finish off your
o^TL work for the future ; I 've quite enough todo
without arranging yours. I may mention
that your accounts are in such a confounded
mess that it took "me two hours to get them
straight before I could begin the letters."

When did you do all that work ? " asked
Cecil.

In my leisure hours."

'* Which he hasn't any," said Ursula.

When are your leisure hours ? "

Their limits are, at present, not fixed."

I know ! " interposed Ursula, once more,

He never went to bed last night. Jane told
me that his candles were burnt out, and that
his bed had not been slept in. He can't deny
it, you see, Cecil."

Max held his peace ; Cecil stood upright,
with a conscience-stricken question in his
eyes. He spoke more earnestly than was his
wont as he said,

I 'm awfully sorry. I did not know that
you had so much work on hand."

'' I haven't. I like working late, that 's
all.

I ought to have done it myself, I know."
Of course you ought."
If there is anything I can do for you,"
said Cecil, in a subdued voice, " I will "

I don't know that there 's anything you
can do for me," said Max, coolly, "except
answer a plain question. Ursula, suppose you
either stop your ears for a moment, or run
into the next room. Thanks," as the girl ran
away, laughing. " Will you tell me something
I want to know ? "

- Well— yes, if I can."

"Are you going to marry Miss Ruby
Eoslyn ? "

"No."

"Does she think that you are in love with
her?"

"How can I tell what she thinks?" said
Cecil, with a very uncomfortable look.

I warn you," said Max, slowly, " that you
will have trouble by and bye if you entangle
yourself with that girl — trouble that you will
have to get out of by yourself. I have helped
you out of many a scrape, but that will be one
in which I shall not be of much use to you."

What have you heard ? what do you
know ? " cried Cecil, with an angry glance.

"Never mind. Eemember that I've warned
you, that is all. If you are carrying on a
double game, it will be the worse for you in
the long run."

He expected an outbreak of anger, but, to
his surprise, Cecil turned and left the room
without a word.

Somehow the little scene gave Max an
uneasy feeling. Cecil's untrustworthiness, his
instability of mind, impressed themselves upon
him more forcibly than ever : he was " hard
to bind, ill to find," as the proverb has it, and
Max augured ill for the happiness of any
woman who had anchored her heart upon so
uncertain a foundation. He hoped, sincerely
that it was not Lenore. Ruby Eoslyn, he
thought, might take care of herself: but
Lenore was too gentle, too delicate, to bear
ill-treatment. And yet — if it were Ruby
whom Cecil meant to throw overboard — what
would be the influence of his action upon
poor James Lloyd ? For the lad's threat had
had a meaning in it, and Max presaged harm
to his brother in whatever way the thing
might end.

THE HAND OF FATE.

Max's visit to the Rectory was shortly
followed up by an invitation to dinner from
]airs. St. Aidan. He was half-disposed to
decline it, for he had divined, with his accustomed
shrewdness, that Mrs. St. Aidan wanted
to " draw him out," and Max made up his
mind that he would not be drawn out at all.
With this resolution he accepted and went,
but, being in this uncommunicative mood, he
talked very Httle, and made short, dry answers
to Mr. St. Aidan's remarks. The Rector, who
was fastidious, lifted his eyebrows over
Emilia's swan," as he dubbed young Brendon
in his mind. " Emilia's swans," he used to

sav, " were apt to turn out very ugly ducklings



indeed." And there was nothing particularly
swan-like about Max.

Eather to Max's annoyance, Miss Lingered
was present. It seemed that she came often
to the Eectory — always when Mrs. St. Aidan
wanted help or amusement. Max did not
understand her manner, which was reserved,
though perfectly courteous, and he was a man
who did not like what he could not understand.
At the same time he could not but
acknowledge that she was pleasant to look
upon. She was dressed in some rich-looking
material of a dull red colour, with wide, yellowish
lace of exquisite workmanship falling away
from her throat and over her beautiful wrists.
If he had not heard anything at home about
her "peculiar views," her '' flightiness and
foolishness," he would have thought her a
rather attractive person. But he was prejudiced
against her, and he was fair enough to
allow that he was prejudiced.

It did not suit well with his preconceived
notions that two lovely children, who appeared

for a few minutes before dinner, and were
then sent back to the Priory under the care of
a servant, should show themselves absolutely
devoted to her. Max heard a little colloquy
outside the drawing-room window which gave
him a new idea of Miss Lingered's qualities.

Won't you come home, Maidie, dear,
before we go to sleep ? "

No, darlings. Say good-night to me
now." What a tender, musical voice she had,
after all ! " Don't keep awake for me, my
Daisy."

"No, Maidie. You've got no flowers in
your pretty dress. Take ours — then you will
remember your two daisies all the evening."

As if I needed reminding of you ! Fasten
them into the lace. Thank you, my darlings.
Good-night. Be good while I am away."

She had two marguerites in her dress when
she re-entered the room. Max glanced at
them with curious interest : he wondered fora
moment what it would have been like to
hear such loving accents, such tender words.

when lie was a child himself. He had known
very little love : it was a plant that had not
flourished in the Brendon household.

When the ladies left the table, and the
Rector and his guest began to talk, Max soon
discovered the reason wdiy he had been asked
to dinner — or thought that he discovered it.
Mr. St. Aidan had set his heart on establishing
a night-school and a series of popular lectures,
in order to provide amusement and instruction
for a set of navvies who had been working on
the railway line near Scarsfield. With these,
he thought that a few classes for other boys
and men, perhaps of a somewhat superior type,
might also be established. He wanted to
know where a large room could be obtained
for his purpose, and thought that Max might
help him in his search for one.

I wonder why he fixed on me for that sort
of thing," said Max to himself, with some
vexation. But he answered with his usual
indifference of manner that he did not know
where any such room was to be found.

I 'm sorry for that," said the Eector.
"The fact is, I thought that there might bean
empty warehouse or a spare room on your
premises that your father might let us have —
at not too high a rent, of course. But if you
know of none "

Max deliberated for a minute or two.
There 's a house in Gay Street," he said,
slowly, '' which my father might let for the
purpose. I looked at it myself the other day.
It has two rooms on the ground floor which
might be made into one ; and the smaller ones
would serve for class-rooms. I '11 speak about
it, if you like."

Thank you. If the rent is not too high.
And if we begin our classes, I hope that we
may count upon you to encourage your employed
in coming to them."

Max hesitated again, much to the Eector's
perplexity. It was with something cj^uite like
a blush that the young man spoke at last.

I 'd better make a clean breast of it," he
said, with a shamefaced smile. " The fact is

that some of our lads and their friends have
been coming to me once or twice a-week for a
little reading, arithmetic, and so on— and, of
course, I think that they would be much
better taught if they were in your hands ; I
shall be only too glad, but— "

"But they might object," said Mr. St.
Aidan, looking at him with a kindly interest
which he had not felt in his visitor before.
Couldn't we amalgamate ? I am very glad
indeed to hear of this work of yours, Mr. Bren-don.
They would come to us if you came too."

Well, I suppose so," said Max, still with
embarrassment. '' I hardly like to tell you
the ground of their objection "

Oh, I know. You want to keep the clergy
out of it ? " Then, as Max laughed a little byway
of answer, the Rector went on quickly :
I know, that 's the usual thing in these big
manufacturing towns. But we mean to be
quite sectarian ; it is not to be distinctively
religious work at all. Miss Lingered, who
started the idea, was strong on that point —

curiously strong, as she is a profoundly religious
woman herself. But she understands
the needs of the people in a remarkable way.
We must talk this over another time, Mr.
Brendon. I am much interested in your
work, and should like to hear more of it. I
wonder that it never came to my ears
before."

There was nothing to talk about," said
Max, almost too bluntly. '' The lads worked
and I looked on ; that was all. Nothing to
make a fuss about."

He almost regretted having mentioned the
matter, and was grateful to the Eector for
saying nothing about it in the drawing-room.
But here Mrs. St. Aidan attacked him on a
different topic.

I have been to the Lloyds, Mr. Brendon,"
she said, smiling at him, and speaking in the
peculiarly sweet, gracious way which had won
Max's liking from the very first.

I hope that James Lloyd is going on
well ? " said Max, unconcernedly.

Mrs. St. Aidan lifted a white forefinger and
shook it at him. '' You can't deceive me this
time," she said. " I have heard your praises
sung, Mr. Brendon. The Lloyds look upon
you as kindness itself. Surely you have not
been acting up to the principles you avowed
the other day ? "

"I avowed no principles; I have none,"
answered Max.

We must judge from Mr. Brendon's deeds,
not from his words, henceforward," said the
Eector, in a very friendly tone, which rather
surprised Mrs. St. Aidan, who had been
thinking herself alone in her liking for her
silent guest. '' Magdalen, will you sing to us
to-night ? "

As Miss Lingered sat down to the piano,
Max looked round him, and was conscious of
a sensation of rest and peace which he seldom
experienced. He liked the room, though it
was not half as grand as his mother's drawing-room.
The colours were bright and delicate,
yet cool ; the curtains were white and rose-colour,

the chintz was white and pink. The
floor was polished and strewn with rugs and
skins. Flowers filled every vase in rich
profusion. A work-basket stood on an
ottoman ; the Guardian lay open on the
floor ; a white fox-terrier had established
himself in the most comfortable chair. It
looked untidy, Max thought, but charming;
he did not quite know why.

The way in which he was treated flattered
and soothed him. The Rector and his wife
tried to make him feel at home, and they
succeeded. Their high-bred, polished, yet
kindly manner, the courtesy which was almost
deferential, combined with a subtle, jesting
vein, in itself a kind of compliment, were new
and pleasant to Max Brendon. The atmosphere
was congenial. He had been overlooked,
snubbed, and despised in the society
where Cecil shone, and had quietly set the fact
down to his own inferiority ; but here, in a
household which was confessedly "aristocratic"
in sentiment, he felt himself in harmony,

at peace with himself and all the world. It
was odd : he never could have expected it ;
but it was true.

Suddenly Magdalen began to sing. She
had a beautiful contralto voice, which had been
most carefully trained. Max's knowledge of
music was of the slightest, but he had an
intense love for it. He sat charmed, entranced,
startled by the beauty of the sound, the while
she sang. When she ceased, he came to
himself with a little sigh, and wished that she
could sing for ever. What a pity ! what a pity
that a woman with such a gift should
be so unpopular in Scarsfield — should lead so
peculiar a life ! Yet, when he thought over
it, he did not exactly know why her life
should be called peculiar I She lived alone
with children and old women, and visited the
poor and needy. *' Nothing so very peculiar
in that'' thought Max, as he looked at the
fair singer's graceful back while she still sat
at the piano, and noted the perfect lines of
neck and chin and oval ivory cheek. " Plain ?

old maidisli ? peculiar ? It seems to me she
is a very beautiful woman."

He did not stay late, and when he was gone,
Mr. St. Aidan launched at once into the story
of the young man's unaided efforts for the
welfare of the lads whom his father employed.
"I told you so!" cried Mrs. St. Aidan,
clapping her hands. She lay back upon her
invalid couch smiling, with a satisfied light in
her pretty eyes. " I knew that there was
something good in him. Confess it, Magdalen ;
confess that you were mistaken."

I was mistaken," said Magdalen, bending
down to kiss her as she said good-night ; " but
although Mr. Brendon may be very good, you
will not ask me to like him exceedingly, will
you ? "

I shall insist upon it," said Mrs. St. Aidan,
laughingly, but Magdalen shook her head.

No. There was something that she did not
like about Mr. Max Brendon : some implied
criticism of her doings, some silent disapproval
of her methods, which she had divined from

the very first. He was a man of the world,
worldly, so she thought ; and naturally he did
not care for the mode in which she worked,
by constant appeal to the higher side in
herself and others. There had come to her
lately a faint haunting consciousness that she
was perhaps cutting herself off too much from
the general life of the world ; that there was
a slight tendency to morbidness and unreality
in the seclusion which she loved. She tried
to banish this notion : she called it a temptation
to evil ; and yet, after all, she was only
five-and-twenty, she was full of strength and
health, she had beauty, and she had riches,
and life was opening before her still. She
was not a nun ; she had never forsworn the
love and beauty of the world. It was not
that she was tired of the work which she had
been doing ; she was still eager for the good
of those around her, but she had begun to
want a wider sphere. Old women and
children were all very well in their way ; but
she wanted to work amongst people who were,

like herself, in the prime of life. And amid
these jarring tendencies and emotions Max
Brendon's want of sympathy, as she deemed
it, made him a repellant influence which she
would fain avoid.

But it seemed as though Fate had decided
that she and Max Brendon were often to he
thrown in contact.

It was a cold, wet summer. The month of
July was noticeable for violent storms of wind
and rain, and in the midst of perhaps the
worst storm of the year it happened that Max
was returning home from a business journey
to Weston, a small town some five miles from
Scarsfield. Weston lay in the grassy lowlands
beyond the heights on which Upper Scarsfield
was situated. The road led upwards for two
or three miles, then became level, and afterwards
descended towards Scarsfield, past the
heather-covered waste ground which lay near
the Priory, past the Priory itself and the
Eectory, and straight into the High Street of
the town.

Max was driving a dog-cart. He went
slowly, for the wind was blowing in his face,
and the night was already dark, although it
was not much more than nine o'clock. Before
he had gone far the wind increased to a very
hurricane, and the broken branches that
clattered down from the swaying trees on
either side of the road told of a danger which
had not occurred to Max's mind when he set
out.

I almost wish I had stayed in Weston," he
said to himself at one point in his journeys ;
these falling branches will startle the mare,
if they don't cause any other accident. However,
it 's too late to turn back."

He got clear of the shady lane without any
injury, and drove more rapidly along the open
high road. He was beginning; to descend the
hill towards Lower Scarsfield, and the wind
had lulled a little, when it seemed to him that
he saw a white moving figure on the roadside.
The mare saw it too, and shied ; but Max had
her well in hand, and compelled the skittish

creature to stand still while he looked back.
On such a night it was not fit for any woman
to be abroad, and he had some idea of offering
to drive the wayfarer into Scarsfield. Perhaps
it was only a labourer in a smock-frock after all.
He looked back, stood up, and shouted, and
looked again, but to no avail. The figure had
vanished ; but, after backing the dog-cart a
few yards, and straining his eyes into the
darkness of the night. Max thought that he
distinguished a strange white heap upon the
ground — a heap that half rose and sank again.
Certainly he heard a cry for help — a feeble,
wailing cry, like that of an ailing child. He
jumped out of the cart, and, leading the mare,
managed to get close to the mysterious white
object, which lay — now without moving — on
the pathway at the side of the road. He put
out his hand and felt it : the darkness was so
great that his eyesight assisted him little, but
the clothing that he fingered assured him that
some miserable woman had sunk down by the
wayside. ^

He had some matches in his pocket : he
struck one, shading the flame carefully with
one hand. By its light he saw the prostrate
form of a neatly-dressed woman, her face
deadly pale, her eyes half-closed, her limbs
rigid, as though she suffered pain. A
light-grey waterproof in which she was enveloped
gave her figure the distinctness which
had attracted Max's attention. He conjectured
that she was very ill or had met with a serious
accident. It was with a sober face that he
rose from his stooping position and, after a
moment's hesitation, tied the reins to a gate
that stood conveniently near. Then he returned
to the woman's side, lifted her head,
and chafed her hands. He was not the man
to leave her lying where he had found heron
a night so wild as this, but he began to be
sorely puzzled as to what he ought to do.

The change of posture seemed slightly to
revive her, for presently she opened her eyes
wide upon him, and said sharply —

Where am I now ? Who are you ? "

"I am afraid you are ill. Where do you
come from ? " asked Max, answering the
question with another.

She hardly seemed to hear, but tried to
rise, and then sank back with a moan of pain.
"Oh, I am hurt! I am dying I" she cried
feebly, and then lapsed into complete insensibility.


Max was in a dilemma. If he left her while
he went to get help from Scarsfield, she
might, for aught he knew, die before he
returned. He could not possibly lift her into
his high dog cart without assistance. Was
there no house near from which he could get
friendly aid ? Surely there was a house not
far away ; he could see its chimneys dimly
revealed against the sky — what place was it ?
He did not stay to think. Only when he had
laid the insensible woman down upon the
grass once more, and reached the gate of the
house in question, did it occur to him that he
knew it — had known it all his life. It was the
Priory — Miss Lingered's home.

So much the better," he said to himself ashe
rang the door-bell sharply and decisively.
It is just the thing she will like to do if she
is the woman I take her for."

He had gone to the back-door, and the man
who opened it looked at him suspiciously. Max
made known his errand — there was a woman
in the road who was ill and needed assistance
would Miss Lingered send out some brandy,
some wraps, and one or two of her servants
to assist him in getting her into his trap, when
he would at once drive her to the hospital.

He had not long to wait. In an incredibly
short space of time Miss Lingered herself
appeared, clad in a dark waterproof cloak,
with wraps across her arm and a flask in her
hand. Three servants, two men and a
woman, followed her ; and, although Max did
not make the remark to himself at that
moment, he remembered afterwards to have
noted that each member of the party was as
composed and self-possessed as though the
matter were one of daily occurrence.

He exchanged two or three words of explanation
with Miss Lingered as he led her to
the spot where the woman was still lying.
He made no apology for troubling her : she
liked him the better for not doincr so. When
she reached the woman's side, she knelt down
beside her, and, by the light of a lantern which
one of the servants carried, proceeded to pour
some brandy down her throat, and to examine
a little into the nature of her illness or injuries.

I think that her leg is injured : she must
have fallen," said Magdalen at last. " Give
me the lantern, Jones."

She took the lantern, and felt the limb
tenderly, but skilfully. A moan came from
the woman's lips : she opened her eyes and
fixed them on Magdalen's face.

I fell down," she murmured. " I can't
walk. I came. . I came . to see
Philip : I heard that he lived this way. Do
you think that he '11 remember me ? that he '11
remember . . . Alice — Alice Mackworth of
Manchester ? "

She is wandering, poor soul," said one of
the servants, marvelling that his mistress
looked so pale.

Magdalen suddenly arose and stood erect,
with clasped hands, as though turned to stone.
Max was startled by the change in her
demeanour : she looked like one who has
received a terrible shock. But the pallor and
the hesitation lasted for a moment only. She
turned to her servants and gave her orders in
her usually calm and collected way.

"Lift her carefully," she said. 'ewe will
take her to the Priory; it is there that she
will stay."

Magdalen's GUEST.

Max felt it his duty to protest.

"Miss Lingered, you know nothing of the
woman : she may be a very unsuitable person
to take into your house."

Magdalen only smiled.

He remembered the smile afterwards, and
was puzzled by it. The red light of the
lantern had flashed upon her face, and showed
a curious look of mingled compassion, amusement,
even a little scorn. It said to him very
plainly that Magdalen despised his prudent
advice, and would have none of it. But perhaps
this interpretation was not quite correct.

He helped to Eft the insensible woman and

to carry her to the house. Magdalen went

before the little procession, walking swiftly, in



order to make arrangements for the reception
of her strange visitor. Much preparation was
not necessary. There was always a guest-chamber
ready at the Priory, and the guests
were sometimes of the neediest.

The men laid their burden down upon the bed,
and softly retired. Max lingered in the passage
outside the door until Magdalen appeared. An
old nurse had taken charge of the sufferer, and
Miss Lingered came out to give further orders.

You will want a doctor. I have my dogcart
here. Shall I drive to Dr. Ellison's, and
send him up ? " Max asked.

If it is not troubling you too much."

Not in the least. I will send him or
bring him myself as soon as I can. I hope,"
Max hesitated a little as he spoke, "I hope
that you will not repent your kindness."

I am sure I shall not. I feel inclined to
thank you for coming to me for help," she
said, earnestly. " And you will not think me
rude — but — you will bring the doctor as
(prickly as you can, will you not ? "

I will. Good-night, Miss Lingered."

He could not help smiling a little at her
impatience. She looked eager, anxious, yet
younger and lovelier than he had yet seen
her, perhaps because of the unwonted flush
upon lier cheek, the light of a strange excitement
in her eyes, the tremble of her parted lips.
Max took that picture of her away with him
as he went out into the night. He repeated
to himself over and over again that she was
eccentric, that he did not like eccentric
women, that he did not like her. But what
a sweet face she had ! He could not get it
out of his mind ; it haunted him like a ghost.
He wished that he could forget it.

Dr. Ellison was at home, and gladly accepted
Max's offer of a drive to the Priory.
The doctor tried to extract information from
his companion on the way, but Max had none
to give.

You don't know who the woman is ? "

No."

And Miss Lingered does not know ? "

I suppose not."

I wonder if she had any reason for taking
her into her own house," said the doctor, more
to himself than to Max. " She is not the
woman to do things from caprice."

'' You know her well 1 " asked Max, forgetting
his reserve.

I know her, and admire her. I reverence
her," said the doctor, shortly and decidedly.
'' She is beyond praise."

The words gave Max a subtle pleasure ; he
could not have said why.

He meant to oho straight home after taking

O

the doctor to the Priory ; but, yielding to an
impulse which he himself thought unaccountable,
he offered to wait and drive the doctor
home again when he had seen his patient.
And as Dr. Ellison agreed to this. Max left
the door-cart in the chare of a man at the
lodge (he had found his way now to the front
entrance), and entered the house with him.

He was shown into the room where Miss
Lingered usually sat. It was a plain, almost

bare-looking room ; there was matting on the
floor ; the only articles of furniture were bookcases,
rush-bottomed chairs, and a writing-table.
Here he stayed for some time — so
long, in fact, that he grew rather weary of
waiting and began to yawn. But at last footsteps
were heard upon the stairs ; the door
was opened, and Magdalen came in, followed
by the doctor. Her face still wore the look of
suffused brightness, almost of exaltation,
which had struck Max as so remarkable. She
was flushed, and her eyes were strangely
bright ; but her voice and manner were perfectly
calm as she exchanged a few words
with the doctor, and then turned to bid Max
good-bye.

Dr. Ellison had walked into the hall, looking
for his hat ; for one brief moment Miss
Lino'ard was alone with Max. She e'ave him
her hand and spoke with a sweeter, friendlier
look and tone than he had ever yet obtained
from her.

You do not know what you have done,"

she said, " but I thank you for it all the
same. I thank you with all my heart."

He fancied that a slight moisture came to
her beautiful eyes as she turned away. He
could not reply ; he was astonished, he was
struck dumb. What had he done to deserve
these almost passionate words of thanks ?
Would she not tell him, some day, what
she meant ?

Yes, one day she did tell him. But that
day was still far off, and she dreamt not of
it yet.

She waited quietly in the hall for a few-minutes
when the two men were gone, as if
seeking to recover her composure before
returning to the sick-room. The lights were
out ; the fire in the wide grate was burning
low. Not a sound could be heard : it seemed
as if the old house were empty and desolate.
Desolate indeed it had often seemed to Magdalen,
but it did not seem desolate now. It
was filled with memories and hopes — memories
of those whom she had taken in and helped and

comforted, even as lie had taken in the homeless
wanderer for whom Max had asked her
aid : hopes for many who had gone back to
their work in the world, strengthened and
cheered by her care for them and theirs. For
this was the work of Magdalen's life, which
caused her to be called eccentric by those who
knew her only by outside report : her house
was always open to the needy and the suffering
: she had made it in very truth a '* house
of rest," a haven for those who were tempest-tossed
; and her heart was as open to the weary
and sorrow-stricken as were her house and her
hands.

But this new-comer was not like the others.
Of all whom she had helped, there had not
been one connected with her by any tie but
that of a common humanity. But this woman,
this outcast, this wanderer, had uttered
names which Magdalen could never hear unmoved.
" Alice Mackworth ! " — It was the
name of Philip Esher's deserted wife, the
mother of those children who were dear to

Magdalen as her own kith and kin. And she
came, she said, " to see Philip " — and would
he remember her ? What did it all mean ?
Was it that Philip's wife was still alive,
and that she had come, by a strange coincidence,
to the very house where her children
lived, where there was one who would love
her as a sister, and nurse her back to health
and strength and happiness ?

It was this conviction that had irradiated
Magdalen's face, and make her thank Max
Brendon for all that he had done.

Standing in the dim hall, where a feeble
flicker of light from the expiring fire only now
and then struggled through the gloom, the
brightness went out of Magdalen's expression,
the momentary triumph from her heart.

After all, if it were true, what did it mean
but greater sorrow, perhaps even greater disgrace
than she had contemplated ? Had
Captain Esher known nothing of the truth
all this time ? Magdalen shuddered as she
reflected that there was nothing in his past

history to give lier any confidence in that
sense of honour, that sense of duty, which she
might have counted on in some men. And,
whether he had known it or not, what had
been this poor woman's history during the last
few years ? Where was her sister, the stern
woman who had stopped Philip Esher's marriage
with Magdalen, but who had also averred
that Alice, his wife, was dead ?

There was a mystery somewhere : and
Magdalen brooded over it with bent brow and
hanging head as she ascended the stairs that
led to the poor wanderer s room. A lamp was
burning, and the fire was blazing brightly,
but a screen had been placed round the bed,
so that the invalid's eyes might not be dazzled
with the lists. An old woman in a close
white cap sat beside her. This was Becky,
Magdalen's former nurse and faithful friend,
who was always ready when helpful work was
to be done.

The woman was under the influence of
narcotics, but her sleep was fitful and uneasy.

Magdalen sent the old nurse away and took
lier place beside the bed. There was light
enough for her to see distinctly the worn and
wasted features, and on these Magdalen gazed
in deep anxiety, not unmixed with fear.

It had been a pretty face : so much was
certain. The fair hair tossed wildly over the
pillows had once been bright and abundant ;
the blue eyes, now closed, were still remarkable
for their beauty. The features bore
traces of illness and care, but they were
delicately cut. She looked older than Alice
Mackworth — Alice Esher — could really be ;
but the hardships of her life might have
impressed that look of age upon her face.
And as Magdalen looked and looked, it seemed
to her that she saw more and more clearly a
likeness to one of Philip's children — to little
Daisy Esher, whom she had always fancied to
be like lier unknown mother. It was Dolly
who resembled Philip ; Daisy, with her blue
eyes and meek face and winning little ways,
was like somebody whom Magdalen had never

seen. Was it the mother of these children
who lay before her now ?

A movement of the sleeper displaced her
coverings ; Magdalen rose to put them
straight. Her gentle fingers came in contact
with something hard, and, almost without
knowing what she did, she drew out a little
locket tied by a black ribbon round the
woman's neck. It was a poor little locket,
battered and worn ; the fastenings had grown
weak, and came loose in Magdalen's hand. It
flew open, and she saw — was it not what she
had almost expected to see '? Why then
should she catch her breath hard, and look at
the pictured face before her with something
like aversion, mingled with dread'? The
locket contained a bit of golden-brown hair, a
wedding ring, and an old photograph of Philip
Esher's handsome, smiling, cruel face.

Magdalen shut the locket again, and put it
back into its place, rearranged the tumbled
coverlet, and smoothed back the tangled hair ;
then she sat down again in her chair at the

bedside. Few could have told from a view of
her calm, pale face, her quietly folded hands,
what a storm had suddenly been aroused in
the heart that seemed so tranquil. The
sight of that photograph had brought back a
tide of memories beneath which judgment and
will went down. She had long ceased to
dream of Philip Esher ; and yet — she was
suddenly conscious that she had not forgotten
him. The light of his mocking eyes was
still before her ; the amused, satirical turn of
his mouth had power over her still.

But, as she considered the matter, she knew
well enough that her predominant feeling was
not that of love, or of what the world calls
love. It was anger, resentment, almost enmity.
She was bitterly indignant with him
yet. She was surprised to find herself feeling
so strongly on the subject. She thought that
she had conquered herself; that her troubled,
undisciplined heart was still. But it had
awakened once more with throbs of passionate,
burning pain ; with the old intolerable sense

of humiliation ; and she knew not where to
turn for comfort.

Did she not know ? Her heart smote her
for the thought. There was a book in which
she read day by day, which had been her
guide in perplexity, her safeguard in danger
and in woe. Desperately she turned to it at
this moment, seeking some counsel or some
comfort. There was a Testament on the table
at her side ; she opened it and turned over its
leaves in the dim light, her eyes roving here
and there, up and down the page.

Presently she stopped short : her mind
arrested by something that she had seen. She
sat with the book in her hands for some
minutes ; then she laid it down and bent her
face upon it as if in thought or prayer.
Tears came as a welcome relief; when she
lifted her head again, the calmness had come
back to her eyes, the grave serenity to her lips.

How often shall my brother sin against
me and I forgive him ? " she had read. " I
say unto you, imtil seventy times seven."

There was to lye no limit, then, to forgiveness
of wrongs. She had harboured hatred
in her heart to Philip Esher all these years.
Now and for ever she would put it away from
her. If she had never foro-even him before, in
the presence of his neglected wife, she would
forgive him now.

In the early dawn the sick woman opened
her eyes and fixed them on Magdalen with a
questioning look. Magdalen spoke to her,
soothed her with kind words, and assured her
that she would be taken care of until she was
well and strong. The woman listened, but
did not respond ; the terrified look in her
eyes did not die away. It was with some
hesitation, some rapid beating of the heart,
that Magdalen said at last, " Will you tell me
your name ? "

The woman was silent for a moment, and
then said feebly, though distinctly, " Mack-worthy''


And your first name is ? "

Alice."

She spoke with her eyes fixed on the wall
before her, as if she were repeating something
that she had learned by heart.

*' Alice," she said. " Yes, Alice — Alice —
Alice — that's it ; I know it now. They gave
me a different name before. He will know
who it is if you tell him that Alice wants
him."

"Who ? " asked Magdalen, bending over
her.

Philip Esher. Send for him."

YeS; I will send for him," said Magdalen.
And then the wild blue eyes closed, and the
poor creature fell into another restless
sleep.

Miss Lingered could do an impulsive thing
sometimes, in spite of her outward composure.
She did not stay to consult her
friends : she did not put the matter into the
hands of Mr. St. Aidan, her natural adviser :
she went straight to the point with a noble
simplicity of purpose which should have
commanded respect. Perhaps she did not act

very wisely, but she did what her heart toil
her to do, and for the moment believed that
she was doing welL She went to her writing-table
and wrote to Captain Esher.

Dear Captain Esher," she began, " I trust
that you will pardon me for troubling you
with a letter ; but I have to write on a matter
of importance which I do not wish to make
public.

*' A woman was brought to my house last
night in a very sad condition. She was found
fainting by the wayside, greatly in need of
help. She had sustained severe injury through
a fall, and now lies here dangerously ill. She
tells me that her name is Alice Mackworth, and
asks me to send for you. She has your
likeness with her, a lock of your hair, and a
wedding-ring.

If this woman is your wife — and although
we were told that she was dead, I am inclined
to think that this is the case — will you not
come to her, and as far as possible repair the
wrong that you once did ? Whoever she maybe,

she has asked to see you. It is only just
that I should tell you this, and give you the
opportunity of setting matters right. She
will be here until you come, and I beg of you
not to delay. — Yours truly,

Magdalen Lingered."

She knew that he was abroad, so she
enclosed her missive in an envelope addressed
to his solicitors, with a request that it should
be forwarded.

Then she began to be afraid of what she
had done. It was not that she believed herself
mistaken in the facts. As the days went
on she saw no reason to suspect that the
stranger who had come to her door was any
other than the person that she gave herself out
to be. " Alice Mackworth " was her name, she
repeated ; and Magdalen grew into the habit
of calling her simply by her first name. She
seemed uneasy if any other name were used ;
and, as perfect tranquillity of mind and body
was the first thing requisite for her recovery,
Magdalen humoured her in this as in every

other matter. But to the household in general
she was known as Mrs. Mackworth.

More of her story she had not seemed
inclined to tell. A long, tedious illness
followed upon her entrance to Magdalen's
house, and made her hostess loath to question
her. And the doctor sometimes hinted that
there was some strange weakness of intellect,
some lapse of memory, the extent of which he
could not exactly fathom. It was best to
treat her like an ailing child, and recall
nothing painful to her mind just yet.

Weeks passed away before an answer
arrived from Captain Esher. But it came at
last, and this was what Magdalen read.

Dear Miss Lingered,

"Your kind interest in me and my affairs
has afforded me the deepest gratification.
I am sorry that absence and press of business
engagements will prevent me for the present
from availing myself of your welcome invitation,
but at some future time I shall be very
glad to renew our old acquaintance.

Let me assure you that the person you
speak of has no connection of any kind with
me, and is probably presuming on your goodness.
My poor wife most certainly died in
her sister's house at Manchester ; I have seen
the certificate of her death, and her tombstone
in Hulme Churchyard : I have also spoken
with persons who 'saw her die. There is
therefore not the faintest need for you to
distress yourself on her account.

Permit me to thank you for a communication
which I take as a token of more friendly
feeling than you have of late accorded to one
who still humbly considers himself — Your
devoted servant, Philip Esher."

Magdalen pushed the letter away from her
with burning cheeks and flaming eyes. Was
this all that she had gained by her championship
of Alice's wrongs ? It was plain what
Philip thought ; he looked on her letter simply
as an invitation to him to come back to her !

And the worst of it was, she felt sure that,
sooner or later, he would come !

HIS SISTERS.

Ix spite of Max's assertion that he had no

influence with his father, Mr. Brendon was

always ready to listen to suggestions from

him, and anxious if possible, to act on them.

It was owing to his representations, therefore,

that a house in Gay Street was let at a

nominal rent (which Max himself undertook

to pay) to Mr. St. Aidan, who thereupon

started a series of classes and evening lectures

for boys and working-men. Max brought his

own lads, and thus formed a nucleus of an

institution which later on developed great

proportions, and became an undoubted powder

in Scarsfield. He himself taught a class two

or three evenings in the week, and other

helpers were rapidly found. Miss Lingered


gave three evenings a week, and started a
class for girls as well as for working-men.
Lie came into contact occasionally with Max
at these Gay Street rooms, but only occasionally,
for he was too much occupied at this
time to think long of anything but business,
and when he had finished his lesson to the
boys he generally went back to the office
instead of waiting to see the other teachers.

He had lately been thrown into company
with a man named Darley, the proprietor in
part of some chemical works, in which Mr.
Brendon was already interested, although his
name did not appear in business transactions.
Max who was his father's right' hand in everything,
had obtained for himself a small share in
the chemical works, and had them much more
at heart than his father's business. When
Darley, becoming involved in money difficulties,
desired to get rid of his responsibilities,
it occurred to Max, who had a strong speculative
turn, that he might purchase the
concern " and become sole proprietor. This,

of course, he could not do without his father's
co-operation, and, as he was not fond of asking-favours,
some time elapsed before he could
make up his mind to broach the subject.
Finding, however, that he would lose his
chance if he did not act quickly, he mentioned
the project to his father in a careless, off-hand
manner, as if it were merely a sudden thought.
Mr. Brendon cut him short at once. He had
no money to spare for risky investments.
Darley's works had never been successful;
they were in an unfortunate spot, whence the
fumes where killing all the trees in Captain
Esher's park. Esher had already threatened
to prosecute the proprietor, and might do it
at any time. Besides, Max ought to be contented
with his present position. Max said,
*' Very well ; there 's an end of it, then," and
changed the subject.

But later in the day Mr. Brendon reverted
to it. He asked some questions, which brought
to light the fact that Max had been seriously
studying the details of the business. Unconsciously

lie betrayed, too, that he had set his
heart on the scheme ; and JMr. Brendon was
not the man to be uninfluenced by his son s
desires. He set off for Darley's works without
saying any more to Max, inspected the place,
saw Darley and his own solicitor, and then
came back to his private room at the office,
where Max was as usual quietly and efficiently
busy.

^Tiat would Cecil say to that scheme of
yours ? He might think it unfair, eh ? " said
the father, turning his back on Max, as he
opened a drawer and pulled out some
papers.

A gleam came into the young man's eyes,
but he simply answered, after a pause, " You
mean about Darley's place ? "

'' Yes. If you 're equal with Cecil here,
and master there, what will he say ? And
what will your mother say?" Mr. Brendon
closed the drawer and turned round, looking
shrewdly at his son from under his grizzled
eye-brows.

I could drop this," said Max — meaning
his work in Mr. Brendon's ofl&ce.

But I don't want you to drop this."

"The matter had better end there, then,"
said Max, coolly returning to his work, as if
there were nothing more to say. But he was
not discouraged : he knew his father's ways.

Mr. Brendon grunted, and kept silence.

'' You 've not been altogether well treated,"
lie said, presently, in a reflective tone of
voice. '* You had the first place here before
Cecil came back : it was rather like cutting
you out when I installed him in the office,
wasn't it ? "

I never made any objection," said Max,
rather gruffly. Certainly father and son were
very much alike.

You might have done. I always meant to
arrange something special for you, if he stayed
on ; but I did not think of your leaving us.
I don't see how we are to get on without
you.

"I won't leave you, then," said Max, without

looking up from his writing. " Put it out
of your head, sir. I was a fool to mention
it."

You were anything but a fool to mention
it," responded Mr. Brendon with a short
laugh. " I have been over the works this
afternoon. I fancy that they would pay in
the long run. I might take Cecil into partnership
by way of a sop to him and his
mother, and set you up independent of us
altogether."

Max laid down his pen, and put his hands
before him on the desk, pressing his fingertips
together in a reflective manner. "Who
would take my place here ?" he asked. " Cecil
could not."

Cecil 's a terribly useless fellow. No, I
should have to look after things more closely
than I have been doing hitherto."

"That would not do for you, father. Let
me stay on here for a time, gradually dropping
the work as I see my way, and training one or
two of the office fellows to divide it between

them. There is young Chaloner ; he 's a
bright lad : and James Lloyd, a thoroughly
conscientious fellow."

'too much for you to do."

I think not. Darley's place is not fifteen
minutes' walk down the canal bank from here.
I timed it yesterday."

How long have you had this plan in your
head, I should like to know ? "

"Only for a short time." And then Mr.
Brendon entered upon business details, in
which the two were speedily absorbed. Mr.
Brendon concluded the discussion in these
words : —

It seems as if it would do. Of course I
shall have to change the disposition of my
capital in my will if I do this for you. You
are getting your share now, you understand."

Certainly, sir."

I would rather do more than less for you,.
Max, but I must consider others as well as
you. I shall be sorry to lose you from the
office."

You won't lose me yet," said Max, taking
the hand that his father held out to him.
I shall not go until everything is in good
trim here. I am very much obliged to you,
sir "

'eyes, yes, we'll take all that for granted.
Walk down with me to Darley's, will you ? "

Thus intentionally was a matter settled
which involved a complete change in the
manner of Max's life and his position in the
world. He had thought of borrowing capital
from his father, and paying back the loan by
instalments, but Mr. Brendon chose rather to
purchase the works and transfer the whole
right to his son by deed of gift, together
with capital sufficient to start him in an independent
career. These arrangements took
some time to carry out, but eventually Max
became sole proprietor of " Darley's Caustic
Works," as the building was generally called,
and seemed likely to develop into a prosperous
man on his own account.

]\Iax was very much gratified. It had been

R

the dream of his life to work for himself, not
as a subordinate, but as a master, and,
although he would not have acknowledged the
fact, he had been bitterly disappointed when
Cecil's return to Scarsfield had deprived him
of the place in his father's office which seemed
to be his by right.

He did not now entirely discontinue attendance
at his father's office, but managed to get
through a good deal of his old work by way of
screening Cecil's deficiencies and making things
easy for Robert Chaloner. In addition to his
room at home he had a bedroom fitted up for
himself at the Caustic Works, so that he
might sleep there when he preferred not to
annoy his mother by coming home late at
nio'ht. His ambition was to have a house of
his own — a home, where, until lately, he had
imagined that Ursula should hold sway. But
recently there had come a slight distaste for
the notion of Ursula's management. He loved
his sister as dearly as ever, but he began to
feel that he wanted more than a sister's help :

he wanted a different kind of affection — the
tenderness and the joy that come of a woman's
love. In short, Max wanted to marry, and,
again, until lately, he would have said that he
knew precisely the kind of woman whom he
wished to make his wife. She must be his
junior by some years ; she must be pretty,
amiable, engaging, teachable ; he would rather
she were poor than rich, and he was quite sure
that he did not want her to have strong
opinions on religious subjects.

Lenore Chaloner was his ideal woman ; and
he had several times thought seriously of
asking her to be his wife. Unless, of course,
Cecil meant to marry her.

By which it may safely be concluded that
Max was not in love with Lenore Chaloner.
He had an idea that he would not marry for
love ; he had had a sharp experience of " calf-love
" before he was twenty, and now, he
imagined, the time had come for making a
wise and prudent choice, undisturbed by
passionate folly of any kind.

It was an odd thing, he considered, that
Lenore's image had of late seemed somewhat
blurred and indistinct in his mind, as if he
were forgetting its graceful outlines. Instead
of it there rose up before him continually the
picture of another and very different face ;
pale, serene, grave, yet sweet, with finely-cut
features, broad tranquil brows, hair black as
night, and deep, dark eyes that held both
sadness and knowledge in their liquid depths.
A contrast indeed to Lenore's girlish prettiness
! This was the face of a mature woman,
who had known what it was to suffer and to
love, and with such a woman Max was certain
that he had no concern. She was flatly
opposite to all his theories of what a woman
ought to be. But, strangely enough, he could
not get Magdalen Lingered's face out of his
mind.

It was partly for this reason that he did not
linger long at Gay Street on the evenings
when Magdalen was to be there. " An
infatuation for a face," as he called it to himself,

ought to be discouraged. He tried not to
see her, not to speak to her. And it was easy
enough to avoid her, for she never thrust herself
in his way. Mr. St. Aidan thought that
his interest in the classes for working; men
was dying out, but this was not the case,
though he was sometimes so tired that it was
as much as he could do not to fall asleep over
the wearisome reading and writing; lessons.
He had a careworn look, and excused himself
from one or two of the Eector's invitations on
the ground of want of time. " Making haste
to be rich ! " observed ]mr. St. Aidan to his
wife, with a half-sad, half-contemptuous smile.
Poor fellow ! I am disappointed in him
after all."

Ursula was right when she once said that
Max was more misunderstood by his friends
than by his enemies.

It was by accident rather than design that
he met Miss Lino;ard one evening; after the
l3oys had gone away. Ten o'clock had struck,
and Max had volunteered to help the Eector

in rearranging some books in a cupboard. To
tell the truth, that vision of a face had been
unusually troublesome all day, and he felt
inclined to try whether a meeting with its
owner would not lay the ghost. He had not
seen her for some time, and he was startled
by the pallor and the weariness of her face.

'await for me a moment," said Mr. St.
Aidan, bustling away into another class-room
with a pile of linen-covered books. " 1 11
escort you home, Madge."

Miss Inward sank down on one of the
benches with an unconscious air of fatigue
which struck pain to Max's heart. For a
moment she closed her eyes.

"You do too much," Max said to her
abruptly. "You are over-tired. You ought
not to have come to-night."

She opened her eyes with a look of slight
surprise.

There is no one to take my place here,"
she answered, gently.

"No one can do your work as you do it,"

said Max, almost roughly ; ''I know that well
enough, but surely somebody might be found
to help." Then he broke off, and added, with
a vexed knitting of the brows, " I beg your
pardon. Of course it's no business of
mine."

She smiled. She was not offended, he
remarked, but she looked a trifle roused and
amused. He turned away, impatient and
angry with himself. Why should he have
manifested any interest in her doings ? They
did not matter to him. Only he did not like
to see a woman half killing herself with work
—that was all.

'' Your sister teaches in the Sunday school
at ■ St. Jude's, Mr. Brendon," said Magdalen,
presently. " Do you think that she would
help us here ? "

Max looked at her and hesitated. " I don't
know. She might. Shall I ask her ? "

I thought of calling; on Mrs. Brendon,"
said Magdalen, " and trying to enlist Miss
Brendon' s sympathies."

I 'm afraid," said Max, in a low tone, " that
her sympathies are not easily enlisted."

Here Mr. St. jiidan returned, and nothing
more was said. Magdalen was a little surprised
by Max's manner, and wondered whether
he judged his sister harshly, or whether she
were really a very impracticable person.

She paid her visit next day and formed her
own conclusions.

Mrs. Brendon was lofty and patronising :
Gertrude uninteresting' and uninterested.

o

Cecil lounged in and out of the room again,
superciliously polite ; Bessie was forward and
pert, and sulked when her mother snubbed
her. Ursula did not appear.

Magdalen's keen eyes observed all that was
painful in the scene, and she judged leniently
of Max's shortcomings ever afterwards. It
must have been uphill work for him to interest
himself in the poor at all, after years spent in
the midst of such a family.

She met with no ■ success when she asked
Gertrude to help her With her class. Gertrude

had no fancy for giving up even one evening
a week for the sake of a " set of shop girls."
Neither aid nor sympathy could be looked for
from mother or daughter ; and when Magdalen
rose to go she felt chilled and discouraged,
although her gentle serenity was apparently
undisturbed.

She did not see Max again for a couple of
nights, and she noticed, when they met, that
his face wore a singularly troubled and dissatisfied
expression.

I was unsuccessful," she said to him, with
a smile.

Yes, I know. I am sorry. You did not
see Ursula ? "

No. Is she another sister ? "

She is too young and too — too — inexperienced
to be of any use, I am afraid ; but she
would like to come for one evenings to look
and listen, if you would allow her. She has
teased me into asking you."

I shall be delighted to see her. Perhaps
Mrs. Brendon will let her come regularly ? "

** I can't say," Max replied, rather shortly.
I don't think she wishes it : but Ursula
generally gets her own way."

The dissatisfaction of his tone was evident.
Magdalen wondered, but did not like to question.
Perhaps Ursula was only a repetition of
Gertrude, with a little school girl curiosity
superadded ! But she invited him to bring
her, whenever Ursula liked to come.

Max's own opinion was that permission for
Ursula's visit had been dearly bought by a
violent quarrel between the girl and her
mother, and a subsequent appeal to Mr.
Brendon, who had decided in Ursula's favour.
Mrs. Brendon was deeply offended ; Ursula,
saucily triumphant. Max, sore and bitter in
heart at the unhappy state of affairs, manifested
his dissatisfaction by appearing only at
meals and wearing his gloomiest countenance.

He escorted her to Gay Street, as he had
promised to do, but he said scarcely a word to
her on the way thither, and Ursula, usually
on such good terms with him, felt that she

was in disgrace. She was too proud to let
him see that this troubled her ; and her eyes
were very bright, her smiles very sunny, when
she was introduced to Miss Lingard^ with
whom Max left her when he went to his own
class. At the close of the evening he went
back for her, and found her talking eagerly
with Magdalen. It was plain that she had
been enjoying herself; her colour and her
animated look told Max as much. " Anything
new ! " he muttered to himself, knitting
his brow as he waited for her to don her outdoor
attire.

You'll let me come every week, Miss
Lingered, will you not ? " Ursula was saying
eagerly. " I should dearly like to teach that
little lame girl — oh, it will be delightful 1
Every Wednesday at eight o'clock. I '11 be
most regular "

^' Ursula ! " Max could not keep his voice
from growing peremptory, and his brows dark.
*' You are not free to dispose of your time in
that way."

Thank you, Mr. Brendon," said Magdalen,
who had been looking half-pleased and half-perplexed.
" I was going to ask her a question
about her home duties."

Ursula gave her shoulders an impatient
twist.

Do you think," Magdalen asked, with a
glance at Max's face, " that Mrs. Brendon
would object to her coming to help me now
and then ? "

I am sure of it," said Max, moodily.
'ursula has her studies; she will not be
allowed to leave them for a whole evening
once a week."

Ursula's eyes flashed angrily, and then as
suddenly filled with tears. Magdalen saw
the change in the girl's face, and pitied her.
She could not quite understand Max's tone ;
it seemed to her harsh and unkind ; but she
did not know all that had gone before. As it
chanced, however, she said the very thing
that was good for Ursula to hear.

Patience, my dear ! " she murmured, laying

her hand caressingly on the girl's arm.
Perhaps you will be able to help me by and
bye when your school-days are over. I cannot
have you here if your mother disapproves of
your coming ; your work would never prosper
if it began in disobedience."

Ursula lifted her tear-filled e5^es for a
moment to Miss Lingered's face, then stood
downcast and silent. Magdalen drew her
aside ; she did not want Max to hear all that
she said. But Max's ears were very quick.

' We needs must love the highest when
we see it,' " she quoted in her sweet and
gentle voice. " What is ' the highest ' for
you just now ? To follow your mother's
wishes, dear child. No good will come of
neglecting the duty that is nearest to you."

That is," said Ursula, passionately, " that
I am to go home and do lessons, lessons,
lessons, all day long, and have no real work in
the world ; and you will go on working here
and — and — forget all about me ! "

Mag;dalen was inclined to smile at the

tremble in the girl's voice, but sbe restrained
herself. After all, it was nothing to laiigli at.

Poor Ursula, goaded into rebellion in an
uncongenial home, yearning for an affection
which was withheld, had suddenly caught a
glimpse of the beauty of work for others
less favoured by fortune than herself. Her
whole nature responded to Magdalen's gentle
call. She was ready to fall down and worship
her new friend ; and lo, the idol was quietly
rejecting her adoration !

I will not forget you," said Magdalen.
You will help me when you are older. And
perhaps your mother will let you come to the
Priory sometimes when you have a holiday.
I will write a note to her about it. Believe
me, dear, you will be happier if you give
up your own will and your own way. Remember
that ' obedience is better than sacrifice.'
"

She kissed the wistful face as she said goodbye.


Marrying AND Giving IN MARRIAGE.

Ursula was at the impressionable age when
friendship must be enthusiastic if it is friendship
at all. She was burning to confide her
admiration of Miss Lingered to Max, but she
did not like to break the silence in which the
first few minutes of their walk home were
passed. He was seldom angry with her ; but
she knew that he was angry now or else he
would speak instead of lighting a cigar and
then walking with his hands in his pockets ina
sulky way. At last she could bear it no
longer, and said, petulantly,

Why don't you talk ? "

I 've got nothing to say."

^'Why not Then, after a pause, "You



generally help me : you are not usually so
cross."

Help you I What do you wish to do now?
Help you to defy your mother's wishes ? You
know I will not do that. I brought you here
to-night under protest."

Ursula w-as rather dismayed, and, but for
the influence of Magdalen's words, would have
been angry.

I don't mean that," she said, in a suppressed
voice. " I meant — I mean — that I'll
try to do what she wants. Miss Lingered
made me see that I ought."

Oh ! So a word from Miss Lingered, whom
you have never spoken to before, goes further
than anything your own family can say."

You never said anything."

"You knew what I thought. Not that
what I thought seems to have been of much
consequence."

Ursula hated crying ; but she was obliged
to raise her hand and dash away one or two
tears that were dimming her eyes at that

moment. Max saw the gesture, and ibis
heart softened at once.

Never mind," he said, kindly, putting his
hand through her arm. " If you mean to do
better, it doesn't matter who made you seethe
rights and wrong's of the case. There is
something horrible to me in seeing a girl defy
and disobey her mother ; it is unnatural —
unwomanly."

It 's so difficult sometimes to get on with
mamma ! " Ursula murmured with drooping
head. " You don't know how unreasonable
she is ! "

Don't I ? "

He turned away his face and recollected a
few of the instances in which Mrs. Brendon
had been ' unreasonable ' in her demands
upon him : instances far more numerous than
any that Ursula could enumerate. " It 's hard
for a girl to bear," he said to himself with a
stifled sigh, as he drew her closer to his side,
and spoke with a tenderness which he seldom
allowed himself to exhibit.

There are plenty of things in the world
that we must make up our minds to bear
quietly," he said, " and when we know what
our duty is, we have no excuse for neglecting
it. You and I, Ursa, both have our difficulties
; let us put a good face on them and
bear them together. That will help us both."

Dear old Max ! I will try. And you won't
be cross with me any more ? "

Be a good girl, then ! " said Max, suffering
himself to be drawn into the shadow of the
shrubbery (they had reached the garden gate)
and vehemently kissed before they entered the
house. Ursula gave him a curious look as
they stood on the front-door steps together.

"It's an odd thing," she said, 'that you
and Miss Lingered take just the same tone in
talking to me. You have not been consulting
with her, have you ? "

"Not I," laughed Max, feeling his face
grow hot for some reason or other. " I don't
know her well enough to consult her."

Then you must be naturally much alike,"

said Ursula, as she went on. And Max was
annoyed with himself for feeling pleased.

Ursula's submission to Miss Lingered and
Max involved submission to her mother, and
she never did things by halves. Max was
amazed to hear her words that night to Mrs.
Br en don :

Thank you for letting me go to Gay
Street, mamma. I ni sorry I was rude and
ill-tempered about it. I '11 try to behave
better in future."

I 'm sure I hope you will," was Mrs.
Brendon's ungracious response, as she allowed
the girl to kiss her coldly proffered cheek.

But the words had perhaps some effect on
her decision, when a note from Miss Lingered
arrived, inviting Ursula and Bessie to tea at
the Priory on the Saturday following. Mrs.
Brendon was not insensible to the advantages
of being friendly With a woman so intimately
connected with * the County ' as Miss Lin-hard.
Certainly she was living in retirement
for the present, but she might take wp the old

society-life at any moment ; she might even
marry splendidly and keep open house at the
Priory, and then what a good thing it would
be if Ursula had gained a footing there ! Oh,
yes ; the children might go to the Priory ;
that, as Mrs. Brendon carefully explained, was
a very different thing from joining Miss
Lingered in foolish schemes at Gay Street.
Ursula curled her lip disdainfully at this distinction,
but wisely restrained her tongue, and
the invitation was accepted.

When Saturday came, however, Bessie had
a cold, and was obliged to stay, at home.
Ursula went, escorted by Max, who was to
take leave of her at the door ; and as he did
not come home to dinner Mrs. Brendon
supposed that he had gone to " his beloved
Chemical Works, as usual." But between
eight and nine o'clock Miss Lingered's carriage
arrived, bringing both Ursula and Max ; and
it transpired, under cross-examination, that
Max also had been to tea at the Priory.

Really," said Lies. Brendon, in a tone of

disgust, " you might have known better, Max.
Of course she did not mean you to go in."

Max cast a comical look of depreciation at
his sister, and was silent.

Max could scarcely help it," said Ursula,
eagerly. " It began to rain just as we reached
the Priory door, and Miss Lingered came up
and insisted on his coming; in. Then the rain
did not stop, and we were all talking and
amusing ourselves, and then tea came in."

I am surprised," said Mrs. Brendon, coldly;
"a very odd thing, indeed! Well," — looking
full at Max — " if you suit each other, you might
do worse. Max. 1 have no doubt that you
could live very comfortably at the Priory."

It was a rare thing for Max to change
colour. On this occasion he actually blushed ;
a dusky red, which would have been painful
to witness by sympathising persons, rushed
into his face and coloured it to the temples.
But Ursula was the only sympathising person
in the room ; the others — Mrs. Brendon,
Gertrude, and Miss Quittenden — were very

much the reverse. He was standing in the
full light of a blazing gas-chandelier, and their
eyes were upon him. It was too uncomfortable
; he bit his lip, and made a step
towards the door.

Mrs. Brendon laughed aloud. " Stay a
moment," she said. " I heard a report the
other day of which I took no notice at the
time ; I see now that it may be true. This
was not the first visit that you have paid
to the Priory, I believe ? "

Ursula started — less at the question than at
the watchful look which showed itself in her
brother's eyes. He paused a moment before
answering.

I have been there once before on business,"
he replied.

Once. Very well. Then I would advise
you," said his mother, in a significant tone,
to time your visits more carefully. It is
well known that you see a great deal of
Miss Lingered, and that you certainly stayed
at her house one night until nearly midnight.

These things do not look well, I assure yon,
and. they are talked about."

Max's eyes lighted up as though by some
inward fire, but he only answered gravely and
steadily,

I have told you already that I have been
to the Priory once only before to-night. It
may have been a little late when I was there,
but as I went on a business matter, that could
not be helped."

*' Indeed ? And how about the woman that
you took to her house one night ? Who was
she, and why did you take her to Miss
Lingered ? Ursula, you had better go away ;
there is no need for you to hear of these
matters."

There is nothing in the least that Ursula
may not hear," said Max, whose look showed
that he was roused at last. "Be so good as
to let her stay and hear the truth of that
story. I found a poor woman by the roadside
one night as I was coming from preston.
She was insensible, and I could not leave her

impelled. I went to the nearest house for
aid. It happened to be Miss Lingered's, and
Miss Lingered was kind enough to take the
poor creature into her own house and nurse
her back to health. I went for Dr. Elbson,
and afterwards I drove him home. The
woman was a stranger to me, and also to
Miss Lingered."

He hesitated a little over his last words.
Was she a stranger to Miss Lingered, after all ?
Then he hurried on.

"That is the whole story. If any foolish
reports have got about the town with respect
to it, I must beg of you to contradict them
when you have the opportunity."

T have only your word for your story. I
can believe anything ridiculous of Miss Lin-hard.
I am sorry that I allowed Ursula to goto
her house. I consider that woman a perfect
fool, and I should not be surprised at anything
she did ; she might even marry — you ! "

The fire in Max's eyes grew brighter than
ever.

Miss Lingered is a woman for whom I
have the greatest respect," he said, "and 1
will not stay to hear her name bandied about
in this way. You oblige me to say, mother,
that unless I and my friends can be treated
with civility in this house, I must make some
arrangement for leaving; it altogether. I
don't wish to do that — for my father's sake,
but I must ask you to remember that I am a
man now, and not a child."

He walked straight out of the room at the
conclusion of his speech, leaving Mrs. Brendon
divided between fear and anger. She knew
well enough that Mr. Brendon would never
forgive her if Max were driven from home by
her bitter tongue ; and secretly she resolved
to curb it a little, so that Max need not carry
out his threat.

Ursula could not escape at once, though she
was longing to go to her brother and express
her sympathy. When she was free, she sped
softly to his room and knocked at the door.
His voice told her to enter, so she crept in.

hushing her movements lest Mrs. Brendon or
Miss Quittenden should hear. The window
was wide open, and he was leaning out of
it, doing nothing. The room was in darkness.


Ursula laid her hand on his shoulder, and
he put up his own to take it.

Dear Max ! I am so sorry."

Don't talk about it, Ursa ; I 'm afraid I
lost my temper."

'you won't go away?" she said, clinging
to him as if afraid.

"Not unless I am driven. A man must
make a home for himself sometime or other,
I suppose. You must come and keep house
for me."

"You'll be getting married," said Ursula ina
low voice.

There was a moment's silence ; then he
turned round and kissed her on the forehead
by way of dismissal.

"You had better go to bed," he said.
Don't fret over my affairs, Ursa. I don't

suppose I shall ever many, so you may makeup
your mind to be my housekeeper."

Ursula ran away to her own room, noticing
as she went that he turned the key sharply in
the lock of his door, as if he meant to guard
himself against all further intrusions.

He told his sister in private next morning
that he did not feel inclined to go to St. Jude's
with his family ; he should go to the Parish
Church. Ursula, of course, could not accompany
him ; and she sighed for the freedom of
action which he possessed. The Parish Church
was the one in which ]mr. St. Aidan officiated
where Mag;dalen and 'her children" went
on Sundays.

Probably Max knew the latter fact. He
was not displeased to find that the verger
had placed him two seats behind Miss Lingered,
in such a position that he could easily see her
face. He wished he knew whether she had
heard the foolish gossip about himself and her.
She must be aware that he was behind her, for
Dolly looked round at him and smiled, and

then whispered into Magdalen's ear. But no
change came over the tranquillity of that fair,
grave face.

Meanwhile the fatigue of the past week's
work was telling upon him. He almost
wished that he was sitting in his accustomed
seat by the stone pillar at St. Jude's, where
he could go to sleep without any one's being
the wiser. But sleep was not to be thought of
when Miss Lingered was in sight, so he leaned
back, crossed his legs, and looked towards the
preacher, who by this time had entered the
pulpit.

' Rejoice, young man, in thy youth,' " —
the Eector's tones rang out sonorously as he
announced his text — " ' and let thy heart cheer
thee in the days of thy youth, and walk in the
ways of thine heart, and in the sight of thine
eyes : but know thou that for all these things
God will bring thee into judgment.' "

Max was too sleepy to listen. He was
thinking about the many-coloured lights from
the windows, the form of the interlacing

arches overhead, the pure profile that Miss
Lingered turned to him as she sat with her
face towards the pulpit, when — crash ! his
prayer-book, which he had carelessly kept in
his hand, fell to the floor, its clasp striking
heavily against the stones. He saw Dolly's
bright eyes fixed upon him with a look of
deep reprobation, and felt so discomposed and
so wide awake that he heard the last few
words of the sermon very distinctly. The
Eector was quoting Frederick Robertson, and
his sentences lingered for many a long day in
Max's mind. " ' What is it which is to you
the greatest and the best that you would
desire to realise ? The character of the rich
man, or the successful, or the admired?
Would the worst misery which could happen
to you be the wreck of prosperity ? — the
worst shame, not to have done wrong, but to
have sunk in the estimation of society ? Then
in the nomenclature of Heaven, where
names cannot stand for things, God sees you
as an idolater — your highest is not His highest.

The name that is above every name is
not the description of your God.' But there
are some among us," said the preacher, and in
what followed Max's eyes rested once more
upon Miss Lingered's face — " there are some
among us to-day of whom, as of Cornelius, it
may be said that their prayers and alms are
come up for a memorial before God ; who offer
up continually a threefold sacrifice — the sacrifice
of praise and prayer, the sacrifice of
penitence and thanksgiving, the sacrifice of
body, soul, and spirit — and these are the men
and women whom you contemn and despise
because their holy lives are a silent reproof to
yours. ' These we have scorned, oh false and
frail ! ' At these, it may be, we have laughed
and sneered because they have lived our
Lord'S blessed Gospel in word, thought, and
deed. Let us then beware how we speak or
think of such a man — of such a woman — lest
we should have to say within ourselves at the
Advent of our Lord, *This was he whom we
had sometimes in derision and a proverb of

reproach : we fools accounted his life madness,
and his end to be without honour : how is he
numbered among the children of God, and his
lot is among the saints. Therefore have we
erred from the way of truth, and the light of
righteousness hath not shined unto us, and
the sun of righteousness rose not upon us. . . .
We have gone through deserts where there
lay no way ; but as for the way of the Lord,
we' have not known it. What hath pride
profited us ? or what good hath riches with
our vaunting brought us ? All those things
are passed away as a shadow. . . . But the
righteous live for evermore'"

Max was none the less interested that the
first distinct thought that crossed his mind
after the benediction was the rather peculiar
one :

She won't fret about a little scandal, if
she 's the woman I take her for ! My lot is
evidently not among the saints."

And he went home to dinner.

Perhaps it was fortunate for him that Miss

Lingered's doings were about this time banished
from Mrs. Brendon's mind by her anxiety concerning
a great bazaar, where she and her
daughters were to preside at one of the stalls
in conjunction with a certain Lady Warrington,
who had been one of Miss Grenvil's friends
before her marriage with Mr. Brendon. Lady
Larpington had two daughters, and Mrs.
Brendon would gladly have sacrificed ten
years of her life if she could see either
Beatrice or Violet affianced to her beloved
Cecil. She was too prudent to take any one,
except perhaps Gertrude, into her confidence ;
and yet all the household knew perfectly well
what she wanted. Even Cecil knew. But he
was too much engrossed with his own concerns
to think much about her plans : certain
complications which had arisen out of his
habit of " letting things drift " were now
causing him a good deal of trouble. He was
not even grateful when Max, by a word or
two of raillery, tried, to put him on his guard.
What a fool you are ! " was all that Cecil

deigned to reply ; not meaning any incivility,
but only that he could do without his
younger brother's interference. Max made
no further remark, but withdrew into himself,
as a snail retires into its shell when a too
confidingly protruded horn has come into
contact with foreign and probably inimical
ladies.

Cecil's behaviour had of late puzzled his
friends, and it had puzzled Lenore Chaloner
most of all. Up to that evening on which she
had ventured a criticism upon his conduct,
and then declined to go out with him, he had
been constant in his attentions to her. He
had then, be it remembered, told her that he
was going to the Roslyns'. Since that day he
had been seen at the Roslyns' house time aftertime
; he had played billiards with the son of
the house, tennis with the daughter : he had
walked, driven, and boated with Miss Roslyn,
and had been asked more than once whether
it were true that he was about to marry her.
Something', though not all, of this had come

to Mrs. Brendon's ears, and seriously disturbed
her; lie had never approved of his
flirtation as she called it, with Lenore : but
an engagement, or even a flirtation, with Kuby
Eoslyn was far less to her taste. Besides, she
knew, and Cecil knew too, that Mr. Brendon
would vigorously oppose a marriage with
one of the Roslyn family. He had had business
dealings with old Mr. Eoslyn, in which
he had accused Roslyn of actual dishonesty,
and there was a very bitter feeling between
the two men. And if Mr. Brendon opposed
his son's marriage, it was likely that his opposition
would be successful, for he had not let
Cecil out of leading strings as yet, and the
young man was entirely dependent upon him.
It was for this reason that Mrs. Brendon was
exceedingly jealous of Max's freedom from all
trammels, and thought that Cecil was treated
by his father with great injustice. If she
could only induce him to marry a girl of good
family like Beatrice Larpington, she thought
that Mr. Brendon would make the young

couple a handsome allowance, so as to relieve
Cecil from the necessity of working. Thus
she schemed and planned for her eldest son,
not knowing that all she did tended to his
harm rather than to his good, by making him
more selfish, more effeminate, more despondent
of himself, than even nature had fashioned
him of her own free will.

The Bazaar was to last three days, and the
Brendons were busy at the Town Hall all the
time ; but Lenore Chaloner, who had promised
to help at the stall of a Miss Mann,
was not able to appear until the evening of
the second day. Her grandmother had been
ill, and required her presence at home. She
looked very pretty as she took her place.
She was dressed in white cashmere, soft and
warm, because the November winds had
begun to blow ; her brown hair fell in loose
silky weaves over her white forehead : her
delicate cheeks were rosy, her hazel eyes bright
with anticipation. She had not seen Cecil for
long ! and he surely would be there ! Surely,

surely, he would speak to her, and she should
have him by her side once more !

He came : she saw him at his mother's stall,
talking to the Warrington. He did not look
her way. Ah, yes, he did — she got a still'
]pow, unaccompanied by a smile or any sign
of friendliness. Lenore's heart stood still.
What had she done ? what was the matter ?
why did Cecil look so white and strange '?
She turned back to her goods and began to
tie up parcels with trembling fingers and
dimmed eyes. Was she to be a stranger to
him henceforward ? she was asking of herself.
Even if he cared for her no longer, she
thought that he might at least show her
ordinary civility. How could he be so
cruel?

She retreated to a bench behind the stall,
and sat down, wondering why she should feel
so unutterably tired. She sat there, alone,
for some moments, until suddenly the sound
of voices fell upon her ear : two persons had
come to a bench belonging to the next stall,

and had seated themselves with their backs to
Lenore. Evidently they were engaged in
earnest conversation, and did not notice the
slender little figure on the other side.

'' If you care for me as much as you say
you do " — Lenore recognised Ruby Roslyn's
voice — "you ought to make our engagement
public. Why need you be so afraid of your
other ? I 'm not afraid of mine ! "

You forget that I am absolutely dependent
on my father," was the answer. It was
Cecil who spoke.

Tell me at once that you are tired of me,"
Ruby broke out passionately. " Then I shall
know what you mean."

How could I be tired of you, darling ! "
said Cecil. But his voice had a weary
sound.

Lenore rose hastily. She could bear no
more. And as she moved away, Cecil, hearing
the sound, sprang up and looked to see
who had been sitting so near. Starting a
little, he caught sight of her face — pale,

patient, mutely reproachful, yet resigned.
His eyes fell : he sighed bitterly as he turned
back to the woman whom he had taught to
love, but whom he loved not in return. Had
he ruined the happiness of two lives ? of
Lenore's life, as well as of his own ?

Cecil's explanation.

Lenore went back to her duties at the stall,

although the bright lights and colours swam

in a confused mist before her eyes, and the

strains of the military band sounded to her a

long way off. She did not know that her face

was pale, or that there was a look of pain in

her soft eyes ; but Cecil Brendon, although

keeping well aloof, was remorsefully aware of

her changed expression. Ruby Ros1}ti had

at length gone home ; and when she was

out of sight he ventured to draw nearer to

Lenore. Before she knew that he was

beside her, he had whispered a word into

her ear :

Lenore ! let me explain "

She started and looked up. Then she



moved away from him, and began quietly to
rearrange the articles for sale upon her stall.
Not a word could she utter ; but the action
was significant enough,

Cecil did not try to speak again, but with a
vexed, miserable face, hovered round her while
she steadily attended to her goods and her
customers. Then he quietly went and fetched
a cap of tea, of which she stood in great need,
for she was faint with weariness of body and
mind.

No, thanks."

You mast : you are killing yourself."

She made a gesture as if she would have
said, " What does that matter ? " and motioned
away the cup. He jut it down on the table,
and retired to a little distance, hoping to see
her take it. She did take it up — at last ! —
but only to convey it to Miss Mann, dio
drank every drop lingering and appreciatively.


Cecil watched, and hated Miss Mann from
the bottom of his heart.

He hated his brother almost more, for the
time being, when he saw Max enter the hall,
and immediately make his way up to Lenore.
You look very tired : shall I get you some
tea ? " was the first question. Lenore said
"Yes, please," with a sense of relief, and
drank the tea thirstily. "When Max took
away the cup, Cecil could not refrain from
drawing near to murmur,

So you refused because you would not
take anything from me ! "

Miss Mann was very tired," was Lenore's
response.

You can pity every one but me."

You do not need pity."

Do I not ? Look at me."

The egoism of his utterances was less

o

apparent to Lenore than the trouble in his
voice. Yet she did not answer : she was
resolved to stand firm against his pleading,
but a mist swam before her eyes.

Please don't talk to me : I must help Miss
Mann:"

I must talk to you : I must explain — I
can t let you think as you do of me."

"This is no time or place for explain.


It is the time — I will find a place. The
ante-room where the players go for refreshments
is quite deserted : let me have five
minutes only. Lenore, you are cruel — cruel ;
and I am the most miserable man on earth."

The low tones of impassioned pleading were
not lost upon her : she hesitated, faltered,
Five minutes only," and found her hand
placed within his arm, as he led her instantly
away from the stall through the crowded room
to a spot in which he thought that they could
speak together in peace. It was a small room,
dimly lighted, and separated from the Town
Hall itself by a passage and another apartment.
There was very little danger of
interruption, so long, at least, as the musicians
were still playing.

Lenore sank down in the chair that Cecil
dragged out from the wall for her; and

he, bending over her, saw how pale she
looked.

You are tired : thoroughly exhausted," he
said. " Won't you let me fetch you a glass of
Wine 5

"I never drink wine, thank you," she
answered, with a great effort to keep her
voice steady enough for even those trivial
words.

*' It isn't that you never drink wine ; it is
that you will not let me do anything for you.
I have offended you, but haven't you punished
me already ? Will you never believe in me
again, Lenore, my darling '? "

He saw that she shuddered slightly, and
turned away from him.

"Don't; you hurt me," she said, with an
accent as of physical pain.

Cecil was on his knees beside her next
moment.

Hurt you, my darling ; hurt you f What
have I done ? " and he wound his arm round
her, for the shiver that again ran through her

frame, and the whiteness of her lips, made
him fear that she was about to faint. But at
his touch she recovered herself.

I am tired, as you say," she answered,
looking him full in the face, in spite of the
weakness that still threatened to overcome
her; "I have had too much to do, and —
please take away your arm, Cecil ; it has no
business there. Had you not better get up ? "

*not till you tell me how I have hurt
you."

"You will force me to leave you, Cecil."

"No, no; I will force you to stay, my
darling," and before she could prevent him he
had seized both her hands, and was covering
them with kisses.

"Cecil," she said, and then stopped, and
almost wept with shame and anger, " how dare
you ? how can you ? Oh, you hurt me by
this more than by anything else ! " — and her
tears fell fast and unrestrainedly.

Cecil released her hands as suddenly as he
had grasped them.

Hurt you hy showing that I love you ? "
he asked, slowly. " How can that be ? It
might have hurt you if — if you had loved meas
I love you, but that, you know, you did
not do. Thank God for it ! If you had
loved me, we should indeed be miserable
now."

Lenore buried her face in her hands. Cecil
rose, walked to the mantelpiece, then turned
and looked at her irresolutely.

'you know," he went on, "that I have
always loved you. always, Lenore ; I swear
it. But I thought that you did not care forme.
Could you not have helped me a little ?
Lenore, Lenore, did you not know that I
loved you ? "

Indeed," Lenore replied, like another
Ophelia, " indeed, Cecil, you made me believe
so."

And I did love you ; I love you now," he
cried, but he held himself back, as if afraid to
touch her or to speak too fervently, while a
strangely despairing look came into his eyes.

And I was not mistaken ; you love me
too ? "

"Yes," she answered, lifting her face from
her hands, and meeting his gaze with complete
abandonment of her former reserve : "I love
you with all my heart."

Cecil turned to the mantelpiece and rested
his arms and head upon it. His face was
hidden ; but every now and then his whole
frame was agitated by a long heavy breath,
almost like a sob.

What a blind fool I have been ! " he said
at last. " I love you, Lenore, I love you
better than all the world beside, and yet —
what can I do ? I have promised to marry
Ruby Roslyn."

For a few moments Lenore was silent.
Cecil dared not look up ; he waited for her
to speak, half expecting an outburst of strong
emotion. But her first words were curiously
calm, and spoken in a low, quiet tone.

Why did you make me love you at all,"
she said, " if you could not be true to me ? "

You can't reproach me more bitterly
than I reproach myself," said Cecil's stifled
voice.

I did not mean to reproach you. I have
no right to complain."

Your very tones and looks are a reproach
to me. Do I not see that I have given you
pain ? And we might have been so happy !
Well, perhaps it is better for you ; you will
meet somebody worthier than I am : but if I
had known that you loved me "

Was it my fault, Cecil, that you did not
know 1 "

"No, it was my own ; the worse misery forme
! What a fool I have been ! "

But since it has turned out in this way,"
continued Lenore's low, soft tones, in which
Cecil could hardly distinguish the carefully
smothered ring of pain, " it will be better to
speak of it no more. Why could you not let
the matter rest ? Why make me acknowledge
that I loved you ? For I do love you, Cecil,
dear ; I love you with all my heart " and

here her calmness gave way. '' I shall never
love any one else ; lout you did wrong in
making me tell you of it, and we must forget
it; we shall get over it — in time." And
there she broke down altogether, and could
say no more.

'' I can't bear it," said Cecil, striking his
foot angrily on the floor ; "is any man
compelled to break the heart of the woman
that he loves ? Lenore, I can't bear your
tears ; they make a coward of me'' and he
came and stood beside her, his own eyes
unconsciously filling with bitter drops. " You
shall be my wife in spite of all. It would bea
sin for me to marry another woman, when
T can love none but you."

Lenore caught her breath, and made a
desperate effort at self-control. 'you must
not talk in that way," she gasped.

And why must I not, my own darling ?
We love each other. I have made a mistake
true ; must that mistake spoil our lives forever
? "

Doing right never spoilt any one's life,
Cecil."

"Doing right is loving you, my sweet.
Ah, you forget ; I loved you first. I only
strayed from you to her by chance, as it were,
and for a time ; she has no claim upon me."

'' She can claim your promise. You made
none to me."

'•' But you can claim my heart." And Cecil
put his arms round her and pressed his lips to
her forehead. She tried to thrust him away
from her, but she could not succeed.

'would you have me lie to her and say
I loved her? God knows I have told lies
enough ! You would not ruin me for this life
and the next ? I shall be a ruined man the
day I marry Ruby Roslyn."

And Lenore so far believed this to be true
that she could make little answer.

"Say only that you forgive me for any suffering
I may have caused you, and that you love
me still ; then I shall have strength to live my

life out and make a better thing of it ; but say

u

that you despise and hate me — then what does
it matter what becomes of me ? The sooner
I marry Ruby, or blow my brains out, the
better ! I shall despair of God and man."

*' Hush, Cecil ! " Lenore's composure came
back as his decreased. "You do not speak in
the way to make me love you — only I love
you already ; lout, come what may, you must
do right."

"Must do right? Does that mean that
I must marry a woman whom I — despise ? "

Lenore drew herself away, and looked at
him steadily. "It means," she said, "that
you must not treat Miss Roslyn — as you have
treated me."

Cecil was silent, the hot colour flooding his
face.

"I do not mean to reproach you," said
Lenore, steadily, "but you must think of
what you did. You made me believe in your
love ; you drew me on to love you ; then you
left me without a word ; and though it maybe
wrong to say so now, Cecil, you know that

I did suffer. I thought that my heart would
break. It has not broken ; and yet — and yet
I vdW not let any woman suffer for me as
I have suffered. How could I rejoice if I
knew that she was mourning because I had
won her lover away from her ? No, Cecil ; you
have given that pain to one woman already ;
she has conquered it ; I do not feel it so
keenly now ; and you shall give it to no one
else with my consent."

'^ What can you mean, Lenore ? " asked
Cecil, slowly.

That you shall not break off your engagement
to Miss Eoslyn for my sake."

'• I will not marry Ruby Eoslyn."

'•'And I will not marry you."

"Lenore, Lenore, how can you torture mein
this way ? Is it for punishment ? "

I don't want to punish you, Cecil."

But you do not love me ? "

'' Don't I ? " And she put her hands before
her face.

In a moment Cecil was kneeling before her.

pulling away her fingers and covering them
with kisses, even with tears. For a little time
she could do nothing to check his ardour ; but
at last she recovered her self-possession, and
spoke firmly.

*this is enough," she said, drawing away
her hands and rising from her chair. " I have
seen you for the last time. There must be an
end of it now. Say good-bye, Cecil, and let
me go."

I will not let you go unless you say that
you forgive me."

'' I do forgive you."

Then I will never give you up."

She froze him by a look. " You will not
forget, henceforward," she said, "that Miss
Roslyn is your promised wife."

He turned away half sullenly and let her
pass ; but when she neared the door, she
glanced over her shoulder and saw him standing
listlessly, dejectedly, with drooping head
and sombre, melancholy eyes. Her woman's
nature could not bear the sight. She went

back to him and laid her hand upon his arm.
Dear Cecil," she said, " forgive me if I have
hurt you too. Oh, my darling, good-bye ! "

He tried to draw her to him, but she eluded
his grasp, and fled out of the room. She was
not a moment too soon. The musicians came
Hocking in : " God save the Queen " had just
been played, and the bazaar ^Yas about to
close for the nis^ht. It was after ten o'clock.
Utterly forgetful of home and visitors, Cecil
strode out into the gas-lit streets, conscious
of a savage satisfaction in the fact that a
drizzling rain had begun to fall, and that
in a few minutes he was drenched to the
very skin.

The Warrington, who were staying at Mrs.
Brendon's house, were much disappointed to
find that Cecil did not appear that evening.
Nobody but Mr. Brendon and Max had had
time for dinner that day, so a supper had been
prepared for the bazaar workers, and a very
merry party gathered together in the diningroom.
It was just such an occasion as Cecil

loved, and every one was astonished, and some
were uneasy, when midnight came and he had
not yet returned to the house. Max's conviction
was that he had gone home with the
Roslyns, but he kept that conviction discreetly
to himself. It was nearly one o'clock when
the company dispersed. Max was finally left
to let the last visitor out at the front door,
and to lock up afterwards. Feeling vaguely
uneasy about his brother, he remained for a
few minutes on the door-step, wondering what
had become of him, and whether anything had
gone wrong with his affairs. He had not
liked the look of desperation that he had seen
once or twice lately on Cecil's face. After a
little meditation on the subject, he took a few
steps down the garden walk to find out
whether it was still raining, and to cool himself
after playing a game in the hot, gas-lighted
billiard-room. He almost stumbled
over a dark figure leaning against the railing,
a couple of yards away from the gate.

Hullo ! " he said, rather sharply. Then,

in a quieter tone, '* Oh ! I see. Where have
you been ? "

'' What's that to you?" growled Cecil,
raising himself into an erect posture.

*' Oh, nothing. Didn't anticipate the
pleasure of meeting you here ; that was all."

Cecil's answer was an ejaculation of a kind
so rare from him that Max said immediately',

'^ There' s something wrong ? "

Can't you see that there is ? "

I see that there soon will be, if you don't
look out. Why, man, you're wet through.
There 's a fire in the library ; you had better
come in and have something hot, or you '11 be
laid up."

Cecil submitted, and followed his brother
through the glass doors of the billiard-room
into the library, where a fire still burned
brightly. Pale, wet, jaded, Cecil dropped
into a chair, and cowered over the embers
with a shiver.

Get off* your boots," said Max, prosaically.
And your other things too ; I '11 bring 3'ou

your dressing-gown. You must be daft to
stay out in this wet weather."

And, relieving his feelings with this north-country
expression, he heaped some logs on
the fire, and went upstairs ; whence he
returned with C^ecil's dressing-gown and
slippers.

'you'll be rheumatic tomorrow if you
keep on these clothes," he said, observing that
his brother had not stirred.

Cecil sighed, looked up, and began to unlace
his boots ; seeing which sign of life, Max went
to hunt for the brandy-bottle, hot water, and
a tumbler. It took him some minutes to find
these articles, and when he re-entered the
library he was relieved to see that Cecil had
divested himself of most of his wet clothing,
and had wrapped the dressing-gown round
him. The brandy stopped his shivering, and
made his lips less blue ; it would have been
better if he could eat, but he declined everything
with an impatient shake of the head.

'' You had better go oft* to bed when you

are warm," said Max, stirring the fire with the
tip of his boot. He would never have taken
any of these precautions for himself; but
Cecil's throat and chest were known to be
delicate, and Max did not like his look.

'^ I shall not sleep if I go," Cecil said at last.

"Nonsense, you'll sleep well enough. I
hope there is nothing seriously amiss ? " he
asked, more gravely.

'' Indeed there is." Cecil's sio-h was almost
a groan.

What 's wrong ? "

Cecil was silent for a little time. '' I don't
know that I can do better than tell you," he
said, rousing himself, but carefully averting
his face. " I 'm in an awful mess, and don't
know how to get out of it. Perhaps you can
help me."

"Perhaps so. Go ahead, playfellow."

END OF VOL. I.

in 2010 with funding from

University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign

http://www.archive.org/details/seventytimesseve02serg

% Eobel.

BY

ADELINE SERGEANT,

AUTHOR OF ".lACOBl's Wife"' " NO SAINT," ETC.

IX THREE VOLUMES.
VOL. IL

EDINBURGH:
OLIPHANT, ANDERSON & Farrier.

LONDON : HAMILTON, ADAMS & CO.
188 8.

'Lintel BV LORIMER AND GILLIES,

31 ST. ANDREW SQUARE.

5'e44s
discontents

OF VOL. II.

CHAPTER I.

ME. Brandon INTERFERES.

It 's not a pleasant position," said Cecil,
bending; over the fire ao^ain as if he were cold,
"to be engaged to one girl and in love with
another."

He felt it rather a relief to disburden his
mind of his troubles, even to his unsentimental
younger brother.

Is that your case ? " asked Max.

Exactly."

Max shrugged his shoulders, and reflected

that Cecil must be in a bad way if he could

bear to make such a confession. Nothing

have wruno- from him so humiliation
VOL. II. r.

admission of weakness. But perhaps Max
hardly made sufficient allowance for the difference
in temperament between himself and
Cecil.

"You have promised to marry one of these
Warrington girls, I suppose ? "

'•' Larpington girls ! Eather not."

Who then ? "

'ruby Roslyn," mumbled Cecil, unwillingly.

Max did not speak for a minute. He
turned and looked at his brother with keen,
incredulous eyes and lifted brows ; then, walking
to the table, ostensibly to mix a second
tumbler of brandy and water, but really to
conceal the expression of his face, he said,
curtly, " I wish you joy."

'' It would never have happened," said
Cecil, as if excusing his choice, 'but for an
idiotic mistake on my part. I never thought
that she cared for me — or that I cared for her
so much '

"And who is the 'she?" asked Max,

deliberately dropping a lump of sugar into
the tumbler, and holding it up to the light.

She ? You might know : Lenore Chaloner."

Crash ! — the tumbler had somehow slipped
from Max's hand, and the hot liquid was running
over the carpet.

Confound it ! Why can't you remember
that a fellow has nerves ? " cried Cecil, angrily.

Beg pardon : I forgot your delicate organisation,"
retorted Max, stooping down to pickup
the broken glass. Cecil lay back in his
chair, and watched the collection of the fragments
and the moping up of the fragrant
stream — chiefly by means of handkerchiefs.

'"• I don't often do a thing like that," Max
said, rising with rather a pale face, as if the
breakage had affected his nerves too ; '' but
there 's plenty more hot water, and I '11 get
another tumbler," and ofi" he went to the
pantry.

How did you find out that she 'cared,' as
you express it ? " he said, on his return.

Oh ! " Cecil looked confused, " it came
out : I asked her, for one tliino; "

•' You asJced her ! " There were volumes
of reproach in Max's stern tones.

'' I ought not to have done it, I know, but

I had no idea that she What's the good

of talking about it ? I 've half broken her
heart, and the sooner I go to the devil the
better."

I don't see that that would mend matters,"
said Max, slowly, while Cecil covered his face
with his hands and groaned by way of answer.
•'It's a great pity. In any case, you won't
please everybody. Mother does not like
Lenore, and I don't believe that the governor
will consent to your marrying Miss Roslyn."

'' All the better."

The fact is that you want him to break it
off, and then to profit ley his decision, while
the odium falls on him, and not on you ;
that 's it, I suppose ? "

Cecil winced, but did not reply.

Well," said Max, after a pause, " one
flinty is clear. Yoii can't marry without his
consent, for you have nothing to live upon,
and he will never give his consent to your
marrying Ruby Roslyn. You had better
make a clean breast of it to him, and perhaps
he will see some way of helping you out of
the scrape. I believe that he would like you
to marry Lenore."

She says that the engagement must not
be broken off," said Cecil, abruptly, with his
head still between his hands.

Lenore says so ? Ah, yes, that she wouhl
be sure to say'' A wistful, almost a tender
look came into Max's eyes as he proceeded.
She is a good, brave woman, candid,
generous, worthy of trust and honour ; you
don't deserve her, and you know it. It 's no
good mincing the matter."

"I know it well enough; but she's my
only chance," muttered Cecil. " What will become
of me if I marry that — that other one ? "

'ray, that's your only cry," said Max, a
little bitterly. "What will become of nef
She 's the only chance for me ! Never a
thought of what will become of them;
and you've behaved shamefully to them
both."

•' If that's all the comfort you have to give
me "

Hang it, man ! don't take offence. You
will have to swallow a good many hard words,
I fancy, before things are put straight again.
At the same time, you need not give up hope.
The governor will probably take the matter
entirely out of your hands ; so much the
better for you. Only, if he does settle it,
don't change your mind again. He would not
forgive a second scrape of this kind, you
know. Now you must go to bed, and so must
I, for I am due at the works at six."

When Cecil's aching; head was laid on the
pillow, Max brought him another hot draught,
which he hoped would avert any dangerous

consequences of this imprudence, and as lie
drank it the younger brother tranquilly
observed :

You need not bother your head about a
formal confession of your misdeeds. I '11
mention them casually to the governor tomorrow,
if you like, and then you will have
nothing to do but look penitent and submissive."


Cecil put out his hand impulsively, " AVhat
a good fellow you are Max ! "

Good-night," said Max, squeezing the
slender white fingers extended to him, and
speaking half in earnest, half in joke ; " don't
fall in love with a thuxl party, while we settle
which of the first two you are to marry."

But Cecil could not lauirh : he turned to
the wall and drew the sheet over his face with
a sound suspiciously like a sob.

Max did not go to his room. He crept
softly down to the library, and stood for a
long time gazing into the fire with bent

brows aucl a .somewhat pale look about this
mouth. At last he shook back his head and
shoulders, as though to rid himself of some
unpleasant thoughts, walked to the bookcase
and took out a volume — it was a stiff
geometrical treatise — to which he applied
himself with a sort of dogged earnestness
until he found his eyelids growing heavy.
Then he had two hours' sleep and a bath, and
went down to his chemical works looking — to
use one of Kingsley's expressions — " as fresh
as a rose, and as dour as a door nail." Cecil
put in no appearance at breakfast time, but
his absence was too common an event to be
noticed until his brother had paid a visit to
his room and said to J\Irs. Brendon, *' Cecil 's
not well ; would you mind going to see him ? "
Mrs. Brendon hurried away, and found that
Cecil had caught a severe feverish cold.
Her presence was greatly needed at the Town
Hall, and she had the Warrington on her
hands; but, in spite of all her engagements

she was half disposed to stay at home and
nurse him ; however, the doctor laughed her
fears to scorn, and said that he would be
better in a day or two ; and she contented
herself with giving Gertrude strict orders to
take care of him, and to send for her if he
grew worse.

When Max went into his brother's room in
the evening, Cecil turned his flushed face and
languid eyes anxiously towards him, and
asked a question in his hoarse voice : " Have
you told him yet ? "

Not yet : I have had no chance of seeing
him alone."

"You 11 do it to-nidit ? "

o

"If I can. It 's no good precipitating
matters. Now you 're not to talk, you know."
I want him to hear about it."
Yes, yes ; he '11 hear quite soon enough."
Soon enough for him, I dare say," and
Cecil groaned and coughed, evidently taking
as a reproach.

"Have you heard or seen anything of
Lenore ? " he said, when the coughing fit was
over.

'' I called this afternoon, thinking you
would like to knows how she was. Now, if you
open your lips to speak, you shall not hear
a word about her." Cecil looked up with
longing pathetic eyes, but said nothing.
She had been at the bazaar, but confessed to
feeling tired — and looked it. She didn't say
half-a-dozen words, and I did not stop live
minutes."

She did not mention me ? "

No. For goodness' sake hold your
tongue."

Cecil could not forbear a smile at Max's
peremptoriness, but his face soon regained its
harassed expression, and though he lay still
there was no ease in his posture. From these
signs, as well as fi-om his previous words. Max
decided silently that the best thing he could
do woukl be to speak to Mr. Brendon as soon

as possible. It was not an easy task to do
this, for lie and his father were both unusually
busy; but the absence of Mrs. Brendon and
her daughters gave him the opportunity that
he lacked. He arranged his work so as to
have a quiet half-hour with his father in the
evening after dinner ; and Mr. Brendon led
up to the subject by saying that " Cecil
seemed quite knocked up."

No wonder," said Max, going to the point
at once ; **' worry always upsets Cecil."

Worry ? What 's the matter ^\ with him
now ? "

"Would you like a daughter-in-law,
father?"

"Eh?— Oho!"

Max could not but laugh at these two very
significant interjections, as he went on peeling
a walnut, and waited fur a more definite
answer.

I should like both of you to marry," said
Mr. Brendon, presently. "You have waited

quite long enough, 1 consider. Is Cecil
worrying himself about my consent ? "

Well — in one sense, yes."

*' Why doesn't he come to me for it
then ? "

"He is afraid the story might be a disagreeable
one to you," said Max, warily.

You mean that it is not a creditable one
to him," Mr. Brendon responded, with some
sharpness.

'' I fear I am making a bad advocate," said
Max, without looking up, "so I had better
come to the point at once. Should you object
to his marrying Miss Eoslyn ? "

Mr. Brendon rose from his chair. "I
cannot conceive how you ask me the question.
I object decidedly ; to herself, her antecedents
her education, and everything belonging to
her. Cecil marry John Eoslyn's daughter !
Not while I can prevent it." And in a white
heat of passion, mr. Brendon walked up and
down the room, uttering threats against

Cecil, and bitter denunciations of Koslyn's
dishonesty. '' I tell you, Max, the man 's a
rogue and a swindler ; he '11 be in prison one
of these days. No ; if my son marries a
Koslyn, not one penny of mine shall he ever
touch."

Max waited for a pause, and struck in
coolly. "That determination of yours will
help Cecil out of his difficulties," he said, ina
slightly satirical tone ; " since he has not
the faintest wish to marry Miss Koslyn — sofar
at least as I know."

Mr. Brendon stared. " Then what did you
ask me that question for ? Is it you who want
to marry her ? "

*' No, thank heaven ! But Cecil has had
the misfortune to entangle himself in a sort of
engagement with her, while at the same time
he is in love with somebody else."

Mr. Brendon sat down, and looked as if he
could scarcely give credit to so extraordinary
a statement. His disgust found vent in a

slow but emphatic exclamation. " What a fool
that fellow is ! " Max thought it best to eat
his walnuts in silence for a few minutes,
and, after some reflection, his father said
sharply :

Well, he 's got himself into the mess ; let
him get himself out as he can. Of course, I
should never sanction the engagement, but I
do not see why I should be made a cat's-paw
of, because he wants to marry somebody else.
It 's a discreditable business."

"So it is," said Max, deliberately ; " but I
think that somebody ought to save him from
ruining' himself for life. I don't believe he
has the strength of will to break the engagement
off, and some fine day we shall hear
that Kuby Eoslyn has eloped with him." A
pause. " Unless we marry him out-offhand
to the girl he wants to marry."

'* Who is the girl?"

"Lenore Chaloner."

That alters the case."

"Not logically," said Max, thinking his
father would be the better for a little contradiction.


Loo^ic has nothing to do with it."

"So it seems'

Come now, don't you be impudent to
your father, young fellow" said Mr. Brendon,
whose brow had cleared wonderfully during
the last few minutes. " I should like to hear
when Cecil told you this fine story ? "

Late last night. He had a sort of explanation
with Lenore — a silly thing to do, it
seems to me — and found out that she liked
him, and was very tragic over it, you know.
There has been a nasty complication ; first, he
made love to Lenore, then to Kuby, and
now "

And now to both of them at once. It
appears to me," said Mr. Brendon, " that he
has acted very dishonourably in the matter."

He has been weak, not wilfully wicked.
A good wife would be the saving of him."

Perhaps. I don't know. I think Lenore
Chaloner is too good for him."

We shall have to be careful about Lenore's
feelings. She says that Cecil must fulfil his
engagement to Ruby ; and unless you break
it ois, father, not Cecil, I don't believe she
will halve anything to do with him."

'' She is a good girl," said Mr. Brendon,
thoughtfully. " I should like Cecil to marry
her, though I don't suppose his mother will
approve. I must think over the matter.
Cecil knows that you are telling me, I conclude
? "

He was very anxious that I should do so.
He was going to tell you himself, but I offered
to talk it over with you first, because I —
thought "

Thought what ? "

Max temporised. "Well, sir, Cecil's a
trifle afraid of you when you are angry. Don't
you know how difficult it is to him to tell you
anything that he thinks you will not like ? "

'* He should not do things I don't like, then.
Well, well ! perhaps it was better that I had
not got him here to blow up, for the idea of
his marrying that girl made me very angry.
In fact, I am very angry now."

"Draw it mild with him, won't you, sir?"
said Max, a trifle more eagerly than usual
"He is really suffering for his imprudence."

I don't call it imprudence," observed the
father ; "I call it dishonourable folly and
meanness, and I intend to tell him so. Stuff',
Max ; leave him to me. He does not deserve
Lenore if he can't see that he has treated her
badly."

"He does see that."

All right ; I hope he does. Nay, if he
gets me to do what he wants, he must take a
bit of my mind as well."

And Max was obliged to be content,
although he would fain have had a fuller
assurance that his father was not going to be
hard on Cecil.

VOL. II. c

The following day was a particularly busy
one, and he had time only to snatch his meals
at home, and could not exchange two words
with his brother until evening. About six he
looked into Cecil's room, and found his father
standing by the fire. He would have retired,
but Mr. Brendon called out to him to come
in. Cecil was lying back on his pillows, the
feverish crimson of his cheeks and the
brilliance of his dark eyes making him look
hardly fit for any fresh excitement. He had
always been subject to these attacks of severe
cold and low fever, and the present illness was
unusually prostrating.

Yes," Mr. Brendon was saying as Max
came in, " I can't say that I think your
conduct has been honourable, or even creditable."


Cecil tried to speak, but his voice was nearly
gone, and he could only look half-appealingly
at Max, who said gruffly,

Cecil ought not to talk, even to say so.'

"I don't want him to talk," said Mr.
Brendon. '' I have only required him sofar
to listen to me. I have been telling him
that I shall not consent to his engagement
with Miss Eoslyn, and I have already been
down to her father and said so. That matter
is virtually at an end. Miss Eoslyn is to send
back your ring and other fine presents tomorrow.
After this folly, Cecil, the sooner
you make a sensible marriage the better.
That is all I wish to say just now. The
sooner you get well, the sooner we can put
these affairs into right order."

Cecil managed to croak out the observation
that he was sorry that he had not pleased his
father.

Sorry ? I daresay. People are generally
sorry — afterwards — when they have made
fools of themselves," was Mr. Brendon's grim
reply. "However, least said soonest mended.
I do not want to reproach you either for your
conduct to Miss Eoslyn or to Miss Chaloner,

but to get you out of your present embarrassing
position. When you assume the duties of
a married man, I hope you will learn more
wisdom than you appear to possess at present.
That's enough of the subject. — Your cold
doesn't seem much better."

''He's feverish," said Max, " and wants to
be kept quiet."

And who prevents his being quiet ? You
mean me, I presume," said his father, between
anger and amusement, " Well, all I can dois
to let him alone, then. Good-night, Cecil,"
and he went up to the bed and took his son's
hot hand, not unmindful of the tears that
sprang, chiefly from bodily weakness, to
Cecil's eyes as he did so. "Don't agitate
your mind over this business ; I '11 see you
well out of it. And you may give some
credit to your brother there. But for Inn,
I should never have moved hand or foot in
the matter, I can tell you. I hope you '11
have a better nidit."

Cecil could do little talking, but he was
right in telling himself, if he could tell nobody
else, that father and brother treated him more
leniently than he deserved. He was relieved
to find that Mr. Brendon would not sanction
the engagement, and yet was secretly ashamed
of himself when he acknowledged that his
father's commands would have had little
weight with him had he ivied to keep faith
with Kuby.

His presents to Miss Koslyn came back to
him next morning without a word of expostulation
or farewell.

The settlement of Cecirs affairs did not give
Max much satisfaction. He tlioiight, rightly
enough, that his brother's conduct had been
inexcusable ; and there appeared to him something
mean in the way in which Cecil
sheltered himself behind his father's disapproval
as a means of ridding himself of the
woman to whom he had " made love " without
serious intention of marriage. Cecil's illness,
as well as something inherently lovable in his
nature, made Max less hard upon him than he
would have been on any other man under the
same circumstances ; at the same time, he could
not refrain from uttering a few severe comments

on the matter, even while he was interceding


with this father on Cecil's behalf, and
smoothing Cecil's path for a reconciliation with
Lenore.

It had been a shock to him to find that
Cecil's heart was really given to Lenore
Chaloner. In old days he had certainly
thought that such was the fact; but during
the last three months he had believed, as
everybody else had believed, that Cecil was
thinking no more of her. He had wondered
whether Lenore grieved over Cecil's desertion
for desertion indeed it seemed ; and it
was this doubt that had made him think
more seriously than ever of the possibility of
asking Lenore to be his wife. On reviewing
the past, he could not easily tell why he had
not already done so. The last thing that he
would have acknowledged was that any
other woman had touched his heart more
deeply than Lenore ; and yet if he lead been
a more sentimental man, or more accustomed
to observe the workings of his own mind, he

would have noticed that it was not Lenore
of whom he thought most frequently, not
Lenore whose opinion of his actions was important
to him, not Lenore whose face hovered
before him in his dreams and in the silent
watches of the night. But the last thing that
occurred to him was that he could be in love
with Magdalen Lingered.

He cared for Lenore very much, but in a
brotherly, protecting way. The pain that
Cecil's revelation gave him was caused by
sorrow for her, not for himself He foresaw
unhappiness for her, whether she married Cecil
or whether she did not, and he was grieved to
think of his brother's unworthiness. It was
natural that he should mistake this feeling for
that of love — the sober, rational kind of love
in which he believed — and half persuade
himself that he was suffering for the loss of
Lenore, and that henceforth he must put the
idea of marriage out of his mind.

He went to see Lenore, however ; diffidently,

at first, afterwards with increasing satisfaction.
He found that he did not suffer quite so much
as he had expected, although he kept himself
well in mind of the fact that she would some
day be his sister-in-law, and not his wife. Ina
very short time, indeed, he had almost
forgotten to suffer at all, and thought with
complacency of the time when Cecil should
make a home for himself, and when he — Max
would be always welcome at the house —
first as the bachelor brother ; afterwards,
perhaps, as the bachelor uncle to Cecil's boys
and girls. Max found himself thinking quite
cheerfully of this prospect, and began to
understand that his love-trouble had not gone
very deep.

But as yet the day of Cecil's marriage with
Lenore seemed far distant. It was evident
that she had been bitterly hurt by Cecil's
treatment of her, and that she took Max's
view of his behaviour towards Ruby Roslyn.
She would not allow any one to mention the

subject to her ; she talked of other things if
Cecil's name were mentioned at her grandmother's
table ; she steadily refused all invitations
to the Brendons' house. Plainly it would
be a hard matter to win her back to him, and
Max sometimes wondered whether Cecil would
succeed in his enterprise. He was not very
certain of his brother's steadiness of purpose.

The illness that had assailed Cecil at this
conjuncture was undoubtedly a fortunate turn
in his affairs. It was not exactly a serious
attack, but by it he was secluded in his own
room, safely out of reach of sneers from his
old companions : safe, too, from the displeasure
of his father and the surprise of his
sisters ; or at any rate from absolute expression
of it, for his sisters had no heart to
reopen wounds from which he was suffering so
severely. Of course Gertrude and Ursula
somewhat misunderstood the cause of his
depression, fancying that he had really cared
for Ruby, and was grieving over an enforced

separation from lier; and this misunderstanding
added to the usual coldness of
Ursula's manner towards him, because, in her
opinion, he ought to have been constant to
the woman that he loved, instead of tamely
relinquishing her at a word from his father.
Mr. Brendon, too, could not repress an
occasional dryness of tone or severity of
phrase towards him. He was much vexed to
find that Cecil could behave so foolishly and
so dishonourably. " He had always thought
him a bit of a fool," the father did not scruple
to say in the first moments of his anger, " but
he had had no idea that the lad was a scoundrel,
too." Mrs. Brendon, on the other hand,
declared that poor Cecil had not been to
blame. That artful girl had entrapped him,
and he was quite right to get free from her at
any cost. Thus, though everybody who came
into contact with him considered that he was
very tenderly treated, Cecil was not without
thorns in his pillow ; and conscience and

imagination supplied voice to the reproaches
which nobody uttered in words. Max was
the most agreeable person in the household
to him, because Max did not say soft things
in order to pacify his mind ; and if he thought
that his brother had acted '' like a born idiot,"
did not mind telling him so, whether he had a
cold on his chest or not.

Cecil's recovery was a tedious affair. The
low fever hung about him till he was much
weaker than he ought to have been from so
apparently trivial an illness. His unquietness
of mind retarded his improvement.
Nobody knew how he hungered and thirsted
for Lenore. If she had asked after him, or
sent any message, he felt as though he could
have borne his humiliation of spirit ; but she
let her grandmother do all the questioning
when Max called, and, while really listening
attentively to his answers, never gave the
faintest sign of interest in them. In fact,
though the effort of self-control was sometimes

almost more than she could bear, she acted
perfect indifference with such success that Max
was startled into the conviction that Cecil's
suit was hopeless, and that he would never be
forgiven.

Touched by Cecil's restless misery, Max at
last persuaded his father to go to Lenore and
ask her to take a little pity on the sick man.
But Lenore would not be persuaded. She
declined to pay Cecil a visit, or to promise
forgiveness of any kind.

She's a hard-hearted little thing, although
she looks so frail," Mr. Brendon said afterwards
to Max, in a burst of confidence, '' and
I believe that Cecil has just fooled away all
his chances with her. However, we had
better leave her alone now. When Cecil is
well enough to plead his own cause, perhaps
she will relent. I don't know why / should
mix myself up with these boy and girl love-affairs,"
he added, in a tone of offence, at
which Max laughed heartily.

Max had also a cause for anxiety of which
he could not rid himself. His friend and
favourite, James Lloyd, had recovered from
his accident and returned to the office. His
manner was a little graver than usual, but he
had worked well, and been as simple and
kindly in his ways as ever until the beginning
of Cecil's illness, and the rupture of that
unacknowledged engagement between Cecil
and Kuby Roslyn. Then, Max noticed, his
manner began to change.

It was impossible to suppose that he did
not know part, at least, of the story. The
Eoslyns had not been reticent on the subject.
Kuby herself might perhaps have held her
tongue ; Exit her father, her brother, and her
sisters were very bitter against Mr. Brendon
and his sons. Mr. Koslyn raved about
breach of promise " eases ; and Ted Roslyn
threatened to horsewhip any man who behaved
shabbily to his sister — a vague threat
which did not bode great harm to anybody.

For, after all, it was not Cecil wIlo had renounced
Ruby; Mr. Brendon had taken all
the responsibility on himself, and simply forbidden
the marriage. He, Max, and Lenore
were the only persons who knew the true
state of Cecirs feelings. But did Ruby suspect
it ? And had she told James Lloyd of
her suspicions ? Else, why should his brow
have become gloomy, and why should his
eye be so pertinaciously averted when Max
spoke to him ? This period of gloom and
depression lasted a few days, and then Mr.
Brendon informed his son that young Lloyd
had thrown up his situation and was coming
to the office no more.

'' What 's that for ? " said Max.

Don't know, I am sure. I heard some
rumour of his mother's marrying again ; perhaps
that has something to do with it."

I '11 go round and find out. We shall
miss him."

I 'm not sure that I would have him back

here, even if he changed his mind. I can't
have any shilly-shallying."

But there was no unpleasantness ? nothing
wrong ? "

Oh no, nothing. I don't know in the
least why he wants to leave. I have not had
time to inquire."

You would not mind my taking him on
at the Works, if he would come, I suppose ? "
said Max, who saw a glimmer of reason for
Lloyd's departure from a place where Cecil
would perhaps be master by and bye.

Of course not ; do as you like about that."

Max made his way to Mrs. Lloyd's house
as soon as he had an hour to spare, but was
told that James was not at home. One of the
younger children opened the door and answered
his questions with such a frightened
air that Max's suspicions were aroused. " Is
your mother in ? " he asked.

No — yes — I don't know," said the child,
looking round, as if for help.

Go and see," said Max, good-hiimouredly.
I will wait until you come back."

The child hurriedly decamped ; and Max,
who had always made himself at home at the
Lloyds', walked coolly into the passage and
opened the little parlour door. There he
stood for a moment amazed. The room
seemed full of guests, to his unaccustomed
eyes. Then he took off his hat, said formally,
1 beg your pardon," and returned to the
hall, shutting the door behind him.

Mrs. Lloyd, James Lloyd, and Ruby
Roslyn were in the little parlour, and
Ruby was sobbing as if her heart would
break.

Max walked straight to the front door, and
would have gone out never to enter it again
had not Mrs. Lloyd pursued him. She also
shut the door carefully behind her, thus, as
Max noticed, leaving James and Ruby alone
together.

'' Mr. Max, oh, Mr. Max," she exclaimed,

VOL. IL D

nervously, " please wj:it just one moment.
I 'm so sorry — I hope you won't go away, sir ;
I hope you're not vexed."

Probably the sternness of the face that he
now turned upon her had something to do
with her last words.

I don't think you need have made your
little girl tell lies al)out it," he said. " If you
did not want me to come in, you might have
said so."

Mrs. Lloyd at once dissolved into tears.
I 'm very sorry, sir," she said. " I didn't
mean it ; but Miss Koslyn was there, and Jim
didn't want to say "

It 's of no consequence ; I can see Jim
another time," Max answered, still somewhat
curtly ; but Mrs. Lloyd would not let him go
without further explanations.

We didn't know that it was you, Mr. Max.
We wanted to keep the gossiping neighbours
out, and that was all. For they will talk, and
I 'm sure it doesn't matter to them if the poor

.girl likes to drop iu now and then, and talk
over her troubles "

The murder was out. Mrs. Lloyd stopped
short, remembering to whom she spoke. But
Max did not look angry now, only thoughtful
and attentive.

'' Does she come often ? " he asked, quietly.

"Oh, not so very often," said Mrs. Lloyd,
twisting her watch-guard nervously between
her fingers; "just now and then when she
wants a little sympathy, because it 's a bit
hard for her at home just now "

Does she come to Jim for sympathy ? "

Well, Jim was always fond of her,"
answered Mrs. Lloyd, whose tone had changed
considerably since Max last conversed with
her on the subject, " and if she gets any good
out of a talk with him, I don't see why she
shouldn't have it, poor thing ! "

The two were standing on the door-step,
where the darkness of night was already
beginning to envelop them. Suddenly the

parlour door opened, and a figure emerged
from the inner room. It was Ruby, cloaked
and veiled almost beyond recognition. She
said no word to Mrs. Lloyd, but dashed
between her and ]\Iax, down the path and out
at the gate, without a moment's pause.

There was a little silence. Then Max — still
watching the dark figure before it disappeared
into the night — said quietly,

Will James see me now ? "

Mrs. Lloyd went back to the parlour. Max
could not help hearing a few words of the
colloquy that followed. "Why should he
come ? . . . Don't want any interfering. . . .
Had enough of the Brendons for one while."

o

Such were some of the phrases that fell
upon his ear, in tones that were not those
of the Jim Lloyd that Max used to know.
Mrs. Lloyd's words were indistinguishable :
from the pleading, piteous accents, Max
imagined, however, that she was begging her
son to receive the visitor.

Max would 1)6 put off no longer. He
stepped once more to the parlour door. " It's
the first time you have ever refused to see me,
Jim, ' he said.

Silence fell upon the wrangling tongues. In
the dark little room the three figures stood
motionless for a moment. Then Jim turned
away.

You can come in if you like, sir," he said,
almost sullenly. '' I don't know what you can
have to say to me, that is all. Mother, will
you light the gas ? "

]airs. Lloyd did as she was desired, with
trembling fingers; then let down the blind and
hurried out of the room. She was afraid of
something' that she saw in her son's face.

The two young men stood on opposite sides
of the centre table, facing one another. A
stronger contrast scarcely could have been
presented between any two men of the same
race, and of nearly the same age. One was
broad-shouldered, dark, sturdy, with a look

of vigorous health of body and of mind ; the
other, fair, slight, with sloping shoulders and
slender frame, his blue eyes upright with a
febrile excitement Which he laboured unsuccessfully
to conceal. Max was shocked by the
change in his manner and appearance. The
young man's face was flushed, his brow lowering
; as Max looked at him steadily, he turned
away, and leaned with his arm on the
mantelpiece. Something was evidently very
wrong.

"What's all this about, Jim?" said Max,
using the old friendly voice that was natural
to him, but eyeing Lloyd very keenly all the
time.

All what, sir ? " The tone was dogged
and sullen ; Jim's pliant gentleness of manner
had disappeared.

'' Well — why have you left my whither s
office ? "

"I don't know that that's an' one's business
but my own, sir."

True enough. But a friend has a right to
ask a question when he sees a man throwing
away a good chance in life."

Jim's pale face flushed more deeply than
ever, and the blue veins upon this forehead
began to swell.

There are as good chances on the other
side of the water as there are here, I suppose'
he said, defiantly.

Yes, if you have introductions. I don't
know that you will find it easier to get on in
New York or Philadelphia without them than
you would in Scarsfield or London. However,
there 's a man I know in New York ; I shall
be pleased to write to him about you if you
think of going there. Unless, of course, you
have been offered a berth already."

Jim shook his head.

"You mean it kindly, I dare say," he
responded, with some abatement of the
roughness of his manner, "but you don't
understand. I '11 make my own way without

introductions. I shall get work, I have no
doubt."

At the docks or the wharves, perhaps,"
said Max, rather sharply, " where your
.strength will break down in a week's time.
Men of your physique can't do that sort of
work, Jim. And what will become of your
mother ? "

'* Mother's provided for," said Lloyd, with
a short laugh. " She 's going to marry
Bracy, the joiner, who says he '11 support the
children as well as herself. I am free to do
what I choose."

And is there no other way of using your
freedom but cutting yourself off from your
friends and doing work that will kill you in a
few days or weeks ? If you want to leave
Scarsfield, do it in a rational way. Let me
write to Mr. Brownlow in New York "

'* It 's no use," said Jim, removing his elbow
from the mantelpiece, and for the first time
looking Max fairly in the face. "As I said

before, you don't understand — or you wont
understand, which is perhaps more likely —
you ivont understand that I would rather
starve in the streets than take a penny-piece
from any one of your family again. I should
be ashamed to do it, and so I tell you to your
face. You rich folks think that the poor have
no feelings, no honour, no dignity. I 'm a
poor man myself, but I would die rather than
act as your brother has acted to a girl that
loved him. And not only your brother, but
your father and yourself ! What consideration
had you for her ? what pity ? what generosity ?
Wasn't she as good as you ? She was good
enough to be made love to by Mr. Cecil
Brendon ; good enough to play with, and then
to cast aside ! I '11 have no more to do with
any of the lot of you ; and I take it as an
inside that you should ask me why, when you
know that she 's the woman that I love —
the woman that I should be proud to call
my wife !

IN PERIL OF HIS LIFE.

Max listened very quietly to this tirade.
When Jim had finished, and stood before him
with flushed face and quivering lips, the hand
with which he had struck the table more than
once during his speech still trembling with
agitation, the elder man asked a question that
fell like ice on the young fellow's heated spirit.

Have you taken leave of your senses,
Jim ^ "

*' That's always the way!" cried Lloyd,
turning away and striking his hand upon the
the little painted mantelpiece ; " that 's always
the way ! If a man shows any honest indignation
against a wrong, you say that he 's out

of his senses ! "


*' I think that you must ])e out of your
.senses, certainly, to apply such words either to
my father or to myself," said Max steadily.
You know well enough that we can feel
indignation against wrong-doing. As to my
brother — now, look here, James Lloyd, I will
speak frankly. My brother has been exceedingly
foolish and weak, I grant you that, but
he has not done anything that you have a
right to call him in question for. He and
Miss Roslyn had an understanding between
themselves ; that was no business of yours.
He told his father of the engagement, and his
father objected to it, and threatened to cut off
the supplies unless he gave it up. Well, he
yielded ; what else could he do under the
circumstances ? "

He could have taken his own way, and
worked for a living like an honest man ! " said
James Lloyd, impetuously.

That would have meant struggle and
poverty. Would that sort of life suit Miss

Roslyn, do you think ? I am quite sure that
it would not suit my brother. He is in very
delicate health."

I call it the act of a coward to give up the
woman you love at a father's command," said
Lloyd, in a somewhat grandiloquent manner.
His sentences grew carter and more pointed ashe
went on. " But that wasn't the case. He
did not love her. He wanted to get rid of her.
It was he who grew tired first. He 's broken
her heart."

My good fellow, hearts are not so easily
broken," said Max, a little out of countenance.
Had Jim guessed all this, or was it Ruby dio
put him on this tack ?

Lloyd saw the impression that he had produced,
and continued with increasing vehemence.


She knows how it came about, if nobody
else does. He likes somebody else. And in
order to get him out of the scrape, you and
your father put your heads together to devise

a way of preventing the marriage. Her
father's reputation, her position, the quarrel
between Mr. Koslyn and Mr. Brendon — I
know the whole story."

Scarcely," said Max. " I don't Avisli to
maintain that my brother has acted with
great courage or spirit, lout I do maintain that
he did not break off the engagement with
Miss Roslyn until he was forced to do so by
his father. And I must say too that I don't
think ]\Iiss Roslyn would have made a
good wife for him. On that ground I too was
against the marriage."

'' I knew you were — I knew it. She told
me so. She said that Mr. Brendon said so,
I never should have thought that you would
have helped your brother to do such a
dastardly thing ! "

The impressible young fellow's emotion was
changing; its character. The tears were near
his eyes as he spoke, and he put up his hand
to rule them away.

My dear Jim," said Max, kindly, " nobody
can have been more sorry about the matter
than I. But I don't see that either you or
I could have done anything to stay the course
of events ; and still less do I see why you
should throw up your position and means of
livelihood in this country from some Quixotic
notion about not taking money from our
family. I can understand that you mayn't
care to work under Cecil any longer; if so.
come to me. I should like to have you down
at the Caustic Works, I want a fellow of your
capacity."

Jim shook his head : his face was very pale.

No, Mr. Max, I couldn't do it — unless

'' Unless what ? "

Unless Mr. Cecil where to marry Miss
Koslyn straight away "

Against his father's wishes ? "

"Yes. If he '11 brave the world for her I '11
forgive him everything."

You know that that 's impossible."

"then it's impossible for me to serve any
member of your family, sir. You yourself
will be the first to say that it 's impossible, by
and bye."

Why, what do you mean ? " asked Max,
struck by something indescribably ominous in
the tone. " Why should it be more impossible
by and lye than it is now ? "

Because he '11 have one more chance to do
the right thing ; and if he refuses, then — let
him look out."

Do you mean that for a threat ? "

Never mind what I mean, Mr. Max. I 've
no wish to quarrel with you. I beg your
pardon if I 've said hasty words about your
conduct. I know that it 's only natural that
you should side with your family."

James," said Max, very seriously, " if you
are contemplating — as I can hardly believe
that you are mad enough to contemplate —
any scheme of — of — revenge "

The young fellow burst out laughing. The
laugh was an odd one, hard and forced, and
with it the glitter came back to his arose blue
eyes.

Revenge ? " he said, with scornful emphasis.
" Revenge ? Its right name would be
punishment." Then he turned round to the
mantelpiece again and stood with his head
leaning on his folded arms, heedless of any
further remark that Max addressed to him.

Max took the trouble to treat the matter
very seriously, to argue, even to plead with
him, concerning his wild speeches. But it
was apparently labour thrown away. Jim
would respond neither by look nor word.
Max quitted the house at last, sorrowfully
aware that he had failed to make an impression,
and hoping only that his words would
sink into the hearer's mind by degrees, and
gradually produce some result.

He thought chiefly, however, about the
effect of the whole affair on James Lloyd's

mind. He did not believe that any harm
would come of that half-implied threat, that
talk of revenge or punishment. Lloyd had
hitherto seemed such a gentle-natured fellow,
that it was difficult to realise the depth
of the passions that j)^ss6ssed him. Max
recalled a half - forgotten story of Lloyd's
relations ; two, if not three, of them had
surely gone out of their minds, and ended
their lives either by suicide or in a lunatic
asylum. Was there, some hereditary taint
in the poor lad's blood ? some weakness of
brain that excitement might turn to lunacy?
Max trusted not ; yet felt that were it so,
the poor fellow's bitter rage might more easih'
be forgiven.

He gave Cecil a warning of possible danger,
in a somewhat vague way, for he did not want
to mention James Lloyd's name ; but Cecil
seemed supremely indifferent to the matter.
His health was beginning to return ; and a new
spring of hope was rising within his breast.

VOL. n. E

Christmas Day and New Year's Day had
passed before Cecil was able to venture forth
from the house. Fortunately for him it was
a mild January, and his strength grew apace
in the soft, cloudy weather, which was almost
like that of spring. Max began to lose his
fears concerning him. Nothing more was
heard of Kuby Koslyn, nothing of James
Lloyd ; Lenore had relaxed her severity of
demeanour, and although she would not yet
acknowledge that she had forgiven her
recreant lover, there seemed good hope of her
doing so before very long. Everything was
going well when Cecil, by the fatal weakness
which belonged to his character, again brought
down misfortune on his own head.

He was sitting in the library one morning
and thinking languidly that he would venture
to call upon Miss Chaloner before another day
had passed, when a note was handed to him.
He changed colour as he saw the hand-writing;.
It was that of Ruby Koslyn.

Father wants me to go away from Scars-field
for a time, but I must see you once
before 1 go. Don't say no. It shall be for
the last time. — R. R."

So ran the note.

Cecil temporised. He wrote back, saying
that there was no place in which they could
possibly meet, their respective homes being
least available of all places for that purpose.
Ruby's reply was ready :

"I hear that you have been out walking
several times. You might meet me on the
Quay, at the end of Orwell Lane, about six
o'clock this evening. I shall be there."

Cecil wavered, cursed his ill-luck, and
decided to go. That he was running a risk he
knew well enough ; six o'clock on a January
evening was the worse possible time for him
to make an excursion of the kind, but he had
a weak and foolish feeling that he owed Ruby
the interview that she desired. It was a
difficult thing to escape from the vigilance of

LIBRARY

bis family, but be accomplished this feat by
dint of a Httle insincerity, and repaired to the
Quay at the appointed time.

Tbe place was an odd one for such a meeting.
Tbe stone piers and docks that skirted
the river for some distance presented a very
desolate appearance when the tide was down,
for only when the tide was at its lieig;bt
could much business be transacted. When
Cecil repaired thither the quays were nearly
deserted ; one or two men sat smoking on
barges in the basins, and the fartbermost pier
of all, stretching far out into the river, was
completely empty. Here Cecil encountered
Ruby, and, almost without speaking, they
proceeded towards its most retired corner,
wbicb was bidden from the view even of
ordinary wayfarers by a round tower, occasionally
tenanted l3y a coastguardsman. Eub}-
was dressed with unusual plainness, and wore
a thick veil ; perhaps with unnecessary assumption
of mystery, but at any rate with an

eye to the becoming. When she let the black
gauze fly back over her picturesque hat from
her brilliantly-tinted dark face, and showed
herself dressed in the very darkest of plain
dark dresses, Cecil knew instinctively that she
had never looked so well. He felt himself at
a disadvantage ; he was already languid and
fatigued by the walk, and the cool breeze
made him shiver, and robbed him of his voice.
There was some new softness in Ruby's eyes,
some new timidity in her manner, which
tended to make Cecil more uncomfortable
than he had expected to be. He had
laboured, not unsuccessfully, to believe that
Ruby's heart had never really been touched,
that only her vanity and her ambition were
excited by his flirtation (for so he called it)
with her, and that of the two, he had suffered
more than she. Believing all this, it was
inexplicable and disconcerting to him to see
this chancre in her manner — a change that
told of deeper feeling and stronger passion

than had ever been associated with his ideas
of Ruby Eoslyn.

He did not see — and Ruby did not see —
that another figure was hovering near. A
man had followed the girl as she came down
Orwell Lane ; he had tracked her footsteps
along the quay, and had uow slipped into a
little niche in the stonework of the tower,
where he could lie concealed in the shadows,
within hearing of every word that was spoken.
If Cecil could have seen that crouching figure,
if he could have distinguished in the darkness
the threatening expression of those sullen,
watchful eyes, he might well have weighed his
words. As it was, he feared nothing but an
explosion of wrath from Ruby, and wished the
interview well over.

'' I wanted to see you once more," she said,
laying her unloved hand on Cecil's arm.
Just once ; you don't mind, do you ? "

Mind ! Of course not. I am only too
glad to see you again," he answered — unable,

for the life of him, to speak sincerely, when a
woman's pleading eyes were fixed upon his
face.

"Is it true, Cecil ? Must it all be at an
end 1 " she asked.

He turned away from her and spoke
sharply.

Why on earth do you want to give me
the pain of saying it ? I can't help myself —
I 'm the most miserable dog alive ! " And at
that moment he certainly was sincere.

Kuby burst into tears.

It does give you pain, then ? " she
sobbed. " You do care ? It isn't true what
father has been saying, that you are only too
glad to get rid of me, and that you want to
marry somebody else ? — It isn't true ? "

Cecil stood silent, with downcast eyes. He
could not bring himself, with the thought of
Lenore in his mind, actually to tell a lie.

Our ene^ao^ement is at an end," he said,
after a pause. " What is the use of talking

about it now ? We could not marry without
an income ; we are in exactly the same position,
you and I ; we can do nothing without
the consent of our parents. We are helpless
in the matter."

She pressed closer to him, her eyes shining
through her tears.

But if we where free, Cecil ? — if you had
some money of your own ? You do care forme
a little, don't you ? "

I — 1 (rare for you very much, Ruby ; I
care for your happiness and your welfare,"
said Cecil, faltering.

Fathers don't live for ever," said the girl,
suite unconscious, in her eagerness, of the
thrill of repulsion that ran through Cecil's
whole frame as she spoke, " and our day
might come yet, if only you would wait forme
as I would wait for you. 1 'd wait a lifetime,
Cecil. But perhaps you — you — you've
changed ? "

Cecil turned away his face.

We should never be happy together,
Ruby," he said, trying to pluck up a little
courage, but not daring to meet her eager
glance. " We are too different — different in
our aims, our lives ; different in every wa'.
Love would not be sufficient to disguise this
difference — even from ourselves. Perhaps it
is that we do not love each other enough."

"Speak for yourself!" cried Kuby, in her
impetuous, outspoken way. " I^ "

She suddenly stopped short. x\ deep crimson
Hush rose to her cheeks and forehead ; a
new look came into her eyes. She began to
feel, almost for the first time, that she was
forcing her love upon a man who did not care
for it. Her womanly instincts had never
been much cultivated, but just now they
leaped into sudden life.

"You mean," she said, in an altered tone,
that father was right ? — that I 've been mistaken
after all ? " Her lip trembled, but her
sobs had ceased, though the tears still lingered

on her hot cheek. Cecil leaned his elbows on
the narrow stone parapet, and covered his face
with his hands, saying nothing. The girl's
eyes began to flame.

I see," she said. " I was wrong, then.
I thought — well, it doesn't matter what I
thought. Who 's cut me out ? I Ve a right
to know that, at any rate. Who is she ? "

Lenore's name fell reluctantly from Cecil's
lips. It seemed to him that, as Ruby said,
she had a right to know.

I knew her before I knew you," he
pleaded by way of excuse. '' I had made her

love me — she had a claim on me ^" ' And

then, by one of his many contradictory
impulses, he took a manlier tone. '' I won't
say that. I mean that I loved her all along.
I thought that she did not care for me, and
so 1 tried to forget her. But I shall never
forget her ; I love her with my whole heart,
and no one else."

n his desire to be explicit, Cecil was almost

cruel — as weak men are apt to be. Struck by
the look of pain upon her face, he came closer
to her side, and tried to take her hand. Now
that the decisive words had been spoken, lie
felt brave.

Don't touch me ! " she said, starting back
from him. " Don't come near me ! I hate
you — I despise you ! "

'' I am deeply ashamed of my conduct.
Ruby," said Cecil.

So you should be. But you 're not ; I
know you 're not. You are thinking how soon
you can get away from me and go back to
Lenore — Lenore ! that insignificant, pale-faced
chit ! Well, go to her and forget me, forget
me as soon as you can, and I '11 forget you too.
But no, no, I shan't forget you, that is the
worst of it ; " and the girl's voice rose plaintively
on the still night air — " I shall never,
never forget."

She hid her face in her hands, and stood
motionless for a moment, as if trying to realise

the extent of her despair. Cecil, dismayed by
her vehemence, murmured some words of
commonplace consolation. He did not see,
and she also did not see, the baleful glitter of
the eyes that watched him from that secret
lurking-place ; he could not in the gloom distinguish
the look of set purpose on the
watcher's features, or the threatening gesture
of the watcher s hand. At that moment he
went in peril of his life, and knew it not.

Forgive me," he murmured, more humbly
than he had spoken yet. " It is no use to
say that I am sorry, lout I do grieve deeply.
Ruby, I "

'' Oh, for pity's sake stop ! " she cried, flinging
her hands away from her face with a
gesture of passionate despair. "Do you think
I care whether you are sorry or not ? What
good will your sorrow do ? You have broken
my heart, that's all."

And with a cry more like that of a wounded
animal than a human being, she sped away

from him into the gathering shadows of the
night.

Cecil gathered himself up to follow her, but
his strength was not yet very great, and he
was ashamed and astonished to find himself
shaking from head to foot, dizzy and sick, as
if he had received a blow. Before he could
master himself sufficiently to advance more
than a few steps, she was out of sight. He
paused again and strained his eyes to catch
some glimpse of her, but she was nowhere, to
be seen. Probably she had gone home ; it
was no use to follow her.

He straightened himself up and drew a long-breath
of relief " Thank heaven, that 's
over ! " he muttered, half aloud to himself
He had no thought of being overheard, and
started violently when a low stern voice fell
upon his ear, and a fierce grip was laid upon
his arm.

It 's not over yet," said the voice.
"You've got to smart for what you have done,

Cecil Brendon. She said that you had broken
her heart, and, by God, if you have, you shall
pay for it."

Cecil heard no more. A hail of crushing
blows about his head and shoulders had
brought him to his knees ; once and again the
heavy stick descended, then he fell forward
upon his face and lay quite still.

Ruby*s wrongs had been avenged.

MY WIFE ! "

Max Beexdox came out of his father's house

one evening with bent brow and anxious eyes,

from which it seemed as if sleep had been

banished for more than one long and weary

night. He did not look up as he walked along

the garden-path, but it was evident that his

mind was occupied with a settled purpose, for

he went straight to the gate of the little Ked

House, and knocked with a peculiarly resolute

air at the Red House door.

Lenore saw him come. Her grandmother

was out ; indeed, she and the maid-servant

were alone together in the house. Max was

ushered as usual into the little front sitting

where he found the girl standing near



the centre-table in an expectant attitude.
She looked as if she longed yet dreaded to see
him enter. Her hands were clasped tightly
together ; her eyes were strained and anxious,
her lips white. Max went up to her and held
out his hand ; she put her trembling fingers
into it and looked piteously up into his grave
face, but she could not speak.

I have come to tell you how he is tonight,"
Max said, letting his eyes rest upon
her fair face with pity and tenderness. If
ever he had thought of Lenore as other thana
sister, he had forgotten it ; now and henceforward
she was to him simply the woman
that his brother loved, dear for his sake,
almost as dear as Ursula herself. The grave
sympathy of his voice and eyes gave Tier
courage. She faltered out a question.

He is no worse ? "

No, we think not. The doctor thinks that
he is no worse."

'soh, thank God!" She drew her hand

hurriedly away, and covered her eyes with it,
turning from Max a little, so as, if possible,
to hide the rush of involuntary tears. He
remained silent for a moment or two, and
when she was calmer she began to excuse
herself for her show of emotion.

I did not mean to be so foolish," she said,
but you know how anxious we have all been
during the last three days 1 And now that he
is better "

I am afraid," said Max, reluctantly, " that
I did not say that he was better; only no
worse. "

She caught her breath. " Only no worse ! "

Since he was found insensible on the Quay
and carried home, you know that he has been
in a sort of stupor. The blows upon the head
must have caused some injury to the brain;
and now he is delirious. The doctors want
him to be kept as quiet and calm as possible ;
it is his only chance of recovery. Lenore, he
constantly calls for you."

VOL. II. F

For me ? " She listened, with her eyes
fixed intently on ]\Iax's face.

For you. He wants you to go to him.
The doctors say that your presence might
calm him. Will you come ? "

She did not hesitate, though her face grew
pale and her hands began to tremble. '•' Oh,
take me to him ; take me to him now'' she
said. '' Why do you stay so long ? "

Max gently detained her. ''A few minutes'
delay will make no difference," he said. '' You
must be calm before you go, and you must be
prepared to stay for some little time. My
mother has sent me for you ; she begs you to
come. If you are staying in the house, you
can be of much more use than if we have
to send for you. Will you help us? Mrs.
Chaloner will not object."

"I am sure that she will not. And if lie
does I cannot help it. I must come."

He waited while she made the few little
preparations that were necessary. She took

this arm at the door, not that she needed
physical aid, Int that contact with his strength
.seemed to give her new resolution and support;
ind, almost in silence, they went together to
the other house.

Mrs. Brendon met them in the hall. For
the iiis't time in her life she took Lenore into
her arms and kissed her. Her face was white
hind worn, her eyes dulled with watching, her
caress disordered. Cecil's danger had taken all
iidve or thought for herself out of her mind.
she was anxious for him, and for him only :
for his sake she even welcomed Lenore, whom
.she had never professed to love.

The girl was taken with small delay to
<.VM:irs room. For the last three days he had
hi in in a stupor, which had now been succeeded
by violent delirium, and the doctors
were seriously alarmed about his state. No
trace of the person who had committed the
assault was to be found ; the weapon, presumably
a heavy stick or bludgeon, had disappeared

; aud it was not known that Cecil
had any enemies who wei'e likely to attack
him by way of wreaking some wild revenge.
At least, so it was said ; but when Max heard
these Avoids, he could not but think of James
Lloyd and the enigmatic expressions used by
him with reference to Kuby Eoslyn and Cecil.
Alas it possible that Lloyd had attacked and
nearly murdered the man who had won Kub}''s
heart away from him ? Surely it was not
possible ; some ruffianly tramp or thieving
vagabond must have set upon Cecil and been
frightened away before his robbery was
achieved. This seemed the most plausible
explanation ; and yet Max was conscious of an
uneasiness which he did not like to acknowledge
to himself.

During the first hours that elapsed after
Cecil was carried home by the men who found
him upon the Quay, Max was too much occupied
with many arrangements and anxieties to
take steps towards the discovery of the truth.

In an emergency it seemed natural that the
whole household should lean upon him ; even
Mrs. Brendon acknowledged that at such a
time he was invaluable ; and it was not until
the following: morning that Max could find
time to look after his own business, and to
learn from his father that the matter had been
put into the hands of the j)^li^6j aiicl that
the cowardly ruffian who had been guilty of
such brutal violence would, it was hoped,
speedily be discovered and lodged in gaol.

Max was snatching a hasty breakfast when
his father told him all this, and he made very
little comment.

'' I cannot imagine what took Cecil to the
Quay at that hour of the evening," said Mr.
Brendon at the close of his communication.
^' Can you ? "

Max shook his head. A suspicion of the
truth had Hashed across his mind, but he did
not want to give utterance to it.

I suppose," his father continued, more

slowly, that this could not have arisen out of
that — that — Eoslyii affair, could it ? "

Max compelled himself to laugh, though his
heart was heavy within him. " Cecil could
have mastered Ted Eoslyn, I think; and who
else could there be ? " he said.

But when he rose from the breakfast-table,
where he and his father had taken their
coffee alone together, Max determined to do
something for himself in the way of detective
work. No doubt it was of a simple and
amateur kind, but there was a possibility of its
succeeding where professional skill might fail.

He went straight to Dobell Terrace and
asked for James Lloyd. He was at once
admitted into a little back-parlour where Mrs.
Lloyd was busy removing the breakfast things ;
.she stopped short with a frightened air when
she saw Max, but she did not seem disposed to
be silent, and at once launched out into a flood
of lamentations respecting ' ' the accident to
Mr. Cecil," of which she had just heard.

Max listened and said nothing for a time.
Then he asked a question. " Is James ver'
busy just now ? " he said.

Not very, sir ; at least he 's sometimes
busy and sometimes not," Alas the rather confused
answer. " And I 'm glad that he should
get work in London rather than here."

'•' In London I Is he gone ? "

■•()b, yes, sir; he went by the four-forty
train yesterday afternoon."

"Four-forty." Max stood and reflected.
Cecil had been at home, alive and well, at
four-forty. " Are you sure that he went 1)}'
the four-forty ? "

Quite sure, Mr. Max. I don't know why
you should doubt my word," said Mrs. Lloyd,
with a touch of ready offence.

I don't doubt it ; not at all ; I only wanted
to be certain. Did you see him off at the
station ? "

Yes, I did ; and so did the children ; and
mr. Bracy, too, if you like to inquire of him,"

fsaicl Mrs. Lloyd, still unappeased. " We all
went down to the station together, and saw
him (ifs by the four-forty train ; and sorry we
were to do so, it coming so unexpected like."

'' Unexpected, was it ? "

"Yes, indeed, sir, on account of a letter
that he got in the course of the afternoon.
He packed a bag and said that he would send
for his things later, and off he went, without
so much as leaving an address. The least we
could do was to see him off at the station,
although he did not seem to want us very
particularly."

There was nothing for Max to do after this
but to take his leave ; but lie went straight to
the railway station to make inquiries. There
he learned that Lloyd, who was well known
at the station, had indeed taken a ticket for
Euston ; that nobody had observed anything
remarkable in his manner or appearance, and
that his whole family and several friends had
accompanied him to the station.

'' That seems plain sailing enough," Max
said to himself as he turned away ; *' and yet
it is quite possible that any one wishing to
conceal his movements might take a London
ticket, and leave the train at Buckley Junction,
tramping back over the fields so as to reach
the Quay between six and seven in the
evening. He could get away easily at the
junction. I '11 go over and inquire. Poor
Jim ! I never thought I should be tracking
him down in this way. But, after all, a
brother 's a brother, and one can't stand by to
see him half-killed without wishing to punish
the guilty man."

But inquiries at Buckley Junction proved
fruitless. It was a large and crowded place,
the meeting-point of many railway lines ; and
a young fellow like James Lloyd, of not very
striking appearance, would easily escape observation.
Max was baffled, and returned home
regretting the time that he had wasted, and
hoping that after all Lloyd might be innocent

of the crime laid to lii.s charge. He called
afterwards to get the young man's London
address, but could not obtain it. Mrs. Lloyd
declared that she still did not know it, and
although Max scarcely believed her, he was
obliged to come away unsatisfied. All that he
could do now was to wait until Cecil should be
able to answer questions. He might know who
his assailant had been, and set Max's mind at
rest upon the point ; until he was conscious,
there was certainly nothing more to be done.
The fact that made Max most suspicious of
James Lloyd was this difficulty in getting his
London address, for he believed that J\Irs.
Lloyd was purposely concealing it.

All this, however, occurred at the beginning
of Cecil's illness ; some days had since
elapsed, and there seemed no likelihood of
his returning just yet to health and strength.
In his delirium he called constantly for Lenore ;
and the doctor had advised Mrs. Brendon to
send for the young lady whom he wished to

see. There was just a chance that he might
know her and be soothed by her presence. 80
Lenore was brought to the Brendons', and
treated at once by everybody as a daughter of
the house.

It was a great shock to her to see Cecil in
this delirium, to hear him calling for her, and
vet to know that he did not recognise her face,
but she bore the ordeal bravely. She preserved
great calmness, and was careful to obey the
doctor's orders with exactitude. To sit by
Cecirs bedside, and take his hand in hers now
and then, to answer in soothing words when
lie called for her, to lav cool cloths and ice
upon his burning head — these were all the
things that she could do for him ; but she was
read' and willing to spend her whole time and
strength upon the work. It seemed superfluous
now to remember that she had been
angry with Cecil ; she knew only that she
loved him, and that she would gladly give her
life for him if he required it.

He certainly became calmer and quieter
from the moment when she entered the sickroom.
There came a day at last when the
fever had left him, and he could understand
that she was at his side. He was weak as an
infant ; too weak to do more than look at her
or whisper a word or two at a time ; but it
was plain that her presence gave him the
deepest satisfaction. But at this point old
Mrs. Chaloner interfered. She had not objected,
she said, when Lenore was summoned
to soothe Cecil in his delirium ; the case was
urgent, and not to be judged by ordinary
rules ; but now, surely now, the need for
Lenore's presence had passed away, and she
could be spared. Mr. Brendon tried to
impress upon lier the fact of Cecil's extreme
weakness and the inexpediency of grieving or
exciting him ; but Mrs. Chaloner had been hurt
by some injudicious comments of ill-natured
acquaintances, and declared that, as Cecil was
now conscious, Lenore must come home . at

once. And for one whole day Lenore was,
kept close at her grandmother's side.

It was a hard day for Cecil and his nurses.
His weakness was very great, and seemed to
be increasing. His constitution was not
naturally strong, and the doctors were still
uncertain as to whether he would recover from
the effect of the attack made upon him.
Throughout the hours of that day his strength
seemed to fail more and more. It was then
that he managed to whisper a few words that
startled his father exceedingly. '* Lenore ; I
want Lenore," he had murmured. *' Let her
])e my wife before I die." And with his son's
hollow, beseeching eyes fixed upon him, Mr.

Brendon had not found it in his heart Into

fa

refuse an assent. He went, as usual in perplexity,
to Max, and told him what had
occurred.

Yes," Max answered, gravely. " I know lie
wishes it. He said so to me last night. He-has
set his heart on it."

Mrs. Chaloner would never consent, you
know."

"I think she would."

'rand Lenore would refuse."

'* No ; you 're wrong there." said Max,
with a half-sad smile ; "Lenore would consent.
And then we should have the right to take
care of her afterwards if "

It won't come to that ; it won't come to
that," said Mr. Brendon, moved out of his
composure by Max's suggestion. "Poor lad!
he 's been weak, but never wilfully wicked, eh.
Max ? He '11 get better and outlive us all,
you '11 see. But it 's hard to refuse him anything
just now."

"TVe must not refuse him," said Max, with
some urgency. " Indeed, it would be a good
things if the excitement is not too great f(jr
him. Lenore can manage him better than
any of us. Look how he has lost ground
to-day. We must have her back ! "

They consulted the doctors ; they spoke

once more to Cecil, whose heart was certainly
set upon his project. " I am dying," he said
to Max, to whom he spoke more freely than to
his father. " Let me show her that I love her;
that I have loved her all the time." And so,
at hist, the matter was made conditional upon
Lenore's refusal <»r consent. Mr. Brendon
himself went to the Red House, and bore her
away almost by force to Cecil's bedside. It
was Cecil who should Breathe his own request
into her ear ; by this time they were sure that
she would refuse him nothing.

She needed no urging. " If you wish it.
Cecil," she said gently, "it shall be done"'
]airs. Chaloner's horror and distress had simply
to be disregarded. Lenore was of ao-e : she
was able to act for herself. She and Max,
between them, made the necessary arrangements.
A few hours had to elapse before it
was possible for the marriage-rite to be performed,
but until that time Lenore was
suffered to be almost entirely with Cecil. His

strength was gradually ebbing away ; it sometimes
seemed doubtful whether he would even
live to call Lenore his wife.

The day and the hour arrived at last, and
Lenore stood — a mournful bride — at his bedside.
With pale lips and trembling hands
the two plighted their troth, promising to love
each other and be faithful one to another until
the end of life. The end did not seem far off
to them just then ! To those who witnessed
it, the scene was a very touching one ; it was
heart-rending to look upon these two, so soon
perhaps, to be separated, plighting their troth
" until death us do part," as Cecil faltered
out ; fighting, as it seemed, all the time with
the enemy whose dread grasp was laid on his
heart and life. The rite was as short as possible
; and for a little while they were left
alone together, hand in hand, looking at each
other with the long loving gaze, with which
for the present loth seemed to be half content.
Lenore now and then rose to attend to the

doctor's orders, or whispered a few words of
love, but nothing distracted the watchfulness
of Cecil's melancholy regretful eyes. He made
a sign at last that he wished to speak. She
was obliged to place her ear close to his mouth
to distinguish the words that he strove to
say.

You forgive me ? " she heard, and there was
something more that she could not catch.

'dearest, if I have anything to forgive,
I forgive it; but I have nothing. Darling,
don't look so distressed ; I can forgive anything,
because I love you so dearly."

His eyes grew a little quieter, and his pale
lips tried to smile. " My wife," he said, as if
there were something inexpressibly soothing
in the sound ; and then his eyelids quivered,
fell, rose once more, half closed again, while
a film gathered over the failing eyes ; and how
terribly those catching, panting breaths, with
long intervals between each, struck upon the
ear of the listening new-made bride ! The

VOL. II. G

doctor came in, stood by the bedside, and
shook his head.

It will soon be over," he said, in answer to
Lenore's agonising imploring look. ''A few
hours, and then "

She could not bear to hear any more ; she
turned back to catch her husband's last look ;
it might be that he would still murmur some
dying word of love.

CHANCES AND CHANGES.

But, after all, Cecil did not die. He struggled
past the crisis into deadly weakness, and
past the weakness into slow and painful convalescence.
Little by little he gained strength
and vigour ; little by little he grew more able,
day by day, to delight in the strange, new
experience of Lenore's society, to hear her
talk, to look at her as she moved about his
room, even to make her laugh and blush at the
pretty compliments he paid her. Never was
there so satisfactory a marriage, everybody
said. Mrs. Brendon was vexed about it
certainly ; she had missed the glory and
excitement of a grand wedding and breakfast ;

but, on the other hand, nothing excites friendliness



more than a bit of innocent romance,
and as soon as Cecil grew better Mrs. Brendon
declared herself "inundated" with notes and
cards and "kind inquiries" from all her
friends and relatives. Lenore had, of course,
taken up her permanent abode at the Brendons'
house ; an uncomfortable state of affairs for
her, which, however, she willingly endured for
the sake of being with Cecil.

As for Cecil himself, he was very happy.
He may perhaps have been a little surprised at
finding himself so much in love with Lenore,
but the surprise was a pleasing one. It had
not occurred to him that there was anything
selfish in his resolve to marry her just as he
believed himself dying. On the contrary, he
thought it a matter for self-gratulation that he
had been so devoted as to wish to leave her
his name and a claim on his father's property.
Lenore took almost the same view of the
question. It was true that their hasty
marriage did proceed from pure love, but

some men would have hesitated before linking
a girl's name to their's under such circumstances.
Some silent criticism of Cecil's
"demeanour occurred to Max. " However," he
reflected half remorsefully, *' if he had died,
poor fellow, I believe it would have been a
consolation to Lenore to think of him as her
husband. Only, I don't fancy he sees that it
was in the least a concession on her part. But
neither does she ; so they are quits." Miss
Roslyn seemed to have passed out of everybody's
mind. Mr. Brendon secretly congratulated
himself on having rescued Cecil from her
clutches. Cecil thought of her occasionally,
but decided that Lenore should never be
distressed by hearing about that unlucky
stolen interview upon the pier. He had no
intention of confessing his errors to his wife.
It was an easier way to forget all that had
passed before his illness ; to resolve to be a
better man for the future, and to bask in his
present felicity, than to begin married life with

a humiliating avowal of weakness which would
lower him in his wife's eyes, and perhaps
render her duties to himself less pleasurable.
Cecil had strong notions of the honour due
to a husband, but far less definite views
respecting a husband's duties. Wifely duties
appeared to him just now so very delightful,
that he never thought of a time when
Lenore's attendance on himself must necessarily
be less exclusive, that jars would certainly
occur in domestic life, and that if this
ideal state of happiness were to continue, it
must be founded upon absolute trust and
mutual respect. There was just the lurking
consciousness in his mind that he had behaved
meanly to Ruby : the dread that in some way
the details of his conduct should come to
Lenore's knowledge ; the more stinging conviction
that Lenore's distrust, if once aroused,
would be hard to overcome. But these wei-e
mere pin-pricks of conscience. In general he
was well protected from them by a sense of his

own good intentions, which had always been
to make people happy as long as they were in
his company ; and he had great confidence in
the stability of Lenore's love for himself. For
as he maintained one evening when he was
getting well, and Lenore was making tea for
him and for Max, who had come up to see
them, " everybody knows that love will never
change."

'• I don't know," said Lenore. "' I think it
may."

'•' Then it was never a true love," said Cecil,
who always took a romantic side ; '' for if it
were it would survive every trial and every
danger."

*' Question ! " said Max, below his breath.

Of course, I am speaking of women,"
observed his brother, with a slight increase of
colour. " Men are less constant, but a woman's
love ouD^ht to be ' strong; as death.' "

Strong as life would express something
more, perhaps," Lenore said, thoughtfully ;

it seems easy to think of death with a person
one loves, but one needs almost more strength
to live with and for him."

You braved death with me," said Cecil, ina
low tone, as he put his arm round her for a
moment; "now try living with me instead.
If you come out of one trial as well as of
the other, darling, you will do splendidly."

There was another point on which Cecil
maintained impenetrable reserve. He would
give no hint, even to Max, as to the identity
of the man who had attacked him on the
pier. "What does it matter?" he said, in a
half lazy, half languid way, which greatly
irritated his father, although Mr. Brendon
was taking a more indulgent view of Cecil's
foibles than he had ever done before. " I
could not see the fellow's face ; perhaps he
mistook me for somebody else. Perhaps he
wanted to take my watch and chain. Who
knows ? You '11 never find him now ; it 's
nonsense to think of it."

Have you actually no idea as to who it
was ? " Max asked him abruptly when they
Averse once alone together.

If I had," said Cecil, lazily, " I should hold
my tongue."

Max turned and looked at him for one
moment, and went away satisfied in his own
mind that Cecil was perfectly well aware of
his assailant's name and motive.

James Lloyd had not returned to the town.
Mrs. Lloyd still professed ignorance of his
whereabouts, but Max did not believe her.
There was a furtive, frightened look in her
eyes which belied her words. However, there
was nothing further to be done. If Cecil chose
to be silent, Max acknowledged that the
search must be useless, ind by degrees the
matter was dropped and half-forgotten by the
world at large, although there was a strange,
uneasy consciousness on Cecil's j)^^, and a
strong suspicion on that of Max, that it was
Cecil's own weakness which had led a once

well-meaning, honest lad very nearly to incur
the guilt of murder.

Ruby Roslyn had left the town, and was
paying visits to her friends. She had scarcely
been seen abroad smce Cecil's serious illness
was first known, and report did not credit her
with deep feeling about the matter. Max
heard more than once that she was looking
worn and ill, but that her spirits were unusually
high, and that she was on the point of
an engagement to a young Hartpool manufacturer.
Max shrugged his shoulders, but
was not ill-pleased by the news. He would
have been delighted to hear that Ruby was
well out of the place, once and for all. He
had a vague sense of danger — danger to Cecil,
danger perhaps to Lenore — in connection with
Ruby Roslyn. And he had a keen dislike to
her for the way in which her influence seemed
to have affected poor James Lloyd, who had
been as much the victim of her coquetry as of
Cecil's weakness.

Max had been too Inisy and too anxious to
see much of the St. Aidanss or of Miss Lingered
of late, but as soon as Cecil was stronger, and
began to talk of a sojourn in the Elvira byway
of a honeymoon trip, he resumed his old
habits of going to Gay Street two or three
times a-week. He thought that Miss Lingered
looked a little worn and tired, as if she had
some cause for anxiety or pain. He wondered
if she were well, and questioned Ursula ina
vague, roundabout way concerning Miss
Lingered's health and strength. Ursula had
cultivated her friendship with Miss Lingered to
an amazing extent : she spent a great deal of
her time at the Priory, and was on intimate
terms with all its inhabitants. She reported
with some wonderment that Miss Lingered was
perfectly well, and that she did not seem to
have troubles or worries of any sort.

Everybody has troubles and worries of
some sort," said Max, drily.

'' Have you ? "

Of course. Business matters."

"I think," said Ursula, reflectively, 'that
that poor woman, Alice — the woman you
picked up in the road, do you remember ? — is
the only worry that Miss Lingered has just
now."

How is she ' a worry ' ? "

She is so fond of the children, you know,
and Dolly is devoted to her ; it is quite funny
to see that child with her ; and Miss Lingered
says that she feels a little anxious sometimes,
because — well, because Alice is not quite in
her right mind, you know, and one does not
know what she may do or say."

"Why does Miss Lingered keep her there '? "

I don't know : she seems fond of Alice
and troubled about her too. It sometimes
seems to me as if she had known Alice before
or as if iVlice were a dear friend or relation.
Could that be so, Max ? "

Max remembered Magdalen's strange words
to him, the strange light in her eyes, on the

night when he had helped to take Alice to the
Priory. There was some mystery here which
he could not understand. But he answered
rather sharply :

Don't be so fanciful, Ursula. Miss Lingered
had never seen the woman before : she told
me so. But she ought to send her away ; it
is hardly safe to let her stay there with those
children."

^^Tellherso."

''I could not take such a liberty. Besides,
Miss Lingered is quite capable of managing her
own affairs."

Max turned away with rather a vexed lookin
his face. Why, even while he acknowledged
Magdalen's capacities, did he always
wish so much to take upon himself the
burden of her sorrows and her anxieties ? He
was ever conscious of a desire to help her ;
and yet she was a woman who gave rather than
took help in her relations with others. Perhaps
he was not free from the purely masculine

conviction that, however wise and good a
woman may be, she is never quite so wise and
good as the most ordinary specimen of mankind.


He had not time for much thought about
Magdalen, or for anything but his own affairs
just then. Cecil's absence threw a great deal
of labour and responsibility upon him, especially
as Mr. Brendon's vigour seemed to be
failing" a little. His chemical works were not
so remunerative as they ought to have been ;
and he was made anxious from time to time
by complaints on the part of an agent for the
Malton property, which belonged to Captain
Esher. The fumes from his works were declared
to be excessively injurious to the
Malton park and plantations, and he was
threatened with a lawsuit on the matter.
Expensive law proceedings, even if he were
to be successful in the long-run, would bear
hardly upon his resources ; he was desirous of
avoiding them, although he had his father's

capital and experience to fall back upon, and
knew that they would never be wanting at a
pinch. He was hoping to compromise
matters with the Malton agent, and, while
still anxious, he did not foresee that the
cloud which had appeared in his horizon was
one which would b}^ and bye cover the
whole heavens, and place him in utter darkness.

Cecil and Lenore went to Mentioned. Mr.
Brendon took a house for them in Higher
Scarsfield, and furnished it with great care ;
it was a pretty place, not far from the Priory,
knowTi as " Chalgrove." For the present,
however, bride and bridegroom were not expected
at their new home ; Cecil's health was
far from strong, and it was thought advisable
for him to remain in an equable climate for
some months to come.

Into the midst of the busy and fairly prosperous
life that Max had made for himself, a
sudden sorrow came with the force of a thunderbolt.


He went to his father's private room late
one night, and found him lousy over some
papers.

I have been putting these in order," he
said, pointing to a pile before him on the
table. " If anything should happen to me,
you will knows where to find them."

Nothing is likely to happen to you at
present, I should think," said Max, covering
his anxiety by an assumption of the odd,
blunt manner which his father understood so
well.

No, nothing that I know of. But death
comes to all of us, sooner or later. Cecil will
have to take another partner in when I am
gone."

Max stood and waited for further indications
of his father's state of mind.

Of course the girls and your mother
are well provided for," proceeded Mr. Bren-don
; '' but there is one thing I should like to
say to you. Max. Your mother is sometimes

a little hasty, particularly with you and
with Ursula ; but I hope that as long as it
is possible for you to hold on together you
will. Cecil won't trouble himself much
about his sisters ; you must take my place
to them ; — do you hear ? "

Very well, father. But I don't see why
you need trouble yourself now about so remote
a contingency."

It may not be so remote as you think.
There's no knowing what may happen. I
might never have another opportunity of
saying these things to you. You are fond
of Ursula, and she of you ; don't abandon
her, whatever you do. I have made you
trustee and guardian, with your mother, to
the two children, should I die before they
are of age. You remember that I spoke
about it before, and explained to Cecil why
I did not care to burden him with the responsibility.
He has a wife and may have
children of his owen by and bye. And you

VOL. II. H

will be more thoughtful for the girls than
Cecil would be, and I should like you to
have a voice in the matter of their education."

I should like to have a voice now," Max
could not help saying. " Mother is making;
the girls work too hard."

I must see about that. I will speak to
her tomorrow. And I know you won't
shirk this responsibility ? "

Certainly not, if I am ever called on to
fulfil it."

That 's it ; that 's what I wanted to hear
you say. I have always been able to trust
you most fully, Max ; you have not been like
Cecil, who, with many good points, is never
steady enough to gain one's confidence. I
cannot depend on him. Yoic have never
given me half-an-hour's anxiety in your
life."

Max felt repaid for a good deal of worry
and much hard work when his father said
these words.

I will try to do my best for the future,
as I have tried to do it in the past," he
said, with a certain proud gratitude which
his father fully appreciated. " But I don't
like to hear you talk in that way, father ;
you know you 're a young man yet, and
will live to see your grandchildren about
you for many a long year."

''I do not think that I shall see many
years," replied Mr. Brendon, quietly ;
** though, as far as I know, I am well and
strong enough at present. Well, I must
finish my work ; it is getting late. Go to
bed, boy ; it 's time that young folks like
you were asleep."

Max smiled at the notion of his requiring
sleep at the untimely hour of twelve ; but
his father sent him off peremptorily.

*' Good-night, my lad," he said, giving his
hand to the young man ; " good-night.
God bless you. Don't wait for me ; I shall
soon have done. I am tired already."

Max left him, and thought little more on
the subject. But the conversation recurred
to his mind with startling distinctness a few
days later, for Mr. Brendon was found one
morning in the quiet sleep from which there
is no awakening. He had died in the night
from heart-disease.

A WALK IN THE RAIN.

It was a wet, windy evening in April. For

many hours had the rain been loading the

laurel leaves and soaking the fragrant brown

earth of the empty flower-beds before a certain

house in Higher Scarsfield. This house, which

stood well back from the road, was nearly

opposite the Priory, and had been selected by

Mr. Brendon for Cecil's residence upon his

marriage. Thither, upon this chilly, stormy

night, Cecil brought his young wife home.

Max and Ursula were there to receive them.

Max was due at Gay Street about eight

o'clock, and intended to take his sister home

before that hour ; but Cecil was so much

horrified at the prospect of Ursula's wet walk



that Lenore insisted on keeping her for the
night. It wanted twenty minutes to eight
when Max started upon his walk back to
Scarsfield.

As the front-door closed upon him, and he
walked down the gravelled path, from which
the most distinct objects to lee seen were the
tips of Miss Lingered's cedar trees, swaying
slightly, and defined in black layers against
the sky, Max's thoughts reverted with satisfaction
to the scene of luxurious warmth,
brightness, and domestic happiness which he
had left indoors. It was a pleasure to know
that Cecil was comfortably settled and his
flirtation with Ruby Roslyn at an end. Max
deliberately preferred to believe that a man
with so loving a wife as Lenore would no
longer find a difficulty in being constant. He
was disposed to think well of Cecil ; and it
did not occur to him, with his meagre
experience in love matters, that marriage does
not always fix a man's affections unalterably

upon the woman to whom he has given his
hand. It did strike him that Cecil's buoyant
spirits might have been sobered with advantage.
Perhaps, considering the manner in
which his marriage had actually taken place,
and the events which had succeeded it,
Lenore's future would have been safer had he
felt a little less self-confidence in entering
upon this new phase of his life. In outward
bearing he had gained : his old sulky listlessness
of manner had passed away, and improved
health had partially robbed his face of its
effeminate delicacy. Lenore, on the contrary,
did not look the better for her year abroad.
Her face was pale, and her eye anxious ; but
her mouth had won a steady sweetness which
helped to give her an older appearance
than she had possessed in her girlish days.
Both of them had exclaimed at finding Max'
so little changed ; though what change they
expected to see in him was difficult to say.
A close observer might have thought that his

face bore increased signs of care and responsibility
in the deeper fold between his
eyebrows, and the added infrequency of his
slight, cool smile ; but Cecil and Lenore, not
being close observers, noted only that his
easy carelessness of attitude, and keen, quiet
glance, were the same as ever, and declared
him unaltered. Max half smiled at the
remembrance of their laughing verdict as he
turned away from their door into the wind
and rain.

He looked up at Miss Lingered's cedar trees,
and began to think of the rainy night when
he had helped to carry a helpless outcast
through those iron gates, and of another time
when he had been detained at her house by a
storm.

Rain seems to be the first condition of my
meeting with her," he said to himself, casting
a long glance back to her house, and forward
down the hill. "It is wet and stormy enough
to meet her now."

And, indeed, he soon caught sight of a tall,
dark figure in the gloom, which he thought
must surely be hers. Half-a-dozen strides
brought him up to it. Contrasted even with
Ursula's bright beauty and Lenore's delicate
loveliness, he could not help thinking that the
pale grave face, turned towards him from a
background of darkness, was the sweetest he
had ever seen. Its very seriousness aroused
in him a sense of sympathy, and a relieved
consciousness that something which had been
secretly jarring upon him was no longer
present. The three whom he had just quitted
were too sanguine, too untroubled for him.
Here was some one who knew that life was
not all play and pleasantness, who had a sort
of religious tenderness for other people's souls
and bodies — a tenderness of which he felt
the subtle charm, but could not understand.
There was an attraction about Magdalen which
had led strangers even to confide their histories
to her, which made her the special confidante

of those who were in any kind of trouble.
Max did not know that she possessed any
peculiar power of winning confidence ; he only
knew that now and then he was irresistibly
attracted into giving her his own.

'' We are bound to the same place," she said
to him, as they walked on together.

Yes. I am going to take Mr. St. Aidan's
class amalgamated with my own."

It will be hard work, when both classes
are so large."

Perhaps so. But I like to have plenty todo."


You are not in want of work generally,
I suppose ? "

No," said Max, with an answering smile.
'' I think I may say I have had plenty to do
since I left school at fifteen."

You were young." Magdalen was aware
that Max's life had differed greatly from
that of Cecil, the elder son ; and she was
curious enough about it to ask the question,

'* Did you leave school so early by your
own wish ? "

No ; by that of my father." Then, as if
he saw some mute wonder in her face, or were
meeting some implied blame of his father's
conduct, he went on quickly,

It happened by accident — almost. The
original plan was that I should not enter the
office till I had been to Cambridge. But the
school broke up early one term on account
of illness, and I came home and managed to
make myself useful to my father. He soon
thought that he could not easily spare me,
and I — well, 1 was reconciled to the change
sooner than you might imagine."

The change must have disappointed you."

•'You should remember what boys of fifteen
are like, Miss Lingered. The sense of
importance, freedom from school trammels,
pride in my father's praise and in being of
use to him — a good deal of self-conceit, in
short — soon consoled me for the disappointment.

For the time being I did feel it
keenly, I acknowledge."

'' Yes, indeed ! When one loves study for
its own sake, it must be terribly hard to be
<iut off from it."

I don't know that I did love it for its
own sake," said Max, bluntly. "The presumption
is that I did not, or I should not
have succumbed so easily."

Whatever you felt then, you must have
some love for it now, or you would not be
so anxious to foster it in others."

Oh, the working men ? " said Max, with
an air of receiving a new subject for consideration.
" I don't know whether that is
the real reason. I 'm a working man myself,
and I like to be among my fellows. I have
been at business nearly all my life, you see ;
I 've done nothing else since I was fifteen."

Nothing ? " she asked, with some significant
emphasis.

"Nothing worth speaking of. And probably

I should have done nothing more under
any circumstances. I was the dolt of the
family."

Who said that ? — your masters ? "

People in general," said Max ; then smiling
at her half-suppressed exclamation of unbelief,
he added, *' It was quite true. My
brain was hurt by a fall I had in my childhood,
and I never learnt anything — not even
my letters — till I was ten years old. Surely
that fact shows how little I was fit for anything
but what Mr. St. Aidan calls ' money-grubbing.'
"

Mr. St. Aidan never meant to depreciate
any honest and manly work," said Magdalen,
warmly.

No, no ; I am sure he did not. But
there was some truth in what he once said
that money-making seemed with some men
more like an instinct than an exertion of
intelligence."

*' I should think that your own work requires

a fair amount of intelligence," observed
his companion, noticing a certain perverseness
in his manner of replying.

It requires some forethought and some
technical knowledge — that is all. And it has
not even the merit of being pursued for unselfish
ends."

'' For what end do you pursue it ? " Magdalen
asked, point-blank.

He hesitated a little before answering, and
spoke at last in a balanced, measuring sort
of way, as if he wished to avoid a direct
reply.

1 suppose I have various ends in view.
There is the end of making good soap, which
I have lately taken up. There is the hope
of underselling one's neighbours, and of gaining
a little credit for acuteness in the commercial
world. There is the supreme object
and aim of making money. Then there is
the excitement of speculation in some kinds
of business — such as that of my brother's —

and it is as keen an excitement as any to
be found at a gaming-table."

'* And, in some respects, of the same
nature''

Just so. Half of it is pure gambling."

But this gambling is not an essential
part of business ? "

I don't know whether we can avoid it.
One can scarcely avoid it and make money
as fast as I and most men would like to do."

1 can hardly wish you to make money
on those terms, Mr. Brendon. Must I say
that I cannot wish you success ? " said
Magdalen, with a smile which proved that
she scarcely thought him sincere. He
smiled too, but was in earnest as he answered
:

My wishes are more likely to prevail
than yours. As the world goes, I believe I
have a fair chance of success. Failure now
will come by my own fault or my own foolishness."


You are confident."

I hope I am not over-confident. Mine
is not the lot I should have chosen in life,
lout, such as it is, I mean to make the best
of it."

You would be a severe judge," said
Magdalen, reflectively, "of people who had
made great mistakes."

No," he answered, rather hastily ; " no,
I hope not. At any rate, I would not judge
wrong - doing harshly — sin, as people call
it. I think one is justified in coming down
heavily on folly."

Yet folly is more excusable than sin inmost
people's eyes."

I suppose so."

The reply was unsatisfactory to Magdalen's
ears, and for a little time she kept silence.

The rain had stopped, and the high wind
had partially dispersed the clouds, through
which a fitful glimpse of the moon could now
be seen. Looking to the right hand, Magdalen

perceived, at the extremity of a wide street,
a tall building, dimly lighted, that stood upon
the river bank.

Are not those sour chemical works, Mr.
Brendon ? I have never been quite sure."

'^ They are, indeed. The wind is this way ;
don't you catch a whifF of the gases ? "

They are not very pleasant."

"Worse; they are very destructive. They,
and the fumes from Badness, have a good deal
to answer for in the way of destroying
vegetation. It is impossible to build chimneys
high enough to carry the fumes away'.
I hear that the beauty of the Malton estate is
quite ruined, and that the proprietor begins
to talk about compensation. I expect that
he will be in Scarsfield soon, demanding
damages."

*' The proprietor ! " Magdalen's voice shook
slightly.

Brute that I am ! " thought Max to himself,
with a sudden remembrance of a report

VOL. IL I

which he had heard from his mother's lips,
but never quite believed. " Her voice sounds
as though she were frightened. Can it be ? "
But aloud he said quite tranquilly, " Yes,
Captain Esher. He has not been here for
many years, 1 believe."

He is the father of Dolly and Daisy," said
Magdalen, recovering her calmness by a great
effort of will, "and Mr. St. Aidan's cousin.
I hope he will not be hard on you, Mr. Bren-don."
She spoke lightly, but, as they passed
under a gas-lamp, Max saw that her face was
pale to the very lips.

Her composure was shaken, and not without
good reason. She had not heard anything of
Captain Esher for many months; the last
(communication which she had received from
him was the letter respecting Alice Mackworth,
which had offended her so deeply. If he came
into the neighbourhood of Scarsfield, would
he not wish to see his own children ? How
could she avoid him, if he visited Dolly and

Daisy at the Priory ? And would he come
to see, with his own eyes, the poor, half-crazed
woman who was still under Magdalen's care,
and whose first word had been Philip Esher's
name ? These were questions which had
rushed into her mind with overwhelming;
force, and made that evening's work difficult
to Magdalen.

She was hardly surprised on reaching home
to find a note from Mrs. St. Aidan, couched
in rather mysterious terms. " I want you to
i'ome to the Eectory as early as possible tomorrow.
I have a matter of the greatest
importance to talk over with you," wrote the
Rector's wife. ]magdalen smiled and sighed
a little as she folded up the letter. She
foresaw trouble and perplexity, for she had
long been aware that Emilia St. Aidan had
secretly espoused " poor Philip's cause," and
thought that he was hardly treated for a misdemeanour
of his youth.

Magdalen presented herself at the Rectory

before ten o'clock next morning, and was at
once taken up to Mrs. St. Aidan's boudoir,
where that lady had been breakfasting. The
Rector was away from home for a few days, so
there was nobody to interrupt the conversation.
Magdalen saw at the first glance that ]airs. St.
Aidan was in a state of suppressed excitement.
Her eyes and cheeks were brighter than usual ;
her pretty white fingers were a little tremulous.
But Magdalen was resolved to take no notice
of these signs ; to ask no questions, and to
show no curiosity.

Magdalen," she said, after a few trivial
and rather absently-spoken observations, '' I
have some news for you."

"For me, dear?" Magdalen had taken up
a piece of embroidery on which Mrs. St. i^idan
had been engaged, and was busily putting in
stitches. .

'eyes, for you. It may affect your plans,
perhaps. Philip Esher is coming back to
Malton."

"So I have heard," said Magdalen, composedly.


*' You have heard ! From whom ? It is
not generally known."

Mr. Max Brendon told me. He was
interested in the fact, because Captain Esher
wants compensation for damage done to the
trees at Malton by the fumes from Mr. Bren-don
s chemical works."

Magdalen ! You take it very coolly ! "

"How else should I take it?" said Magdalen,
lifting her eyes for the first time to
Mrs. St. Aidan's face. " What is Captain
Esher's return to me ? "

Mrs. St. Aidan bit her lip. "He is the
children's father, at all events."

You mean," said Magdalen, gently, " that
he will want to see them. Is that likely ? "

Yes ; he has written to me to say so."

Magdalen put down her work. Her eyes
wandered reflectively about the room for a
minute or two. Then she answered with

perfect serenity ; "Of course he must see
them, then."

"And you too."

That is scarcely necessary."

"My dear!" exclaimed Mrs. St. Aidan,
with much emphasis, " do you know what
you are saying ? If he comes to your house
to see them, lie is sure to see you too."

"I do not think so. I shall give orders
accordingly. He will never be shown into
my presence."

And you know so little of Philip Esher as
to think that he weill not find his way to you
when once he is in your house ? "

Magdalen's face flushed. "You speak," she
said, slowly, " as if you had some knowledge
of his intentions. / should never have
supposed for a moment that he would try
to see me ; you seem to think that he will.
What reasons have you ? "

A letter from him."

I thought so. AVill you let me see it ? "

I would rather not, clear. It is meant
for my eye alone' said Mrs. St. Aidan, with
some embarrassment. " But I may tell you
this much : he means to see his children, and
he means to see you."

Magdalen's lip quivered. She leaned back
in her chair and reflected for a few minutes.
Then, she said, almost passionately :

'' He can only strike me through the
children. If they were not with me, he
would have no pretext for coming to the
house."

That is wdiat Gervas and I have always
said. If you really wanted to keep him away,
you should not have taken charge of his
children."

Mrs. St. Aidan stole a glance at Magdalen
to see how she took this speech, but Magdalen
did not seem to hear.

Emilia," she said, more abruptly, than
was usual with her — " Emilia, help me out of
the difficulty. Let the children come to you

for a few weeks' visit. Then he can have no
pretence for coming to the Priory."

*^My dear chid, I would if I could!"
sighed Mrs. St. Aidan, "but it's impossible.
Gervas says that he cannot accept the responsibility.
I did ask him, but he thinks that it
would be only shirking the difficulty, and that
you would have to face it sooner or later."

That is quite true," said Magdalen, in a
dejected tone. " Quite true. But I do not
see — ivy — Captain Esher should want to visit
me."

"Then I'll enlighten you," said Mrs. St.
Aidan, with more of her wonted briskness.
He wants to visit you because he intends to
ask you to become his wife."

PEACE OR WAR ?

Magdalen rose to her feet; a burning red
came to her brow ; her eyes flashed. The
excitement lasted only for a moment, however ;
she sat down again, her face paling as she
spoke.

'* He will not dare," she said.

Not dare ! Is there anything Philip will
not dare if he has set his heart on it ? "

Emilia," said Magdalen, desperately, '* I

have never told you all. It is my firm

conviction that his wife is not dead. I am

almost assured in my own mind that the

poor woman who was carried into my house

some months ago is Alice Mack worth."

'' Magdalen are you mad?" Mrs. St. Aidan



8a t up very erect, with the flush deepening
upon her face. " If she were alive, do you not
suppose that Philip would own her ? "

'•' I am not sure."

"At any rate, he would never speak of
marrying again."

Can we be sure of that ? "

Mrs. St. Aidan spoke almost angrily.
What a man will do when he is young and
foolish is nothing to go by now. Besides,
I never quite understood that story, Madge.
I believe that Philip thought that his wife
was dead. Of course it was very sad — very
dreadful — very unfortunate for — for everybody,
but I cannot think that poor Philip was
quite so much to blame as was said."

Magdalen kept silence. Her lip curled a
little, but she would not trust herself to speak.

*' Tell me the grounds for your belief," said
Mrs. St. Aidan after a painful pause. "You
would not sa' a thing of that kind without a
reason."

Very quietly Magdalen related the cireiini-
stances of Alice's arrival at the Priory. Mrs.
St. Aidan had never heard the whole story
before. She was not convinced by it.

'' You have ridiculously little to go upon'*
she said. " I wonder that you condemn a
man on such slight grounds, magdalen. He
denied it, you say ? "

'eyes."

"Did you tell Gervas ? "

"I did."

And he did not believe it ? "'

'• No. And for that reason he did not
wish me to tell you, but I think that you
ouojht to know."

There was another silence. Magdalen sat
looking at her hands, which were clasped
before her in her lap. On jNlrs. St. Aldan's
mobile face various expressions testified to
the rapid workings of her mind. At last
lie stretched out her hand and touched
.Magdalen's.

Forgive me, dear, if I have spoken
hastily," she said. '' I know your feelings
I know how much you were wronged.
But I was brought up with Philip ; he was
like a brother to me for many years ; and
I cannot bear to think him wholly bad.
Oh, Magdalen, it is such a grief to me ! "

The tears fell from her eyes as she spoke.
Magdalen, softened at once by the sight of
her friend's agitation, bent forward and kissed
her on the forehead.

Dear Emilia ! " she said. She could
add nothing more. It was impossible for
her to think of Philip Esher as Ilia
desired, and she felt that it was better
to be silent. Mrs. St. Aidan wiped her
tears away, and then took up an embroidered
silk bag which lay on the couch
]beside her. From this bag she took n
letter.

This was enclosed in one to me," she
said, handing it to Magdalen. " Don't be

angry with me, dear. He entreated me to
give it to you, and I cannot bear to refuse
him."

Magdalen held the letter in her hand
for a moment, with a blank look upon
her face. The envelope bore no address,
'' Is it for me 1 " she asked.

Yes, dearest. Read it, Madge ; for my
sake, if not for his."

Very slowly, and very reluctantly, Magdalen
opened the letter and read.

This was what Philip Esher wrote :

My dear Miss Lingered, — My last letter
received no answer from you. Perhaps it
did not deserve one. I have scarcely the
courage to ^Yvite again ; and yet, something
in my heart tells me that you may not
have forgotten me altogether, that I am
not too presumptuous in hoping that one
day you will forgive the past so far as tolet
me call myself your friend. At any
rate, I trust that you will not forbid me

to visit my children, whom you have cared
for so devotedly. Perhaps when I see you
I may induce you to believe a little in my
regret for the past, and my ambitions for
the future. — Yours, with sincere regard,

Philip Esher."

"It is a clever letter," said Magdalen,
coldly, as she laid it down. " But he asks
too much." She crushed it together in her
hand as if in a sudden spasm of pain. " He
is presumptuous."

Then she straightened out the crushed
letter, and gave it to Mrs. St. Aidan, who
read it with eager interest.

Do you call that presumptuous, Madge t "
she asked, rather wistfully. " Considering
Philip's disposition, I should scarcely have
thought it possible for him to write so
humbly. What shall you do ? "

Oh, he can come to see his children, if
he pleases," said Magdalen, in her gravest
and coldest tones. " Would you be so kind

as to tell him so when you write,
Emilia ? "

"And you will see him yourself?"

The old colour, the old light, flashed into
Magdalen's face and eyes. " Never — if t
can help) it, ' she replied.

Mrs. St. Aidan paused, and then said
softly,

Magdalen, dear, excuse me if I say that
your refusal looks as if you were afraid of him."

Magdalen's lips curved in a slight disdainful
smile ; she did not seem to think
it worth while to answer. Mrs. St. Aidan
began to feel irritated by her serenity.

You are hard on him," she went on.
*' What can a man do but express his
sorrow for past wrong-doing ? Is he never
to be forgiven ? I thought your creed was
that no sin was beyond forgiveness, no sinner
too Ijad to be reclaimed ? Do you make
Philip the one exception, because he injured

Oh, Emilia, it is you who are hard now,"
said Magdalen, gently. " I certainly think
that all sin can be forgiven to a repentant
sinner — forgiven by God."

You remind me of that story about Queen
Elizabeth," said Mrs. St. Aidan, sarcastically.
What was it she said to the woman who
had injured her? *God may forgive you,
but I never can.' That is your attitude,
Magdalen, towards Philip Esher ; I leave it
to you to decide whether it is a Christian
one.

You are mistaken," said Magdalen, with
energy. "You misunderstand me completely.
I do not think that I have any personal
grudge against Captain Esher. But it
seems to me that I have no right to treat
him as though he had never erred. It is the
consequence of his wrong-doing, not the
punishments Emilia, that I feel his presence
an offence to me. I cannot help it. God
knows that it was not always so ; I loved

Philip Esher once ; but I have reason now to
thank God that I have been saved from the
misery of linking my fate to that of a shameless
and godless man."

Magdalen's face was pale ; her eyes were on
fire. Not for years had she been so much
moved ; perhaps she had never spoken so freely
l:)efore. 'Mis. St. Aidan murmured some soothing,
imploring words, but they did not avail
to silence her; she felt that she must now say
what she had to say, once and for all.

If," she said, ^' Philip Esher insists upon
meeting me, I must meet him, but not as a
friend. He must be changed indeed before
1 could forget the wrong that he did to those
children's mother, to the children themselves.
We have no right — you and I, Emilia — to
look on him as an honourable, high-minded
man, whom we can trust. I may be forced tolet
the children see him, but I will not Ije
forced into friendship with him."

"My dear, nobody wants to force you —

VOL. 11. K

unless it be Philip himself; but do think of
the children."

Of the children ? "

"Philip has a perfect right to take them
away from you if he chooses ; if you offend
him he may do it. AYould it be good for
them to be brought up in his way, amongst
his friends ? "

Mrs. St. Aidan showed a good deal of tact
in making this suggestion. It struck Magdalen
powerfully ; the colour came and went
in her face, and her mouth trembled.

No," she said. " No, indeed."

Then be prudent, dear. I do not ask you
to show him more than civility. But let him
come to the Priory and see the children.
Very likely he will not care to come more than
once or twice."

I have said that he may come to see them."

'* But see him yourself, Madge. Don't avoid
him ; don't show, if you can help it, that you
are afraid of him."

The eyes of the two women met, and Magdalen's
fell first. A rush of burning colour to
cheek and brow almost startled Mrs. St. Aidan,
who was not used to seeing' Mag-dale blush so
painfully. There w-as a momentary pause,
and then Magdalen rose to her feet.

1 must go," she said, in an altered voice.
I ought to be at home. I have a great deal
to do. Good-bye, Emilia."'

Mrs. St. Aidan drew her face doTvn and
kissed it, but she did not venture to allude
again to the message for Philip. She felt that
she had said enough, although she had not said
all that she meant to say. For Philip Esher
was already in Scarsfield, and Magdalen had
not been told.

She was not long to be kept in ignorance.
Captain Esher presented himself at the Priory
that very afternoon.

Magdalen was sitting alone in the bare and
business-like little room in which she transacted
most of her affairs. She was writings

letters, aDcl had given orders that she was not
to be disturbed. It was with some surprise
therefore, that she heard a low knock at the
door ; but supposing it to be from one of the
children, she called out " Come in' without
raising her head from the hand on which it
rested. She was weary and languid after her
exciting discussion with Mrs. St. Aidan, and
she did not look up until an uu familiar step
and movement attracted her attention.

Who is there ?" she said, suddenly.

I hope I do not interrupt," said Captain
Esher, politely, but in as common-place a tone
as if he had been in the habit of seeing her
once a week.

Magdalen rose, without haste, but with the
greatest dignity, and confronted him. Her
eyes gleamed and her face was paler than
usual, but she showed no trace of embarrassment
in her manner. She bowed slightly,
as if to a stranger, and Quietly asked a
question.

'may I inquire what your business is with
me \

It was like a declaration of war. Captain
Esher looked at her steadily, and allowed himself
a little smile. He thought that he understood
her very well — as he understood all
women. But he had a good deal to learn
about Magdalen.

Before he had been two minutes in the
room, he had subjected every detail of furniture
and of Magdalen's dress to subtle criticism.
He was simply amused by the ascetic plainness
of the room, the absence of ornament from her
dress. Her face dismayed him somewhat;
it was so calm, so grave, so different
from the girlish face that he used to know,
that he absolutely began to consider whether
it were worth while to overcome the aversion
that she felt, or pretended to feel, for him.
But it piqued his vanity to think that a
woman should so easily forget an old love, and
that his presence should have so little power

over her. This, at least, was not to be borne
he would make her speak to him as an old
acquaintance, at any rate. And he would
begin] the attack at once.

Magdalen was thinking meanwhile how
little he was changed. The slight figure, not
very tall ; the cropped golden brown hair and
heavy moustache ; the inroad, well-developed
forehead, straight eyebrows, and long, brilliant
dark eyes — a rare combination of colouring,
which was rejected in Dolly's child-face — -
these were unchanged still. The only differences
she could find lay in the lower part
of his face. A slightly unequal curving of the
nostrils, a habitual curl of the lips, had been
deepened by time into a perpetual sneer.
There was more fulness of outline about
the chin than in old times, more pressure
about the mouth ; and these changes, small as
they were, gave to the whole face an expression
of scorn and cruelty, not lessened by
the piercing coldness of his fine eyes. It was

a face of some power and much refinement ;
but, more noticeably than ever, the f^ice of a
man who had all his life been bent on his own
pleasure, and who never forgot or forgave a
wrong.

He now permitted himself to assume a look
of confusion and distress. " I thought," he
said, apologetically, " that you had consented
to see me. Otherwise, I could not have dared
to intrude. Mrs. St. Aidan told me that I
might come — to visit my children."

To visit your children — yes," said Magdalen.
She turned to rincr the bell. " I will
send for them at once. Mv servant made
some mistake in showing you into this room ;
I trust that you will excuse it."

Her voice was calm and untroubled, but
cold as ice : her eyes met his without
flinching, as she stood erect near the mantelpiece,
waiting for the servant for whom she
had rung. Captain Esher looked at her
with admiration. He had not known that

Magdalen could be so stately, so magnificent.


He made a step forward, as if moved by an
impulse that he could not resist. " Magdalen,"
he said, slightly opening his arms as though
to clasp her to his breast ; " Magdalen — I did
not come to see them : I came to see you ! "

There was no sign of emotion on Magdalen's
face. She looked as if she had not heard a
single word. And at this moment the maid
appeared in answer to her summons : Magdalen
noticed that she looked guilty and
frightened, as if she knew that she had done
wrong.

Show this gentleman into the drawing-room,
Jane, and then find Miss Dolly and
Miss Daisy and send them here to me."

The maid waited for the visitor to follow,
but Captain Esher, bending his brows and
pulling at his long moustache, did not move
from the spot. Magdalen looked at him : he
made her a courtly bow.

'* I follow you," he said, in a low tone. '' I
can wait until you are ready."

Magdalen made a gesture of anger — a rare
manifestation in her.

Find the children, Jane," she said, over
her shoulder, to the maid : " I will show the
way to the drawing-room. Captain Esher — "

As the door closed, he interrupted her.

"I told you," he said, "that I came to see
you as well as the children. Are you not
going to listen to me ? "

You can have nothing to say to me."

'' You mean that you have nothing to say
to me. And do you think that I am going to
leave my children in the care of a woman who
will not even speak to me ? "

The words were softly spoken, but there
was a threat within them for all their softness.
Magdalen had turned towards the door, but as
she listened her hands fell to her side, her foot
halted. After a moment's pause, she turned
to him again.

'' What do yoii want ? " she asked, in a
different tone.

A gleam of triumph showed itself in Captain
Esher's eyes. He had touched the right
string now : in time, he thought, he should
get all that he desired.

You have given me leave to see my
children ; I thank you for it. But I want
sometimes to see you too. I want to meet
you as a friend."

We are not friends : we never can be,"
she answered, coldly.

"How is it possible," he murmured, "that
1 should leave my children in the hands of
one who is not my friend ? Do you think
that I wish my two little girls to grow up to
hate me ? "

'^ As far as I have anA^thino- to do with your
children," she said, resolutely, *' I shall teach
them to honour their parents."

Is it possible," he asked again, " that my
enemy can teach them to honour — me ? "

I was never your enemy. I am not your
enemy now."

Then be my friend, Magdalen' lie cried,
stretching out his hands towards her ; " forgive
me the wrong' that I once did ^'ou, and
be my friend."

Magdalen drew herself away from him
T^dthout a word of answer. Her look, her
movements, were enough : Esher saw what
she meant. He uttered a bitter exclamation.

So this is what your Christian charity
comes to ! You cannot forgive an injury, it
seems: you cannot forget that I once erred —
although it was from love of you. You have
decided the point at issue, Miss Lingered, in
your own way : I suppose you are prepared to
take the consequences."

'* What consequences ? "

I will take the children back with me to
Malton. They cannot stay here unless you
will treat me with civility. I reassert my
claim. My children shall come with me."

Oh, no, no, no ! " cried Magdalen, suddenly
turning white and clasping her hands before
her. '' You would not take them away !
Anything — anything but that ! "

As she spoke, and Captain Esher stood
regarding her with a cruel smile upon his
handsome face, the door softly opened, and
two fair childish heads appeared. " You sent
for us, Maidie," said little Daisy's soft voice.
Shall we come in ? "

WAR.

The entrance of the children effected an immediate
diversion. Magdalen turned to them
with relief. She had meant to prepare them
in private for the meeting with their father,
but as this was now impossible she made the
best of the matter, and told them quietly
their visitor's name. It was rather a curious
meeting. Captain Esher had not seen his little
daughters since the day of the interrupted
wedding at Riversmead, when they were only
three years old. In spite of his expressions
of anxiety and affection concerning them, he
did not scan them with a very loving eye.
He cared little for children in the abstract,

and for these two in particular, he was coll



scions of something approaching dislike. He
knew, however, that it would be unwise to
show his true feeling, and resigned himself to
play the part of the affectionate father. With
Dolly, bright, vivacious, saucy, and singularly
like himself in appearance, he soon divined
that he could easily get on ; Daisy, shy,
sensitive, and silent, irritated him from the
first moment by her evident fear of him. It
was, perhaps, against Daisy, too, that she so
strongly resembled her poor mother.

Further private conversation was impossible,
and Magdalen was only too glad to escape
from Philip Esher's company, and to regain
her calmness by c[uiet thought in her own
room. The children were bidden to entertain
their other for a little while, and they
acquitted themselves well. Even Captain
Eslier was astonished and pleased with their
intelligence, their good manners, their pretty,
dainty, little ways. Dolly soon forgot all
shyness with him, and as she was a child of

whom any man might well be proud — brilliantly
beautiful, clever, original, and vivacious
he speedily succumbed to her fascinations,
and developed a liking for her at which he
was half surprised and half-amused.

The children led him into the drawing-room.
He knew the place well, and looked
about him with interest as he entered it. In
the days when he had been old Miss Esher's
favourite and reputed heir, he had planned a
thorough transformation of this old room.
Its slightly faded splendours had not satisfied
him. Now he was pleased to see that Magdalen
had changed nothing ; the old silk
hangings, the Chippendale chairs, the gilded
mirrors, were exactly as they used to be in
Miss Esher's time. A rush of anger came
over him when he remembered the way in
which he had been, as he phrased it, 'defrauded"
of the old place. Magdalen had
no business to possess it ; it was his by right,
and his children's after him. He vowed to

himself that he would get it back again at
any sacrifice. The house — and its mistress
should be his one day.

He smiled as he remembered the bareness
of the room in which he had found her. He
did not believe that she had not expected him
to come that afternoon. Her reception of
him had been a bit of finished acting, he
thought ; the mise-en-scene was perfect, and
Magdalen was a consummate coquette. Well,
she should be punished for her coquetry,
sooner or later, and the children should be the
instruments of her punishment.

It was nearly four o'clock when the children
were called to see their father. In half-an-hour's
time, Dolly came running to Magdalen,
her face glowing with delight.

He is such a nice papa, Maidie ! " she
exclaimed. " I love him so much, and he has
promised us all sorts of things ; a lovely fan
and a pearl necklace for me from Paris, and a
doll for Daisy, and we have asked him to stay

to tea. He sent me to ask if you would let
him."

Of course, if he likes to stay, Dolly.
You can have tea in the drawing-room. I
will tell Miss Jessop about it. Now run back
to your papa."

'miss Jessop !" said Dolly with a twist of
her shoulders; "why should 3'ou tell her?
Papa won't want her, I'm sure."

Magdalen hushed her.

Your papa does not know how kind and
good Miss Jessop is, but you do, so I do not
like you to speak in that manner, Dolly.
Miss Jessop will come to pour out tea. Your
little fingers can't do it."

But why won't you come ? "

I am going to have tea with Alice and old
Mrs. Miller upstairs."

But why ? Just when papa is here too ! "

'run away now, Dolly; that will do,"
said Magdalen, with the accent of gentle
dignity that imposed obedience even upon

VOL. II. L

Dolly's wild spirits. The child ran back to
the drawing-room without another word, and
Magdalen went to find Miss Jessop and
request her to give Captain Esher his cup of
tea.

But, my dear Madge," said the old lady,
with many a flutter and stammer, " are you
sure — do you think that it's right — I was
never so much surprised in my life as to
see Captain Esher here ! "

Do not let us speak or think of the
past," said Magdalen, quietly'. " I cannot
keep his children from him. There is no
necessity for me to see him again."

No one would have guessed from her tranquil
manner that she felt as if her heart
were burning itself out in a passion of
indignation at Philip Esher 's presumption,
an agony of jealous fear for the children
whom she could not protect from the father
that she distrusted. She went about her
usual affairs in her usual wa' ; presiding,

as she often did, at the table, where two
or three humble pensioners took their afternoon
meal, wondering all the time, with her
ears strained to catch every sound from the
drawing-room, when her unwelcome visitor
meant to go. When tea was over, she
hesitated for a few moments as to whether
the usual routine of her household should
go on, or whether she would alter her custom
while Captain Esher was in the house.
She was in the habit of conducting evenings
immediately after tea — a practice
which ensured the presence of the children
and her more infirm visitors. She usually
had some half-invalid strangers in the
house — pale needle-women from London, in
want of country air, an ailing homeless
governess, perhaps, or a sickly child whose
parents could not afford to send it away
from home, and for their good she had
adopted various little rules and customs
which she knew would be greatly at variance

with Philip Esher's ideas. She put
down her hesitation to cowardice, and was
ashamed of it ; she resolved to go on as
usual, without taking any notice of his
presence in the house, but at the same time
she was conscious of a thrill of proud
reluctance at letting him know how greatly
she was changed. She felt sure that this
reluctance was sin, and mentally castigated
herself for it, but she could not get rid of
it altogether.

Meanwhile, Captain Esher had had his
tea with the children and Miss Jessop.
The old lady disappeared immediately afterwards,
and at a quarter to six a bell
began to ring. Daisy was standing rather
timidly by her father's chair, while Dolly
sat on his knee, when Captain Esher
glanced at his watch, and asked what the
bell was ringing for.

It 's time for prayers," said Daisy,
glancing at her sister.

Prayers ! What prayers ? " asked Captain
Esher, in an amused tone.

We have prayers every evening in the
great hall, papa."

Prayers in the hall ! Good heavens !
Head by the old lady, I suppose, to the
servants ? "

No ; Maidie reads them. I think we
ought to go, Dolly."

Magdalen ! " murmured the Captain
below his breath, as he caressed his moustache
to hide a slow smile. " What a

transformation ! Yet I don't know And

are yoic obliged to attend Divine worship
in the hall ? " he asked aloud, in a tone of
which the ridicule was not lost upon
Dolly's quick ears.

Yes, papa," said Daisy. " We have a
hymn, and Maidie reads ; it is very nice to
have it so early, or else the old people and
the children would have to go to bed
without hearing it."

And I wish we did," muttered Dolly,
who had been in a perverse mood all day.
I don't see the good ! "

Oh, Dolly, how can you be so naughty ? "
said Daisy, with grave eyes.

Little Methodist ! " said her father, half-aloud.
" Never mind, Dolly ; you are papa's
own daughter in your dislike of cant."

Dolly understood only that papa was
rather pleased that she did not care for
prayers, and cast a triumphant look at
Daisy, who had moved towards the door.

May I go, papa ? Mai die likes us to
come."

Take me with you," said her father''
I should like to hear it too, for once."
And, though Dolly pouted and hung back,
Captain Esher was accordingly escorted by
his little daughters to the hall.

When the little assembly had dispersed,
Captain Esher approached sufficiently near
to say in Magdalen's ear —

What sort of a play is this ? Tragedy,
comedy, melodrama ? A new version of
/ Puritanic

"I am not acting ; I am in earnest," said
Magdalen.

Miss Lingered as la helle Puritaine is
a novelty to me, you must remember."

She stopped short in her slow walk
towards the door, and seemed, by the fire
in her eye, to be about to reply with some
vehemence ; but she met Daisy's wondering
glance, and turned back with lips more compressed
than usual. The children followed
her ; their father came behind.

Must you go now, papa ? " said Dolly,
possessing herself of his hand as they reached
the hall.

In a few minutes. First of all, I want
to speak five words to Miss Lingered, if she
will grant me audience."

Again Magdalen looked at him, this time
Avitli merely a grave, considerate expression.

a little weary, as though she wondered when
this trying visit would be over. He understood
the look well enough, but he had yet
a bold stroke to make, which Magdalen had
unconsciously suggested to him.

She led the way into her sitting-room, and
stood upon the rug by the window with her
face turned towards the garden outside. Not
once, as he noticed, had she seated herself in
his presence.

Captain Esher half-extended his hands, as
if he would instinctively have taken hers, yet
knew that she would not allow him to do so ;
an effective gesture of entreaty, well seconded
by the softness of his eyes and voice.

"Magdalen — forgive me for using the
name," he said ; " forgive me too that I fora
moment doubted your sincerity."

*' My sincerity ? I can scarcely see why
you should doubt it."

''• Not now — not since I have seen you and
heard you pray like the saint you are ; no.

I am not mocking, Magdalen; and, believe
me, it is no small tribute from one to acknowledge
your sincerity."

Is it ? "

"I see ; you do not believe in mine. You
are very just ; implacable just, Magdalen ; but
your own Scriptures tell you to ' love mercy '
in the midst of justice, do they not ^ I appealed
to old memories, to your recognition of
the fact that I was those children's father,
before ; now I will appeal to your own goodness,
for I feel that you are a good woman."

*what do you want?" asked Magdalen,
abruptly. "I do not wish to be flattered.
Captain Esher, and I do not know what you
can require from me, now that I place no
obstacles in the way of your seeing the children
when you please."

I ask only for what you can give easily,"
said Esher, with a look of humility ; " help to
make me a better man than I have been. My
life has been wild ; I have erred in many ways.

and my heart wearies of sin and error, Magdalen.
I come to you ; I see your exquisite
faith-your sweet devotion ; I envy you the
beliefs that once I shared — that now I long
to share. Teach me, as sou have taught my
children, to believe."

He came nearer as he spoke, but Magdalen
did not answer ; she was looking into the
gathering dusk, and he could not see her face.
Was she touched or not ?

'' I do not ask now for your friendship, and
it would be profanation to dream of love," he
went on, in low distinct tones ; " but let me
be to you as the heathen, Magdalen, whom
you would gladly instruct ; I have little more
knowledge than they. Let me be your scholar
1 shall be a docile one — and teach me the
simple truths that I have forgotten."

"Forgotten? yes; but you learned them
once," said Magdalen, so sadly that he fancied,
with a sudden thrill of hope, that his request
would soon be granted. "In old days you

did not profess to know so little of the
truth."

I tried to make myself better for your
sake — then. And since I lost — forfeited — the
hope of you, I have gone from bad to worse ;
I own it freely. Now I would gladly change.
Help me, Magdalen."

I am not the right person to help you ; it
is of no use to come to me."

*' You are the only person who can help mein
this world."

Not so," said she, with tremulous decision.
There are God's authorised ministers "

What ! Magdalen, do you think I should
go to a priest ? "

"There are churches open; there is God's
Word that you can read."

He turned away with a scornful laugh.
It is not these that I want. They will dome
no good. I want your help, Magdalen."

I will give you my prayers," she said,
mournfully; "I can do nothing more." Her

voice took a softer, sweeter inflection as lie
added, '' I have prayed for you all these years,
Philip ; it would be my greatest comfort, my
greatest blessing, to know that I have not
prayed in vain'

Philip's heart gave a bound of triumph.
His silver tongue had carried him far
indeed ! She had called him by his first
name ; she had acknowledged that she
prayed for him. What more might he not
expect ?

I thank you," he said, in a low, moved
voice. " I thank you from the bottom of my
heart. I know that I can ask for nothing
more. Your goodness has touched me very
deeply. Will you forgive me my foolish words
this afternoon about taking the children from
you ? Not for worlds would I remove them
from your influence. Let me see them sometimes
— let me see you ; it is all I ask. Your
friendship is too high a boon."

It is not that," said Magdalen. Her

voice lead grown tremulous, and she sank into
the seat that he proffered her, as if her limbs
were weak. " But surely you forget all — all
that passed between us. We are the last
people — the last people in the world — who can
be friends."

Then let us be something more," he said.
It was a daring stroke, and one which he
repented as soon as it was made. The room
was nearly dark, and he could not see Magdalen's
face. The silence that fell between
them was so deep, so pregnant, that he
scarcely dared to breathe. But it lasted only
for a moment. She rose from her chair and
spoke in the voice of icy coldness which he
was learning to know so well.

'' I think there is no more to be said. Pray
come to see your children as often as you
please. Captain Esher. I am too busy to
receive visitors, Ijut the little girls will be at
liberty whenever you like."

Is that all ? " he said in low, muffled tones.

You will make no truce with me, then ?
You refuse to help me, Magdalen ? "

I can do nothing for you, Captain Esher."

Then I am thrown back on my own
resources," he said in a voice that was gentle
indeed, almost tender — though his eyes
glanced with an expression of bitter anger
which made her start. He went on deliberately.
" You will not wonder if I cause my
children to infringe your rules sometimes ?
Of course I shall have nothing to guide me ;
I shall not know how you wish them to be
brought up. Suppose I unwittingly say to
them things of which you do not approve ?
You know that I have very little belief in
what you teach them. Whose influence will
be the greater in the long run, I wonder, yours
or mine ? "

AVhat do you mean ? "

He laughed. " It would be 2^i^ua7it to hear
my sceptical notions from Dolly's baby lips,
would it not ? If you will not help) me to

correct my wrong ideas, yon inst not grumble
if I convey them to lier mind. I fancy that
she will prove an apt scholar."

A great fear came into Magdalen's eyes.
She pressed her hands tightly together and
spoke with a new vehemence. "It is useless
to leave me their bodies if you mean to steal
away their souls," she exclaimed, half involuntarily.


"My dear Miss Lingered," said Captain
Esher, politely, " you need have no cause for
alarm. Give me the inestimable boon of your
friendship, and I promise you that not a word
shall pass my lips to which priest or governess
could object. I acknowledge that I don't
answer for my prudence otherwise."

The sneer, the veiled threat, offended Magdalen.
She turned from him with grave
disdain, refusing in her own mind to believe
that he would try to influence the children
against her teaching saw that he would
gain nothing more frr)m her that night, and so,

with a low bow and a few words of courteous
farewell, he took his leave. The children
were waiting in the hall to say good-night ;
Magdalen heard his cool, amused laugh and
their ringing, merry voices through the half-open
door, as she sank with a faint, exhausted
sensation into the nearest chair. There was
relief in knowing at last that he had left
the house. Relief — was there also some
regret ?

'* I was a fool to think for a moment that
she had gone off," said Philip Esher to himself,
as he walked slowly to the Rectory, where
Mrs. St. Aidan was anxiously awaiting him :
she has gained in expression and manner ;
she moves like a duchess, and her eyes are
magnificent. When her fanaticism brought
the colour to her cheeks and fire to her eyes,
she was twice as handsome as she used to be.
Ah, my lady, I '11 make you ask my pardon
some day for the insults you have heaped on
me, to-nio'ht ! "

Captain ESHER's TACTICS.

It occurred to Captain Esher on his way to this
hotel to wonder a little that Magdalen had not
named Alice to him — the homeless vagrant
whom she had, as he thought, so unwarrantably
connected with his life. He supposed
that she had found out her mistake, or that
the woman had left the Priory. This,
however, was not the case. Magdalen was
resolved that Alice and Captain Esher should
one day meet ; but on this occasion she had
been taken by surprise, and had had no time
to bring the two face to face. Besides, Alice
was unusually weak and ill ; she was almost
entirely confined to her room by chronic
bronchitis, and Magdalen feared the effect

VOL. II. 161 M

upon her of sudden excitement. For, whether
Alice were Captain Esher's wife or not (and
Magdalen now thought that she could not
be his wife), she had at any rate once been
deeply interested in him, and could still lie
thrown into an alarming state of agitation at
the mention of his name.

Captain Esher had been asked to dine at
the Eectory, rather against the Eector's will.
But Mrs. St. Aidan insisted on his coming :
her affection for Philip Esher was not to be set
aside. So the Rector had consented to receive
him once ao-ain.

Philip was a little late, but he made his
excuses very gracefully to Mrs. St. Aidan,
explaining that he had been visiting his
children, and that time had slipped away
alarmingly fast in their delightful society —
delightful to a father, at any rate ; " and
that he had then had to go back to his hotel
to dress for dinner.

"Your paternal feelings have been in

abeyance rather long," said Mrs. St. Aidan.
She could defend him behind his back, but she
could not always govern her sarcastic tongue
in his presence.

Esher shrugged his shoulders. "There
were other circumstances to keep me away,"
he said, blandly, as though Mrs. St. Aidan
were a stranger to whom that fact needed
explanation.

"What do you think of the children,
Philip ? " asked the Rector, by way of
diversion. " Beautiful little creatures, are
they not ? "

"Very. Dorothy is, I think, the prettier
of the two."

Dolly resembles you," said Mrs. St. Aidan,
with a smile.

Ah ! I did not notice the resemblance,"
said Captain Esher, with a slightly conscious
air of personal beauty, rather to be deprecated
than otherwise. " Her hair is like mine,
perhaps : as it used to be. They have been

very carefully trained in Miss Lingered's
peculiar views I should imagine."

The announcement of dinner fortunately
cut short the conversation, for Mrs. St.
Aidan's bright eyes were beginning to show
that she was indignant. She refused to be
wheeled into the dining-room, so her husband
and Philip had the dinner-table to themselves,
over which they talked politics and
Dews of the day. The two men did not
amalgamate well : they never had done so, and,
when they talked of politics or religion, they
were further apart than ever. Mr. St. Aidan
was a Conservative and a High Churchman ;
Philip Esher's opinions were too slippery to
be easily seized and classified, but they ranged
about in a haze of polite Agnosticism, and
general disbelief in God or man. He had
varied intellectual and artistic tastes, however,
if he had no strong convictions of anything ;
he had plenty of brain power although he
seldom chose to use it, and he could talk

SO well on most subjects that his uncle was
sometimes half-amazed to feel how little they
lead in common, and how few topics he cared
to discuss with him. The sneering careless
tone that it was natural to Esher to adopt
about everything was one that the Eector
particularly disliked. And when he disliked
a man's tone, he was rather apt to retire into
a shell of silence and look courteously fatigued,
instead of arguing the points that he feared
would be attacked. Captain Esher, too,
never exerted his conversational powers
without occasion, therefore dinner became a
somewhat tame affair, and a return to the
drawing-room was decided on as soon as
possible.

They had just rejoined Mrs. St. Aidan,
when a servant summoned the Eector into
the hall, where stood a messenger from
Chalgrove ; he presently returned to explain
that he was obliged to go out for a short time,
but would be back as soon as possible, and

after a few words in a low tone to his wife, he
left her with his nephew.

Parish business, I suppose ? " said Captain
Esher, with an ironical emphasis on the first
word.

'•' One of our neighbours — Mr. Brendon — has
sent for Gervas to baptize his little girl, a
child only a very few hours old, and not
expected to live."

"Brendon? I know that name, I think.
Max Brendon, owner of some chemical works ?
I did not know he was married."

No ; this is his elder brother, Cecil ; son
of old Mr. Brendon, whom perhaps you
remember."

Ah, yes. They were hardly in your set,
I think ? "

We have known them much better lately
Max Brendon more particularly."

Esher looked up quickly. 'you know
him personally ? Really, I am a little
surprised."

What have you to say against him, pray,
Phil ? "

"Nothing at all, my clear Emilia, save
from a business point of view. His chemical
gases have spoiled all my trees. I am rather
sorry you know him well, for Stoner, my
agent, calls him ' that impracticable young
man.

"And why should it affect our knowing
him?"

For no reason. It may be a little inconvenient
that I should have a lawsuit with
him ; but I dare say we shall arrange it
amicably."
I hope so."

How did you make his acquaintance ? — if
I may ask the question," said Philip, lazily
ensconcing himself in the depths of a comfortable
easy-chair. " Your husband used to have
rather an objection to business-men."

"Max Brendon is not at all an ordinary
man," answered Mrs. St. Aidan, decidedly.

He can both think and feel ; and his family
is by no means despicable — his mother was a
Grenvil."

You remind me of the ancient epitaph,
Emilia ; ' Sincerely pious, and first cousin of
the Earl of Cork,' " said Captain Esher,
maliciously.

I never spoke of Max Brendon as ' sincerely
pioifs/ did I ? I should be very far
from the truth if I did."

I thought he was your pattern young
man."

*' Gervas sees a great deal of him at a
night-school that is held three or four times
a- week." Mrs. St. Aidan ignored the last
remark.

*' Can't Mr. Max Brendon read and write ? "
inquired Captain Esher in a sleepy tone.

Philip ! what are you talking about ?
Mr. Brendon goes to Gay Street to teach
others, not to learn, of course. You are too
absurd."

Philip suddenly grew wakeful, and changed
his position to a sitting one.

"The night-school in Gay Street! The
same place to which Magdalen goes so often,
I presume ? "

"Yes; Magdalen teaches there. How did
you know anything about it '? "

"Dolly told me," said Philip, lying back
negligently. Then, with a slight, disagreeable
smile : "Is this young man after Magdalen ? "

I confess that I don't quite know what
you mean."

I beg pardon. Does Mr. Brendon wish
to marry Miss Lingered ? "

No one ever thought of such a thing," said
Mrs. St. Aidan, looking so much startled that
he was assured of her sincerity. "It would
be most unsuitable ; besides "

"magdalen has somebody else in her eye,
I suppose ? "

I think it is time you dropped that name,
and said ' Miss Lingered,' Philip."

A slightly needless assumption of formality,
don't you think ? "

Not needless, under the circumstances."

So you are my enemy too, Emilia ?
I almost thought that you would have helped
me."

My help would do you no good. She will
never marry you now."

"You think not," said Captain Esher,
stroking his moustache. '^ I am not sure."

"You have certainly no mean opinion of
yourself, if you think she will."

I never found that it answered, to have a
mean opinion of one's-self"

I am surprised that you admire her
still."

She has grown into a very beautiful
woman. You look amazed ; but I think her
far handsomer than she was in the days of her
bloom. I admire her very much. She would
make a fine tragic actress."

So you saw her '? " said Mrs. St. Aidan,

laying down her work and looking at him
eagerly.

Saw lier ? Excuse me, but for what other
purpose did I go '? "

To see your children, you said."

Ah, yes ; I did say so, I remember. To
see my children, of course. She said she
would not admit me, I suppose."

Are you going again ? "

Captain Esher laughed, a low musical laugh
that irritated Mrs. St. Aidan. " You are very
curious, Emilia. Yes, I am going again —
and as often as I choose. How long will
you give me to conquer her in ? "

You '11 never conquer her, Philip ; so do
not think of it."

Six weeks," said Captain Esher, softly ;
and then he laughed again and went to the
piano, where he began to play with exquisite
taste and skill.

Mr. St. Aidan returned about ten o'clock
and reported that the baby was a little

better, and that Mrs. Cecil Brendon was
sroing on well. He had named the child
Cecilia, according to the mother's wish, and
Max Brendon, Ursula, and Mrs. Chaloner
were to be its sponsors. Mr. St. Aidan
was much touched by the anxiety that
Cecil had displayed about his wife and
little daughter ; *' he was evidently quite
unnerved, scarcely master of himself," the
Eector said. " I liked him very much,
though he is certainly different from his
brother, who is a diamond in the rough,
Ilia."

Emilia has not lost her habit of finding;
out wonderful virtues in the most
unlikely subjects," said Philip Esher, smiling,
as he rose to take his leave. '' I wish
her joy of her rough diamonds; I prefer
them polished."

Magdalen, meanwhile, had heard from the
children a most enthusiastic account of their
father. Their hearts had been completely

gained by his amused, half simulated interest
in their sayings and doings. Dolly,
particularly, seemed to have been greatly
flattered and more caressed than Daisy.
Her tongue went at twice the pace of her
sisters, and Magdalen wondered, but could
not quite discover, whether the quieter
child had felt herself slighted for talkative
Dolly. Both children had some odd questions
to ask, which it puzzled Magdalen to
answer prudently. " Maidie, why did papa
call me a ' little Methodist "? " " Agere you
sorry that papa came, Maidie ? Why
wouldn't you come to tea ? He was very
vexed when you didn't come." " Why
aren't you and papa friends now, Maidie ?
He says you used to be, but you don't
like him now." At which Dolly burst out,
angrily, " I don't mean to love anybody
who isn't friends with my dear papa."
Magdalen found it expedient to hush the
conversation, which went on while she was

brushing their hair before they went to bed,
and to remind them that they usually
learned a verse or two before kneeling
down to say their prayers. But here again
she met from opposition from Dolly. " I
don't believe papa cares for our saying
prayers. I don't want to say mine tonight."


The habit of obedience, and Magdalen's
grave surprise, brought the child back to
her usual submissive frame of mind. But
it was no wonder that Magdalen went
downstairs and spent the evening in a state
of alarmed dismay at the kind of influence
which Philip Esher evidently chose to exert
over his children.

Captain Esher stayed in Scarsfield, and
visited his children with laudable regularity
almost every day. But he seldom saw
Magdalen. She managed to avoid him,
although he laid several snares to entrap
her into an interview ; he always came unexpectedly,

and once or twice met lier in
the street ; but lie either eluded him altogether,
or had a companion in whose presence
he could not speak.

This intercourse with their father produced
a notable change in the children. They were
in a constant state of excited expectation, for
he never came without gifts of toys, sweet
things to eat, ornaments or flowers, in his
hands. Magdalen expected him soon to tire
of the little girls' companionship ; but his
patience seemed to be unwearied. Shut up in
her own bare little chamber, busy with needlework,
for she suffered from a feverish
excitement of the nerves which would not let
her read or think connectedly, she heard
bursts of gay laughter, snatches of song,
merry voices, from the morning-room in which
they generally sat. Sometimes they crossed
the lawn, or went out for a walk, clinging to
his hands ; and then, if he passed Magdalen's
window, he would look in, not rudely or

boldly, but with a sort of intentness of
expression which showed that he was anxious
for a glimpse of her. If he did not come fora
whole day, Dolly grew restless and fretful ;
when he had been and gone, she became
languid, as if the excitement had been too
much for her, or else passionate and defiant,
as though he had taught her not to brook
contradiction. Daisy behaved more equably,
but at times Magdalen could not account for a
puzzled, saddened look on her little face, and
was grieved at the alternations of feeling
towards herself which both children showed,
being now affectionate, now sullen or constrained.
Miss Jessop, too, came to her with
stories of Dolly's utterances and quotations
'' from papa," which Dolly had not dared to
parade in Magdalen s presence, and which had
made the good old lady's hair stand on end ;
irreverent expressions and doubts of all kinds
about sacred things that Captain Esher had
not scrupled to pour into her ears, being much

diverted by the precocious avidity with which
she imbibed anything that could justify her
recoil from constituted authority. At first
Magdalen said, " Patience : I will not impress
those notions deeper on her mind by argument,
unless I am obliged to do so. Her father
will soon go away, I hope ; and she cannot
forget all that she has been taught through a
few careless words from him. She has said
nothing of the kind in my presence, and I am
not forced to notice what has been only
accidentally overheard. "

But the battle came at last. One Sunday
afternoon Magdalen sat talking with Daisy
over some Bible pictures, while Dolly lay on
the sofa in a lazy attitude rather unusual
with her. Magdalen had been explaining a
picture and telling a Bible story in simple
words, wondering meanwhile why Daisy
looked so puzzled, when Dolly suddenly
interrupted her by remarking —

Papa doesn't believe all that. Papa says

VOL. II. N.

that half the things you teach us are nonsense."


Magdalen Laid down her book.

'' What things, Dolly ? "

"About the Bible," said Dolly, promptly.
"He doesn't believe that the Bible is true,
and I don't either."

"You don't believe that God's Word is
true ? Dolly, my poor child 1 "

I won't be called ' poor child ! '" said Dolly,
sitting up with flashing eyes and crimsoning
cheek. " I am not poor, and I believe what
papa says ; not what you do. Papa knows
best."

Oh, Dolly, Dolly," said Magdalen, sadly,
*' can this be you ? My darling, listen tome


But before she could continue Daisy had
burst out crying, and hidden her suce on
Magdalen's lap.

"It is true, is it ? " she sobbed. " You 're
not mistaken, are you, Maidie ? Oh, do, do

tell me ! There is Somebody to take care of
iLs up in heaven, isn't there ? It 's not a
mistake ? "

"No, my darling, it is not a mistake," said
magdalen, and then she added some simple,
loving' words about her own faith which had
the effect of calming the sobbing child, and of
making Dolly look half-sullen, half-ashamed.

Then Daisy turned to her sister with a flash
of unusual indignation.

Papa is wrong," she said, " and he is
wrong when he says that Maidie does not
really love us. She does — she does ! "

Dolly uttered an inarticulate sound of
dissent, and Magdalen, whose heart was
bleeding within her, said gently but firmly —

"You must know that your father is
quite mistaken. You know that I love you
better than any one in the world."

Daisy put her arms round Magdalen's neck*'

Papa slant be mistaken ! " cried Dolly,
bursting into passionate tears. " Daisy, you

don't love him, and Magdalen doesn't ; but
I do, I do 1 "

The uncontrollable passion of the child was
most painful to witness, and Magdalen would
gladly have soothed her, but she struggled and
fought at the slightest touch, and would listen
to nothing. In the midst of it all came Captain
Esher's well-known ring at the front-door belL

"It's papa; don't go away!" whispered
Daisy, anxiously, as his footsteps crossed the
hall.

I am not going," answered Magdalen,
and sat motionless, her arm clasping Daisy
closer still.

Captain Eslier took in the situation with
one keen glance. For some time he had been
expecting some such scene as this. Perhaps
he had not desired it to be a stormy one.
Magdalen rose and faced him, still keeping
her arm round Daisy ; Philip bowed politely,
but his eye sought out Dolly, weeping tempestuously
on the floor.

"Dolly!" lie said, in a quick voice, "What
is the matter ? "

In a moment Dolly was in his arms, sobbing-out
incoherent statements.

I love you, papa, and they don't — they
say you are tong. I don't love Magdalen
any longer ; let me come with you. . . . She
is angry with me "

Magdalen saw Captain Esher bend his head
and whisper something quick and short into
his little daughter's ear. Dolly replied, aloud :

"No, she didn't punish me . . . but she
talks and looks and . I want to be like
you, papa, and with you always ."

"Has your system answered. Miss Lingered ? "
asked Philip Esher, over the child's head.

And Magdalen returned another question :

How dare you say what you have said ? "

Whose fault has it Ijeen ? " he asked, with
a smile upon his face. " I warned you beforehand
— quiet, Dolly; don't cry — and you
must take the consequences."

'must I see them deprived of their faith in
my teaching ? " said Magdalen, indicating the
children by a slight movement of her head.

*' By no means," and Captain Esher drew a
long tress of Dolly's golden hair through his
hand ; " but you must see them follow their
father's lead sometimes, if you put yourself in
opposition to me. Dolly and myself against
you and Daisy there, who clings to you so
devotedly — who '11 win ? Do you throw up
the game 1 "

Let me send the children away, and speak
without metaphors."

"Daisy can go if you like," he said, indolently,
'dolly stays with me."

"Then stay, Daisy," said Magdalen, sitting
down wearily, as though her powers were
leaving her. " Stay, and let me hear in your
presence what your father wants."

The children held their Breath, half-terrified
; Philip looked at her with a cool,
musing smile.

I will make a bargain with you," he said,
drawing nearer to her, and speaking in so low
a tone that the little ones could not hear.

'' Well ? "

I will say nothing that you can disapprove,
so long as you stay in the same room
with us whenever 1 come."

Stay — with you and the children ? "

"Yes, I will even contradict what I have
told them."

And — suppose I say ' No ' ? "

On your own head be it ! " said Esher,
with an evil, mischievous look. "You have
seen what I can do."

"Anything but that. For the present,
then, I must stay."

"Thanks, although you do not give your
consent with flattering readiness. Dolly," he
said, softening his voice as he looked down at
the bright head that leaned against his breast,
have you left oft' crying ? What have you
been troubling Miss Lingered about ? You

little fool, I never meant you to take what
I said seriously. Believe all lie tells you, and
more too, if you like."

'you said — what she told us — was not
true," gasped Dolly, with open eyes and
mouth.

I was teasing you then."

And the Bible is true, and everything
? "

"Don't oro into details, little one. Don't
you hear me say that you are to believe all
she tells you ? "

Dolly looked from one to another in
grievous uncertainty. She had never thought
that her father would deceive her, or amuse
himself at her expense, and her disappointment
in him was sudden and bitter. For the
time being she returned to her old allegiance ;
ran to Magdalen, and hid her face on her
shoulder.

Captain Esher did not go away. He made
himself comfortable in an arm-chair, talked

unconcernedly to Magdalen, petted both his
children. They had tea together, much to
Miss Jessop's surprise, who could not understand
her Madge's pale face and fixed grave
eyes, though she saw well enough that trouble
and anxiety were there. They all walked to
church together, too, and then it was that
Magdalen said abruptly, in a moment when
the children were out of earshot :

I am doing what you asked, after all ; but
it is for their sakes."

Don't trouble yourself to explain, my dear
Magdalen ; I quite understand on what terms
we are at present."

'' I may not always be able to sit with the
children when you come. You will not insist
on my doing that ? "

There can never be a moment when your
presence is not most welcome."

"You will not talk about those things when
I am away ? " she said, with a tone of painful
entreaty in her voice.

Well, perhaps not ; so long as we are
friends, Magdalen."

She sighed heavily, but did not now dispute
the name.

A STATE OF SIEGE.

A CURIOUS quietness came over the household
after that stormy Sunday at the Priory.
Dolly and Daisy, delighted at the pact made
between Magdalen and their father, were
nearly their old obedient, docile selves ; and
Magdalen seemed able no longer to contend
with the influences that surrounded her.
Captain Esher constituted himself her ever-present
visitor and devoted attendant. He
had found out her weak side, her vulnerable
point — this ]passionate love of the children
and, by attacking it steadily and skilfully,
he hoped to win her altogether for himself.
He felt almost certain that she would not

now quarrel with him while the children



were in her care, because she was afraid
that he would take them from her ; and
he sedulously abstained from giving her any
definite assurance that they should remain
at the Priory. In fact, he purposely
dropped suggestions now and then that they
should be sent abroad or to school ; and
enjoyed the expression of pain that came
to Magdalen's face at the mention of such
schemes, for he wanted to make her feel
his power.

Dolly soon found out that Maidie would
not refuse, if possible, what papa requested ;
and she tried hard to gain indulgence by
working on his feelings with representations
of her hard fate in the schoolroom, where
she had to learn lessons with Daisy. Captain
Esher had some moderation left ; he
neither wanted to destroy Magdalen's influence,
nor to have his children constantly by
his side ; and accordingly, he was as thoughtful
as one could expect a man to be about

not disturbing the routine of lessons, or
taking Dolly out for a drive when Magdalen
thought she was better at home. Daisy
he left in the background. It was Dolly's
enthusiastic devotion to himself, as well asher
beauty, that had touched his heart ;
Daisy was too unobtrusive, too soft and
quiet, to gain his affection. She clung still
to Magdalen, who was thankful to keep the
love of one, if not of both, of the children.
Certainly Dolly's little heart seemed to have
gone from her completely.

Maoxlalen made one effort to dislodge
Captain Esher from his position, but failed
to stir him an inch. She brought him face
to face one day in the garden with the
woman who called herself Alice Mackworth.

It was a warm spring day ; so mild and
balmy that the invalid had been brought
out in a bath-chair to taste the sweetness of
the blossoming year. She was sitting with
her wan face turned to the west, whence

a flood of golden light was pouring as the
sun neared the horizon. Her long, thin
hands were crossed upon her lap ; her blue
eyes rested languidly upon some brightly-tinted
flowers that Dolly had brought her.
Dolly had a strange liking for this silent,
half-mad creature, who had come no one
knew whither on that stormy July night ;
and the poor woman herself was attracted
and interested by the golden-haired child as
she was by nobody else. Dolly could always
bring a faint smile to those bloodless lips ;
she could even coax Alice to speak and to
eat, when every means of persuasion had
been tried and failed. Watching them together,
Magdalen had often wondered whether
it was the tie of kinship that united them ;
whether some subtle yearning sprang up between
the woman and the child, yearning
of which neither knew the meaning:, but
which unconsciously worked upon the heart
and mind of each. In a minor degree.

Daisy was also attracted by door Alice ; lout
with her it was merely a child's natural
feeling of pity and tenderness for one who
was sick and suffering. The odd and special
fascination which Dolly seemed to find in
Magdalen's guest was peculiar to herself alone.

Magdalen led Captain Esher to the place
where Alice was sitting, without any preparatory
word. She wanted to see whether
he would recognise her or not, and whether
she would show any sign of agitation in his
presence. If it was likely to be a cruel experiment,
she said to herself sternly that she
could not help it. She was in peculiar circumstances,
and was not to be bound by
conventional rules. She thought that she
should know the truth when she had brought
Philip and this woman face to face. She led
him up to Alice's chair, and then she looked
at him.

'•' Do you know her ? " she asked — so cj^uietly
that even Philip could not have guessed that

her heart was beating wildly, and that her
voice was almost choked by the fast-coming
breath. " Do you know her ? " — It was all
that she could say.

Perhaps Philip was not entirely unprepared
for some such scene as this. Dolly's chatter
had already made him well acquainted with
Alice's position in the house. He had been
wondering when Magdalen meant to confront
him with her ; he knew that she would do it
sooner or later. " Madge was always given to
stage-effects," he said to himself, with careless
contempt. "Fortunately, I am not a stage-villain
to be scared into remorse by a chance
likeness, or the trick of a stranger's voice and
manners. She has mistaken her man."

He did not flinch then as he glanced at
Alice's face. He raised his eyebrows a little
and smiled — that was all.

"Is this your protegee?" he asked, in his
usual negligent, easy voice. " Poor soul ! she
looks very ill."

Magdalen turned from him abruptly, to
glance at Alice. The haggard blue eyes were
lifted blankly to Captain Esher's face : there
was no trace of recognition in their dull stare.
Magdalen leaned forward and touched her on
the arm.

*' Do you know this gentleman 1 " she asked.

No answer : only silence and that vacant,
unmeaning gaze.

'this is Captain Esher— Philip Esher,"
said Magdalen distinctly. '' You said that
you wanted to see him."

The woman shook her head.

"No," she murmured, as if speaking in a
dream, " not I ; it was not I. Take him
away."

Do you not know him ? " Magdalen asked
again.

There was no answer. She had turned her
head aside like a tired child, and was playing
with the flowers in her lap.

'rit is no use distressing her," said Captain

VOL. II. o

Esher, softly. *' Don't you see that her mind
is completely gone ? "

Magdalen moved away from the sick
woman's side, with a gesture expressive of
deep disappointment and chagrin.

I hoped," she said after a moment's pause,
that the doubt would be cleared up at last —
that now I should know the truth."

I can tell you the truth," said Captain
Esher, who was watching her with a stealthy
look in his long, dark eyes, and a curious
twitching of the muscles of the face. " If you
would believe me, I could set all your doubts
to rest."

Magdalen looked up quickly.

Do you know her ? "

"I do. It is Louisa Mackworth, my dead
wife's sister."

Can that be ? She is not old enough for
the woman that I remember."

*' You do remember her ? You saw her fora
few minutes only."

I know." Magdalen did not add with her
lips what her heart said at that moment :
'but I could never forget the face of the
woman who brought me so much misery."

She was seven years older than Alice,"
Captain Esher proceeded, slowly ; " and Alice
was only seventeen when I married her. She
would be twenty-eight now — it is eleven years
ago. Louisa Mackworth would be thirty-five.
That woman looks thirty-five and more."

'her life has aged her," said Magdalen,
abruptly.

Captain Esher paused, and then resumed,
with his eyes on the ground :

Louisa Mackworth," he said, " had a scar
on her left arm : the mark of a burn. Perhaps
you know whether that mark is there now."

Magdalen's face flushed and then grew pale.

*' Yes," she said, " there is such a mark on
her arm."

I have here," he continued, taking a small
case from his pocket, " a miniature of Alice,

and a lock of her hair. Take them and compare
them for yourself with the woman before
you."

Magdalen held out her hand. She opened
the square morocco case, and saw a small
painting of a woman's head, done on ivory.
Below it was the word " Alice," in seed pearls.
A lock of golden hair was coiled under the
o'lass on the other side.

The face was that of a very lovely girl, fair,
blue-eyed, golden-haired. It was not that of
the woman whom Magdalen had called Alice
for so long. The hair was of a different
shade : it was brighter, more definite in hue.
Even allowing for age and the lapse of time,
with their dimming effects, it was hardly
possible to suppose that that golden tress had
ever been cut from the head of Magdalen's
guest.

She closed the case and gave it back to its
owner without a word. He stood watching
her curiously.

Are you convinced 1 " lie said at last.

I suppose I must be," she answered, in a
very low tone.

You speak as if you were sorry."

He could not understand why a sudden
flood of crimson covered her pale face, nor
why she turned from him so abruptly and
began to pace the garden-walk. He strolled
by her side, thinking to himself that of all
women Magdalen was the most incomprehensible.


He did not know that she felt as if a
safeguard had been removed. As long as she
could believe that Philip Esher's wife was
still alive, there was no danger of his asking
her to marry him, or of her being tempted to
consent. Now that, against her will, she
was driven to the conviction that his wife
was dead, and that this woman was only
Louisa Mackworth after all, she knew that
she stood in a perilous position. Something
in Philip Esher's eyes had already told her

what he wanted ; and she — she was not at
liberty to repulse him, to treat him with
merited disdain, because of the children who
were so dear to her. She was in a cruel
strait, and the way out of it was dark to her
indeed.

It was with a slight smile upon his face
that Philip spoke at last.

'you are very ready to believe evil of me,
Magdalen," he said, "and therefore I offer
you unlimited proof. I can give you the
names of twenty of Louisa Mackworth's
friends and neighbours in Manchester. They
would identify her without hesitation : tome
she seems wonderfully little changed.
I will send for some of them, or you can send
for them yourself, if you please. You might
then feel satisfied that I speak the truth."

"It is needless : I am satisfied," said Magdalen.


I trust that you will see that you have,
for once, done me some injustice."

"Yes," she said listlessly, with her eyes on
the ground, " I have, as you say, done you an
injustice. I am sorry for it."

His eyes flashed. "Magdalen," he said, in
his softest tones, "be sorry for me, too."

He had called her back to life at last ! She
darted a superb glance upon him, drew up her
stately head, and turned away from him to
the children, who where playing on the lawn.
For the moment he had offended her, and yet
he did not think that he had gone too far.
He was not ill-satisfied with this abrupt
ending to their conversation.

It was not long before Mrs. St. Aidan
heard of the newly-established truce between
Magdalen and Philip Esher, and thought
herself justified in coming over to the Priory
to question Magdalen about it.

"You have set me wondering with the rest
of the world, Madge."

Why ? " Magdalen asked quietly, though
with a troubled face.

"The world says that you are going to
marry Philip."

The world is wrong."

But will it always be wrong ? Oh, Magdalen,
my dear, don't be hard. You might
forgive him )ioiv.^'

There are some things that a woman has
no right to forgive," said Magdalen, rising up
suddenly, as if to put an end to the conversation.
" What I do, Emilia, is for the children's
sake, not for their father's."

Marry him for the children's sake," said
Mrs. St. Aidan, intrepidly, " and then you
will have them all to yourself. Philip would
never be bothered with them then. But,"
she went on, with a rapid change of tone,
of course I did not come to talk to you
about him, dear." Magdalen smiled a little
bitterly. " I came to ask you to dinner on
Thursday next. Do come."

Who is to be there ? "

Mrs. St. Aidan ran over a list of guests.

Philip was not among them ; and Magdalen
promised to come.

On Thursday evening, therefore, a very
pleasant party of guests assembled at the
Rectory. The clerical element was rather
largely represented ; but for this Magdalen
was not sorry. She was a little surprised
to meet Max Brendon ; ]airs. St. Aidan had
not mentioned him, in fact he had been
asked at the last moment to supply the place
of somebody else. Mrs. St. Aidan was very
keenly watchful of Magdalen's demeanour,
especially when she was taken in to dinner
by Max Brendon, whom Captain Esher's
words had taught her to look upon from a
marriageable point of view. But nothing
could be more un-dovelike than Max's
manner, although it was evident that he
liked Miss Lingered's company. And Magdalen
en grande tenue always looked well ;
the style of dress that she adopted, although
old for her years, suited her to perfection.

She wore black velvet, trimmed with old
point lace ; diamonds in her hair and on
her neck. In spite of herself Mrs. St.
Aidan wished that Captain Esher could see
her in the full magnificence of her large
and noble beauty.

And thus Captain Esher did see her.
He had not been invited to dinner, and nobody
could tell whether he had heard of the
party or not. but in some mysterious manner
he was found in the middle of the evening
standing by Mrs. St. Aidan's sofa, lightly
explaining that he had been obliged by business
to see Mr. St. Aidan, who had brought
him into the drawing-room. The hostess expressed
her displeasure by a very frigid
assumption of dignity, and glanced apprehensively
both at Magdalen and Max ; but
Philip Esher took no apparent notice of her
coldness, stayed beside her some moments,
and only sauntered away when the piano
was opened, and the Rector was asking

Magdalen to sing. Then he ensconced himself
in a corner, with folded arms, and the
indifference of a man who is going to be
bored. In reality he was watching, with
eager eyes, every movement of Magdalen's
face and hands. She had never looked to
him so handsome as when she sat down at
the piano, the transparent paleness of her
face slightly disturbed by a faint carnation
flush, her large dark eyes less calm than
usual, her white bosom rising and falling
beneath the delicate lace and rich velvet
that covered it so softly. Captain Esher
was confident of success ; it was clear to
him she kneiv he was there — that in itself
was a triumph, for she had never looked
his way, and yet her calmness had departed.
What would she sing 1 anything
that they both remembered ? anything that
they had sung together ?

He was disappointed. She sung a stately
old canzone which he had never heard

before. As she played the concluding chord
she knew that he was standing at her side ;
his whisper fell hotly on her ear.

Sing ' Tender and True,' Magdalen ; that
is the song for you," he murmured.

She rose and moved a little to one side.
Some one asked Captain Esher to sing ; it
was well known that he had a very fine tenor
voice. He smiled as he sat down at the
piano, and glanced at Magdalen, who had
not been able to move away altogether.
I will sing — to soit" he said, in a voice
meant only for her ear. But the words
were a little louder than he had intended
them to be, and were overheard by one
listener at least. And this listener was Max
Brendon.

Captain Esher dashed at once into a
passionate love-song, which he had often sung
to Magdalen in days gone by. It seemed to
make no impression upon her. At its close he
saw that she was sitting by an uninteresting

old lady, with whom she was exchanging
occasional quiet remarks ; calm and composed,
and, to all appearance, quite unconscious of
his own keen glance, or of a strangely intent
and troubled gaze that she was receiving from
Mr. Max Brendon.

I was right," said Eslier to himself
That fellow is in love with her ; and what is
more, he heard what I said."

Aether Max Brendon were in love or not,
he was remarkably silent for the rest of the
evening, and took careful note of Esher s and
Magdalen's movements. There was little to
be seen. They kept apart from each other
until it was time to go, and then, when Mr.
St. Aidan took Magdalen to her carriage,
Philip Esher was ready at the door to hand
her in. Further than this Max could not see ;
though, if he had been as near as the Eector
was, he would have noticed, as the Eector did
not, that Miss Lingered took no heed of the
proffered hand, and spoke only to Mr. St. Aidan

as she took her seat. Captain Esher came
back with a dark frown upon his face.

Max said good-night to Mrs. St. Aidan, and
went slowly home with a sense of bewilderment.
He could not believe that Magdalen
eared for Captain Esher ; he knew — better
than she could know, he thought — what sort
of a man Philip Esher was. Surely her
delicate instincts would warn her against him !
And yet there was that eager, impassioned
whisper, " I will sing — to you'' still ringing
in his ears. "What right had Captain Esher to
sino to Maoxlalen ?

THE LAST ATTACK.

Captain Esher had not been at the Priory
for nearly a week — a wonderful gap in his
series of visits. Possibly he thought that a
little absence might plead his cause more
effectually than words could do. At last, one
afternoon about four o'clock, he presented
himself in Magdalen's drawing-room, with his
hands full of flowers and parcels.

Will you allow me to share these flowers
with you ? " he said to Magdalen, in the tone
of one who asks rather than bestows a favour.
'* You used to be fond of them''

She thanked him carelessly and placed the

bouquet on a table as if she did not value it,

vet she could not help observing that it was



composed of her favourite flowers ; lie had
remembered them all these years. Dolly and
Daisy did all the admiration for her : it was
easy enough for her to remain silent.

Captain Esher could scarcely be pleased
with the way in which his gift was received,
but he dared not express any dissatisfaction.
It was something that she took his gift at all.

^' And now I have a present for you, fairy,"
ne said, turning to Dolly. "What will you
give me for it ? "

Kisses," said Dolly.

I want something better than kisses : I
am tired of kisses."

Dolly pouted.

I 've nothing else to give you, papa."

We 11 see about that," said her father,
smiling. "Catch!" and he threw a parcel
into the air, which Dolly leaped up to seize,
and began to unfasten with eager hands,
uttering exclamations of delight as the contents
came to view.

It 's the fan and the sash you promised
me : how lovely ! Oh, Maidie, I shall wear
this with my white frocks ! Did they really
come from Paris ? "

She was unfolding a wonderful fabric of
gold-embroidered, rose-coloured silk, made
scarf-wise, and a daintily painted, spangled
fan, while she spoke. Captain Esher laughed.
Magdalen could not forbear a troubled smile
as the little creature tied the broad ribbon
round her waist and flourished the fan with
the air of a miniature princess.

I must go and look in the big glass
upstairs," she said, suddenly, and rushed cleaving
the door wide open.

A true woman's love of dress ! " said
Captain Esher, critically. 'you look very
grave over it, Magdalen ; why should not the
child have the privilege of her sex ? "

Eather a failing than a privilege."

"All women are not perfect. I would, on
the whole, rather not see my Dolly a saint ;

VOL. IL P

lie lias not the physique for it. Saints — in
my experience of them, which has been small
have pale, calm faces, statuesque and a
little cold in repose; they are tall, majestic,
beautiful exceedingly.' Dolly is not of that
mould; she will be a very bewitching little
person, but a woman of the world and a flirt."

"You do not sketch a pleasing picture of
her future," said Magdalen. She was not
much like his portrait of a saint at that
moment, for her face was warmly flushed, her
lips curving with displeasure.

Don't I ? An attractive one at any rate —
to a man." Magdalen was silent. "Not but
what both pictures have a peculiar charm tome,"
he went on ; " for I have now seen them
combined in one person — or, as I should say,
I have seen both represented at successive
stages of life by the same person."

At this minute, the door opened, and Daisy
appeared, carefully carrying a vase in which
she had placed the flowers.

Come here, Daisy," said Captain Esher,
'' I was talking about an old friend of mine ;
would you like to hear about her ? "

Daisy put down the vase and said, "Yes,
papa." She stood by his knee, but did not
offer to climb upon it as Dolly would have
done ; nor, in his turn, did he try to caress and
play with her as he generally did with Dolly.

She was very proud, this friend of mine,"
said Philip Esher, his eyes on Magdalen still,
'every proud of her truth, and purity, and
goodness, but very unmerciful to people who
did wrong. She was beautiful and young ;
she had never been tempted, and she did not
know what temptation was. She wanted to
be loved alone, and could not bear that her
friends' hearts should stray from her a moment.
When she found that one of them had for a
little while forgotten her, she was offended ;
and although he was very sorry, she would not
speak to him again. Now, what do you think
of her, Daisy ? "

I think lie was very unkind," said Daisy.
Maidie says we ought to forgive people who
offend us."

Magdalen teaches you that, does she ?
Well, Daisy, I saw this friend of mine a little
while ago. She was more beautiful than ever,
though she had grown graver, older, and less
joyful. But she was just as hard to her old
enemy, and though he begged her to forgive
him, she refused. Was she not very cruel ? "

I think so. But " Daisy hesitated,

and looked from her father to Magdalen, '' he
must have done something very bad. What
do you think, Maidie ? "

There, there ; that will do," said Captain
Esher ; "go and find Dolly ; that is enough."

Half-conscious that she had vexed him in
some incomprehensible manner, Daisy sprang
away, and he turned round saying, " Well,
Magdalen, what do you think ? "

"Daisy does not understand," was the quiet
reply, in the very words that she had used to

Mrs. St. Aidan, '* that there are things in the
world which a woman has no right to forgive."


Never ? Not if the offender repents ? "

Perhaps upon repentance. But you do
not repent, Captain Esher."

There was no contending with that accent
of conviction. Captain Esher drummed impatiently
upon the table, shrugged his shoulders,
and looked far from pleasant. Magdalen
really asked too much from him, and he was
hardly in the mood to humour her by more
lying than was necessary. And as he hesitated
what to say or do, the children's voices
were heard again, and Dolly entered with her
sash and fan, while Daisy followed wistfully
behind.

Papa, haven't you brought a fan or a sash
for Daisy '? "

Daisy does not care for such vanities, does
she ? No ; I have nothing else."

I don't want anything," said Daisy, with

tears in lier eyes, but a brave attempt to
smile.

Dolly tore off her sash, angrily. '' Then
I won't have them. There ! which will you
have ? Choose, Daisy."

Nonsense ; you are not to give them
away," said Captain Esher. " They are for
you, Dolly ; you are to keep them."

Magdalen wondered whether it was pure
love of torturing that made him say this ;
for Daisy's tears fell one by one over her
cheeks, and Dolly changed to an image of rage
incarnate.

^' I won't have either of them," she said,
and before Magdalen could interfere, had
thrown the fan to the other end of the
room, and torn the scarf down the middle,
then looked with triumphant flashing eyes
at her father. Captain Esher uttered his
low, teasing laugh, and Dolly would perhaps
have flown at him with all the force
of her tiny arms, had not two firm hands

been placed upon her shoulders. The father
laughed ao-ain and strode to the window,
as he saw Magdalen gather up into her
arms the crying, struggling child, and carry
her swiftly from the room. Daisy crept
after her, and Captain Esher was left alone,
though for some minutes he heard the shrieking
sobs that resounded through the passage
as the child was borne away.

When all was quiet, Magdalen came back,
sith a firm tread, and shining, resolute eyes.
She waited by the table as if composing
herself to speak, and in the interval Esher
said in his lazy, mischievous tones —

There 's some devil in that child."

The devil that tempts her is outside, 1
think," said Magdalen, looking him full in
the face.

You flatter me, Madge ? "

A stop must be put to all this, Captain
Esher."

I am sure I have no objection," said

SEVENTY TIMES SEVEN.

Eslier, contemplating this filbert-slipped nails
with great interest. " Might I ask what is
to be stopped ? "

These scenes in which you try to arouse
all the evil nature in your children," said
Magdalen. " You bribed me into receiving
you into my house by promising that Dolly
and Daisy should stay unharmed, while you
where allowed to visit them. I thought they
would be happy and safe with me ; but I
think now that they would be better anywhere
else, so long as your whole object is
to undo my work and weaken my influence.
We must change oar plans ; I see it is not
right for you to be in my house."

What ! you propose to prevent my seeing
Dolly and Daisy ? "

I wish I could ! I know that it is impossible.
You must please think of me as
the children's schoolmistress, who has some
right to demand that their life shall nob be
constantly disturbed by their father's cruel

fondness. I have certainly a right to limit
your visits, Captain Esher."

"And the father has a rig-ht to take his
children away from the school where the
mistress is so severe," said Esher, emphasising
his words.

'' Of course."

I don't wonder at your getting tired of
them," he went on, slowly. " Dolly is a
perfect little fury at times ; and Daisy is
decidedly uninteresting. Besides, they are
riot your own children. ' The patience of the
saints,' of which I have somewhere heard,
might well fail with them. They had better
come away with me."

Magdalen's face paled, but she did not
speak.

*' Let our quarrel be settled in another
way," said Captain Esher, coming round to
her side, " and then I will do my best to
become an exemplary father to those two
girls, or, at any rate, I will leave them

entirely to your care. You say you cannot
forgive me ; well, be it so ; you may find out
some day that you have helped to make me a
better man than you took me for ; but think of
the children, and finish your work with them
if you want to do good, Magdalen. Be their
mother in earnest ; come and make a home
for them at Malton ; I swear to you that I
will never interfere with what you think best
for them. You know what guidance they
need ; I will trust them entirely in your
hands ; only come ! "

To be your wife ! "

He was chilled by the tone of shuddering
dismay in which she spoke, but proceeded
rapidly —

Yes, Magdalen, to be my wife — and their
mother. We will not talk about love, nor
of those past sins which you say you cannot
forgive ; let me but remind you of the good
you would do my children, of the dangers
from which your example and teaching

will preserve them. Eemeniber that if
you refuse me, you must say good-bye to
them. We cannot go on as we have been
doing lately — it is an unnatural state of
things ; and I cannot give up my children
entirely to you ; you must take all of us or
none."

"None," she said, in a dull, sad tone, a
mere echo of his own. He went on, however :

You are cruel to them if you refuse. Cana
religious woman like you neglect so splendid
an opportunity of doing good ? " She shrank
at the sneering tone, and he changed it for a
more earnest one. " Magdalen, I mean it !
If you have any love for them, come and be
their mother."

He tried to read some answer in her face,
but it was turned away from him, and the
attitude in which she had sunk down was
one of intense dejection.

He stood close beside her, longing to take
her in his arms, but not daring to touch her

until she gave him leave. She had some
power over him still ; more power than she
dreamed of, more than he would have acknowledged
even to himself.

Magdalen," he said, " have you no love
left for me f "

No, no," she cried, starting as if she had
been stung ; '' I have none — for you — for
anybody. Oh, leave me, Philip, I cannot
bear any more."

The utterance of his name gave him
courage.

My darling," he said, " you need a helper.
Let me help you ; let me love you. After all
our troubles, let us learn to be happy together.
No one will ever love you as I do, Magdalen ;
and you gave the first love of your heart to me
many years ago."

His voice was musical, his manner tender
and impassioned. But his words touched
other chords than those which he had meant
to reach. She stood up, wearily stroking the

hair back from her forehead, and averting' her
face from his eager glance. But still she did
not speak.

I will not ask you for an answer now," he
said, with great tact. " I will come again —
in two or three days — on Monday, perhaps,
when you have thought over the matter.
I could plead for my own sake ; but I will
not. I will ask you only to think of the
children, Magdalen, and what you might be to
them."

Thus he left her, and when Magdalen was
alone she covered her face with her hands and
wept bitterly.

For the next two or three days. Captain
Esher left her in peace. She was glad to be
free of him — glad to be alone, free even of the
children's company. It was plain that he had
managed to give the two little girls some idea
of the state of the case. Dolly and Daisy
seemed to her to look at her with strange,
considering eyes. Both children were almost

oppressively loving and submissive — so sweet
and good, indeed, as to make Magdalen's
heart contract from time to time with a
violent pang of grief at the very thought of
letting them go away from her. How should
she live without them ?

She was strongly tempted to do evil that
good might come. For very evil in her eyes
was this proposed marriage with Philip Esher.
And yet she was almost ready to take the risk.
The children where so very dear to her ! And
the consciousness that she would then be
choosing a dangerous course by no means
deprived it of fascination. Magdalen had less
of the saint than the woman about her still.

Sunday found her still undecided. It
rained, and she did not go to church in the
evening, but read aloud to the children,
servants, and customary visitors until half-past
seven. Then she settled herself in her
sitting-room with Daisy on her lap, and Dolly
silently leaning her head against her knee.

"Papa hasn't been here all clay," said
Daisy.

He won't come till tomorrow," responded
Dolly, in an odd, abrupt way. " He said
that Magdalen would perhaps let him come,
then."

Dolly scarcely ever used the old abbreviation
*'Maidie" now. Captain Esher did not like
it, and she copied him in his likes and
dislikes as much as possible.

Will you let him come, Maidie ? " whispered
Daisy, stroking Magdalen's face.

I don't know, Daisy."

"Do, Maidie."

Magdalen sighed. Dolly sat up and looked
round.

"Cousin Magdalen, don't you want to
marry papa 1 "

Hush, Dolly, hush ; you don't know what
you say."

Yes, I do ; papa told me. He made me
promise that I would be good if you did.

And I will be good, Magdalen, if you will
marry papa, for be wants you so much."

"You would be our mamma then," said
Daisy, wistfully ; " and that would be so nice.
Let me call you mamma, dear Maidie."

My children, hush, you do not know"
cried Magdalen, rising in her agitation, and
putting Daisy aside : " you must not speak in
that way. I cannot listen to you."

The children were silenced, but Magdalen's
heart spoke louder than before.

When they had gone to bed, she sat for
some time over the fire in her little sitting-room,
thinking of the answer that she was to
give to Philip Esher on the morrow. It was
strange that she could not decide. Her heart
drew her one way, her conscience another, and
between the two opposing influences Magdalen
sorrowfully acknowledged that her will was
weak. A touch might decide her either way :
which should it be ?

A light knock at the door roused her from

lier meditations. To her extreme surprise,
Ursula Brendon suddenly entered the room
and closed the door behind her. She was a
frequent visitor at the Priory, but she had
never before presented herself at this late
hour on a Sunday night. Magdalen noticed
at once that there was something a little odd
in her demeanour. Her face was flushed, her
eyes shone, her breath came thick and fast
as if she had been running, her short curly
hair was wet with rain, and her ulster and hat
were dripping.

My dear child," said Magdalen, " come to
the fire and take off your coat. You will be
wet through."

But, to her surprise, Ursula gently forced
her back into her chair, and then cast herself
down on her knees before her and looked up
into her face.

"Tell me that it's not true !" she panted.
Oh, do say that it isn't true."

That what is not true ? "

VOL. II. Q

You are not going to marry that man ?
that Mr. Esher ! — Oli, Magdalen, do hear me,"
cried the girl, as Magdalen made a slight
movement as if to rise ; " for pity's sake,
listen to me, for I am sure you do not know ! "

Do not know what ? " said Magdalen compelling
herself to speak more calmly than she
felt.

You do not know what sort of a man he
is ! Oh, please don't be angry with me,
Magdalen. I could not bear it : I ran away
from home to tell you, because I am so miserable
about it. And I am sure you would not
be happy if you had to give up your classes
at Gay Street, and your poor people, and
turn Miss Jessop and everybody into the
street "

Ursula this is madness ! "

No, it isn't, indeed, Magdalen, dear. And
Max knows it isn't, too, only of course he
could not say a word. You know how much
he cares for you ! — more than all the world

beside — or perhaps you don't know; but /

know, and some day you will know too "

I cannot listen to this, Ursula'*
No ; and I won't say a word more about
Max, dear Magdalen ; but only let me tell you
what I heard about Captain Esher. Indeed,
indeed, I think that you ought to hear."

And Magdalen listened with tingling pulses
and flaming cheeks, while Ursula told her tale.

Magdalen's decision.

It was Cecil who told us," said Ursula, in her

headlong, impetuous way. '^ He came in with

us from church this evening, and he said that

he was at the Conservative Club Rooms last

night — you know the place, in Field Street

and Captain Esher was there, and some of

the gentlemen where talking to him — ' chaffing

him,' Cecil called it, in his horrid slangy way

about the rich woman he was going to

marry — that was you, Magdalen, you know —

and about your having turned the Priory into

a hospital and an orphanage (do forgive me

for saying it, dear), and Captain Esher laughed

and said "

Ursula, I do not wish to hear what he said.


You have no business to come to me with these
stories."

'* You shall not go I you must hear ! " cried
Ursula, catching at Magdalen's hands, and forcibly
detaining her while she hurriedly continued
her recital ; — " and Captain Esher
laughed and said, * Oh. there 11 soon be an end
to that when she 's my wife. I shall turn the
whole set of pensioners out of doors, and send
the kids to a French convent-school, while we
spend our time at Vienna or Paris : I 'U stand
no preaching, I can tell you.' And everybody
laughed, and Cecil said that Captain Esher
had been drinking too much — that he was
half seas over,' or something of that kind."

Magdalen had extricated herself from
Ursula's grasp by this time and walked to the
other end of the room. The earl had never
seen her look so angry.

"And you came up here to bring me this
gossip," she said, in a tone that cut U: vl :,'
the heart.

If you call it gossip," she began, clinking
back the sob that rose in her throat, and then
stopping short to regain her self-possession.
I thought that you ought to know. It is all
quite true : Cecil heard it, and Max heard it
too, for he tried to make Cecil be quiet, and
said that it was no business of mine when I
asked him straight out whether Captain Eslier
had said so. But he looked so black that I
was sure it was true ; and he couldn't deny
it!"

'' And you came here to enlighten my
mind ? " said Magdalen, with a touch of satire
in her voice.

I thought that you ought to know,"
Ursula repeated, stubbornly. " Nobody knows
that I have come ; they are all at supper.
Magdalen, you won't — you ivon't marry Captain
Esher ? "

"My dear Ursula," said Miss Lingered,
gravely but gently — she had recovered from
her momentary vexation of spirit, — " I think

that you should not ask me that question. As
your brother remarked, it is really not your
business." But she smiled a little as she
spoke. " Now, I am sorry not to be able to
keep you, but you must go home immediately.
I will send one of the servants with you.
Just think what anxiety your mother will be
feeling if she finds that you are not in the
house ! How can you do these wild things,
dear child ? "

Ursula submitted to be reproved, and then
very tenderly kissed before she was sent away
under the convoy of a couple of maid-servants.
But she did not yield her point. At the very
last moment, as she clung; round Magdalen's
neck and said good-bye, she managed to whisper
another sentence into her friend's reluctant
ear : '^ You won't give up all your work, and
turn your poor people adrift, vdll you, Magdalen
? " And Magdalen's "Don't be foolish,
child," had not a reassuring sound in Ursula's
ear.

Magdalen returned to her meditations with
the sense of having had a mental shock. With
a little touch of perversity she refused at first
to acknowledge that Ursula's words had had
any effect upon her. " I will not heed gossip,"
she said to herself, resolutely. " I will not
believe even of Philip Esher that he would
speak of me in that way before his friends —
nay, before strangers, for he does not know the
Brendons ; never in his right mind would he
have forgotten himself so much ! " Then
Ursula's words about Philip's state of semi-intoxication
recurred to her, and made her
shiver with disgust. " Is it possible ? Has he
sunk so low ? No ; I will not believe that it is
true. And yet — and yet — " again she thought
of Ursula's disjointed sentences — " Max could
not deny it. Max looked so black that I was
sure it was true." " Max Brendon would never
allow a report to be circulated in his presence
unless there were some foundation for it. He
could not contradict it ; and he had heard it

all. Ah, then, it must be true." Such was
Magdalen's involuntary conclusion, and she
blushed as she formulated it. Why should
she trust Max Brendon so implicitly ? It was
no use questioning herself ; she did trust him,
and that was enough. In her heart of hearts
she knew that she believed Ursula's story.

It came across her with sudden and strange
distinctness that she and Philip Esher lived
in two separate worlds. There was surely no
need for any one to tell her that he would
oppose her schemes for good ; that he would
scoff at her benevolence, and scatter her
charitable projects to the winds ! Could she
imagine him at the Priory, amongst her pale
seamstresses, her infirm old women, her
rickety children from the London slums ?
He would never be content with anything but
the gayest, brightest, most exciting of worldly
lives. He would dispose of the children (ashe
had said) in some fashionable school, and
he would take wing to the most frequented

resort of Europe — the most pleasure-loving
cities, the wildest rounds of dissipation and
indulgence. It seemed to Magdalen that she
might have known this all along — that her
hesitation had been a madness which might
have hurled her to uttermost destruction !
What had she been thinking of? Ally herself
to Philip Esher, who feared neither God norman,
who spared neither young nor old, woman
nor child, in the furtherance of his own
designs? Did Miss Esher leave her the
Priory for this end ? And — higher and more
solemn question — had God given her wealth
and position and responsibility in order that
she might please herself by keeping two little
children in her care, at any cost ? No, not
even for Dolly and Daisy could she do this
thing. She did not love Philip Esher; and
she would never marry a man whom she did
not love. Her mind was made up : she would
do the thing that was right, and leave the
result to God.

Before she went to bed that night she wrote
her letter to Philip Esher. She refused his
offer of marriage, unconditionally. She begged
leave to keep his children with her still ; but
she also said that not even for their sakes
would she change her decision. She had no
love to give him, and she would not marry
without love.

Captain Esher received this note in the
course of the following afternoon, and could
not believe the evidence of his eyes in reading
it. He walked up to the Priory in a state of
intense though suppressed fury, and was met
at the door with the information, from the
lips of an old servant, that the children had
gone into the country for a few days with
Miss Jessop. Magdalen had no thought of
keeping them from their father for more thana
day or two ; but it had seemed to her
better to put them out of his way until the
violence of his anger against her should have
abated.

I should like to see Miss Lingered," said
Esher, on receiving this intelligence. *^ Take
her my card, and say I particularly wish to
speak to her."

I can't do that, sir, begging your pardon.
I was ordered not to admit you if you came."

Captain Esher looked daggers at old Becky
in her clean white cap, and exclaimed as she
was on the point of closing the door, in a
voice nearly stifled with passion —

Wait 1 The children's address ! "

Without speaking, Becky immediately held
out to him a card with an address upon it,
written in Magdalen's clear handwriting. It
was plain that she had expected him to come.
While he looked at it and hesitated for a
moment, the old servant, who knew the state
of affairs quite as well as he did, and hated
him cordially, took the opportunity of quietly
shutting the door in his face. It was of no
use to protest : he was alone on the broad
stone steps, with that solid door before him ;

and in spite of his rage and baffled hopes
Captain Esher saw that his only wisdom Lay
in retreat. But he was not inclined to give
up a last chance that remained to him.
Magdalen might possibly be going down to
Gay Street between seven and eight o'clock,
and he might intercept her and force from her
the reason for this treatment of him. It was
six o'clock now : not very long to wait.

Mr. St. Aidan was much astonished to find
that no Magdalen appeared for her class that
evening. She was generally there at seven on
Mondays, but at five minutes to eight, when
he arrived, there was a little crowd of inquiring
girls at the door — and no Miss Lingered.

1 can't think what has become of Miss
Lingered," he said to Max. " She is generally
so punctual that I am afraid something is
wrong. I wish I knew what to do."

I '11 run up and see, if you like. My class
doesn't begin till half-past eight. I can get to
the Priory and back in half-an-hour."

Mr. St. Aidan hesitated, objected, but
finally gave way to Max's determination, and
saw bim go. He bad time to grow uneasy
and a little indignant before bis coadjutor
returned.

Max walked rapidly up the bill to Higher
Scarsfield, and reached Miss Lingered's bouse
by ten minutes past eight. At the gate be
stopped to look at bis watch. He put back
the watch in bis pocket, and noticed that the
figure of a man stood in the shade given by
some overhanging lilac and elder-bushes banging
over the garden wall. He looked bard at
the figure, but could not recognise it. But no
sooner bad be entered the gate and rung the
door-bell than Captain Esher crept slowly out
of the shadow and watched the new-comer
through the gate.

The door was opened. Max did not go
in, but stood for several minutes on the doorstep
— evidently while the servant took some
message to Miss Lingered. Captain Esher

opened the gate and stole a little nearer.
There was Magdalen herself ! Magdalen, who
had declared she could see no visitors ! She
was talking to this young man, who, only a
week ago, Esher had declared was in love
with her. A bold stroke was necessary : for
very shame Magdalen could not refuse to
speak to him now. He advanced from the
shade of the shrubbery, and stood at the very
foot of the steps. Magdalen stopped speaking,
and turned pale. Max, whose back was to
Captain Esher, wheeled round and saw
him.

Your servant informed me that you could
not see visitors," he said, lifting his hat with
ironical politeness, and showing that his face
was deeply flushed. " I find that she was
mistaken : some visitors are received."

His tone was so insolent that Max thought
that he had been drinking, and stood so that
Esher could not easily pass him on the steps
unless miss Lingered asked him to advance.

If you can see him, you can see me," said
Esher.

Stop ! " said Max, barring his progress.
No farther, unless Miss Lingered invites you,
sn\

I do not invite him," Magdalen answered,
clearly. " I have already refused you admittance
to-night. Captain Esher ; I am surprised
that you cannot see how unwelcome your
presence is."

'rout of the way, you fool ! " said Esher,
adding a strong epithet as he tried ineffectually
to push by Max. " I will see her, I
tell you — she '11 be my wife some day "

Is that true, Miss Lingered ? " asked Max,
without yielding an inch of ground.

No; and never will be true," said Magdalen.

Then the sooner you are off this lady's
premises the better," said Max, sharply, as he
became more and more convinced that the man
was half-intoxicated, " or I shall give you in
charge."

Captain Esher threw this cigar into Max's
face. There was a momentary struggle, serious
though silent, between the two men ; then
Philip Esher was seen falling down the steps,
frantically catching at the iron railing as he
went. Magdalen uttered a faint cry.

But he was not seriously hurt. He gathered
himself together, lifted his head, brushed the
dust from his knees, and rose to his feet again.

I suppose I must accept that dismissal,"
he said, with a sneer, rendered more ugly than
usual by the sudden ghastly whiteness of his
face, and a bleeding cut upon one temple.
"I shall not forget it. Miss Lingered; and as
for you, Mr. Max Brendon, you 11 pay for it
sooner or later. I shall remember youJ^

He turned smartly upon his heel, and
walked away without once looking round.

I beg your pardon. Miss Lingered," said
Max. " I could hardly help myself. He
would have been inside the house in another
moment."

VOL. II. R

Magdalen's face was pale, but she tried to
smile. The effort was too great, however :
after a short, sharp struggle with herself she
turned away and covered her eyes with her
hand. Max hesitated for a moment, then
entered the house and closed the door behind
him.

It has been too much for you," he said,
in a low tone, as they stood together in the
dimly lighted hall. " Will you not rest now?
And will you pardon my violence ? "

For answer, she gave him her hand. Max
took it in both his own, and then, acting on
an impulse which seemed to him uncontrollable,
he bent his head and kissed it. Magdalen
started, but could not speak. And
before she had recovered her self-command
he was gone. The little act of homage was
his farewell.

Magdalen sat down on one of the old carved
chairs in the hall, her hands pressed tightly
together, her head bent. A rush of actual fear

had come across her. For the first time lie
seemed to l^now of what Philip Esher was
capable when his wrath was aroused. She
had roused it now most effectually — she and
Max Brendon together. What would be the
upshot of it all ? For that he would try to
revenge himself upon them both she was but
too well assured.

For herself, she knew what to expect. She
had sent the children to a friend's house in
the country with Miss Jessop, because she had
been certain that their father's anger would be
almost ungovernable in the first hours of his
mortification and disappointment. He would
not care what he said in their presence — how
he reviled her and wounded her through them.
It would be better, she thought, that, fora
few hours at least, they should be out of the
way. He could not see them until the next
day, and by that time his anger might have
cooled. He would probably take them away
from her and send them to school — but that

she could not help. Not even for them would
Magdalen consent to sell her own soul.

And the other person on whom Philip
would be eao'er to revenge himself? What
would be the effect of this night's work on
Max Brendon's prospects ? A lawsuit was
already pending between him and Captain
Esher : it mioiit be taken for granted that it
would now be pushed forward with ^dgour.
Neither of the combatants would allow it to
drop, after what had passed between them
that night on Magdalen's door-step. She did
not know whether the issues involved were
great or small, but she felt sure that Max
Brendon would suffer every annoyance and
injury that Philip was able to inflict. She
wondered whether Captain Esher would take
out a summons for assault against Max ; as he
was himself the aggressor it was hardly likely
that he would do so, except for pure spite and
the desire to give Magdalen the annoyance of
appearing as a witness. For this last reason,

however, it was quite possible that he would
sacrifice his own repute in the attempt to
bring trouble on the heads of other people.

Seeing him in this light, Magdalen shuddered
to think of the danger that she had run.
She remembered with shrinking awe that not
long ago she had felt uncertain as to whether
her old love for Philip might not yet revive.
She had feared to meet him lest she should
find her heart once more in his keeping. That
had been the real explanation of her dislike to
his visits, her desire to avoid his presence.
She had been very near falling into the snare.
If Philip had had a little more prudence, a
little more self-control, she would have believed
in his repentance and in his love for
her. He had himself undone his own work as
fast as it was achieved. His treatment of the
children, his sneers at her faith and her charities,
had displayed his real character too
clearly for her to misunderstand it any longer.
She was certain now, more certain than she

could ever have been before, that lier love for
Philip Esher was gone, and gone for ever.

In the background of her mind she still
heard Ursula repeating some words to which
she was resolved that she would give no
attention. " You know how much Max cares
for you. He will tell you so some day."
What folly Ursula talked ! It had been wrong
Lo listen to her ; it was wrong to think of
what she said. And yet — as if to corroborate
the girl's words, there came to Magdalen's
mind the memory of the kiss softly pressed
upon her hand that evening. Were Ursula's
words true ? Could it be possible that Max
Brendon " cared " for her — loved her as a man
should love a woman, '' better than all the
world beside " ? And if so, what then ? Magdalen
could not tell.

Alone.

DuEiXG the dark hours of the night and in
the intervals of business in the course of the
next day, Max had leisure to think a good
deal about Miss Ling-ard. He almost wondered
at his own temerity when he remembered
how he had taken leave of her ; and it was
with an odd thrill of the nerves that he reflected
on the fact that she had shown no
anger, no resentment ; that the little start
of astonishment which she had given when
his lips came in contact with her hand alone
showed that she was conscious of his caress.
This unpremeditated action of his — this momentary
touch of her soft, warm hand with

his mouth — had stimulated his passion to a



surprising extent. She had long attracted
him : he had been haunted by her sweet face
and musical tones for many a day ; but it
was only of late that he had discovered what
this fascination meant. The latent passion
in him leaped up like a long-smouldered
flame that at last has found a vent. He
knew now that his affection for Lenore, and
even for the faithless jilt who had played
with him in his boyhood, had been " as
moonlight unto sunlight, and as water unto
wine," compared with his present love. Withall
the strength and fervour of his manhood,
he had given his love to Magdalen, and to
Magdalen alone. And for the first time he
realised, with a quickening of his pulses, that
it was possible, since she had not been offended
when he kissed her hand, that she was not
entirely indifferent to him.

Ursula's escapade had, fortunately for her,
passed unnoticed. She had managed to slip
out of the house unobserved. It was thought

that she had gone to bed, as she had been
complaining of a headache earlier in the day,
and nobody had thought of going in to inquire
after her welfare. She re-entered the
house by the side-door, and fled upstairs at
once without encountering anybody ; and,
although the servants grumbled next day at
finding her ulster and dress and hat in a
damp, crumpled heap upon her bedroom floor,
none of them thought of reporting the circumstance,
or even of wondering how she
had managed to make herself so weet.

Max was annoyed to find that his mother
had heard some gossip about Miss Lingered
and Captain Esher, and was bent upon putting
him through an examination upon it.

Really, mother," he said at last, rising
from his chair with a displeased look, *' I
cannot see why I should be expected to know
more than other people about Miss Lingered
and Captain Esher."

You might know something, considering

your connection with the St. Aidanss. Tellus
this : do you know whether they are engaged?"
asked Gertrude.

Yes, I do know ; but I think they do not
want their affairs to be gossiped about," he
answered rather severely.

*' If they have told you, their affairs can
be no great secret," said Mrs. Brendon.

"Ah, well; true. Well, I suppose it does
not much signify," said Max, taking up a
book. " All the world says that they are
not engaged, and I think I may say that all
the world is right."

Do you know anything more ?"

No."

Haven't you asked Miss Lingered to
marry you yet ? " Mrs. Brendon asked,
satirically.

No."

May I ask if you mean to do so ?"

I '11 wait till I have done it before I tell
anybody," said Max, getting up with a smile.

To treat the matter lightly was the only way
of concealing his vexation.

He made his way into the hall and was
putting on his coat when Ursula stopped him,
her face full of excitement and eagerness.

*' Max, Max, how do you know?"

*' How do I know what?"

That Magdalen is not going to marry
Captain Esher."

'' I heard her say so," said Max, shortly.

Ursula gave a light little bound into the
air. " Oh, I am so glad! Then she did believe
what I told her."

What you told her ?" Max turned upon
Ills sister with as much severity as voice and
manner could possibly express. " What do
you mean ?"

You won't betray me, I know," said
Ursula, fearlessly. " I went up to the Priory
on Sunday night and told her all that Cecil
had been saying."

She had never seen Max look so stern.

Ursula, you do not know the mischief you
might do by your indiscriminate meddling
with other people's affairs. We shall be
afraid to speak before you soon. You do
not deserve to be trusted."

A year ago Ursula would have pouted,
or been defiant; now she only laughed.

Dearest Max, you do look so very
grim ! I told her a good deal more than
that. Do you think I don't know your
secret ? "

Do you mean that you had the audacity
"

I only dropped a word by accident, Max.
I only said that you thought more of her
than all the world beside, or something to
that effect. She 11 never think of it again."

^^ You had no business to say anything
about either my feelings or her affairs."

'* So she told me," said Ursula, saucily.
*' I won't say anything more ; — having said
all I wanted," she added to herself.

Max was not mollified. He muttered
something excessively uncomplimentary respecting
Ursula's discretion — or want of it
as he went out, but as it was less severe
than she expected, or indeed deserved, she
thought that she had got off very
cheaply.

He was on his way to Gay Street. Mr.
St. Aidan was not to be there, and Max
had his own and the Eector's work to do.
He did not think that Miss Lingered would
be present ; he knew that she must still be
deeply disturbed by the events of the previous
night, and expected to find that she
had sent an excuse ; but, to his surprise
she was in her usual place, and at her
usual work. He was so much accustomed
to find that the slightest shadow of uneasiness
or illness would keep his mother and
elder sister from their ordinary duties, that
he had unconsciously judged Magdalen by
them, and had to acknowledge to himself

with a smile, half proud, half pleased, that
she — the woman whom he loved — was not
to be judged by common standards, and that
to her, duty came before personal pleasure
or convenience.

He made haste to be at the door when
she came out, and asked if he might not
walk home with her, as Mr. St. Aidan was
not there.

She hesitated for a moment, and he
thought that he saw a slight flush rise to
her cheeks. Then she assented very graciously,
with a smile the sweetness of which
intoxicated him, giving him a sense of courage
and hope that he had never felt
before.

The night was dark, but fine ; the old
church clock struck ten as they left the
door. Max offered her his arm ; she took
it, after a moment's hesitation ; and it was
the touch of her hand that kept him silent
for a time, thinking, in spite of reason

and common sense, of the joy and comfort
it would be to him to have her always
beside him, always to see her as the guiding
star, the beacon of his hitherto somewhat
gloomy life.

Magdalen spoke first.

Can you tell me," she said, rather falteringly,
" whether Captain Esher is still in
Scarsfield or not ? "

I believe not. Miss Lingered. I heard,
by chance, that he left the town this morning."


I was half afraid," she said, in a very
low voice, '' that I mioiit see him — to-night
when I walked home "

And yet you came ! You are brave,"
said Max, his voice tenderer than he
knew.

Oh, no," she answered, " I am a great
coward. I am afraid now."

'' Of what ? "

Of him. Not for myself, exactly ; for

others — for you. He never forgives — never
forgets."

Max felt a mad longing; to kiss the little
hand that lay so lightly on his arm. But
he restrained himself, and answered,
quietly,

I assure you, Miss Lingered, he can dome
no harm. I am not afraid of him."

^' But there is a lawsuit likely to come
on, is there not ! About your chemical
works and their effect on his property ? ''

"Yes. But a private quarrel will make no
difference. I am much more seriously concerned
lest he should annoy you again. If
there is anything that I can do, any way in
which I can help you "

"Thank you, Mr. Brendon. I am only
afraid of one thing for myself. He can take
the children away from me ; he threatened todo
it long ago. I am afraid of that."

It is a mean and cruel way of taking his
revenge," said Max, warmly.

It is cruel," she responded, sadly, " but he
is not a man from whom one can expect
mercy. He knows that I love his children ;
that fact gives him power which he would not
otherwise have had."

Max felt a throb of pleasure at these words.
She was condescending to explain to him why
she had tolerated Captain Esher so long.

"He may perhaps remember all that you
have done for them," he said, searching for
something that would comfort her.

She shook her head.

He will remember nothing," she answered,
drearily, " except that he has been offended,
and that the person who offended him must
be made to suffer."

"You will suffer. You will be left alone,"
said Max, hurriedly.

"Yes." She sighed as she said the word.
I shall be left alone."

Max lost his head. He had made up his
mind what to say, and had intended to put

VOL. II. s

his meaning very plainly and yet in a very
reasonable manner : but at the supreme
moment, his carefully prepared sentences
went completely out of his mind. If he spoke
like a blundering school-boy, his love was to
blame rather than his judgment ; and Magdalen,
with her sore heart, was not disposed to
judge him harshly.

'* There is one who would give all the world
to prevent your feeling sad or lonely anymore.
If only I could comfort you a little !
If it would be any good to you to know that
I think there is no other woman like you —
that I love you with my whole heart — I ask
for no other recompense ; I only care to make
you, if possible, a little happier."

She had withdrawn her hand from his arm,
and paused in the dark road which they were
traversing. He could not see her face distinctly,
but, somehow, he knew that she was
trembling.

Don't let me trouble you," he went on.

'* I ask for nothing that you do not wish to
give. Only — if ever I can help you — if ever
you want a friend or a helper, I am here,
always ready. I dare not ask for more than
your friendship — your trust ; but you shall
know, once and for all, that I love you, and
always shall love you, to the last days of my
life."

His tone was dogged in its determination.
Her silence afforded him no hope. Her very
attitude seemed to give him the answer that
he had dreaded ; it was an attitude of doubt,
almost of fear.

*'Mr. Brendon," she said at last, and her
tone was one of distress, "I do not know what
to say."

** There is no need to beat about the bush,"
he said, still doggedly : " tell me at once that
you do not love me, that there is no hope forme,
and send me about my business. I know
that I had no right to aspire to you ; it was
presumption on my part."

No," said Magdalen, in a firmer voice,
I do not think that. And yet I cannot tell
you to — to — hope, as you phrase it. I do not
intend to marry. I have my work."

And is there anything in a marriage with
me that would prevent your doing your work?"
he asked.

*' I cannot think of it," she said, still distressfully.
" Don't urge me ; don't ask me,
I do not feel as if I could ever love — again."

The last word came out very low, almost
inaudibly ; but Max caught it. He started,
and kept silence. He had forgotten that she
had loved a man like Philip Esher ; so-different
in every way from himself. Memories
of the old story of her engagement came
back to him. No doubt, after all, she loved
Philip Esher still ! He was a fool.

The two were still standing on the road.
Now Magdalen moved on.

"Forgive me if I hurt you," she said,
gently but very firmly. "I did not mean

to mislead you — if I have misled you — in
the past. I have had my love-history and
outlived it. I will not many any man unless
I love him."

And you do not love me ? How should
you ? — I understand."

They walked on silently for some little time.
Max's heart was full of grief, trouble, and
bitterness ; Magdalen's pulses throbbed with a
strange pain, a strange uncertainty. In a
faltering voice she said at last,

Let us be friends still, Mr. Brendon. Let
us forget what you have said. You can often
help and advise me ; I shall be so glad of your
friendship." In her heart she said, "I cannot
do without your friendship." But as yet she
scarcely recognised that still small voice.

I have said that is all I ask," Max answered,
sadly. " If my friendship is of any
use to you, I shall feel honoured. If ever you
want more than friendship from me, it is yours.
Call on me when you will, for what you will."

If ever I need you," said Magdalen,
gravely, " I will not forget what you have
said. Here is my hand on it, Mr. Brendon,
We are friends still."

They had reached the garden gate. He
walked with her np the drive towards the
front door, which, to their surprise, was standing
half-open. Magdalen quickened her steps
as she advanced. A flood of light streamed
from the hall ; a hum of voices was heard ;
the place, to their eyes, wore an unwonted
aspect.

What can be wrong ? " Max heard her
rather breathe than speak.

"My dear," said old Becky, meeting her at
the door, " we 've had a loss, and you will
feel it sorely. Bear up, my dear ; it '11 all
come right at last."

Magdalen turned deathly pale.

The children ! Are they here — here ?
Let me see them ! "

*' Madge, dear Madge," said Miss Jessop,

throwing herself tearfully into Magdalen's
arms, " it was not my fault indeed ! Oh, they
are quite well, but their father came and said
they should never see you again — cruel things
he said of you ; and he has taken them away
to France, I don t know where."

Taken them — already ? "

"Taken them, saying they should never
enter Scarsfield again, nor he either ; and no
one to take care of them except a servant,"
wailed Miss Jessop.

"This is very sudden," said magdalen,
turning round to Max with the ghost of a
smile upon her white lips. '' I thought at
least I should be able to say good-bye. I am
left alone indeed."

'' Let me help you ; what can I do ? " said
Max, thrilled with the sio-ht of her sorrow ashe
had never been in her calmness. " I will
bring them back to you."

"No, that you cannot do." She leaned
against the wall as though for support and put

her bands across her eyes. "It is hard — God's
will be done ! "

"There, there, she'll be better now," said
Becky, seeing the tears well out from under
those full eyelids. " All we can do is to let
her alone now. Good-night, sir."

Max could not take the hint without saying
another word. " Is there nothing I can do
for you ? " he said, earnestly.

Nothing."

Then good-night."

Her hand was stretched out to him, but she
could not speak. He held it until Becky's
keen glance warned him to desist, and then
went out reluctantly into the night. It was
hard to leave her alone in her sorrow and to
know that she had none to comfort her.

"Not EASILY JEALOUS."

Eighteen months changed the aspect of

affairs very little. No great event transpired

at any one of the three houses with which our

story is concerned. If any change of relations

had been brought about amongst the inmates

of these dwellings, it took its rise from deeper

sources than those of outward circumstance.

Magdalen Lingered was still separated from

the children, who were with their father in

France. Her rejection of Philip Esher had

caused a slight diminution of the friendship

between herself and Mrs. St. iVidan, and

Magdalen missed the old kindly intercourse

very keenly. She threw herself, heart and

soul, into work among the poor ; but she



had never been more lonely, seldom more
depressed, than in the long months that
followed upon the departure of Dolly and
Daisy Esher. There was a blank in her life :
she put it down to the children's absence,
although at times a suspicion crossed her
mind that there was another reason for that
sense of aching emptiness.

Lenore and Cecil Brendon lived tranquilly
at Chalgrove ; but the tranquillity was
not altogether unbroken. It was a difficult
thing for her to pay constant attention to
Cecil's whims and fancies — and these were not
few — when she herself was far from strong
in health, and her baby fretful and delicate.
A drive or a walk with him was a matter of
dread to her ; for, although he was anxious
not to over-tire her, he made his excursions
thoughtlessly long, and hated to be reminded
of her fatigue. She neither liked to shorten
his walks nor to refuse to accompany him,
though she would have shown greater kindness

and real wisdom in doing; so. But at
present her sole idea of married life was that
the wife should be a devoted slave ; and the
husband, a noble generous master. She found
it easy to play the first role — easy, so far as
feeling was concerned, for it was an arduous
one in fact ; the difficulty of her view lay in
exalting Cecil to a sufficiently high standpoint.
He was given to small worries, petty outbreaks
of temper, that somewhat impaired the
heroic qualities with which his wife would fain
have invested him ; and when she wanted to
sum up his virtues (which she did sometimes
in a spirit of extenuating tenderness rather
than in exultant pride), she was apt to decline
rapidly from moral qualities to an enumeration
of his tastes and hobbies : his love of the
beautiful, in house, garden, or personal surroundings,
his preference of French over
English cookery, and his delight in old china.
He was fond of his wife and child, with a sort
of condescending fondness : he seemed not to

have forgotten his own surprise at himself for
loving anybody so well ; and it was evident
that he had never thrown his whole being
into his love — never known what it was to
lose sight of his own aims and wishes in care
for any other person. Cecil was, in every
respect, a half-hearted man ; when he spoke,
he spoke with an arrlere pense; when he felt,
he was not sure of the depth or lastingness of
his feelings ; when he thought, he seldom
arrived at definite conclusions, or saw one side
of an argument more clearly than another.
As if to counterbalance this natural indecision,
he occasionally acted with an impetuosity
that had its rise in utter fatigue of his
own weakness.

These characteristics were not easily understood
by Lenore. She herself was peculiarly
sincere and truthful ; her standard of womanly
duty, if not very advanced, was one that she
was always trying to attain. She had never
tampered with her instincts of right and

wrong. When she knew her duty, her
impulse was to do it, rather than to find
reasons for not doing it. Duty and authority
had never, so far, been recognised as possibly
opposing elements. In her girlhood she had
imagined that duty would some day be
embodied to her in the person of a husband,
in obeying whom she was sure of doing right.
It did not occur to her that her husband
might require care, watchfulness, support,
from herself When she longed to rouse
Cecil to a better life before her marriage, she
imagined that such an awaken ino^ could be
accomplished at a stroke and once for all.
His strong religious feeling, manifested upon
his recovery from illness, caused her to believe
that this work was done : that her hero was
now perfected. From this dream there came
a speedy awakening.

The changes that eighteen months Inwrought
in Ursula Brendon were chiefly fur
the better. She was handsomer, cleverer, and

to her mother's surprise — sweeter-tempered
than she had ever been before. She still
worked hard at her books, but not under the
guidance of Miss Quittenden. Ursula was
emancipated from the schoolroom : she was
'•' out," and it was not thought worth while to
keep an expensive governess for Bessie's sake
alone. It was clear that Bessie had not the
strength for hard study : she had grown paler
and weaker every month so long as Miss
Quittenden held sway in the schoolroom.
Mrs. Brendon began to see that the child was
over worked ; and as soon as Ursula left the
schoolroom, she consented to dismiss Miss
Quittenden and give Bessie holiday. The
respite came a little too late for Bessie's
health ; she had developed a spinal affection
which had been increased by the want of rest,
and it was feared that she would be an
invalid for life. Ursula was wonderfully
patient with, the crossness and irritability
which the child could not help showing now

and then, and the whole family seemed
relieved at the absence of that somewhat too
rigid censor of manners and morals,
Quittendeu.

Max bore about with him a quiet face but a
harassed spirit. He had troubles at home in
the shape of his mother s captious fault-finding
; and greater ones abroad in his money-perplexities.
Darley's Chemical Works would
pay well in a few years, if he had capital
enough to bear a yearly loss until certain of
his own improvements and inventions began
to be appreciated ; in the meantime the drain
on his resources was severe. He contributed
a sum to the housekeeping arrangements at
home ; but Mrs. Brendon was an extravagant
manager, and he was constantly called upon to
pay far more than his share, or to settle bills
about the length of which he remonstrated in
vain. He was ill able to afford these expenses
; for, in addition to his present outlay,

there was the prospect of a greater call upon
him. Captain Esher had caused law-proceedings
to be instituted against the owner of the
chemical works upon the river-banks, on the
ground that the noxious fumes from the chimneys
had greatly injured, and would still
more injure, the wood upon his estate. Max
maintained that the injuries done to the
trees had been inflicted before he came into
possession of the works ; but certainly the
trees were very black and lifeless, and his
chemical products were very poisonous, and he
had an inner conviction that the day would
go against him. Ten thousand pounds was
the enormous sum that Esher's solicitors
demanded, and, though it was not likely that
Max would have to pay so much, he was none
the less fearful about the result. A third of
that amount would cripple his business ; a
loss of seven or eight thousand pounds would
force him to throw up the whole concern.
But he did not think think's had come to a

NOT EASILY JEALOUS." 273

desperate pass. He wanted to fight the
lawyers fairly, and he had the stimulus to the
conflict given by a consciousness of personal
animus. Esher was not only anxious to repair
the damage done to his estate ; he wanted to
ruin a man who had insulted him. For this
result he would fight, by fair means or foul,
every inch of the contested ground. On this
account Max put far more spirit, as well as far
more anxiety, into his combat with Captain
Esher's lawyers than otherwise he might have
done.

He saw little of Magdalen Lingered at this
period, but he was more and more attracted
and yet saddened each time he saw her, by
the patient reticence with which she bore the
separation from Daisy and Dolly. Courage
and fortitude were two qualities that he
specially valued in man or woman ; and
Magdalen was brave and strong beyond the
conceptions of most people. And yet she
never failed in tenderness for others, except

VOL. II. T

for him. He had seen less of her than ever
since the day when she refused him ; and at
times he was disposed to sigh to himself in the
words of Ladislaus's song —

Oh me, oh me, what frugal cheer
My love doth feed upon !
A touch, a ray, that is not here,
A shadow that is gone."

Yet in spite of the frugal cheer on which it
lived, his love flourished and grew apace.

Mrs. Cecil Brendon was sitting; in an undo
nified attitude on the nursery floor, at play
with her little girl. " Baby " was an inexhaustible
fund of amusement : she was always
doing something sufficiently novel and striking
to redeem her mother's life from any chance of
monotony. She was a particularly joyous
little thing, more like the Chalmers than the
Brendons. She was inclined to be short and
chubby : she had dancing blue eyes, golden
curls, limbs that never rested for five minutes

at a time (as long as she was awake), and a
tongue that jabbered all day long. How
delightful it was to Lenore to feel the warm,
clasping arms and somewhat moist kisses, to
bark like a dog and mew like a cat for Baby's
pleasure, to sing or play or dance for Baby's
benefit half through the day, can only be
understood by happy mothers like herself.
The appearance of new pearly teeth, the
acquisition of novel and extraordinary words,
the saucy defiance of authority and uncomprehending
want of any kind of fear, afforded
matter of interest and occupation to Lenore
from morning until night. She had already
been seen to arm herself with several works on
education for the better training of the infant
mind ; and she kept a volume of English
history on hand because she did not want to
be " quite too ignorant to teach Baby when
she grew older."

Mrs. Brendon tumbled that the child ouQ-ht
to be called by its proper name, now that it

was a year and seven months old, but father
and mother found it hard to abandon the title
of " Baby " for the stately name, Cecilia, which
she had received. " Cissy " was now and then
attempted, but Baby had evidently great
difficulty in understanding that she could be
addressed by it.

*' Oh, Baby, Baby, what have you done to
my hair?" cried Lenore at last, putting up
her hand to the brown tresses that were
certainly very much out of order. " And
there is papa coming : what will he say ? "

Cecil's step was heard on the stairs, and
next moment he appeared at the door.

I thought I should find you here," he said,
smiling at the pretty picture presented by the
mother and her child, '' so I came to find you.
Baby worship going on ? "

"Come and worship too," said Lenore.
I must stay until nurse comes up from tea.
Do you want me ? Shall I ring for her ? "

''No, I'll come in." And Cecil entered

with an air of not being at home in that
unfamiliar place, the nursery. " I wanted to
ask what you meant to do about Mrs. Bering's
invitation."

'' I declined," said Lenore, opening her eyes.

I wish you would not decline invitations
so often."

Cecil, dear, this is the first I have declined
since I was able to leave Baby for so long, and
I thought you did not like my going to Mrs.
Derings ? "

I don't like the woman herself, but everybody
goes there. I have been asked two or
three times whether we were oroino:."

You can go," said his wife, after a little
pause. " I declined only for myself, you
know."

'' But I like to have you with me."

"How kind of you," said Lenore, taking
hold of his hand rather mischievously. " But
you must do without me sometimes."

Cecil did not smile, as she expected. He

looked a little pored, walked to the window,
and glanced out, then came back to the
hearthruoj. These movements were sims to
Lenore that his mind was uneasy.

Have you any special reason for wanting
me to go on Thursday, Cecil ? I daresay
I could arrange it with Mrs. Derinor.'*

No : don't make a fuss, of all things.
But another time I think you might ask me
before you refuse an invitation."

I will, dear, another time," said Lenore,
wondering inwardly what had displeased him
in the refusal that they had long ago agreed
to send. But she did not care to pursue the
subject, and he left the room after sang a
few words to Baby.

They did not speak of it again until Thursday
evening, when Cecil went alone to the
dinner-party that Mrs. Bering gave for her
newly-married son on his return from his .
The Derings, father and son, were
rich soap-boilers ; people decidedly below the

Brendons in the social scale, but enormously
wealthy. Cecil generally avoided them, and
ridiculed their pretensions to refinement ; so
Lenore had some right to feel surprised at his
wanting her to accept their invitation to dinner,
even if he chose to accept it for himself.

He came home earlier than she had expected
him — before eleven o'clock. She was
sitting in the drawing-room, half-asleep over
a novel, when he appeared.

So soon, Cecil, dear ? It wasn't a nice
party, then?"

Not particularly." He went to the fire,
and stood with his arm upon the mantelpiece,
in an abstracted manner. He was generally
so full of talk about the people he had seen
and the news that he had heard that this
silence puzzled Lenore and woke her up. She
asked in a much more lively tone,

Who was there ? "

He mentioned the names of two or three
persons whom she knew.

"Oh, I should have thought that they
would make a pleasant party. Then what
went Wrong, darling?"

She did not imagine to herself that Cecirs
thoughts were running round and round in a
sort of rhythmical refrain, " Shall I tell her ?
Shall I not?" Or again, " Shall I be sent ?
Shall I speak?" At her question he took
down his arm and turned a little, so as to
look into the red coals. It was better to tell
after all.

There was a visitor whom I did not much
care to see," he said. " Mrs. Dering does not
understand Scarsfield society very well. She
had asked Miss Roslyn."

He waited for a response. None came for
the space of some two minutes. If he had
looked round he would have seen that Lenore's
face changed colour more than once ; that her
eyes first opened wide, then fixed themselves
upon the floor. At last she uttered a soft,
nervous little laugh, and said,

"not easily jealous. 281

"Well?"

"Well!" repeated Cecil, more boldly and
with some indignation. " Can you not see
that it was excessively awkward ?"

Yes, it was awkward," she said, slowly.
Then she left her seat and came round to
him, touching his coat-sleeve with one hand.
You don't think that I mind your having
seen her — spoken to her even — again, Cecil ?
You look half afraid to tell me about it. I
don t mean to be vexed — I should be ashamed
to be jealous — dien I know that you love
me so truly. Of course, you could not help
meeting her. I am afraid it was worse for
her."

I don't know that," he answered, astonished
at a generosity which he hardly understood,
and thinking that she underrated the
perils of the situation. " She seemed quite
unconscious of anything unpleasant. It was
very disagreeable for me."

Yes. If you could have avoided meeting

her it would have been pleasant er. But it
is no use to attract attention by being uncivil.
Very few people knew that you were
engaged to Miss Eoslyn. I am very sorry
for you, dear ; but I suppose we must expect
such meetings if we live in Scarsfield."

You don't mean to say that we are forced
to be acquainted with the Roslyn family?"

'' No. Ashen we can quietly avoid them,
let us do so ; but don't let us set people
talking and asking why we quarrelled with
them. We used to knows them very welland
of course they have been so long abroad
that people do not recognise the fact that
we are no longer on visiting terms. Perhaps
you can manage not to meet her again."

You take it very coolly," said Cecil. '' I
thought that you would so much dislike my
seeing her!"

Dear Cecil," she said, earnestly, " I am
your wife !"

You are not like other women," he said,

putting his arm round her. " Some wives
would be jealous, you know !" He laughed
as he spoke, but there was a little anxiety
in his tone.

The faith that I have in you, Cecil, makes
me able to trust you anywhere with anybody.
I never feel jealous ; no, not one bit !"

She spoke eagerly, and the bright tears
glittered for a moment in her eyes. Cecil
stooped to kiss them away, a little touched
by her confidence in him. His nature had
nobleness enough to wish to respond to it,
but perhaps he would have been more content
at that moment with a lower and more
exacting kind of love ; it would have better
suited his own, which craved for as much in
return as it gave.

You are a perfect wife, Lenore," he said,
remorsefully, " and I am not half good enough
for you."

Not good enough ? Why not ? You
are all that I want when you talk to me

and pet in this way. You must not think
that I do not prefer your being with me
to talking to other people, you know,
Cecil ; I don't mind your being with
them, but I like you best to stay with
me."

All ! just that touch of womanliness at
the end prevents your being too angelic,"
laughed Cecil, with an air of relief " You
can bear to acknowledge then that you selfishly
prefer my devoting myself to you
rather than to anybody else ? "

Of course I can," she answered, with a
pretty smile and blush. " I am selfish, if
I am not jealous, and you always tell me I
married into a very selfish family."

He kept his arm round her, and continued
to look at her with an air of
possession, while she went on more hesitatingly,


"Did Miss Eoslyn show that she was
vexed at meeting you, Cecil ? "

I don't think she stiowecl any particular
kind of feeling."

I wonder if she knew that you would be
there ? "

To this Cecil returned no answer.

You had no idea she would be there, of
course."

As he was still silent, she raised her face
and looked at him. The colour had mounted
to his forehead, and he seemed as if he did
not know what to say.

Did you know you were going to meet
her ? " asked Lenore, withdrawing herself a
little from his embrace.

*' You are jealous after all," said Cecil, trying
to smile.

"No, not jealous, Cecil ; but do you think
you ought to have gone if you knew "

You would not go with me, remember,"
he said, sulkily throwing himself into a chair.
Besides, I was not sure, I had merely a suspicion
"

'• It was not right," she said. But while
he looked Vexed and gloomy, she added,
However, you will not be likelY to see her
again, I suppose. I beg your pardon, Cecil ;
I did not mean to show any distrust of you.
Do as you like about Miss Eos1}ti — and
everything else."

She moved away as she spoke, trying to
repress the feeling that her husband had not
treated her quite openly in the matter. They
did not recover complete cordiality of manner
to each other until next day ; for as there
had been no quarrel, there could be no reconciliation,
and Cecil was YagoielY conscious
that his wife thought that her perfect trust
had not been quite cheered. He felt guilty
enough to be anxious that she should forgive
him, but did not care to reopen the subject.
So through the following day or two he made
a point of paying her great attention, of
waiting upon her with a graceful deference
which reminded Lenore of the earlier days

of their married life. The silent little courtship
touched her ; she had never been able to
hold out against Cecil's dark eves and readiness
to own himself in the wrong:. In
another day she was too happy in Cecil's
love to trouble herself concerning Paiby
Roslvn.

END OF VOL. II.

% 'gabtl

BY

ADELINE SERGEANT,

AUTHOR OF "jacobs VTIFE," " NO SAINT," ETC.

ly THREE VOLUMES.
VOL. III.

EDINBURGH:
OLIPHANT, ANDERSON & Farrier.

London : HAJkllLTON, ADAMS & CO.
1888.

PRINTED BY LORIMER AND GILLIES,

31 ST. ANDREW SQUARE

CONTENTS OF VOL. III.

Caper

I. AN OLD LOVE,

IL FLIGHT,

III. AN ACCIDENT,

IV. HIS PUNISHMENT,
V. IN LONDON, .

VI. THE END OF THE CHEMICAL WORKS,

VII. Magdalen's work,

VIII. DISTRUST,

IX. FORGIVENESS,

X. " COMING EVENTS CAST THEIR SHADOWS BEFORE,

XL "only ONE THING,"

XII. THE END OF THE GAME,

XIII. A FALSE STEP, .

PAGE



























in 2010 with funding from

University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign

http://www.archive.org/details/seventytimesseve03serg

CHAPTER I.

AN OLD LOVE.

The Roslyns had been away from Scarsfield for
some months. Before they had long been
back, it was noticed that Ruby was changed.
Her manner was subdued, her dress comparatively
quiet in style and colouring. It was
said that she was ' improved,' and at the same
time it was acknowledged that she was handsomer
than ever.

Cecil's account of the evening at the Derings'
did not include a repetition of the conversation
which she had almost forced him to hold
with her. Under cover of a noisy piece of

VOL. III. B

pianoforte playing, she had walked up to him
and said coolly,

"You seem to have quite forgotten me, Mr.
Brendon. And how 's Lenore ? "

Mrs. Brendon is very well, thank you."

"Eemember me to Mrs. Brendon, will
you ? " said Ruby, with mocking emphasis.
'* She will have not forgotten me, if you have."

Cecil turned over the leaves of a photograph
book, and said nothing.

She needn't be afraid of me," said Ruby,
almost in a whisper, drawing so close to him
that her breath fanned his cheek, '* nor you
either, Cecil. I 'm engaged to be married — to
that lignite haired man talking to Mrs. Dering
and you 're quite an old married man by this
time, so there can't be any harm in our speaking
to each other."

'•' I must congratulate you," said Cecil, much
more embarrassed than she was. '' I am sure
I wish you every happiness."

Many thanks. I 'm so much obliged to

you, Mr. Brendon. Especially as I was rather
remiss in sending my congratulations upon
your own romantic marriage," and a sudden
lightning darted from the dark beauty's magnificent
eyes. " You were always very
kind."

I never meant to be anything else," faltered
Cecil. " I never wished to hurt you,
Ruby."

Hurt me ! " said Ruby, tossing her head ;
you never hurt me : you flatter yourself I
wonder your wife has not taught you more
humility yet, Mr. Brendon." And then she
spoke to some one else, and the tete-astute was
at an end, to Cecil's infinite relief. There was
some reason for his reluctance to tell Lenore of
this meeting, although he could sincerely have
defended himself from any imputation of flirting
with Miss Eoslyn. He found it hard afterwards
to account for the impulse that had leal
him to accept the Derings' invitation, when he
knew that he should meet Ruby at their house.

Honestly, he would have liked better to go
with Lenore than to encounter his old love
alone ; but, either alone or in his wife's company,
he wanted to see Ruby once more, and
to compare his present with his past impressions
of her. It was rather hard on him, he
thought, that Lenore should be displeased at
so innocent an inclination, especially as he was
inclined to think Ruby less handsome than she
used to be.

Chance did not throw her in his way again
for some time. At the beginning; of the following
inter there came an invitation for a
dance at Lady Larpington's. The society frequented
by Lady Larpington was not very
select, and it was possible that the Roslyns
would be asked, for their wealth and Ruby's
beauty were making them powerful in Scars-field.
Cecil hated dancing, but he was fond
of meeting his friends, and of showing off his
pretty young wife. He had enjoined her to
take great pains with her dress ; and the soft,

rich white silk and tulle, adorned with pearls
and water-lilies, which he had helped her to
select, was so becoming that he felt some pride
in the thought of her appearance. With herat
his side he felt safe, even if he should meet
Kuby Eoslyn, whom he dreaded as a possible
disturber of his peace.

The carriage was ordered for ten o'clock :
Cecil had dined at his mother's, and returned
home about half-past nine. He found no one
in the drawing-room, and was not surprised,
for he expected Lenore to be dressing, but
on knocking at her door no answer came,
and the room was apparently empty. He
peeped in ; the candles were lighted, and a
chair still stood beside the dressing-table,
which was strewn with brushes and hair-pins.
Lenore had evidently been busy there ; but she
had not yet donned her dress, for it lay
extended on the bed in all its magnificence.

She has gone to the nursery, I suppose,"
Cecil said to himself as he turned into his

dressing-room. "She'll be late if she does
not take care."

No light, no hot water, no dress-clothes laid
out for him. Cecil thought the world was
coming to an end, and rang the bell violently.
He rang twice without receiving any answer,
but at last the nurse, instead of the customary
housemaid, knocked at his door and delivered
a message.

Mistress says, sir, will you kindly step upto
the nursery."

Cecil audibly wondered what was the
matter, but mounted the stairs two at a time,
and entered the nursery. There indeed sat
Lenore on the low chair by the fire ; her hair
was dressed, and adorned with the glittering
ornaments that Cecil had especially asked her
to wear. Her head, thus decked, was in
striking contrast to the rest of her appearance.
She had come upstairs in haste, with her blue
dressing-gown wrapt round her, and on her
knees she held her little girl.

"Hush! don't make a noise," she said,
hastily, as Cecil appeared at the door.

What is the matter ? Is Baby ill ? " he
asked, drawing nearer.

She is asleep now, poor darling ; she has
not been well all day, but I thought she was
better until I came up and listened to her
breathing. I am so afraid of croup, Cecil."

Have you sent for the doctor ? "

Yes ; he was here half-an-hour ago. He
said it was only a cold, but that if she grew
worse we were to send for him again."

I think she is easier now, ma'am," said the
nurse, who stood by. " She breathes more
quietly, and she isn't near so hot."

'' Poor little thing ! " said Cecil, compassionately.
" Send for Dr. Ward directly, if you
think there is any occasion, nurse. But there
does not seem to be very much the matter
with her now, Lenore," and just then Baby
opened her heavy eyes, murmured a hoarse
Papa," and held out her little hands.

He took her up very tenderly, and held her
in his arms for some minutes.

"Yes, she looks better," said Lenore, relieved
to notice the soft dew on the little
white forehead, and the sleepy stare of the
blue eyes into Cecil's face. " I don't think we
need be anxious now."

'* Certainly not. I suppose you know how
late it is ? Had you not better finish dressing
? "

She had taken the child back into her arms,
and looked up with a face of dismay.

Oh, Cecil, dear ! I can't leave her ! "

Cecil dropped his watch back into his pocket,
and said rather curtly —

You need not make a slave of yourself to
the child. The nurse will look after her, and
if she is not well Ward can be sent for. There
is really no occasion for you to stay."

Lenore discreetly sent Mary out of the
room before she answered.

I cannot trust that woman, C^ecil. She

will not stay here alone if she is tired or
sleepy. Hannah would sit up gladly, but she
knows nothing about children. I am very
sorry dear ; but I cannot leave Baby to-night
don't ask me."

It is really provoking," said Cecil. " I
would not ask you to go if the child were ill,
Lenore, but there is nothing much the matter
with her. She is fast asleep already."

"I can't — I can't leave her," responded
Lenore, as a croupy little cough aroused the
sleeper and made her begin a fretful wail.
I should be miserable the whole time, Cecil.
You must go without me."

It isn't as though this were an ordinary
occasion," i:rged Cecil. " You have refused
the Warrington' invitations often enough
already. Don't be over-anxious, child ; Baby
is right enough. Put on your dress and
comer"'

I cannot, Cecil. You ought not to ask
me, indeed," said Lenore, her eyes filling with

tears. " How could we fomive ourselves if
anything went wrong when we were away ?
I could not go and dance when Baby was
ill."

It is very absurd," said Cecil, walking to
the door. " She is not ill, by any means ; and
would get on quite well without you. What
good can you do her ? If she were ill I
wouldn't say a word ; but it is perfectly
ridiculous to sacrifice your own pleasure — and
mine — for a foolish fancy"'

Yours need not be sacrificed, darling, and
I don't care about my own. My pleasure is
to be with Baby."

Of course, Baby comes before everybody,"
grumbled Cecil, leaving the room in a very
bad temper. Lenore pressed her lips to
the soft face on her arm, and tried to keep
back the tears that were only too ready to fall.
It could not, for once, be denied that Cecil was
selfish ; and she thought that his love for their
child was somewhat small in comparison with

her own. But after the first painful three
minutes, she tried to forget his coldness in
murmuring lullabies over the child ; and
almost forgot to be grieved when the sound
of closing doors and wheels upon the gravel
told her that Cecil had driven away without
even coming upstairs again to say good-night.

Cecil's ill-humour was hardly mitigated by
the time he arrived at Lady Larpington's
house. He thought himself injured by Lenore's
refusal to accompany him, and had the
instinctive desire of a weak man to avenge his
wrongs by acting in the way that would have
most vexed her had she been present. And
the way to do this, was to ask Miss Eoslyn to
dance.

I think I 'm engaged for every dance," said
Ruby, looking indifferently at her card. *' Ah,
not quite, I see ; like to put down your
name ? "

Cecil, sera W' led his initials in three or four
places, and returned the card with a smile.

You Ve written over somebody else,
surely," said Kuby, examining it. " What
will he say ? It 's Charlie Carew."

And who might Charlie Carew be ? "

The man I am going to marry, Mr. Bren-don."


Oh ! I beg your pardon. But you can the
more easily refuse to dance with him, you
know."

I don't mind dancing once with you,"
said Ruby, "though I don't know about
throwing Charlie overboard. He might
object."

What ! object to an old married man like
me ? " said Cecil, as they glided into a waltz.

''No; I didn't mean that exactly. But
some people want such a lot of attention and
propriety and all sorts of horrid things."

Engagements are not always states of
perfect felicity," said Cecil.

No more is any other state. Marriage, for
instance," suggested Ruby, maliciously.

Marriage," he repeated, with great coolness.
" Well, of course, it has its drawbacks."

Ruby's eyes gleamed, but she said nothing ;
merely storing up this remark as an indication
of the state of Cecil's feelings, which seemed to
be widely different from those entertained on
the night of Mrs. Bering's dinner-party. She
was looking' and talking; her best this evening.
She had thrown os-er her attempt at " quiet "
dressing, and had chosen her gown to please
herself ; accordingly, it was almost barbarous in
its magnificent defiance of the usual canons of
taste. And yet it became her splendidly. It
was a mixture of pale gold and vivid crimson ;
and she wore red camellias in her hair, and a
ruby necklace on her white neck. As Cecil
looked at her dazzling attire, at the glow of
her complexion, and the brilliance of her eyes,
he was reminded of nothing so much as of
some wonderful Eastern flower — pomegranate
or cactus in the full glory of its bloom. He
told her so when the waltz was over.

Dear me ! are pomegranates pretty ? "
asked Ruby. " I did not know I was like a
cactus, I 'm sure ; stiff, prickly thing ! You
dont admire those flaunting flowers, do
you i

Indeed I do. Every one with anything of
an artistic eye must admire such gorgeous
colouring." But Cecil looked as though he
were admiring Ruby rather than an imaginary
cactus. " Let us go into the conservatory ;
there we shall see some flowers," he added.

Ruby went with him willingly. The conservatory
was nearly deserted, and nobody
noticed them as they loitered down it, her
hand resting on his arm.

'' There ! that 's the sort of flower I thought
you liked," said Ruby, suddenly stopping
before a pot of lilies of the valley. " White
and sweet and humble, and all that sort of
thing, you know."

Pleasant flowers to have in one's own
home," replied Cecil in the same strain ; " but

wanting in colour and variety. I like to look
at the others too."

Kuby was silent for some minutes. Then
she disengaged her hand from his arm, and
plucked a stem of the lily plant, from which
she employed herself in stripping the bells.
"Are you very happy?" she asked at length,
in an odd undertone.

Happy ? " Cecil repeated as he stood
opposite her with lazily folded arms ; *' who
is happy ? As happy as most men, I dare say."

I thought you expected to be happier than
most men," said Ruby, her eyes flashing as she
looked at him.

Does anything fulfil one's expectations ? "

You might answer me seriously ! " she
pouted, turning away. Then, after a minute's
pause, she proceeded in a sadder tone than he
had ever heard her use. " I used to expect
to be happy. I don't see why I should not
have my owen way, like other people, but
everything goes against me."

"Everything ? With that beautiful face and
dress, and admiration from all the world ? "

"People admire — but they don't ca?'e," said
Ruby, almost plaintively. " Even Charlie,
who wants me to marry him, is always talking
about my looks, and I get sick of hearing him
sick to death of being told of my eyes, and
my complexion, and my figure. What 's the
good of them ? They '11 never bring me anything
I want."

That is a new tone for you to take, Ruby.
I thought admiration was life to you."

It used to be. I do like it now, but
I want other things as well. You never talked
to me much about my looks, and 1 learned not
to care for them ]half so much — I wish I did."

One cannot change one's life," murmured
Cecil, " or there are things in mine that
I would gladly change."

He thought simply of his foolish engagement
to herself; she thought that he meant
his marriage to Lenore.

There are things that can be changed inspirit,
however, if not in action," he went on.
We cannot altogether forget the past, Ruby,
but much of it that was fair and sweet we can
retain. Perhaps our lives have been made
unsatisfactory by our own fault in some
respects : let us at any rate keep sympathy
and fellow-feeling' for each other."

o

Ruby did not understand all this, which
sounded to her like nonsense — as indeed it
was — but she responded suitably in her own
way.

I don't see why we shouldn't be friendly,"
she said. " I often want somebody to tell all
my troubles to, for I have plenty of them, and
very few friends who care a straw for me.
I don't see that we need leave off liking each
other — just in a friendly manner — because we
can be nothing more than friends."

This plain-sullenness grated somewhat upon
Cecil's ear ; but he said, softly,

By no means, Ruby. Though we may be

VOL. Il c

separated in life, our hearts and souls can hold
communion," and he took her hand in his own
as he spoke. Her next words moved him
more strongly.

"Do you know, Cecil," she said, throwing
away the bare lily-stalks, and turning round
upon him, " at times I hate you ; but when
you talk like that, I could almost forgive you."

"Forgive me quite," he said pressing her
hand tightly, and scarcely knowing what he
said.

She looked into his eyes in reply : her
whole beautiful frame swayed slightly towards
him, as though drawn by some magnetic
power. Her beauty was very great : so was
the temptation. He knew that she would
betray him in nothing he did or said. He
leaned forward and kissed the parted scarlet
lips, as he had kissed them in days gone by.
Her face flushed with triumph and delight;
but as for him — when the moment had gone
by there came a sudden shock of reaction.

He turned sharply away, white and sick with
disgust and shame at his own weakness : left
her standing, and walked to the end of the
conservatory and back, alone.

Half to his relief, and half to his vexation,
a party of visitors entered at this moment,
and he could say or do nothing more. He
offered his arm to her stiffly and silently ; she
took it as silently, the flush gradually fading
from her face as they walked back into the
dancing room.

Where shall I take you ? " he asked. " To
Mr. Carew ? "

"No," said Ruby, shrinking a little, " not to
him. Anywhere." Then, lowering her voice to
a whisper, she added, " You ivill see me again,
sometimes, Cecil ? I didn't mean any harm."

For some womanly instinct told her that
Cecil was startled at what he had done.

I know that you didn't mean any harm,"
he answered, " nor I either ; but we harm
each other whenever we meet."

*' You don't harm me," lie said, and low asher
voice was it sounded like a cry of distress ;
you do me good ; and I haven't much good
left in me, or much comfort either. Promise
that you'll see me again, Cecil."

"Yes," he said, "I w411 — once more perhaps."


He left her, and Ruby met him no more
that evening. In fact, he went away immediately,
although he did not reach home for
some time afterwards.

Lenore was not in her room. A sudden
impulse prompted him to ascend to the
nursery. There Baby was sleeping sweetly in
her crib, and on a little bed beside her Lenore
slept too. Cecil stood motionless for some
minutes watching them. If Lenore had waked,
he fancied that he could have thrown himself
at her feet, confessed his weakness, and
entreated pardon. But she was tired outwith
long watching, and slumbered peacefully.
And, besides, the promise to meet Ruby once

again lay heavy on his mind. He left the
nursery with a heavy sigh, and went to his
own room, when he lay weary and wakeful
until morning.

FLIGHT.

Breakfast was on the table, and Lenore sat

at its head, wondering whether Cecil were

going to join her or not. He had risen early

and sone out for a stroll, the servants told

her, and now it was ten o'clock, and he had

not come in. His step in the hall was heard

at last. She hastily lighted the spirit-lamp

under the coffee-urn, and went to the door.

He was hanging up his hat, and did not at

once turn round, although he must have

known that she was there.

Good morning, Cecil, dear. How are you

after your night's dissipation ? " she said,

putting the tips of her fingers on his arm,

and holding up her face to be kissed.


He seemed to hesitate unaccountably before
bending down to give the expected salute, and
did not answer the question.

I am afraid your head aches."

Yes, horribly." He stood for a moment
at the door of the dining-room, and then said,
I don't want any breakfast ; don't wait for
me.'^

You had better have some coffee, dear
Cecil, I will bring it you if you will go and
lie down."

No, thanks ; at least I will have it here."
And Cecil came forward to a chair on the
hearth rug, where he cowered over the fire
with his head on his hand, shivering from cold
and headache.

Lenore poured out the coffee and brought
it to him. He took it with scarcely a word of
thanks, and, if she had not seen any of his
attacks of nervous headache before, she would
have been alarmed at the pain and giddiness
that seemed to stupefy him. To tell the

truth, Cecil was not suffering from headache
half so much as from an evil conscience, but
the headache was a convenient excuse. He
found Lenore's gentle ministrations almost intolerable,
and amazed her, after lying on the
sofa for half-an-hour, by saying that he must
go down to the office. She represented in
vain that work would make him worse ; he
silenced her by saying that he had business
to do that would not wait until his head was
better, and that the walk into Scarsfield
would do him good.

On arriving at his office he received as
usual a bundle of business letters. He had
nearly gone through the pile, when his fingers
reached an envelope which caused him to
start as soon as he saw the writing upon it ;
a wade, straggling kind of handwriting, not
devoid of dash and freedom and flourish, very
conspicuous in the violet ink that the writer
used. He opened the letter unwillingly, and
perused its contents with a frowning brow.

My dear Cecil, — It is early, I know, to
claim your promise of help and friendship,
but I am in great trouble, and rely upon you
to give me your advice. I send this note to
the office by Teddy, as 1 suppose it is safer
there than it would be at Chalgrove. If you
are walking on the Quay to-night I shall be
there. — Yours affectionately, Ruby."

Cecil had received many of those tinted,
perfumed notes, but never one that caused
him greater perplexity and distress. It was a
case in which friend or brother could not
protect him, as Max and Mr. Brendon had
done before his marriage ; his own heart
and will were his only safeguards. Cecil's
will was pitiably weak, and his heart divided
against itself. He scarcely tried to do battle
with his impulse of submission to Ruby's
wishes ; he sighed, cursed his ill-luck, and
said to himself he supposed he must go,
though what complication of affairs could
possibly have arisen to need his assistance

since last night, he found it hard to
divine.

Evening " was a vague term on a November
night, but at six o'clock Cecil repaired
to the Quays, and soon found himself face to
face with Ruby Roslyn.

You got my note 1 " she asked.

'' Yes, or I should not be here."

'rit's not pretence, Cecil," Ruby said, from
behind her thick veil, and he thought that her
voice trembled. " I would not have written
if I had not felt driven to it. You 're the
only person that can help me."

You know that I should like to help you
if I could," Cecil answered, in a hard voice ;
but I would rather not see you often. I
don't mean to speak harshly, Ruby, but you
know I can't bear it ; you tempt me to say
things I do not mean, to behave as though
I did not love my wife "

Do you love her 1 " asked Ruby, with a
strident, mocking laugh. " Well, one would

scarcely have thought it; but you men love
in a queer fashion — yourselves best of all. If
I professed to love a man I would give him
my whole self, not half"

As you mean to do to Mr. Carew ? " said
Cecil, cruel because he himself was stung.

'*No; that's just what I can't do!" she
answered, breaking into sobs that seemed
wrung out of her against her will. " I can't
love him. I can't marry him. I 'm very
miserable."

She stopped and leaned against the stonework
of the round guard-house, her face close
to the wall, her hands clutching at the hard
stone. Cecil was shocked to see her shaken
by the storm of sobs as though by an invisible
hand. He tried to say some words of consolation,
but they fell flat upon her ears ; and
when he touched her, she shook him angrily
off.

"What do you know of love ?" she gasped
at intervals, with bitter scorn. " You who

have amused yourself all your life, and only
married at your father's bidding ! I can't
expect you to understand ; and yet you are
the only man I know that I would care to
ask to help me — more fool I. You know
nothing about love, although you think yourself
so wise."

Cecil asked himself whether this passionate,
sobbing woman was the gay, imperious, almost
brazen-faced flirt that he had known of old.
The intensity of her feeling seemed to elevate
her to a tragic height. She said truly that
he " could not understand " her ; he had
known neither her love nor her sorrow, and
stood outside both, watching their manifestations,
but entirely incapable of comprehending
them, even in imagination. He was not
sufficiently on her level to appreciate her
thorough sincerity, of which a sympathetic
observer would have been immediately convinced
: he stood and looked at her, sorry,
puzzled, sceptical, wishful to help her, but

much more wishful to bring their conference
to an end.

How shall I help you, Ruby ? " he said,
in a low tone, when he saw that she was
calmer.

She put up her veil with both hands, and
looked at him earnestly, quite forgetful that
her eyes were swollen and her cheeks inflamed
with crying.

Promise that you '11 do what I want,
Cecil."

If 1 can."

Of course you can. Promise me, Cecil ;
I won't ask anything that you can't do, but
give me your word."

I promise to do whatever I can for you,"
said Cecil, reluctantly.

And I must be content with that half-promise,
I suppose — as much as I might have
expected from you. It 's Carew's fault : he
followed us into the conservator last nio^lit

Cecil uttered a strong ejaculation.

He did not Lear much, but he saw us —

and "

He wants to break off your engagement ? "
No — no ; I have begged and prayed of

him to break it off, but he holds me to it.

He says he does not mean to take any notice ;

it 's not that he thinks I am so very bad,

he says — but he wants to make sure of me,

and so he says he will marry me in three

weeks ; and I '11 — die first ! "

Your either — what does he say ?"

He says I must consent ; he won't listen

to a word I say. He told me this morning

that if I objected any longer he would tell

Carew to take me next week, and a good

riddance."

When did all this take place, then ? "

Last nio^lit and this morning But I '11

defeat them yet : they shall see that I can

hold my own."

Don't you think," said Cecil, slowly,

that you would be happier married — even
to Mr. Carew ? He is very fond of you, and
you would have a home of your own "

Oh, I can guess your views of marriage !"
she exclaimed, drawing up her head haughtily.
'' I did not come to hear what you thought I
had better do, but to ask you to help me in
what I mean to do."

"How?"

I want you to lend me some money. I
shall go away."

*' Away from Scarsfield ? "

Yes," said she, sullenly ; " I mean to be
my own mistress now. I '11 be a companion,
or a housemaid, or a shop-girl, I don't care
what ; but I won't be married against my
will."

Your father would surely not insist "

I won't risk it ! " said Ruby, with a flash
of her dark eyes.

I don't think that I ought to help you in
so mad a scheme."

Oil Cecil, Cecil, you won't fail me now !
I 've no one else to ask. I haven't a shillings
of my own ; father keeps me so short ; but
I '11 pay you back directly I earn any money."

It isn't the money I care about," said
Cecil, in a disgusted tone ; "it is the utter
absurdity of your plan. What can you do ?
Where can you go ? Be a good girl, and do
what your father tells you ; you were ready
enough to marry Mr. Carew last night. What
has changed you ? "

You should have left me alone if you
wanted me to marry him," she said steadily.
I liked him very well until he said horrible
things of you, and tried to force me to kiss
him, and to marry him. It's not my fault
that I 'd as soon touch a snake as take his
hand ; or that the very look of him is hateful
to me. You see the water down there, Cecil ?
It looks black enough, doesn't it ? I would
sooner plunge down there, and you know
I should never come back again, than marry

Charles Carew. The matter lies in your hands.
Help me to go away, and I '11 do my best to
live honestly and respectably ; keep me here,
and I shall put an end to my engagement ina
way he can't dispute. They say it 's impossible
to fish persons out of these locks and
basins if once they fall in."

'* Kuby, ho\^^ can you talk so wildly ! It is
wrong, you know "

'' I don't know what right and wrong mean.
There ! Why shouldn't one go out of life
when one 's tired of it ? I did not bring
myself here ! I didn't want to be miserable
for years and years ! . . . You don't know
what misery is like ; so why should I talk to
you ? Promise to help me."

I will help you," said Cecil, grudgingly ;
'' but I wish there was another way of help."

"There is no other way."

But, is it not a pity ? and am I the right
person to help you ? "

"Yes," she said, clenching her hands beneath

VOL. III. T)

her cloak, and drawing back her lips from her
white, even teeth. " I have a claim on you
because you might have saved me this
misery. You ought to help me as much as
ever you can."

Yes, I ought," he murmured, his eyes
fixed on the ground. "And I will, Ruby;
I will."

I shan't thank you," she avowed boldly.
What thanks do you deserve ? And yet,
Cecil, if you save me from that man, I will
bless you to the end of my days. They say
no woman forgives the man who casts her off
and slights her ; but I '11 forgive you, CeciL
only help me ! "

She began to cry again as she said these
words, and Cecil was strongly moved by her
appeal.

I '11 do everything I can," he said, warmly.
"Never fear, Ruby, my dear girl; I'll save
sou from that Carew if I do nothing else.
Have you any definite plans ? "

I want to get away from Scarsfield."

Yes ; but where will you go ? "

To London," she said, in a faint tone of
suo-question.

'' You would not he easily traced in
London, certainly. But what would you do
there ? "

Get a situation somewhere'

Without references ? "

I can't go into these details," said Ruby,
passionately. " 1 11 get on somehow, never
fear. If you see all these difficulties so
plainly, can't you find a way out of them ? "

"I see one way," answered Cecil, after a
pause of reflection, " but it is a dangerous
one. When could you go ? "

Any time. To-morrow."

Well, go tomorrow or next day. Take
lodgings in London, and send me your address.
I can tell you of a quiet boardinghouse,
where you would be comfortable. Ina
few" days I will run down — not at once.

for fear of exciting suspicion — and once in
London I believe that I can obtain a situation
for you."

Kuby listened breathlessly. " That would
do ! That could be managed ! To-day is
Tuesday. I must see you again before I go,
so I must wait till Thursday. You will come
to London on Monday next."

I will send you word. Yes, 1 must see
you tomorrow to give you some money. I
have none about me now. Where shall we
meet ? "

'' Not here ; it is too far from home. I
may have been missed already."

'* Come to the counting-house tomorrow,
at nine in the evening. Can you do that ?
I shall be there alone, and it is not ten
minutes' walk from your house."

*' At nine. I '11 come. And now I must
be off, or they will be sending out to look
for me. I suppose my best plan is to seem
to give in about marrying Carew I loathe

the man. Now, don't come with me, Cecil.
You walk up to the end of the pier, while
I go across the bridge to Orwell Lane."

They did not say good-bye, but separated
at once. Cecil walked straight ahead ; Ruby
pursued her way homewards — a somewhat
dangerous way for any one unacquainted with
the quays ; for she had to cross more than
one narrow, entailed footway across the lock-gates,
where a false step might precipitate
the passenger into the dark water below.

The twenty-four hours that elapsed before
they met again proved a troubled time to
Cecil. Lenore had never felt so thoroughly
at fault in dealing with him as she felt then.
He was moody, captious, evidently miserable,
and she had no clue to the cause of his disturbance
of mind. He declared himself to
1)6 perfectly well in health, and she knew of
no sorrow or misfortune that could have befallen
him. The very gentleness and affection
by which she sought to soothe him

seemed only to irritate lii.s temper the more ;
and by Wednesday evening she was reduced
to complete silence as the lest means of
avoiding collisions. She had made excuses
for him many times ; her patience now Began
to fail. She thought vaguely within herself
that his unreasonable ill-temper was almost
too hard to bear.

After a pretence of dining, Cecil left his
house and walked down to the office. It
was dark and deserted. He opened the door
with his own key, lighted the gas, assured
himself that no one else was in the building,
and awaited the hour of nine. Precisely as
the church clock struck, there came a single
tap at the office-door. He opened it and
admitted Kuby Eoslyn.

Their meeting was cold and business-like.
They touched the tips of each other's fingers ;
Cecil did not look up, Ruby did not speak.

Here is the money," he said, standing
beside the baize-covered table, over which a

gas-jet flared uncomfortably. " You must
have plenty. There are ten sovereigns and
eight notes — fifty pounds in all. If you
want more I can let you have it."

That 's too much," she said, not touching
the money.

Nonsense. You would find it very awkward
to run short in London."

I shall not run short. 1 11 take the gold
and a five-pound note. I shall have found
something to do before I spend all that."

As you please. I think that it is foolish
of you not to take more. You will need
money. The expense of food and lodging maybe
more than you expect."

I shall not stay at any expensive place ; I
shall look out for quiet, clieaj) lodgings for myself
after the first nidit at the boardinghouse,"
said Kuby, indifferently.

*dont be rash, Ruby; Avait till I come
before you decide upon anything," he said,
earnestly, for the first time noticing the feverish

ilusli on her cheeks, the excited gleam of
her eyes. " You must be careful, or you will
compromise yourself completely."

Do you think I care ?" she asked, with an
insolent, bitter laugh. " Don't I know that I
shall compromise myself by running away from
home ? It 's odd that you should caution me
about it. The caution ought to come from my
side, because, if you choose to help me, you
must make up your mind to compromise yourself."


Cecil started a little.

You had not thought of that, had you ? "
she continued. " Don't you suppose that when
I am missing, my father and Mr. Carew will
come to ask soit where I am ? What will you
say ? You never had pluck enough to tell a
consistent lie in your life. They will say,
Where has she gone ? Didn't you know that
she was going ? ' Then you '11 betray me, and
I shall be worse off than ever. No ; you
needn't interrupt me : I know all about it.

We '11 suppose you 're not bullied into telling
the truth. Then my father and Carew will
blazon abroad every possible bad story they
can invent. They 11 tell your wife, and your
mother, what they think ; and you '11 be a
marked man henceforward. Can you bear
that?"

Cecil had turned pale during this outburst,
which he had more than once tried to interrupt.
But when she stopped and waited
remorselessly for an answer, no answer came
for several minutes.

I have promised to help you," his dry lips
finally made reply, "and I will. You may
trust me."

May I? " she asked, satirically. " Can I?
would be the better question. I believe you
mean what you say, but I don't believe you are
bold enough to carry out your plan. You '11
betray me yet, I know." Then with a passionate
change of tone she added, " No, Cecil, for
your own sake I won't trust you. I don't want

you to be made miserable for my sake. I won't
tell you where I 'm going, or what I mean todo.
They shan't suspect you of having had a
hand in my escape. After a time, perhaps,
I '11 let you hear where I am — when the hue
and cry's over, you know — but till then
you shall know nothing. And, whatever
happens, don't put my father on my track.
Promise."

I promise faithfully."

And if anything goes Among — you won't
blame me more than you can help, will you ? "
she said, looking at him with sudden softness
in her eyes. " I '11 do my best not to hurt you
in any way. . . . You '11 let me take another
five pounds, won't you ? I may want more if
I 'm not in communication with you. Thanks.
I '11 pay it back some day."

"Take it all, Kuby."

No ; twenty 's as much as I care to have.
Now let us say good-bye. I 'm sure Lenore
couldn't object to the way we have behaved

to-nights Fie, Cecil, you are like a baby 1
It's I that ought to cry, not you."

For Cecil had covered his eyes with his hand
and turned away.

*•' I 've been a brute to you, Kuby."

"Not a bit of it'" she answered, with a
forced, painful lightness, which was more
pathetic than open grief ; " you 've been pretty
good to me on the whole. I 've fared as well
as I had a right to expect. I have no grudge
against you. Good-bye."

Good-bye," he answered, in a shamed,
abashed true.

She waited a moment, looking at him with a
strangely fixed expression, then pulled down
her thick veil, opened the door and went out,
shutting it behind her. And when the sound
of her steps had died away, Cecil — weak, miserable
Cecil — laid his head down on the table
and sobbed aloud.

AN ACCIDENT.

Late on the following Saturday afternoon
Cecil walked uj) to his own front-door, and
found himself confronted in the doorway by a
man whose face he knew very well : an
elderly, grey-haired man with a lowering red
face and angry eyes.

]mr. Eoslyn ! " he exclaimed, involuntarily.
Then he stood still, realising the fact that a
contest was to come. He motioned to the
servant at the door to retire, and waited fearfully
for the question which was sure to
follow.

Where is my daughter ? "

Is she not at home ? " asked Cecil, bracing
up his nerves to act unconsciousness. If he

had been wise he would at once have avowed
his knowledge of Ruby's departure and her
reason for it, and saved himself from suspicion.
But he was not wise.

You know that she is not at home ! " cried
Roslyn, angrily. " What have you done with
her ? I could swear that she would not ^o
without telling you where she was bound
for."

I can safely swear that 1 don't know
where she is. Do you mean to say she has
leftScarsfield?"

^' I mean to say that we found this letter in
her room this morning," and Mr. Roslyn
pushed a crumpled piece of paper into Cecil's
hand. '' Read it ! — do you think I believe a
word of it ? An infernal lie from beginning
to end."

Cecil read. " You know, father," Ruby had
written, "that I said I would die sooner than
marry Charles Carew, and you will find I can
keep my word. Look for me in the river if

you want me. I Ve outwitted you both at
last. Good-bye."

The letter dropped from Cecil's hand. Had
Ruby really ended her life, or was this her
plan of diverting her father's suspicions from
himself ?

She can't think to humbug me in that
manner," said Koslyn, angrily. "The hussy
isn't in the river, I '11 lay my life ! " And
forthwith he poured out a volley of abuse and
imprecations, in the midst of which CeciFs
denials were unheard.

Suddenly the young man uttered an exclamation
of dismay, and started forward.
Leisure was comines down the stairs with Baby
clinging: to her neck. Cecil left the furious,
raging father at the door, and went nervously
towards his wife. " Go back, dear, go back,"
he whispered, "the man's mad — drunk —
he is saying things not fit for you to
hear."

Lenore would have retreated hastily, but

Eoslyii had caught sight of her and called
out,

Mrs. Cecil Brandon, isn't it ? You 're the
wife of a scoundrel, young lady. Ask your
husband what he has done with my daughter,
Ruby Roslyn."

Lenore cast a horrified glance at (cecil,
whose face was white as ashes.

Don't listen, for God's sake, Lenore ! "

Yes, listen to me," said Mr. Roslyn.
"Ask him yourself if she wasn't in love with
him ? whether he wasn't making love to her
the other night at that fine dancing party of
theirs ? Didn't Carew see them meet on the
pier the night after ? Didn't she send letters
to his office ? Didn't he see "

Cecil bore the accusation no longer. Roslyn
was standing on the threshold. By a sudden,
desperate effort, Cecil thrust him out of the
house, and shut the door upon him. He could
not have done it in a calmer moment, but
excitement gave him strength. They heard

the infuriated father uttering angry, profane
words outside, but at last lie walked away and
all was still. Not till then did Cecil turn and
confront his wife, who stood pale and speechless,
clasping her child to her breast. Baby
cooed and laughed, and held out her arms to
him as lie drew near.

How much of that is true ? " she asked,
with forced, unnatural calmness.

T don't know where she is, or anything
about ber," said Cecil avoiding her eye ; " she
has disappeared, and left a letter, saying that
she has drowned herself. I don't know
whether it is true or not."

Do you think it is true '? "

'' I tell you that I don't know."

^' What did he mean by the other things he
said ? "

Cecil was silent.

Did you meet her on the pier ? did she
write to you ? "

If she did, it was for nothing wrong."

What was it for ? "

I can't tell you."

Lenore moved away a few steps. She was
trembling so violently that she was obliged to
put the child down on the ground.

"Lenore, there is no just reason why you
should be angry — at least — I never meant any
harm "

Tell me what it all means," she said,
faintly. " About the party on Tuesday — what
has somebody seen ? "

Oh, nothing." But the red flush of shame
that rose to his face belied his words.

"There is something you are hiding from
me," cried his wife. " Make it clear, or I shall
never trust you again. You are ashamed of
something ; what is it ? "

Cecil would have given worlds to be able to
reply, but the urgency of her anxious eyes
seemed to deprive him of all power of speech.

Did you know that she meant to leave
home ? "

VOL. III. E

Very unwillingly the monosyllable " Yes "
was uttered. And then Cecil wished that he
had been silent still.

That is enough ! " she said, haughtily,
though her lips were white and quivering.
'you know more than you will confess, I see.
What has become of her ? "

Upon my soul, Lenore, I don't know."

I do not believe you," she said, turning
away.

'' You might trust me so far ! " exclaimed
Cecil, his resentment rising ; "I am not so bad
as you think ; I have been weak, but I have
tried to do right — I have striven with all my
might to be true to you ; and this distrust of
me is all the reward I o^et."

I am sorry you had to ' strive ' to be true
to me," said Lenore, bitterly wounded by
this expression. " I had no idea until now
that it had been an effort. I have no
wash to trouble you any longer. I think 1
had better oro home."

You will Dot ! " said Cecil, with savage
vehemence. " You are my wife, and here you

stay."

%/

Your wife in name alone from this day
forward," she answered, " unless you clear up
this mystery."

At this moment Baby, finding herself unheeded,
began beating upon her father's coat
with a little broom that she had taken from
the hearth. Cecil turned round angrily.
'' Get away, child ! " he said.

Baby, come here ! " said the mother.

But Baby was wilful, and struck again withall
her tiny strength. Cecil, scarcely knowing
what he did, threw out his hand to push her
away. It was hardly perhaps a blow, though
it looked suspiciously like one ; but before
Lenore could dart forward to the rescue, the
little thing had fallen with a sharp cry of fear
or pain.

She fell heavily on one side, knocking her
head against the sharp projecting corner of a'

LIBRARY

UNivFRgTY OF nuw

carved oak chest that stood on one side of the
hall. A quivering movement ran through the
little limbs ; and then they lay horribly still.
Limp, motionless hands, a waxen face down
which drops of blood began to trickle from
amongst the shining curls — these made up so
dreadful a sight to the mother's eyes that she
cried out passionately, as she bent over her
child,

It wanted only this ! You have killed my
darling — my Baby ! "

An hour afterwards, a curious hush seemed
to have fallen upon the household. The
doctor had been and gone ; the mother sat
upstairs with a little moaning child upon her
knees, and the father had locked himself into
his dressing-room, trying to think what way
led out of the misery which he suffered — less
for his fault than for his folly.

He was hardly conscious of darkness or of
cold. He stood or paced about the room,

unable to assume an easy position in the
anguish of his mind. He had certainly not
meant to hurt the child, whom he had angrily
thrust out of his path ; but if she were injured
or — more terrible supposition ! — if she should
die, would not conscience lay her death at his
door ? would not Lenore again accuse him of
having " killed her Baby " ? In any case, he
had forfeited Lenore's trust and love : he knew
that she would not forgive him easily for any
apparent unfaithfulness to her. And yet, he
had meant no harm, he thought to himself,
writhing under a sense of injury as well as of
wrong-doing ; he had not intended to make
love to Ruby, to wrong Lenore, to strike his
child ! Surely at last Lenore would acknowledge
that. But a glimmering notion crossed
his mind, for the first time, that the fact of his
"intending" no harm did not sufficiently
excuse him for the harm that he had done.

He could not help recalling every incident
that had happened since the child's fall. He

could not forget that when, in horror and
dismay, he had drawn near to see how she was
liiirt, his wife had cried wildly, " Go away
from her ! She is my child, and you struck
her," and how he had not a word to say. It
was Lenore who had carried her upstairs ; he
tried again to approach her, but she had said
in a sharp low tone that no one heard lout
himself, ''No, you shall not touch her." So
he stood aside, and silently let her pass.
Then the doctor came — old Dr. Ward whom
they had known for many years — and he had
said a few hurried words of explanation before
taking the keen-eyed old man Upstairs, and
he had fancied that the doctor eyed him
strangely. Then he crept up into the nursery,
and stood in the background while the medical
examination went on ; but Lenore, calm enough
now, though very pale, gave him neither
word nor look. And at last Baby began
to moan and cry, and the dreadful cut on her
temple was dressed ; but the doctor still

looked serious, and said something about
injury to the hip, which would have to be
carefully treated. Then he went away, and
the nursery door was shut upon nurse, mother,
and child ; and Cecil was left alone. All this
Cecil recollected with a sensation of ineffable
desolation, as he paced his room in the darkness.
If Lenore had looked towards him,
spoken bitterly to him, or of him, he could
have understood her better : but those first
two or three sentences were all relating to his
share in the accident that she had said. Even
the servants had not heard how it happened,
and she had explained nothing at all to the
doctor. Did she mean to shield him from
blame ? Did she mean always to be cold and
distant, and to avoid his glance ? He knew
he had no excuses to offer her ; he could only
wait and hope that she would relent.

After a time he grew weary of his loneliness,
and went downstairs. It seemed strange to
see the servants laying the table as usual ; he

wondered that any one could eat and drink at
such a time. But for the sake of appearances
he took his seat at the head of the table.
'' Mrs. Brendon is not coming down, I suppose
? " he said, nervously, to the trim parlour-maid
who waited.

No, sir, she has had a cup of tea upstairs,
and says she will stay with Miss Cissy, and
sleep in the nursery."

Cecil swallowed two or three mouthfuls,
drank some wine, and strolled restlessly into
the drawing-room. He could not go upstairs ;
he had no inclination for reading, and he was
afraid to go out — afraid of meeting Eoslyn
and Carew, and afraid lest he should be away
if his child grew worse. Surely Lenore would
tell him if the child were in danger ?

He grew so restless and miserable amid
these thoughts that a ring at the door-bell
was positively welcome, although he did not
know what visitor might appear. He had
already given orders to prevent the admission

of the two men whom he wished to avoid, but
he was not prepared to see his brother Max
enter the drawing-room. At that moment
Max was one of the last men he wanted to
see.

Cecil was standing in the middle of the
room, looking at the new-comer with doubtful
eyes. j\[ax came in, shut the door, and looked
at his brother doubtfully too.

'*I was just coming here when I met Ward,
and he told me about little Cissy. How is
she ? "

About the same, I think."

'' How on earth did it happen '? "

Cecil found it hard to give an answer, but
he gave a truthful one, nevertheless.

I pushed her away from me ; she fell
down and was hurt."

Max looked as if he could have been indignant
at the coolness of the reply, but all
that he said aloud was —

"It is to be hoped that no exaggerated

version of that story will get abroad, as is the
case with Miss Koslyn s disappearance."

"What have you heard?"

She is said to have drowned herself, and
some articles of dress belonging to her have
already been found near the docks ; but Roslyn
tells a different tale, and so does Carew — that
fellow to whom she was eno-ao'ed."

What is their story ? "

"They say that you are hiding the girl
somewhere: that, in plain words, you have
persuaded her to be your mistress. It's an
ugly story."

"It's a lie."

Glad to hear it," said Max, with more
cordiality of manner than he had yet shown,
for upon my word, Cecil, when Ted Eoslyn
came to me with the story I half believed it."

You all seem to have precious little faith
in my honour ! "

"You gave some of us, before your marriage,
precious little cause to believe in it. But

I thought you lead dropped that sort of
behaviour since you married Lenore — not
liking to think you a scoundrel."

You needn't come and try to bully me in
my own house," said Cecil. "I do not know
where the girl is, and there 's an end of it."

Not quite. For instance, is it true that
you were walking with her on the Quays last
Wednesday night ? "

'' Yes, it is."

"Is it true that you kissed her in the conservatory
at Lady Larpington's dance ? "

I should like to know what right you have
to ask such questions ? "

I want the truth," said Max, impatiently.
Out with it ! "

It was after an evident struggle with himself
that Cecil answered sullenly, "It is true."

"Do you suppose, then, that people will
believe that you have no connection with her
disappearance ? Can you imagine that your
word will be taken as trustworthy ? "

I can't help it. I do not know where she

is now."

Eoslyn told you she had gone. Was that
the first thing you knew about her flight or
suicide, or whatever it may be ? "

I think so — at least ," Cecil faltered,

and broke down, his face flushing hotly. As
Ruby had said, he " had not the pluck to tell
a lie ; " certainly not to tell it well.

"It is no good my asking questions, I see,"
said Max, with a wrathful gesture ; " when
you begin lying all my hopes are over. I cannot
believe what you say ; neither will anyone
else. It is quite evident that you know
something about Ruby Roslyn that you do not
choose to tell, and that knowledge condemns
you. I don't know how you stand in a
business point of view, but you have ruined
yourself socially in Scarsfield. I am sorry for
Lenore and your poor little girl ; I am not
sorry for you. It serves you right."

I speak the truth when I say I don't

know what has become of her," said Cecil,
vehemently. " I don't know whether she is
alive or dead ; I wish I did ! It is hard that
for committing an indiscretion you should
believe that I would commit a crime. Not a
soul has any trust in me, it seems ; not even
my wife."

"Does your wife know?" asked Max, slowly,
as though shocked and startled by this admission.


She heard part of what Eoslyn said ; she
asked me about it herself. She said she would
leave me," groaned Cecil, leaning his elbow on
the mantlepiece.

Max was silent ; his face was even more
anxious and concerned than before.

It 's a bad business — an unlucky business,"
he said, half aloud, while Cecil stood in his
dejected attitude, still hiding his face. After
a pause he went on, in a slightly softened
tone, *' Well, I '11 trust you so far as to believe
that you don't know where she is. But mind,

if it comes to your knowledge in the future
you must tell. You owe it to your wife to
clear up the mystery, whether it is an innocent
one or not. Until that is done — and for
aught I know, after it is done — you will be a
marked man, suspected of everything evil.
But I hope, Cecil, I hope it may be cleared up
satisfactorily. I can't do anything in the
matter for you, I suppose ? "

'^No, thank you."

A sort of pitying look came to Max's face ashe
heard the smothered tones and looked at
the bowed head. He came and laid his hand
on Cecil's shoulder.

You '11 come to me, of course, if there is
anything I can do ? "

"Thank you."

I hope Baby will be better soon. Shall
I call on Mrs. Chaloner, and send her up
tomorrow morning ? "

If you would do so, I think that Lenore
would like it."

I will. Good-iiiglit."

Cecil moved from the mantelpiece as his
brother went away. Max did not offer to
shake hands ; sorry as he was for Cecil, and
anxious to help him, he was not inclined to
show any outward token of friendliness.

HIS Punishment.

Nothing more was seen or heard of Lenore
downstairs that night. Baby was reported to
be a little better, and Cecil went to his room.
But he could not sleep : he dozed for perhaps
two minutes at a time, then awoke nth a
violent start and lay awake for the next hour.
At last he gave up the attempt, and wandered
about the house like a ghost, going up several
times to listen at the nursery door. As he
paused there for the fifth time, to hear if
Cissy's fretful moans continued, the door was
softly but suddenly opened, and Lenore stood
upon the threshold. She had heard some one
moving, and came to see who it was.

How is Baby ? " Cecil ventured to say, for



she waited silently, no change coming over the
set calmness of her face.

"A little quieter."

May I see her ? "

I think that you had better not."

Cecil shrank into himself at the cold, quiet
words, and turned away sighing heavily. She
was moved neither by his sigh nor by the
pleading eyes that once had had such power
over her. She went back into the room and
closed the door. Cecil descended the stairs,
and locked himself into his room until morning

Sunday was the most miserable day
that he had ever known. Baby, he heard,
was ill and feverish : Lenore remained with
her all day; Cecil had not the heart or courage
to venture out of doors. Mrs. Chaloner
arrived early in the morning to held her
granddaughter, and made a slight diversion
for him by coming down to lunch and dinner ;
but she seemed much perplexed by the
state of affairs, and not sure whether she

VOL. III. F

ought to condole with Cecil upon the unfortunate
accident, or to regard him as a
monster of cruelty Lenore had said nothing
about him, but one could easily see that
husband and wife were not on good terms.
Mrs. Brendon and Gertrude appeared in the
afternoon, very anxious on Baby's account,
but utterly unconscious, of course, of any
other source of discomfort or anxiety.

I can't understand Max's story at all."
Mrs. Brendon began, seating herself on the
sofa after the first greetings. " He never
gives one a clear account of things. Cissy fell
down, did she not ? "

Yes, she fell," said Cecil, " but through
my fault. I had pushed her away from me,
and she fell with her head against the corner
of the oak chest in the hall."

"My dear Cecil, don't call it your fault,"
said his mother. " How can any one blame
you for a mere accident like that ? Surely
Lenore has not put it into your head ? "

I don't know what she thinks about it,"
said Cecil, evading a direct answer.

I should like to see her. What does Dr.
Ward say ? "

He seems to think the cut on her head is
going on very well, but he cannot judge
whether her hip was much hurt. Mrs. Chalk
is here ; shall I send for her to comedown
? "

'' I would rather see Lenore. Can't you go
and ask her to come ? "

"She has scarcely left the nursery since
Baby was ill; I do not like to trouble her
unnecessarily," and Cecil rang the bell.

His mother majestically addressed the maid
who appeared. " Tell your mistress I should
like to see her for a few minutes."

The girl departed : Mrs. Brendon waited
silently. Cecil moved restlessly from place to
place.

How anxious you must have been ! " said
Gertrude, noticing his pale looks. " I hope

poor little Cissy will be better now. It was
very unfortunate for you."

Cecil's answer was an inarticulate sound,
between a grunt and a groan. His eyes were
fixed on the door : his heart palpitated with
the expectation of seeing his wife again.

The door opened, but only to admit Mrs.
Chaloner.

"Baby is asleep on Lenore's lap," she said,
and we don't like to disturb her ; so will you
kindly excuse her from coming down, dear
Mrs. Brendon ? "

Can we not go upstairs ? " said Mrs.
Brendon, with a dissatisfied air. *' I should
like to see how she is treated. I might be
able to suggest something."

'' She is to be kept very quiet," observed
Cecil.

'' Don't you go up ? " asked Gertrude, in a
bewildered tone.

No. I could do no good, and they don t
want me."

Mrs. Brendon became convinced that somebody
— probably Lenore — was injuring and
oppressing Cecil; but though she stayed for
an hour, she could not get to the bottom of
the matter.

For two or three days the child seemed
much better, but she lay wonderfully still
wherever she was laid down, and disliked
being handled. Dr. Ward examined her
carefully on the Wednesday, and came to the
conclusion that injury had been done to the
hip-joint, and that she would have to be kept
from walking for some time to come. He was
obliged to force the little thing to put her foot
to the ground, thus inflicting great pain ; and
Baby showed that her lungs at least were not
injured, by a terrible fit of screaming and
shrieking which brought Cecil in spite of himself
to the very nursery-door.

The examination was just over, and the
child was being tenderly held and comforted
by her mother, when Cecil was admitted by

the nurse, who had found him the picture of
misery, outside the door. Dr. Ward had
driven his last directions, and turned at once
to speak to the father, to whom he expounded
his view of the injury in a few kindly words.
Cecil hardly heard ; he was looking at his wife
and child. When Lenore saw him, she had
started and turned half-round, as if to hide
Baby from him : a nervous, involuntary movement,
but one which deeply wounded her
husband. He came nearer, saying,

Baby ! Cissy ! Don't you know papa ? "
It was not likely that the child remembered
that her father had been the cause of her
sufferings ; probably the sight of any fresh
face would have excited her. She broke out
again into piercing screams of fear or pain, hid
her face in her mother's breast, and clung to
her with both hands.

Go away," said Lenore, scarcely glancing
at her husband. " Don't you see that she
knows you too well 1 "

The nurse had gone downstairs : Dr. Ward
only remained in the room. He looked
sharply from Lenore to Veil. from Cecil to
Lenore, but loth seemed to have forgotten his
presence.

"Lenore.! did not mean it. I would not
have hurt her for the world' he said, entreatingly.


She merely repeated her words, "' Go away !
go away ! Leave us alone," and seemed to
become entirely absorbed in the child.

Cecil hesitated and retired slowly with a
look of pain upon his face that the old duct or
did not like to see.

Mrs. Brendon," he said, gently, approaching
her, "surely you do not attribute this
accident to any intentional act upon your husband's
part ? I assure you a simple fall would
produce all the injury I have noticed. Of
course, one must deeply deplore the fact that
Mr. Brendon, by a hasty movement, caused,
as one may say, the injury, but nobody is

more grieved at it than himself. I hope you
do not blame him."

I know. He did not mean it' said
Lenore, in a quiet, matter-of-fact way.

She was calm now.

My dear," said Dr. Ward, who often
adopted C[uite a paternal manner towards her,
** forgive my interference, but are you treating
him with the sympathy that he so evidently
craves T'

She was silent ; he thought she was considering
the question as she rocked Baby
backwards and forwards, and stilled her half-quieted
cries. Presently, she said, in the
same quiet manner, to his utter astonishment
and partial dismay :

Would not sea-air be better for Baby than
any other, Dr. Ward ? I think complete
change — perhaps to some place in the South —
would do us both good."

Dr. Ward was taken aback. He stammered
something, he knew not what; and then

Lenore continued in lier steady, gentle
way:

Scarsfield is too cold in the winter, and
the air is not pure. I should be glad if, when
she is a little stronger, you would recommend
us some pleasant place where we could passa
few weeks agreeably."

"I will think of it. Yes, the little girl
might be better for a change," said the doctor,
and then he went downstairs and encountered
Cecil in the hall. "You know, I suppose,
that your wife wants to go to the sea-side,"
he said, abruptly, observant of the young
man's start and sudden change of colour.
Torquay would not be a bad place for the
child ; and Mrs. Brendon looks very far from
strong."

She must decide for herself," replied Cecil,
and forthwith said good-morning. Dr. Ward
went down into Scarsfield, and there heard
some of the reports current about Ruby
Roslvn ; after which, he did not wonder so

much at what he had seen and heard at
Chalgrove.

The end of the week approached, bringing
no chang-e in the relations between husband

o

and wife. Lenore slept and ate upstairs still,
although her constant presence was no longer
necessary to little Cissy; Cecil went in and
out as usual, not trying to seek her society ;
even passing her silently if they met upon the
stairs, and conducting any unavoidable intercourse
with her by means of Mrs. Chaloner, or
the servants.

One Friday night, as Max sat in his office,
knitting his brows over letters which were
more unsatisfactory than usual, the door was
opened by Cecil. He came in with traces of
curious excitement in his manner.

"You said you would help me if I wanted
help," he burst out. " Can I trust you ? "

"Trust me; what to do?"

I know where Ruby is — I did not know
until this morning, but I can't let her father

hear — at least, not yet : you must promise me
that you won't tell him."

'' I never promise before I know what the
promise entails."

'' Look here' said Cecil, still more vehemently;
" I'll tell you how it came about, if
you won't be so cursedly scrupulous. The
girl was being forced to marry that Carew
against her will by that brute of a father : she
threw herself on my protection, and begged
me to help her to leave Scarsfield. I was
naturally unwilling to agree to this ; however,
I yielded, lent her some money, and knew she
was going — where, she did not tell me. I
promised that if I did get to know of her
whereabouts, I would not betray it to her
father. She horsed to obtain a situation, I
believe. Now, give me your word to keep
silence if I tell you where she is now."

I daresay we can see that she is not forced
into marrying Carew, or ill-treated by her
father, without making rash promises," said

Max, somewhat satirically. " I should have
taken better care of myself in your place than
you have done."

"How?"

I should have told my wife the whole
story, to begin with. Then I should have
taken high ground with Eoslyn : said I did
know where his daughter was, but didn't
intend to tell him, and so on. By acting as
though you were ashamed of yourself, you
lead other people to believe you have some
cause for shame."

So I have," said Cecil, in a half-whisper.

Ah ! well, I wouldn't have had cause, had
I been in your place."

"That's nothing to do with the present
question. I must trust to your generosity to
keep the secret. I have no one to tell but
you, and I suppose I must not act in the
matter myself. Head that," and Cecil threw
upon the desk a letter which he had hitherto
held in his hand.

Max took it up, looked at the writing, which
was bad ; at the post-mark — London ; at
the envelope, which was of the poorest and
humblest description, before he opened the
letter. It was written from a street in the
neighbourhood of Manchester Square, and ran
as follows : —

SiE, — Mrs. Jones begs the gentleman will
excuse the liberty, but having found his
address in the pore young lady's pocket, and
his name being continually on her lips in
raving fever, Mrs. Jones thinks it right to
acquaint the gentleman as may be one of Miss
Ross's friends, and if so, they ought to know
that Miss Ross is very bad, and the doctor
says it is brave-fever. Yours respectfully,

"M. Jones."

'' It seems genuine," said Max, refolding the
letter.

*' Genuine ! " repeated Cecil, reproachfully;
'' can there be any doubt ? Oh, Ruby, Ruby,
I little thought it would come to this ! " and

he put this hand to his head as though half
distracted.

'' Don't make a bigger ass of yourself than
you are," said Max, cynically. '' You are not
in love with the girl, I hope, although you
have the gift of getting into critical situations
with her. It 's a worse mess than usual this
time." Then he sat with the letter before
him and reflected. '' Somebody will have to
go after her, of course."

"Not her father!"

I don't know. It s awkward to have to
tell him : it will be awkward still if anything
happens to her, and we are found to have
known of the illness. Then again : I suppose
Miss Loss ' means Ruby Eoslyn ? "

'* Of course."

There is just a doubt — not a reasonable
one, perhaps. Then the illness may be less
serious than the renowned Mrs. Jones intimates,
and I quite understand your feeling
about not betraying the girl's confidence

unnecessarily. It would be a great saving of
trouble, however, if we just placed the letter
in Eoslyn s hands, and left him to deal with
her. She could not blame you."

I won't consent to that. No, unless she
is dying I will not place her in that fellow's
power."

Max shrugged his shoulders. " How are we
to know whether she is dying or not ? Somebody
must see her. You can't ; it would
never do for you to leave Scarsfield now"

No, no. Mother— or Gertrude ? "

Quite impracticable. I suppose I shall
have to go myself," said Max in an injured
tone, " and interview Mrs. Jones. You telegraph
to her at once that ' friends-will arrive
tomorrow morning,' not a word more or less,
remember. There 's a train soon after eight
reaching Euston Station about twelve. I can
be back by midnight, or I can stop till Monday
morning'. Bayonet that be best ? "

Best ! I can never thank you enough."

One thing ! I won't be hampered with
promises. I must act as I see fit. If she is
not very ill, good nursing and doctoring only
need be seen to, until she is better ; if the
matter is serious you must tell Roslyn at
once."

Cecil tried to object, but his brother stopped
him.

I won't undertake it on any other terms.
Don't you see, Roslyn must be told, if she is
dying ? I won't make you break your promise
lightly. If absolutely necessary, I '11 telegraph
to you, and you must immediately put the
woman's letter into his hands, or let him know
its general import — immediately, do }' ou
understand ? — You consent ? All right. Now,
you 'd better go, or I shall never get off intime.
If it was not Saturday, I don't see how
I could go at all."

When Cecil had gone, Max threw himself
back in his chair, and meditated deeply for a
few minutes. His lip curled with a curious

smile at last. " A case of conscience," lie said
to himself. "I'd better take it to Iter.''' He
wiped his pen methodically, folded and put
away his letters, locked his private drawer,
and went out. Cecil would probably have
been surprised to see that he took the road to
the Priory.

Cecil had gone home, enduring a strange
sickness of heart. He told himself that he
was destined to bring misery upon all he
loved ; and there was a dreary satisfaction to be
ordained in abusing: the selfishness and weakness
that had brought things to this pass. He was
half inclined to go to Lenore, and tell her the
whole story, more freely even than he had
told it to Max ; but he was deterred by shame
at the remembrance of those moments when
he had indeed wronged her in thought, if not
in deed. With a good conscience he could
have pleaded well both for Ruby and himself ;
but his conscience was not clear.

He had put down his hat in the hall, and

VOL. HI. G

was turning into the dining-room, when
Lenore came down the stairs. She did not as
usual avoid him ; she followed him into the
room, closed the door, and said,

Can I speak to you for a moment ? "
The colour leaped up into Cecil's cheek ; he
could not answer, but he hastened to place a
chair for her as for a stranger. Lenore took
no notice of this attention ; she stood quietly,
her head a trifle more erect than usual, and
spoke.

Dr. Ward tells me that baby is strong
enough to be removed and advises me to take
her to Broughton. Grandmamma and Kate
will go with us. You have no objection,
I suppose ? "

Do exactly as you please. I have no
right to interfere."

We propose starting on Tuesday."

Shall I — would you wish me to — go with

you r

*' Certainly not. Of course / have no right

to object," said Lenore, with a slight curl of
her lip, " but I do not see the necessity.
I merely wished to tell you of our intentions."


"It is of no use asking when you will be
back then ? " he asked, with a touch of jealous
sullenness.

"I do not know. That can be decided
later."

I can write you a cheque to-day if you
will tell me the amount. You had better
have what you want before setting off."

*swill you please make those arrangements
with grand mamma ? " said Lenore,
colouring. '' It will be more pleasant to us
both."

So," said Cecil, slowly, " you cannot forgive
fine ! "

"It is not a question of forgiveness. I
cannot trust you, and I cannot love where
I do not trust. It is as though you had died
to me ; you are not the Cecil that I knew and

loved. The life that I lived with you has
come to an end."

She left him to reflect on what she had
said.

IN LONDON.

Miss Lingered," said Max, with more tliau
his usual abruptness, as he entered Magdalen's
sitting-room, ''I want two things from you:
an address — and your advice."

Magdalen looked up and smiled. She had
not seen much of him lately, but they had
been more than ever friendly and companionable
when they met, while Max's quietness of
manner led her at times to doubt whether his
avowal of love had not been a dream, or, at
most, a transient impulse on his part. She
was glad to feel that she could meet him with
as much frank kindliness as if he had never
wanted to be her lover — and with no danger

of being misunderstood.



"The address," he continued, "is that of a
nursing institution in London, of which I have
heard you speak ; I think I may have to
obtain a nurse for an acquaintance of mine
who is iU."

May I ask," said Magdalen, as she wrote
down an address, " may I ask what is your
friend's illness ? "

My friend — as you call her, not 1 ! — is ill
of brain fever, I believe, and her name is Miss
Kuby Koslyn."

He made his announcement half mischievously,
to see what effect would be produced
upon her. She did not start, but her lips
parted, her eyelids flickered, with an expression
of the greatest surprise. She had heard
more town gossip than she cared to confess.

'^I fancied," she said, with a very slight
hesitation, " that Miss Eoslyn had disappeared
from her home, and that no one knew where
she had gone."

Unhappily I do know where she is, and

am not at liberty, until I have seen her, to tell
her father so. I want to talk to you about
her, if you will kindly listen." And then he
told her the whole story, ending with the
question, " Now, have I done right or wrong ? "

Right, I think, and your brother ought to
be grateful to you. If you find her very ill,
however, you must send for her father at
once."

"Yes, but shall I not find it difficult to
judge of her state ? " said Max, with rather a
gloomy brow. " I shall only be able to go by
what the doctor tells me, and he will not
judge so well perhaps as a woman who knew
all the circumstances. I wish I had a sister
who could go ! "

Miss Brendon ? "

'' She is proverbially useless in a sick-room,
and we want to keep the knowledge of the
whole affair both from her and from my
mother. Ursula is too young. Lenore is out
of the question. Mrs. Chaloner, whom 1

Avould ask as soon as anybody to go with me,
is occupied with the care of her grandchildren
and little Cissy."

It would certainly be better if a woman
could go to her," said Magdalen, thoughtfully.
Her mother is dead. She has no aunt or
elder sister who could be taken into your
confidence."

None whom I know of. And there are
numberless points of detail in which a woman
would be of more use than the best of men.
I promised Cecil to get him out of the scrape
if possible, but I see rocks ahead. I doubt
whether it would not be better to inform Mr.
Roslyn of his daughter's illness and place of
abode in any case. Then she may be better
than her landlady represents, and, if so, what
am I to say to her — how am I to deal with
her ? Or, if she is seriously ill, how shall
I judge whether the nurse is competent and
serviceable, and all the rest of it ? A woman
would do all those things better than I. At

any rate, it seems frightful to think of her
lying ill, perhaps dying, away from everyone
she knows. I am bound to do the best 1 can
for her, for Cecil's sake, but I wish I was well
out of it."

Poor girl ! she must have suffered greatly,"
said Magdalen, with a tender, pitying accent.

"Miss Lingered," said Max, turning round
upon her suddenly, " I know only one woman
in the world who would deal with her rightly,
and that is yourself And I dare not ask
you.

Magdalen's face flushed a faint crimson.
She did not S23eak at once, but rose, walked
once or twice across the room, her hands
clasped before her, and her head bent as
though in deep thought, before she answered

Brendon, if you want me — if I can be
of use — I will go."

Will you really ? My mind would be
easy then. But no : it is too much to ask
from you. Could you spare the time ? "

Max tried to look as if he were not very
anxious for her to go, but the proposed plan
was one which he so heartily desired that his
attempt at remonstrance was a failure.

Yes, I can spare the time, and 1 think
I might be of use," she said. " If you really
wish me to go, I don't see why you should be
so reluctant to ask me, Mr. Brendon."

I wish for nothing better, but I did not
like to trouble yon. However, I will confess
that I had some sort of notion of this kind in
my head when I came up. I won't says that
I am obliged to you, for I know you do it
out of pure benevolence, not from personal
motives."

*' Thank you," said Magdalen, with her
brightest smile. She received his speech as a
compliment ; which was as he meant it. Then
they entered into details about their journey,
and Max hurried away to complete all his
business that he might be ready to leave home
next day.

He arriyecl at the station on the following
morning, his little black bag in his hand,
before Magdalen ; and occupied himself in
taking; tickets, and securing a comfortable
carriage. She was to be accompanied by Miss
Jessop, who was taken into confidence as much
as was necessary and no more.

Max was glad to see her really installed in
the compartment he had chosen, both on
Ruby's account and on his own. The feeling
of comradeship in the same work seemed to
draw them closer together, he thought ; and
Magdalen was not insensible to this influence.
Yet neither of them talked much during the
journey. Magdalen looked out of the window,
and meditated with the calm look on her
serene white brow, which seemed as though it
never could be ruffled. Max ensconced himself
in the opposite corner, with the blue window
curtain drawn forward slightly so as to conceal
the fact that he was intently watching every
turn of her graceful head, every glance of her

soft brown eyes. Miss Jessop read Punch,
dozed, and regarded her companions with an
air of puzzled interest.

About five o'clock they reached Euston
Station. It was a dark day, and there was a
thick fog ; London did not look inviting.
Max and Magdalen had decided upon their
plan of action ; and as soon as they stood upon
the platform she said to Miss Jessop,

"I told you, dear, that I was going to see
a friend who was ill. Mr. Brendon is o'connor
with me, but we shall stop at the hotel on our
way thither to take rooms and leave you in
them with the luggage. You don't mind
being left alone ? "

Miss Jessop minded nothing, and was only
agitated by the thought that her dear Madge
might be running into danger of infection ;
lout when she was told that the illness was not
infectious (as far, at least, as could be known),
she relapsed into quietness, and asked no
questions.

A sitting-room and bed-rooms were accordingly
obtained, for Magdalen bad made up ber
mind to remain, at all events, until Monday,
and Max was of opinion that be might as well
do so too. They left Miss Jessop to make herself
comfortable on a sofa, and directed the
cabman to drive to 49 Earl Street, Manchester
Square. They reached it in ten minutes.

Tbe street was a respectable one ; but No.
49 was its least respectable bouse. A
corner bouse, with a picture-sb op on the
ground-floor, and a general air of discomfort
and equality about it. Tbe ball was dimly
lio-bted and narrow : the stairs were uncarpeted
; the shock-beaded servant wbo showed
the way was indescribably untidy. Altogether,
Max, wbo bad known Ruby Eoslyn in the bey-day
of youth, beauty, and insolence, wondered
how she had condescended to inhabit a bouse
like this. They were ushered into a tiny little
parlour behind the shop, and there Mrs. Jones
received them. She was a pale, dumpy

woman, with an injured air, and remarkably
small eyes, that looked as if they could not
open wide.

"We are Miss Ross's friends," said Max,
taking the initiative, " and we have come to
see what can be done."

Then he looked towards Magdalen, as much
as to say that he left the matter in her hands.

"I am afraid that she is very ill," said
Magdalen, gently.

Mrs. Jones made a faint attempt at a
curtsey as she answered,

Indeed she is, ma'am ; and very hard it is
on us who 've had to bear the burden of it.
Some persons would have turned a lodger out
into the streets who was took hill in that uncomfortable
way; but I was always kind-parted,
and didn't like to send her away, and of course
she can't be moved now."

I am afraid not. But now that we have
come, we will see that she has attendance and
nursing without troubling you unnecessarily.

Mrs. Jones. We do not wish you to be a
loser in any way by your kindness."

Mrs. Jones's face cleared at this speech, and
she replied more civilly,

'•' I 'm sure I 've wished to do the best for
her I could, ma'am ; but I 've a family of six,
and only a small servant, and I 've been
worked off my legs ever since the morning
when I went into her bed-room and found her
clinging to the bed-230sts, and raving like a
madwoman. She 'd been ailing since she
came, which was two days before ; and Jones
and me we had to hold her down and send fora
doctor that instant, and he said it was brain-lever.


I should like to see her," said Magdalen.
Will you stay here while I go upstairs ? " she
asked Max.

He assented, and ]airs. Jones led the way to
poor Ruby's room, while Max walked about
the little parlour and looked at the daubed oil
paintings in the shop, until they came down

again. Magdalen drew him aside, and spoke
with rather a shocked face.

I should like to see the doctor before we
decide what to do," she said, " but she seems
to me so ill, that there can be no question
about letting her father know at once. He
ought to come to her."

If you think so, that 's enough, without
waiting for the doctor. Shall I telegraph to
Cecil ? "

I think, under the circumstances, you
ought to judge for yourself Will you see
her, just for a moment ? "

As you like. It would be best perhaps."

After a word to Mrs. Jones, she led the way
upstairs to a little sitting-room, from which a
door led into a smaller bedroom. This door
was half-open, and he looked in. Ruby was
sitting up, her face crimson, her eyes wild
with fever, her magnificent black hair all
tumbling over the pillow, her hands working.
She was pouring out a torrent of words, mostly

indistinguishable ; the name '' Cecil " occurred
very often, and was more distinct than anything
else. Max came back into the sitting-room
with a black frown on his forehead.
'rand this is Cecil's doings ! " he said. "I
wish he could see the effects of his folly
now."

Magdalen joined him there in consultation.


"Don't telegraph to your brother," she said.
It sill involve him far too deeply if lie is the
hearer of such intelligence to Mr. Koslyn.
Telegraph in my name that I have found his
daughter very ill, and beg him to come at
<^nce. Explanations, if necessary, can follow.
And here, I think, is the doctor."

The doctor was a young man with a jaunty
manner, which was somewhat subdued in a
conference with the gentleman and destine
lady who had come to look
after his patient. Miss Loss was very ill, he
said, and needed great attention if she were to

VOL. III. H

recover : in feet, he did not think that she
would recover 'eat any price." He did not
object when they proposed to call in another
doctor, and proved more tractable than they
had anticipated when called to account for
certain points of treatment which Magdalen
thought inadvisable. When he was gone, she
said rather abruptly,

"Take your telegram now, please, Mr.
Brendon, or you will be late. And then, may
I trouble you to go and ask Miss Jessop for
my bag, and tell her that I shall not return to
the hotel — to-night at least."

You are not going to do any such thing,
excuse me ! Stay here to knock yourself up
with nursing ! I beg your pardon, but you
must give up that idea. I shall go for a sick
nurse immediately."

*' Mr. Brendon," she said, laying her hand
lightly on his arm to detain him, " your sick-nurse
is here. I am used to illness, and I
think that a friend ought to stay with that

poor girl. I must go to her immediately.
AVait till tomorrow, at any rate ; and tell
Miss Jessop to send me my tidings. If
nursing knocks me up, I \Yill go back to
Scarsiield."

I almost wish you had never come ! And
yet it is like your wonderful goodness and
kindness — just what I might have expected !
You are too good."

Go and telegraph," said Magdalen, smiling,
and don't talk nonsense, Mr. Brendon. I
should feel as if I were neglecting a duty if I
ran away from that poor girl now."

She went back to Ruby, and Max repaired
to the nearest telegraph-office, whence he
sent a message in Miss Lingers name to
Mr. Eoslyn, mentioning the train that he
thought would serve him best. Then he went
to the hotel, encountered Miss Jessop's tearful
alarm and inquiries, and brought Magdalen
her bag in safety. She had taken off her
bonnet and cloak, had had a fire lighted

in the desolate sitting-room — which already
looked home-like, thought Max — and had sent
for and received a physician, whose verdict had
been slightly more favourable than that of
the jaunty young doctor.

Mrs. Jones is really very kind," she said,
She works most willingly, and seems to have
been attentive. Don't trouble yourself about
me, Mr. Brendon ; I shall be quite comfortable.
You will meet Mr. Roslyn, I suppose,
and explain to him how all this came about ? "^

"All?"

Do you think we should gain anything by
concealing; the truth ? He cannot make her
marry against her will now ; and I will do my
best to protect her and to shield your
brother."

Your very presence will silence slander,"
said Max, as he took his leave.

He did not much like his next task ; that
of meeting Mr. Roslyn, who came about
midnight, and of explaining to him how

matters really stood. But lie found that his
own character, and Miss Lingered's well-known
name, gave his testimony higher worth than
Cecil's in Mr. Roslyn's eyes ; and when he
averred that neither he nor his brother had
known where Ruby was until that morning,
and that Cecil had been informed simply
through the accident of Mrs. Jones's finding
his card in her lodger's pocket, Mr. Roslyn,
althoLio'h he racked a o;ood deal at first, decided
to accept the story as true, and partially to
exonerate Cecil Brendon. They went to the
hotel where Miss Jessop was staying until
morning, and then Roslyn repaired to Earl
Street, saw his daughter, conversed a little
with Magdalen, by whom he was somewhat
overawed, and returned to the hotel for
breakfast.

As soon as ]\[ax saw Mr. Roslyn safely
seated at the breakfast-table in company with
Miss Jessop, he went quietly to Earl Street
himself.

The table was spread for breakfast in the
sitting-room, and Magdalen stood beside it,
drinking a cup of coffee. Her face was rather
pale, as though she had passed a trying night,
but it brightened with a sudden smile as he
came in. His honest, friendly face could not
but be welcome in that dark London house,
where everything else was strange.

You are early," she said, giving him her
hand for a moment, '' but we have had a
visitor already. Her father has been here."
Yes, I know. He is breakfasting now."
He told you how she was, perhaps ? "
"He said you thought her a trie Letter.
But he did not tell me how you were. So
I came to see."

You don't suppose one night's attendance
would make me ill ? You do not realise what
a strong person I am, Mr. Brendon. Shall
I give you some coffee ? I must go back to
my patient in a moment ; Mrs. Jones is there
now."

'^ Thank you," said Max, accepting the cup
of coffee from her hand with a sensation of
great luxury. He stood by the mantelpiece
sipping it slowly, as though to prolong the
situation, and Magdalen sat down in the only
easy-chair the room afforded, on the other side
of the hearth. The fire leaped and crackled ;
Kuby's voice now and then rose sadly upon
the silence. Outside the bells beoran to rino-
for some early service. Hearing them, ]magdalen
broke the pause by saying :

** You are going to church, I suppose ? "

"Yes, if I can be of no use to you. I
thought of piloting Miss Jessop somewhere.
Tell me where she would like to go."

I am afraid she has no clear ideas on the
subject. You are already too late for St.
Paul's."

I have no clear ideas either. AYe must
take our chance. Shall I go now ? "

Yes ; and tell her that I want her to goto
Westminster Abbey. She will enjoy that

at any rate." And Max did as he was
bidden.

He hoped to persuade Magdalen to go out
in the evening, but found that she would not
leave Ruby either to the care of Miss Jessop
or of Mrs. Jones. He was able, however, to
consult further with her as to future arrangements,
and was a little staggered by the
resolution she announced to him. She had
already obtained Mr. Roslyn's consent to her
plan. She wished to stay with Ruby as head
nurse until the invalid should be able to move;
if, indeed, she recovered. Miss Jessop was to
be sent back to Scarsfield in company with
Max ; Mr. Roslyn intended to wait for some
change in his daughter's condition. It was of
no use for Max and Miss Jessop to protest;
Magdalen was resolved. She had already
proved herself a capable nurse, and her very
presence seemed to soothe the delirious girl.
Until the end of Ruby's illness Magdalen had
made up her mind to stay. A professional

attendant would also be secured upon the
morrow, but Magdalen wished to remain as
well.

Mr. Koslyn had very hazy ideas as to how
she had arrived at his daughter's bedside, but
he was well satisfied to have her there, and
did not ask many questions. In fact, it
occurred to him that Ruby had won Max
Brendon's affections, and — as, in common with
half Scarsfield, he rated Max's means twice as
high as they really were — he was quite willing
to give up Charles Carew, if there were any
prospect of having young Brendon as a son-in-law.
Max had inherited his father's prestige
in matters of business, and was already far more
respected in the town than his brother. Few
people had heard much about the lawsuit that
was slowly progressing towards what might bea
disastrous end for him.

The uncertainty of the final decision, and
the insecurity of his position, made this
period of his life a very harassing one.

But, as Mr. Eoslyn knew nothing about his
possible money difficulties, he was quite ready
to leave off abusing the Brendons if Max
wanted to marry Ruby.

THE End OF THE CHEMICAL Woes.

"Telegram, sir."

"Very well. Give it to me. Go on,
Elis."

Thus Max dismisses the office-boy, plants
his foot more firmly on a coil of rope, and
listens to his foreman, who is discoursing
chemically before a great furnace in the
caustic works.

The yellow-brown envelope in his hand

causes him a thrill of dread. It may contain

bad news. The end of that lawsuit is certain

to be very soon. He swings it idly to and

fro as Ellis talks, as if it were not worth a

thought ; in reality he has to summon up

courage to open it. Carelessly, at last, he



seems to tear it open; the thin pink paper
rustles in his hands as he reads. Ellis halts
in his speech, respectfully.

Go on," says Max, calmly putting the
paper into his pocket, and letting the brown
envelope drop away. ** What were you
saying ? "

The tints of his face fade a little during the
next few minutes, but he gives marked attention
to all that Mr. Ellis has to say. The
foreman winds up by the remark—

"It's a pity they're so long of deciding
that matter about the gases, sir. Not but
what we re safe to win, but if that was over
we should feel more secure."

"It is decided," says Max, coolly. "And
you're wrong, Ellis. We have lost."

The foreman recoils, and utters a sharp
ejaculation.

Max's lip curls with a satirical smile.

It 's to be hoped you 've no bets on the
event," he says, walking away with a more

deliberate step than usual. " I always told
you we should not win."

"You're a cool hand!" — so Ellis apostrophises
the retreating figure of his master —
But if this don't ruin him, my name 's not
Tom Ellis."

If Max had heard the latter observation, lie
would have declared himself of the same
opinion. To all intents and purposes he was
from that hour a ruined man ; and he knew it.

The knowledge was bitter to him. He had
never thought that he should find himself
unable to carry on what he had begun. He
hated failure ; he hated ill-success. He could
hardly believe it possible that such bad fortune
had come to him ; he almost fancied that his
calculations had deceived him, and that if he
went over his books once more he should find
things better than he expected. Late into
the night he toiled over his figures, but with
no happier result. It would take nearly all
he had to pay Captain Esher the damages

given him by the law, and the costs of the suit.
All that he could do would be to wind up his
affairs, shut up — perhaps dispose of — the
works, and begin life over again as a clerk or
commercial traveller. That was all he vv^as fit
for, he thought, half angrily. On the other
hand, he was young and healthy ; he might
make his way in the world yet. But he had
lost his first chance, and he was troubled at
the loss.

There was one way out of the difficulty, but
he did not think that it would be an honourable
way. He might carry on his business on
credit, and without capital, for a time ; if he
were successful, the crisis might be tided over,
and he might recover himself. If he did not
succeed, the Bankruptcy Court lay open to
him. It would not be an honourable failure,
he thought, if he did fail. But if he succeeded,
nobody would know that he had been so near
ruin. The element of dishonesty was one
which he had always contemned, but which

Others often utilised. Wealth and esteem lay
on the one hand — if he succeeded ; utter ruin
on the other — if he failed. He did not believe
that he should fail. He could withdraw from
his business now honourably and honestly ; if
he risked his honour and honesty a little, he
might gain a brilliant success. And he wanted
success in the world above most things. He
was sorely tempted.

He sat in his office throughout the cold
winter night, his head upon his hands, planning,
deliberating, wavering. "When the grey
dawn looked in at the tiny window he dropped
into a half-doze — more like a stupor of exhaustion
than slumber. His mind, freed from
the control of the will, wandered mistily
through various scenes— some of the past,
some of sheer fancy, but Magdalen's face was
distinct in all. At last he seemed to find himself
in a dim vast church, and she was beside
him, and the voice of the preacher sounded in
his ears with words that he had heard before —

What good hath riches with our vaunting:
brought us ? All these things are passed away
like a shadow. . . . But the righteous live forevermore."



He woke with a start, and was angry with
himself for his folly. Why on earth should
his dream be so applicable to the occasion ?
It should not weigh with him for a moment.
And yet, against his will, the remembrance of
Mr. St. Aidan's sermon, of those words against
the love of riches ; above all, the remembrance
of Magdalen's ipuie, s^^^eet face, came back to
him, and withheld him from an unworthy
action. He would not make himself unfit to
touch Magdalen's hand ao^ain : this, rather
than any preference of duty for its own
sake, was the dominant thought with him
when he resolved at last to close those
dearly loved but ruinous chemical works.
And he was calm enough as soon as the
struggle was over. He had been unfortunate ;
but misfortune was not a crime, and he

intended to begin the world again gaily,
with unabated vigour.

He went home to bathe, dress, and breakfast.
Ursula thought him in unusually good
spirits. There was a defiance of fate, a force
of resistance in him that would not let him be
depressed. He was disappointed, baffled,
pained ; but he was not beaten. He passed
the day busily : a disagreeable interview with
a lawyer took up half the morning, and his
own work was pressing. He dined at home
in the evening, and, contrary to his usual
habits, did not go out afterwards. Mrs.
Brendon and Gertrude went into the drawing-room,
but Ursula loitered behind, in obedience
to a signal from her brother, who had murmured
the word "Library" in her ear as he
opened the door for the ladies, with caution
which Mrs. Brecon's jealousy of his influence
over Ursula rendered necessary.

The ]library-fire was not lighted, but Max
turned up a jet of gas with a business-like air.

VOL. Il I

His face was more sombre than it had been
in the morning, and Ursula asked if he were
tired.

A little : not particularly. I wanted to
speak to you for a moment."

"What is it?" asked Ursula, winding one
arm round his neck, caressingly. "You've
got on your grim face, boy. What's gone
wrong ? "

You know of that lawsuit that has been
hanging over my head for the last eighteen
months ? It 's decided at last."

How ? " said his sister, fearfully.

Against me. It will cost me ten thousand
pounds or more."

Max ! What a horrible shame ! Can you
pay it 1 "

Of course I can. I 'm not bankrupt yet."

I beg your pardon, dear Max, I did not
mean that' said Ursula, with unusual softness.
" But won't it be an immense strain on
you?"

I shall have to close the works, Ursa, and
begin the world over again."

Oh ! Max, is there no other way ? "

No," he answered ; " none."

'max, dear old Max, aren't you sorry?
Oh, I am so grieved," and Ursula hid her face
on his shoulder. "But you will soon make it
up," she said, after a few involuntary tears,
during which he put his arm round her, and
held her close to him, feeling her affection an
inexpressible comfort. "Everybody respects
you ; everybody mil help you on, and you
will soon be as well off as ever. And
wee shall not care whether you are rich or
poor."

Don't you think that mother will care ? "

"You must not mind what mamma says,
darling. She will scold, but she says more
than she means. Don't you remember how
often you have told me that ? Why can't you
take my money for your business ? I 'm sure
I don't want it."

Max laughed. " I don't want your money
either, my dear. In a few years I may be able
to go on with the chemicals, if I work hard
and save. I shall keep the works, I think.
It is simply a temporary want of capital that
stops me now."

Then, when I 'm of age, at any rate, you
can have mine. We '11 manage to get along
till then, Max ! "

^' You 're a good sister," said Max, stroking
her hair, " but I shall do without your fortune,
never fear."

"What shall you do. Max ? "

Don't know exactly. Get a situation
somewhere."

Ursula felt instinctively that his position
was hard, but did not like to say so. She
clasped his hand more tightly, and drew a
long breath : two signs of sympathy which he
well understood.

We must think about telling the others,"
he said, presently.

** Won't you leave me to do that ? It maybe
a little unpleasant at first "

"And let you bear the brunt? No, my
dear Ursa, I won't do that. And I want to
caution you about another thing. Don't
tell all this to Miss Lingered when you
write."

"Not to Magdalen?"

'* No. If you enter on the subject with her,
she will feel at liberty to ask you how the
lawsuit came about, and so on ; and I have
particular reasons for wishing her not to
know."

Very well," said Ursula, much surprised,
but submissive. " But I thought — somehow —
you told her most things ? I was quite sure
once, Max, that you liked her better than anybody
else "

She was rather alarmed by the sharp
manner in which he interrupted her. " Why ?
What did I say or do to make you think
that ? "

I don't know. . . . Tm not sure. Was
there no tutti in it ? "

He made an impatient gesture with his
hand. "What good would there be in it, if
it were true 1 Why need you ask such a
question ? It is true, so for," he said, softening
his voice and turning away from her,
that I never saw any woman equal to her in
my life — there is no other woman I would look
at beside her."

"Are you sure that she does not care for
you ? It would be splendid if you married
her. You would have no money bothers then,
and she would be our sister."

"Don't be silly, Ursula. I shall never
marry her : least of all, novo. Shall we go
into the drawing-room ? "

They found Mrs. Brendon lying on a sofa
reading a novel : Gertrude was working ;
Bessie had gone to bed. There could hardly
be a better opportunity for ]\Iax's communication.
So, after a little delay, he began.

"Mother, I think you may like to know
how my lawsuit with Captain Esher has
ended."

'eyes," said his mother, without lifting her
eyes from her book. " How ? "

"I have lost it."

'' Dear me ! " said Mrs. Brendon, slightly
rousing herself; "I suppose that is a loss for
you. I can't think how you managed to
involve yourself in a lawsuit with that man ;
your father would never have done it."

I have had worse luck than my father,"
said Max, in a constrained tone. " The loss
to me is very severe. I shall be obliged to
shut up the caustic works altogether."

Shut them up ? Then what will you do
with yourself?" asked Gertrude.

Mrs. Brendon continued to read with an
indifferent air. Stung by her coldness.
Max answered in a negligent yet incisive
way,

I have a hundred or two left. I thought

of opening an ironmonger's shop. You and
Cecil could patronise me."

He had succeeded in startling his mother.
Her book slipped to the ground as she raised
herself to exclaim,

What folly you are talking ! What can
you mean ? "

Max picked up her book, straightened the
crumpled leaves, and returned it to her before
he replied :

I must earn my living somehow, I suppose."


Do you mean to say that you have spent
all the money your father left you ? — that you
have saved nothing ? May I ask what you
have been doing for the last three years ? "

Working hard and losing money," said
Max, briefly.

*' There must have been shameful extravagance
somewhere!" said Mrs. Brendon. "Such
losses could not come by accident."

"It is the lawsuit that disables me,"

observed Max. " Neither I nor my father contemplated
its possibility when we took Darley's
Works. The only thing I can honestly do
now is to shut them up, and obtain a situation
elsewhere."

Not in Scarsfield, I hope."

Certainly in Scarsfield, if I can get one,"
said Max, with a sudden lighting up of his
eyes. " I have done nothing that I need be
ashamed of, and I do not mean to leave the
town if I can help it. Of course I see that it
is impossible for me to continue my old way
of life in every respect. For instance, it maybe
better for me to be entirely independent
of this house ; I cannot afford now to contribute
an equal share to its expenses."

Oh, Max, you don't mean to go away ! "
cried Ursula, starting forward.

Max is right," said Mrs. Brendon, with icy
severity. " If he cannot, or will not, pay his
share, and take a part in the responsibilities of
the household, it is high time that he left us.

My means are not large enough to support
him."

Max walked to the door. " You ^Yill not be
burdened with me much longer. I shall lookout
for lodging's tomorrow," he said. His
tones were low but composed ; the muscles of
his face were sternly set. Ursula was grieved
for him beyond measure, for she knew how
deeply he was hurt by his mother's words.
She had out-grown the period of tempestuous
remonstrance ; but as he closed the door
behind him, and Mrs. Brendon broke into
fretful and unjust complaining, she bent her
head over a book, and allowed hot tears of
bitterness and grief to flow as freely as they
would.

Max wished that it was a school night as he

o

strode along the streets. Then he should have
something to do, instead of allowing the
miserable sensation of failure and incompetency
to pursue him like a nightmare. He had
a desperate desire to inform all his friends as

soon as possible of his position. The desire
drove him up to ChalgTOve to see Cecil at
once, as it had already driven him to enter
upon immediate explanations sith Mrs. Bren-don.
He looked up at the Priory as he
passed, and wished that Magdalen were thereto
comfort and advise him. She was still in
London with Paiby Eoslyn ; a fortnight only
had passed away since he left her behind.
Lenore had taken Cissy to the sea-side, and
sirs. Chaloner and Kate had accompanied her.
Thus Max felt tolerably certain that if Cecil
were at home he would be alone and glad to
see him.

Preoccupied as Max was, he could not but
be struck by the painfully solitary air that
Cecil wore. He was sitting in an arm-chair'
by the fire, doing nothing, and looked pale
and tired. He received his brother languidly,
but brightened into interest as he heard Max s
story.

''I. am awfully sorry. It 's a hard blow

for you," he said, looking away into the
fire.

Pretty hard. One must expect hard
knocks in the world now and then."

I '11 tell you what ; you must come back
to me."

Eh ? What do you mean ^ "

Why, my business is going down. It
wants somebody with a good head to look
after it. I wish you would come and take
Jackson's place."

Jackson was head-clerk. It did not occur
to Cecil to offer his brother a partnership.

Thanks," said Max. '' I shall not take it
unless I see for myself that there is a need
for such a change. As long as Jackson does
well for you, don't turn him off to make room
for me."

"Jackson does not do well. Look into
things with me tomorrow, and you '11 see how
they arc going to rack. Come, it would be
jolly for us to work together again."

Would it ? I don't know that we always
found it so."

"Things are different now. You'll think
about it ? "

I will. Do you know of lodgings suitable
for a single man ? "

"What's that?"

"Mother and I never work well together,
and now that I can't pay my full share of
housekeeping expenses, we think it better to
part company."

She thinks it better, I suppose ? That 's
a shame. Don't trouble about lodgings yet.
Come and stay with me, here. Do ; I 'm
horribly lonely."

No ; I 'd rather be independent. Besides,
it 's a long way from the town."

But it will be very miserable for you."

I 'm never miserable."

You 're lucky, then," said Cecil, with a
great sigh.

Misery 's a mistake," remarked Max,

sententiously, straightening himself as he
prepared to go. "A popular error, which a
wise man should always combat. I 'm a wiseman,
of course. So I combat the error in my
own person."

I am glad you can take it so easily. I was
afraid you would be very much disappointed
and depressed."

Do I look like it ? "

No, you don t ; " and Cecil contemplated
the careless posture, the cool eye, and calm
mouth of the brother, so unlike himself, with
a sort of wonder. " But every one knows " —
and he hesitated — " that it is a bit of a downfall
for you."

He was not quick enough to notice that
Max winced under his plain-speaking as
though it hurt him.

** I have broken no bones," said the younger
man, pausing at the door; "my fall can't
have been very great." But in spite of his
light words, his features again wore the rigid

sternness that covered pain. He would not
acknowledge even to himself that Cecil had
been cold and unsympathising, but he felt
chilled as he walked homewards.

It seemed strange to him to find how easily
the change in his fortunes came about, and
how little it affected him. In a day or two he
had taken a couple of rooms for himself at the
house of a Mrs. Turner, the mother of one of
his night-school boys, and a great admirer of
Miss Lingered and Mr. St. Aidan.

He was pleased to find himself with people
who, as he soon discovered, were never tired of
praising Magdalen. It was a bond of union
between them. In a few days the works were
shut up and the men dismissed, the money
was paid and Max was free to do what he
pleased ; he had no debts, no encumbrances,
and a capital of two hundred and seventy
pounds to begin life with. He had swallowed
a qualm of pride and accepted his brother's
offer of a clerkship ; and there was, after all,

something restful in resuming his old position,
although it was no longer under a father
whom he respected, but an eminently 
brother, whom in old days he
had often scolded for punctuality and laziness.
Cecil was as unpunctual and as lazy as
ever, and Max soon saw that there would be
ample scope for his energies in the office.
With somewhat misplaced generosity, Cecil
offered to increase the salary usually given to
a clerk, in his brother's case ; a proposal which
greatly annoyed Max, who said bluntly that
there was no necessity to pay him more
than he was worth ; and if he were to be a
clerk he would take nothing but his proper
wages." So his salary was fixed at two
hundred a year : a sum out of which Max
meant to save half at least.

He was on his guard against depression of
spirits, which he thought would be unmanly ;
and it was easy to stifle sad thoughts as long
as the occupations and interests of his change

of condition were upon him ; but when,
towards Christmas - time, his affairs were
arranged and he himself was settled at Mrs.
Turner's, he could not help finding that his
spirits were less governable than he had
imagined, and that he had a cheerless, hopeless
feeling which he called himself weak for
indulging. His remedy for it was increase of
work ; and, what with Cecil's business, teaching
at Gay Street, amateur chemistry in the
deserted works by the river, where he wandered
sometimes at night like a ghost, and private
study in his own rooms, he left himself very
little leisure. Ursula was always glad to
come and see him ; but Mrs. Brendon did not
let her come very often. Magdalen still
stayed in London. Max was inclined to think
that everything was against him.

VOL. III. K

MAGDALEN S Woe.

Ruby Roslyn had struggled past the crisis
of her illness and convalescence. She was
terribly weak and wasted ; but the doctor
declared her to be out of danger. She made
a tractable patient in the earlier stages of her
recovery ; but as she grew stronger Magdalen
found her difficult to deal with. She was
wilful and passionate still, even in her frequent
moods of despair and sadness, and it was long
before she showed any sign of gratitude or
affection towards Magdalen for her tender
nursing and care. Mr. Roslyn had gone back
to Scarsfield as soon as the danger was pronounced
to be over ; and he had seen her fora

few minutes only at a time, as all excitement


was shunned in the hope of keeping her
braiD quiet. For some days after she regained
the full use of her senses she did not seem to
recognise Magdalen as the Miss Lingered whom
she had occasionally seen at a distance ; and
Magdalen did not hurry her by giving information
unasked. At last, one evening, she
said,

Do you belong to a Sisterhood ? or are
you a nurse ? "

*' Not by profession. My name is Magdalen
Lingered."

Lingered ? Miss Lingered of the Priory ? "

'' Yes. Call me Magdalen, if you like."

But I am not in Scarsfield ? "

''No ; you are in London."

Then why did you come ? Who brought
you ? Tell me ; I will know."

Magdalen thought that the least exciting
measure would be to tell her the truth — or
part of the truth.

Mrs. Jones found Mr. Brendon's address

in your pocket, and wrote to him. Thus it
became known in Scarsfield that you were
ill."

Who asked you to come ? Cecil ? Did
he come too ? " asked Ruby, panting.

No, dear, he did not come. He told his
brother, and his brother told me, and then Mr.
Brendon and I came down together. T sent
for your father afterwards."

Ruby's eyes lost something of their strained,
unsatisfied expression as she said,

So it was Max who brought you. I wonder
at that. He doesn't like me."

And then she turned her face to the pillow
and said no more.

Several days passed before she asked —

Was Cecil not sorry 1 was ill ? "

Her tone was so childish in its half-sullen
eagerness that Magdalen could not be startled
at the open mention of Cecil Brendon. She
had expected Ruby to show some shame — to
try and hide her love for a married man — but

Ruby had little notion of being ashamed.
Magdalen answered in a soft, slow voice,

'•' I believe that he was very sorry."

I knew he would betray me," murmured
the girl. " You know he promised — he vowed
he would not tell where I was gone. If
Mrs. Jones had not pried into my affairs,
none of you would have known even now."

"' But you would hardly have been so much
better as you are, if nobody had come to you,
dear."

Perhaps I should have died. And I wish
I wish I had ! " said Ruby, with a long,
heavy sigh.

Are you so ready to die ? Have you
thought of what comes after death, Ruby ? "

Sometimes. Judgment — heaven — and
hell. I don't think I should care to go to
heaven, and I don't believe hell would be
much worse than — than — what I suffer
now."

She burst into tears as she spoke. Magdalen

put her arm round her, and caressed her
tenderly. Presently she looked up and cried,

How good you are ! Don't you think me
very wicked ? Why don't you scold me ? "

"Don't you think I know what it is —
to feel as you do ? " whispered Magdalen,
laying her heart bare to the passionate girl.
To love where love is forbidden — to be sick
of the daylight — to wish to creep under the
ground and die — if this is what you feel,
I have felt it too. I have suffered like
you."

Then you understand. Why won't they
let me die ? " and Ruby raised her head
piteously. " There 's nothing in the world
left for me. It isn't only that he has broken
my heart, but he's darkened and poisoned
everything in the world. It is just as though
some one had drawn a black veil over my
life : I can't see anything bright in it any
longer. Don't you think he has as good as
murdered me, Magdalen ? I 'm only a body

without a soul — or with a dead soul in it.
Why may I not kill it out and out ? "

Because you are mistaken. Your soul is
not dead : it is only tortured and keenly alive
to pain, Ruby. You would escape nothing hy
killing your body ; your soul would suffer the
more."

It would be change — complete change of
place," said Pulpy, her eyes taking a hunted,
pathetic look of pain. " I might forget Cecil,
then. Tell me, Magdalen, if I died, should
I remember him, and love him just the
same ? "

I believe you would."

Then there is no hope, no rest, anywhere ?
I shall have to bear it always ? "

"When I felt as you do," said Magdalen,
her slow musical voice in striking; contrast to
Kuby's thin, gasping utterances, " I saw that
there was no escape from myself. Wherever
I might be, in this life or the next, I believed
that my soul — my heart — would be the same.

The I heard of a Saviour : One who saves us
from ourselves, Kuby ; One who could and
would change my very thoughts, my very
love, if my love were contrary to His laws.
I was in despair at myself ; my pride left me,
my strength was gone ; I could just breathe
out the words : ' If there is any strength,
any help, to be had from God, then let me
have it, or I am lost ! ' . . . And the help
came."

Ruby clung to her, sobbing at intervals, but
trying to stifle the sobs lest they should overpower
the sound of Magdalen's voice. Magdalen
went on :

God does not tell us to do what is impossible.
I gave up the man I loved ; and
without other strength than my own I could
never have done it. It was a great struggle.
I was ill afterwards as you have been.
. . My heart would have broken quite if
I had had nothing to trust in but his love.
The pain was cured, the emptiness filled up,

by God's wonderful love and grace. Without
that, I think — I am almost sure — I should
have died."

"Tell me about it," Ruby demanded,
breathlessly. "Did he marry somebody
else ? "

And in low, quiet tones, Magdalen told her
story.

It must have been hard. I couldn't have
done it. Did you love him . as I loved
C^ecil ? "

I loved him with my whole heart."

Do you love him now ? "

Magdalen paused for a moment before
answering in a quiet, steady voice, "No."

Do you think I shall change like that ?
I can't ! "

God helping you, you will. Or, at any
rate, your love will be changed so that it shall
not be sin."

Ask Him to help me," murmured Ruby.

I will, dear ; I wilL" And Magdalen did

not wait. With her arms still round the
wasted, quivering figure, she prayed aloud for
help, strength, and comfort. It was such a
prayer as Kuby had never heard before ; and
it was not for her alone, it was for Magdalen's
own self. She, too, knew something of the
same need and the same sorrow. A ray of
faith seemed to penetrate Ruby's dark soul as
she listened. She wanted help from something
or somebody outside herself ; she wanted
raising, purifying, strengthening. And here
was Magdalen with so deep and loving a faith
in things unseen that they seemed to start into
sudden life and reality as she spoke. Hitherto
Ruby had been a very heathen. A true
'awakening" to spiritual things had to take
place within her before she could be influenced
by them. Magdalen got new insight into the
meaning of certain much-used Bible words,
when she prayed for Ruby that a 7ieiu heart
might be given to her, a right spirit created
within her.

But the battle was not half won yet. Many
a time it seemed to Magdalen as though the
girl would go mad with sorrow and sickness of
heart. She had never controlled any of her
wishes or passions ; and this passion of love
for Cecil Brendon had taken such hold upon
her that Magdalen almost despaired of leading
her to anything higher and purer. She had
been taught neither morality nor religion ; and
Maoxlalen was thankful that Cecil's weakness
(rather than any force of right principle) had
kept him from leading the girl further astray ;
for, as she acknowledged without shame, if
Cecil had asked her to fly with him from
Scarsfield, instead of letting her go alone, she
could not have resisted. At first she even
refused to see that there was anything wrong
in her devotion to him ; she avowed her love
boldly, defiantly; but in growing stronger
she became more reserved, and though she
listened attentively to all that Magdalen had
to say, she ceased to speak passionately, and

lapsed into a state of languid indifference to
everything and everybody.

The doctors soon began to talk of sending
her abroad or to the sea-side, and here a new
difficulty occurred. She fell into an agony of
dread at the thought of parting from Magdalen.
She entreated Magdalen not to leave
her — she seemed to cling to her as a sort of
anchor of hope and salvation — and at last
Magdalen was obliged to pacify her by promising
that she would go with her to
Bournemouth, or some place on the south
coast, and stay with her until she could bear
to return to Scarsfield or to be left alone.

Neither Magdalen nor Kuby knew that Mrs.
Cecil Brendon and her little girl had established
themselves in lodgings at Bournemouth for
the winter. Lenore had found Broughton far
too cold for Cissy, and had therefore travelled
south in search of warmth and sunshine.
Quite unsuspicious of any possibility of meeting
the Brendons, therefore, Maoxlalen took

her charge with her to the pleasant shade of
the pine-woods and the salt breath of the sea,
and hoped that these soothing and bracing
influences would bring; back strength to the
girl's feeble limbs and colour and fulness to
the wasted cheeks.

At first Ruby took little interest in anything.
The only thing that attracted her
notice, after she had been there for a week or
two, was, to Magdalen's perplexity, the work
of a basket-maker, who occupied a room in a
poor but respectable little fancy-shop nor far
from their lodgings. Several baskets were
exhibited in the shop window, and when Ruby
saw them for the first time she stopped short,
flushed, and grew pale again, then insisted
upon going into the little shop and buying
more than one specimen of the basket-maker's
work. When they came out into the street
again, Ruby said, tremulously,

'' I once knew somebody who could make
those rush-baskets."

And that was all.

But lie was restlessly eager to go that way
again, and one day she said that she wanted a
basket of a certain shape, and that she must
see the basket-maker himself about it — she had
heard that he lived in the house above the
shop — would Magdalen go with her ? And
Magdalen wonderingly agreed.

She was not surprised, however, when the
girl begged her to "do all the talking." Since
her illness, Ruby had grown nervous and
silent : she would scarcely ask a question for
herself of a stranger, and Magdalen was accustomed
to transact all business for her as if she
had been a child. She asked, therefore, to seethe
maker of the baskets ; and was shown into
a little back-room, where she found a delicate-looking
man T^ith a light-brown beard busily
eno'ao-ed in his weaver's work. Magdalen
entered into conversation sith him, gave her
directions, and finally asked his name.

Lloyd, ma'am."

Ruby gave a Yitth <ij.\:<i). Magdalen looked
round at her in .surprise : the girl's face was
crimson, and tears were in her eyes. She
thought it better to borne ^i^xux at one, and
therefore said good-live to ijje basket-maker,
who civilly hut unernotioually conducted them
to t]je door.

iiuljy said not a \s'ord until they reached
home, when, to Magdalen's utter amaze, she
flung herself down on a sofa and began to sob
hysterically

^= What is it, Kuby ?"

He must have known me," said Ruby,
'rand he would not so much as look at rne !
AVe used to lee such friends ! Oh, it is hard!
lie must Ijave heard stories against me from
vScarsfield, or else — or else — he wouldn't have
never ever glanced at me ! '"'

Magdalen sat down beside her and took her
hand.

'•'Are you speaking of the basket-maker,
KubyV

Yes : Jim Lloyd. Don't sou remember him ?
You used to go to see him when he ^\^as ill
He was in Mr. Brendon's office. AVe were old
friends." And then she began to sob once more.

''My dear child," said Magdalen, very
gently, " did you not see that the man of
whom you speak is hinc f "

Blind ! " The word seemed to take away
Kuby's breath. '' Blind I He can't see me ? ''
she whispered. " How do you know ? "

'' The woman in the shop told me. You did
not hear her, I suppose. And if you had
looked at his eyes you would have seen for
yourself; there is nothing unpleasant about
them, but there is no sight in them."

'' Oh, poor Jim ! "

Magdalen was glad to hear a word of pity
for another from her mouth.

Tell me about him," she said, soothingly.

So Ruby told the story of her early love
affair with Jim, and of its cessation when she
became attached to Cecil Br end on. But of

what followed — of James Lloyd's jealousy, and
the reason for his leaving Scarsfield — she did
not speak.

Magdalen listened, and wondered whether
there was any reason why Ruby should not
renew her old acquaintanceship with James
Lloyd. She did not know why, but she had a
slight feeling against it. Ruby was so like u
fire-brand, so dangerous to others, so difficult
to hold, that Magdalen shrank a little from
letting her see her former lover. But she had
no authority over Ruby, and, after all, she
could not but be pleased to see her taking a
healthy and natural interest in anything after
her long absorption in herself and her own
affairs.

On the following day, therefore, she went
with the girl to the little shop, and asked to
speak once more to the basket-maker. He
was sitting, as usual, in the little dark room
behind the shop, and thither the visitors were
conducted.

VOL. III. L

Mao-chalet looked at him with interest. She

o

noticed that his features were finely cut, and
that the expression of his face was melancholy.
His voice had already struck her ; it possessed
a o-ood deal of refinement, and was well modulated.
Certainly as different from Ruby
Roslyn as light from darkness, it was hard to
understand how he had come to ^^ his affections
upon her.

I did not at first recognise you, Mr.
Lloyd," said Magdalen, speaking first, while
the basket-maker put down his work and
listened attentively to her voice. "Do you
not remember ]\Iiss Lingered of the Priory,
ScarsfieldV'

The young man — he was not more than
five-and-twenty, though his beard and his
melancholy air gave him the appearance of
greater age — suddenly flushed scarlet and
drew back.

'miss Lingered! I thought that I knew
the voice," he said. Then a look of extreme

agitation came into his face. " I — I hope —
all 's well at Scarsfield," he said, anxiously.

*' I have a lady nth me who can tell you
Scarsfield news better than I can," said
Magdalen, cheerfully. "You know her, I
think."

She drew Ruby forward, and signed to her
to speak. But Ruby did not seem able to say
very much. '' Jim ! " she said, softly ; and
then she laid her hand on his.

The young man changed colour once more ;
this time he turned pale. " It can't be ! " he
exclaimed, breathlessly. " Surely it can't be
Eiihy ! Oh, my God, why can't I see who
it is that's peaks to me in he?^ voice ? '^

The anguish of his tone took the hearers by
surprise. Ruby burst into tears. "It's me,
Jim, and no one else," she said, giving him
both her hands, and allowing herself to be
drawn closer and closer, for it seemed as if Jim
would never let her go. " I Ve been ill, and
Miss Langford came with me to the sea-side.

But, oil, Jim, Jim, how did you come here 1
And can't you see me, Jim, at all? "

*'No, Kuby, my eyesight's gone for ever."

"You must have suffered a great deal, Jim."
Then, much to Magdalen's discomfiture, she
went on rapidly, " I 've suffered too. I can't
tell you what I 've gone through, Jim, or what
a wretch I've been. Perhaps I'll tell you
some day. If it hadn't been for Miss Lingered,
I believe I should be dead now. You would
hardly know me for the same girl, I 'm so
altered."

'rand I am altered too," said Jim, very
sadly.

*' I am so glad you are here," Kuby went on.
I want to have a long talk with you, Jim.
Does your mother know that you are
here ? "

No. I think nobody knows. Nobody at
Scarsfield, I mean. I cut myself adrift from
the old life there, and they think that my
boat 's gone down. So it has."

"Not gone down, Mr. Lloyd' said Magdalen,
gently. "A little battered by the
storms, perhaps, but seaworthy as ever."

He listened to her with bated breath, like

one who hears a strain of distant music, and a

faint smile stole over his face. '' It 's the first

time that I 've heard a word of hope for many

a long day," he said, " if I could only think

that it was for me ! But you don't know

me, ma'am, and you don't know what I have

done. Stand away from me, Ruby ; yes, my

darling, stand away, for you don't know what

I am. It's not my doing that I can't call

myself a murderer ; a murderer I was in heart

and soul that night when I lay in wait on

the Quay for Cecil Brendon. It was I that

nearly killed him, because he had been false to

you ; and I am not going to make a secret of

it any longer. I hid myself down here, blind

and helpless, thinking that I was safe, never

to be seen again by any who used to know

me at Scarsfiel<l ; but you are both here, and

it is the finger of God that has tracked me
out. As far as 1 can I '11 make amends ; I '11
be a coward no longer, and perhaps you can
held me, as I know yoti will, ma'am, to
tell the truth to Mr. Cecil Brendon, and ask
his pardon for the harm I did him in days
gone by."

DISTRUST.

Lenoee took Cissy to Broughton for a short
time, and then to Bournemouth, little dreaming
that her old rival, Ruby Roslyn, was
staying there. In her absence, Cecil's position
was anything but enviable. Although the
scandal respecting his behaviour to Miss
Roslyn had been partially silenced by the
reports given by her father and by Max
Brendon of Ruby's state, he was still under a
cloud of suspicion, and it was agreed on all
hands that his wife's absence showed that
there was " something wrong."

Lenore wrote to him from time to time.
She told him how Cissy was, and what the

weather was like ; she put '•' Dear Cecil " at



the beginning, and 'your affectionate wife"
at the end of her letters. Cecil read and
re-read them a hundred times, and each time
they seemed to chill him to the backbone.
One evening he went to his desk and took out
of a secret drawer some half-dozen notes
written to him by Lenore when he had been
away from her once or twice for a few days.
They were overflowing with mirth and tenderness
— almost childish in their exuberant
fondness. Cecil glanced at them remorsefully.
"My love — my own darling — my dearest
Cecil," he was called in them. AVhat a contrast
to the controlled frigidity of Lenore's
last letter to her husband ! He could hardly
understand the change.

At last he wrote her a wistful little note,
asking when she thought of coming home
again. Her answer was the greatest blow that
his belief in himself had yet sustained. Lenore
thanked him for his letter, and said she
had thought over it, but had come to the

conclusion that she had better not come back
at all. '' We do not love one another," she
wrote; "and we do not agree. Let us separate
before we ruin our own or each other's
lives. At present I shall remain in lodgings
at Bournemouth ; but I should rather like
to go abroad with Cissy, if you have no
objection."

No objection ! Cecil had a thousand objections
! He dashed the letter down in a furious
passion at first ; but passion was succeeded by
dismay and dejection. Could it be true that
Lenore did not love him ? He knew that she
was angry ; anger was compatible with love,
and could be borne ; but how could he meet
this coldness ? It was impossible to answer
her letter in writing ; he would go to Bournemouth
and see what could be done by word of
mouth. He packed his portmanteau and set
ois at once, leaving word with Max whither he
had gone.

He arrived at Bournemouth about four in

the afternoon, and went at once to the lionel
Then in the dusk he proceeded to the terrace
where Lenore was lodg-moj. The rain was
falling steadily, and the February wind blew
keenly in his face. The brilliancy of the
shops attracted Cecil's attention more than
once ; their contents suggested to him the
advisability of buying a toy for Cissy on
his way. Before he reached Cliff Terrace, he
had stuffed his pockets full of playthings and
sweets.

Number Five, Cliff Terrace. He reached
the house, and then found that his courage
failed him. He had not imagined, in his preoccupation,
how hard it would be to enter
Lenore's presence composedly. He felt that
he must have a little time for preparation
first.

He waited long, but no courage came. He
was half inclined to go away and return next
morning, but chance decided against that
inclination. A curtain was drawn ]pack in an

upper room. Lenore, looking out, saw a dark
figure near a lamp-post. A tardy lamp-lighter
passed at that moment and lighted the lamp,
which threw a sudden yellow glow over the
face of the loiterer. Lenore saw that it washer
husband standing in the rain, with his
face turned towards her window. A sudden
impulse sent her downstairs to the front door :
she opened it, and stood upon the step*'
Cecil ! " she called to him. " Cecil, come in."

Cecil obeyed — reluctantly at first ; hastily
as soon as it occurred to him that her heart
had softened at his appearance. He looked at
her expectantly as he came up the steps ; her
hands had been involuntarily outstretched,
but as he came closer they sank to her side
and stayed there. She wore a dress of that
faint blue colour which Cecil always associated
with Lenore ; her face had l)een pale, but it
Hushed as he drew near.

"I thought that you would catch cold
standing out in the rain," she explained, drawing

back a little as lie approached with the
eager look on his face that made her fear for
the moment that he meant to catch her in his
arms and stifle reproaches and explanations
alike in kisses. She could almost have forgiven
him, if he had. But a sense of shame
held him in check ; and the opportunity was
lost.

*' Did you get my letter ? " she said, quickly.

'' Yes, I came to answer it."

She retreated into the hall, holding the door
wide.

Come in," she said, coldly enough ; but
Cecil accepted the invitation.

She showed him into a bright - 
where a servant was laying a
white cloth on the table. '^ Grannie will be
down directly," she said, and left him alone.

Cecil turned towards the fire, and wondered
what he ought to do. Their meeting had been
most uncover-like ; yet he felt more like her
lover than he had done since the early days of

their carnage. Old Mrs. Clialoner disturbed
some bitter reflections upon the instability of
woman's love when she entered.

I am very glad to see you, Cecil ; very
glad," she said, impressively. " I don't know
what to do with Lenore, she is so dull and
silent. I think she must be missing you."

Cecil felt a sort of relief in concluding from
Mrs. Chaloner's unembarrassed tone that she
knew nothing of Lenore's intentions. Her
ignorance seemed to make them less formidable.
Before he could answer Lenore came in again,
and took a seat at the other side of the room.

You will be cold there, dear ; come nearer
the fire," said Mrs. Chaloner.

No, thanks. Grannie ; I am warm enough,"
and Lenore took up her work, an elaborate
piece of point-lace that seemed to require all
her eyesight.

Isn't it very cold out of doors ? I hope,
Cecil, you won't mind our having no regular
dinner. This is a sort of dinner-tea that we

generally have. If we had known you were
coming, we would have prepared."

Don't mind me," said Cecil. " I don't
know whether I am going to stay : at least,
I came over to see Lenore about something—
and she "

He stopped short, confusedly. She did not
look up, but said quietly, "You had better
stay," and went on with her work.

Of course you will stay," said Mrs.
Chaloner, and then she spoke to the servant,
and set something to rights on the table,
expecting husband and wife to entertain each
other. But both sat perfectly still. Lenore
never lifted her eyes : Cecil looked into the
tire without speaking. Presently, when Mrs.
Chaloner and the maid had both left the room,
Cecil said, with evident difficulty,

Do you wish me to go or to stay ? "

As you please."

Will you give me a few minutes' private
c< )n sensation now or afterwards ? "

"Afterwards. The tea is coming: in now."
And as she uttered these indifferent words
Lenore rose and advanced to the tea-tray,
which the servant at this moment brought in.

o

Kate entered, round-eyed and rosy ; Mrs.
Chaloner followed, and they sat down to the
table. Cecil had not much appetite, nor had
Lenore, It they managed to maintain a
studied composure throughout the uncomfortable
meal. Cecil talked to Mrs. Cholera
little ; Lenore poured out the tea, toyed
with some bread and butter, and leaned
silently back in her chair. A child's cry fi'om
another room caused Cecil to lose the thread
of what he was saying, and Lenore to
exclaim —

Oh, I must go to Baby."

She hurried from the room as though she
were glad to get away, and Cecil pursued her
with his eyes, and longed to follow.

How is Cissy ? " he asked.

I think that she is a little stronger, poor

darling!" was Mrs. Clialoner's reply. 'she
does not seem able to walk at all yet : she is
wonderfully patient and good for such a mite
of a thing. The doctor hopes that she may
beojin to walk again in a week or two."

Cecil wondered if Lenore would bring her
lack, but she did not return until tea was
over, and then asked Kate to go and play with
Baby until nurse was ready to attend to her.

*' May I not see her ? " asked Cecil, in a low
voice.

Mrs. Chaloner and Kate were conferring
apart : Lenore alone heard the request. She
hesitated, a bright colour tinting her cheeks.

I see. You don't want me to go to her,"
said Cecil, "but you might remember that
I am her father. I am far enough from doing
her any harm now."

I did not mean that," said Lenore. " I
hesitated because I was not sure if you knew
what to expect. To me the sight of a crippled
child was always very painful."

x\ncl don't you think it will be painful tome
? " he exclaimed, huskily.

She made no immediate answer, but said
after a pause,

Come, then, if you want to see her. I do
not think she will know you, but she may."

He followed her out of the room. She
opened a door on the other side of the passage,
and admitted him into the nursery. Balmy
was sitting on a sort of couch which had 1 )been
constructed for her under the doctor's supervision.
A board was fixed across it, and on
the board lay her toys and picture-books. A
month of suffering and confinement had
robbed the child of her bloom and plumpness.
It was a wan little face that was upturned
when Lenore entered ; a thin, white face, in
which the bright eyes looked too large, and
bore an odd fleeting resemblance to Cecil's
own. The nurse went out as they came in,
and the little girl stretched out her arms with
a quick cry of —

VOL. III. M

Mamma ! mamma ! "

"Darling, this is papa," said Lenore,
steadily, as she bent and kissed the topmost
cm^l of bright hair. " Do you remember
papa f

Cissy looked doubtful as to whether she
should cry or laugh ; but finally her face
broke into a charming infantine smile, and
she kissed her hand two or three times with
an odd form of salutation peculiarly her own :
■" How de do ? Good morning."

She 's not afraid of me now, at any rate*'
said Cecil, rather Bitterly ; and then he pulled
out the toys and sweets from his pockets, and
Cissy pulled a solemn face of wonder, and said
venice! nice I"

Kiss me, Cissy ! " said her father, kneeling
on one knee, so as to bring his face on a level
with hers, and after a little coquettish
resistance Cissy clutched at his moustache
with one hand, and kissed his right ear. Her
shyness being vanquished she began to talk.

and Cecil was struck l3y the progress she had
made in the art of conversation.

Cissy not walk now. Cissy not get down.
Foot hurt Cissy. Bow-wow-wow-wow ! Pitty
dolly, nice dolly. Dolly go for walk ; Cissy
too ill to walk. Poor Cissy ! "

And she o-ave a o^reat sigh, almost comical
in its childish self-pity. But it was also so
pathetic that Cecil could not bear to hear it.
He put his head down on the little table,
completely overcome, and hot tears trickled
between the fingers that shaded his face.
Cissy peeped to see whether he was in play or
earnest, but, on finding that he was really
crying, tugged at his hands, called " Mamma !
mamma ! " and began to cry too. Lenore was
unmoved ; she had expected Cecil to be upset
by the sight of his child, and his tears had
no effect upon her. She touched his arm
lightly and said,

Come away. I will leave her with nurse.
She does not suffer much pain now." The

last words were Iw way of comfort ; she could
afford to lee gentle in manner, for she was
prepared to be very resolute in deed. Cecil
rose and walked away a few steps, turning his
back upon the child. Lenore called the
nurse from the next room and quieted the cry
by the exhibition of a new toy, and as soon as
Cissy was again happily employed, she said to
her husband,

I can give you a few minutes now, if you
want to speak to me, in the sitting-room.
Grannie and Kate are coming here."

Cecil followed her into the room where they
had dined. The servant was taking away the
things. Tenore said a word to Grannie, who
hastened the girl, and went out with her when
she had finished. Lenore closed the door, and
walked to the fire-place, by which she stood.
leaning against the mantelpiece. Cecil stood
a few feet away from her on the hearthrug,
scarcely composed enough to begin the
conversation.

You wanted to speak to me," Lenore said
after a painful pause.

Yes, about your letter. Your cruel letter."

It was not cruel at all. It contained
certain facts which you know as well as I do."

It contained few statements of fact at all.
It expressed your intentions merely." Cecil
had recovered himself by this time, and was
vexed at the emotion he had displayed.

You say that you want to leave me."

"Yes."

You can't mean it, Lenore. It is impossible."


How impossible ? "

"Impracticable, perhaps I ought to say.
Think what people would say. What slanders
we should have to pass through."

If we fear slander, wee can always tell the
truth," said Lenore, a pale, wintry smile
brightening her face for a moment, like a ray
of sunshine on a snowy day.

You have no cause to fear either slander

or truth," said Cecil, hanging his head ; " Ijut
I — perhaps I may fear both. Have you not
punished me enough ? "

She shook her head hopelessly.

There is no question of punishment," she
said. '' We seem to have drifted away from
each other ; that is all. A wife cannot punish
her husband for not loving her."

But I do love you ! " he cried out, passionately.


Oh, no," she said, with a dreary little
smile. " You told me that you ' had striven
to be true to me.' That was not what I
wanted."

I did not mean it in that way, Lenore.
I never meant to hurt you."

Never meant ! That is what you always
say," she answered, bitterly. " You never
mean to do wrong ; the fault is that you never
mean — you never really try — to do right."

"You are epigrammatic," he said, with
sudden coldness.

He drew back a step or two, and watched
her sith puzzled, reproachful eyes as she spoke.

You are weak — you are selfish," she went
on, with a ring of pain and passion in her
tones that showed her to be far less indifferent
than she strove to appear. " You care for
nothing but your own pleasure ; you care
for nothing else. You have never once sacrificed
your own impulses, your own instincts,
for wdiat was right. As Iouq; as it was
pleasant to you to think you loved me, you
were gentle and loving ; when you tired of me,
you found consolation elsewhere. You can do
very well without me ; you have made me see
that. Don't say you love me ; I cannot
believe you now."

If I am so contemptible in your eyes," he
said, slowly, " perhaps it is better that we
should part."

He dropped into a chair, and covered his
face with his hands. She watched him, and
her bosom began to heave, her lips to quiver.

She had relieved herself now of the bitterness
of her heart, and something perilously soft
stirred within her — something very like the
pity that is said to be akin to love. But she
steeled herself against relenting, and, when he
looked up again with a tremulous sigh, her lips
were as calm as though they had been carved
in stone. Her calmness drove him to despair.

I must go," he said, starting up suddenly.
I can't bear this any longer."

He looked at her steadfastly ; conscious that
he had no more power to alter her resolution
than to soften a piece of granite. The soft
outlines of her face, the tender grace of her
posture, were in striking contrast to the cold
expression of her face, the fixity of her averted
eyes. Cecil felt a wild desire to arouse her,
to bring some colour and warmth into that
cold, delicate face. He seized her listless
hand, and drew her suddenly into his embrace.
'tenore," he said, "you know — you Jiuoiv
that I love you ! "

She was passive ; she neither returned nor
shrank from the crisp of his arms, but he felt
that she was trembling from head to foot.
For one moment her head rested on his
shoulder ; for one moment he could not but
think that she loved him after all.

The door-handle rattled ; the door opened
slowly. Lenore sprang away from her husband
like a guilty creature, covered with hot
blushes ; Cecil could have cursed the intruder
in his heart.

It was nurse carrying Cissy in her nightgown
to receive a o-ood-nio-ht kiss. Lenore
took the child in her arms and kept the nurse
in the room. Cecil stayed on till he was tired,
but she said not another word to him that all
the household mio'ht not hear.

Forgiveness.

Cecil went back to Scarsfielcl next day, but it
was not possible for him to remain there contentedly.
In a few days he was lack again,
and although Lenore's demeanour was still
unchanged, he made up his mind that he could
not leave her yet ; he would stay in Bournemouth
until Cissy was stronger, and, if his
wife were implacable, he would then make
some definite arrangement for her to remain
away from him.

It was hardly possible, however, for him to
stay in Bournemouth without discovering the
fact of Ruby's presence. Lenore had never
met her, because she went out so little, and

because her rooms were in a different part of


the town from that which Magdalen had
chosen ; but Cecil's only occupation was to
take long walks, and in the course of one of
these walks he came one day full upon Miss
Lingered and Miss Eul^y Eoslyn. He had
never been more startled in his life. She was
dressed in black ; her face was thin and white,
her eyes were haggard and hollow. She was
a wreck of her former self. To Cecil she
looked like one newly risen from the dead.
Involuntarily he half stopped ; his lips parted
as if to speak ; but she passed him rapidly,
silently, like a ghost. It had not needed the
touch of Magdalen's hand to impel her forward
; she had not wanted to pause. The
sio'ht of Cecil Brendon now filled her with
remorse and shame.

He felt that he was not surprised when he
heard that evening that Miss Lingered was
inquiring for him at his hotel. It would be
easy to find out from the local newspaper
where he was staying, and Cecil fancied that

he knew her errand. Probably she had ,come
to ask him to leave Bournemouth — on Kuby's
account. He set his teeth and said to himself
doggedly that he could not do it. Nothing
would induce him to leave Lenore. His wife's
lodgings were close to the hotel at which he
was staying, and surely his duty was to remain
at her side. He would not go.

He was standing in the middle of his little
private sitting-room when Miss Lingered came
in, and she was instantly struck by the look
of trouble upon his face. He bowed as she
entered, and gave her a chair ; his manner
was very different from what it had been in
the old days when she had called upon Mrs.
Brendon and thought him so coldly supercilious.
The brooding care upon his brow left
no room for affectation or self-consciousness.
Its very gravity gave Magdalen
hope.

I have come on a strange errand," she
said, without preamble of any kind. " There

is one who has wronged you and wishes to ask
your forgiveness."

I have nothing to forgive," said Cecil, in
surprise.

Oh, do not say so. Do not mistake me,"
responded Magdalen ; " listen to my story
before you speak again. Before your marriage
you were ill, were you not ? You were
attacked upon the Quay and nearly murdered.
It was generally thought that a tramp had
attacked you ; lout this was not the case. I
have come to tell you who it was."

It is needless, Miss Lingered," said Cecil,
simply. " I have known this story all
along."

Known ? "

Yes. Shall I give you the name of my
assailant? It was James Lloyd."

Why have you kept silence, then ? "

Cecil paused for a moment, looking down.
I suppose that you know the circumstances,"
he said at last. " I had no very good motive

for holding my tongue, I fear ; I merely
Avantecl to keep the story quiet, knowing that
it would tell against me as well as against poor
Lloyd. I did not think of him very much ; I
am sorry for him now."

"Then, Mr. Brendon, you will be the more
ready to listen to my plea for him."

You need not plead for him," said Cecil
almost roughly. " I can guess his story. He
was in the right."

I cannot think that," said Magdalen, whose
eyes filled with tears of sympathy, as she
began to perceive the bm^len that he was
carrying ; " but I can see that he was almost
mad with grief and pain, and I know that he
has suffered bitterly for his violence. But for
God's mercy he might have been a murderer.
Mr. Brendon, he wishes to place himself in
your hands. If you desire to punish him, he
says that he will submit to anything that you
may devise or desire. He is in this town,
and earnestly entreats you to believe that he

sincerely repents of his murderous attack upon
your life."

"In this town?" said Cecil, wonderingly.
What is he doing; here ? " A thought of
Ruby had crossed his mind.

"He has lived here for the last two years.
He gets his living ley making baskets. He is
blind. '^

Poor fellow ! "

Can you forgive him, Mr. Brendon ? "

Cecil looked up. " I am inclined to ask him
to forgive me," he said, with a little smile that
touched Magdalen more than a confession of
utter misery could have done — it was so very
hopeless ; " for his action sprang from genuine
love to her; and I had proved myself — the
cur that you know me to be." Then he
turned sharply away from her, and stood
looking into the fire.

Nay," said Magdalen, in the low, tranquil
tones that Max always found so sweet ; " all
that I knows you to be is a generous-hearted

mail; who has made errors and repented of
them, and who will be stronger and braver
all his life because of his repentance." Still
he did not look round, and, fearing lest she
should have said too much, she added, *' Will
you see James Lloyd for yourself, and assure
him of your forgiveness ? It would be an
unspeakable comfort to him."

'•' If he wishes it, I will," said Cecil, turning
round ; " but it seems absurd for any one to
ask my forgiveness. I feel as if I ought to
apologise for living."

The tone was sadly humorous, and Magdalen
read a mournful story in the sound of the last
few words. She thought it best to keep to her
point.

He is here — downstairs : I brought him
with me. He is waiting in another room.
AVill you go to him ? "

Cecil assented, and she told him where to
find his visitor, but she would not accompany
him to the room. The meeting would be

painful on both sides, and it was better that it
should pass unwitnessed.

In a few minutes, Cecil came back to her
with a greatly moved and softened expression
upon his face.

"Thank you, Miss Lingered," he said. ''I
am very glad that you brought him, and I am
sorry — deeply sorry — that he should have
suffered as he has done. Do you think
there is anything that I could do for him
now {

I think not. He earns his o^vn livelihood
with fair ease. If he were in want, I believe
that he would let me know — now."

I should be only too glad if he would look
on me as a friend, ready to help him whenever
he requires help."

Thank you, Mr. Brendon. I thank you in
his name. And now I must go."

Let me see you home."

No, thank you : James Lloyd is my
escort. Although he is blind, he knows this

VOL. HI. N

way perfectly. I would rather not take you
out."

'^ Tell me one thing," said Cecil, not daring
to lift his eyes to her face ; " how is — shes

There was a perceptible pause before
Magdalen replied.

You mean Miss Eoslyn ? "

Yes. I saw her in the street with you.
1 did not know that she owns here." •

She has been very ill. She is very weak :
.she has had brain-fever, and does not gain
strength as she ought to do. Mr. Brendon, it
is a hard thing, perhaps, to ask of you ; but if
any other place would suit you as well "

What can I do ? " said Cecil, turning away.
My little girl is ill : my wife is with her, and
is not likely to leave the town. I have no
influence with her now. Tf I asked her to go
she would not attend to me — it would be a
reason for her to stay."

He had never said as much to any other
living: soul : Ijut Magdalen had a wonderful

power of winning confidence. She murmured
a few words of sorrow and surprise.

"It is what I deserve, perhaps, for my folly
and selfishness," said Cecil. " But in one thing-she
is mistaken. I loved her all the time.
There never was a moment when I did not love
her — though she will not believe it now."

The words sent Maoxlalen home in a thoughtful
mood. She had never before realised how
much harm had been done ley Ruby's want of
self-control and Cecil's weakness ; she saw now
that sorrow and disunion had arisen which she
had never contemplated, and that husband and
wife, loving each other tenderly, were yet on
the verge of a breach which might never in
this life be repaired.

She took an opportunity of gently telling
Ruby something of what had happened.
Surely, she thought, it was right that the girl
should know the misery that had been caused
by her mad escapade. But Ruby turned her
face away and said nothing.

It seemed as if Cecil's presence in Bournemouth
were after all of no importance to poor
Ruby. She had taken cold in one of the chilly
days of early spring, and was entirely confined
to the house. James Lloyd came to see her
daily, and his visits constituted her only
interest in life. He sat beside her couch and
wove his baskets ; sometimes the two exchanged
a few quiet words ; but very often
they sat in silence, never speaking at all.
Magdalen used to look at them with a great
pity in her heart. Two ruined, wasted lives —
ruined and wasted more by their own passion
and folly than even b}' the weakness of the
man who mourned the loss of his wife's love
as punishment for his errors. Sometimes in
her walks Magdalen met Cecil Brendon and
when she noted the weary, sorrowful look
upon his face, she wondered which ought to
be pitied more, the silent couple whom she
had left behind, or the man to whom they
owed their unhappiness.

As spring advanced Magdalen heard that
little Cissy was much stronger. So much she
learned from Cecil, with whom she was now
on very friendly terms.

And you are all going home, I hope ? " she
asked.

He shook his head. " / am going home,"
he said, with mournful emphasis. '' My wife
is going abroad."

For how long ? "

For ever, I believe," he answered gloomily.
We have agreed to separate."

And this also Magdalen told to Ruby.

The spring brought no improvement in
Kuby's health. She did not go out ; she did
not often leave her room ; she had scarcely
the strength to turn herself in bed, or to lift
her wasted hand. There was no use in
disguising the fact ; Magdalen knew, as all
about her knew, that deep decline had set in,
and that Euljy's days were numbered. Perhaps,
to her stormy, passionate heart, death

was the greatest blessing that could befall
her.

One night, after that communication,
i\f magdalen heard her weeping quietly to herself,
and came to her side to comfort her. Kuby
clung to her fondly, but did not speak for
some time. At last she said,

I have l)een thinking — I don't see any
other way — I must speak to Lenore myself."

Dear Kuby ! "

"I must tell her the truth — how little he
was to blame. It was all my fault. And I
can't bear to think that they are separated all
through me ; it isn't right, is it, Magdalen 1 "

Magdalen scarcely knew what to answer.

Will you send for her tomorrow ? And
for Cecil too — but keep them away from each
other till I have seen her. They will be going
soon — and I should like to say good-bye."

The task set before Magdalen was one of considerable
magnitude. Would Lenore come ?
It was evident that she was a woman of no

ordinary strength of will, of great pride and
determination, and Magdalen knew that it
would be a trial to her to comply with Kuby's
request. But she did her best. Even as she
had set out to plead with Cecil that he would
see James Lloyd, the man who had nearly
murdered him, so now she went to plead with
Lenore for the woman who had killed her life's
happiness. And the latter task was the more
difficult of the two.

She saw Mrs. Cecil Brendon, and told her
errand. Lenore listened with polite, cold
surprise. She felt a strong repugnance to the
proposed visit. AMiat could Kuby have to say
to her ? Would she unfold some terrible story
of Cecil's unfaithfulness — something worse,
perhaps, than Lenore had yet imagined to
herself — and crave pardon of the injured wife ?
Lenore felt as if she did not want to hear
Ruby's confession. " Why should I go ? " she
said, trying to speak calmly, but painfully'
conscious of a surgeons: tumult of her inmost

soul. " I am sorry that she is ilL I will send
her all kind messages, but I would rather not
see her."

I think that it is your duty to see her,"
said Magdalen. " She is very unhappy : it
would be cruel to refuse her now"'

Lenore had a short, sharp struggle with
herself, then yielded.

Well, if it is my duty," she said, with a
sigh, " if it is my duty, I will go."

Cecil made no difficulty. He was evidently
startled by the request, but, as he said, he put
himself into Miss Lingered's hands. He would
do what she thought right.

So, at four o'clock that afternoon, Lenore
was ushered into the pleasant little sitting-room,
where Kuby was lying on a sofa near
the fire. Magdalen was present, but after
staying for a very few moments she withdrew
into the adjoining room, where Ruby slept,
and left the two women alone.

Lenore was painfully amazed at the change

iu Kuby's appearance. She was the shadow
of her former self, and, although her cheeks
were flushed, and her large eyes bright with
fever, the emaciation of her face was not to be
disguised. She wore a soft, loose garment of
dark-red silk, and a great fur rug was thrown
over her feet. Lenore could not but notice
her hands : they were so white and slender
that the ]blue ^ sins stood out on them with
alarming distinctness, and the fingers looked
unnaturally long and thin. Lenore had never
admired Ruby Roslyn, but she was compelled
to admit that, with features wasted and
refined with suffering, her old rival had gained
a marvellous beauty.

But the cold and critical mood in which she
entered the room was swept away by a wave
of diviner pity. Lenore was not hardhearted
; and as she seated herself beside the
couch she could not be insensible to the
softening influences of the scene. Ruby
looked at her so wistfully that it was Lenore

who — against all her previous resolves and
imaginings — spoke first.

You wanted to see me. AVhat can I do
for you ? " she said.

Yes," said Kuby, with faltering breath, '' I
asked you to come. I thought that you would
not refuse. It is to say good-bye, you know."

Lenore looked at her questioningly, and
Ruby went on, with the faintest possible
flicker of a smile : " It is I that am going
away, I mean. Don't you know I am dying ? "

Lenore was inexpressibly shocked. She had
never thought of death as a termination to
Ruby's illness. " No, oh, no," she said :
don't say so. It can't be."

I should not have asked you to come if
I had not known that I could not get better,"
said Ruby, watching her with the same
wistful look in her gleaming eyes. " It was
that which gave me courage, Lenore — may I
call you so ? just for a little time — as I am so
near death. Perhaps you will believe what I

say. I have something to tell you ; will
you promise me to remember that I could
not tell a lie — now — with death so very
near ? "

I promise," said Lenore, in a low voice.
She was intensely sincere, and it was all that
she could honestly say.

I want to tell you this, then," Ruin' went
on, in rather firmer tones; "I want you to
know that ever since the time when my engagement
to Cecil Brendon was broken off, he
has never hesitated to tell me that he loved
you and only you. I know you have
thought differently. But all that you disliked
was my fault. I led him on ; I told him that
I wanted his friendship ; I let him see how
much I cared for him. He never loved me ;
never."

Lenore's eyes were fixed upon Ruby's face ;
she listened intently, greedily, to every word.
She spoke in an eager whisper when Ruby
paused.

He — kissed you — in the conservatory at
Mrs. Dering's."

It was my fault," said Ruby.

Was it true, or did she speak in self-abnegation
that was almost sublime ? Or did
she in very truth blame herself for Cecil's
act?

Lenore seemed driven by some invisible
power to utter what was in her heart, cruel
though it might be. '* He knew of your
leaving Scarsfield ? " she said.

Yes, I told him. I found my life unbearable
at home. They wanted me to marry a
man I hated. So I turned to him for help.
He lent me money and promised to keep the
secret of my flight, though all that he knew
was that I was going to London. I meant to
give him my address later on, because he said
that he could get me work. That was all.
I did my wilful, wicked best to tempt him,,
and I failed. You can't think too badly of
me ; Ijut you need not blame him. It was

not his fault that I could not leave off loving



him."

Ah, but it had been his fault that she loved
him at all I Lenore noticed the generosity
that passed over those earlier stages of Ruby's
story, and was shamed by it. She covered
her face with her hands to conceal the tears
that were gathering in her eyes.

Will you not forgive him ? " said Ruby,
putting one thin hand on Lenore's knee. " T
don't ask you to forgive me : but he — he is so
miserable. He loves you — who can know
better than I do ? — and you love him. Go
home with him and make him happy."

Her voice was growing low and feeble.
Lenore fell on her knees beside the couch, and
kissed her cheek. Her tears moistened Ruby's
face, but the sick girl shed no tear. Her eyes
were bright with a wonderful radiance, as of
one whose gladness was not of this world.
She put forth her hand and sounded a little
bell beside her. It was a signal, the meaning

of wliirli Miss Lingered knew. Lenore rose as
if to go.

"Not yet," said Kuby, detaining her. " See
your husband has come to fetch you
home."

Lenore turned with a start. There indeed
stood Cecil ; pale, grave, but with an eager
lighting of the eyes as he glanced from her to
Ruby. Lenore did not hesitate. She held
out her hands to him. It did not seem to her
possible to refuse to do what Ruby had
desired.

As Cecil took her hands, the girl turned on
her ]Pillow with a sigh. The colour went out
of her cheek, the light from her eyes ; her
hands fell idly to her sides. " I 've done all
that I can do," Magdalen, who had followed
Cecil, heard her murmur to herself: " there is
nothing — nothing left."

But at this moment Lenore glanced back at
her, saw that deathly whiteness, those languid
eyes, and, with a woman's instinct, divined

what was passing in the dying girl's restless
heart. She turned once more to the couch,
still holding her husband by one hand.

You have given him back to me," she said,
•' and I thank you and forgive you with all
my heart — if there is anything to forgive."
And then, she kissed her gently and lovingly,
knowing that it was a Ides of farewell.

Ruby's eyes wandered past her to Cecil,
with a lingering tenderness of regard. And
Lenore drew him forward. " Kiss her, Cecil,"
she said, softly, 'rand say good-bye."

And Cecil pressed his lips to the girl's
white brow, as one that reverently salutes the
dead.

"COMING EVENTS CAST THEIR SHADOWS
BEFORE."

Before April was over, Magdalen came back

to Scarsfield. Ruby Eoslyn had been laid to

rest in a quiet graveyard near the sea : she

would be troubled no longer by the sorrows

and vexations of this uncertain world. James

Lloyd had been asked to return to Scarsfield,

where work and a comfortable home could l.)e

found for him ; but he had refused. He did

not say wdiy, list it seemed to Magdalen that

she knew the reason. In life, in death, he

wanted to be near Ruby.

Magdalen's work was accomplished ; and

she felt the strain which she had put upon

herself. She was more listless, more inclined


fair rest and quietness, than she had been for
many years. She was almost disposed to Ind
Miss Jessop be silent, when that good lady
discoursed to her of Scarsfield works and ways.
Some of the items of news were old to
Magdalen, and some were new. She had
heard, for instance, that Mr. and Mrs. Cecil
Brendon were living happily together in the
Riviera, and that their little girl was nearly
well. And she had not heard that Mr. Max
Brendon had lost his lawsuit, closed his
chemical works, and taken a situation as
head-clerk in his brother s office.

When Magdalen did hear this, she sat u})
suddenly (she had been Ipng lack on a sofa,
rather white and silent for some time), with
her face in a flame. " Why was I never told
of this before ? " she said.

Miss Jessop was rather alarmed at such a

manifestation of feeling, and began to excuse

herself nervously, saying that she had had no

idea that her dear Madge would be so much
VOL. in. o

interested. And Magdalen, turning rather
pale again, said that it did not matter, and
that she was a little surprised — that was all.
And when Miss Jessop had finished her
gentle gossip, Magdalen got up and wrote
a note to Ursula, asking her to the Priory
to tea.

Ursula came, full of delight at seeing her
beloved Magdalen again. It was not until after
tea that Miss Lingered introduced the subject
which just then seemed nearest her heart.

Ursula, you never told me that your
brother had lost his suit," she said, going at
once to the point, as was her wont.

Ursula looked confused. " I know," she
said. Then she stopped, and went on again :
^'Max told me not to tell you."

Why ? "

'' Oh. he said that you would not be
interested. Or, if you were interested (as I
said you would be), that you had so many
other things to think of that your mind ought

not to be disturbed. Anyhow, I was not to
say anything."

She wondered at the beautiful softness in
Magdalen's eyes.

And he has closed his chemical works ? "

'' Yes. He says that he might have gone
on, but that he had no reasonable hope of
doing better for the future, and that it would
be only fair and honest to close them. He is
in Cecil's office ; and I pity him."

*' Why ? "

*' It must be horrid to be under Cecil, after
being one's own master. Not but what Cecil 's
very fond of him, and lets him do just as he
pleases. And Cecil is much nicer than he
used to be. But I think that Max finds it
hard sometimes."

'rand he does not live at home ?"

Ursula reddened. " Mamma did not want
him. She was very unkind — but he said I
was not to say so. He has taken rooms at
Mrs. Turner's, and lives there ; it 's a little

house, an artisan's house, near Gay Street.
When he wants a little variety he goes to the
works and prowls there at night amongst all
the dust, and cobwebs, and machinery. Cheerful,
isn't it ? " — and then the girl's lip
quivered, and she hid her face on Magdalen's
shoulder. "Oh, Magdalen," she said, "he is
very miserable."

Magdalen caressed her, but did not reply,
and presently changed the subject in so
decided a manner that Ursula did not venture
to allude to it again.

The classes in Gay Street were still going
on, but Miss Lingered had felt doubtful
whether she would reopen hers just yet. Bat
after that talk with Ursula she resolved to go
there on the following evening. It was one
of Max's nights : she knew them of old. She
wanted to see for herself whether he looked
miserable " or not.

She saw him, and she thought that he was
very little changed. There was a deeper fold

between his brows, a sterner look about his
mouth, ]mt there was the old fire in his eyes,
the same resolute coolness of manner. "Miserable
' was not the word for him ; and yet,
she did not think that he looked quite
happy.

She had to plan a little in order to speak to
him alone. She went into an empty classroom
at the top of the house and sent a
message by one of the boys to ask Mr. Bren-don
to join her there. Max, not kno wing-that
she was in the house, obeyed in some
amaze.

The night was peculiarly warm and balmy,
and the window of the room in which he
found her was wide open. Magdalen was
looking out at a distant prospect of the broad
river, crossed by the many arches of its
famous bridge ; the whole silvered by the
light of the rising moon. The gas was turned
d(jwn ; the room was in shadow, save for
that spot where the moonlight shone. Magdalen's

figure was only just discernible, but
Max could see her face plainly, and was struck
by some new and indefinable charm that it
seemed to him to possess. Perhaps the weird
light of the moon gave it that fine, white,
spiritual look ; and yet its calm was troubled
as he drew near.

Moved by a strong instinct of pity and
sympathy, Magdalen advanced a step and held
out both her hands, with a very gentle look
and tone. '' I am so sorry ! " she said.

He took her hands, and his own face
changed in a way that startled her ; yet the
change, though unusual, was very slight. His
under lip was fuller than usual ; his eyelids
seemed to redden, and his eyes to glisten.
Sympathy from her at that moment was so
sweet that it brought to his eyes the first tear
that had risen to them since his childhood.
The pressure of her hands continued only a
moment ; he dropped them and walked away
to the hearth rug where he stood, looking

down, not master enough of himself to
speak.

Can nothing be done ? " she asked.
Could I not have done anything if you had
told me ? Sometimes money is useful ; and,
you know, I am rich ; I should have liked to

help you, had it been possible "

"No," he answered. "Not in that way!
I mean that you could have helped me
you can help me now — by your kindness,
your counsel. I have missed you very much.
You have no idea what I seem to lose when
I know you are away."

"Tell me, is Captain Esher to blame for
this ? You lost the lawsuit ? "

I did. But I had lost in other ways too.
The lawsuit does not account for everything."
If you had not been mixed up in that
unhappy quarrel of mine, perhaps he would
not have pressed matters so far."

Now, that is just what I have been afraid
you would think," said Max, with an eager

look at her troubled face, "and that is why I
told Ursula to say nothing to you about the
lawsuit. Eemember, it was set on foot in reality
before he came to the town. Our personal
quarrel had nothing to do with the matter.
Don't let me think you believe that it had.
It will vex me horribly if you do ; it would
not be a true view of the matter at all."

She paused a little, and then said, 'eat least
you will let me help you ? "

He shook his head.

Why not, Mr. Brendon ? We made a
league of friendship ; give me the privilege of
a friend."

He smiled and looked away from her. " It
would be too great a responsibility," he said.
** I should always be afraid of losing your
money ; and the fear might make me nervous."

"You are jesting," said Magdalen, in a tone
of reproach, "and I am in earnest."

I could not take money from you," he
said, meeting her eyes with a full, grave look

of resolve, which she could not gainsay.
*' Don't ask me. I can't well explain my
feeling ; but it would place us on a wrong-footing.
Besides, everything is settled ; I am
working for Cecil, and the caustic works are
shut up. I believe I should have to get
another building before I could begin again,
too ; unless I want another lawsuit — though
I suppose the Malton trees are about as black
as they can be."

It has been very unfortunate."

'* / have been unfortunate, you mean. And
I daresay you remember that I boasted of
certain success. I said that I should not fail
except by my own fault or foolishness. And,
as far as I know, it is neither."

No ; you have been unable to control
events in any way."

Exactly so. Chance has been too strong
for me."

Chance ! — God's will," said Magdalen, half
under her breath.

Yes, God's will," he said, gravely ; " and
I made a mistake."

Their hands met in a close, friendly grasp,
but further conversation seemed impossible to
them both. They parted with few words, and
Magdalen went home ill at ease.

She did not know that her interview with
Max was made the subject of some spiteful
gossip between the woman who took care of
the Gay Street rooms and her next-door
neighbour, who happened to he Mrs. Bracy,
formerly Mrs. Lloyd. James Lloyd's mother
had an odd, inexplicable grievance against
Magdalen, chiefly because she had befriended
poor Ruby Eoslyn, whom Mrs. Bracy considered
to have been the ruin of her son. And
Mrs. Bracy was quite ready to do j\Iiss Lingered
an ill turn. Hence came a complication for
which Magdalen was unprepared.

It was a little later in the year, and Daisy
Esher sat alone one afternoon in a arose sitting
in an Antwerp hotel. She was on the

ground, with her arms on the sill of the broad,
low window, whence she was gazing into the
Place Verte. The market-place presented a
bright scene : it was crowded with countrywomen
in quaint-looking caps and wonderful
earrings, with men who held yellow parasols
above their heads, with bronzed young fellows
in dark-blue blouses, all of whom nodded,
gesticulated, passed and repassed under the
trees, before Daisy's admiring eyes. The
Place was comparatively empty of tourists :
listless waiters gossiped with folded arms upon
the hotel steps ; the benches under the trees
would not be filled by smokers and nursery-maids
until later in the day, but Daisy found
plenty of amusement in watching the passers-by.
She had been charmed by the sight of a
yellow dog drawing a washerwoman little
cart, and was now watching for another.
However, the carillon had sounded twice from
the cathedral since her watch began, and she
was growing tired of waiting. She looked

round the Jig, spare room, with its profuse
gilding, its red velvet, and ticking clocks, and
sighed to herself.

'' If Mademoiselle would only let me undo
the black trunk," she whispered to herself,
and get out my books or old Topsy ! . . ."

Old Topsy was the last remaining of Daisy's
dolls ; the one which Fate, in the person of
Mademoiselle Mequillet, had spared. In the
absence of toys and books, the tears began to
well up in Daisy's eyes.

I wonder where Mademoiselle has gone.
Shopping, I suppose. I wish I might have a
new frock ; Dolly has such a lot, and I have
so few new things. Maidie used to keep us
dressed alike. Oh, dear ! how I wish I was
back with Maidie ! "

She laid her cheek on the window-seat, and
let the tears trickle down. It was nearly an
hour since she had been left alone — not in
disgrace ; simply in the too common order of
events : Dolly having gone out with Captain

Esher, and Mademoiselle absenting herself to
buy odds and ends of flowers and lace to make
a fresh bonnet for Sunday. Presently the
door opened, and Dolly rushed in.

I 've news for you, Daisy : real news !
What will you give me for it ? I '11 have six
kisses and a dance — come along ! " And she
went pirouetting down the room, as light as a
fairy.

What ! won't you come ? Sulky thing !
Petite grogneiise, as Mademoiselle calls you.
I know why we are here, and where we are
going' next."

Tiens, for what is all this noise ? " said
Mademoiselle, entering with a band-box.
'' Tais-toi, DoW-j, petit iter coquet ! Pourquoi
lettres-tu, Marguerite ? "

"I am not crying," said Daisy, getting up.

But you lie ! " said Mademoiselle, in very
rapid French ; ''I see the tears upon your
face. Why do you tell me such falsities ?
Figtirez-vous, Mademoiselle," she turned to

Dolly, " I leave the little one for a quarter of
an hour, and she weeps at being left alone ?
And I, who had gone to buy her bon-bons ! "

Oh, never mind her," said Dolly, in
English; "she is always silly. Adhere are
the bon-bons, then ? "

Mademoiselle felt in her pocket, and threw
up her hands with a tragic little cry. " They
have disappeared. On m'a vole; they have
stolen my pretty present for my angels. Ah,
the thieves."

"Have they picked your pocket?" asked
Daisy, rubbing away her tears. Dolly stopped
dancing, and looked intensely sceptical.

Indeed they have ! the monsters ! — and of
my purse also ! I must complain to your good
papa ; he will recover it for me. All, Dieu !
what do I not suffer in these voyages on your
account ! "

Mademoiselle hurried into the next room,
holding her handkerchief to her eyes.

"I am sorry ; aren't you, Dolly ? "

"I don't believe it," said Dolly. "Mademoiselle
tells dreadful stories. It just came
into her head to say the purse was gone, and
she said it."

Oh ! Dolly, would she be so wicked ? "

"It isn't wicked in her; papa says she
can't help it. AVe needn't copy her, you
know. She is only here to make us speak
French. Her purse is in her pocket or on her
dressing-table all the time."

I don't think it can be."

Wait and see," and Dolly ran out of the
room, with a mischievous laugh. Presently
Mademoiselle came back, and Dolly followed
almost directly, saying, " Here, Mademoiselle,
your purse was on the floor. It is not stolen
after all."

Vraiment!''' said Mademoiselle, with unperturbed
gaiety. " You are my good angel,
little one. Imagine to yourself that I did not
see it."

Dolly gave her sister a laughing look,

which Daisy did not return. Then she
went on :

*now for my news. You are so stupid,
you will not guess it. AYe have come here on
our way to — England."

"England!" Daisy's scream of joy was
re-echoed by one of horror from Mademoiselle.
To the Priory— to Magdalen ! "

England I that sad country," moaned the
Frenchwoman.

" Not to the Priory ; to Malton, I believe.
Papa has had it refurnished. He says it is
very ugly there, because Mr. Brendon's nasty
chemical works have spoiled our trees. It 's very
horrid of Mr. Brendon to spoil them, I think."

"He can't help it. I like Mr. Brendon."

Papa doesn't," said Dolly, significantly ;
and he gained the lawsuit, and got ever so
many thousands of pounds from Mr. Brendon
in payment for the trees and things."

Poor Mr. Brendon. Don't you remember
him, Dolly ? "

Yes, I remember him well enough ; but
papa doesn't like him, so I don't. You always
like people papa doesn't like. You ought to
be ashamed of yourself, pitying his enemies.
I don't love you a bit when you talk like that ;
do you, Mademoiselle ? Let us go out for a
walk, and leave her to herself."

Willingly, mon enfant'' said Mademoiselle,
who always humoured Dolly, and snubbed
Daisy when possible. " Let us go and see the
town. I will put on my hat."

They went out together, and Daisy stood
alone again, sorrowfully looking at the .
A bold idea soon occurred to her.
She would go out alone, if nobody would take
her ; she had heard of Antwerp Cathedral, and
there it stood on the other side of the Place
Verte ; thither she would go. Her hat and
jacket were ready for her, and five minutes
after Dolly and Mademoiselle had started to
see the town, Daisy started to see the
Cathedral.

VOL. III. p

She was much delighted with the visit she
paid to it. Of course she did not see the great
pictures, for she had not the necessary shilling
to give the sacristan ; but she wandered about,
admiring the carving and painted windows —
especially one which represented a procession
of figures winding up to the door of a church.
She found occupation for some time in counting
the faces in the procession, but grew dizzy
somewhere about the sixty-fifth, and left ofi".
Then she strayed into the Place and sat down
on a bench which was screened by some trees
from the windows of the hotel. There lie
made friends with a young Frenchwoman in
black — a far letter person than Mademoiselle
Mequillet — and had heard half the details of
her history before she descried Mademoiselle
bearing down upon her with a wrathful
face.

Daisy bade her friend a polite farewell, and
walked to meet her governess, who seized her
arm and poured out a torrent of voluble

reproaches. She was half dragged into the
hotel, and up to their sitting-room, where she
had to listen to a long lecture on the enormities
of which she had been guilty. Daisy listened
meekly enough, and brought out a little
pocket-handkerchief to wipe away a few
tears, while Dolly laughed, first at Mademoiselle's
anger and then at Daisy's want of spirit.

In the midst of the fracas, Captain Esher
sauntered in.

Eh ! Daisy whimpering ? What is the
matter ? "

Mademoiselle explained, with many gesticulations,
what was wrong. Captain Esher
laughed silently, and asked why Daisy did not
go out with her sister.

Dolly reddened as she answered, defiantly,
I didn't want Daisy to go."

Was she not fine enough ? " asked Captain
Esher, lazily surveying the two children.

They resembled each other much less than
they used to do, but the dissimilarity did not

lie altogether in feature. Dolly wa.-^ certainly
taller, and had an older look than her sister ;
but their dress was vastly different. Daisy
wore a plain brown dress, good and comfortable
; but very unlike Dolly's blue and white
costume — as perfect a child's dress as could be
made by a Parisian dressmaker. The difference
was an index to the sort of treatment the
two received. Dolly was petted and indulged
in every whim : Daisy dared not have any
whims if she wanted to lead a fairly peaceable
life. Captain Esher did not love her as he
loved Dolly ; and a look, half of distaste, half
of anger, came to his face as he heard Mademoiselle's
account of the friend whom Daisy
had made in the Place — " canaille, the lowest
of the low."

Ah ! I remember," said Captain Esher,
stroking his golden moustache, " Daisy has a
taste for low people."

She was not low, papa ; I am sure that she
was very good."

Good or bad," said Captain Esher, "it does
not much matter. We are going to England
tomorrow."

Then he strolled out of the room aorain,
leaving Mademoiselle to occupy herself with
the children, and thinking very little about
the trio. He had other things to think of.
In his pocket at that moment lay a dirty little
missive which had been forwarded to him from
Malton, and which he had read and re-read
until he knew every word of its contents by
heart.

*' A well-wisher thinks that Captain Esher
might like to hear as how Miss Lingered is
going to 1)6 married very shortly to Mr. Max
Brendon, a gentleman that Captain Esher has
iso cause to be fond of."

"No cause to be fond of! I should think
not," the Captain had ejaculated to himself
when he first read this epistle. " Who on
earth has written this ? However, it puts me
on the right track : i 11 have another try for

Magdalen, and if she won't have me, at any
rate I '11 put a spoke in Brendon's wheel."

This was the business that brought Captain
Esher back to Malton.

ONLY ONE THING."

Captain Esher's first act on arriving at

Malton, was to write a conciliatory letter to

Magdalen. He waited for some days without

receiving an answer (for, indeed, it was not a

letter that imperatively demanded one), and

then decided upon making a call at the Priory

and seeing Magdalen with his own eyes. He

scarcely thought that she would refuse to

admit him, but, if so, he had other resources

at his command.

Magdalen was out : she had gone to Mrs.

8t. Aidan's for the day. Captain Esher

congratulated himself upon his good luck.

Aunt Emilia would not shut him out : he was



.sure to be able to get a few minutes alone
with Magdalen at the Rectory.

Fortune certainly favoured him. He met
Miss Lingered at the gate of the Rectory
garden. She was going out as he came in.
He paused and raised his hat, noting the
colour that flashed into her face when he drew
near. She returned his greeting, and made as
though she would pass on, but he would not
let her pass without a word.

"Excuse me*' he said, "I have had no
answer to my letter."

I did not think that it required an
answer," she said, coldly. .

"Not when I asked for your friendship —
your forgiveness ? "

You have asked for it before."

And you have always denied it to me,
good, religious woman that you are ! Magdalen,
what stands between us ? Is it the
shadow of my dead wife ? "

She flushed a little at the words.

*' Perhaps it is," she answered dreamily,
with her eyes on the distant landscape, and
her hand resting on the gate — " perhaps it

is."

His face darkened. She had never before
given him so clear an indication of the effect
of Alice's history on her mind.

Is there nothing else ? " he asked, in a low
voice.

She started, looked at him suddenly, and
changed colour once again.

"Yes," she said, abruptly, " there is."

What ? " His tone was fierce. " You are
orinoco be married to some one else. Is that
it ? Is it "

"Nothing of the kind. I am not going to
be married. Good morning. Captain Esher. I
am pressed for time."

Her tone was so haughty that he felt
disinclined to force himself upon her : he
lifted this hat, and let her pass, with a distinct
conviction that absence had at any rate not

restored him to his old price in her heart.
But what did she mean by saying that she
was not going to be married ?

He made some veiled inquiries of Mrs. St.
Aidan, but she had nothing to tell him, and
was not disposed to be too gracious. She
upbraided him frankly for taking the children
away from the Priory, and utterly refused to
have anything to do with his future schemes.
In fact, though she did not say so, her
husband had strictly forbidden her to aid and
abet Philip in any of his plans, how innocent
soever they might seem, without previous
reference to him ; and therefore Captain Esher
was thrown back on his own ingenuity.

One of the first of his steps towards the
attainment of his end seemed to be a very
simple one. He sent a message to the schoolroom
that Miss Dolly was to come down to
dessert. No mention being made of Daisy,
she solaced herself in Mademoiselle's company
with Topsy and a white kitten, while Dolly,

looking radiant, tripped away to the diningroom.


Here Captain Eslier smilingly heaped her
plate with fruit and sweets, made her drink a
glass of wine, and then, when the round
cheeks were aflame and the dark eyes gleaming
brightly, he made a careless little
proposition. " Suppose you went to the
Priory for a few days ?" he said, "while I goto
London."

Dolly did not seem to relish the idea.
With Magdalen, papa ? It will be dreadfully
dull. You might take me with you, and
let Daisy go to the Priory."

But suppose I particularly wanted you to
go," said Captain Esher, bringing the spell of
his handsome eyes to bear upon his little
daughter. " Would you not go then ? You
don't love me well enough for that, do
you?

Dolly looked indignant. " I don't see why
you should say so. You know very well that

I love you. But why should you want me to
go to the Priory ? "

*' Will you do something for me ? "

Why, of course, if I can, papa. But "

*' ' But me no buts,' " said Esher, impatiently.
'eyes or no, once for all, Dolly.
You '11 keep your word, I know, though you
are only a child. Will you do something forme
— something that requires a little skill, and
a little boldness, and a little ingenuity ? Yes
or no."

"Yes," said Dolly, looking at him fearlessly.


Very well. Then you and Daisy must
write to Magdalen, asking her to let you go to
the Priory for a week or two while I am in
London. When you are there you must write
to me every day, telling me who comes to the
house, and what is going on. Especially tell
me if any of the Brendons come. You must
keep you eyes and ears open, and get to know
all you can. I want to find out whether magdalen

is engaged to be married. Do you
understand ? "

'' I don't think that that will be very
difficult," said Dolly, with rather a puzzled face.

Don't you ? Perhaps it is more difficult
than you think. Mind, you are never to ask
a question. You are not to show any curiosity.
You are not to drop a single word to
Magdalen, or to anybody else, that will
show your purpose. Is there no difficulty in
that ? "

Dolly had drawn nearer to him, and was
sitting with her elbows on the table and her
dimpled chin resting upon her hands. A
careful father or mother would have been
saddened to see the precocious intelligence of
her face, the premature wisdom of her bright,
attentive eyes.

"Then," said Captain Esher, in his most
caressing voice, " there is one thing still more
difficult to be done, Dolly. You know that
Magdalen has quarrelled with me, do you not ?

Y(ui know that she will not let me into the
house ? "

It 's a shame ! it 's a great shame ! " Dolly
exclaimed, resentfully.

"So it is, little one. And it is not my
soult either. But let that pass. I want you to
watch the habits of the people in the house,
and let me know when Magdalen goes out —
when she is at Gay Street, for instance. Then,
some day, when you know that she is to be
away, you must let me into the house, without
telling anybody else."

Dolly's eyes opened wide. " What for,
papa J

"That is my business," said her father,
harshly. Then, softening his tones again.
I want to see that poor woman that Magdalen
took into her house : Alice, I think they
call her. Could you get me to her room
some day ? "

I dare say that I could," Dolly answered,
thoughtfully. " But why — why "

'' You are very curious," said Captain Esher,
with a cold smile. " But I suppose I must
satisfy your curiosity. This person — this
Alice — used to lee known to me in her younger
days. (Her name is not Alice, but Louisa, by
the bye.) Her friends have asked me to see
her, and to ascertain whether she is happy in
her present abode. For this purpose I want to
go to her without giving Magdalen a chance
of preparing her — perhaps of prejudicing her
mind against me. Don't you see ? "

The necessity of throwing dust in the child's
eyes made him slightly impatient. He wished
that Dolly were a little less intelligent !

I don't think," said Dolly, slowly, '' that
Magdalen could mind your coming, just to
see poor Alice. Why don't you ask her first,
papa {

Captain Esher uttered a short, vexed
laugh.

'' I know Magdalen better than you do,
child. She wants to keep her protegee out of

my way. Are you old enough to understand
that some women can bear anything, except
the loss of power ? "

Dolly nodded.

Magdalen never liked anybody to interfere
with us' she said, applying her father s
words with wonderful quickness.

Well, it is the same thing now with this
woman. So you must use all your cleverness,
Dolly, to give me the chance I want. Magdalen
seems to like keeping people who don't
belong to her," he added, lazily. " See what
trouble I had to get hold of you."

*' You darling papa, I should have died if
you hadn't come ! "

*not you. You were as happy as possible,
psalm-singing, when I broke in upon you."

"Papa, I hated it all." And for the
moment, Dolly believed that she did.

Well, you must submit to it for a few days
ao'ain. You will write to me here — every day
under cover to Mademoiselle "

'' I thought you said that you would be in
London ? "

Simpleton ! I said so. Is that any reason
for my going ? "

Must I say that you have gone ? " said
Dolly, uneasily.

Why shouldn't you ? Women always tell
lies ; it is part of their vocation : one more or
less won't matter. However, perhaps you are
not old enough to do it well. I '11 relieve
your mind ; I do mean to go to London, so
you will be safe in saying I am there."

Dolly nodded, but was evidently a little
taken aback. The Bohemianism of the past
two years had not effaced all traces of
Magdalen's teaching ; the child hesitated still
to tell a downright lie.

You must contrive it in some way," said
her father, seeing the need of a little
encouragement. '' You would not betray me
to Magdalen, would you, Dolly ? for want
of a little adroitness and courage ! My clever

VOL. III. o

Dolly will not make a fool of herself in that
manner."

No, papa ; 1 11 do or say anything you like."

'•' That is right, little one. You need say
nothing untrue ; I mean to be away for a few
days. You will help me, I know, as well as
though you were older, for you are quick and
observant ; you have plenty of tact, and can
keep a secret. I could not trust Daisy with
anything that I have told you."

No ; Daisy would let it all out directly,"
said Dolly, feeling proud of the confidence
reposed in her.

Now, go and write your letter to Magdalen,
and bring it me to read."

Dolly left Captain Esher to smoke a cigar in
the library, and smile over the simplicity that
he was deluding. In a wonderfully short
time the letter was written : Dolly had a
knack of expressing herself prettily. It was
shown, approved, and sent off the same
evening.

Magdalen was pleased at the prospect of
the children's visit, and readily consented to
receive them for a few days. They came on
the following afternoon, but her pleasure was
soon marred by the conviction that something
was wrong with Dolly. She could keep a
secret, as her father had said ; but the deceit,
the consciousness of a plot, the remembrance
of Magdalen's authority, were almost too much

m

for her nerves ; she laughed and talked
excitedly, with such affectation of being
pleased and charmed with everything she saw,
that Magdalen felt as if unreality had eaten
out the whole heart of the child. Daisy was
simple and sweet as ever ; she had suffered in
health during her absence from England, but
not in character, and Magdalen only wished
that Dolly had had to bear from her father a
little more of the negligent coldness with
which he treated her sister.

Dolly soon found a time which would be
favourable to her plans. Magdalen had pro-raised

to dine at the Eector's before going to
Gay Street, three nights after the children's
arrival, and during her absence it would be
easy for Dolly to open a side door leading
into the garden to her father. The chief
thing was to get Daisy out of the way, and
this she knew she could do by a little coercion.
She wrote a note to Captain Esher, and
waited anxiously for Magdalen to go out.

There had been nothing else for Dolly to tell
her father. None of the Brendons had been
to the Priory: she had heard and seen nothing
remarkable or suspicious. She had paid one
or two visits to Alice out of sheer curiosity,
but had not been able to extract any information
from her on any subject. The poor
woman was gradually sinking in consumption,
and, although she seemed rational enough, it
was doubtful whether she had recovered her
memory, or would ever be likely to give an
account of her past history.

Captain Esher read his little daughter's note

with a feeling of triumph and satisfaction.
Magdalen's rebuff had once more kindled the
fires of his false and fickle love. He had tried
in vain to forget her during his long absence ;
and the sight of her serene and stately beauty
had stimulated his desire for the unattainable.
Besides, his fortunes were at a low ebb. He
had betted and gambled largely ; his estates
were heavily mortgaged, and he had even
speculated upon the money that would come
to his children on their majority ; but all his
devices for raising money where at an end,
and he knew very well that if his last coiq^
failed, if his attempt to secure Magdalen's
hand came to nothing, he would soon be
obliged to leave England and seek refuge in
some obscure corner of the Continent, or on
the other side of the Atlantic. It was a desperate
venture, the one which he had resolved
to make ; but it was his only chance.

He had gradually come to the conclusion
that Magdalen had never jjeen convinced that

the poor woman whom she had taken into her
house was really Louisa Mackworth. It was
quite possible — " Magdalen was obstinate
enough for anything ! " he said to himself —
that she still believed Alice to be alive and
in her house. And in that case, of course, she
would never agree to marry him. What was
the natural result ? Of course, that this
woman must be got out of the way.

Philip Esher did not go much further, as
yet, in elaborating his idea. If this woman —
Alice," as Magdalen called her — had to begot
out of the way," it was plain that he was
the only person who could do the work. He
thought vaguely of removing her by stealth
to some out-of-the-way workhouse or asylum.
But at the back of his consciousness there was
a darker thought. If it were she who stood
between Magdalen and himself, he felt in his
desperation as if he could strangle her with
his own hands.

The first step, however, was to gain access to

the house. He must see her, to judge for
himself whether or no she was sane or insane,
strong or weak. He must see, also, how far
she resembled Louisa Mackworth. Magdalen
had never been convinced that she was Louisa
Mackworth ; Philip was giving up the hope of
convincing' her. How far he believed what
he had told her was known only to himself.
Of one thing he was quite certain:
that when Miss Mackworth appeared in the
little village church of Eivefsmead and said
that his wife was dead, she had not spoken
the truth. She had been content with separating
him from Magdalen ; she had not wished
to give Alice back to him. Alice, as Captain
Esher had ascertained, had not died in her
sister's house at Manchester, when the babies
were only a few months old. What had
since become of her he knew only too well.
He remembered the asylum to which he had
consigned her : the alarm that he had felt
when he heard that she had escaped from it —

and then ? Not to a single soul had Philip
Esher ever breathed any further knowledge
of Alice Mackworth's fate.

Dolly's letter brought him earlier to the
Priory than she had anticipated. He wanted
to lurk about the road, perhaps even about
the garden, for a little time ; he thought that
he might see Magdalen, and to see her even at
a distance was something to hope for. He
sneered at himself for his readiness to wait
on her footsteps ; but the fact remained. He
had never in his whole life been so long, so
steadily, so strongly drawn to any woman ashe
was to Magdalen Lingered.

The evening was dull and dark ; a fog-seemed
to be rising in the valley, and a few
drops of rain were beginning to fall. It was
nearly seven o'clock, and the thick overhanging
trees and shrubs in the Priory garden afforded
all the protection that Esher desired. Little
by little, as the dusk increased, he stole nearer
to the house ; he knew the place so well that

there was small clanger of his exposing himself
to observation. Presently he saw a light in
one of the windows on the ground-floor ; it
belonged to Magdalen's sitting-room. A mass
of Portuguese laurel and rhododendron shrubs
grew before the window. Between these he
slipped, regardless of the fact that the
branches were heavy with dew and rain. The
window was slightly open ; the curtains were
drawn, but not close ; by standing close to the
building Captain Esher found that he could
obtain a clear view of the interior of the room.
And then for a moment he fell back with a
gasp of surprise and a muttered oath.

The occupants of the room were Magdalen
Lingered and Max Brendon.

^Yhen did he come ! " said Esher, furiously,
to himself "I have been here half-an-hour.
He must have come before me. What is he
doing in her house ? The letter spoke truth
after all, curse him ! "

The transport of fury over, he drew near to

the window again ; looked and listened. The
two were standing on the hearth rug, apparently
engaged in earnest conversation ; a smallwood
fire in the grate threw a flickering light
from time to time upon Magdalen's face.
Max's back was tinned to the window, and his
head was bent ; Esher could not see his face.

But why should you go ? " Magdalen was
saying.

I think it better. Scarsfield is not
altogether a pleasant place for me just
now."

Why not ? "

Can you ask ? My position is different
from what it used to be. I have made a
failure of my own life, somehow ; and yet
I don't see that it has been my fault. But the
fact remains."

If he had seen the expression of malicious
exultation that crossed his listener's face at
that moment, he might have modified his
words.

There may be brighter days in store for
you," said Magdalen. Her lip trembled as she
spoke.

Yes ; at the other side of the world."

I meant — here, in Scarsfield."

('* Can't the fool see what she wants ? ''
thought Philip Esher, angrily.)

Max lifted his head a little and seemed to
look at her. There was a new tone in his
voice as he answered.

"You know that there is only one thing
that could change my life for me in Scarsfield ;
and that, I — dare not ask."

"Dare anything," she said, stretching out
her hands towards him with a sweet glimmering
smile. " Dare anything — rather than
go away."

He caught her hands in his. " Ah, Magdalen,"
he broke out passionately, " dare I tell
you that I love you ? "

The answer was easy to read in the transfigured
face that she turned upon him. But

Philip Esher heard no more. With an angry
ejaculation, he turned from the window and
plunged once more into the gathering darkness
of the night.

THE END OF THE GAME.

But Esher did not leave the vicinity of

Miss Lingered's house. He strode out into the

lane, and for a time scarcely knew what he

did or whither he was going. By and bye

he mastered himself, and crept back to the

garden gate, near which, in a sheltered corner,

he stood while Max came forth — Max, with a

look of utter contentment upon his face which

made Esher long to see him lying dead at his

feet. Failed ! Did the man say he had

failed ? In Esher's opinion, he had gained

everything that was worth having. Was

there no way of depriving him of what he had

won ? Magdalen's peace of mind was as

nothing to the gratification of Philip's revengeful



spirit. He would gladly have seen her
broken-hearted but consenting to marry him,
than happy with another.

Presently he saw the carriage drive up to
the door. Magdalen came out, enveloped in
velvet and furs ; the night was chilly, and she
was well protected from the cold. He drew
near enough to note the exquisite sweetness of
her face, to hear the musical intonation of her
voice as she said o'ood-nio'ht to his two child

o

ren, who stood on the steps to see her go.

I shall be late, my darlings ; you must not
sit up for me. Good-bye."

And then the carriage drove away ; the
house-door was shut, and Philip Esher fotmd
himself alone.

He had not long; to wait. Before soothe
window of Magdalen's sitting-room was slowly
opened, and a little figure wrapped in a grey
shawl ventured out amongst the laurels. " Is
that you, Dolly ? " said Captain Esher, drawing
near.

Yes, papa. "Will you come in ? Magdalen
is out, and Miss Jessop has gone to bed with a
headache. All the servants are downstairs,
and Daisy is reading in the drawing-room.
Everybody 's safe for half-an-hour at least ; soif
you want to see Alice "

'* You 're a heroine, Dolly. I shall not stay
long. I want to speak to her if she is awake
to look at her if she is asleep, that is all."

"You will have plenty of time for that.
And if any one comes upstairs "

Oh, I shall manage all that. I know the
house as well as you do, child. If any one
sees me as I come or go you may say that it
was the doctor ; and mind, if she should
scream or faint, you must give no alarm until
I am well out of the house."

Dolly nodded assent.

Tell me," he continued, stopping her as
she turned to leave the sitting-room in which
they stood, 'has young Brendon been here
this afternoon ? "

Yes. He came to see Magdalen on
business about the Gay Street classes, he said.
He had tea with us, and then he came in herewith
Magdalen, and had a long talk with her.
Do you know, papa, he is going to India ? "

Captain Esher's lip curled.

75 he ? " he said, dryly. '' What else ? "

'• Else ? Nothing else that I know of," said
Dolly. " He went away to Gay Street to teach
his boys. He had been asked to the party
to-night, but he could not go — he had business
down at the docks when the tide came in.
Will you come up now, papa ? "

Captain Esher knew that it was not well to
delay. He nodded briefly, and Dolly led the
way out of the room. They crept upstairs
together ; then he took the lead. Alice's
room had double doors from the passage, and
another door leading into Magdalen's own
room, which again opened into a dressing-room
and upon the back-stairs. By some of
these openings Captain Esher^was sure that he

could elude any one who caught sight of hiui.
Dolly was stationed outside Alice's double
doors, in order to give warning if any person
should come upstairs.

Dolly stood still, excited and interested.
Alice was asleep ; her father could wake her
or not as he chose. She let him open the
inner door and look in.

There was a pause. He did not go further,
and Dolly wondered why. His hand grasped
the handle of the door ; one foot was inside
the room, one outside, and there lie stood.
Inquisitive Dolly forgot her watch, and pressed
forward to look in. Never did she forget the
sight she saw.

Alice was not asleep. She was sitting up
in her bed ; she seemed to have suddenly
started up from amongst the pillows at the
sound of the opening door. An unutterable
hoiTor looked out of her great strained eyes.
Tiike hers, Captain Esher's face had paled to
an ashy whiteness, fear and dismay were

VOL. III. R

visible in every trait. Evidently some sort of
recognition had taken place.

In after days, when Dolly was old enough
to guess at the meaning of a scene which she
witnessed without comprehending, she felt
sure that at that moment Alice was perfectly
sane. The light of intelligence had come back
into her eyes ; there was no uncertainty of
mind in the voice with which she spoke or the
words she used. And it was this change of
expression that had so dismayed Philip
Esher.

She spoke first, raising her thin, trembling
forefinger, and pointing it towards him as she
spoke.

You have come back at last," she said.
*' You — my husband — Philip Esher."

Philip recoiled a step. This was not the
o-reetino: that he had looked for.

"You are mad," he said, recovering himself
at last, but not noticing the little listening
figure in the doorway just behind. " You are

perhaps Louisa Mackworth, the sister of Alice,
whom I married ; but Alice is dead."

Alice is not dead," cried the woman, rising
herself still hosier, and seeming to threaten
him with that spectral saving hand : "I am
Alice ; I am yom wife."

Then she sank back upon her pillows, rigid
and insensible. But Philip Esher was not
moved to pity by the sight of that death-like
swoon. With a muttered oath he broke from
the room, not noticing the child-watcher at
the door. He marched through the passages
and down the stairs without a thought of
caution. Fortunately he met nobody ; and
not until he was out in the garden once more
did it occur to him that he had run a risk of
any kind.

He was utterly taken aback by the suddenness
and completeness of Alice's recognition of
him. Would her apparent sanity continue,
or was it only a lucid interval ? If she
spoke of him to Magdalen in that tone, which

would bring conviction to cveiy soul that
heard it, he knew that his chances, not only
with her, 1)ut with the rest of the world,
would be over. Not only could he never hope
to win Magdalen's hand, but he might be
obliged to exhibit himself to the world in the
character of a married man. He did not
mind suppressing the fact that his wife was
alive, but there could be no hesitation in avoiding
the possibility of prosecution for bigamy.

He had been a fool, he thought to himself,
to see her again. But when he had been
brought face to face with her in the garden
lie had scarcely had time to examine her
lineaments very minutely. There had been
more than a doubt in his mind ever since. It
might be — it might not be : after all, he had
not been very sure. But now he was sure
enough : there could be no doubt at all.
And what was he to do ?

Idly he wandered along the streets, his head
lient, his eyes turned towards the ground. A

knot of boys and men gathered at the gate of
a small house in a narrow street brought him
to a pause. He looked up and recognised the
place. He had unconsciously taken the way
to Gay Street : he stood by the house to
which Max Brendon went so often. This fact
brought back his old feeling of bitter animosity
to the man who, as he phrased it, had stolen
Magdalen from him. Was there anything
that he could do to revenge himself upon Max
before he disappeared from Scarsfield, as, it
struck him, at this juncture it would be wise
to do '(

He halted in the street ; and while he
paused the very man of whom he was thinking
drew near, in conversation with the
foreman of Cecil's business.

'' Thanks, Jackson," he was saying ; ''1 11
be down at the quay about half-past nine, or
ten o'clock at the very latest. You must come
as soon as you can. I will wait if I don't see
you.

It was a mere business matter of which they
spoke, and Max turned into the house with a
nod of dismissal. The man passed down the
street : the group of boys broke up, and
Captain Esher was left standing by the
railings alone, buried in thought.

A new idea had occurred to him. He might
get rid of Max Brendon altogether. If he — ■
Philip Esher — could not hope to call Magdalen
his wife, neither should this other man.
Suppose Max never went home again ?

The thought excited him so much that he
turned into a little public-house in order to
steady his nerves and clear his brain with a
glass of brandy. When he had taken it he
was conscious of an increasing fierceness of
anger, an ever-waxing desperation of resolve.
How satisfactory it would be to put a stop to
this hateful courtship by the accident of Max
Brendon's death ! And how fatally easy to
compass it !

No ; Magdalen should never be flax benson's

wife — she should never see him again,
alive or dead. Captain Esher knew what
could easily happen on those dangerous quays :
a step in the wrong direction, a push, a blow,
and a man would fall only too easily — fall,
perhaps, into a dark basin between the sides
of a dock and an empty ship, without hope of
rescue — with not even room enough to swim.
To fall there would be as fatal as to fall into
an Alpine crevasse when the ropes had
given way. Esher knew of two or three
places where there might be an easily conceivable
accident ; and he knew that if he had the
opportunity, his hand would not be slow to
give the secret push or blow. He had a stout
stick with him : he held it close. There was
a cruel look in his eyes, a haggard paleness
about his mouth, which seemed to tell of
unlimited capability for hatred and for
violence. The fog was thickening and
turning to a drizzle ; very few people were
m the streets. Esher waited outside the

house in Gay Street, restlessly pacing up and
down, and keeping hungry eyes upon the
(dosed door. His watch had not lasted lone.
when something soft and cold touched this
hand. He drew it away and looked down,
suddenly startled. Dolly was beside him,
wrapped in the grey shawl, as he had seen her
last.

"What brings you here?" said Esher,
angrily.

1 followed you, papa," she answered with
a little sol). " At first I thought that I would
go to the hotel to you, and then I saw you in
(ray Street and came after you."

•' What made you leave the Priory ? "

I was afraid," said Dolly, repressed nervous
passion beginning to show itself in her working
throat and face ; "1 stayed a little time —
but they think that she — she — will die ; 1
suppose that it is with seeing you — and whitehall
I do if Magdalen asks me how you
came :

She burst into loud sobs, and caught hold of
his coat as if to compel him to stay with her.
Esher, intensely irritated, was inclined to
shake himself free and send her home, but
he saw the necessity of calming her, and the
awkwardness of his own position, supposing
that Alice died in consequence of the excitement
caused by his visit.

Dolly," he said, " leave off crying, child.
She will be better soon."

No, no, no, she won't ! She is dying,"
sobbed Dolly so loudly that Esher frowned.

*' Hold your tongue," he said, harshly.
'* Do you hear ? Or I shall go away and
leave you altogether. You hear me ? "

He grasped her shoulder roughly, but, even
with Dolly's most desperate efforts, the soils
would not cease all at once.

If you are quiet I will perhaps take you
with me, and send a message to tell Magdalen
where you are. If you can't control yourself,
the sooner you oro lack the better."

*' I — I 'm not crying — now," said Dolly,
gulping down her tears.

'' Well — wait a minute. You know the inn
where I was staying ? You can take a note
there ? "

Yes." At her answer, given pretty
steadily, Esher drew out his pocket-book,
wrote a few lines on a blank page, tore it
out and folded it like a note.

There. I have said that you have gone
with me to Hartpool. You must speak to
Hargrave, the landlord ; say I shall be back ina
few days, and ask that this note may be sent
up to Miss Lingered. Don't say 'papa;' say
Captain Esher.' You understand ? "

Yes, papa. But I have no hat or anything."


Never mind. You can poet one tomorrow
in Hartpool. Go now."

Shall I find you here again ? "

Probably not. Go down to the quays
and wait for me near the end of Orwell Street.

Don't attempt to go on the quay, or to cross
the lock-gates till I come for you — even if you
should see me. They are dangerous. Now, go,
and speak to no one on your way, remember."

Dolly started off, and Esher was again left
alone. He stood still, leaning against the iron
railings in front of the house : his face was
paler than ever, his watchful eyes were fixed
upon the door. He knew that there was sure
to be some barge or steamboat bound for
Hartpool starting from the quay that night ;
if he could induce the men to take him on
]board it would be an easy way of getting off
from Scarsfield (and at the same time of
accounting for his presence at the docks,
should awkward inquiries be made afterwards)
as soon as his business teas done. He worded
it vaguely thus.

The door opened at last. Max came out,
closed the door behind him, and took the road
to the river. Again, at a moderate distance,
Esher followed him.

There were several ways by which they
could reach the quays, and Max took one of
the longest. He went round several Ixack
streets, and crossed a lock-gate at some little
distance from the place where boats anchored
at the pier-head ; probably in order to walk
the whole length of the (quays on the chance
<jf meeting the man he wished to see. An
occasional gas-lamp threw a feeble glimmer
over the broad stone walk, the deep basins,
and the canal which ran parallel with the
river for many miles ; a black-looking barge or
two lay silent in the docks, with a man asleep
or smoking on deck to o;uard it. The river-tide
was not yet quite high, and the steamers
lead not come in ; the fog lay thick over the
distant water, and the only sounds heard were
the lapping of little waves round the piers, the
clang of a far-off bell, the occasional rush of a
railway train over the bridge that connected
Scarsfield with Badness.

Max lighted his pipe, and went meditatively

down the quay. It was deserted, apparently ;
the foreman had not come, and he walked to
and fro for some little time. Esher hid himself
from view as much as possible, but Max
was conscious that a dark figure stood in the
shadow of a building, though he did not know
how intently he was watched. Once he struck
a match as he passed the very place, and the
light fell flickering upon the mysterious
stranger, who seemed to have no business at
the docks ; but Esher had muffled up his face
in coat and handkerchief, and passed unrecognised.
Max was not in the mood to
trouble himself about strangers. A smile
played upon his lips as he stood and watched
the water ; and the smile pleasant and
thoughtful as it was in itself, provoked Esher's
ire tenfold. It was the happiest time of his
life that Max had ever known — so happy that
he was almost awed, as a great joy does sometimes
awe us. And he had said grave words
to Maoxlalen that nio-ht ; he had told her, in

answer to her questions, how much her life
lead influenced his own ; that they were now
at one in spiritual as well as temporal
matters, so far at least as aim and purpose
went. He meant to live differently, he lead
said, though he did not yet know how ; but
Magdalen knew that, with him, the bare
expression of this determination amounted to
more than other men's protestations. The
awakening of higher principle in him was
truly the beginning of a new life.

Max thought of these new ideals, and of his
talk with Magdalen, as he stood smoking and
looking at the water. Presently he felt cold,
and walked about again, stopping at last on
the very edge of the quay to read the name
of a vessel lying in the docks. There was
about a yard of motionless black water between
the quay and the tall side of the schooner.
Philip Esher's opportunity had come.

A FALSE STEP.

Philip Esher was within two yards of his
enemy. His eyes glittered with evil passion
now that the man whom he hated was within
his reach. He lifted his stick : he knew what
would follow ; a dull thud, a fall, a splash,
perhaps a cry and a hopeless dying struggle.
He had rehearsed it many times while he was
waiting in Gay Street, and dogging Max's
footsteps down the quay.

But before the stick fell or the thrust was
given Esher's arm was seized from behind
with feeble, frantic, force, and dragged downwards.
He gave his assailant so violent a
push that she was almost thrown to the

ground. It was a girl : his little daughter



Dolly. The child must have had rare courage
and comprehension, for she had never cried
out so long' as she feared that ]\Iax mii^ht see
her father in his murderous attempt ; but now
she uttered a quick, shrill scream that caused
Max to turn and rise from his half-kneeling
posture. He looked full at the two : the
child wrapped in a grey shawl, the man whose
face he could not see ; he recognised neither.
The night was dark, and naturally he did not
expect to see Esher or Dolly on the quay.
He moved slowly away, not suspecting the
(hanger that he had escaped. Dolly rose
trembling, and Esher grasped her arm with a
fiercer imprecation on her folly than she had
ever heard. Why had she come there when
he had told her to stay away ?

Dolly only gazed* at him with horrified,
despairing eyes, and a face from which fear had
drained every drop of blood. He pushed her
before him, holding her shoulder in a grasp
that left blue marks upon the delicate flesh,

and thus guided her from the quay to a
sheltered place beneath an outhouse, where he
told her angrily to wait for him. She was
too frightened to say anything, or to call for
assistance ; she cowered down, sick and faint,
watching her fathers figure until it disappeared
in the darkness. He was going back to
the quay to make another attempt on a man's
life, and there was nothing that she could do.
So she waited and waited, and clocks struck,
people left the quays, lights were put out,
shrill whistles proclaimed the departure of the
steamers, but Captain Esher did not return.

When he left her he went forward and saw
at once that Max was busy talking to a rough-looking
man, and that business was beginning.
He must wait for another chance. As the
night was cold, he turned back and entered a
little river-side tavern, where he called for
more brandy. His nerves were shaken, and
he felt it necessary to drink a good deal
before the old fierceness of feeling returned to

VOL. III. s

him. When it returned it brought also a
slight conciseness of thought, and the very
faintest possible tendency to see double. He
grasped his stick more firmly, however, as he
went out, and resolved upon taking the shortcut
through the docks to the quay, where he
knew Max Brendon stood.

This short cut had a peculiarity. The way
led over a lock-gate, which was sometimes left
partially open and sometimes shut. At the
point where the canal joined the river lay two
large docks or basins, in one of which boats
awaited the height of the tide ; in the other
barges were repaired and overhauled.
Between these basins were lock-gates, so that
water might be always kept in the repairing
dock, even if the second one were empty.
When the tide was low in the river the gates
of the canal were closed, but the gates
between the two basins remained slightly
open so as to keep the water in each at
the same level. And this was now the

case. He trod upon the planks of the footway
rather unsteadily. The surging water
beneath made him giddy; and the fog was
thick. He advanced, averting his eyes from
the flood beneath, looking towards the quay
where a few dim figures could be discerned.
Thus he reached the middle of the bridge, and
never noticed that the gates were open and a
half yard of space lay before him, which he
could have stridden over easily had he seen it.
No, his eyes were strained with a thirsty look
towards the spot where Max Brendon stood.
He lifted his foot for the onward step ; it fell
upon vacancy. He had not time to withdraw.
Horribly conscious of his miserable fate, with
a scream of agony, with outstretched arms
that caught in vain at the woodwork of the
lock, he fell. A dull splash in the deep writer
followed — a momentary struggle, but, numbed
by cold and stupefied by drink, he scarcely
rose again. No one heard ; no one saw ; the
hum of traffic went on ; men passed and

re-passed ; Max Brendon crossed that very-gate
upon his way home, and did not know
that his enemy lay drowned in the sullen
depth below.

Dolly had wrapped herself in her shawl, and
crouched down behind the building near
which her father had placed her. She was too
much exhausted to move had she even dared
to do so. There was not much wind, and she
was sheltered somewhat from damp. The hours
passed on, and she stayed motionless, falling
now and then into a doze, now wide awake
listening for her father s step, and suffering
agonies of cramp ; now only sensible of fatigue
and faintness, which gradually passed into
semi-unconsciousness. Thus the night wore
away ; a night of horror such as she could
hardly bear to recollect in after days. But
when the church clocks struck six, she knew
that some one touched her, that a voice said,
Get up, my child ; this is no place for you
to sleep in." She tried to move, lifted her face

a little, and elicited an exclamation of deep
surprise from her awakener.

Good heavens ! Why, it is Dolly ! "
She could not help uttering a little cry of
joy when she saw Max's face bent over her,
but immediately fainted, and knew nothing
more until she awoke to excruciating pain in a
soft, white bed, T\ith Magdalen by her side.
The night of exposure had done its work upon
her ; she was ill with rheumatic fever.

Little by little Magdalen learned what had
occurred. The basins were dragged, but
PhiHp Esher's body was never recovered. It
must have been swept away by the tide —
swept out to the ocean ''to toss with tangle
and with shells " — the very fate that he had
planned for the man who had crossed his path.
He was dead, with his sins upon his soul, and,
knowing all the truth, Mag;dalen could not but
bow her head in trembling thankfulness that
she had never linked her life to his. Her
instincts had not deceived her — she had never

been convinced that he deserved the forgiveness
which he craved. Forgiveness, indeed,
she gave him now ; forgiveness she had given
him long ago, for the wrong that he had tried
to do her ; but forgiveness did not mean the
love of a woman for a man that she would
marry. He had pushed his claims too far; and
she was thankful to remember that though she
had forgiven, she had not consented to love.

From Alice no explanation could be obtained.
She sank into a stupor from which
she never woke again after that short but
terrible scene with Philip Esher. Husband
and wife, if such they were, were fated to
follow each other at a very short interval to
the unknown land. She died of syncope two
days after Philip Esher's death.

It was poor little Dolly who made all these
matters clear. Her nerves had received a terrible
shock, and it was doubtful for many weeks
whether she would recover. Magdalen nursed
her very tenderly, and was tenfold repaid

for all her pains when lie found that not only
was Dolly's bodily strength returning, but that
her heart had come back to its old allegiance.
Henceforward the child seemed to look upon
Magdalen as her dearest and truest friend.

But the scenes through which she had passed
had left indelible traces on the child's heart
and mind. She could never be the simple,
innocent, trusting creature that Daisy still
remained. The memory of her act of treachery
to Magdalen — an act which certainly hastened
Alice's death, and led, in some degree, to
Captain Esher's tragic end, poisoned her life at
the Priory. When she was strong enough to
bear the change it was thought best that she
should go to the Eectory for a long visit, and
then, with Daisy, to a good school ; where, in
healthful work and play, it was hoped that she
would finally recover the elasticity of tone, the
gaiety of spirits, which seemed to have deserted
her. And in due time these better influences
did their work. One things she was never

told. Lie never learned that Alice was
possibly her mother.

Max and Magdalen were married very
quietly, and there was no more talk of his
leaving Scarsfield. Life at the Priory did not
go on altogether in its old grooves. The
house was still a centre for every good work,
and the poor and needy were always welcome
within its precincts ; but Magdalen's interests
had a wider range than in the days when she
was single, and her influence grew with her
interests. She had ties, too, which bound her
to her home as nothing else could have done.
Little children's voices were once more heard
in the old-fashioned rooms. Little feet
pattered along the wide corridors. Max
and Magdalen Brendon were happy in every
sense of the word : happy in their children,
happy in each other, happiest of all in the
work that they lived to do.

Mr. and Mrs. St. Aidan, at first vehemently
opposed to the marriage, soon withdrew their

objections, and lived, as of old, in the friendliest
relations with Magdalen. Of Max, too,
they became very fond, although the Eector
still wondered, from time to time, what had
attracted Magdalen to him. For Max's virtues
did not lie on the surface. Only his friends
knew what a tower of strength he could be
to them, how brave, how full of fortitude, of
patience, and noble resolution. And as long
as Magdalen "put up with his defects," he
used to say, " he cared very little for the
opinion of all the world beside."

Ursula spent a great deal of time at the
Priory, but in course of time married, and was
borne off to London, where her handsome face
and clever tongue made her a power in her
own world. Mrs. Brendon, Gertrude, and
Bessie, Heed on at the old house, a little more
peacefully, perhaps, than they had done in
days of yore.

And what of Cecil and Lenore ?

It was scarcely possible that their lives could

be as bright and as hopeful as those of Max
and Magdalen. The minds of these two were
not so strong, their aims where not so lofty.
But at least it was plain that Cecil had learnt
something of the beauty of candour and
courage and unselfishness, and that Lenore
judged him less harshly than she had done in
days gone by. They loved each other very
truly and devotedly ; and it was certainly a
gain to each of them to remember that each
had had something to forgive. And as years
went on they drew to each other more and
more, learning each to prize the other's merits,
to think gently of the other's weaknesses ;
knowing, as we should all know, that perfection
is not easily reached, and that with those
whom we love best, there is much to endure,
much to forgive — 'even unto seventy times

seven J'

THE END.

LORIMER AND GILLIES, PRINTERS, 31 ST. ANDREW SQUARE, EDINBURGH.

ON SOME

RECENT PUBLICATIONS

OF

OLIPHANT, ANDERSON & Farrier,

24 ST. GILES STREET,

EDINBURGH.

JUST Beat.

Extra Crown Svo clothe with Six Original illustrations, price 5s.

BRIAR AND PALM:

^ Stung of Circumstance anU Infiucncc*

Tee Baiae and the Palm are the Wages of Life-Tuppcr.

OPINIONS OF THE PRESS.

Is as charming a tale as this talented writer has produced. It paints
with quiet force and occasional touches of fine pathos, the career of a young
doctor, Dennis Vulgate, a character in whom the author arouses a deep
interest by the skill with which she has traced his growth through work
and suffering to gentleness and nobility of nature." — Scotsman.

In ' Briar and Palm ' Miss Swan is at her best, and the characters are
so well drawn that they absolutely stand out from the page like living and
breathing realities. Taken as a whole, this is the best effort of the
talented authoress." — Leeds Times.

"Miss Swan's versatility is truly wonderful, and in no previous instance
has it been more powerfully exhibited than in this highly interesting and
dramatic story." — KUmarnoclc Standard.

The whole conception is quite novel, yet vigorously worked out, and
with a success that justifies the effort at showing how the influence of
genuine Christian love and sympathy can soften and ultimately conquer, ina
naturally noble woman, the harsher teachings of poverty." — Haddington
Courier.

Need we say that the tale has a high moral purpose, and that it is told
with a charm of style which rivets attention from the first page to the
last." — Northern Ensign.

Edinburgh: OLIPHANT, ANDERSON & Farrier,

24 St. Giles Street.

BY ANNIE S. SWAN.

Id extra crown 8vo, cloth, price 5s.,

The Gates of Eden: A Story of Endeavour.

Tliii-.l Ecliti.ui. With Portrait of the Author.

The subject of Miss Swan's " Gates of Eden" is one wMcli demands, and
receives from her hand, a skilful treatment. John Bethune rears his
motherless boys in accordance with a preconceived plan. The elder is to bea
minister, the younger is to follow the plough. Circumstances seem to
favour his scheme ; for the future minister has, it appears, the advantage in
appearance, in manners, and in ability. But the real truth is different. The
depth of character and the best mental gifts really belong to the latter. How
the young man, conscious of his power, yet stedfastly walks along the
appointed path till he is free to choose, and how, once free, he enters on his
own way and overcomes all its difficulties, is very well told in these pages.
We have not often seen a better portraiture than is that of the two brothers.
Miss Swan is too skilful to make the weaker of the two a mere foil to the
stronger. He, too, with all his faults, has virtues of his own, and the reader
is glad to see them reaching their true development before the story is
finished. The episode of the recovery of WiHie Lorraine, a repentant
prodigal, is full of pathos ; as is also the love-story of Mary Campbell. The
"Gates of Eden" is a worthy successor to the author's " Aldersyde."' —
Spectator.

A distinct success. . . . We follow the career of twin brothers through
the book — Sandy and Jamie Bethink. Sandy, apparently getting all the
brains, is sent to St. Andrews to study, and his conceits and fine talk on his
visits home are humorously described. Then we see him transformed into
the Eev. Alexander Bethune of Lochbroom. Jamie seems fit only for the
harrows and the loom at first, but Aunt Susan always sees deeper than this,
and we read with interest the story of his endeavour to rise to higher
things. His character is well drawn, the earnest, noble soul following
God's leading.' — British Weekly.

The " Gates of Eden" is, like most of its predecessors, a homely tale of
Scottish life and manners. The homely dialect is given with admirable
fidelity, and there is much truthful delineation of character.' — Scotsman.

The imderlj-ing conception — that of a contrast between two brothers,
the one brilliant, clever, and superficial, but needing stern discipline before
the real strength of his nature can be evoked ; the other modest, unselfish,
but earnest and indomitable — is strongly grasped from the first, and is
wrought out with such power and consistency as to hold the reader's
attention by a kind of spell. The book is one which everybody can read
with pleasure, and from which many will profit.' — Scottish Leader.

One of the most dramatically rendered scenes of the book is that in
which the death of old Peter Bethune is described. If the author had never
written anything else, this part of the story would justify her claim to the
place in the front rank of our most gifted literary artists.' — Northern
Ensign.

A happy note is struck at the very outset of the " Gates of Eden," and
the quality of the good beginning is maintained throughout. . . . The best
of all the stories that we have yet received from the pen of its accomplished
authoress.' — Kilmarnock Standard.

Remarkably beautiful, noble in spirit, rich in pathos, strong in the
triumph of an earnest purposeful life.' — Daily MaiL

Just ready. Seventeenth Thousand, in One Volume, small crown 8vo, cloth
gilt, with numerous Illustrations, price 2s. ; cloth plain, Is. Od. ; paper
cover, Is.

Jock Halliday, A Grassmarket Hero ; or, Sketches

of Life and Character in an Old City Parish. By Robinaa F.
Hard, Author of ' Annette's New Shoes,' etc.

The narrative is swift and flowing, lit up with flashes of humour, and also
with pathetic touches that are equally true.' — Christian Leader.

Charmingly got up. . . . Sure to have an influence for good over the many
readers which the book certainly deserves to have.' — Daily Free Press.

'A very sweet little story. . A simple idol of everyday life, naturally
and pathetically told.' — Scotsman.

'Fitted to do good service alike in connection with temperance and general
mission work.' — British Messenger.

Pleasing and natural ; . . . well rewards perusal.' — Inverness Courier.

'A delightful Edinburgh story'— Liverpool Mercury.

A good stock of healthy, mischief-making, but generous good-nature about
the lad. . He is the very soul of tenderness to the little blind girl.' —
United Presbyterian Juvenile Missionary Magazine.

Full of lights and shadows, queer bits, laughter-forcing bits, moving bits.
. . Difficult to lay down.' — S. S. Teachers' Magazine.

Written with much ability and feeling.' — Christian World.

'A fascinating story of humble life.' — Dundee Advertiser.

A very effective story.' — Haddington Courier.

'Will assuredly take its place beside the productions of the author of " Rab
and his Friends," and the tender and touching tales of Professor Wilson'—
Brechin Advertiser.

A tender, spirited story of mission-work among the slums.' — Sunday-school
Chronicle.

A capitally written sketch of Scottish city life among the humbler classes.'
Christian.

The story is an incident of city mission work, and it is capitally told. It
is a book which should And a place in every Sunday school or temperance
library.' — Southern Reporter.

The narrative, though plain and unadorned, will be found of great interest,
especially on the part of those who appreciate Scottish life and character in its
more homely phases.' — Northern Whig.

A real story — one that interests and, in many of its pages, amuses, and
therefore the moral is not obtruded on notice; but its moral is of the best. . . .
We never saw a better of its kind.' — Arbroath Guide.

Altogether, the book is one which excites the deepest interest, and conveys
a moral in every chapter.' — Derry Sentinel.

Have no hesitation in commending, not only to those who love a good and
racily-told tale, but to those who are sometimes puzzled to know what sort of
a gift-book to get for a young friend.' — Newcastle Weekly Chronicle.

A good sketch of one of those sterling characters, who, in spite of their
surroundings, developed into useful members of society, spreading wholesome
influence around them in some of the least reputable quarters of our great
cities.' — Aberdeen Journal.

'The pages are full of pen portraits, which must have been drawn from
nature. Mission-work, as presented to us in this little volume, means very
much more than a good story. The Christian heart, yearning over the fallen
and lost, will find in it much to enjoy and much to learn. We could not conceive
of any book more suitable for a prize, or better fitted to place temperance
teaching in its proper niche. Among the illustrations are some choice bits of
Edinburgh scenery.' — Band of Hopi^ Revipm.

Fifth Edition, in small crown 8vo, cloth, extra. gilt edges, price 2s.;
paper covers, Is. ; plain edges, Is. 6d.,

Tom Telfer's Shadow : A Story of Everyday
Life. By Robinaa F. Hardy, Author of ' Jock Halliday.'

• Excellently got up. . . . It is neatly written ; but has the fault that its
pietistic efforts are too obtrusive.' — Sc(4sTna!i.

'A book that boys will like. It is written with a certain dash of dramatic
poAver, and with a thorough appreciation of the eccentricities of boyhood.
The characters are distinctly sketched; the situations are lively, often
humorous, and the plot is of sustained interest. The mischief is healthy, the
fun is natural, and the moralising are sufficiently scarce.' — Fifeshire Journal.

Touched with genuine pathos, and illuminated by the freshness of Scottish
home life. Every character is made to stand out well'— ^cac^e/n?/.

'Full of healthy feeling.' — Baptist Magazine.

A capital story, full of characters well drawn,' — Sunday School Chronicle.

The author has a true perception of the style of writing suited to boys
and youths.' — Belfast Whig.

'It is unlike "Jock Halliday" in many respects, because the characters
belong to a different rank, but we are sure it will have a popularity equal to
that of its fascinating predecessor.' — Edinburgh Courant.

Written with great vividness, delineates many phases of Scottish character,
and well sustains the reader's attention from beginning to end.' — English
Presbyterian Record.

A capital story for boys.' — Liverpool Mercwv/.

'A book in which the young reader's interest will never flag from beginning
to end.' — Kilmarnock Journal.

Full of interest and instruction. . . . The illustrations are admirable'—
Outlook,

'Just the very book to give to a boy when he is going out to face the world
for the first time. It will gain his ear by its shrewd Scotch humour, and
then, before he is aware, the truth thus admitted will knock loudly at his
heart. Tom Telfer's "shadow" is self, and a sorry life it leads him; but in
God's good time he finds the Saviour, and is translated out of darkness into
marvellous light.' — Sword and Trowel.

The authoress knows Edinburgh and the human heart; and the fulness
of her knowledge of both is displayed in a most winsome way.' — Christian
Leader.

The whole tone of the book is eminently healthy, and its tendency is
to deepen our love for those things which are honest, pure, and kind.' —
Perthshire Constitutional.

'Tom Telfer finds in himself a "shadow" which, in the early part of his
history, sadly obscures the true light. He is introduced to us as a wayward,
selfish boy. But holy influences win their way to his heart, and his
life becomes radiant with a brightness which lights up not his own being
only, but the lowly sphere in which he moves.' — British Messenger.

Lately published, crown 8vo, price Ss. 6d. ; or in plainer binding,
without Illustrations, 2s. 6d.,

Glenairlie ; or, The Last of the Grammes. By

Robin F. Hardy, author of 'Jock Halliday,' etc. With Six
Original Illustrations by Tom Scott.

The tale is one of life and character in a Highland glen ; it has a rather
complicated but well-managed plot, contains some shrewd and effective
studies of different types of Scottish character, and is imbued with an
emphatic but truthful local colour. Written with considerable narrative
and descriptive power, and having an enjoyable flavour of humour, with
here and there a touch of real pathos, the book is a wholesome and readable
story.' — Scotsman.

Brightly written, and does not flag. The author is well up in the
Scotch dialect, and gives some good portraits of Scotch character, which
tends mainly to crossgrainedness and perversity.' — Literary World.

Done in Miss Hardy's happiest, freshest, and quaintest style ; is a scene in
the Highland parish kirk of Glenairlie, on the harvest thanksgiving Sabbath,
Everything in this sketch is brought out with the hand of an artist, — old Dr,
Cargill. and his sermon on Ruth ; the creaking pulpit stair, and the pagoda-like
sounding board, with a gilt pine-apple on the top ; and the square family
pews, adorned with green baize and brass nails ; and the old crones in front of
the pulpit in rusty black, and Bibles wrapped in clean white handkerchiefs, with
sprigs of thyme or southernwood; and '' Betty " coming in late and bustling, and
provoking an angry scowl from the laird for letting the folding-leaf of the seat
fall with a crash ; and the close of the service, when there was a stir in the
elders' pew, and each seized his wooden implement for the "lifting of the
offering." The whole is admirable.* — Perthshire Constitutional.

Rich racy Scotch humour.' — Presbyterian.

A book which contains such characters as Miss Leslie, Betty, and the
impracticable "oldest inhabitant " — a persona mute only — can need no recommendation.'
— Academy-the

story is full of dramatic interest. Its principal events are gi-duped
with all the power which the gifted authoress can command. There is a
fascination in the detail, and a richness in the language, savoured with nota
few natural pictures of Scottish life and character, which compel the
reader to peruse it page by page to the end.' — Kilmarnock Herald.

There is a fine Scottish flavour in the book ; and it is made more attractive
by a set of original etchings, which help the reader to realize more vividly
the scenes depicted with so much graphic power by the story-teller.' —
Christian Leader.

The plot is an admirable conception, and the incident is powerfully presented,
while the tone of the story is healthy, as the writing is vigorous.' —
Daily Review.

'Shows keen insight into the motives and humours of ordinary human
nature, distinct literary power to sketch those motives, and the true novelist's
tact, that can draw into a complete and beautiful whole the severed and
tangled skeins of character and purpose. It is the story of homely life in a
remote parish of Scotland.' — Fifeshire Journal.

'The incidents are woven into the literary web with consummate skill.' —
Bender Advertiser.

The sketches of character are exceedingly good, and there is a flavour of
quiet humour which is thoroughly enjoyable.' — Glasgow Herald.

Martha and her faithful maid are very truthfully drawn.' — Athenaeum.

Now ready, uniform with ' Bits from Blinkboxnt,'

New Edition, in One Volume, cloth extra, with Six Original Illustrations,
price reduced to 3s. 6d. ; or in plainer binding, without Illustrations,
price 2s. 6d. ; paper boards, 2s.,

Aldersyde. A Border Story of Seventy Years
Ago. By Annie S. Swan.

The Authoress has received the following Autograph Letter from Mr.
Gladstone: —

10 Downing Street,
Whitehall, April 16, 1883.

Dear Madam, — I have now read the work which you did me the honour
to present to me with a very kind inscription, and 1 feel obliged to add a line
to ray formal acknowledgment already sent. I think it beautiful as a work ol
art, and it must be the fault of a reader if he does not profit by the perusal.
Miss Nesbit and Market will, I hope, long hold their places among the truly
living sketches of Scottish character. — I remain, your very faithful and
obedient W. E. GLADSTONE.'

Sir Walter Scott himself never delineated a character more true to life
than Janet Nesbit.' — Stirling Observer.

'Readers who can follow Scotch idioms easily will be moved by the narrative
of Janet Nesbit's life. . . . Incidents common enough, but eloquent of
character and "well told.' — Athenaeum.

'Full of quiet power and pathos.' — Academy.

'She has brought us into the presence of a pure and noble nature, and ha
reminded us that a life of sorrow and disappointments has its deep compensations,
and its glorious meaning.' — Literary World.

'If there is anything more noteworthy than another in this cleverly constructed
story, it is the vigorous raciness with which the vernacular is
employed. ' — Haddington Courier.

A tale of deep interest; it is a work of true genius.' — United Presbyterian
Magazine.

• Hurrah ! our good Scotch stories, with their dear rough old vernacular,
are not going to die out just yet, or, if at all, they are going to die hard'— *S.5.
Teachers' Magazine.

Beautifully conceived and exquisitely written.' — Airdrie Advertiser.

'One of the best Scotch tales that has appeared for many years. . A
wealth of local colouring and fineness of touch rarely to be met in these days
of painfully analytic writing.' — Kilmarnock Herald.

A book we must read through at a sitting. It lays hold of our interest in
the first page, and sustains it to the end.' — Daily Review.

Deserves to occupy a prominent and permanent place among Scottish works
of imagination. . . . Not a dull page in the book ; while not a paragraph will
be skipped lest some of the finer touches should be missed.' — Kelso Chronicle.

We have not read a fresher, livelier, or more wholesomely stimulating story
for many a day.' — Kilmarnock Standard.

As a type of the sound-hearted, high-spirited Scottish gentlewoman, who
can sustain her dignity on a poor pittance, and who is tender and true without
any pretence of high sentiment, Janet Nesbit is a fine portrait of a noble
woman.' — N. B. Daily Mail.

The central figure in the narrative is Miss Janet Nesbit, of Aldersyde,
a young gentlewoman who is early called to a life of self-sacrifice. This she
humbly accepts, working out the problem with so much sincerity and faithfulness
that the grey morning is followed by a bright day.' — Christian Leader.

Thirty Edition, crown 8vo, Paper Boards, price Is. ; cloth, Is. 6d.

Across Her Path. By Annie S. Swan, Author of ' Alder-side,'

' Carlowrie," &c.

The deservedly popular shilling novel still holds its own, and bids fair to
exercise a yet wider sway in time to come. Amongst the most successful of
these ventures in cheap literature may be ranked a new novel by Miss Swan,
K story almost as powerful as it is bewitching. It possesses, amongst other
virtues, the rather unusual one of being entirely free from padding, presenting
no temptations for skipping, even to the most frivolous reader. A little
moralising would nevertheless have been pardoned readily in so excellent a
tale, and would have imparted to it a solidity it does not now possess ; yet let
it not be supposed that an alteration in this' respect would have been advantageous
— we do but marvel that Miss Swan could have had the strength and
good taste to suppress herself for the sake of her art.' — Literary World.

As to skilful construction of the plot, is one of the most successful efforts of
its authoress, a young lady who has, in a remarkably brief space of time, gained
a national reputation by her story of " Aldersyde." The interest is sustained
in her new story with remarkable skill ; and few readers, when they have
taken up the book, will be able to lay it down again until they have reached the
denouement. The scene is laid for the most part in London, and it must be
owned that Miss Swan shows herself about as much at home in that Modern
Babylon as in her native Lothians.' — Kilmarnock Standard.

"Written in a clear, terse, crisp style, it is at the same time a full and
lively portraiture of the phases of English society with which it deals.' —
Brechin Advertiser.

Has a good plot, and the characters are well sketched.' — Scotsman.

A story that no one should miss reading. Although published in the now
popular shilling edition, it has nothing of the "shilling horror " about it —
indeed, the name of the authoress is a sufficient guarantee for that. The plot,
although interesting, is far from being sensational, and it is not worked out
at any cost to the character painting or to the descriptive writing. Miss
Swan's literary style is graceful, and she can write really good dialogue. The
authoress of " Aldersyde " is certainly at her best in "Across Her Path." ' —
Fifes ire Journal.

The story is well and forcibly told.' — Christian World.

l\Iuch originality is seen in the conception and in the development of the
plot. Miss Swan, in her narrative, also shows a marked improvement. It is
free from restraint, and it is not encumbered with the verbose commonplaces
which too frequently are made to take the place of dialogue, and which are
generally irrelevant besides. The gifted authoress of ' ' Across Her Path " has
successfully avoided such blemishes, and has turned out a story which, for its
interest and for its style, ranks with the most famous of her works, and in
seme respects exceeds the best of the rapidly lengthening list.' — Daily Review.

The interest is cleverly sustained throughout, the plot being constructed
with the skill of the practised story-teller ; it is indeed a tale difficult to lay
down until it has been finished.' — Chrism Leader.

Kew Edition, small crown 8vo, extra cloth gilt, price Is. each ; or the
two in one Volume, cloth, Is. 6d., — paper covers, Is.,

Marion Forth; or, Unspotted from the World,

By Annie S. Swan, author of ' Aldersyde.'

Mistaken. By the same Author.

These are two issues of the " Christian Life Series" which we are glad to
see written. "Mistaken " is excellent, showing how we may be mistaken even
when engaged in religious work.' — Sunday School Chronicle.

The stories are simply told, yet are drawn in strong decided lines ; . . .
worked out with a subtle, dramatic instinct, on every page can be traced fine
touches of art, which, never obtrusive, yet leavening all, lend a charm to the
composition. . . . Exhibit a ripeness of judgment, a delicacy of sentiment,
and a depth of feeling which impress their lessons strongly upon the mind.' —
Dundee Telegraph.

" Mistaken " is a stirring story stirring told. We shall be "mistaken " if
every Miss is not taken with the book. Those who read and heed will be
better by it, so all had better try it. The "Christian Life Series" is
decidedly enriched by " Marion Forth." We feel sure it should help on
in the Christian life all who read it. Buy it and try it.' — Sword and Trowel.

Stories for young ladies, whose perusal may help to define the position
which active participation in mission-work should hold in relation to home
life and duties.' — Christian.

'Good in tone and teaching; and young people will read them.' — British
Messenger.

These novelettes, so pure, so sweet and chastened in style, may be read
with advantage in every Christian family.' — Scottish Reformer.

A fine Christian tone pervades the whole, and a manly piety is held up,
in contrast with an unwise though well-meaning enthusiasm.' — Bateman.

Two very tempting little books of a new series, whose charming stories
may well fascinate and instruct our elder girls.' — Freeman.

Will do one's heart good to read. . . Narrated with telling effect.' — Scottish
Sabbath School Teachers' Magazine.

*Both stories are told in a style which holds the mind of the reader
throughout, and each illustrates in its own way the truth that the path of
duty is the path both of safety and honour.' — Baptist Magazine.

T wo capital stories for girls.' — Sunday School Times.

Should be widely circulated amongst religious workers. . . . Just the sort
of books needed.' — Kilmarnock Journal.

To realize the skill and pathos with which the plot is wrought out, the
keen observation of character marking every page with a heartfelt sympathy
and approval of whatever is noble and good, the books themselves must be
read. They are worthy the author of " Aldersyde." ' — Brechin Advertiser.

New Edition, in crown 8vo, cloth extra, with Six Illustrations in Chalk
by Tom Scott, price reduced to 3s. 6d. ; or in plainer binding, without
Illustrations, price 2s. 6d. ; paper boards, 28.,

Carlowrie ; or, Among Lothian Folk. By Annie

S. Swan.

'A treat to the lovers of Scottish fiction, the scenery and local truth of the
dialect and " modes of thought " are all that can be desired ; and the book is
no small addition to the literature which endeavours to depict a phase of
country life fast passing away.' — Athenaeum.

Will certainly enhance the reputation of the authoress of " Aldersyde.'- ' —
Liverpool Mercury.

The characters are sketched with more freedom and with more keenness
also than those in "Aldersyde," and this comparison is just as severe a test
as could be applied.' — Daily Review.

'The delineation of the house-mother, Mrs. Dalrymple. strikes us as being
one of the very finest portraits to be found in the whole extent of our national
literature of a clever, sunny-hearted, and utterly unselfish Scotchman of
the rustic middle class.' — Kilmarnock Journal.

The interest of the reader is enchained from first to last.' — The Christian.

The book possesses a quiet idyllic charm which it is impossible to resist
. . The breezy freshness and pervading refinement of the story will hardly
fail to please all readers of simple tastes.' — Academy.

" Carlowrie " is already one of the pronounced successes of the season.
All the Scottish newspapers, with one characteristic exception, are delighted
with this tale of the Lothians. That it is a study from the life, executed
with the delicate insight that comes from loving sympathy, hardly admits of
a doubt; and the delineation of the farmer's gentle wife — one of nature's true
nobility — is a masterpiece of the purest pathos.' — Christian Leader.

Of such stories as this — full of tender religious feeling, life-like characters,
and graceful description — one cannot have too many.' — Literary World.

A sweet idol of rural life in a country farm.' — Southern Reporter.

'A healthy tone, and a Doric having the right twang in it." — Fifeshire
Journal.

It is with choice taste, and an appropriateness rarely found in the inscription
of a book, that Miss Swan dedicates her " Carlowrie " to the dear memory
of her who made the sunshine of the home that was ; and she may be well congratulated
on her work as the book of the season,' — National Literary
Journal.

True to the life. . . . Interesting from beginning to end, and the reader
must be hard to please who cannot find entertainment in what is at once e
pleasant novel and a good book.' — Northern Whig.

• An episode of Midlothian life, so true in its local descriptions, so graphic in
its character drawing, and so pure-spirited withal, that the most fastidious
critic will fall in love with it. . . . Parents of taste and intelligence will be
glad to put such a book as this into the hands of their children.' — Courant.

Crown 8vo, cloth extra, Illustrated, 2s. 6d. ; bevelled boards, gilt edges, 3s. ;
Cheap Edition, paper covers, Is. ; cloth. Is. 6d.,

A. Divided House : A Study from Life. By Annie S,
Swan.

'The author of " Aldersyde " and "Carlow-ie" will lose nothing in reputation
by her new story, " A Divided House." It professes to be a study
from real life, and bears strong internal evidence that it is so, and that it is
a faithful study. It is well written, in a quiet but clear and effective style.
Its interest owes nothing to the sensational element, dealing as it does
■nath domestic loves and trials, with the mistakes and follies of human
weakness, followed by the chastening of consequent misfortune, and the
final triumph of religious faith and patient human valour. The principal
characters are admirably portrayed, and there is great delicacy of touch in
the delineation of the female characters, the weak and erring, but finally
purified and ennobled, wife of Richard Blake, and his sweet and almost
perfect cousin Mary Osborne. The religious element in the story is
essential to the plan, and to the development of the characters, and is always
justly subordinated to the leading pm-pose of the book, never degenerating
into canting talk, as is too often the case with books of this class. "A
Divided House" may be heartily recommended to all lovers of pure wholesome
fiction'— ,S'co^s'/«an.

There is nothing striking in plot or incident, the events related in the
narrative being all such as we see happening around us every day ; . . . but
gracefully told, and in many passages full of quiet pathos. The moral intended
to be taught is, of com-se, the chastening and purifying influence of
adversity on a worldly mind, and the need for mutual patience and forbearance
in wedded life.' — Aberdeen Journal.

Its quiet, human touches give us an almost personal interest in the personages
of the story. Indeed, as might be expected from the author's peculia
faculty for limning home life, the domestic passages which abound throughout
the book are the most attractive.' — Dundee Advertiser.

The present tale is one of deep interest. The title is derived from ihh
result of the marriage of a young city merchant with the daughter of a
country squire with highly fashionable connections. The various points,
such as "The Dawn of Love," "Across the Rubicon," and "Taking up
the Cross," being worked out with unmistakeable power. There is a good
deal of subtle analysis of character in the story, which from the change of
theme, as compared with her previous books, reveals a variety of power on
the part of the novelist, and holds out the prospect of other good work
from the same pen. The whole book is full of quiet, true power.' —
Liverpool Mercury.

This story is told with the same directness and simplicity which
characterize Miss Swan's previous works, and we are sure that those to
whom she has in them already afforded pleasure and instruction, will not
be disappointed when they turn to the pages of "A Divided Houses'—
Literary World.

Full of pathetic feeling and deep insight into human native.' — Warrington
Guardian.

Full of those quiet, quaint, and unexpected touches of genius which
have made her other stories so popular, and the tone that nine through
the whole of this graceful story of struggle and triumph is ol the highest
and most true-hearted,' — Sheffield Independent.

Now ready, crown 8vo, Thirteenth Edition, price 3s. Gd. ; or in plainer
binding, without Illustrations, 2s. 6d.,

Bits from Blinkbonny ; or, Bell o' the Manse. A

Tale of Scottish Village Life between 1841 and 1851. By John
Strathesk. "With Six Original Illustrations.

The daily life in a thoroughly Scotch rural village is described in the most
lifelike manner, and one feels a personal certainty of being able to recognise
any of the people described if one met them. The homely but pretty illustrations
place the country scenery before our actual vision.' — Athenaeum.

'Altogether, "Bell" is an exquisitely careful and finished study. The book
abounds in quaint touches of Scottish humour, delightful specimens of our
vernacular language, incidents and anecdotes grave and gay.' — Scotsman.

The effect is really delightful, and the blending of quiet humour and
natural pathos in the volume makes it a positive refreshment to the spirit.
. . The account of Bell's courtship with the shamefaced bachelor, David
Tait of Blackbrae, is delicious.' — Glasgow Daily Mail.

'If there are not so many characters introduced as in some of Sir Walter
Scott's works, the characters have an individuality as pronounced as any of
his, and the lights and shades of character are finished off with an equal
degree of care and truthfulness.' — Huntly Express.

Bell is the heroine of the book, and a well-drawn character she is, with her
quaint ways, her happy expedients, her clever but never shrewish tongue, her
simple yet strong fidelity to the family she served, and her wise, droll, and
pithy sayings. Dan Corbett, the one-eyed smuggler, poacher, flycatcher,
and a dozen other things, ranks next to Bell as a finished portraiture.' —
Chambers's Journal.

Piquant and charming in its very simplicity. Enlivened in almost every
page by bits of genuine Scottish humour.' — Ayr Advertiser.

'The chapter treating of "Wee Nellie" comes closer home in its power of
stirring the heart than anything we have seen since the appearance of Dr.
John Brown's " Bab and his Friends." The illustrations are true works of
art.' — Brechin Advertiser.

'A story of homely Scotch life, pleasant and amusing. The dialect is well
managed and faithful without being overdone.' — The Graphic.

Scattered throughout the volume are several graphic sketches of village
characters, including Gavin Sinclair, the beadle and grave digger, an old
worthy descended from John Brown of Priesthood, the covenanting martyr,
Dan Corbett, the village poacher, etc' — Edinburgh Courant.

'Pictures penned. . . . "Bell "is simply delightful. We defy anyone to
read it without a sense of real enjoyment.' — The Literary World.

'We have never seen Scottish village life better described.' — Montrose
Review.

'A finely told story, which, for interest, excels not a few of our novels. A
splendid study.' — Hawick Advertiser.

• The author describes the village life of Scotland with the fidelity and grace
of Wilkie. We should have enjoyed hearing Burns read them to Tam o'
Chanter over the last gill.' — Sheffield Independent.

Just published, crown 8vo, Third Thousand, price 3s. 6d. ; or in plainer
binding, without Illustrations, 2s. 6d.,

More Bits from Blinkbonny. A Tale of Scottish

Village Life between 1831 and 1841. By John Strathesk,
Author of 'Bits from Bliukbonny,' 'Little Bluebird,' 'Elder
Logan's Story about the Kirks,' and 'Miss Graham's Protege.
With Six Original Illustrations.

Readers will only be too glad of the privilege of sitting with the Author
on Nancie's Knowe, and listening to his stories of Scottish characters and
customs of fifty years back. . . . Pawkilytold. . . . Glimpses of Scottish rural
politics, church and school life, fairs and marriages, customs of half a century
ago that are manifestly drawn from the life." — Scotsman.

The homely village life of Scotland depicted in the most graceful,
humorous, and skilful way. Some pretty softly-tinted drawings make the
volume still more attractive.' — Literary World.

'A worthy sequel to the former-bits from Blinkbonny:" rare racy stuff
we have here. Never say the Scotchman Las no fun in him, — for a deep,
quiet, thoughtful mirth, he beats us all. We ]ike this book, and would
aid its circulation.' — Eev. C. H. Surgeon in Sword and Trowel.

'An abundant feast of fun, suitable to all ages. It is long since we have
seen such a lifelike gallery of portraits. A sincere vein of piety runs through
the book, and aptly embodies the shrewdness and common sense wldch the
Scotch character — at once practical and poetic — is able to carry into the
sacred regions of religion.' — The County Gentleman, London.

'As a faithful representation of Scottish life and character, this book maybe
deservedly classed with such books as Dean Ramsay's " Reminiscences " or
George M-JJonald's "Alec Forbes," and will be read with delight by all
who appreciate humour, pathos, and fidelity of description.' — Australian
Witness.

" The Parish School," " The Gas Question," " The Tailors at Gibbiesbrae,'
are particularly good. Altogether, one of the most readable books we have
met with for many a day.' — Otago Laity Times, New Zealand.

Full of bright and truthful sketches of habits of life and modes of thought
prevalent in the Scottish Lowlands.' — Chambers's Journal.

'Characteristic details, realism of touch, tender humour, and permanent
Attraction. The book has our high commendation.' — Nonconformist.

Every chapter enjoyable ; the scenes of the "Wee Italian laddie," "Adam
Rankine's dying hours," and "Jamie Murray's wedding," maybe instanced
as particularly fine.' — Stationery Trades' Review.

Very amusing, and very instructive as well.' — Liverpool Courier.

'Picturesque, but faithful to nature; and simple, but full of genuine
interest.' — Northern Whig, Belfast.

Keen and kindly observation, combined with a thorough knowledge of
Scotch human nature, and a rare power of graphic portraiture.' — Aberdeen
Free Press.

'As full of "meat" as a newly laid egg. We find on the canvas such
characters as Tibbie Murray, the honest washerwoman ; Astrachan Gemelli,
the tailor; Big Murray; Mr. Torrance, the parish teacher; — the whole interspersed
by a wealth of anecdote and happy humour.' — Southern Reporter.

Authentic touches of the true artist, poet and humorist; a perennial and
affluent leanness which looks kindly on all the world; racy anecdotes
galore, admirable sketches, etc' — Methodist Recorder.

Crown 8v ), cloth extra, Illustrated, price Ss. 6d. ; plainer binding, without
Illustrations, 2s. 6d., Paper Boards, 2s.,

Preston Tower ; or, Will He no' come Back Again ?
By Jesse M. E. Saxby, Author of ' Ben Hanson,' etc.

A capital story, with only so much flavour of religious teaching in it as to
give it that quality which may parents and others think essential in all such
works.' — Scotsman

'Will be found specially interesting by those who are familiar with the
scenery of East Lothian, some of the local descriptions being particularly
good. . . . We have not forgotten Mrs. Saxby's story of "Ben Hanson,"
but the present volume seems to us full of gx-eater power both in plot and
incident.' — Liverpool Mercury.

The tone of the book is morally healthy, its spirit evangelical, and in a
quiet persuasive manner it inculcates lessons of the highest moment, and
offers to young men counsels and warnings whose observance will not only
save them from failure and dis-race, but insure to them success, honour, and
'•,he infinitely greater boon of eternal life.' — Baptist Magazine.

'Tldsisa romantic and pleasing story of family life and affection, which
reminds us of a sentence by Edward Garrett, to the effect that "there is a
certain misery which means, for the wise observer, that one of the other sex
has been at the making of it"' — Christian World.

'A very readable romance of real life. . . . There is plenty of incident as
well as character, and the author knows how to portray deep feeling in a
simple, natural way.' — Liverpool Courier.

'The author of "Preston Tower" possesses abilities as a story-teller of a
very high order. It is some time since we read a story of such good all-round
merit.' — Ardrossan Herald.

'A quaint story, opening with an exceedingly graphic description of the
village of Prestonpans, and presenting in the course of its clever plot a
remarkable variety of typical characters, some of them "racy of the soil,"
and all of them people worth knowing.' — Kilmarnock Standard.

The plot is good, and the hero is successful in getting out of the toils, and
virtue is rewarded in the good old fashion.' — Aberdeen Free Press.

The whole story throughout is beautifully told, and an exciting interest is
awakened at the beginning, which feeling becomes more intense as the story
proceeds, and which never flags till the last page is reached.' — Huntly Express.

'This is a Scotch tale of a very refreshing and wholesome nature. . . . The
interest of the reader is aroused by the introduction of a thread of love, which
takes its usual devious course, but ultimately triumphs.' — Perthshire Constitutional.


'The history of a young high-spirited youth, who engages in all kinds of
mad escapades, and becomes at last an exile from home, serving with distinction
in the Indian army, supplies the authoress with plenty of material for
telling situations, thrilling scenes, and romantic incidents, and of this
material she fully avails herself.' — Northern Whig.

There is abundance of incident woven together into a well-contrived plot,
and there is powerfully drawn character in this story, which is sui-e to interest,
and can hardly be read without some advantage.' — Spectator.

Small crown 8vo, cloth extra, bevelled boards, gilt edges, illustrated,
price 2s; cheap edition, paper covers, price Is.; cloth, Is. 6d.,

Katie : An Edinburgh Lassie. By Robinaa F.
Hard.

sit is a great relief to turn to Miss Eobina Harde Katie: an Edinburgh
Lassie." A tale told with genuine humour and pathos. The two old fishwives
are splendid.' — Athenaeum.

A well-told tale of a Scottish lass and her humble father.' — The QUeen.

Another of those strong realistic transcripts of Edinburgh lire that we have
learnt to associate with the name of Robins F. Hardy. . . . Sure of a warm
welcome at thousands of firesides. . . . Would have delighted the author of
"Eab and his Friends'" — Christian Leader.

A particularly bright and pleasant little story. There is genuine humour
in Katie's misadventures.' — Christian World.

gives us the portraits of a group of women and girls, drawn with rare
individuality and brightness.' — Literary World.

Touches universal human sympathies, and conveys most valuable lessons.'
Canada Presbyterian.

Miss Eobina Hardy is the Dickens of " Auld Eeekie." She has a rich twofold
gift, that makes her equally at home in depicting those humorous and
pathetic aspects of life which are often so subtly interwoven with each other.'
North British Daily Mail.

'Scotch humour is to the fore in "Katie," who furnishes material for an
effective character sketch.' — Graphic.

The story is full of action, the touches of humour are frequent and
genuine, and the tone and tendency are alike admirable.' — Glasgow Herald.

iiich in pathos and humour, with a freshness and truth to nature that
cannot fail to commend itself.' — Leeds Times.

'Never since reading "Flitters Tatters and the Councillor" have we been
80 much touched by a picture of Arab life in one of our great cities, as by this
story of 'katie'" — Aberdeen Journal.

It is distinguished by genuine pathos, quaint, never coarse humour ; its
Scotch is admirable, its scenes are lifelike, its pictures of West Port manners
and customs are true without being overdrawn.' — Edinburgh Courant.

Natural and yet most thrilling, the humorous, the pathetic, and the tragic
are so well blended that the interest is sustained to the last.' — Primitive
Methodist.

The external features of Auld Eeekie are reproduced with the felicity born
of love. The characters are marvellously lifelike.' — Kilmarnock Standard.

'A capital little story of life and Christian work. . . . Will encourage
Christian workers amongst the outcasts. ' — Sword and Travel.

'A capital gift for any one fond of a touching story, told in first-rate
Scotch, and dealing with scenes, places, and domestic incidents which must be
dear to all Scotch folk. The illustrations are carefully done, and characteristic
of the life of which they treat.' — Sunday Talk.

Readers will find the same power, humour, kindliness, and keen discrimination
which characterize all Miss Hardy's writings.' — Perthshire
Constitutional.

lu 4to, Illustrated, cloth extra, price Is. each ; cheap edition, 6d. each,

The Story of Old Whiddy; or, How Little Doris

began to make Her Mark in Life. By Sala.

Rough, a Clever Dog. A True Story of his Life.

By Mrs. Jarvis.

Two companion stories for young people-which would make a good
present for brother and sister.' — Scotsman.

Two excellent books for the young, attractively illustrated. The intention
of the writers, it may be stated, is not merely to interest their youthful
readers, but to induce them to treat with kindness and consideration their
faithful, intelligent, four-footed friends. We wish the books every success in
this laudable object.' — Border Advertiser.

The writers of these charming stories are doing great service to the cause
which the Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals have at heart.' —
Haddington Courier.

'enough" is a true story of a clever dog, told in a most humorous and
taking vein by the author of " The Autobiography of a Robin." She proves
that Rough was no ordinary fellow, and makes him tell the story of his
wonderful career like the clever dog he is.' — Dundee Courier.

These are companion volumes which enforce upon children the duty of
kindness towards animals, and the publishers deserve credit for the dainty
dress in which they appear.' — Dumfries Courier.

We commend " The Story of Old Whiddy" as a book of rare merit. The
story is sure to please the young folks, especially those who are fond of
domestic pets. It is not a mere book of pictiu-es — though these are beautiful
and plentiful— they are illustrations, and make the narrative more real and
vivid.' — Orcadian.

Handsome little volumes, . . . very pleasantly written, . . . calculated to
teach excellent lessons. They will be appreciated by children when more
expensive gifts might not be. No parent or friend will regret putting them
into the hands of the young folks.' — Brechin Advertiser-wonderful

Old Whiddy ! Let all the children read his Mie'— Weekly Post.

'rough" is worthy to be classed with " Eab and his Friends." "Old
Whiddy" is also delightful.' — Presbyterian Witness, Halifax.

Both stories are as graceful and pretty as anything of the kind we have
seen for many a long day.' — Manchester Examiner.

An exceptionally good little story for the nursery library ; bairns should
learn to know what a dog is.' — Aberdeen Juuriial.

Pleasantly and simply written, and containing many picturesque details of
family life, both books will be appreciated.' — Scottish Leader.

Books for very little folks that deserve special notice.' — Newcastle
Chronicle.

If any real dog possessed the accomplishments so amusingly described by
Mrs. Jarvis, it must have been a canine genius indeed.' — The Graphic.

Both books, which are nicely got up, may help to train young people m
works of mercy.' — Liverpool Mercury.

Rough's biography discloses features, incidents, tricks, and traits which
are certainly novel and, beyond question, interesting.' — Zoophilist.

'sold AVhiddy" is one of the most charmingly simple pussy-cat stories
we have met with. We have been delighted with the pictures.' — Aberdeen
Journal.

'Both stories are clever, and are certain to be appreciated by the young
people, for whose entertainment they have been designed.' — JS'civs Letter,
Belfast.

Small croAvn 8vo-hath Frontispiece, paper cover, Is. ; cloth, Is. 6d.,

A Door of Hope. By Jane T. Stoddart.

A pretty story is " A Door of Hope." . It has genuine interest, and ia
thoroughly healthy.' — Scotsman.

'Take the trouble to get the book and read it.' — Glasgow Herald.

'A bright and healthful story of Scotch people in England.' — Christian
Herald.

The writer has not only produced a pleasant, "well-written, and interesting
story, but has woven into it the great principles of religion in an unobtrusive
and natural manner.' — People's Journal.

The story is full of incident, with which high teaching is interwoven.' —
British Weekly.

This is a very ably written story.' — Airdrie Advertiser.

A good moral tone runs through the volume, and, as we have read it from
beginning to end, we have no hesitancy in recommending it as suitable for
young people.' — Home and School, Toronto.

This is a marvellous book, and proclaims the writer to possess great
literary powers, which may yet gain for her a distinguished place among the
literary fraternity.' — Presbyterian Messenger.

We have read it with great interest, and have found it worthy of high
commendation. " A Door of Hope '" is a good title for a good book.' — Kelso
Mail.

In the true sense of the word, this is a popular little work.' — Canada
Presbyterian.

The interest of the story is well sustained throughout.' — Dundee Courier.

alike as regards quality and quantity, it is splendid value for the money.
It has the further charm of not likely to be thrown aside after being once
read Those who go over it once will find fresh thoughts awakened on »
second reading.' — Huntly Express.

The tale is well constructed, and told with much feeling.' — Perthshire
Constitutional.

Merits high praise for originality of ideas, combined with probability,
the lack of which renders many books unreadable. " A Door of Hope " will
take its place ^vith the highest class of modem literature.' — Dublin Evening
Mail.

The chief characters in the book are evidently life studies, and exceedingly
well drawn, the individuality of each being full and striking, as
well as perfectly preserved throughout the story. Ko healthier, pleasant
reading could be put in the hands of young people ' — Aberdeen Free Press.

We have nothing but praise for the work, which we hope may meet with
such a reception as will encourage its talented young authoress to favour
the public with other books. The high moral and spiritual tone which
pervades "A Door of Hope" will open the doors of every Christian household
to her succeeding books, and "will make her not only a successful
writer, but a power for good.' — Kelso Chronicle.

Many beautiful passages scattered throughout the volume would well
bear quotation did space permit. The chapter entitled " To the West,
Three Gates," reveals a reserve of power, and a distinct ray of genius.' —
Christian Leader.

Our readers vnll have no difficulty in identifying the watering-place
which is the scene of this story, although it is called Westerley-on-Sea.
The book tells as pretty a little love story, or rather double love story, as we
have read for a very long time. The author's object is unpretending ; but she
has produced an interesting, wholesome, and lifelike story.' — Bristol Mercury.

Crown 8vo, 23. 6d., Illustrated ; or in bevelled boards, gilt edges, Ss. ;
paper covers, Is. ; cheap edition. Is. 6d.,

By still waters : A Story for Quiet Hours. New and
Cheaper Edition. By Edward Garrett.

We like this " Story for Quiet Hours " very much better than we have
liked any of Mr. Garrett's recent tales ; he has shaken himself free from the
leaven of Puritanism, and is at his best — always pleasant and readable, sometimes
giving utterance to a really flue and graceful thought, and showing
silent of dry humour.' — The Graphic.

We have read many books by Edward Garrett, but none that has pleased
us so well as this. It has more than pleased, it has charmed us. All through
it runs a golden thread of spiritual wisdom that makes you linger as you
read. The best character, drawn with great care, is Sarah Russell. We have
all of us, we hope, met such good, kind, wise women who seem to be sent
into the world to put things straight and lift everybody to a higher plane of
existence.' — The Nonconformist.

It possesses merits of a very sterling order. The book is a good one in
every sense of the word. The author sets a high aim before him, and he
achieves it. In Tibbie there is a grim humour closely allied to pathos underlying
her queer epigrammatic sayings.' — Morning Post.

The beauty of the language and the profusion of fine thoughts scattered
throughout, constitute its chief charm.' — Dundee Advertiser.

The volume is interspersed with some shrewd savings.' — Daily News.

Mr. Garrett is a novelist whose books it is always a pleasure to meet. His
stories are full of quiet, penetrating observation. Few novelists photograph
characters so beautiful and subtle as Sarah Russell's and Tibbie's, or envelope
their tale in a like bower of tender, thoughtful love.' — Echo.

'Is full of good sense.' — Westminster Review.

'A natural, well-written, and deeply interesting story.' — Primitive
Methodist World.

'The story is well and racily told; it is lit up with occasional gleams of
humour, and, withal, with a better light still. It is a wholesome and a helpful
book.' — Leeds Mercury.

A fine combination of masculine vigour, spiritual insight, and racy
humour. . To quite an extraordinary extent the volume abounds in sayings
that are notable, both for the striking originality of their substance and their
pointed style of expression.' — Christian Leader.

We have received nothing of late better entitled to attention. . It is
(he fruit of robust, fearless thinking, and is brimful of quaint humour." —
Greenock Telegraph.

Very well told, with much power of thought and breadth of sympathy,
which is very pleasing to meet.' — Spectator.

The characters are finely drawn. . . . Worth a legion of its contempt
>rarieB.' — Brechin Advertiser.

• A book to be read slowly aud read again.' — British Messenger.

A religious book in a good sense, and by no means bad reading from a
literary point of view.' — Athenaeum.

'Perfection of literary form, and vigour of thought . . . The exposure of
smug Pharisaism is executed with trenchant force. Let us hope the book
will have the effect of lessening the number of the Pharisees. We expect it
will make some of them very angry.' — Kilmarnock Standard.
