CHAPTER I.

It was in the latter days of December, 1829,
before the seasons had begun to puzzle and
discomfort agriculturists, or ' to totter,' as
Rossetti says, 'in their walk.' It was a time
when the months were supposed to act up
fairly to their accustomed character. The
Yule-log was still expected to blaze at
Christmas time, and March was more associated
with the daffodils, ■ that come before
the swallows dare,' than with the pale cheeks
and red nose of youth, or the dust which
brings tears into the eyes of 'reverend age.'

B 2

The Shakespearian winter, ' when coughing
drowns the parson's saw,' was still said to be
succeeded by the mildness of a spring in which
young people were fabled to bathe their faces
with dew, and to go a-maying decked in white
blossoms under sunlit skies.

Yet the traditions of our fathers were already
beginning to be shaken. And the nation, which
was suffering from the bad effects of two uncongenial,
wet summers, was ill prepared to encounter
another January of extraordinary frost
and snow. August and September had not
brought the red ripened corn, the warm, sweet
twilights, or the soft harvest moons; nor had
the ' happy autumn fields ' of October been as
genial as usual, with brown nuts, ruddy apples,
and touches of russet and gold.

Winter seemed to be setting-in with greater
virulence than ever, and tramps and beggars
who more than fifty years ago were tolerated
nuisances to such an extent that Smith,
the ' king of gipsies,' was followed to his
grave by a hundred children and grandchildren
— must have had a bad time of it in

their wandering life. But these people were
hardened from childhood to endure all sorts of
changes of temperature. Not so a poor beggar-woman
who, at the time of which I write, had
been wandering for weeks on foot in spite of
bleak winds, and over almost impassable roads,
with a patient, careworn face, and a pathetic,
heavy-laden expression like that of an overdriven
dumb animal in its silent misery, which
attracted more than one passer-by.

When she had set out on her weary walk
from the neighbourhood of London, her shoe-leather
and bonnet and shawl had been in fair
condition ; but now the shoes hardly held together,
and her shawl — torn here and there in
strips — scarcely protected her emaciated person.
The little that was left of the once efficient garment
was wrapped in folds round the baby
which she clutched close to her breast, as if she
would communicate to it the small amount of
warmth which yet lingered in her own body ;
and the bonnet, w T which was so draggled as no
longer to protect her head, revealed her unkempt
hair, which had once been arranged in

the fashion of the period, in loose, full curls,
falling on either side of the face, and only
parted to show the forehead and eyebrows.
The forehead was already furrowed, though
the woman was still young, and the large,
restless eyes glanced nervously at the clouds
which were being driven across the sky by the
pitiless wind that tore at the chimney-stacks of
the cottagers, sending clattering slates from
the roofs of the houses, as she passed through
the village.

Now and then she begged an alms, and it was
the poor who gave her from time to time of their
broken victuals. She was in search of a cottage
which she had left in her innocent girlhood in

the neighbourhood of a town in shire,

and which for the purpose of my story shall be
misnamed Torringmoor, and she was beginning
to despair of ever reaching it. She could not tell
herself how she had lived through that walk of
nearly two hundred miles. It seemed to her
that she had walked day and night, eating
from time to time the dry crusts which the
pitying poor, so kind to each other, spared from

their own need. She would have lain on the
ground had it been summer weather, but, as it
was, she took shelter in sheds and outhouses.
She had wandered from village to village
singing for pence. Sometimes she had been
hospitably received, and sometimes she had
been driven away from the farmers' houses
with curses.

It must be acknowledged that the farmers
had some reason for being afraid. Tramps
were sometimes in league with housebreakers
then as now ; and when it was not an uncommon
occurrence for men with bludgeons to enter the
premises of a farmer, bruising and lacerating
his servants, and decamping with all the provisions
on which it was possible to lay hands,
the dread of tramps was not unfounded.

Even in London a lad had but lately been
promised a gratuity for discovering a cave
within the iron railings of Leicester Square, in
which six or seven sturdy beggars had been
accustomed to crouch, smoking their pipes, upon
a stone which concealed a number of convenient
housebreaking instruments.

So ignorant was the poor mother of the
district through which she was travelling that
more than once she retraced her steps. But
always a sort of instinct taught her to avoid
companionship. If she could get out of the
highway, she preferred the cart-track in the
fields, or the path in the copses. More than
once a merciful waggoner had offered her a
lift, but she invariably had refused by a shake
of the head. Perhaps she was afraid she would
have to join iu conversation as a return for
his hospitality, or perhaps she was aware that
even hospitality itself might not be safe. It
was possible that she might have heard the
tale of how a waggoner lately travelling with
goods had been attacked by three fellows in
smock-frocks, who knocked him down, severely
beating him before they stole his packages, and
terrifying to death a young woman who had
been in the waggon during the affray.

More than once she had been asked, ' Wold
is your little boy?' But she had never
said, ' Six months.' If she did not exactly resent
the inquiry, she seemed not to hear it,

and only answered it by hugging him closer
to herself. Once or twice, the people who
passed had joked about it. making coarse
jokes, but she did not seem to hear them, except
for the somewhat savage expression which
crossed her face as she walked on again, almost
barefooted, digging her nails into her own
flesh.

All the heroism of which she was capable
was owing to the fact of being a mother.
Were it not for her child, she would have
been a poor, helpless thing, and would long
since have sunk down on the ground to die.
But as she passed by the happy homes of the
rich, with their splendid evergreens, grassy
slopes, and holly-trees glistening with the hoarfrost
— the ideal old homes for Christmas merry-makings
— contrasting strangely with the ' dog-hatches
' which were considered to be good
enough for the poor, she felt as if she herself
was one of the broken shards of ruin only tit
to be cast into waste places, to add to the useless
rubbish-heaps which no sanitary commissioner
as yet had cleared away. Were it not

for her child, she would rather have been
dead.

Often, in a state of fever and temporary
delirium, she called on the names of those
whom she had known in her girlhood, and
for whom, in some blind way, she was searching
again. And then, as the darkness came
on, she would feel as if wounded to the heart,
putting her hand to her side, and moaning.

That morning she had felt tolerably strong,
as if she could accomplish the remainder of the
way. The few people whom she passed did
not know what to say to her — some of them
deciding that she was mad, the shadow on her
eyes betraying the sorrowful thoughts within.
More than one who had met her on the
road had shunned her, crossing over, and passing
by on the other side. This solitary, absorbed
woman — walking straight on, with her
feet almost bare, on the stony roads, clasping
her infant so tightly to her, and muttering
at times to herself with that strange wildness
in her eyes — was not pleasant to encounter on
a lonely road.

1 The creature is mad,' said more than one of
the passers-by, with a shrug. * No doubt she
has brought her troubles on herself.'

For those were days in which the tenderheartedness
of our times would have been
looked upon as a false and foolish sentimentality.
* Mercy,' it was said, * can be no relaxation
of justice ;' and there were certain fatal
weaknesses whose criminality seemed to be
so ingrained into the character that those who
prided themselves on the superiority of the
moral sense were ready, w T with pitiless cruelty,
to pronounce it incurable, to be cast out, and
trodden under foot. In this stern sense of
duty, there remained no room for compassion
for the criminal.

And though, in the middle of that day, when
the unhappy tramp fainted on a doorstep,
there proved to be one farmer's wife with a
larger heart, who helped the swooning and
suffering sister into a homestead, which was
snug and neat, with a look of smiling hope,
plenty and comfort about it — every ox and ass
about the place sharing in the warm domestic

feeling, and seeming to know that it was well
cared for — I am afraid it must be admitted that
even this gentler and kindlier hostess allowed
her conscience to reproach her for a self-indulgent
impulse, and never stayed to reflect how
Christ Himself, instead of excommunicating
publicans and sinners, openly associated with
them, and tried to benefit them.

What is your name ? ' asked the good
woman of the house, after she had given
milk to the child, and had told the mother
that she would kill it if she kept it out in the
cold.

8 I — 1 am not going to tell my name to nobody
— I should like to be somebody else — I
can't tell why God Almighty created me,' answered
the poor soul, impressed by the benevolence
in the pitying eyes, while something like
a sob choked in her throat.

Hush ! you have been ill — one can see that
to look at you, and you will bring the fever
back if you talk like that,' said the farmer's
wife, involuntarily retreating a little as she put
the child back in the mother's lap.

Footsteps were heard at the door. It was
the men returning to their dinner.

Cover me — hide me — don't let anybody see
my face — I used to be known in these parts,'
said the poor unhappy one, rising in alarm
from her unusual place of luxury; and the good
woman who listened to her shuddered.

An hour afterwards she went in search of the
stranger, whom she had concealed in an outhouse.
She found her crouched with her child
in the furthest corner of the shelter.

Why do you trouble yourself about me V
was the almost fierce inquiry.

1 You be sick was the answer.

It is the first words of pity — as anyone has

said to me — since — my mother ' and she

broke off the speech, made with but little of

the shire accent, in an unaccustomed flood

of tears.

1 We've been in Lunnon,' answered the elder
woman, relapsing into the vernacular, and
noticing that the stranger was much younger
than she had at first imagined.

She rose slowly, and looked in a dazed way
around her.

I will go away,' she said, taking no notice
of the question. ' I am not good enough for
such as you to come near me. How far is it to
Torriugmoor ? I can walk it quite well — I am
bound for Torringmoor to-night.'

CHAPTER II.

The afternoon had already begun to wane
when the outcast set out again, nor did her
hostess try to detain her.

'How much further am I?' she had asked,
almost fiercely, turning away from her would-be
helper, and relapsing once more into the
silence which is the refuge of suffering souls.

Wandering folks were supposed to ! overlook'
people's donkeys and hens, and though the
very severity of the law against vagrants had
a tendency to defeat itself, and the vagrants
were left pretty much alone so long as they
did not interfere with the farmer's hedges and
ditches, the kind woman who had sheltered the
wanderer in her benevolence was inwardly not
sorry to see her depart.

Yon be weak-like,' she said, as she supplied
her with an ash stick which one of the farm-labourers
had cut from the hedges, and which
she thought might help to steady her steps.

In summer-time the soft downs over which
she again began to wander would have been
pleasant enough bathed in the evening light,
but now the endlessness of the great moor,
its vastness, and the immense expanse of
of sky above, suggesting the infinite distance
of the plain below, was wearying to the ej*e.
She — who in old times had been familiar with
this moor, watered by a river of which now the
brown aud turbulent water rushed over the
rocky stones — would have been glad that the
darkness was setting in, had not the place been
haunted by ghosts and memories of the past.

Strange stories were then afloat, and were
confidently believed by the superstitious, of
wildernesses infested by evil spirits, the air
being filled with the clash of instruments and
with the noisy footsteps of demons ready to
pounce upon their prey. Some of these familiar
stories returned to the poor woman's memory.

The bare and denuded branches of the little
vegetation about the place only added to the
ghostliness of the scene, undisturbed but by
the cry of a solitary water-hen, beating its
wings and trailing its legs as it flew out into
the evening air.

It was well for the lonely mother that her
state was almost that of stupefaction, or all the
strange and haunted sense of a wanderer by
night — who hears the dead whisper, and can
almost see them pass by white in the moorland
mist — would have been hers. Suddenly she
knew that she was alone, and uttered one cry
a mother's cry, instantly stifled by the effort
which she put upon herself. Only the despairing
could have understood her despair. It was
but a few miles further to walk. She could seethe
smoke from the chimneys of Torringmoor,
but her strength was failing her.

On she went again over dead leaves and dry
branches, which crackled under her feet, tearing
them and making them bleed. She took
no notice of the pain ; she might not even have
felt it. Her eyes were fixed on the distant

VOL. I. C

horizon, on which lingered the tints of the
wintry sunset — the colours of the Eternal city.
It brought back faint recollections to her mind.
How long since she had talked to her own
mother in childish language of the gates of
amethyst and pearl, how long — how very long
since she had read her Bible. Darker it
grew, and her consciousness became more than
ever confused. She murmured names now as
she pressed the crying child to her bosom —
tried to comfort and soothe it, but found she
had no nourishment to give it. Yet mechanically,
as if she remembered a habit of her girlhood,
her eyes began to watch the darkening
sky, noting a change in it. The skirts of the
mists, which had begun to gather over the distant
moon, were now drawn up, revealing
clouds which fell away and seemed to retire fora
time till the wind should arise like a giant in
its fury. She knew that snow was beginning
to fall by the small particles which she could
feel in the darkness stinging her face. But,
by the shorter cut which she had taken, she
had but a few fields more to traverse, and

then she would be able to reach Torringmoor.

If only her strength had not been exhausted
! She was compelled to sit under one of the
hedges for a few moments, having taken the
precaution to wrap the child more closely in
the tattered remnants of the woollen shawl.
And then, remembering the stick, she tried to
assist her tottering steps by using it with one
hand, and propelling herself forwards. It was
rather limping than walking — limping with
great strides, each one more exhausting than
the effort which had preceded it, and rendered
all the more difficult from the fact that the
snow was beginning to fall in larger quantities.
The flakes were wrestling in furious dance
with the wind, which had risen as she expected,
and was flinging the powdery white in
blinding masses not only into her eyes and
face, but into the closest casements of the
cottages, so that in the morning it would be
found drifted high into heaps wherever the
pitiless wind had flung it.

She had reason to be alarmed. For there
had been a night of snow in the preceding year

C 2

which had caused much consternation and confusion
in all parts of the country, at a time
when the means of locomotion were fewer and
much more difficult than they are now. If the
snow were to continue to fall like this, in six or
seven hours the roads would be impassable, the
coaches would cease running, the mail-bags
would have to be brought on horseback at the
risk of life ; while — on some of the important
thoroughfares — there might be carts and waggons
buried in snowdrifts, causing an obstruction
to all traffic. The chance for a solitary
traveller would be desperate indeed, and in
spite of the unerring instinct which the human
mother shares, under peculiar circumstances,
with brute beasts, she did not feel as if it
would be of any use for her to fight against
fate. The cruel blast of the knife-like wind
seemed to cut her face almost into pieces, and
every drop of blood in her body felt frozen.
The child cried louder than before, and with
the desperate emergency her consciousness
partially returned to her, as she sang wild
snatches of songs in a low voice, that it might
not be terrified at other sounds.

"Was it her fancy, or did the Christmas bells
for it was Christmas week — sound mingled
with that blast of wind as she ceased her
singing? She was at the outskirts of the town
of Torringmoor, and the churches were close to
her. She did not stop to think that the ringing
of bells could scarcely be heard, and that
the ringers would have ceased practising, as
it was past ten o'clock. For to the sore-hearted
mother the thought of pouring out her agony
at the feet of One born of woman had come
to her with the sound of those Christmas
bells ; and a pitying face — as of One crowned
with thorns — seemed to look down at her
through the blackness of the clouds.

CHAPTER III.

The snow that night did not prove to be so
serious as had been expected. So furious was
the rush of wind, when once its power was
thoroughly stirred, that the common people said
it had ' drey the new away.'

So it seemed to a middle-aged nurse, who
was watching that night in the chamber of
another young mother, listening to the tumult
of winds round a house in one of the poorer
streets of Torringmoor. The woman, who was
about forty years old, but who looked older
than she was, was urging flakes of fire up the
chimney with an enormous pair of bellows.

There was an expression in her face like
that in the face of a good but rather sulky dog,

with whom the world has not gone straight,
and who loves but one thing in it, and that
a master or mistress whom he is likely to lose.
And the young lady who lay in the bed — for,
in spite of her sickness and the poverty of the
place, she was unmistakably a lady — had spent
a portion of that night with both her arms
passed round this faithful creature, relieving
her overcharged heart in weeping on her neck.
She saw that, though her nurse returned her
caresses by stroking and petting — much as the
dog, in the same case, would have put out its
tongue to lick — there was a strange look about
her, and that the eyes, generally good and
loving, shone like live coal.

One might have said that, if the intelligence
had been high enough to allow of the nurturing
of any far-seeing project, there was vengeance
in the face, and vengeance of a kind to be
dreaded. But, however that might be, there
was certainly nothing but love and gentleness
in the countenance of the young lady, whom
the woman had nursed since her childhood, and
to whom she had returned now that all others

bad deserted her. Though the patient had wept
that night on her nurse's neck, hers was naturally
a buoyant temperament. She had not been
one of the over thoughtful ones who find it hard
to rejoice when tales of real suffering are rife,
and when they can only stand by, with folded
hands, and watch the apparent triumph of evil
over good.

Hers, on the contrary, had been a happy,
childlike temperament — never perplexed and
wavering, and never liable to depression. A
bright and cheerful sense of duty would have
made duty easy to her, even when it seemed
hard to others. And though this was what
the doctor had said would probably be her last
night on earth, though her dearest wish remained
still ungranted, and in nurse EIs-
path's eyes she had endured one of the cruellest
of wrongs, she could still be confident and
hopeful. She was one of those who have passed
from life to death because they love in a sense
which others cannot comprehend, and because
their love is stronger than death, and can conquer
all wrongs.

Had it been her lot to live, she would have
sought to lighten the troubles of others instead
of brooding over her own. But the Master had
not given her so hard a lot. She had suffered
enough for one so sweet and patient in her
short, trustful life, and now the Master, who
had reserved the crown for the brows so young,
which had borne but a few of the thorns,
was calling 1 for her. She was listening for
the sound of His feet, and the sweet, almost
unearthly smile upon the face which had succeeded
the fit of weeping, and which was so
incomprehensible to the lower intelligence of
the servant, told that she was already conscious
of it.

Nurse, dear,' she said, presently, in a tone
which, though weak and faint, could have made
a bystander comprehend how, in the days of
health and strength, she had possessed, besides
her physical beauty, and the naive grace of her
slightest gestures, a childlike intonation in her
voice, with a fascination in her smile which it
could not have been easy to resist — 'nurse,
dear, I do — not think — he will come now ; he

said — he — would be here before to-night. I
am sure — it is not — his fault.'

The nurse, who was a north-countrywoman,
did not speak loud enough for her charge to
hear, but muttered to herself, ' She was a full
to think he ever would come.' She did not let
her young mistress see her face, but relieved
her anger by making greater efforts with the
bellows, lashing her indignant feelings into a
still greater height of fury as she remembered
the hated face of the man who was mentioned,
with long falling mustachios, which few people
wore then, and which, it was the nurse's impression,
were probably worn with the intention
of not letting the diabolical nature of his smile
be seen beneath them.

'T pair crater she muttered to herself; and
then, rocking herself backwards and forwards,
she groaned, ' Think o' yer soul,' till a blast of
the pitiless wind blew down the chimney, and
made her shudder.

I do — think — of it — Elspeth,' said the gentle
voice from the bed, ' though — I — may not tell
you — all. It will make no difference — now.

You must let — me — speak to you. This is the
week when God removed — the gulf — between
me and Himself — when He became flesh like
my little baby here — when He was seen—and
handled — born of the Virgin Mary. Do you —
think — I would deceive — you — though — I may
not — tell you — all?'

There was a pause. The nurse did not answer.
Only yesterday some of the servants
of the man who owned the moustache, and who
was still so mysteriously absent on his travels,
had spoken of the marriage as an impossibility,
and had laughed her to scorn on the subject.
She knew that the doctor thought the same,
and who was she to flaunt her opinion in the
face of her betters ? The world was as bad as
possible — it could not well be worse. She believed
in her ' young teddy.' but felt confident,
at the same time, that the poor lamb had been
deceived. One peep at her wedding lines
would have been better than all this talk ; and,
if her suspicions were not correct, why could
not her nursling show her the proofs ?

There was silence in the room. Elspeth,

who had risen from attending to the fire, was
now feeding the little boy, a baby of some five
or six months old. An outsider might have
noticed that she eyed it askance when the sick
lady was not looking, as if it were the enemy
rather than the child of her mistress. From
time to time she muttered to herself, in a voice
too low for the invalid to hear, 'He's non
coming,' — ' Chap to coom at my young teddy,'
' Such careless craters,' — ' But he'll be soa
alius,' — ' Not coomin', not he, and t' pair soul
nobbut just seeing.'

She did not see the smile which shone
brighter on the face which lay upon the pillow,
so bright at times that it seemed to illuminate
the room. Exhaustion of body had subdued
the lady's power of speaking, but not of recollection,
not of prayer. She seemed again to
hear her lover pleading.

1 1 cannot help it if I love you past all compass
and description. The love is as a thing
outside myself; I could not help it if I would.
They always wanted me to be married to a
rich woman — the fortunes of our house required

it, they said. Cannot you pity me when I
tell you they would like me to make a marriage
simply as a business partnership, without
one reference to the impulses of the
heart '? They would like me to give up one of
the sweetest and prettiest of girls because a
sum of hard cash cannot be handed over to me
on the day of my marriage. It is that which
makes a coward and a fool of me. But, my
darling, after we are married, properly married,
I will outwit them. I will go away and make
a fortune, and bring it back with me ; and
meanwhile you must keep our secret, or the
whole thing will be a failure.'

She never thought of reproaching him, even
in her own mind, for the fact that he had been
absent for so long a time that she had pined
and died without him. It was characteristic of
her that she told herself he had nothing to do
with the catastrophe, since there was consumption
in her family, and she would probably have
died anyhow. There were times when she had
not even missed him, with the dim dawning of
a mysterious other love which made her feel

brave with the strength of motherhood. She
looker! at her baby with a yearning look. It
had fallen asleep. The whole room was very
quiet now. For the wind, which earlier in the
evening had howled down the chimney, shaking
the bare trees and. stripping them of the few
russet autumn leaves which yet had remained
upon them, had now sunk, like her little
child, to sleep, and the nurse had told her that
the snow, which a couple of hours before bad
been driving thickly outside, had also ceased.

All was quiet save for the dropping of an
occasional ember in the fireplace, and from the
shutterless window the dying woman could see
some of the thousands of worlds taking their
places again in the sky — where perhaps there
were schools for the souls of those who should
attain the resurrection.

A sense of the wonder at the new and grander
life seemed to be gently opening before her.
The only trial for one so loving was to go forth
to it alone. She spoke rather to herself than
to the nurse, when she said, a little languidly,

■ I sometimes wish I could take my baby with

me. But that would be selfish — his father
would want lino.'

What if, when her child was waking in one
world, she would be waking in another — that
was the more likely I She felt very feeble,
very care-worn, going in the path of darkness
which her Saviour had trodden before her. Had
He not told her, 'I go to prepare a place for
you?' Perhaps in one of the many mansions
which she could see now in the sky ? She spoke
more feebly.

'Nurse — when — I am gone — take the baby
away — at once — this is no place for him — take
him to his — father's house. I could not tell
you — the reason — while I was living — but when
I am gone — you will find — it out. Take
him — he is the heir — to the housekeeper's room
and undress him — the morning — air — will not
hurt him. When they see it — they will acknowledge
— him. Promise me, promise.'

Elspeth gave her one rapid, searching glance,
and concluded that she was wandering. The
more so because she said, a few minutes
afterwards,

I feel— just — as if — I were a child — again,
hardy — and scampering — over the heather — on
the moor. . Open — the window, and — let me
breathe the air.'

The older woman humoured her by pretending
to let in the cold air, and shutting it out
again directly, in the same spirit in which
she would have given any number of required
promises.

Yet she was a little awed in spite of herself
by the rapt expression in the happy face which
did not seem like that of anyone dying. Something
in the manner in which the wide open, lustrous
eyes gazed through the window, which she
had begged to have opened, at the stars now
shining in the sky reminded the nurse of the
joyous childhood to which she had just alluded,

When on some gilded cloud or flower
Her gazing soul would dwell an hour.'

T' pair bairn wur alius a gowk she muttered
again to herself, shivering a little, partly
with superstitious fear, and partly with the
cold, as she noticed the unusual expression in
the shining eyes, which seemed in no way to

notice either herself or her child, but to look
through them and beyond them in a manner
which alarmed her.

She would have been surprised if she could
have been told that her young lady was absorbed
in prayer — not the sort of prayer to
which she had been accustomed herself, consisting
mainly in groans and guttural noises, butin
that leaning of the faithful and loving soul
upon the Everlasting Arms which are beneath
it, which from the habit of a lifetime passes in
hours of weakness beyond the meaning of
words, and even beyond the need of them, and
yet realises the Divine Nature in the most perfect
way, acting in its uttermost necessity upon
the human.

I cannot pray for myself ; I am so weak. I
have forgotten the words,' the invalid had
complained but a few days before.

But now God Himself seemed to be teaching
her that the essence of prayer was purely
spiritual, the appeal from spirit to spirit for
inward light and quickening help, the coming
of the child, by a conscious act, into the merci-vol.

1. D

ful Father's presence. Even the nurse herself
seemed to be suddenly conscious of the opening
of a larger window, than that which she
had sulkily pretended to open, to the supernatural,
though she could not have guessed
that just then, if her eyes could have been
opened like those of Elisha's servant, she would
have discovered herself to be the least and
most insignificant of the numerous presences
in that poverty-stricken room. Suddenly the
invalid stretched out her arms. The smile,
which melted into an unconscious but muttered
{ Abba, Father,' still more lit up her face.

'Oh! Elspeth, do you not see she cried,
in a stronger voice. ' They are here — all of
them Come, Lord Jesus — I '

She could not finish the sentence. The colour
which had suddenly flushed it crept from
her face. But the smile still remained. It was
Life — more abundant in the fullest sense — which
we so ignorantly call by the name of Death. The
sentiment of immortality — the conviction that
that which we call the 'last act' does not end all
for us, but is really a new beginning of which not

only the New Testament, but our own heart
and reason assures us — became overpowering
to the more limited intelligence of the looker-on,
with a strange and weird conception of
the possible fact that the mistress who lay
there smiling, in her new, mysterious, frozen
beauty, might perchance have the power of
punishing her, if she did not obey her behest
directly.

She did not like to think much about death
herself, but had an idea that her sweet lady,
who had wronged no one, had been somehow
badly treated, not only by her fellow-creatures,
but by the messenger which had so suddenly
come for her, and which did not seem to her
to be God's gentle ministrant, tenderly sealing
the bodily eyes in His holy slumber, while
gentler angels carried the rejoicing spirit to
that Paradise described of old in metaphoric
speech as ' Abraham's bosom.' Rather was it
something horrible, to be struggled with and
resisted, and, had it not been for the pride
which kept her quiet, the angry woman would
have liked to rend the air with her cries, ind

t

forming her neighbours, after the manner of
her more savage ancestors, that Death had
been let loose upon its ravages.

But there was no time to be lost. She had
first of all to perform the last sad offices for
her dear one, that no one should despise her
as she lay there, so mysteriously smiling, but
still undoubtedly maltreated before her time
by the enemy ; and then she had to carry out
the promise — which she was rather glad than
otherwise had been exacted from her — and to
get rid as quickly as might be of the hated
baby.

CHAPTER 17.

The daylight had scarcely penetrated into the
little house when Elspeth shuffled as quietly
as possible down the wooden ladder which led
from the little chamber. She wished to accomplish
her mission as rapidly as possible,
and to return secretly before the other people
in the house could discover what had happened.
The most gloomy evening imaginable had
been succeeded by a resplendent morning.
The bells which rang out in Christmas week
were already ringing again, after an interval
of silence — now in a hallowed and consecrated
strain, and now again in a merry din, only
suitable for a time of human festivities and
gladness. Elspeth could not have told the

names of the hymn tunes which were chiming,
and awakening no responsive chord in her
heart, but she knew that the burden of them
was 'rejoice evermore,' and to her they sounded
like a mocking injunction, when all that she
cared for in life seemed to be in ruin and
collapse.

The river in the neighbourhood of Torring-
moor was frozen. It was an unusual occurrence,
and she knew that on the following
evening there was to be a scene of holiday-keeping,
when a number of men would be
balancing themselves on steel blades, by the flare
of torches, and amidst the jocund laughter of
those who would be sure to detect the awkwardness
of the natives. And, though the
women did not then trust themselves to be
whirled about on skates, there would be plenty
of amusement for the fair sex.

Elspeth could imagine the bustling crowds
upon the banks of the river, the pedlars selling
articles of food and dress, and more than one
charlatan willing to turn a nimble penny.

Already there were tall young fellows busily

sweeping the ice, and hanging lamps between
the ribs of the skeleton trees.

But all the kindliness in the woman's heart
had been poisoned. She turned with a sickening
sensation of envy from the thought of the
happy actors and friendly spectators in the
merry scene. Had not her young lady as
much right to enjoy herself as the best of them?
The despair and contempt which never yet
cured any grief were in the faithful, unreasoning
creature's heart, with all that tendency to
querulous fault-finding, all that distress and
bewilderment at things difficult to be understood,
which, in a more modern stage of
development, have contributed towards the
making of many a poor uneducated petroleum.

Elspeth had received few kind words and
few encouraging smiles during her somewhat
hard, dry life, and these had come from her
1 young leddy/ who, she was ready to conclude,
had been too good for this earth. And
there was now no one to teach the embittered,
broken-hearted woman that to dwell on the
melancholy hopelessness of some aspects of

human life, and not to believe side by side with
it in the loving mercy of a God, is to be dragged
down to the misery of a suffering brute.

The passion which possessed her had set her
usually sallow complexion in a blaze, and she
was ready to stamp her foot as she remembered
that that evening, when the men and commoner
people would be amusing themselves on the
ice, a splendid ball would be given in Torring-
moor, at which all the beauty and fashion in
the neighbourhood would be collected, and in
which the merry dance was to be kept up to a
late hour, with every luxury and delicacy of
the season, so that the New Year should be
ushered in with heart-felt glee. A number of
fine ladies would be visiting in the neighbourhood
for the purpose, and the woman cursed
them in her heart.

Ech th' old world is jest so ill, it wur
better it wur toon wi' altogether, it nubbut
grass worser,' she said to herself, in a mixture
of her own dialect, and her young lady's southern
speech, little knowing that such sentiments
would in the future be honoured by the name

of * pessimism,' and that philosophical ideas,
bearing a remarkable resemblance to her own
dreary lament, would fall glibly from the lips of
weaklings who would like to be thought wise
in depreciating human life.

She gave a long, searching look at the infant,
and began more than ever to realise how impossible
it would be for her to lake the child
to the big mansion in the neighbourhood, from
which the master, the only nobleman of whom
Torriugmoor could boast, was now absent on
his travels. The common sense on which she
prided herself had always convinced her that
her young lady told an incredible story, and
that the ' proofs ' of which she had spoken
would prove to be a delusion of the poor girl's
sick fancy, whilst she herself would be hunted
from the lodge-gates with insult for venturing
to speak of the reputed father.

Sheer fright of the dead body had for the
time overpowered Elspeth's usual fair share of
wits, but her sense of the absurdity of the
situation seemed by degrees to be returning to
her in the clear, keen, morning air. There

would be a ghastly make-believe, a forced joke
about the thing, which would lead not only to
cruel observation, but to cynical satire from the
very men-servants of the establishment. True,
her lady had told her to inquire for the housekeeper,
and to seek for the proof of the childbirth
in the housekeeper's private room. But
the distinction of rank in a servants' hall, the
artificial demarcations imitated from masters,
would quite preclude such a proceeding.
Elspeth was poorly dressed, the housekeeper
would spurn her and snub her.

Hitherto Elspeth had been walking very
slowly. There seemed to be growing upon hera
sort of progressive * locomotor ataxy,' — the
doctor's gorgeous name for failure to direct
one's own steps — both in the physical and the
moral sense. But suddenly, as she perceived
that she was nearing the nobleman's park, the
remnant of her courage deserted her, and she
fled. Fled, scarcely knowing or caring w r here
her footsteps might take her, towards a barren
upland strewn with boulders, where a few of
the poorer folks, washerwomen and others,

were known to congregate, to pick up a scanty
living : for they were close upon the moors,
and this suburb was well suited to the drying
of linen.

A dreary, desolate place it was, gleaming
just now with the cold gleam of snow, which
had fallen earlier on the previous night, and
had collected here and there in heaps. The
wind would be shrieking and moaning here
when it had ceased to shriek in other places,
and it had risen a little now, and seemed to be
playing with a few of the scattered flakes, and
rushing along with them against their will. A.
dog, a shepherd's colles, whined pitifully, following
Elspeth ; as, for reasons which she could
not have given, she passed on with the baby,
which was cooing, and even attempting to
make more articulate sounds, so delighted was
the little fellow with the change from the sickroom.


Elspeth scarcely knew whither she meant to
take him. She had no respect or sympathy
for the bright little creature, whom his mother
had so ardently loved, as a fresh link from the

chain let down from heaven to earth from the
ever-working Spirit. Elspeth, as a pessimist,
was only reminded by the little one of the
short time that the joy of many mothers lasts,
when the babies they love are either parted
from them betimes, or live to grow up in a
separation of heart which is often worse than
death. She remembered that the mother had
said she wished it had been possible for her to
take the child with her.

Elspeth, who had so loved her, re-echoed the
words,, as, scarcely noticing what she was
doing, she followed the dog, which, alternating
its whine with short deep barks, seemed to be
leading the w 7 ay somewhere, she did not care
where. Yet she could not help remarking that
the animal seemed to have its nose close to the
ground, and that in the direction in which it
led there were footprints in the snow, as if
some one else had tramped that way before
her.

The dog's whine became more eager, and at
last it stood quite still before a large and deso-
late-looking barn, the door of which was ajar.

Elspeth pushed it more widely open, her mind
still in that strained state, and so fully occupied
with keeping back its own woes that she
troubled herself little about any other grief
which was foreign to her own private source of
sorrow. But she could not help noticing that,
in a sitting posture under the shed, and upon
a heap of dirty straw, another woman sat with
another child in her arms, and that the child
was pressed closely to her bosom, as if she too
would protect it from the cold. There was
need to do so, for it was freezing hard, and an
old neckerchief, more like a rag, which lay
at this other woman's feet, was stiff and
frozen.

1 What a to-do the creature was making ! It
was no worse for her than for others, and many
wanderers must have been homeless that dreary
night,' was the first selfish thought, as Elspeth
noted the coincidence. But her next idea was
one of horror, for, on calling to her fellow-sufferer,
the latter did not seem to take notice.
Her attitude was easy and peaceful as that of
a child asleep, but, on closer inspection, it was

evident that she and the baby in her arms were
dead.

To do Elspeth justice, she was not quite destitute
of feeling, as she took off her own cloak,
and tried to pile it on as clothing, hoping that
the warmth might help to restore vitality. But
such an event was too common an occurrence,
in days when the sufferings of the poor were
thought to be no one's particular business, and
when Christian benevolence had not taken the
more active forms which it now so commonly
assumes. It was easy to see that what had
happened was nobody's fault, and that no one
could take in such a wretched creature, not
feeling sure of what she might be up to. Easy,
too, to surmise that, when the snow had whirled
about her during the night, she could not have
been able to find her way blindfold, and might-have
been bewildered as to landmarks. But,
though the Yorkshirewoman had no poetry
about her, it struck her with some pathos that
the Eternities, as Carlyle would have expressed
it, which had looked down on the sons of Time
during the preceding night, should have witnessed

the death of two poor mothers of boys
of much the same age, and resembling one
another.

Both the children were of about the same
size and complexion, while the hair of both was
brown, and both had that vague indeterminateness
in the other features characteristic of baby-life
in general. What a good thing it would
be if both were dead !

The thought had no sooner occurred to a
mind capable of strong emotions, explosive
passions, but with a want of sufficient principle
to resist bad suggestions, and hardly able to
exert any form of self-control, than it was
followed by another thought with the rapidity
of lightning. How the poor outcast got into
that shed was altogether a mystery, and was
likely to remain a mystery for all the pains
that people took to inquire into such things.
The infant in Elspeth's own arms was now
crying with cold and hunger. A little more
would suffice to kill it, and it was not Iter
fault that it had been taken out according
to its mother's suggestion. Appearances would

be all in favour of the plan which seemed to
be suggested to her by Providence itself.

She did not wait to parley with temptation,
but, hastily stripping the infant in her arms
of its somewhat handsome cloak and embroidered
upper garment, she placed it in
the arms of the dead woman, and — noticing
that fortune seemed in every way to favour
her scheme, since the underclothes of both
children were more or less ragged, from the
want of means, which had forced her to part
with some of her lady's baby-linen — she dressed
the dead child in the warm cloak and long
embroidered dress, wrapping the other up as
closely as possible in the woollen, though ragged
shawl.

No one else but herself had ever looked
closely at her mistress' child ; no one but the
doctor and the landlady in whose house they
lodged had ever been allowed to come at all
near to it, since not a breath of scandal that
the servant could prevent had ever been suffered
to cross the threshold. Nor did her
conscience reproach her much as she fed the

living baby once more with some soft cake,
which she had carried with her for the purpose,
and noticed that a little colour crept into its
cheeks. Such religion as she possessed — a
bitter form of Calvinism — had made her a
fatalist; and reasoning with herself that, if it
were the Lord's will, some neighbour entering
the barn would surely save the child's
life ; and, if it were not His will, her lady's wish
would be granted : she placed the little one
in the dead woman's arms, and, regardless of
its frightened cries, once more fled.

VOL. I.

CHAPTER V.

HAVING once yielded to a sudden temptation,
there was not only no going back for Elspeth,
but no time to be lost in conscientious regrets,
even had such regrets been likely to occur to
her. For I must ask my reader to remember
that this woman had been reared in a comparatively
remote period of the century, when such
things as school-boards were unheard of. She
had associated with ' factory hands,' whose instincts
were somewhat savage, who were utterly
unable to read and write, and who, some of
them, as in Moslem countries, not only regarded
women as marketable commodities, to
be beaten or kicked in the absence of cockfighting,
bear-baiting, or other soul-stirring

amusements, but thought that mothers, in the
absence of their proper lords, had more or
less absolute rights over the persons of their
offspring. Probably, in spite of the slight
amount of Calvinism which had been grafted
upon Elspeth's otherwise heathenish creed, an
ethnologist of the present day would have
looked upon her with interest, as a * survival '
of the untutored childhood of the nineteenth
century, just as the stone axe is a relic of
pre-historic times.

Had any tender and pitiful remembrance of
the terrified child, screaming and stretching out
its little arms to her, been likely to linger in
her fierce bosom, it would have been extinguished
by the sight of two pretty, smiling
women, who were tripping from the steps of
one of the houses to get into a closed coach,
as she came back into Torringmoor. They
were apparently about the age of her own
young ' teddy,' and the contrast struck her
cruelly, as she listened to their light laughter.
One had on a dress-hat of pink satin, ornamented
with ostrich feathers. Her pelisse and

tippet were trimmed with marten-skin ; a Chantilly
lace veil was drawn over her comely face,
and her little feet peeped in and out ' like mice '
in her fawn-coloured boots. The other had
a walking-dress of light cashmere, quite unsuitable
to the weather, as the corset displayed
a cambric chemisette, only half hidden by a
chinchilla tippet — sleeves a la Caroline, as they
were then called — and pale-lavender gloves.

I fear that Elspeth cursed them in words
which it would not do to retail here, not only
from the recollection of another stiff white toilette
on a fairer form in an upper room, but because
the money which had been spent on their
fal-lals ' might have saved the taxes spent on
such articles as sugar, candles, and soap, taxes
which were severely felt in such a period of
distress.

The hate in her heart seemed to aid her
natural shrewdness. What had these Jezebels
to do with such worldly vanities in this life
which was so full of death ; when but one of
their expensive fur or feather dainties, sold for
what it could fetch, would have helped Elspeth

to purchase dainties for the sweet soul which
had been left to die ? She clenched her hand
and ground her teeth, being in that frame of
mind which made her thankful for that which
her minister had told her would be the fact,
that God would bum up this miserable world,
and she hoped He would burn it as soon as
possible.

She had no one but the doctor to outwit
now, and her natural shrewdness told her that
would be pretty easy, since the distress had
been so great among country practitioners that
many of them had been unable to keep their
families, and were embarking for America and
the settlement on the Swan River. The doctor
who attended her poor lady had had difficulty
enough, as Elspeth knew, to provide sufficient
food for the mouths of his own children. One
death, more or less, from exposure to cold,
amongst the common slaughter of innocents
from causes which were preventible, would not,
as Elspeth knew, be likely to attract much
attention.

And, though she had her tears and lamentations

ready, she did not suppose that too much
attention would be accorded to her trouble as
she stopped at the doctor's shop, where the
blue and red lights had been burning all night.
The most benevolent of all professions had not
then learnt to be afraid of lowering itself by
allowing the common people to call its dispensaries
' shops,' nor did it shrink with horror
from defiling itself by having anything to do
with exchange and barter.

As she had expected, the doctor was not too
sympathetic.

What? the mother was dead, and the child
sick already, and yet you took it out in the cold
morning air — what a fool you must be !' said
the young man, whose assistance she thought
it wise to seek, as she told her plausible tale,
and he also told her how senseless it would be
to try to restore life by inadequate means, for
the boy had been evidently dead more than an
hour already. ' And the best thing that could
happen, too, though that does not excuse you
for your atrocious carelessness, woman,' said
the young man, as he somewhat roughly unfastened

for the second time the cloak and
dress, and in so doing dislodged a tiny parcel
of something which had been sewed into the
bosom of the little dress, and which fell down
at Elspeths feet. She coloured slightly as she
picked it up, and thrust it into her pocket,
determining to examine it at leisure when she
reached her home.

In spite of her nervousness she was somewhat
angry with the doctor for his haughty, repellant
manner, and resented the fact that such a manner
was reserved for the 'tag-rag and bobtail,'
whilst he could be suave enough to the ' quality
and was not above the snobbishness which
made him think it a possible stepping-stone to
a fortune to have a right to feel the pulse of a
lord, or prescribe for a duchess.

There, don't stand blubbering there anymore
— my time is precious, and a mistake of
this kind can't be undone,' he said, impatiently.

What could the fool expect of him ? he had
enough to do to attend to the living. And, indeed,
when medical science had still to make
such strides that the idea of inflating the lungs

of still-born children was spoken of as a curious
experiment only attempted by Paris savants,
and problematical in its results ; when anonymous
letters had sometimes to be written to
mayors and coroners, before a jury was summoned
to investigate mysterious deaths; and
when itinerant vendors or other unfortunate
men could be discovered dead, with their skulls
fractured, and jurymen trouble themselves so
little about their fate that, from want of evidence,
they were content to bring in, as their
most decisive verdict, 'Found dead, but how or
by what means cannot be determined,' Elspeth
need not have feared that there would be much
ado about a baby's death.

Meanwhile the little one, which had been so
heartlessly abandoned, was not so forsaken as
it might have seemed to human ken. Doubtless
its guardian angel was watching over it ;
and without speculating as to the true meaning
of old-world myths, such as that of Romulus
and Remus, there was certainly another angel
at hand in the shape of a four-footed brute.

The dog — of whom we are ready so hastily to
assume that it is soulless, because we know
nothing about the nature of its soul — proved
itself in this case, as in many other cases
equally well authenticated, to be kinder
than a specimen of degraded humanity.
It was anxious, though excited, as a mother
might have been, keeping, as it were,
one eye upon the door of the barn that it
might watch what was passing outside, and
another on the child, which at intervals it endeavoured
to amuse by wagging its tail and
barking.

I am afraid that this latter kindly mark of
attention, which involved some expenditure of
strength on the part of the faithful animal, was
scarcely needed in this instance, as the child
had hardly reached that stage of existence
which would have enabled it to appreciate such
courtesies. A partial mother might have declared
it was ' taking notice,' but it was fortunate
for it that that ' notice,' which had reached
the extent of enabling it to make odd noises
when it was in Elspeth's arms in the open air,

did not render it at all uncomfortably aware
of its awful companionship. Had it remained
with all that was left of its mother in the
strangely-curtained room, with the mysterious-discovered
elevation on the white-sheeted bed,
it would still have been in merciful ignorance
of the spectre, Death. But in this case, after
it had comforted itself with its cake, and had
sucked the remnant of the crumbs from its
poppy fingers, it discovered nothing strange in
the near neighbourhood of an apparently sleeping
face, from which the premature wrinkles
had been smoothed. With the absence of
instinct so characteristic of the human infant,
it apparently took the face for that of its mother,
and, having exhausted itself with crying,
and finding the warmth of the old shawl in this
protected part of the shed to be better than
the cold outside, it betook itself philosophically
to sucking its thumb.

From the thumb the next stage was that of
taking an early siesta, a proceeding of which
the dog appeared to approve. But when the
nap was followed by the infallible consequence,

that of waking and becoming aware of the
pangs of hunger, and when its tiny fingers,
which were somewhat numbed, began to search
for its mother's face, and only came in contact
with what w T as marble cold, there was no resource
but to burst into a terrified howl. The
dog caressed it — otherwise licked it — as I suppose
its tender predecessors caressed the dying
Lazarus ; but the pathetic expression in its
faithful eyes deepened, as it recognised its
utter inefficiency under the circumstances. Indeed,
it had some reason to be depressed inspirits,
being with all good-will more incapable
than the fabled she-bear. The infantile howls
became gradually feebler; the baby was growing
weak, and the dog, sitting on its haunches,
and lifting its muzzle as if in appeal, gave
utterance to one of those long, lamenting, almost
human whines which seemed to protest
against the fate that was hovering over the
child.

At that moment a woman, with a plaid shawl
thrown over her head, after the manner of the
Yorkshire or Lancashire operatives, was passing

the shed. She was not one of the factory
hands, though, from her appearance, an outsider
might hastily have concluded so. The expression
of her face had nothing of that bold, uu-
seed, and almost supercilious stare characteristic
of too many of the women employed at
the Torringmoor factories. It was, indeed, remarkable
for its patience and docility. It
might once have been good-looking, but there
was now a greyness of the complexion, a languor
in the carriage of her thin, somewhat
gawky figure, and an appearance of ill-health
which told the tale that Mary Burton was no
native of these parts, and that insufficient
clothing, poor living, keen air, and the searching
winds of Torringmoor were breaking down
a constitution ill calculated to endure privation.
She and ber father had been born and bred in
the neighbourhood of London, but had been
unfortunate, like others, in a period of agricultural
depression, when work had been difficult
to obtain both in Sussex and Middlesex.

It was not in the vegetable world alone that
the snows and frosts of two successive winters

were beginning to be perceptible. But, among
the occupants of land in many of the English
counties, there was said to be a great deal of
distress. Sadness and disappointment were
already experienced by those who were beaten
down by the rigid nature of the laws, and
seemed fruitlessly to spend their energies upon
the soil. The Burton had seen better days ;
but when starved women had been found in
wretched habitations near Battersea literally
famished, with some straw in the corners of
their rooms, but no covering of any sort, old
Jem Burton — who had been tempted by the
account of the lace-work which was going on

in shire, much as Whittington was tempted

by fables of gold to be picked up in London
had spent his last remaining shilling in determining
to take his daughter to offer the
assistance of her deft fingers to the lace-workers
at Torringmoor, rather than remain to starve
at Battersea.

He commenced by spending his shillings on
coach-fares, but, when his little store of silver
was exhausted, he and his daughter were

obliged to trudge. Sanguine still, he had comforted
Polly by the reflection that, if they had
carried more money on their persons, rogues
might have stolen it. But a short time before,
as he reminded Polly, a poor working-woman
had been murdered on this very road for the
sake of the eight shillings which' she carried
in her pocket, and which she had earned by
her honest toil. The verdict had been, ' Accidental
death;' and Jem, who did not read
his newspaper for nothing, had commented
on the circumstance to his uncomplaining
daughter.

They had reached the El Dorado at last,
which honest Jem believed in because he
prided himself on the possession of thews and
muscles, and was still able enough to perform
a day's work, while he believed that his Polly
would be good at the lace-making. But, if
labour was a little more plentiful for Jem, Polly
preferred her own quiet modes of life to the
gossipping, jealous, and immodest ways of some
of the Torringmoor lace-makers. Rather than
expose herself to be contaminated by association

with them, she had preferred to do a little
washing, and to take in some sewing. And
there was worse than all this, on which the
woman, who never openly complained, was
always secretly brooding. Her father's determination
— a set purpose from which it had
been impossible to deter him, but which she,
with her better wisdom, had known from the
first to be blind and obstinate — of coming to
a strange town, had broken Polly's heart and
blighted her life.

The man with whom she had kept company
for years, and who was angry with her for
leaving Battersea with her father, and not
remaining and facing her position with him
and all its difficulties, had seen her off with
specious speeches and manifold promises to
write to her, but had jilted her as soon asher
back was turned, and had married a more
comely and younger woman. Since then,
Polly Burton had tried to face the future with
a settled determination to make the best of a
life from which she believed all the brightness
had gone. She would not deceive herself, or

make friends with other people. She believed
herself to have done with affection
of all sorts, unless it was that for her aged
father.

She was passing this shed this wintry morning
with a feeling that she had outlived all tender
desires. The loving flame, which had once
shone so brightly in her heart, burned very
low indeed ; the last sparks which made life
sweet to her were nearly out. And the divine
love seemed to have almost gone with the
human, so faint was her interest in anything
which God had made, so dull and stolid her
determination to plod through her allotted
task, so weary her soul. She was almost angry
with the people who had given her a little
washing, which involved the painful task of
fetching it on such a bitterly cold morning.
The latter stage of existence with this woman
seemed at present as if it would be worse than
the former; and yet the former, in which the
love in her nature had once asserted itself,
and made toil pleasant to her, had left its
hand-writing in that look of endurance and

docility on the sickly face, and her Father in
Heaven had not forgotten her.

She was passing the shed with her head cast
down, feeling like a machine, capable of so
many hours work every day, and only a little
wearier and colder than usual, when the child's
fatigued wail struck upon her ear. Her first
thought was the severe one, that it was * all of
a piece with all the other ill behaviour of these
set-up hussies,' the way in which they neglected
their children ; but her second thought
brought a stirring of some warmth about her
heart, as the infant's cry recalled a recollection
of her own childhood, of how carefully she used
to tend a little baby sister when her mother
was otherwise occupied, and how she had loved
it. Her third thought, that if her life had been
differently ordered she might have had little
ones of her own to sweeten and beautify it,
brought a sudden wave of colour to her pale,
thin cheek. Then she was aware that her
dress was being gently pulled by the dog, and
that the colles looked as if it could almost read
her secret thoughts, and answer,

VOL. I. F

f No, you are not a machine. You had once
a passionate, loving nature, with a woman's
longing after domestic life, for all you pretend
to be made of cast-iron, and try, in spite of
your ill health, to be always in working order.'

She yielded to the dog, and let it draw
her into the shed, when, lo ! the baby stretched
out its little arms to her and wept. And,
though it was a matter-of-fact and rather
comical travesty of the sweet old idyll of the
Egyptian princess with heart warming to the
abandoned babe of the despised Hebrew slave,
yet the effect was much the same with the like
6 touch of nature.' In both cases the woman, in
the simple language of Scripture, ' had compassion,'
and in that of Polly Burton it was as
if a spring was suddenly touched which hitherto
had been lying dormant in her nature, revealing
a fund of hidden treasure. She was,
though she knew it not, emphatically a mother,
though she had never brought forth a child,
and motherhood in such a case is more unselfish.
From the moment that she took the forsaken
little one, and laid it near to her heart,

wrapping it about with her own warmer garments,
pressing her lips on its lips that she
might help to keep up the life in it, a new and
softening influence brought about a change of
feeling in her.

Her old father, Jem Burton, found that evening
that he might as well have argued with a
wilful little girl who had just had a new doll
given to her, and only hugged it the closer
when urged to give it up, as to try to remind
Polly that nobody required her to burden herself
with f other folks' brats.'

Tis a child of ill fame,' muttered old Jem,,
whose sturdy honesty made him feel as if he
and his would be decidedly ill-treated if the
Almighty did not visit the sins of other people
upon them from generation to generation. His
daughter refused to argue about it, knowing
nothing of the perplexing and mysterious question
of indwelling and transmitted evil by
which the finer sense of justice has been chilled.
She could not answer, because she did not
know that, if there be evil in the parent, it must
be transmitted, not by any arbitrary re-intro



diction of ignominy into the stock of humanity,
but by the natural and inevitable law which reproduces
in the brain and character of the
child, the inherited or acquired peculiarities of
habit and thought in the brain of the parent.

From generation to generation,' repeated
old Jem, not knowing that he was dabbling in
the region of metaphysics, and smacking his
lips with a sense of his own superior righteousness
over the text. ' Tak' my word for it,
Poll, the little un 'ill be hup to no good. And
if you tak' 'im, my gell, from those as by
rights bought to kep 'im, it'll only be the
prison or the gallows. If ee comes of gaol-birds,
a gaol-bird we'll be.'

Then the woman's heart broke out.

f Shame on yer, father! As if the Lord
meant us to keep a-harpin' on that saying', and
t' forget the t'other as He comes to save the
lost.'

Ain't it 'gainst yer conscience, gell V persevered
the father, honest and ever self-sufficient,
and he went on, as his fashion was, making
the best of every odd moment, and chanting

an old-fashioned hymn to the strokes of his
axe, as he cut up some wood which his daughter
had gathered to help with the fire.

Some folks talks of their consciences when
they are fools, and of their booty when they is
downright cruel answered Polly, who wished
her father would not sing, as he always sang
out of tune, and somehow the false notes jarred
more than ever with the new melody which was
singing on deep down in her heart that night.

She had washed the little fellow, fed him
with milk, and propped him upright with a
pillow on a fragment of old rug covering the
stones before the fire. And the baby cooed
with delight, stretching out its podgy little
fists to the fire, and making futile attempts to
catch hold of one of its pink toes and suck it.

He be blythe and bright-eyed as a young
rabbit. And yet his mother was a bad 'un,
and the parish 'ill lev to bury 'er,' pondered
Jem, with whom the divine virtue which covers
a multitude of sins did not come naturally, and
was no part of his religion. ' That folks as was
honest should do their best for theirsels,' was

his creed, and his head shook a good deal ashe
thought of his daughter's strange and unexpected
obstinacy, of the injury which she
was inflicting on the State, according to the
man's rough politics — and Jem Burton, as a
London-bred man, liked his pipe and his newspaper
— by ' encouraging' o' paupers.'

The recollection of the few hard-gained
earnings, which Mary had carefully tied up ina
stocking, did not do much to make him more
sympathetic, when his daughter, who had not
the gift of speech, tried to express something
Which she had dimly in her mind about the
Pharisees, who had their moral sense ' upside
down, and thought they was a-doing right
when they was all the time only a-doing
wrong.' She did not venture to hint that she
would have been glad to help the poor dead
creature, whose pathetic face had impressed
her imagination as it would certainly not have
impressed it if she had only seen it in life.
Help in her case would have been too dilatory
to be efficient. But Polly's sympathies, since
she had suffered cruelly herself, were all on the

woman's side instead of on that of the man ;
and as she had looked at that forsaken sister,
and registered a secret vow to cherish her
child, something in Polly's heart had cried out
against the man who had been allowed to go
scot-free, and who had robbed the wretched
creature of her fame.

I'd ha' given her shelter, and lev braved it
lout wi' 'em all,' she though t, as she remembered
that no one had come to the poor woman's
help.

CHAPTER VI.

Polly Burton never regretted the exceptional
fit of obstinacy which caused her, in defiance
of her father, to adopt the dead woman's child.
True, during that first winter, the room, which
had been bare of furniture before, became barer
than ever, now that there was an extra mouth
to feed. But when the spring came, and the
March dust was succeeded by warm April rains,
Polly got out between her hours for washing,
and admired, as she had never done before, the
varying shades of green contributed by the
larch, oak, ash, and chestnut in the pathways
by the river. She put down the child to crawl
when she was hanging up her clothes to dry
near the moor, and she noticed as she had

never yet noticed the buttercups and primroses,
because the boy crowed and tried to gather
them. It was as if a new spring had come into
her hitherto blank life, and as if fresh spring
corn, giving promise of rich aftermath, was
practically being sown in the poor dead heart.

As the first few years went on, the struggle
for the necessaries of life was sometimes a little
difficult. But the child, who had as yet shown
none of those evil tendencies at which old Jem
had so darkly hinted, was always merry as a
lark, when he had apparently little to satisfy
his bodily cravings.

He was naturally small and thin, and could
not be otherwise than ill-clad, and looked like
a lamb that had been sheared of its wool before
it had grown to be a sheep. But, in spite of
all these drawbacks, the lamb seemed to thrive
fairly well, and Jem Burton had now an infinitely
better prospect before him than he had
enjoyed for the last three or four years. He
was not yet free from anxiety, but could look
forward to the time when the boy would help
him. The period was already drawing nigh

when ' ile Jem,' as he had been clubbed by the
neighbours, would be sent for his schooling,
and as much learning was not considered necessary
for boys who could turn an odd penny in
the fields fifty years ago, both Polly and her
father considered that the desired event was
tolerably near at hand.

Meanwhile the family, which had been absent
from Rashleigh Hall, returned to Torringmoor
when 4 ile Jem ' was four years old. The old
Sir George was dead, and the new one had
come into his own, but it was rumoured that
the present Sir George Rashleigh had never
been the same man since the death of his first
wife, while he was absent on his travels. He
made no secret, after his father's death, of the
fact which he had always intended to make
publicly known, that he had been privately
married, but that his wife and infant child had
both of them died before he had received the
news of the birth of the latter. It was contended
on his behalf that the letter had miscarried,
but it was also said that he blamed
himself; and, however that might be, the fact

was certain that no one dared allude to the
circumstances of his early life in George Rashleigh's
presence, his temper being uncertain.

He had married again, as in duty bound, but
his second wife was not much richer than the
first. Rumour declared that, in a violent fit
of anger, he had vowed to his father that he
would never marry a woman who had money,
and the same busy rumour hinted again that
he married his second wife rather from gratitude
than love. She was an Italian whom he
had met abroad — many years older than himself
— and report said that the young Sir George
had been nursed by her through a fever which
nearly proved fatal, and which had prostrated
him when he first received the news of the
death of his former wife and child. He might
be grateful, but the Torringmoor people concluded
of him that he was neither affectionate
nor genial to the lady whom he had married
or anyone else. He had now another infant
heir, nearly a year old, and the decadence of
ancient families, with their gradual impoverishment
and consequent decline in honour, was

said to press heavily on the spirits ot the
young father. It seemed to be his doom, as
well as that of his ancestors, to see his broad
lands heavily mortgaged, and fated to pass
into alien hands. Already some of the family
plate was said to have gone to the collectors,
and other articles of vertu were destined to
follow in the same humiliating direction.

Some of the Rashleighs had been extravagant,
but no one could account for the aggregate
of money which, as the price of land
had increased, had literally passed through
their hands, the tenant farmers not seeming
to be much richer than they who roughly tilled
the soil years before. It was said that the
incessant and reckless activity of self-destructive
force was already beginning to be at
work in the age, and old tories shook their
heads.

The Rashleighs had been a handsome race,
and the present Sir George Rashleigh was no
exception to the rule. He was tall and well-featured,
carrying his head a little forward
after the manner of the Rashleighs generally.

His profile was considered by connoisseurs to
be exceptionally well cut; and the Italian lady,
some fifteen years bis senior, was said to have
fallen in love with him for bis manly beauty.
The Rashleighs, in the good old times, kept
pretty well to the rules of life laid down by a
gay poet ; rules of hunting and banqueting in
the open-air in autumn and summer, and of
carousing by the fire in winter days. Of these
traditions, George Rashleigh retained but one
extravagance. He came of a hunting race, and
probably the hunting would be the last thing
which either he or his descendants would be
inclined to give up. He still managed to keep
half-a-dozen hunters, and, when remonstrated
with on the subject of this outlay, he would
lose his temper, and declare that — rotten as
the times might be — it would be long before
rents and profits would fall to so low an ebb
that country gentlemen would be obliged to
deny themselves the solace of their hunters.

It was somewhat before the days when merchants
and manufacturers were beginning
to be munificent patrons of fox-hunting ;

but already there were signs that commercial
prosperity might follow on the depression of
the agricultural, and George Rashleigh was
among the number of those enthusiasts who
would rather have seen their country mansions
follow in the way of the old monasteries than
admit that so dire a calamity as the surrendering
of sport must be inflicted upon him asa
punishment for the want of foresight of his
ancestors. Other modes of economy, however
drastic, might be adopted, with the exception
of one — that of inter-marriage with the commercial
classes. In the opinion of his family,
George had fallen low enough in marrying, as
his first wife, the penniless orphan daughter
of an old Yorkshire parson. But just as it
was necessary that he should ride to cover and
wage war against the vulpine race, so was
there the need that he should remember his
blue blood and the monumental brasses. He
had angered his father by declining to marry
a rich lady of title because she had a plain
face, but he also inherited the prejudices which
had prevented all the Rashleighs from connecting

themselves with the ' commercial classes,'
and so re-invigorating with new blood the
decaying stock, as well as the ill-supplied coffers
of the Rashleigk family. He shared another
tradition with his father, which enabled
him to keep his hounds. That tradition was,
that one might borrow, or mortgage, but never
actually sell, one's estate.

CHAPTER VII.

The motto which is usually attributed to
Madame de Maintenon might have been adopted
by Sir George Rashleigh — ' After me the
deluge.'

It did not serve to improve his temper when,
on one November afternoon, he rode back from
a tolerably successful ' run,' and got separated
from some of his friends, to remember — as he
passed from the open country into the solitary
woodlands — that the ' deluge ' must come on his
infant-heir. The sharp frosts which had set in
about the end of October had had the effect ot
bringing the leaves off the trees, so as to make
the district through which he rode nearly as
bare as in a dreary December. This was really

an advantage, as it prevented George Rash-leighton
losing bis way amongst the innumerable
narrow ' rides ' which he had to traverse
in the wood after leaving the moor. But the
prospect round him was exceptionally melancholy,
and in his present mood he fell into a
dreary reverie, from which he was startled by
hearing a little piping voice Gi' us a penny, sir
not in the usual dialect of the countryside, butin
an unmistakable cockney intonation caught
from the Burton, who had been in London.

George Rashleigh could not have described
the odd and indefinable sensation with which
he encountered a pair of bright, shrewd eyes, of
the same colour as the wild hyacinths which
used to bloom plentifully in the fields round
Torringmoor in spring time — eyes which glittered
under a brow crowned by matted, curly
locks, of a dark brown tint mingled with tufts
which had been bleached fair by the summer
sun. The eyes and the hair belonged to a
very small boy of some four or five years
of age, dressed in a sort of wisp of ragged
clothing, which clung to the upper part

VOL. I. G

of his person and left the little brown legs
bare, except where they were covered with
splashes from the brooks and country roads.
There was nothing in the little imp to account
for the odd mixture of feeling with which Sir
George regarded him, but the child, getting no
answer, and beginning to suppose that something
was expected of him, tried to put his
accomplishments into practice, and turned a
somersault, rags and all, after the most accredited
manner in which old Jem had trained
him. The unexpected exploit had the effect of
startling Sir George's horse, and, with one of
those quick revulsion of emotion, not unusual
with passionate people, the baronet raised his
whip, and shouted,

Get out of my way. you little beggar.
AVhat is your mother thinking of not to send
you to school?'

Human consciousness is so complex that, if
George could have analysed his feeling, he
would have seen that he had almost involuntarily
lashed himself into a rage to escape
the softer recollections which were so oddly

associated with the child —-an experience which,
I believe, is also not uncommon to irascible dispositions
— so strange are the mysteries of the
inner life, and the conflict of evil and good in
the hidden nature of a man.

The tone of his speech had the effect of
arousing a similar anger in the boy, and, as
soon as the man had gone, little Jem looked
after him, clenching his little hands, and with
ugly wrinkles on his young face.

But the baronet was a magistrate, and had
returned to his native place determining to do
his duty to it, and to get the people into
better order, ruling them, if possible, with firmness,
as well as justice. He did not see much
occasion for suavity Adhere the poor were concerned,
but he prided himself on being energetic
in rectifying abuses, and would have been considerably
astonished if anyone could have told
him that he appeared to those whom he considered
to be his inferiors as the hardest of taskmasters,
and that they looked upon him as a
monster with a heart as hard as a millstone.

He kept little Jem in his mind, and when he

next met the boy with the woman who had
acted as his mother, and who, since she had
solaced herself with her scheme of benevolence,
appeared to have a noble as well as a
pensive face, he told Polly that the little one
was old enough to be at school, and that he
should not be allowed to run lazily about these
rambling outskirts, with cottages straggling as
if they, like their inhabitants, had no respect for
law or order.

4 Send the youngster to school, or he will come
to no good.'

The words fell somewhat heavily on Polly's
ear. They seemed an echo of the dismal prophecy
hazarded years ago by old Jem. But
the baronet was determined and somewhat
prejudiced against the child. The fact that his
reputed mother was not a native of the place,
but had come from the neighbourhood of London,
served to prejudice Sir George, who made
no further inquiries about the boy.

And, though Polly had an unreasonable aversion
to the school which had been endowed by
a former inhabitant of the parish, in which

boys and girls were educated gratis — with such
severity that on one occasion a poor child was
said to have hidden himself in a dry ditch, and
to have remained there a couple of days, from
fear of being cruelly whipped for playing
truant — she had no adequate excuse for not
obeying the magistrate.

And now came the dismal fulfilment of the
prophecy, for as soon as little Jem went to
school the evil part of his nature, which had
before been kept in abeyance, came to the frontin
an amazing and alarming manner. It was
perhaps somewhat hard on him that he should
no longer have been allowed to tumble about, a
dusty imp, amongst the rubbish-heaps near the
cottages. It was hard to be made to learn
when incapacity for teaching was too often
seasoned by hard words and severer blows.
But harder still, according to old Jem, that a
child like that should be kept to lessons,
when he might already be earning something,
in days when the farm labourers had
only eight or nine shillings a week. Every
field had its huge hedgerow, with pollards for

firing, which 'He Jem' could gather — a proceeding
at which most of the farmers winked,
so long as the hurdles were not interfered with.
So little Jem's schooling meant an absence of
sticks for fuel, as well as an absence of the
pennies which he had hitherto been accustomed
proudly to bring home as a reward for his
cleverness in turning somersaults.

Polly sent him with much protest. People
were more strict with children then, and did
not take the same kindly notice of them as
they do now ; also the language which they
used to them was often cruel and profane.
Polly Burton was aware of this when she insisted
that she ' could larn him herself, for all
that such a little 'un need larn,' and further
declared that she ' didn't hold to beating with
a stick.' Yet it was the stick which was applied
to the child's back, and that a little
sharply, when, on the first day of his academic
studies, he took a field-mouse in his pocket,
bright-eyed and agile like himself, which raced
round and round the room, to the consternation
of the master. It was a bad beginning on both

sides, and i He Jem who was uncompromising
iu his dislikes, made up his small mind once
and for all on the question of learning. It was
not that actively or outwardly he rebelled, but
his spirit rose against the bullying treatment,
and he hated the very sight of a book.

He would be a truant, and take the consequences
of it, and I am afraid that Polly and
Jem Burton often connived at this wickedness ;
for active of limb, frank and honest, and with
a faculty for enjoying himself, little Jem was
at least capable and ingenious. He had a hundred
ways of making the best of it when he
determined to absent himself from school, and
in those days he could pick up enough to help
the elder people. For the curriculum of gout
and rheumatism, never likely to end in this
world, had commenced for old Jem, and, as the
years went on, in his readiness to help, the
little fellow determined to brave the wrath of
the schoolmaster and of Sir George himself,
who every now and then appeared in the village,
with a good many rings on his fingers,
a plaid shawl about his shoulders when the

weather was cold, and a habit of kicking small
dogs which got in his path, and of pushing
children out of his way with a stick. Polly's
foundling used to stare at him with childish
wonder in his big eyes. The man's face was
not feeble, but it was conceited, and the lines
of temper and discontent in it could hardly
be concealed. The baronet prided himself on
knowing the character of almost everyone in
the neighbourhood. He had set himself determinately
to suppress mendicancy, and the
child's saltatory tricks, as well as his cleverness
in running away from school, seemed to merit
reprobation.

The insidious disease, which had concealed
itself so long in Polly Burton's constitution,
made rapid inroads at last, and, though the
boy had learnt little, it became necessary to
keep him at home to help both herself and her
father. But so ignorant was she, and so careless
of new and somewhat necessary regulations,
in her life which had glided by with little
count of rules or days, that she was not aware
of the infliction of a fine for truancy, which the

magistrate, in his desire to make the people
grow np virtuous and respectable, had determined
to enforce as a matter of regularity. As
to the legality, he cared not. Xo one was
likely to interfere with his jurisdiction. He
had called a committee to assist him, and the
committee had determined on this course.

It was no secret to any of them that the
child, which was sometimes called 4 He Jem,*
and sometimes ' Little Nobody,' had been found
a greater pickle than the schoolmaster could
manage ; that, when he had been punished
concerning the field-mouse, the boy had next
provided himself with a hedge-hog, and that
often in summer-time he had been found wandering
about with hopeless little feet, or sleeping
on grounds in which he was trespassing,
so that it had been necessary to shake him
to get him awake. Such a case needed stern
measures, the more so that the gentlemen
were, one and all of them, by this time acquainted
with Jem's history, which was no
secret in the place.

Jem's mother had been a tramp, and the

nomadic tendencies were doubtless inherited.
For children of the criminal classes were supposed
to enter into perdition by a natural
title ; the curse belonging to their parents was
handed on to them.

Sir George really supposed that he was eminently
self-denying in undertaking a nauseous
task, when, on the return from one of his rides,
he reined-in his horse, and forced himself to
speak to the little urchin, who had his tongue
in his cheek in a manner which w T as certainly
most abhorrent. It was a cold day, and the
boy, who had been scantily fed — though he
required as little for his wants as a sparrow,
which could pick up a grain here and there —
was looking thin and sharp-faced, whilst the
colour in his usually fresh young cheeks had
turned to violet edges from the keen air and
want of nourishment.

Tell your mother,' said Sir George, ' that
she has a couple of shillings to pay on account
of your ill-behaviour, as you have not been at
school

The boy vouchsafed no other answer than a

rapid, somewhat significant glance. His tongue
was still in his cheek — an irritating grimace.
He bore more than one resemblance to the
easily-satisfied sparrow. For, like it, he could
be occasionally pert, though generally inoffensive.
He did not believe in Mary Burton, who had
no money to buy food, having to pay fines.
It was not in his nature to fear, but he was a
little inclined to laugh.

The jackanapes is disrespectful,' thought
Sir George, as he glanced down at the impish
figure of this ill-mannered child, who shuffled
his feet, but made no attempt to doff his hat.

The waif must have known well enough, as
the magistrate reflected, that every well-trained
youngster was expected to pull the front lock
of his tangled mane when he talked to his
betters. All the people round cringed to the
Baronet, and Sir George could not possibly suspect
that by some of the very people who cringed
the most he was inwardly detested. He did not
fly into a passion, but, with the conviction that
anyone who gave the lad a thrashing would
be doing a good work, he adroitly used the

butt-end of his whip to dislodge the hat on
the impudent young bead, in spite of a mocking
gesture made by the child. But it seemed as
if an evil spirit of mischievous glee possessed
the strange waif; for when Sir George, priding
himself on his self-command, shouted, in a
louder tone,

Tell her to pay it by next Monday.'

The boy shouted back :

She hasn't got it to pay.'

And then, dodging about the while, he commenced
shying tiny pebbles at the horse's legs,
the smile curling the corners of his mouth as
the animal began to rear.

It was the climax. Sir George, who was a
powerful man, managed to soothe the horse,
and then dismounted, holding the bridle with
his right hand, while he grasped the boy as
if he had been a puppy with his left, and,
flinging him a couple of yards, began to slash
him as if he were made of wood. Swish,
swish, went the pitiless whip, curling round
the lithe, uncovered, sunburnt legs of the little
lad, but the pride in the child not only prevented

him from crying out, but even, for the
time, from feeling.

I will teach you to throw stones, and to
answer me like that — you ragamuffin — you
beggar's brat!' cried the angry gentleman, with
little idea of the rage and vengeance which he
was rousing in the poor boy's heart.

It was only Mary Burton who could tell, from
the cut clothing and from the wheals on the
child's back, that which he purposely concealed
from anyone else ; only she who could guess
how the mind, just as it had begun to bud,
was slowly withering and becoming fit for
nought but bitterness.

'Oh, hush!' said the good woman, thoroughly
affrighted at the clenching of the little fists
and at the look of hatred which had been summoned
with a dark frown on the young face,
'you will make me think that I have spoilt
you.'

For already old Jem was shaking his head
and reminding her how he had told her that
the parent stock was bad, and that from an ill
tree like that there could come nought but evil.

CHAPTER VIII.

There was as yet little of that precocious
speculation and intellectual refining which has
come in with the so-called ' march of knowledge,'
and which may make it difficult to impress
on the mind of the youngster of the
future the danger of the violation of the Decalogue.


There was still a firm belief in the use of the
rod, and it cannot be said that Sir George's
conscience reproached him in the least when he
felt that he had given an ill-taught brat the
hiding which he deserved.

Had Polly Burton lived, the love might still
have conquered the hate. But on one morning
in the following spring, when the swallows

were coining home, and when the scent of
flowers was on the wind, Polly was found stiff
and stark, with but little enough of bed and
bedding. It could not be said that she had
undergone more privations than others of her
neighbours. But the winter again had been a
hard one, and Polly had less constitution than
others to stand it. Her simple funeral was
obliged to be at the expense of the parish. It
was fortunate for old Jem that he was becoming
a little childish, and, when he was told that the
kindly heart had ceased to beat, he comforted
himself by repeating over and over, with the
simplicity of a child, that she had c gone to
glory,' and that his 'time,' he thanked God,
could not be long. He still never did anything
by halves, and though he sang out of tune with
his poor old cracked voice, he took especial
pains with his singing, and piped with odd
recollections of old melodies about f glory,
glory when the funeral was over, and he
was left with no other companion than little
Jem in the house.

He was beginning to be afraid of the waif,

whom his daughter had taken in contrary to his
approval, and rather winced when he came in
contact with the child's shrewd, sharp glances.
But Polly had a truer mourner in the little desolate
child whose heart felt as if it would break
under the burden which oppressed it.

Old Jem had a way of drowning his sorrows
which Polly might not have allowed had she
remained to take care of him. For, though the
hothouses did not as yet outnumber the cottages,
there was a convenient ( public ' near at
hand where the farm-labourers and operatives
could get their pint of beer. ' It were a hoggish
sort o' a place,' as Jem the elder sometimes
declared in a fit of confidence to a boon companion
when he descanted on the greater
glories of the metropolis. But brandy was fortunately
little drunk in it, and almost as rare
as nectar. The beer was so weak that it could
not do the old man much harm, and some of
the neighbours — pitiful at the sight of the
wreck of such a grand physique — would ' treat
him ' when the * He Jem ' was out of the way.

Meanwhile, no one seemed to care what became

of the child. He was left to pick up ashe
could a scanty means of livelihood from
gathering the spring flowers, and tying them
into bundles for sale. His little sunburnt figure,
bare-footed, with keen face, was well known
that spring to the visitors at Torringmoor. For
the child had sense enough to understand that
if he did not do enough to turn honest pennies,
old Jem would soon be left to collapse into
something worse than what Carlyle called a
1 poor-law Bastille,' and, though there was little
enough love lost between the two, the boy had
a dim sense that Polly would not like it, and,
for the sake of what Polly had done for him,
he was in duty bound to support her old father.
The word 'Polly' in those days comprised the
whole of his religion ; it was a sort of fetish to
him and served to keep him straight.

There's a deal of wickedness in this place,'
Polly Burton had said to him on the day
before she died. And, for the sake of the woman
who had acted to him as a mother, he
would run away as fast as his little bare legs
could carry him when he heard other mothers

VOL. I. H

execrating their offsprings with volleys of
curses up the street. He was thankful to think
he had never had a real mother, if that was
the way with them.

For Polly had spoken nothing but good
words to him. She had left him her old Bible,
but unfortunately he could not read it. And
what pleased him since her death best was to
get out, on the pretence of gathering flowers,
to the loneliness and isolation of the desolate
moor. To be there at sunrise, and to see the
sun striking through the clouds and illuminating
their dark edges, was always a pleasure to
him, and a still greater pleasure to watch the
great ball of fire throwing open the gates of
heaven as it sank into rest. The mystery of
interwoven foliage, and of subtle shining reflections
in the pools, which suggested the
neighbourhood of the river, did something also
to comfort him and to speak with Polly's voice.
But best of all was the time when it seemed
to his untutored fancy as if invisible hands
must be kindling the lights in those far-away
mansions where his adopted mother had gone

to dwell. He scarcely ventured to wait to wonder
if, when this solemn hour came,, she might
be allowed to look down upon him and help
him. For the darkness brought its task, and,
hastily gathering together the bunches of wildflowers
which during the day he had failed to
sell, he would make his way, under the merciful
covering of the gloom, to the graveyard in
which they had hastily buried Polly, with the
grass not yet grown upon her grave.

The graveyard was supposed to be closed
after sunset. But this could make no possible
difference to the agile little figure, which crept
along with stealthy steps, and prided itself on
climbing every sort of fence. Not only was
the wall no impediment, but the child had a
sense of having the place to himself as soon
as the stars came out. And evening after
evening he brought his bunch of wild-flowers —
primroses, violets, cowslips, bluebells, and
marsh marigolds, as the case might be — and
piled them, as any little idolater might have
heaped his offerings before a shrine, on Polly's
grave, pressing his own little face on the 



less mound, and watering some of the flowers
with tears which no one in the world would
have thought he could shed. For, after he had
accomplished his pilgrimage, he would return
moodily from the churchyard, scowling and
getting out of the way whenever his fellow-creatures
tried to draw near to him.

It was scarcely in human nature that this
sort of thing should continue without any
change, and, after a few weeks, it occurred to
the lad that his adopted mother must be tired
of always seeing the same flowers. He had
seen ladies who were rich with magnificent
floral wreaths made of azaleas and amelia ;
for though as yet the Protestant feeling had
decreed that it was rather an unsafe thing to
take to praying' over graves, lest by any chance
one might be tempted to take to praying for,
or even to, the souls of the departed, yet love
overleaped such decrees in its eagerness to give
its best.

He had heard a good deal about trespassing,
but it never impressed him in the least. The
farmers or the gentlemen round would have

found it as easy to catch a hare as this swift
little trespasser when it pleased him to exercise
himself in his neighbour's estates. He was
familiar with all their grounds, and though the
committee, which in time was to give place to
a f Town Council,' had lately taken to putting
up trespass-boards, ' He Jem ' could not read
them, and so the trespass-boards made no difference.


Old Jem had once tried to impress upon his
obtuseness that Sir George was a magistrate,
and had added in his hearing,

What was the use o' going into Torring-
moor for magistrates — wasn't the gentleman as
lived close to them one himself, as well as the
parson as cum on Sundays V

I am sorry to say that this warning effected
a very different purpose from that which it was
desired to accomplish, since the child's principal
wish was to spite Sir George. It flashed
upon him suddenly that in the garden at Rashleigh
were some rare spring flowers, with the
cultivation of which the gardener had taken
especial pains. There were double narcissi and

some beautiful waxy hyacinths. To pick the
plants in the greenhouse would have seemed to
6 Little Nobody' to be a crime. His system of
ethics was a strange one, but nothing would
have surprised him more than to be told that
to pick a flower which grew in the open air,
and which seemed to belong, as much as the
stars did to heaven, if they did to anyone,
would have been looked upon by the magistrate
as an act which obviously required
punishment.

Evening after evening, after the brilliant idea
occurred to him, garlands of the golden-centred
narcissus and of the creamy hyacinth appeared
on Polly's grave. The depredator first of all
took three or four, and combined them with
the wild ones, but after a time he grew bolder.
The gardener set somebody to watch, by the
advice of his master ; and the child was caught,
with his hands full of the blossoms. Even old
Jem had nothing to say for him, when he was
told that the punishment would be a fine or
else a term of imprisonment.

Some of 'em holds to being converted

said the old man, over his cups that night at
the ' public' f I was never one o' that sort,
but seems to me my Polly was alius converted.
Now this chap comes of a bad lot. I all along
sed as he'd go to the gallus.'

It was ungrateful, to say the least of it, of
old Jem. But the little sense which he once
had was altogether deserting him. And it
never occurred to him to think how he was
to ' get along ' when the swift-footed little
rascal could no longer run by the side of the
carriages in Torringmoor, holding out his
bunches of wild flowers, and exchanging them
for half-pence.

It seemed to the little fellow that soon
everything would be punishable, when he was
asked if he had seen the trespass-board, and
read its directions. The comparatively small
number of men and women who could read
would have made most of them naturally
frightened of undecipherable printed directions.
But little Jem, who had not troubled himself
about them at all, seemed to be only surly-tempered,
and had no excuse to offer. He

never thought of mentioning the sacred matter
of Polly's grave, but had somehow an idea
that the angels, of whom his adopted mother
had so often talked, would be equal to the
emergency, and would be sure to protect him
the more so that Polly had urged it upon
him with her last breath to keep honest and
true and never get into jail.

The child's silence made the matter worse.
His case was considered to be one of contumacy.
He somehow understood that the policeman
to whose tender mercies the gardener
immediately handed him was a functionary of
the law, and, though he felt fairly crazed when
he was taken, as a matter of course, to the
lock-up for the night, he had sense enough
to know that he could not resist the municipal
authorities, though he was, as he had been
often told, in a free country. He had meant
no harm. But when his pockets were searched,
and the policeman seemed to think the case
looked terribly grave, because they contained a
pocket-knife, two stones, and a ball of string,
he felt more than ever an apathy of fear, which

showed itself by grumpiness and silence. Cases,
such as that of a man who had recently died
in Whiteness prison for a debt of fifteen
shillings, had been discussed before him, as
well as that of another wretch who, for stealing-two
odd shoes, had been sentenced to transportation
for seven years. Old Jem did not
hear the newspapers discussed at the public-house
for nothing.

The child was literally stupefied by terror.
On the following morning he was brought upto
be examined before the magistrates, one
of whom was a parson (and Polly Burton, who
had taken her charge to the meeting-house, had
failed in her duty by not taking him to church),
another, who had a jerky, genial manner of
speaking, but who looked properly shocked at
the appearance of the little beggar, and finally,
and worst of all, Sir George himself. That
the form of examination was a farce, and that
there was a ' foregone conclusion,' as the act
was undeniable, was evident from the way in
which the gardener, as witness, stated the case.

Little Jem had never before heard his character

stated in plain terra. He opened his
eyes wide in his accuser's face, and then
literally gasped for breath. He began to forget
his terror, and his natural shrewdness
came to his assistance. There was an angry
glitter in his blue eyes, and more than one
of the gentlemen who were present could
not help being struck by the shapeliness of
his limbs and face, and by the fact that he
carried himself erect as no cottage-bred lad
ever carried himself, as he answered, saucily,
'I am not a vagrant.'
A friend nudged his elbow.
Be wise, and hold your tongue, you young
rascal,' he whispered.

Little Jem looked round. There should have
been many people to speak a good word for
him, he thought, people who had known him
since his babyhood, and could have said that he
meant no harm to anyone ; but somehow or
other they were not there. He was only aware
of faces which looked stern and terrible, and he
knew that all the evidence went to show that
he had taken the flowers. His only hope seem-eel

to be in speaking for himself, as, breathing
hard, with face white and scared, but looking
defiantly at his judges, he cried out,

1 1 never begged from no one. I only sold
my flowers.'

It was an unlucky speech, as one of the bystanders
laughed, and said, in a tone loud
enough to be heard,

1 You sold w T hat you had stolen, you young
vagabond.'

1 The lad is a good lad,' said a woman, kinder
than the rest, and who stood up for his defence,
since she, like Polly Burton, had a natural dislike
to the Torringmoor people, and prided herself
on retaining more cockney speech. ' You
would not bracket him with thieves. A beggar
in course he is, poor brat, but, saving your worship's
pardon, I don't see how he can be anything
else — coming, as he did, by a wrong tack
into the world, and taken up by a wearisome,
cranky creature, as always lived more or lesson
charity. He's down enough in the mouth already,
without throwing o' it into his face.'

1 He is a vagrant — all the mischief comes of

his vagrancy,' said one of the magistrates,
severely.

That will do, my good woman — you may
step down,' answered another. ' We cannot
allow uneducated people to pamper mendicancy.'


There was no other attempt made at little
Jem's defence. Certainly one neighbour, who
wished to magnify his own importance, pretended
afterwards without an atom of truth that 'he
gnawed who did it ; but o' course he wasn't a-
going to blab.' — ' He'd heard tell,' afterwards
said another, ' that if folks only looked over a
gate at a turnip-field,, there'd be other folks
ready to swear to a whole waggon field of turnips
against 'em.'

In each case it was the rustic, as usual, shutting
his eyes and ears, lest he should be caught
and dragged in himself by some of the wheels
and pulleys of this horrible machinery called
the law. More than one man and woman had
come into court intending to say a word respecting
the ignorance of the waif and the fact
which had been guessed by them and confirmed

by the sexton that the flowers had been pulled
in childishness for Polly Burton's grave. But
each, when summoned to come forward, fell
back like a coward on assumed stupidity, and
slipped out of court.

Meanwhile, the examination, which had made
the little fellow's head whirl, was quickly over,
and he had to hear the sentence pronounced
in this terrible judgment-chamber.

Tbe gentleman who had the genial manner
had asked him if he had anything to say for
himself. But when the boy looked round and
saw that the neighbours,, who could have
spoken in an ordinary way to his industry and
readiness to oblige, were none of them thereto
help, he could only repeat doggedly that he
did not know he might not be allowed to pick a
few of the flowers.

'Then it is time you knew now,' said Sir
George, who began to speak. And to little
Jem, who listened, it somehow became plain
that, because he had stolen the flowers, he might
some day be guilty of any theft, arson, or murder,
that the mischief was to be beaten out

of him, and he was to have twelve days' confinement
with hard labour.

When he heard of the sentence, the pride
which had hitherto kept him up broke down.
He burst into a passion of angry tears, striking
with his fists at the policeman who took him
out of court.

CHAPTER IX.

It was but a very unimportant event of everyday
life in the neighbourhood of Torringmoor.
Old Jem had gone to the workhouse by the
time that ' He Jem ' came out of prison. No
one had thought of what would become of the
lad, who was more than ever ' Little Nobody,'
or i Mr. Nobody ' now, as his companions, who
wished to be witty, had called him. He had
kept the title to himself as soon as he heard it,
not knowing that it was already familiar to
Polly Burton. Why should he be jeered at
because he was ragged, and had hardly enough
to eat %

When he went to look for old Jem, and
found that he was gone, a fire of impotent rage

consumed the boy, and seemed to tear at his
vitals. It was not that the old man had been
particularly kind to him, but he had looked
upon him as a trust, and had promised Polly to
4 do ' for him.

The child's life had required wonderfully
little before the term of imprisonment which
had branded him as a gaol-bird. A little water,
a little bread, a little straw or heather to sleep
Ode had sufficed for his daily wants. He had
risen with the lark during Mary Burton's lifetime,
and had been an active, bright-eyed creature,
picking up enough for his daily wants in
the fields.

But prison life had changed him more than
ever, bringing him in contact with fresh people.
He was conscious of new instincts which made
him vow revenge, and which told him he could
do something in the world some day. Had he
been less clever, it might have fared better with
him. His retentive memory was far worse for
him than if he had had the power of covering
his injuries with oblivion. He had not been
long enough in confinement to become pallid

or heavy-eyed — in fact, he had been fed better
than usual ; the prison diet was like feasting.
It was not his body which had suffered, but his
soul. At the expiration of the twelve days,
there was not only a wild look in the poor
boy's face, but all the self-respect had gone out
of him. He hung his head with a sense of
shame, as if he could no longer walk erect, and
the sunlight, of which he had been so fond,
seemed to dazzle him. But this was not the
worst. It was not only that life seemed to be
almost as much over for him as if the last
planks had been nailed over his little body, but
that deep down in his heart there slumbered a
sullen dull instinct of revenge.

Blast them ! ' he cried, though he had
promised Polly he would not use bad language.
' Blast him ! ' as he thought of the
magistrate, with a sudden frenzy of impotent
passion.

The woman who had tried to say a word for
him was fairly frightened into the belief that
the child's wits had been scared ' out o' him,' as
she met him coming away from the tumble-vol.

I. T

down cottage in which he had lived with old
Jem. Her explanation was afterwards that he
was not only grumpy and glum, as if nothing
would ever make him smile in this life again,
but that he wandered in his speech, and seemed
stupid — ' nilly, willy,' as she put it.

1 1 wish they'd 'ave killed me — it 'ud been
soon done wi,' he said, rubbing his fists into
his eyes, in his determination not to disgrace
his manhood of ten years old. And these were
the only sensible words which she could get
out of him.

As to Sir George — of whom the child had
heard in prison that he only cared for one
stratum of humanity, his own, and the rubbish
which lay beneath it might be kicked at and
trodden down — he had oddly determined to be
equal with him, to make his way in the world,
and by-and-by to defy him.

The boy was quick enough when he chose
to learn, and he had proved an apt pupil at his
new school, the prison. All pains were to betaken,
all means to be justifiable by which
tyrants could be met as equals. His ideas

were perhaps a little confused, but he had
almost an iron constitution. From his babyhood
he had been used to bear cold, hunger,
and thirst, to sleep anywhere and anyhow,
to bend his body into all sorts of extraordinary
positions, to lift heavy weights, and
endure all sorts of privations. He intended to
put his abilities to good use. He would emigrate,
work hard, learn everything that he
could, and come back with a fortune to defy
his would-be masters.

There was a desperate fellow, who had been
in Australia, now in the prison, and this man's
stories, told at nights — in the days when the
same precautions are not taken as they are
now, and when the ' non-imprisonment of children
' was a question not even debated — had
fired the little urchin's imagination. It is
likely that these tales of adventure, under any
circumstances, would not have left the boy's

mind, and the drearier his life in shire, the

more he probably would have longed after these
wild exploits of fabulous travel.

'You're not quite a fool,' one of the map's

fellow-prisoners had answered, 'but that kind
of talk is all my eye.'

6 Little Nobody ' believed in it, and meant to
prove it. Once, on the day after he came out
of prison, he saw Sir George's carriage pass,
the owner driving with his wife and child, and
looking obtuse and self-complacent. He would
probably have laughed heartily if he could have
been informed that the small gaol-bird had
shaken his fist at the carriage until it vanished,
that his little body had been contorted with
rage, as if the boy were in a fit, that his strong
white teeth had been ground together, and that
he had tried to pull his once lion-like mane as
if he would drag it from the roots, and had
been in a greater rage than ever when he found
that the prison scissors had only left him short
stubbly stuff to torture.

But the sight of the carriage had done
something. It had intensified his resolution.
More than ever he was determined that he
would not stay in the town where he had
been flogged, and proved guilty of a punishable
offence. The punishment which had been

administered was shameful and degrading.
Rather would he walk to his death, with
suffocating heart and blistered feet. He had
been used to long-continued hunger, and it
was nothing to him to plod painfully over hill
and dale. The walk to Bristol might be a
long and painful one, and he would have to
earn his bread upon the way. It was all the
more painful now that he believed no more
in Mary Burton's angels. If there were any
such things as angels, why should they allow
such things to be ?

But, if the child did not believe in angels,
he believed in endurance of suffering. One of
the men in prison had told a tale of General
Jackson — how, when he filled the post of
president in the United States, he and his
men could bear privations. It was quoted of
him that once, when warring against the Indians,
he perceived acorns, which were spread on the
door of a hut in which they had taken refuge.

4 Gentlemen,' said Jackson, looking significantly
at the acorns, 'we have no reason
to complain of want of food.'

The story — true or not — had photographed
itself indelibly on the memory of the boy, ashe
thought of the many miles of dusty road
which lay before him, and which he should be
forced, hopeless, to tread.

A little girl, who had loved him, and who
had been accustomed to play with him in the
days before Polly Burton's death, when love
of solitude had not taken possession of the
unhappy waif, watched for him from one of
the cottages with large, liquid eyes, and offered
him a crust of bread. But a better instance
of the evil which maltreatment had already
brought on his nature could not have been
given than by the push which he gave his
would-be helper, bringing the tears to her eyes,
as he burst from her grasp. The poor, little,
puckered, woebegone face controlled itself with
an effort ; for the child had the intuition of a
woman, that ■ He Jem ' would never have
given her that surly push, if they had not
been cruel to him.

The girl had belonged to the somewhat particular
clique of people whom Polly Burton had
liked to favour.

Ye're glad yew've a-cum out — aren't yew
now?' she said, twining her arms again about
her friend. ' Lord ! who's to pay for fewer vitals
and drink, if there's nobody as 'ill employ yew V
she added, with sharp precocity.

This was a difficulty which had not yet
occurred to Jem. But, if he needed a further
proof that the honest and independent peasantry
would have as little as possible to do with
prisons, he had it at that moment in the fact
that a woman appeared at the door, calling
sharply, and the girl, recognising her mother,
turned immediately, and went in.

And yet I never knewed the law, and never
intended to go 'gainst it — never,' thought the
waif, trying to speak soberly to himself, since
one of his resolutions — essential to the carrying
out of his deeply-laid plan of vengeance —
was not again to let his passion visibly get
the mastery of him, and to learn to read that
he might try to keep himself closely within
enactments and statutes, whenever he was
likely to be found out. Otherwise his hand
was against everyone, and everyone's hand

against him. He forgot all about Polly Burton
and her precepts as he toiled, jaded, footsore,
and heart-sick for some weary miles,
covered with dust or wet with rain. Once
a kind woman, to whom he said that he was
Walking to Bristol, gave him a bit of supper
and offered a barn for him to sleep in for
the night. But oftener he had to lie down
in the hay-fields, or by the side of a hedge,
gathering wild flowers to sell in the day-time,
but no longer caring for the beauty of them.
And, during these few days, there was one
refrain chiming on in his heart,

i When I be greed a man, I'll back to pay
'im in 'is own coin.'

A man's a man for a' that.

Burns.

CHAPTER I.

ABOUT thirty-three years afterwards, on a bright
March afternoon, a man, vigorous in figure, and
with one of those picturesquely bearded faces
which have become more common in England
than they were earlier in the century, with a
shaggy overgrowth of hair hiding much of the
features, was driving in a hired carriage in the
neighbourhood of Torringnioor. This traveller
had been borne, like other people, on the ' tireless
wings ' of the spirit of steam past mine and
waste and common, past grey rocks and green
pastures, watered by shining rivers, to the now
flourishing town of Torringmoor, which not
only boasted a railway station of its own, and
had populous suburbs where once there had

been fields and flowery lanes, but had even for
more than thirty years been allowed to have a
voice in the government of its country.

The express train which had been tearing
away at a terrible speed on its south-westward
journey, carrying passengers from London, did
not astonish the new-comer, and though the
Torringmoor people were proud of the rapid
growth of their town, in which the old landmarks
seemed to have disappeared, he looked as
if he thought it a sleepy sort of hole, compared,
for instance, with such a place as Chicago.

Wherever he had spent the earlier portion of
his life, the traveller had certainly been used to
a world of change and progress, and, if he had
anything to complain of in this ' tight little
island,' it would have been that the people in
it moved too slowly. But he did not, as a
rule, reason about anything at all. He was not
sufficiently educated to appreciate the intellectual
development and social improvements
which he took as a matter of course, and would
have looked puzzled if any philosopher or
historian had suggested to him that the present

age was one of the most wonderful in the
history of the world — greater than the age of
Augustus in Rome, of Leo X. in modern Italy,
or of Louis XIV. in monarchical France, and
possibly surpassing in our own country that
Elizabethan era which is still to the majority of
Englishmen a period the thought of which
makes their heart glow with the enthusiasm of
national exultation and pride.

Others might crack mental nuts of that sort.
Reuben Sellwood, as he called himself, was
more inclined to think that the old country was
going to the dogs, and considered himself to be
less of an Englishman than a cosmopolitan. He
had picked up a sort of polyglot knowledge in
his contact with adventurers of all nations. He
prided himself on having little sentiment, and
was not accustomed to render homage to grand
old names, or to analyse high-sounding phrases.
He cared less about the success of the age than
his own personal success in it, and he would
have cared little enough about that had he not
looked upon it as a means to an end. He flattered
himself that he was nearer to the accomplishment

of that end than his wildest hopes
had led him to expect, when — on landing but a
short time before in England — he had seen the
announcement for sale of a certain property
called by its recent owner ' Broadmeads ' — a
property which was advertised at an enormous
price, and which was built in close proximity to
the estate known as 'Rashleigh Park That
park still existed, but it was an open secret that
its owner was no longer the greatest landowner
of the parishes of Torringmoor and Watergate.

Reuben Sellwood's past history was in a secret
drawer. No one knew the trick of it, or could
touch the spring. And his own son could not
possibly have guessed at the reason why he
determined instantly on the purchase of * Broad-meads,'
not even seeing the house and land
before he closed with the bargain ; still less why
it should have been a triumphant day for Reuben
when the great mine-owner, who had made
an almost fabulous fortune, and built for himself
that which he intended to be a palatial
residence which should outshine the glories of
Rashleigh Park, had suddenly failed, owing to

the rashness of his speculations, so that ' Broad-meads
' was put up for sale.

People have their idiosyncracies, and Reuben
considered he had right to his. He had never
before talked seriously of residing for any
length of time in England, though he had sent
his only child to be educated in the old country.
But then he had never spoken of his intentions
or plans to anybody. And so impatient
was he now to see the place which he
had purchased that, if the driver had not been
sure of securing a heavy fare, he would have resented
the way in which this gentleman with
bronzed face, and beard which seemed to have
been burnished by too much exposure to the
sun, kept urging him forward.

In the opinion of the driver there was not
much to look at in the old moor that March
afternoon when, as the sunlight began to fade,
the north wind got the advantage and began
stinging their faces. And yet the stranger in
the carriage, who had not seemed to take any
notice when he passed through Torringmoor, or
passed people on the road who might observe

his ' queer ways would every now and then
start up and look about him, bending his neck
as if he would almost dislocate it — a proceeding
on which he certainly would not have ventured
had he not looked upon the man on the box-seat
as a mere machine, not likely to take heed
of anything.

Reuben Sellwood was generally no admirer
of landscapes. He might have observed grimly
of them (in the same spirit in which he once
observed of the sea that it ' took too much
room') that he had seen ' too many of them.'
Mountain, vale, or wilderness were pretty much
alike to him, and he would pretend that he
was so utilitarian in his principles that factories
and towns like busy ant-hills, with signs of
man's determination to wrest gifts out of the
hands of Nature, were the scenes which he
most appreciated. No sound was so pleasant
to him as that of the beating of Labour's heart.
He liked to think that other men had spent
their lives as he had in the stupid commonplace
of getting on, and that few had conquered ashe
had done. And yet this man, who had

something bourgeois about the sharp expression
of the little which could be seen of his face, the
cut of his clothes, and even the shape of his
boots. Yet he had none of the joyous swagger
of success which is generally to be found
amongst the rich bourgeois class.

As the carriage turned a corner of the road,
its occupants came in sight of a river, not flowing
quietly, as in the gentlest days of summer,
or churned into creamy foam, as it gurgled over
brown stones, but full of water, which overflowed
the big boulders — hiding the mosses, which
could be seen on them when the water was
lower, and overflowing even the meadows, as
it came bounding with a joyous rush of white
through the stony jaws of a little gorge.

The sight was a fair one, the more so as the
afternoon sun was declining, and its faint rays
seemed to fall in oblique lines over the moor,
which, though it was not now aglow with furze
and heather, had yet retained a richness of
colouring from its peat-bogs and deep beds of
withered bracken — the * red fern ' of the ballad-writers.
The reeds, the sedgy grass, the stunt-vol.

I. K

ed oak-trees near the river, and the grey rocks
in the distance added to the beauty of the
picture, and yet hardly accounted for the manner
in which Reuben Sell wood drew a deep
breath, and struck his sun-burnt but well-shaped
fist against the door of the carriage. Possibly
he was interested in the surroundings of his
new property.

I have said that he prided himself on not
being romantic, and yet the bifold nature of
the man — who, like most people, had not only
a mixture of black and white qualities in his
character, but in whom the shades were darker
and the lights stronger than they are in the
average man — might have been guessed by a
cunning, analyst of human nature.

The key-note of the moor was still its loneliness
and desolation. Yet the traveller was
scarcely likely to feel its ineradicable sadness.
The weird impression of the little arrowy
torrent dancing in the midst of the desolation,
and of an old tree which had been hewn
down perhaps some forty years before, but
which, for some reason, had not been removed,

so that the frost and rain of years had split its
smooth-hewn surface, might have impressed a
poet or an artist, but seemed to be little in
keeping with Reuben Sellwood's matter-of-fact
disposition. He had travelled hard all day, not
waiting to break his fast ; and though he had
been used to far more fatiguing journeys, and
could endure greater bodily hardships, he had
possibly not counted on the exhaustion which
might be produced by the excitement of purchasing
his new possessions, and that such
exhaustion might render it^jnost difficult for
him to maintain his usual unimpassioned self-control.


As he leant back in the carriage with a
muttered exclamation, it might have been the
drowsiness caused by the keen air and long-continued
exertion which made it a little difficult
for him to keep his reasoning powers on
the stretch. And he, who w r as accustomed to
boast of his contempt for dreamers, lapsed into
a reverie which was strangely like a dream,
He dreamed that in the old days, before the
march of civilization had swept them away,

k2

there had been wolves and red deer on this
moor ; that there had once been pixies, sometimes
shaped like rolling balls of heather, and
sometimes shrouded in grey cloud, and that he
had heard a little child calling to them,

Wee folk, good folk,
Trooping all together,
Green jacket, red cap,
And grey cock's feather.'

The child's voice seemed to haunt him, as
did an odd idea that where some cottages
stood in rows there ought to be grand old
oak trees, remarkable for the strength and
upward spring of their branches. What had
become of the wood which seemed as if it
ought to stand where there were now blackberry
branches trailing and old tree stumps ?
How came there to be a growth of rank grass
on the open where he had dreamed of a picturesque
road, with ruts made by the carts
of wood-cutters, arched with overspreading
branches, adorned with the richest foliage in
summer, and enlivened by a joyous flood of
bird-music in the young abundance of spring ?

He — who prided himself on his want of
imagination — had done his best to keep back
these childish fancies, but they seemed to be
born of his overreached brain, just as mysterious
forms, and what Mr. Ruskin would have
called ' spiritualism ' mists, were born of this
stream of water and the distant tors. He
was ready to swear at himself as a fool, especially
as the silly old doggerel about ' Wee folk '
kept jogging on in his head. And with it
came another shadowy impression that some
old woman had once told him about a pack of
spectral hounds, whose cry was said sometimes
to echo amongst the hollows of the hills.

The intellectual conception of anything
spiritual — even of the humorous sort — had
been for years utterly foreign to the man's
nature. But, owing to the causes which I
have mentioned, a superstitious dread, which
is often to be found in connection with scepticism
— as if the circumscribed nature made
its protest against being kept within the
narrow bounds which condemn it never to
look deeper than the mere material fact of

its own life — was strangely gaining on him.
He was inclined to think his senses were
fooling him, when suddenly, at the next turn
of the road, he came upon a huntsman bespattered
with mud, riding with impetuous
speed. The apparition might have been an
optical delusion, for all he knew to the contrary
; for the driver — who, finding as soon ashe
had left Torringmoor that his new fare,
so far from inviting confidence, was taciturn
and a little abrupt, had relapsed into sulky silence
— did not appear to have seen the huntsman
at all. The appearance was evidently
a creation of Reuben's own brain. Surely, if
the rider had been what the metaphysicians
call ( objective ' instead of ' subjective,' he would
have been leisurely returning in a commonsense
way to his home, at an hour when a
hunt — if it had taken place at all— must have
been over. But that the huntsman should still
be spurring on his tired mare, whose eyes were
glittering, whose little ears were still erect,
and nostrils still dilated, as if she and her
rider had not had the glory, an hour or more

before, of being ' in at the death,' was a thing
impossible. For the mare and her rider — evidently
creatures of Reuben's distempered brain
looked a couple to go straight over hedges
and ditches, when one after another of the
lesser fry had ceased to follow.

These thoughts dimly shaped themselves in
the traveller's mind as the huntsman came
nearer, and, with a complexion which was
strangely white, in spite of the healthy red
which was stamped, like the ruddiness of an
apple, into his cheeks, dashed past the carriage,
and disappeared at the turn of the road.

Reuben would have tried to think no more of
the apparition, except that his health must for
once need the care of one of those superfluous
beings called doctors, had not the huntsman
been followed, a few moments afterwards, by a
boy, bare-headed, and running swiftly, with
every appearance of agitation. The driver
seemed to wake from the stupor into which he
also had relapsed, owing to the snubbing which
he had resented, and shouted to the boy, who,
more communicative than the gentleman, held

out a card with a pencilled message on it, as he
gasped, short of breath,

1 It is poor out Sir George — he be terrible
bad — a fit, or summit. Mr. Monckton be a-
going for the doctor at Torringrnoor. But
there's another as lives nearer, at Newton, ye
sees. I be hurrying' for he.'

'What was the matter with Reuben Sellwood?
Was he, as he himself fancied, in that state
from an overstrained nervous system, in which
the taxed brain can bear no extra pressure?
Why else should the perspiration break out in
drops on his forehead, and the deep breaths
w T which he had drawn once or twice when looking
at the landscape became quicker and more
laboured ? Why should his own healthy colour
fade even more perceptibly than that of Colin
Monckton, who had been for several years the
intimate friend of Sir George Rashleigh, and
w T ho might well reproach himself for allowing
himself to be separated from the old gentleman
having been conscious as usual of the presence
of neither friend nor foe from the moment
that the first difficult line offences rose stiff and

straight before him that morning. It was all
very natural for Mr. Monckton to feel it. But
why should a stranger who prided himself on
his want of sentiment have to make two or
three ineffectual efforts to speak, and then ask
in a quick, sharp tone, and in a voice which did
not seem to belong to him,

'What was that?' he said, 'an accident — a
fit — somebody — injured — ivho V

1 He'll be a stranger to you — Sir George
Rashleigh — anyway,' answered the man on the
box-seat, slackening the speed of his horses, ashe
looked with his mouth wide open at the
foreigneering ' gentleman, who for the first
time seemed to take a real interest in anything.

Stranger ! yes, I believe you,' repeated the
new-comer — who was afterwards described by
the flyman as a ' queer customer ' — bursting
into a peal of harsh, unnatural laughter.

'Tis nought to laugh at, as I sees — anyhow,

he be a-dyin' ' muttered the honest fellow,

eyeing Reuben Sellwood with something of the
same expression with which the pilot's boy
might have looked at the ancient mariner.

< Attend to your horses. I laughed at something
connected with my own affairs answered
Reuben, angrily, as he resumed his usual harsh,
arbitrary manner.

And the man, a little ashamed of his own
uncharitable fancy that there had been something
wicked-looking in the expression of the
face of the unknown gentleman, drove on as he
was desired.

CHAPTER If.

Reuben afterwards heard what the flyman had
failed to tell him — how that morning the
rustics near Rashleigh Park had been all agape
as an army of gentlefolk had invaded the
village, streaming from all directions, most of
the ladies gaily dressed and in barouches and
pony-carriages, and some of the more enterprising
damsels mounted on horseback.

In other words, the placidity of Rashleigh had
been disturbed by a meet, and Sir George's
pack, which had no right to be kept up considering
the impecuniosity of its owner, was
said to be in * unusually good form ' as it sped
away in the eastward direction. Torringmoor
lay to the west, and had other excitements of its

own, its more enterprising' inhabitants looking
down on the hob-nailed Cincinnati who were too
willing to desert their ploughs to follow the cry
of the hounds, and to admire the costumes of
the hunters. But, had Reuben Sellwood cared
to enter into conversation with the Torringmoor
people that morning, he would have heard
many remarks of disapproval, and seen many
shaking their heads at the rashness of Sir
George who, in spite of repeated warnings in
the way of a broken collar-bone on one occasion
and fractured ribs on another, had yet persisted
in ignoring the advance of age, which rendered
feats which had been easy of accomplishment
when he was younger, absolutely impracticable
for him now. And it was well-known that it
required no little quickness of eye and skill in
horsemanship, to follow hounds over the
morasses and rock-strewn hills.

A moraliser, fond of dealing in commonplace
platitudes, could have drawn a good picture
of the uncertainty of human pleasures from
a contrast between the neighbourhood of Rashleigh

Park that morning and evening. In the
morning there had been a bewildering vision
of carriages filled with bright, expectant faces ;
groups of men in picturesque costume talking
eagerly together, and the villagers had been
delighted by the sound of the huntsman's
horn, the crack of whips, and the yelp of
the dogs, with the blue sky above, in the fresh,
invigorating air. Now the temporary excitement
was over, the merry party of people which had
met together that morning having dispersed
under the influence of the bad news which
threw a gloom over everything. No one had
been with Sir George w r hen the accident took
place. He had seemed to lack his usual
energy, falling behind the others, as soon as
the hounds were on the scent. Some surmised
that he had had a fit, others that he had been
thrown in carelessly attempting to take a fence
which presented no such difficulties as to account
for the catastrophe. Anyhow he had
been found lying senseless on the grass, with
his horse standing by looking as sympathetic
as a human being. His friends were so started

at his appearance when they lifted him up,
that they thought it better not to risk the jolting
of a carriage, and therefore a litter had been
hastily improvised and four stalwart men were
now carrying him to Rashleigh Hall. The
pony-carriages with their fair drivers had long
since disappeared. Only one or two sturdy
horsemen lingered about the park gates to
see if they ' could be of any use.' But all
thoughts of selfish amusement, with all chatter
and commonplace talk had ceased long
before.

The driver of Reuben Sellwood's carriage
had again to slacken the speed of his horses
to save being brought in contact with the last
remnant of the tag-rag-and-bobtail which —
attracted by the new excitement — still followed
the mournful procession at a respectful distance.


The owner of Broadmeads had conquered
his transient excitement, and leant back on the
cushioned seat of the carriage with a look of
passionless indifference almost amounting to
boredom, as if nothing disturbed him but the

slight delay which almost amounted to annoyance.
Had he been a few minutes earlier, he
would not have been able to help seeing the
litter carried into Rashleigh, with the figure
on it, looking gaunt in the evening light,
though the face had been carefully covered
up.

Reuben was on his guard as he gave a
passing glance at the little crowd near the park,
and muttered, as if to himself,

Well, if report speaks true, he was not in all
respects such a neighbour as one would
desire — still I am sorry — it should have come
to this''

It was the strangest return to the place he
had bought.

A bad omen,' the servants said, who were
standing in the hall of Broadmeads to meet
the new master. He told himself that it was
scarcely surprising he should be dazed by the
suddenness of the catastrophe; and certainly ashe
drove in through the splendid iron gates — in
themselves supposed to be a culmination of
artistic skill, and on which his predecessor had

lavished a fabulous sum of money — be scarcely
noticed their magnificence, nor the beauty of a
new plantation in which trees of every variety,
from the theodora to the Wellington, had
taken root and seemed to flourish.

His coldness of demeanour was more studied
than usual as he walked through the entrance-hall
to the dining-room, and informed the man
whom he had engaged as butler that he wished
to be alone, and would require nothing buta
few biscuits and some brandy and water till
he rang for him.

Reuben Sell wood was a temperate man : his
temperance had stood him in good stead at
certain crises in his life when it had enabled
him to triumph over others who were less temperate.
But on this occasion he helped himself
to the brandy more than once, though — in
spite of his long fast — his appetite had disappeared.
He did not ring for some time, exhausted
though he was from want of food. He would
not have been able to give an account of the
strange, conflicting emotions which struggled
within him, but these emotions made him

desire to keep by himself. He was so accustomed
to keep a strict watch over himself, and
if possible to betray no feeling to his fellowmen,
and so conscious that the storm which was
convulsing his inner man, and which was making
his eyes burn and his strong frame tremble
in spite of himself, might betray itself in the
tones of his voice or in some passing glance,
that he required a little time to recover his
habitual reserve.

His wit was too rude, his intelligence too
uncultivated to enable him to analyse these
emotions. But now that he was alone, and
it was no longer necessary to hide the swift
changes of disappointment, vexation, rage,
and pity which passed over that usually impassive
portion of his face which he had been
unable to veil from his fellow-men, he rose
once or twice and walked rapidly up and down
the room, murmuring something between his
set teeth, and even bursting into another fit
of the rather horrible merriment which had so
disturbed the Torringmoor driver, and which
made it seem as if for some unaccountable

YOL. I. L

reason the hate and exultation in his

heart had been shaken into discordant
laughter.

CHAPTER III.

Reuben Sellwood had scarcely noticed the
place which he had been so eager to purchase
in the shades of evening. He had to wait for
the next morning to experience his just keenness
of disappointment in the fact that — seen
by daylight — the mansion, which was partly
modern Gothic and partly Jacobean, presented
too much of that mixture of styles, that aiming
at the combination of inconsistent novelties,
which often proves the pitfall for the taste of
a self-made Englishman.

The ivory, the purple, and the cedar had been
brought from different climates as for Solomon,
but Reuben had heard enough of the ways of the
aristocracy to see at a glance that the finishing

L2

touch of some well-educated man, or high-bred
lady was painfully needed, and there was that in
Reuben's temperament, though he was by no
means free from vulgarity, which made him
wince a little as he recognised the want. If
there had been a receipt for withering the furniture
a little, making it look properly old, with the
faded loveliness which Reuben had some dim
idea would be natural in great people's houses,
he might have liked it a little better. But there
was nothing in this house stately with age,
and the large gilded mirrors and velvet pile
carpets reminded him too much of the great
hotels with which he was already familiar.

He was not happy in the house, shutting
himself up as much as possible, though the
Torringmoor people were ready, as he had expected,
to bow before his wealth. He only
scorned them for it, and took little interest in
any of the cards which were left by the neighbours,
concerning himself about none of them
but the owner of Rashleigh Hall.

It seemed a little odd that a man who cared
so little about his neighbours should trouble

himself to inquire constantly about the old
patrician who lay dying* in the neighbouring
hall, and that he should appear to take more
than a little interest in the details of the painful
bodily suffering caused by those injuries to
the spine which were expected by slow degrees
to prove fatal. He listened apparently with
half-an-ear to the story of how the son, the
future Sir Ralph, who led a retired life, had not
been the only son, but had had a twin brother
who, being by about half an hour the elder,
would have inherited the title had he lived todo
so.

8 But that wur the queer part of the story, as
I alius ses,' continued the gossiping housekeeper,
' they do say as that lad Richard, as they
called "im, was quite different from the rest of
'em, and as how he turned up his nose at
what he called shabby gentility when he wur
quite a youngster. There was no such thing
as contradicting 'im, but he sets out by himself
to some place among the savages to build the
family fortunes, as he puts it. Well, he marries
an' all on his own hook, like, and ses as he hates

all artificial ways of living — all shams, as he
calls 'em — that his sons shall learn to plough
and his daughters to milk the cows, and all of
'em to live on together in a sort o' Irish
Eden. Then you see, as a body with a bit o'
sense might ha' known all along, he died of a
fever, and his gentle lady o' pining. And back
comes all by herself the most managing' little
maid, the last left o' the family.'

'And what became of the child after she
returned from New Zealand V

Well, it wur just for all the world like a
fairy tale. Home she comes with roses from
the sea-air on her cheeks, and box packed with
shells, and seaweed, and feathers, and such
things — and some money, which they do say
the old gentleman wasted. But the comfort as
she wur — that little un with her bright ways,
and such a managing' head on her shoulders.
For hafter the death o' his mother it's Mr. Ralph
who gets married to a furrin lady as was alius a
grumbling when she found how poor the family
was. Then she would lie with her black eyes
a-starm', and little Miss Vere a-tending of her,

and she a-dwindling away, accustomed all her
life to company. And what company could she
git ? For what comfort,' suggested chatty Mrs.
Rose, who was glad to gossip about anything
to which her taciturn bachelor master would
listen, ' could all they horsey penmen be to
she?'

Reuben tried to hide his inquisitiveness. It
was no news to him that Ralph had married a
foreign countess, and that that lady had brought
no money to replenish the family coffers already
exhausted by the extravagance of his grandfather
likely to suffer further still — in spite
of Sir George's pretences at economy in other
things — on account of his father's mad propensity
for hunting. But the story of the elder
brother who — directly he had discovered that
his chances of doing anything he wanted were
likely to be ruined by money difficulties in
England — had shown such a strength of will
in setting out to do the best for himself and
for others, was as interesting as that of the
little girl who, with temper insured after the
death of her parents, seemed to have taken up

her father's work, and let her daily thought befor
the people she lived with. It was easy to
guess that the bare notion of emigration would
have been distasteful to the retiring and scholarly
habits of Mr. Ralph.

He wur alius one to sit at home, leven when
his lady wur taken from 'im, though they do
say as Miss Vere wur a born sick-nurse, and
that though she wur but ten year old it wur
pretty to see how she took the charge o' that
new baby. And I often ses,' continued the good
soul, ' how if Mr. Ralph's wife had lived, or the
dowager teddy either, old Sir George 'ud never
ha' been let ride when he had ought to have
been sitting' comferble-like in his arm-chair, let
alone the fac' that he had a letter given to him
the morning' of the 'aunt — a business letter, as
they ses, which was disturbing-like ; but there,
God Almighty only knows whether he was took
with a kin' of fit, or whether, when the loss
tries to jump and jerks him a bit, he ses' tumbles
off cos as how he could not sit — leastways,
he'll never be the same again, and it is agonies
as they ses he suffers in his poor old back.'

Reuben Sellwood made no remark. He was
taciturn as usual. But he shifted his chair, and
sat with his head bent down, and his back to
the light, as Mrs. Rose, who Jcved nothing so
well as to spin a yarn of her own, however
unsympathetic might be her listener, continued
rapidly, as if she was afraid her communication
might be interrupted.

'And most misfortune is the family, sir,
for Sir Ralph as'll soon be — with the poor old
gentian having, so to speak, both feet in the
grave already — is not much above forty, and
begin' yer pardon', lookin' older than herself,
sir — for not only did he love his lecldy, but his
heir as should be is a bit of a gell, and no such
right to what is left as Miss Yere as wur the
elder brother's child. There be a matter o' ten
years, as I ses afore, atween the two. They
du say as the eldest is like a mother to the
beetle un — bless both their pretty faces. A nice
little black-eyed gell, a bit like her furrin
mother, that little un — and yet she 'minds meo'
un as I buried nigh her age. And her father
as weighted with the old gentleman's debts, as

well as his grandfather's that went afore— and
all that by Mr. Richard's plans — the crushingest
disappointment. No wonder as Mr. Ralph's
a bit snarling-like, he 'ad snuff to dorrit him
if ever a living' man 'ad — for both the old gentleman
and the one afore him in their ways as
ye understand — the one a sort o' screw 'bout
everything but horses, and the other,' here, to
fill up a rhetorical pause, Mrs. Rose held up
both her hands, i they were both that extravagant
— the un with his rowdy ways, and
t'other as alius said he were r t extravagant
neither."

< There, that will do, my good woman,' said
her master, in a deep voice which came from him
so suddenly and so sharply that, as Mrs. Rose
afterwards explained to those whom she called
her ' bosom friends it ' went through her like
a dart, and turned her blood all to cuds-like/
'That will do,' said Reuben, with quite unnecessary
sternness. 'Remember that the one
thing I can never forgive in a cook is punctuality.
Let everything be properly done, and
spare no expense to do it, but bear in mind

that I do not wish to hear anything about it.'
Mrs. Rose curtseyed and went away muttering,
yet a little mollified by the judicious clause
• spare no expense which justified her in ordering
a new black silk dress,, and a dress cap
which she had long coveted, though, as she explained
to her confidants, her new master was
1 a hold one.'

1 A letter,' — he received a letter that morning
' I wonder if it was a lawyer's letter,' thought
the new-comer, who, without any conceivable
cause grumbled at all the dishes which were
served to him that day, and told Mrs. Rose to
dismiss the cook, though he had hitherto appeared
not to have a fastidious appetite. An outsider
might have said that the rich man was troubled,
ashamed in a way which he could scarcely
explain, ready to hate himself and everything
about him, and to loathe the new house which
he had purchased with his savings, if he could
have seen him with his head resting on his
arms for hours together, deep in thought, during
that day.

Naturally enough the tragic catastrophe

"which had happened to the great man of the
neighbourhood, whose impoverished fortunes
had often before furnished a subject for conversation,
was the principal theme of talk in the
mouths of the few visitors to whom Reuben
could not well refuse admission.

e A more melancholy state of things it would
be scarcely possible to picture to yourself,' said
one of the Torringmoor manufacturers who
volunteered his information to the owner of
Broadmeads — Reuben being too downright to
excuse himself by the fashionable lady's fib of
not at home,' and having no excuse for refusing
to see a man who sent in his card that he was
a bachelor, and would like to make his acquaintance.
' One might think that a curse had
alighted on the family, though it is one of the

oldest ones in shire. You see, the father

and grandfather of the man who will soon have
the title were both equally selfish. The former
fellow was decidedly the most extravagant,
but, though Sir George knew how things were
going, he was such a dab at fox-hunting, and
liked to keep up the name for taking the lead in

that sort of thing in this part of the comity,
that there is no doubt he launched out
too much in that direction, whilst he was pretending
to curtail in another. They do say,' he
added, dropping his voice, ' that the property is
heavily mortgaged, and that much of it will belong
to Sir Ralph only in appearance. Sooner
or later it must pass into other hands — there is
some mystery about the mortgagee — these
things generally pass into the hands of several
people — but they do say '

An acute observer might have seen a
glance keen as steel dart from the dark blue
eyes of Reuben Sellwood, as a change of some
sort, like a ripple caused by a sudden gust
on ordinary impassive water, passed over his
face, and, seeming to deprecate further information,
he held up his hand as if to impose
that reticence which he was known to practise
habitually himself.

The Torringmoor manufacturer was not an
acute observer, and did not notice how Reuben
managed again to bring up the subject
which he appeared to have dropped, though he

seemed as usual to be lending only half an ear
to the chatter of his guest.

'Hard lines for the future Sir Ralph remarked
Reuben, with a yawn. The manufacturer
afterwards said to his wife that he was a
rough sort of customer,' and had not learnt
manners in being battered about the world.
To the rich man he answered, politely,

'Yes, a laborious sort of fellow — does his
best under the circumstances, but proud — proud
as Lucifer ; just the sort of man to make an
excuse for shutting up his place, and living
quietly abroad, because he can't meet the expenses.
A vast improvement on poor Sir
George, who didn't manage to keep out of
scrapes himself, though he was a blustering
sort of magistrate, and hard enough on the
peccadilloes of the poorer folk whom he had to
deal with. When Sir Ralph comes into what
they call the property, he will find that one
half already has taken to itself wings, and the
other half is hypothetical. Most of it is mortgaged,
and the curious part of it is that they
say there are not many creditors, but that

the whole is likely to pass to one man, and he
a foreigner.'

• Warranted to go on like a barrel-organ for
hours thought Reuben, whom nothing irritated
like small talk. Yet a refrain of the barrel-organ
rang in his ears, and even haunted him
in his dreams that night. 'One might almost
think there was a curse on the family.'

The attitude of the cynical new-comer during
the next few weeks hardly seemed to justify
him in trying to usurp for himself the character
of a Diogenes, or even to allow him to class
himself with that half of the world which, according
to the celebrated saying of Talleyrand,
rejoices at the misfortunes of its neighbours.
That the owner of Rashleigh Park was writhing
day after day in sufferings which medical
skill was almost powerless to alleviate, seemed
to affect him in a singular way, as if he could
give little attention to anything else.

In accordance with the directions which he
had given to Mrs. Rose, gardeners — chipping,
chopping, planting fresh flowers, and mowing
the beautiful lawns — were busy day after day in

the gardens of Broadened. But though spring
was coming in with its golden daffodils, its
white narcissi in the gardens, its little pink-headed
daisies and its yellow and blue hearts-ease,
and though the simple-hearted people in
the neighbourhood could enjoy themselves in
their little plots of ground — the poorer sort
sending their little ones into the green fields to
gather the pale cuckoo-flower and bells of blue
hyacinth with the yellow primrose and golden
kingcup — a heavy weight seemed to lie upon
the heart of the man who, avowedly by his
own exertions, had been able to beautify his
life with such surroundings as few can enjoy.
One might have said that the motive which had
made exertion pleasant to him, and the fruits
of exertion worth coveting, had been suddenly
withdrawn.

Reuben Sellwood still kept up the mask in
the presence of others. But, when he was
alone, he lapsed into the dulness of languor.
The poor peasant in the neighbourhood of
Torringmoor, invited that spring by the Divine
Master to a feast of beauties which is our earnest

in this life of greater and higher delights,
was happier than Reuben. Nature's ritual,
with its odorous breezes, its blended tints, and
its rush of harmonious sound, did absolutely
nothing to satisfy him ; the feast was spread in
vain. He sat alone, and no one could guess
that he was secretly troubled by the thought of
the poor, disappointed, heart-broken old man
who was dying slowly in protracted agonies
in a neighbouring mansion. He would not
admit that the matter was of any consequence
to him, who had prided himself on the fact that
his heart had been shut for years to the grievances
of any of his fellow-creatures. Possibly
it was, because he was unused to most of the
recreations with which others are accustomed
to beguile their leisure, that this event which,
if he had heard of it at a distance, would
have seemed to be nothing to him, had the
power to disturb his peace when he realised it
in detail.

VOL. I. M

CHAPTER IV.

Though, after a time, Reuben Sell wood had
judiciously determined not to draw attention
to himself by appearing to be too much of an
anchorite, and refusing to see the people who
called on him from Torringmoor, it could not
fail to be a matter of remark that those who
had speech with the new-comer knew no more
about him than if they had abstained from
seeking his acquaintance.

Had he wife and family, as most respectable
men were supposed to have ? Did he hail from
America or Australia, and had he made his
money in trade ? It was remarkable that no
one dared to put these questions point-blank.
Many had beaten about the bush, and one enterprising

lady from Torringrnoor, more daring
than the rest, had ventured upon a sort
of prefatory catechism, only to discover that the
enigma ' — as Mr. Sellwood began to be nicknamed
— however deficient he might be in other
sciences, was a scientific adept in the art of verbal
fencing.

One thing was certain, that the e enigma '
made no pretence to be other than a self-made
man. Yet it could not fail to be noticed that,
though he was ready enough to announce this
fact, he never told a single anecdote of his
earlier life, and parried all inquiries with a reticence
which he practised to such an extent that
the gossips decided with a sigh of despair that
even his nationality seemed to be a point which
must be kept shrouded in uncertainty. He
called himself a ' cosmopolitan,' an explanation
which they were fain to accept.

Even supposing he is an American remarked
one pompous man, deigning to explain for the
benefit of the weaker sex, ' you see, it would
not make him a foreigner, for the English-speaking
folk, wherever they dwell, and under

m2

whatever government, must be still our people.'

The name ' Reuben ' was felt to be misleading.
The man was fair, and had not the unmistakable
physiognomy to be seen now in flesh and
blood, little altered since it was carved on the
stones of Nineveh. The men of Torringmoor
shook their heads, and again explained to the
women, who were inclined to invent a romance
like that of the Rothschild,

'The fellow is no great commercial prince,
no Haroun-el-Raschid, and no great Hebrew
financier either, however he may have chosen
to adopt a Jewish name.'

So the tongues wagged for a little while and
then found they had nothing further to wag
about.

Little difficulty was made about admitting
the rich man to the club at Torringmoor, although
that club — like most in provincial
towns — had prided itself on its narrow exclusiveness,
apparently because no name had
yet been enrolled upon its list which was of
any consequence to the world at large. It
was difficult for anyone not amongst the

initiated to steer bis social course so as to keep
out of all the little eddies and currents of prejudices,
conservative respectability, and sectarian
shibboleth which a new-comer could by
no means afford to defy. But Reuben Sell-wood
did not defy them ; he simply ignored
them. And, unpolished as was his address, he
had talents of his own which marked him out
from the common ruck. Business men who
made his acquaintance soon discovered that he
had an aptitude for mechanical invention, and
was able instantly to suggest some small improvements
in the machinery they employed,
which proved lucrative in the long run, and
made them wonder less that he himself should
have been able in the course of years to amass
a not inconsiderable fortune.

They do these things better than we do in
America,' was once more tentatively said.

1 So I have heard,' answered the man, who
was never off his guard, and who was careful
never to let slip words which should betray
his familiarity with the newer as well as the
older side of the ocean, although he was continually

and almost unconsciously making comparisons
— comparisons which were not altogether
to the credit of the provincial people,
who, with a narrow and unjust heedlessness of
the opinions of other nations, were nursing
their little prejudices and their insular pride in
this out-of-the-way corner of the world, which
seemed stirring enough to them, but to which,
as Reuben scornfully thought, they could retire
like lobsters who had cast their shells and
were afraid of being rubbed by too active contact
with their more enterprising fellows.

Power is sweet, and flattery not unacceptable
to most of us. Reuben had always looked forward
to enjoying it, and was not philosopher
enough to understand the sudden sense of
satiety and reaction, which was already making
the fruit taste bitter which he had left so long
to ripen.

The man, as his new acquaintances reasoned,
had probably gone through much, and been
moulded by many experiences. He held his
head erect, and looked, they said, as if his hair,
as well as his complexion, had been subjected

to the scorching processes of a tropical sun,
whilst his broad chest and powerful physique
seemed to tell the tale of his having been braced
by more than ordinary exposure and fatigue.
His words were energetic and definite, but
generally few. They went, said the more
sentimental of the Torringmoor folk, like rifle-shot
straight to the mark. He disliked what
he called hollow babble, and did not mince his
speech. ' Poltroons, idiots !' he muttered more
than once to himself, as be winced at what he
called their ' hollow babble And yet he smiled
rather grimly to himself when he found that
other men deferred, not only to his wealth, but
to a capability which was new to them, and
consequently rather startling. He owed, as he
felt, nothing to anyone, and was scarcely aware
how he in his turn had begun to look down on
all the little fry of butchers, bakers, and ,
being tyrannical in his dealings
with them, and never brooking interference
from anyone beneath him. From a habit of
watching affairs with an amount of keenness
which approximated to genius, he had become

accustomed to consider his own power as omnipotent,
and those who sought his advice found
him skilled in the secret of screwing down to the
lowest the wages of the most competent workmen,
with a decision of will and toughness of
heart which had hitherto been unprecedented
at Torringmoor.

It was an ill compliment to that class which
is accustomed to be called the higher one, that
this tendency to injustice to those beneath him,
and also a certain contemptuous inclination to
keep aloof from those aspiring citizens who had
just cast the chrysalis of the shop, and had
retired in the newly-acquired butterfly state to
gorgeous suburban villas, should have been
taken as a sort of indication that a strain of
nobler blood, possibly communicated to him
from some remote ancestor, ran in the veins of
the owner of Broadmeads.

I don't pretend to know all the ins and outs
of my family,' answered Reuben, with ready
aplomb, when some fresh adventuress, credited,
according to the old tradition, with the curiosity
of Eve, remarked graciously on the probability

of Mr. Sellwood belonging to that
branch of the family of Sell woods which was
well-known in Dorsetshire. * Madam, I was not
aware that there were any Ellwood in Dorset-shire.'


His voice sounded so very determined and
defiant, and the look of severity, coupled with
keen observation, which formed the main characteristic
of Mr. Sell wood's face, w r as so terrific
that the good lady forgot to detect the owner
of Broadmeads in his first unwise admission.

Reuben was himself aware of the ' slip and
chafed over it in secret. It worried him nearly
as much as the weary feeling which he had
had lately, as if the principal concern in his life
was over, had worried him lately.

Meanwhile the crisis of the tragedy w r as fast
approaching at Rashleigh Hall.

On a night towards the close of April, a group
of figures was gathered round the bed on which
the form, which looked a little more gaunt and
tall, had been lying since the beginning of the
illness. Sir George had not asked any questions,

or seemed to take much notice of anything
which had passed since his accident. But
now that waking-up of the intelligence, which
the doctors had prophesied would come before
the end, warned the watchers that that end
was nearer than they had expected. And as
the sufferer began to toss about, clutching at
the counterpane, he muttered for the first time
articulate sounds.

His son bent down to catch the words, and
started as he heard that the revelations which
had been dimly hinted at were all too true,
Could not help it— it was the debts ; could not
pay the money — all the estates'

CHAPTER V.

Reuben Sellwood was reputed to love no one,
but the world was wrong in so judging. He
had a soft place in his heart for his only son.
He would have increased his reputation for
cynicism if he could have told how — in being
battered about in different countries, and coming
into contact with much of that evil which is
so difficult to disentangle from the remnants of
good — his experience of women had been unfortunate.
He had been shaken out of all his
finer theories about the sex, and, as soon as he
became a victim to that devastating doubt
which will sometimes make itself felt in morals,
as well as in mental difficulties, he was wont to
say,

'Some of them may be angels, but the
larger proportion are — not to use a stronger
word — wretched hypocrites. You can't trust
'em, and it is no use to make companions of
'em.'

And yet he had married, when fortune began
to smile upon him — a girl who was supposed to
be somewhat above him in birth. He had no
intention of making a friend of her, or of trying
to sheath his own rough nature in the softer
tissues of hers, but he liked her to be dressed
luxuriously, and always to drive in a carriage,
and he would boast that she had quite an ' eastern'
love of luxury. So far from not humouring
her extravagance, he would talk largely of
that extravagance as of something s oriental,'
which reflected a sort of glamour upon
him.

In this sort of talk he showed his weakness,
but in most respects his tact helped him to
avoid any solecisms in manners. Whether or
not, as the theory was, he had educated himself,
he was certainly fairly well educated.
Probably it was owing to a habit of reading

Shakespeare in his leisure hours that — except
for an occasional expression, which, as he was
always on his guard, he seldom let slip before
strangers — his style in English was far from bad.
Better in some cases in its terseness and even in
its abruptness, than the style of others who had
received a more classical education, — had it not
been for the lapses in grammar.

The wife died ; she was kept for a few years
like a canary bird in a cage which was supplied
with plenty of seed, cake, and groundsel. She
was expected to chirp and not to cry, but possibly
she pined, as canaries are apt to do, for a
little human love, or the companionship of her
mate.

Her boy was delicate like herself. He resembled
his mother in his fairness of complexion
and his delicately-cut features, and he had blue
eyes like the father's. His hands were a trifle
too white and effeminate in size, possibly it
was hard manual labour which had made the
father's grow large and bony.

Reuben had not shown his usual severity to
this child, possibly because he had lost two

others, who died in infancy. The boy had been
remarkable before he left school, for a dreamy
look in his face — * visionary,' some people called
it. He had been apt to wander about for hours
by himself, and his father— concluding somewhat
disdainfully of the lad that he would belike
his mother in ' building air-castles and not
realities,' and in taking sickly imaginings for
reasoning power — had nicknamed him, with
tender condescension, his ' poet.'

Poets must not work, they must have others
to give them everything,' he would say, as he
loaded the child with pocket-money.

This fair-haired, gentle-looking boy was his
only toy in the earlier days when, though he
had some capital at his command, he had not
achieved his present success. He liked to be
seen in public with the lad, as if he knew that
the juxtaposition was picturesque. He sent
him to England before he returned to the old
country himself, that he might be educated
at Eton and afterwards at Oxford. He was
almost sorry when Godfrey — as the boy had
been called to gratify a fancy of the mother's —

had grown hardier in the course of years so as
to lose something of the look of exceeding
refinement which the practised eye of a medical
man would have recognised as the sign of a
state of delicate health.

It was now seven or eight years since Godfrey
had begun to think, and had understood
that little was known respecting his father's
antecedents.

Don't trouble yourself with what does not
concern you,' Reuben had answered, a little
sternly, when the lad asked a few questions.
You worry yourself with fancies. It is too
early yet. You will have time for all that nonsense
when, at the university, you take up that
humbug called metaphysics.'

He seldom reproved his son, and, though he
privately despised all his youthful enthusiasms,
he yet abstained from throwing cold water on
them. Nonsensical aspirations were to be excused
in ' poets And though this was a nickname
which Godfrey would willingly have forgotten,
and his father could have adopted no
better method to deter the lad from writing a

line of verse, yet there was something in his
character — which tallied with his frail physique,
and which seemed to be shadowed by the
memories of his mother's long-continued sickness,
and his own early life — which gave a satiric
sting to the title.

Reuben put a tolerably high price on this
article of his own 'turning out.'

'I have spared no expense to make him what
he is,' he would say to himself of his elegant
son, whom he believed to be a thoroughbred
product of this highly-strung modern civilization.
'I cannot talk their language,' he would
think to himself. ' There is something which
one feels but cannot articulate. But he — he
has been brought up to it — he can chatter
all their jargon. It is he who shall right me
and show that he can hold his own amongst
people of any rank. They shall bow down to
him. He shall claim a share in their great
memories.'

He tried to repeat this cherished idea to
himself on the morning of the day when Sir
George's funeral passed a road leading to the

little churchyard which could be seen from the
windows of the house at Broadmeads. It was a
windy day with showers of rain, and the cortege,
swelled by many of the carriages of the
gentry in the neighbourhood, had to contend
with stormy gusts which threatened to blow
over the hearse with long black plumes, which
the protests of Dickens and other writers
had not yet rendered obsolete. Reuben, who
stood at the window which overlooked the
road, shuddered and turned away as he
thought for the hundredth time of that lawyer's
letter, and wondered whether without its intervention
that man in his old age would have
been doomed to a wretched death. Somehow,
the bloom had been rubbed off his triumph. It
was in vain to puzzle out the causes of his
failure. But, as he turned away from looking
at the funeral, the turmoil in his mind went on
as badly as ever. And Reuben wondered if he
was growing superstitious as he felt himself
strangely sore at heart and bruised, as if he had
just been freed from the assault of visible evil
spirits.

VOL. I. N

A few days afterwards Sir Ralph was closeted
with the family lawyer, and heard for the first
time the full extent of the disaster which was a
part of his inheritance. That the estate had
-already dwindled to a very meagre portion of
what it had been centuries before, was no information
to the new baronet. Aware of the difficulties
which might befall him, and at the same
time not without a rather overweening sense of
his own importance and the value to be attached
to the home of his ancestors, Ralph Rashleigh
had struggled and striven even during the lifetime
of his father, to perform his own not unimportant
part in diminishing the sorrow which
threatened him. But the load of debt seemed
like a living thing to take hold of him, and to
be for ever pulling himself and his father
down — a thing from which he could not escape.
Of late days, he and the older man had ceased
to have altercations on a subject which was
painful to them both. That the place had
been heavily mortgaged was no secret to the
son, but that more and more of the land was
still being mortgaged was a fact that his father

thought unnecessary to confide to him, knowing
that the estate was as dear to Ralph as it
had been to any of his forefathers. The dreary
suggestion of a fear as to the possibility of
losing it, had more than once presented itself
like a nightmare to his morbid imagination,
but Ralph refused to be haunted by any such
wild suggestion.

And now as he sat alone, after the lawyer
had had his lunch and departed with papers
and baggage in the trap to catch the London
train — looking cherubic and self-satisfied as if
there were no such thing as mortgages and
family property in the world — Sir Ralph felt as
if the walls of the room and everything about
him were falling like a pack of cards.

It was characteristic of the new Baronet that
he sat perfectly still, though the discovery which
he had just made was a bitter one. Who could
help it ? When Sir George had succeeded to
the estate, it was already a rapidly dwindling
one. Energy and self-denial might have done
much to right things then. But now it was so
heavily encumbered that there might be nothing

n2

for Sir Ralph to leave to his daughter or his
niece. He could wrestle for his own part with
the encroaching poverty. But he had loved
the land and the surrounding country for the
sake of his ancestors. He had ever been a
good landlord, caring for the interests of his
tenants. And it was a question if he could any
longer speak of tenants depending on him.
There were, in fact, three sets of people
to be considered in a question of this kind
the landlord, the tenants, and the landlord's
creditor. It would be a question for the
future whether the landlord's creditor would be
harder on the tenants than the landlord. For
the latter was a man of straw, existing only in
the name. It would certainly have been better
to have no property at all than the miserable
parings which were, after all, his sole inheritance
; he was thankful for the first time
that there was no heir to carry on the family
name.

More than once during this sad soliloquy his
fair-haired niece, with the roses blooming on
her cheeks, and eyes of the softest Norwegian

blue — true and tender, with long dark lashes — ■>
had looked anxiously into the room. But he
sent her away somewhat sternly, for the very
reason that his heart was yearning over her,
and that he had not the courage to inform
the girl of the state of his affairs. In his
honesty he was most anxious to pay off certain
creditors, but to do so he must be involved still
further in the clutches of the outlandish neighbour
who was the real owner of nearly all that
surrounded him. Ralph Kashleigh clenched his
fist aud brought it heavily to bear on the desk
which, till lately, had hidden the much-detested
papers, as he muttered to himself,

Who would have dreamt that the fellow
could first of all spin his web with such precaution,
like a spider to catch a fly ? And
then that he would come near to us — he of all
others, when he knows that the greater part of
the land is Ms V

He was almost ready to curse the strange
luck which had caused the mortgages to be
nearly all purchased by one man, and he a
stranger, and to think his father was to blame

for placing them so unreservedly at his disposal.
Further thought made him realise how irrational
was this bitterness, and acknowledge that
the lawyers who were entrusted with the sale
could not pick and choose their purchasers, and
that if one man — living abroad and having a
fancy for the thing — had come forward through
his agents on each occasion, never quarrelling
with the price, they had no alternative but to
sell.

Was it instinct or was it suspicion which
made Sir Ralph conjecture, as perhaps his father
had conjectured on the fatal morning, that
something was wrong, and that the freehanded-ness
which was so eccentric in this fellow might
possibly be harmful ?

Sir Ralph's own keen sensitiveness made him
nervously aware of some steady and possibly
baneful purpose in the transaction from which
his own finer nature revolted. How long his
melancholy reverie might have continued is
doubtful. It was suddenly interrupted by
another tap at the door, and a merry little
ten-year-old child, so small as to resemble a

large wax doll, with dark brown eyes looking
black through the long lashes, surmounted by
a curly fringe, and a crape dress fancifully cut
so as to display to full advantage the graceful
little legs, daintily encased in black silk stockings,
ran into the room, and, taking no rebuff,
leaped like a small fairy on her father's knee.

'Whatever happens, my Dot, nothing shall
harm thee said the father, laying a caressing
hand on the glossy dark hair, and looking as if
he were half relieved from his burden as he
glanced at the sparkling eyes and red lips of
the little one.

It was Vere who sent me,' said the child,
stroking his face with loving action in return.
She said you had been too much alone.'

The cloud returned to his face.

Vere,' he muttered, ' the girl knows too
much. It is bad enough for men to be annoyed
by things of this sort — but — women '

Say not no to such a suitor,
All I ask is — bless mine, purest of ambitions,
Grant me leave to make my kind wise, free, and happy.

Browning.

CHAPTER I.

It was the ' eights ' week at Oxford.

It is needless to say that the unique city, with
its host of historical memories — set in by moist
green fields and stately trees in the angle
formed by the junction of the Chigwell and the
Isis — is more beautiful than usual, like its sister
university, in the month of May. In the lonely
walks of the college gardens, the flame-coloured
cyrus, the sprays of the wistaria adorning the
old walls, the laburnums beginning to drop
their ' wells of gold,' and the opening lilac-blossoms,
hanging like plumes upon the bushes,
were lighting up the dignified solitudes with
brilliancy of colour. While some old chestnuts
with wide-spreading branches — under whose

shadow perhaps a Heber, a Keble, or divines
and scholars of earlier renown, had nursed high
thoughts or meditated noble deeds — were putting
forth their leafy fans, hidden so long within
the shining buds.

The genius of university life has changed,
let us acknowledge, in most respects for the
better. And nothing on this afternoon in May
could be more significant of the changes which
have revolutionised Oxford, identifying it with
the entire English nation, instead of limiting it
to certain sections, than the appearance of the
crowds of bustling, well-dressed, happy-looking
people who were hurrying down Corn-market
Street in the direction of Christchurch. If the
'Philistine' element did not preponderate, it
was pretty clearly to be traced in a good many
faces of the fathers, mothers, sisters, and friends
who seemed, as they streamed through the
town, completely to destroy the quasi-monastic
appearance of the ancient walls and buildings.
They were merry enough as they crowded
down the ' avenue ' on their way to the barges,
but few among them took heed of the beautiful

openings between the trees, or the distant vistas
of scenery.

A cynic might have grumbled at the c aggressive
juvenility ' of some of the youths
who were entering for their minor Olympian
stakes, with almost as much excitement as if it
were that more important race which — as a
subject of newspaper chronicling and speculation
— ranks only second to the Derby day. And
if the atmosphere of jollity seemed to have
little in common with the medievalism so eloquently
described by Matthew Arnold, and said
still to linger in dreamy precincts and sequestered
nooks, it might have pleased Mr. Ruskin
as a proof that there is no decadence in our
national love of sport.

It had been raining warm, soft showers that
morning. But the rain had only left the spring
verdure at its freshest and best. The sky had
cleared, and there were cool whispers of soft
breezes stirring the leaves of some of the trees
in the narrower and more beautiful walks,
where lazy undergraduates, ' clad all in virgin
while,' had been indulging themselves by sleepily

reclining at the bottoms of their punts, listening
to the ' soft, sweet pipings ' of birds in

. . . glades all haunted by grey rams,
And footfalls of the falling shower.'

A little while afterwards they were routed from
their lairs by the more industrious of their comrades,
as the barges became thronged with
anxious spectators, and the boats for their races
started, the various inmates trying to look as
if they were quite superior to the consciousness
of the becoming nature of their costumes.
Mothers and sweethearts, not so reticent, murmured
to each other their approval of the pale
blue, the pretty pink, the mauve and white, the
magenta, or the bright scarlet, as the case
might be. In a short time the excitement commenced.
Why describe a spectacle known to
so many who have carried memories with them
through life of such spring days?

One is not always young,' as a smiling,
match-making matron confided to another
mother, in excuse for the very evident flirtation
of Kate and Jennie with James and Harry,
whom ' they might never see again,' as, a
minute afterwards, she sentimentally added,

(sharp enough to notice that James had offered
a bunch of daffodils to Kate, which the latter,
with pink cheeks, was pinning to her dress.

Had she not made great exertions to secure
a place for herself and her girls on the 'Varsity
barge, or, failing that, on one of the college
barges which were ranged in a row, and to-day
were looking more gay than usual ; and had she
not wished it were possible to intrigue in someway
with the weather, knowing that the spring
toilette which she had taken such pains to
secure for her girls would make them look
all the prettier if they could throw off the
wraps which had been rendered necessary by
the rain, and a lingering sharpness in the May
wind, telling of a recent severity in the weather.
Ah ! let us not be too cynical on the weak
short-sightedness of all such manoeuvres, for,
as another lady observed with a sigh, ' It is
not always May,' as memories recurred to her
of her own young days, and a miserable climax
to such plotting in her own particular case.

Close to them was a third mother, a Mrs.
Vernon-Smith, who had stinted her ill-dressed,
pale-looking girls that every farthing that could

be spared from the merest necessities of life
should go to young Hay ward Vernon-Smith,
not that he should achieve success in the
schools or fit himself for any calling whatever,
but win for himself a place in the university
eight — a circumstance which was about as
likely to take place as that the cow in the old
nursery rhyme should jump over the moon.
Only that very morning Mr. Vernon-Smith had
informed his better-half that she had made a
fool of herself in pinching the family for the
superstition of a college education for her
spoilt darling, when Mary Ann had been ordered
port wine, and they could not afford to give
it to her, and the i young dog ' was as likely to
be as great a stick at rowing as at classics and
mathematics.

Poor Mrs. Smith had too high an opinion of
her offspring to be daunted by these insinuations,
but her hand shook and her heart misgave her,
as the parasols which had been raised to shelter
some of the young faces from a glint
of sunshine were as suddenly lowered, and
the boats were shooting past before the nervous

lady thoroughly understood which were
her son's colours and what all the excitement
was about.

Poor Mrs. Smith positively closed her eyes,
as the boats with their stalwart figures seemed
to swim before her dazzled vision. She afterwards
declared that she had seen the pink and
violet caps of the Balliol and New College
men, with the scarlet of Magdalen — the athletic
forms looking to good advantage as they shot
past the barges with a clean and even sweep of
their oars. But she could not look at the
Exeter boat in which her own son was stroke,
knowing that this race bore the same analogy
to the greater race which she coveted for her
boy, as the Bath races bear to Ascot. She heard
nothing but a rush of feet on the banks, deafening
shouts, ' Well done, New'— 4 Well done, Exeter
and cries of half the names of the colleges, after
which she seemed to wake again to hear that
her boy's boat had been * bumped ' to a more
ignominious place on the river.

1 And the last day too,' said somebody near
her, who seemed to have an interest in the

VOL. I. O

same boat. ' They say that stroke lost his
head.'

4 Do you hear that, ma V asked Mary Ann,
not altogether sorry to retort on her mother,
I always told you he would never do it.
Why, he lost his head in the same way when we
wanted him to take the poker and go down to
attack the thief. I heard somebody saying that
they should never have a stroke who is liable
to loss of nerve, and who hasn't a good lot of
stay.'

Mrs. Smith was too crushed to put down her
daughter with the spirit which she usually
showed when Mary Ann opposed her. Terrible
recollections of Hay ward's { Battles ' which had
amounted to so much more for the last term
than she expected, that she could scarcely
now summon courage to tell his father, made
her silent and absent-minded.

But Hayward Vernon-Smith was not the only
man disappointed.

Well, Sell wood,' said a friend, about half an
hour afterwards to a disconsolate-looking man
who was walking home with the crowd, and

speaking to no one, ' you did not do as well as
we expected.'

I never do,' was the reply. e I ought to
have been firm enough not to have rowed
at all, coming just at this time. 1 have
made a worse mess of my " Greats " in consequence.'


But it does not matter to you,' was the
answer.

Sellwood shrugged. If he could have spoken
his secret thoughts, he would have said that was
the pity of it. If he had ever had any relation
to encourage him, and to care if he made a
success or not, instead of being simply told to
make friends and to spend an unlimited amount
of money — he might have done better in everything.


They were going with the multitude past the
beautiful Christchurch meadows. Even the
fools who had just struggled out of the water,
having upset their boats from the desire to
distinguish themselves, had more friends after all
than he had, in spite of his father's urgent messages
that he would ensure for himself brilliant



acquaintances who would be useful to him in
his future life.

There was scarcely a soul whom he cared
for in all this crowd. What a motley throng
of people it was streaming up the far-famed
walk, whilst now at every Christchurch
window, over banks of flowers, peeped out
young faces, merry, critical, or even cynical, as
the case might be, but few of them jaundiced
with the midnight oil. He thought a little bitterly,
as he glanced up at them, that these were
the swells with whom his father would have
liked him to be thick, and that it was a
contemptible thing, altogether lowering to a
man's self-respect, to be commanded to ' make
friends' with any persons, as if such friendships
would be of material advantage to his future.
It seemed to him that his father must be of an
uncommonly sanguine disposition to persist instill
clinging to the vague hope that he would
attach himself to sprigs of the nobility, when
evidently his own antecedents would not bear
inspection, and no one but a madman would
expect money to do everything. In fact, Godfrey

Sellwood's only objection to the dark,
energetic, well-knit young fellow who was
now walking by inside, and whose appearance
bore a marked contrast to his own fair-haired,
fair-skinned, and somewhat graceful but languid
face, was that Charles Lloyd was an Honourable
and the younger son of a lord. Charles
was a marked contrast to him in every way.
Bright and brilliant in his manner, with all the
confidence which came to him from the fact
that he was well-born if not particularly well-provided
in this world's goods, he had not only
found Godfrey a valuable ally, always ready
with money for every conceivable thing, but a
sympathetic friend. For, as he acknowledged
to himself, Sellwood — whose connections were
probably ' fishy from the fact, that though he
mentioned a father, the ' old boy ' had never
shown himself, and was therefore probably unpresentable
— had as much of the manners and
tone of real gentlefolk as if he had been accustomed
to mix with them from his infancy.

Why Sellwood had not done more was a
mystery not only to Lloyd but to most people.

Great things had been prophesied of him when
he was a freshman at St. Anne's. But it could
not be said that he had verified any of these
prophecies. He had begun well by standing
pretty high in an examination for the Hertford,
though he himself always declared that the
mention ' was owing to a lucky hit. He certainly
went-in for the Ireland, and was nowhere
at all, though his Greek was generally better
than his Latin, and though ' he,' as Charles
Lloyd was wont to remark, with the repetition
of a hackneyed joke, ' was born with no natural
aversion to that wretched Aristotle who wrote
his horrid philosophy on purpose to stagger
men with wits, or that over-estimated Plato
with whom most folks were dinned till they
were quite as ready to swallow poison as ever
Socrates was.'

4 No, it looked a little fishy,' that friend was
wont to declare, with the usual candour of
friends, * that Sellwood actually stood well for
the Hertford in his first year, and then went-in
and did nothing the next. Somehow he lost
his first in " Mods," and after that he got disgusted

with the whole thing, and found out, as
I could have told him before, that classical
education was all a mistake. Why, it makes
one shudder to think, if there had not been a
bonfire of that Alexandrian library, there would
have been a lot more red-ink lines and wretched
notes for us to make;

That was Charlie's explanation of his friend's
apparent failure, and probably it was not so far
from the truth. After the discovery that classical
education was a mistake, Sellwood had
taken a little to the sports. He was a ' fair
bat,' a ' fair oar,' but not absolutely good at
either. Probably because he did not take the
pains, and preferred lying lazily on his back,
and reading poetry in one of those hiding-places
amongst the grasses, to be discovered beside
the little Chigwell before it falls into the Isis.
Punting on a summer's day in a white flannel
suit involves no great exertion of strength, and
seemed to be congenial to Godfrey Sellwood's
retiring nature. There were occasions, however,
on which he could emerge from his ordinary
shyness, and he had even been known to

give Lints to his friend, Charlie Lloyd, when
the latter was preparing his brilliant speeches
for the Union.

But even at the Union Sellwood had not distinguished
himself. His delivery was that of a
man who was struggling with his ideas, thinking,
as it were, the thought over and over
again, aud labouring to clothe it with such
expression as should represent it to his fellows.
Nor did it add to his popularity that, though
words were not always ready with him, he was
fastidious about their right use, and quick to
detect the weak part of an epigram, or the
confusion of metaphors — marring the construction
of some high-sounding sentence, which,
picked to pieces, could be proved to mean
nothing at all. Unlike the Honourable Charles
(who was accused of having ' ratted ' in his
political creed since he came to Oxford, his
family traditions having been in favour of
Toryism, whilst the majority of the more
original speakers were Radicals), Sellwood
seldom changed his opinions, and clung to
ideas which he had formed from boyhood with

a tenacity unusual for one so young. He seldom
volunteered a remark in company unless
he had something to say. And, although he
had joined the debating club, — where the grave
questions of whether Mr. Disraeli was or was
not a traitor to his country, and whether the
Oxford youth should lend its patronage to
Church and State, were discussed and settled
with a vehemence which was perfectly innocent,
and proved a whetstone for sharpening
wits, — he never made more than one speech of
any length. A speech which led to the report
that he not only stammered, but had something
wrong in his bronchial arrangements, when,
after all, he was merely nervous, merely in
search of the right words.

In company he had been somewhat silent,
having no taste for wines or breakfast-parties,
not intending to be unsocial, but preferring the
friendship of a few. Perhaps the natural indolence
of his constitution, which made it somewhat
hard for him to exert himself to overcome
obstacles, had much to do with this love
of retirement ; perhaps it was that the hurry

and fulness of modern life, the crowd of fresh
thoughts, the new discoveries in science, and
the desire to grapple with the problems of his
age, were together somewhat overpowering to
a man of his temperament, and he required to
realise them in solitude.

Alone with young Lloyd he was perfectly at
his ease. The ' burden of the mystery ' of life
ceased to oppress him, and the crux of how to
reconcile religion and politics, looking upon
them as one, could for a time be put on one side.
The two friends were each moved in different
ways by the ' Zeit-geist,' though they might interpret
it in a different manner. They enjoyed
their battles-royal, their skirmishes of words
which did not become seriously warlike, for
both at heart were Radicals, with a natural love
for social equality and a desire to meet others
on the same level and enter into their grievances.
It mattered little by what party names
they called themselves. The truest statesman,
Conservative or not, must have sympathised
with their burning enthusiasm to snap Gordian
knots which their fathers had tried to untie in

vain, whilst be might have smiled a little sadly
at their somewhat crude impatience to set right
those complicated social problems, whether of
land, property, or national health which bad
baffled many and harder heads. It was the
desire for brotherhood and comradeship which
was the hopeful element in their case. And
though it pleased Charlie Lloyd to draw back
on occasions, or to make a great deal of the few
questions on which he had thought it desirable
to give out that he had changed his opinions,
with a pugnacity that was pertinacious, this
was all the more invigorating.

1 shall come up to your rooms for coffee,
after hall to-nights said the latter with a nod,
as the two men separated in High Street,
Godfrey Sellwood turning into the quadrangle
of St Anne's, and Charlie Lloyd crossing over

to college, with its queer Dutch windows

to the chapel, and its Common room where old
Sam Johnson, according to his boast, had sometimes
f drunk off three bottles of port without
being the worse for it.'

CHAPTER II.

Charlie Lloyd did not ( look in ' quite so early
that evening as he had promised, a matter
which did not cause Godfrey much surprise.
For was not Lloyd one of the most popular
men at Oxford ; not a ' fast ' man in the ordinary
sense, but up to all the fun which was going on ;
not a wine-bibber to any serious extent, but the
life of a wine-party? Was it not the ambition
of many, who found it difficult to maintain their
own standing in a place which shifted its population
every three years, to be seen arm-in-arm
as if they were on the closest terms of intimacy
with this well-looking, well-born young fellow,
who took his social ' honours' in a way which
was peculiar to himself.

Godfrey was not in the best of spirits as he
sat alone waiting for him in his picturesque
room, which was one of the finest in the quadrangle,
large if low-roofed, and with cushioned
window-seats commanding a peaceful view of
an old moss-grown churchyard, on which the
setting sun had but a short time before cast its
golden rays. The stars were coming out now,
and Godfrey, who had chosen to dine alone — with
his dinner laid by a solemn scout, who looked as
if he himself had graduated in all the learning
of the university— now retired from the window,
and seated himself in a cozy arm-chair by his
reading-lamp.

It was before the modern revival of domestic
art, when ' sestheticism ' as it is called, could be
paraded as an excuse for organized attacks on
the persons of undergraduates, who burn incense
or worship peacock's-feathers. It did not
occur to Godfrey to have lilies in his room
and to offer reverence to them more than to
other flowers. But flowers were crowded together
in profusion on one of his tables, simply
because he cared for those beautiful things

which seem to be bora of the air and the sunshine
almost as much as the tints of the rainbow,
and had given orders to his scout to see
that he was always to be supplied with them.
Of course he was cheated about the prices for
them, as he was about most things. But, as his
father wished him to make a sensation by-spending
as much money as possible on the
Oxford tradespeople, this was a matter of no
consequence. Godfrey was fleeced with impunity,
but the c sensation ' was far off still.

All that could be said in excuse of this lavish
expenditure was that his room was furnished
with scholarly taste. Of old china, which was
one of the lad's hobbies, there was a plentiful
supply (not of plates, as now, crawling up the
walls, or hanging from the ceiling in a way to
make nervous people feel as if they are standing
beneath so many swords of Damocles) but
of vases standing on the floor, of various sizes
and beautiful shapes. There were pictures,
exquisitely selected, of water-colour and oil on
the walls, with a few rare line engravings. A
glass lamp of artistic design (where now there

would be a Japanese one) was suspended from
the ceiling; and a piano with a finely carved
case (it had not occurred to Godfrey to fling an
Indian scarf over it) stood open with a violin
near it, and some of Mendelssohn's and
Beethoven's music on the stand. Iu one corner
of the room there was a trophy of pipes, and
musical instruments, amongst which was a
Syrian drum. Godfrey was a member of a
glee club which on the previous evening had
performed for a temperance society. They had
chosen Mendelssohn's vintage song, as peculiarly
appropriate for the occasion, and had entered
it on the programme as ' Selections from
Corelli.'

Side by side with the defects in the young
fellow's nature were many high qualities — keenness
of perception, a temperament yielding
readily to culture, an organisation as acutely
sensitive to changes in the social atmosphere
as his musical ear was fine to changes of sound,
an inclination to choose employments which
were congenial to him, and a retiring tendency
which perhaps might have been inherited fronds

his mother, or perhaps was a result of his
peculiar education. To those skilful appraisers
of character who pride themselves on cataloguing
a man or a woman according to their
surroundings in the rooms which they generally
inhabit,— forgetting that such things may be
studied even when they appear most careless —
it would have been easy to form a tolerably
accurate estimate of the versatility of Godfrey
Sellwoocl. His very books told a tale. English
literature figured largely as well as German
and French, threatening to outnumber the conventional
Latin and Greek. And amongst
them were rare editions of the best illustrated
literature of the day, and a splendidly
bound copy of Turner's ' Liber Studious,' for
which he was said to have given an almost
fabulous price. Probably if the lad had been
poor, or if he had had relations to be interested
in his success, he might have made a speciality
of one of his many gifts. But as he sat with
his slippers on, waiting for Lloyd to come in
and have one of his usual talks, and as he
watched his own thoughts as it were in a cloud

of curling smoke (having no aunt, cousin, or
sister to inform him that smoking was an
illicit practice), the provoking part of it was
that he saw as plainly as anyone else could
have told him, how— because his wages had
been a free gift to him, and he had had nothing*
to stimulate him — he had been too lazy to do
anything.

Put your Irishman in a free cottage, with
lots of potatoes to eat, and he'll never rise any
higher,' he said to himself — that being one of the
questions under dispute between himself and
young Lloyd, which one or the other was going
to settle for the good of the community.

Now it was the Pater's mistake to keep
me like a prince, when he himself probably
worked hard enough in his time.' The shifting
of the responsibility in this way on-the Pater
led him for the hundredth time into another
reverie. Why, if there was anything in the
doctrine of heredity, did he and * the Pater,'
have so little in common? His father made
no secret of having sprung from the people,
and seemed at times to be proud of it.

YOL. I. P

According to Godfrey's theories it was a thing
to be proud of — a self-made man had nothing to
be ashamed of. But why was there a mystery ?
Why did his father seem to have positively
no connections? His own experience of the
first year of his university training had furnished
him with an acute instinct which advised
him of the impossibility of attempting to introduce
people to each other, in the case of the
one set being refined, and the other utterly unpresentable.
But not only did the young
blood in him rise in a sort of scorn against
any such meanness as that which disallows
honest kith and kin for the sake of a little
inconvenience happening to oneself; he was
confronted with another difficulty. He could
just remember his mother in some foreign
country, a pale delicate woman, rather crushed
and feeble, but apparently with all the habits of
a lady.

As far as he could recall it, his mother had
never had reason to complain of ill-treatment.
She had simply been neglected, and his fear
was that she had died, as some plants do, from

the absence of light and sunshine. She could
not presumably have had anything in common
with the stern, self-reliant man who treated her
with deferential politeness, but had apparently
centred his attentions on his child. In this
case it had not been the usual cause and effect
of love begetting love. The young fellow
was inclined bitterly to resent, for his mother's
sake, a course of conduct which it seemed to
him was lowering to womanhood in general.
That he himself should be valued was of small
importance to him. He knew nothing about
his father's antecedents. He did not even
know the extent of his fortune, nor did Reuben
become more communicative as his son grew
up. His father's reputation as a business man
had apparently been without a stain. He made
a point of keeping his word with his servants
and dependents, and, so far as Godfrey knew,
he had never wronged a single person. His
actions might be a trifle less hard than his
words to the people who were beneath him,
but words and actions were both hard enough.
How would he and his father * hit it off' when

p2

they happened to come together, seeing that
they held different opinions about nearly everything
under the sun? He had tried to put off
the evil day as long as possible, but now it was
close upon him.

Godfrey's soliloquy was interrupted by a
sharp, quick rap at the door of his room.

Come in,' he said, not sorry to hear the rap,
and to welcome the brisk man with the big
forehead, bright expression of face, and clear
brown eyes, whose company was always welcome
to him. ' Hullo, Lloyd ! you won't find
most people in the world as patient as I am —
coffee gone cold.'

'I don't exjDecfc to find many as dreamy,'
answered the other. 4 No, not that thing with
the carved back ; I broke it the last time I was
here,' he continued, pushing away the high-backed
chair, and flinging himself down on the
sofa. ' You are like Carlyle, you know — quite
superior to time and space, and all those world-enveloping
appearances.'

Space !' said the other, interrogatively, ashe
looked, in his meditative way, at the

smoke from his cigar. ■ I'm not a ghost yet.'

Yes, you are — a ghost in a body. But you,
with your riches, can reduce to a minimum the
inconvenience of that body. You can travel
almost as quickly as Puck, if it so pleases
you ; whilst I, poor wretch, a younger son,
and not being afflicted with the chronic malady
of too many thousands, am doomed to be content
with Lincoln's Inn, celibacy, and the Bar

'The Bar?' rejoined Sellwood, to whom the
information was new. ' So you have made up
your mind? It's a road that begins seductively,
and ends — where?'

Well, it leads to most things.'

To those who win

Hitherto Charlie Lloyd, with all his expansiveness,
had had a certain shyness about his
plans for the future, with which his friends did
not interfere. At one time he had planned to
remain at Oxford, but academic life began to
pall upon him, and he longed for a wider arena,
directly it was found that he had taken a degree
which was not so good as had been
expected.

I mean to win,' he responded, with his
brightest smile. ' Of course there'll be lots of
snubbing to which one has not been used, but
they are good for the moral constitution — and
there's a chance of being left by the receding
tide.'

High and dry, like some of the rubbish left
behind from a wreck. No, that will be quite
impossible for you,' answered Sellwood, with a
shake of the head, and looking at him with
approving eyes.

Well, I must take my chance of it ; it's a
refuge for the destitute, the best I can get.
After all, it's the political life which has most
temptation for me.'

A future representative of your country,'
answered Godfrey, with a smile; 'you must
change your ideas a little before that time
comes.'

I must be a disciple of patience, to say the
least of it,' answered the other, with a sigh,
wedded to my ink-bottle and musty law-books
for the '

4 Doubtful hope of becoming a Q.C.,' interrupted

Sellwood, waking into life and throwing
away the end of his now finished cigar, ' oh, you
won't see much of the chambers in which you
will be supposed to spend your life — there will
be balls, and dinners, and conversazione, or
whatever else you call them, and then you have
your eye upon politics. Good ! You will fight
your battles and succeed in them as you succeed
in everything you take up. You have the
power of concentration — ay, and of fascination
too — the fates have denied them both to me.
It will be simply for you to go in and win in
literature and everything else, just as you have
won at the debates here in a certain sense —
though you have talked a lot of bosh — you were
made for success''

Stop, my good fellow — if it's the literature,
the cutting language, and anonymous vivisection
of the review which is to deprive some
poor devil of an author of this night's rest, I
should say it was a precious deal more in your
line than mine.'

1 1 — I have made a mull of everything. My
Greats " are sure to be mulled, and I spoilt the

chances of our boat because I bad not the courage
to say " no " about attempting both. No,
I am off at once. I feel half ashamed to show
my face.'

Don't you wait for Comme V

Why should I ? If the jokes were worth
anything — but they are sure to be stale as well
as noisy. It's not quite so bad as it used to be
when the noise was like the row in a theatre on
Boxing-night. But one can still read in the
newspapers about the ' man in the straw hat.'
They have established a precedent to let the fellows
make fools of themselves, and precedents
in my opinion are always a mistake.'

'Not always? answered Lloyd. In spite of
being impregnated with the young reforming
spirit which likes to sweep away old abuses and
to introduce anything new — speculating a little
too rashly and perhaps too familiarly on all
sorts of subjects hitherto supposed to be unassailable
— Charlie Lloyd had, as I have hinted
before, his own little reserves on which the
popular Iconoclasm was not to be exercised. * I
can't agree with you,' he continued, with his

usual combativeness, springing to his feet as if
ready for a battle. ' Precedents are not always
a mistake. For instance, the law of primogeniture
is a capital one, though I would not stand
in my brother's shoes for something, I can
tell you.'

1 A good many other people would,' answered
Sellwood, who was too much out of spirits to
take up the glove which he knew had been flung
down to him for championship.'

1 They wouldn't if they knew all. Call a lord
free ? Why, he is a slave — the puppet of the
people — ten times less free than the peasant
who earns enough and no more for his daily
meals.'

Sellwood simply shrugged his shoulders at
this outburst, and lit another cigar, while his
friend — now standing on his feet with his
brown eyes sparkling and looking so much like
a young war-horse scenting the battle, that
Godfrey almost expected to see his ears go up
and his nostrils dilate — went on, as if expecting
to be contradicted.

1 Free ! Why, I'm the free one. I assure you

I feel sometimes when I am with Newderry as
if I have an air of quite impertinent independence.
It is he who has to sacrifice himself
for the good of his country — his very name and
the way in which people look at him is an
infliction '

1 Only to be borne by one of a great nature
said Sellwood, drily.

1 Ah, yes ; why, when they see us together, the
very cut of his clothes and the set of his necktie
become matters for criticism — he can hardly
ever look right, that's because they whisper,
Si Look at him, he's the lord." Would you expect
a lord to be short, or at all mean in appearance 1
The 6l ttoWoI say no, and condemn Newderry
accordingly. If the poor wretch is tired they
shake their heads and say " dissipated," while
as for me I'm let off lightly — " that's his brother,
you know, nothing." '

You're always let off lightly.'

s I'm used to it, you see, from the time I used
to play football, and, not having enough weight
to be a " forward," learned to slip in between
the fellows' arms and legs like an eel. But

between ourselves, you know, I expect they'll
alter a good deal of all this by-and-by. When
lords get sick of state and long for a seat in
the lower Parliament where they can express
themselves with better effect — it may be only a
feather, yet it shows '

1 That a tedious parade of greatness begins to
pall on them V said Sell wood, interrogatively.
From long habit he had been accustomed to
finish young Lloyd's disjointed sentences, who,
also from habit, expected it of him.

Both men were well aware that this conversation
on an old topic which was pretty well
threadbare, was kept up with a show of excitement
on Charlie's part, purposely to ward off
another undebateable subject which was uppermost
in the minds of both. For as soon as
Lloyd had heard, a few weeks before, that Sell-wood's
father had settled in shire he had

invited himself, as a matter of course, to spend a
portion of his summer holiday at Broadmeads,
and had met with a discouragement. Now
without any vulgar fawning upon wealth,
Charlie Lloyd was unaffectedly fond of Sell-wood,

and the latter was too good and useful a
friend to be easily lost sight of.

Yet Sellwood was now leaving Oxford for
good. He, on his own part, had declined
Lloyd's offers of hospitality with a decision
which could not fail to cause surprise; and now,
while etiquette forbade that Lloyd should again
introduce the subject of his own proffered visit
to Broadmeads, Sellwood remained stubbornly
silent.

The latter suffered acutely in maintaining a
silence which he knew would be misinterpreted.
For, if Lloyd cared for him, he cared ten times
more for Lloyd ; his being one of those deep-hearted,
sensitive natures, whose loyalty is unobtrusive
and whose love was 'passing the
love' of — well, at any rate, of some women. No
sour envy had been allowed to mar the goodwill
which Godfrey had ever felt for his more
popular and prosperous friend. To part from
him would be one of the keenest trials of his
life. If the two friends were to be torn apart,
it was Sellwood's nature and not Lloyd's which
would be left bleeding at the pith. And yet,

when Charlie Lloyd broke off in his rattling
speech, there was an awkward pause for a minute.
In that minute Sellwood had for the last
time turned it over iu his mind and decided —
he could not ask Lloyd to come to Broadmeads
he could not introduce him to his father.

What a strange and yet universal law it
seems, that other people's lots in life always
appear to us better than our own,' he said, a
little wearily, by way of breaking the silence.
1 This rank, you think, and these vested interests
— with which I cannot say I sympathise —
bring their own curse. Very likely, but how much
greater is the curse of being a sort of social
pariah. Do not think I am not proud of the
fact that no blood but that of the people runs in
my veins. I have often said so, but to have no
one belonging to one with whom one can '

It was like himself to stammer a little, but
unlike himself to leave his sentence in his turn
unfinished ; probably to regret that he had
commenced it. Lloyd gave him a rapid glance,
which he immediately regretted, as the colour
sprang to the Saxon face, and spread to the

roots of the fair hair, though Sellwood still preserved
his meditative attitude.

Surely you would never misunderstand me
like that,' flashed out the quick-spoken Charlie,
with about as much thought as when he had
ventured a celebrated simile concerning the
'pendulum of liberty going jog-trot on the
plains of time' — ' We've been too close friends,
you and I, for our friendship to be allowed to — '

'Allowed to what?' asked Sellwood, with his
brightest smile, whilst Charlie, unassisted, muttered
something about the ' absurdity of being
influenced by a hair's breadth of difference here
and there in social distinctions.'

f Getting to your weights and pendulums
once more V asked Godfrey. 'Are you going
to tell me again " You are one of those people
who walk through life on a ladder of paradox,"
or "You and I are like two mill-stones, grinding
one another away till we become like Kilkenny
cats?'

And both men were not sorry to break out
into one of those hearty laughs which made the
parting between them easier.

CHAPTER III.

Meanwhile it could not be said that matters
went on smoothly between the owners of Broad-meads
and Rashleigh Park.

1 They are neighbours,' said the Torringmoor
people, ' but so uncongenial.'

Sir Ralph was low-spirited and wretched :
the wrinkles began to show deeply on his
pallid face. Other men, less fastidious, might
have found some way of wriggling out of the
network with which he had been so skilfully
surrounded, but the baronet was too honourable
about debt to avail himself of the numerous
plans for evading his increasing difficulties which
modern subtlety might have suggested. Having

a conscience which would reproach him for
devising means of escape of which other men
would not have been ashamed, he tried to think
of it as a morbid thing which had done him an
ill turn. But the conscience stood firmly in
spite of his efforts to be free to it, and he could
only vent his vexation on those around him.
Misfortune had been to Sir Ralph no sweetener
of the temper. He had passed through much
suffering in his life, and the suffering had been
all the more terrible because it had been quiet,
but it had left its marks on him nevertheless.

He showed these marks more than usual on
one evening towards the end of May, when he
was sitting alone in his study with a pile of
papers before him, and with a very traceable
likeness to some of his ancestors whose portraits
decorated the walls of the room, aud who seemed
to stare at him with surprise and disapproval.


The impossibility of spending any extra
shillings on keeping up the necessary repairs
of the house was noticeable from the state of
those paintings, as well as that of the tapestry-covered

arm-chair on which Sir Ralph was
reclining, and which bore many signs of the
depredations of moths, the horsehair protruding
unpleasantly in several places. The portraits
were cracked and faded, displaying the
canvas here and there. Some of the worthies
had received injuries to their noses, and others
to their eyes ; but all stared, and some smiled
with cold equanimity. The sadness and solitude
of the night, the dull light of the wax
candles which were burning low in their sockets,
and the funereal company of his ancestors , were
overcoming Sir Ralph with the melancholy
which had been too constantly his companion
of late — when he gave a scarcely perceptible
start. He was too accustomed to his niece's
noiseless tread to be much surprised when he
saw that Vere was standing near him. She
often glided into the room with a determination
to resist his cynicism, though he sometimes
resented her intrusion.

1 Uncle, it is late, and you are bothering
yourself again about those stupid letters,' she
said, trying to speak merrily, but with a little

VOL. I. Q

catch in her breath which proved that the effort
of intruding upon his privacy had cost her
something.

Hers was not one of those weak natures
which acquiesce in all that is arranged for them.
On the contrary, an energy which was unconquerable,
and a will which was capable of
endurance, might have been discerned by a
skilled physiognomist in her firm lips and
steadfast eyes. The face, if it was not exactly
bright, because it had a look of care in it
scarcely natural for one so young, was softened
by an expression of pitying tenderness, as
she stood gazing down upon him with her fair
hair thrown into vivid relief by the dark oak
panelling of the old room. She could deny
herself willingly for those whom she loved,
though subjection of a slavish sort would have
been impossible to her.

But it was characteristic of Sir Ralph, and in
keeping with his chronic state of petulant dissatisfaction,
that he not only noticed with a
pang of disapproval the dark-stuff dress trimmed

with rusty crape, when he would have liked to
see folds of some delicate muslin, just open to
display the white gleaming of her neck ; but
that he told himself the bright flush which went
and came with the varying emotions of the
speaker, and the unusual lustre of the blue

eyes, were due to the shire climate — an

evanescent lustre of flesh and blood, a mere
glory of colour for which a skilful judge would
prophesy a very limited duration.

She will be nothing to look at in a few
years' time, and I cannot afford to bring her
out properly. They will say that I neglected
poor Richard's child,' he was thinking to himself,
as he said aloud, a little querulously,

How often have I asked you to dress yourself
more prettily? The very servants must
blame me, when they see you going about like
that,'

Another girl, proud as himself, might have
resented the speech. For she knew that he
knew, as well as she knew herself, that he had
supplied her with no pin-money for pretty

Q2

evening toilettes, and that it was only owing
to the most dexterous management of domestic
details that she was able to keep her little
cousin tidy, and supply the wages for the servants.


It was only with a deeper flush and with
a tender, little, protective air, gracious all the
more because she was homely in her dignity,
that she answered him,

We are in mourning, you know.'

You are in mourning, but you need not be
shabby; there is nothing left for you poor
children but the scrag-ends, instead of meat.'

He covered his face with his hand. She did
not answer, but drew a chair close to his. She
had heard that some people loved each other so
well that to be near each other was enough ;
their love was of the trusting kind, they did
not need to speak. And there was a great
yearning for love in the heart of this orphan
girl, shut out by her poverty and the circumstances
of her life from the society which her
uncle considered to be suitable for one of her
birth, and equally debarred from making friendships

with those whom he supposed to be
beneath here

You ought to be in bed,' he said, after a
pause.

1 1 thought,' she answered, timorously, ' that
perhaps I could help you V

About what V (a little sharply)

About those — letters.'

1 Have I not told you again and again that
women have nothing to do with business V

'But you know what the doctors say, and,
if your heart is not strong, you ought not surely
to be sitting up and worrying yourself in this
way.'

Who dares to say I worry ? Is it likely
that I would degrade myself to be worried —
actually worried — by the little gnat-like stings
of that pettifogging creature who has come to
live near us ? They say he is reserved — reserved
indeed — when he is always troubling me with
his vulgar, interfering letters. He knows that
I do not keep an agent, and so he takes advantage
to write like one of those people who
have risen and who do not know the manners of

gentlemen. Our estates, forsooth, join each
other, and he has unlimited resources at his
command. So at one time he complains of
that tower in our grounds, because, forsooth,
it obstructs his view ; at another he advises me
to thin my timber, because it interferes with a
free current of air so that it cannot be good for
myself; and at another it is that a pond should
be drained, and then he talks nonsense about
sanitary commissioners. The fussy, restless
interference of these people who are nobodies,
just because they happen to have made a little
money ! There — I will show you my answers,
if you care to look at them — I have kept copies,'
and he pushed them before her.

She read,

4 It is nonsense to suppose that you must build
up a high wall, because our old summer-house
called the Tower — overlooks your grounds.
The Tower is rarely used and has stood therefor
more than a hundred years. If you were
to consult the antiquarians, you would hear that
some of them think its foundations date from
the seventeenth century. It would be madness

to pull it down, while if you build a wall it
will be greater folly to shut out my air aud impede
my view.'

And again,

I can by no means agree with you as to
the propriety of denying the people the right of
way, which they have had ever since I can remember,
in a footpath through the park. We
Kashleighs have always prided ourselves on conceding
these privileges to the poor. It is not
my fault that the increasing numbers on the
estate have to toil in a state of squalor from
year to year, since these have no longer the
monopoly of poverty. But while many of
their wants might be neutralised by prompt
attention on the part of a really rich man like
yourself, — the actual owner of a large part of
the property — I consider it a piece of selfish
interference to deny the poor a right which
they have always had

Oh, uncle, I don't think that will exactly do,'
remonstrated Yere, ' do you think it wise to
irritate him like that V

1 He irritates me,' said Sir Ralph, angrily.

4 These nonsensical, caddish nouveaux-riches are
always interfering with that u longing for confirmed
tranquillity " which, if you had come to
my age, child, you would " know," as Wordsworth
said, "to be one of the inherent wants
of humanity." '

An outsider would have seen the humorous
side in the disputes which were ever cropping
up between the combatants, with the victory
remaining undecided. More than once the two
neighbours had met in their walks through the
village with no further result than the meeting
of two evenly-matched dogs who growl, show
their teeth, and after all turn tail without
coming to actual encounter.

But Vere looked sufficiently grave as she
glanced at the correspondence which had been
a fruitful source of sleepless nights to her irritated
uncle.

Fancy the impudence of a fellow,' he
continued, ' who could write me such a thing
as this, " The trees want thinning on your
grounds — the fir-walk especially is in a very
bad state." And when I answer, " Thanks, but

my fir-walk pleases me' has the positive insolence
to write again, " If yon change your
mind, and would like to sell your timber, I will
offer you a good price for it." '

1 Perhaps he knows — ' began Vere, and then
faltered, fearing the expression on her uncle's
face, and unable to finish her speech.

Perhaps he knows F thundered Sir Ralph.
If he does, he has no right to brag about it.
Depend upon it I know my " Evelyn " on trees
fifty times better than he with his vulgar
modern theories. I thought you had more
spirit, that yon resented as much as I do the
change in the old country when a beggar's son
can be a millionaire and a good old family
reduced to beggary. How can you twit me
with " perhaps he knows V '

And he, who had been pacing about the room
restlessly, while his niece looked at the letters,
now sat down again hopelessly, and covered
his face with his hands.

There was nothing more to be done, as Vere
knew from sad experience, when once she had
blundered on an unfortunate speech. The same

experience had taught her to avoid altercation,
and the unfortunate uncle was positively relieved
when, on changing his attitude a few
minutes afterwards, he found that he 'was
alone.

1 She has obeyed me, and gone to bed,' he
said to himself. ' She is much more obedient
than my own child. I have not much to complain
of.'

And then — though the figures were literally
dancing before his eyes — he sat down again to
his account-book, telling himself that it was his
increasing duty to place his affairs before himself
without reserve.

It was past one o'clock when he spread another
note out before his tired eyes in the handwriting
which was so odious to him, and which
had been received but the day before from his
neighbour. It convinced him that the man, who
seemed to have eyes as sharp and arms as far-reaching
as the octopus, was aware of a further
loss which had happened to him lately — a
disaster which he had supposed to be known
only to himself.

'I wonder bow he, who enjoys a reputation
of omnipotence, and who could not endure the
slightest reverse, would like to have this sort of
patronising letter himself,' he said, shrugging
his shoulders. Yet the note might have seemed
a kind one to outsiders who knew nothing of
the curious relations between the two men.

It closed with offering the Baronet a loan often
thousand pounds, if be wished to recoup
himself for his loss, and was signed, as it seemed
to him. in mockery,

'I have the honour to be, your obedient
servant, Reuben Sellwood.'

Sir Ralph felt a shiver down his back as he
read the words and the signature. Destiny
seemed to be against him. He looked round
the room, with which he had been so familiarly
acquainted since his boyhood, with the unsympathetic
ancestors staring down at him, and
felt as if he were one of those victims exposed
to a peculiar form of torture in the middle ages.
For the walls seemed to be slowly advancing
and closing in upon him, the floor appeared to
be rising, and the ceiling, sinking. He would

soon be crushed between the complex machinery
which had been devised to grind him to powder.
If he accepted this loan, he would then be more
fully than ever in the power of an upstart
whom he hated. If he did not accept, he would
be in his power still, and some people might
consider his refusal to be graceless.

The painful emotions of pride and agony
had never been contending more strongly in
his heart than when he seized the pen, and
humiliated himself by saying what was not
true, that he was much obliged for the offer,
and asking to be given a few days for reflection
before he availed himself of it.

CHAPTER IV.

Godfrey shirked ' Commemoration,' as he had
intended, and returned to Broadmeads by the
end of May.

Had the lad been returning from South
Africa, his father could not have made more
pompous preparations to receive him ; but, in
truth, South Africa or the North Pole would
have been all the same to Reuben Sellwood.
He had been rather proud than otherwise when
his son had shown the slightest tendency towards
extravagance.

This had been all very well at a distance.
It was years since the father and the son had
met, the latter spending his holidays on the

Continent, and the former supplying him with
lavish money for his travelling expenses,
like a King Log from the other side of the
Atlantic.

Godfrey knew little more of his father than
if he had been King Log. His childhood still
haunted him with a number of shadowy recollections,
amongst which he himself — a very
white and solemn child with a good deal of
individuality and embryonic philosophy — had
seemed to creep, a pale little figure, among the
shadows.

Few children had lived in a more sunless
atmosphere. And yet there had been a sort
of uncompromising down-rightness about the
boy which made him long to get to the heart
of things. A longing which was rather increased
than otherwise, when, as Reuben sarcastically
expressed it, the lad had taken ' intellectual
measles.' Then it was that he found he
had nothing in common with the reserved,
defiant man, who came across the seas to
visit him once when he was at school, who

seemed to have lapsed into an indifference,
as bad as the worst forms of cynicism. Godfrey
could not know that the indifference
was studied; he was only too well aware
that his father would try to crush his own inquiring
spirit, and that he might as well keep
to himself all questions which he was ready to
venture respecting his birth-place, and the
memories which they might be supposed to
share in common.

The two met as if they had been strangers
in the new house at Broadmeads on an evening
late in May. A dispassionate spectator might
have discerned something pathetic in the restrained
feeling on either side which manifested
itself in the deferential manner of the son, and
in the little expressions which escaped him
betraying the tenor of his thoughts, and making
his father conclude that the lad was fearfully
sensitive, just like his mother. Reuben
was rather pleased to observe this trait of
character, which proved to him that he possessed
a piece of Parian marble which would require

more gentle handling than usual, and
was quite unconscious that he himself was
trembling with some strange repressed feeling,
and was scarcely able to articulate at times from
excitement. Unknown to himself, he had been
queerly anxious about the appearance of his
poet.' By the light of the flaring gas, which
Godfrey mentally likened to that of a first-class
waiting-room at a railway station, Reuben saw
a tall young fellow with sloping shoulders, a
little pale but with features which had been
pronounced good by the sex that ought to
know, with a build which was slender and muscular,
brilliant eyes, and a maturity of forehead
which was startling in one so young. He
was scarcely familiar with the type, but he
looked at him with pride; while the young man
himself was relieved to find that his father
was not, as he had supposed, vulgar by nature,
but was evidently possessed of a good deal of
character,

Godfrey was up betimes on the following
morning. He escaped from the brand-new
house, with the colours which set his teeth on

edge, and even from the pictures-which his
father had selected, to watch the promise of
cloudless splendour in the early dawn, and to
console himself for a somewhat sleepless night
by listening to the gush of bird-music which
filled the pauses of his thoughts, as the first
sun-shafts glanced down on the slopes and
lawns of freshest grass.

Even then, it was not the newly planted
evergreens which attracted him, nor the greenhouses,
which were full of pyramids of rose-heed
azaleas. Instinctively he bent his steps
to the oldest part of the park — that which had
not been newly planted, but was a part of the
property which had originally belonged to the
Rashleighs. He had heard nothing of the
story, but his fastidious taste was gratified by
the grey trunks of the old oak-trees, and the
moss-stained boles of the beeches with glimpses
between them of far-off reaches of the river.
Beyond the river was the purple moorland
melting away into the distance, and from an
old gate which led away from his father's
grounds, could be seen the roofs of cottages

VOL. I. B

and orchards with clustering trees still bearing
here and there traces of lingering blossom.
Something of easy grace in his son's attitude
caught Reuben's eye, as he hurried up to him,
and saw him leaving against the gate.

'Well?' he said to him, with a well pleased
smile. 'Pleased with the prospect ? I thought
as much. By-and-by you will be monarch
of all you survey.'

He forgot himself a little, and rubbed his
hands. Something in the action, as well as the
quotation which betrayed the direction of his
father's thoughts, jarred on the young mau's
mood. He shifted his attitude a little impatiently,
and made no longer an attractive
foreground to the picture, as he answered,

'Does it not strike you that we can admire
things just as well when we don't possess
them? It is surely a poverty-stricken
and a selfish spirit, which wo aid lead us to
appreciate because we can appropriate V

He regretted the speech as soon as it was
uttered, remembering how, in his childhood, his
father had never been contradicted, but had'

been absolute master in bis mother's eyes, just
as if they had lived in feudal times. The recollection
gave him a pang, when he recalled
the figure of his gentle mother who had been
apparently a refined woman, but who had
always contented herself with the secondary
part, watching carefully for her husband's
meaning, glossing over his inaccuracies of
speech, and endeavouring so to lead up to his
best effects that it seemed to Reuben himself
as if he had said a fine thing when he had
only uttered some bald truism. The remembrance
of the surprising assistance which
could be given by a sympathetic wife in
doing nothing to irritate an overbearing man,
softened Godfrey a little. For his mother's
sake he would not wrangle more than he
could help over his father's sayings. He would
look upon him as much as possible as a diamond,
though a rough one, and try to ignore
the fact that he and his father were opposed
to each other in traditions, ideas, religion —
everything.

'I did not mean he began, apologetically,

r2

f that it is not a fine thing for a man by his own
nervous energy to be able to push on, and
make the best of every opportunity. In that
sense great wealth may represent great labours
and achievements — of course it is in the highest
degree honourable.'

4 Eh !' said Reuben, to whom these niceties
of expression were almost as incomprehensible
as if he had been physically deaf — so near is
moral deafness to physical — but who had been
listening to his son's explanation as if he were
hearing some air at the opera. 'I didn't think
you could be such a fool as not to appreciate it.
Ah ! all the good things in life come to the
young people in the present day. It is the
parents who slave, who are ready to cut themselves
up into pieces to please their offspring,
and after all — well, everything is taken without
a thank-you.'

Hitherto, the father and the son had so little
understood each other that there had been a
sort of fear — unacknowledged on the part of
Reuben — always between them.

The orthography of the father's letters had

been somewhat extraordinary. And now that
he counted on displaying the fields and the
timber which he had always coveted to his son,
he was conscious of being constrained and uncomfortable.
He had been revolving many-thoughts
— very earthy and entirely unsentimental
— in his head, and felt that now he had
broken ground it would be his duty to go
through with them. He had not been able to
shake off his reserve for many a long day, and
it would be something to be able to throw off
the mask a little in the presence of his own
flesh and blood. His spirits were scarcely equal
to the occasion, and yet he administered a
thumping blow in the mid-chest to his son, at
which Godfrey did not stagger, though he
looked as if he could have dispensed with it.

Yes, it'll all belong to you,' he said, ' thanks
to what I have done for you — a good part of
the moor, with the cottages as far as you can
see — you can cut down the trees if you like ;
you can leave your mark on it, anyhow.'

There was an odd expression in the young
man's face as he looked curiously at his father,

with a significantly humorous curl of the somewhat
too flexuous lips.

'I wonder where the right ends? If I were
to burn down the cottages, for instance, I suppose
it would not exactly be legal V

Again Reuben did not follow him. He was
thinking,

What a good thug it is that he should take
to early-rising, a virtue,' — as he added to himself
— ' in which many of those Oxford chaps are
wretchedly deficient.'

But Godfrey's spirits sank as his father's rose,
and on the following morning his usual languor
had gained on him. He had not sufficient
energy to turn out of bed. Nature's normal
school of sentiment, the family, seemed to belike
other things, a failure. It is a consequence
of our rapid civilization that the younger generation
should in many cases outstep the elder,
and that the sons should be keenly conscious of
the ignorance of the fathers. And it is probably
only where a son is sensitive that such a consequence
should seem to take the bloom off the
flowers of life.

The table was heaped with dainties, and
adorned with the brightest silver and the finest
linen, when Godfrey made his appearance late
at the breakfast-table the next morning. But,
with a keen sense of what pleased the lad,
Reuben saw that his eyes were directed to a
bunch of hothouse flowers whose tender, waxen
petals adorned a crystal vase in the centre of
the table.

Ah, that's something better than picking a
lot of rubbish out of the hedges as most folks is
obliged to do,' said Reuben, sharply. And again
he was conscious that he had managed to touch
some wrong chord.

It was probably his state of exhilaration
which accounted for the lapse in his grammar —
an unusual one with Reuben, who generally
kept too strict a watch over himself to be guilty
of any such solecism. He coughed as if he were
aware of the mistake directly he uttered it, and
Godfrey hated himself for colouring to the
roots of his hair, and becoming suddenly uncomfortably
conscious of the presence of two
tall footmen who handed the breakfast dishes,

and who seemed to him most unnecessary appendages
to the formality of the meal.

Thanks, I prefer something simpler,' he
said, as he declined an elaborate dish prepared by
the French cook. ' They are pretty enough,'
he said a little coldly, to his father in the same
breath, ' but I must say I like the plain things.
I don't call them rubbish.'

'As you like a plain egg,' said Reuben, trying
to laugh, 'I like it myself.'

Ah, that's the bore of all these luxuries — we
cease to relish them,' muttered Godfrey.

The big room, which was far too big for two
men to take their meals in, was a nuisance to
him as the rich food was, which Reuben disliked
himself, but had had prepared to suit the dainty
appetite of his son. Neither could Godfrey
praise the pictures which his father had purchased
at great cost. The fault might be
in the purchaser, but the ambitious historical
canvases themselves seemed to prove to the
young man how sadly we as a nation had
fallen from pictorial art of the highest kind,
stringing up our taste to concert pitch, and too

often sounding the keynote while we are
unable to get at the tune.

With the furniture it fared no better, and
here Godfrey was outspoken.

1 1 hate machine-made work. Symmetry, yes,
but manufacture of things of this sort is destructive
— fatal to art. I would give more fora
little bit of work, real and true like it was in
the good old times, coming out of the carver's
brain.'

Reuben began to feel that matters were again
going wrong between them.

1 You can't make men all o' one build and
height,' he tried to say, reassuringly, to himself.
He reflected that he could part with the furniture
and purchase new, and that he had known
it was not f properly faded-like ' all along,
whilst his son was brooding over the hideous
arsenic greeks and magenta dyes, and the
wretched decorative sham art of the richer middle
class.

What was the matter? Reuben Sellwood
did not exactly know. And Godfrey, who had
often lamented his loneliness and his want of

any near relations, reproached himself for not
taking everything in better part.

It was not his fault that he was artistic, like
ing everything that was pleasing to the moral
rather than the physical palate, and that he
had an involuntary recoil from all that was
coarse and trifling. His artistic nature could
find plenty of food in studying the moors,
the river, and the trees. He was easily disgusted
at his own amateur efforts in oil or
water-colour, and concluded that he had not
been endowed with any creative power. But
this morning, partly from the want of anything
better to do, and partly from the revulsion
of feeling which had made him shrink
from the unspeakable ugliness of the few
gaudy landscapes which had been painted expressly
to meet the demand of cotton-spinners
at an English manufacturing town, he drew his
sketch-book out of his pocket and commenced
jotting down pencil notes.

So his father found him a few hours afterwards,
with his dreamy eyes turned towards the

shadowy moor, just where the grey turrets of
the old Hall could be seen against the softer
grey sky. towering over the green woods which
nestled beneath it.

'It is beautiful.' said the young man, desisting
from his task, bat too intent upon the view
to notice the slight shadow which flitted across
Eeuben's face.

What is beautiful V asked the elder man, a
little grudgingly,

'Why, the old Hall, with its picturesque turrets,
and his curious mixture of architecture — in
every way delightful. Who would think that
there could be anything so extraordinarily beautiful
in the process of decay, in the many-coloured
mosses, aud the varying tints on those
walls which are mouldering with age.'

'Ah, you would like to possess it?'

The light, which had been growing brighter in
the young man's face, faded a little as he continued.


6 1 can admire without possessing. The
place must be full of memories. Think of the

many who must have lived and died in

it;

A queer reason for liking it. I should like
the doghole to belong to you, and then, when
it got too narrow for you, I would have you
build on it a palace that should rival any place
in New York. 1 hate the place,' Reuben continued,
thinking of the spindle-legged tables,
the worm-eaten oak furniture, and the moth-riddled
tapestry, which he had despised as
only fit for an old Jew shop on one occasion
when he had been admitted to write a business
message when the master of Rashleigh had not
been at home.

'Well, tastes differ, you see, and, as I am
never likely to possess it, we needn't quarrel
over it. To my mind, there is something-stately
in old age,' continued the young man,
warming to his topic, and making up his mind
not to let his father's odd ways seem repugnant
to him, and never to be repelled by his
strange words. l Now, if there is any sort of
fetishism which / could tolerate, it would bethe
worship of antiquities. What sort of people

live in that house 1 Couldn't we get to know
them? Are they as antique as their belongings?'

He looked more like the radiant young
Apollo which his father wished him to resemble
than he had looked at all since he came to
Broadroeads as he asked the question, with fun
dancing in his eyes.

'What sort of people?' repeated Reuben,
with one of those sudden flashes of passion
which proved a safety-valve for the pent-up
forces within him. ' The man who owns it is
a contemptible fool.'

Godfrey arched his brows.

'Then of course you don't know him. — That
would be hardly a kind or flattering way in
Which to speak of a friend,' he added, beneath
his breath, deciding that his father might be
classified amongst the professors of strong
language.

4 1 know him I Ah ! just for my own convenience,'
answered Reuben, as his son stood
motionless and perplexed. 'It is to serve my
own purposes that I know him.'

If Reuben's lips were compressed ironically,

and if he indulged in a sarcastic smile, it was
an aside to himself. The moustache disguised
the mouth, but the look on the upper part of
the man's face disconcerted his son. It was as
if he strove for speech as he laid his hand on
his son's arm, and said at last, as the words
came slowly.

1 1 will tell you a secret ; do not talk about it
though, if things go on as they are, it will
pretty soon be an open secret,' added Reuben,
his voice shaken with some emotion which
seemed to be difficult to control. ' You admire
the place — in time it will be yours.'

Good heavens ! does there happen to be
some curse about me that, immediately I look
at anything. I must be told it is mine?' thought
Godfrey, half fearful of the detaining arm, the
eyes that glittered strangely as they looked
into his face, and the breath, ordinarily so
quiet, which now came in quick gasps. Aloud
he said,

You must be joking. Do you think I have
the evil eye, that I covet everything? I was
only admiring the colours of the old building,

which time aud weather seem to have arranged
with about as much intention as a bird has
when it chooses the mosses for its nest. God
forbid that I or anyone should wish to pilfer
the nest.'

So determined was he to treat the whole
thing as a delusion, that Reuben — if he had
been ready with a confidence — drew again into
his shell.

We resemble each other very little,' murmured
the older man, in disappointment, as he
took the younger one to look at the different
points of interest in his grounds.

1 It is very big, certainly ; but that part of it
is too new. I like things a little untidy, overgrown
— don't you think so V

1 Newness is like youth, my boy — a fault that's
mended in time.'

"That's true; but there is the lake, with
the overhanging trees, where the wild-flowers
grow. I call that really beautiful,' answered
Godfrey, cordially.

The lake— it is a fever-bed. I mean to have
it drained.'

'Really! It does Dot look as if there was
anything malarious about it.'

'It used to belong to the Rashleighs, with a
ghost's walk, and all the rest of it, and is in a
wretched state, like everything that belonged
to them. Cleared out it must be, and as quickly
as possible. I mean to have a landscape
gardener down from London. A large sheet
o' clear water, rockeries, and asphalt e.'

Do you mean to say that you would do away
with the bulrushes and forget-me-nots, and all
those charming grasses?'

What, the weeds !' cried Reuben in utter astonishment.
' In the conservatory you can have
fine growths of '

*I know — of all sorts of hothouse beauties,
from the azalea to the rarest orchis, and they
are fine ones said Godfrey a little sadly, ' they
do to look at in a drawing-room or under glass,
but do you really think I care for those
cultivated beauties so much as for a tangled
growth of the good old English wild-flowers?
Father, you must get it out of your head that
I am at all ambitious. If the doctors tell you

to drain the lake, do so if necessary, but for
my sake you need not change it. I like it
better as it is. And I would respect the feelings
of the Rashleighs. It is easier to demolish
a family ghost than to restore it.'

Again Reuben bit his lip.

1 Acknowledge,' he said, 4 that, after all I have
done for you, you only despise me for it, and
look down upon my way o' doing it.'

6 On the contrary, I try to understand what
you like."

VOL. I.

CHAPTER V.

LOVE founded on duty — on the natural obligations
arising out of the ties of blood and of
nature — is not for that reason less necessary to
be based on real sympathy and regard. It is a
mockery to wear a fair outside show to meet
the claims of a social ritual, while the inner harmony
of the affections is wanting.

Godfrey found himself thinking something
of this kind when the question occurred to him
day after day of how it would be possible for
him to make his father understand the sort of
life which it seemed to him would be tolerable
at Broadmeads. Gifted with a strong religious
tendency, so that actual negation was distasteful
to him, the lad found himself constantly moved

to indignation, bordering on disgust, by the
expressions of cynicism which seemed to him
little less than blasphemous. There were
utterances to which Reuben gave vent only in
the presence of his son. How could Godfrey
tell his father that he saw and resented the
satiric intention with which these speeches were
barbed, and that it seemed to him occasionally
as if the words betrayed inconceivable heartlessness?
And how could Reuben tell Godfrey
that he considered his self-communing to
be ridiculous, and that his son's meaningless
scruples roused his risibility.

The men were so divided from each other
in spirit that an outsider might have indulged
in hilarity at the absurdity, and the utter hopelessness
of their attempting to understand one
another. Reuben had at times a faint and
somewhat sorrowful perception of the fact
that there was a far-away look in his son's
eyes, as if he were miles away from him. For
there were a thousand ideas and sensations
familiar to Godfrey at which Reuben would
have sneered had he attempted to speak of them.

s2

As to the older man's own religion, Fichte
might have said of it, cas gar night existirte.
But though he prided himself on the possession
of a certain number of ideas to which he adhered
with the tenacity of a genius in business —
driven like hard nails into his granite head —
he was secretly pleased to feel himself eclipsed
by the more brilliant qualities of the youth.
It even struck him as quite the proper thing
that Godfrey should devote a certain portion
of his time to the study of church music. All
such fancies would have been antipathetic to
Reuben, but then he had an undefined idea
that benevolent schemes and religious theories
were somehow characteristic of the upper
stratum of society, and that to take a part
in these unpractical notions would fit the
piece of Parian marble which he prided himself
on having produced, for taking its place on an
upper shelf where it could be regarded with
admiration. Yet his pride in the superiority
of the article which he had turned out did not
make him patient with some of the new and
startling opinions on the most burning political

questions of the day, which came naturally to
a young combatant fresh from an atmosphere
of keen debate.

The older man, who had been almost de-naturalised
by long expatriation, did not
trouble himself to fight under any particular
political banner, or to help in the solution of any
of these questions. Yet he winced when Godfrey
exclaimed, one morning,

'Yes, we are of the people. I am proud of
belonging to the people. I have a better excuse
for loving them and working for them because
I belong to them.'

Sheer astonishment seemed to take away
Reuben's breath. He stared in utter amazement
as his son continued,

You know I do not care to be a large landowner,
but, if I am to have responsibilities of
this kind by-and-by, the sooner I get some sort
of knowledge about farming the better.'

Reuben's face was an utter blank for the next
few moments. His jaw dropped as he was
slowly taking in the idea, that — whilst he, withall
the partiality of a mother, had been bent on

raising his son, and priding himself on his completeness
in education, appearance, and demeanour
— the lad was determined to depreciate his
own market value.

Humbug he said, impatiently ; ' they are
some o' them — these others — born in the mud
and doomed to live in the mud — like reptiles as
relish the shiny ooze and can't wriggle their
tails out o' it. But you — to talk like that —
why, I slaved and toiled for you or ever you
were born — and you to talk of yourself as if
you were a common farmer.'

'Ah, I have no doubt. One can see that
some strong desire must have acted upon you
to make you work with a dozen times the
energy of the average man. The energy was
admirable — I envy it. But I reproach myself
for letting you work in such a way for me.'

4 Why not? there are two classes of chaps —
the chaps who work and the chaps who don't
work, but just sit down and sun themselves
like kings. I always intended ye to belong to
the idle uns:

Thanks,' said Godfrey, repressing his inclination

to betray his scorn. (It seemed to
him impossible to conceive anything much
more prosaic or contemptible than the role
which his father had so kindly assigned to
him.) 'I fear the toiling has hitherto been on
one side. I was just telling you that I reproached
myself for leaving St. Anne's in something
very like ill-favour, because I had done none of
the things which were expected of me '

'A fact to be proud of,' said Reuben, slapping
him on the back. ' I sent you there to be amongst
gentlemen, not to be drenched with learning. A
vicious thing that cramming — your Shakespeare
and Burns didn't cram. Why, the ancients
were for drawing out a man, and the moderns
all for putting into him. I heard that saying'
when I was a boy, but I had precious little
Greek and Latin to spoil my English.'

That's true. I was going on to say that I
didn't take a sufficiently good degree to go to
the Bar, and I should not like the responsibility
of being a doctor, but that — I ought not to lie
quite fallow, and leave you all the laurels. It
strikes me that I might do something to help

you in business which you leave to stewards.
Other men have taken up the vexed question of
how to help the working classes.'

• As how V demanded Reuben, lapsing into
the vernacular.

Well, you tell me 1 shall probably be a
landed proprietor some day.'

A precious large one,' answered Reuben,
with glittering eyes.

A landed proprietor should know something
of agricultural progress. He should have a
scientific training which even now it may be
possible for me to get. Sometimes I think
that if we had consulted over this before, if I
had not been too young to properly understand
it, we should both have decided that the university
was not exactly the place for me to
gain my experience. Why, look at the amount
of probation which is required for either of the
learned professions, and yet, of all human occupations,
the one that stands most in need of
the safeguards of training and skill is that of
tilling the ground and feeding cattle.'

He did not intend hrs sentence to end in

bathos, as he felt it had ; nor that his father
should stand stock still and look at him as if
he were a fit inmate for a lunatic asylum. In
default of any other answer, Reuben Sell wood
began to laugh.

4 Stick to your club, my boy, and your music
and kickshaws. Some of us were born to bethe
working-bees, and the rest to be worked for
and sit quiet.'

1 The club may be all very well in its way ; I
am for the free expression and ventilation of
opinion,' muttered Godfrey to himself, as a
vision floated before his eyes of the highly
respectable Torringmoor club to which he had
just been duly elected, with all its wonderfully
fine decorations, and the newspapers — dailies,
weeklies, and monthlies — with what they said
repeated in a heavier way by the quarterlies.
I should like to have a free library in Torring-
moor, and a lecture-room for working-men,' he
said, aloud ; ' the sooner we get them the
better.'

It is doubtful what Reuben's answer might
have been, for at that moment the con sensation

was interrupted by cries of distress, and
at a little distance one of the gardeners could
be seen, apparently out of breath, and dragging
a terror-stricken, ragged urchin, who had been
trespassing on the property, and who held
something huddled up in a basket close to his
face.

The boy was followed by a tiny, round-eyed,
wide-mouthed girl, who trotted after him
as rapidly as her legs could carry her, and who
was howling as loudly as her lungs would allow
her to howl. Both children had a wretched,
ill-fed appearance, with shrivelled skins and
thin limbs, instead of being healthy country
children.

'I tell my gardeners to frighten the brats
when they find 'em trespassing here,' said
Reuben, in explanation to Godfrey, to whom
the sight seemed to have given a shock, as if
he were roused out of his usual listlessness by
a discord which came into sharp collision with
his theories about the future, and his dream-world.


I thought I understood you to say,' he faltered,

in a low voice, as be placed his hand on
his father's arm, i that — this place would belonged
me — some day?'

'Well, what of that?'

1 It's nonsense about the place really belonging
to me, if the poor can have no right of way
in it. And look — he has been filling his basket
with nothing but a few harmless flowers ; perhaps
there is a sick mother at home, and he
wants to cheer her with them. It is not such
a very terrible offence.'

A flash of expression lit Reuben's usually
impassive lace, which was gone as instantly as
it appeared. Was it a revelation of something
concealed even from his son — the same ' something
' which made Godfrey often wonder why
a chance word or look should make his father
fire-up when there seemed to be nothing to
offend him ?

Eh V he asked, as if to gain time to cover
his confusion, and conscious of the altered tone
in his own voice. 'I told the gardeners to
make an exception if ever a poor brat wanted
a flower. Eh? but don't you think I am a

d — d fool to be so weak about flowers ? There
were folks in ray day who would have belaboured
that young un till he could scarcely
stand — it was scant mercy then. All they
wanted was to rid the world of such vermin,
and then pretend they had performed a service
to humanity. I knew a boy once — ' he commenced,
looking before him as if he had forgotten
the presence of his son. And then he
suddenly pulled himself up, as if he had changed
his mind about repeating a story.

What were you going to tell me ? You
knew a boy once — V said Godfrey, after a
pause, in a puzzled undertone.

'Nothing. I shouldn't think of boring you
with an idle story. Tales do for old women,' he
said, looking after the retreating child, who was
making good his escape.

'Ah, to be sure,' answered his son, with that
wideness of assent which relieved him from the
necessity of pressing for further details. He
stood stroking his upper lip, deep in thought,
while he watched his father's face with a

curious mixture of fanciful speculation — consisting
at once of attraction and repulsion, fear and
pity, trust and distrust — and the sense of something
like a shadow falling on him as he stood
in the sunlight.

He drew a long breath as he asked himself,


What could the antecedents have been
which led to that expression on Reuben's face,
something like the look of a fag turned into a
bully V

It was true that there was a widening gulf of
silence and unsociability opening more and more
between them. Reuben's secrets, whatever they
might be, were locked and double-locked in
his own breast, and Godfrey had no cabalistic
spell.

Neither of the two was communicative.
Reuben gave instructions to the gardeners tolet
the child be free of the place and help himself
to a few flowers, much to the astonishment
of the gardeners ; and Godfrey, knowing
nothing of Reuben's queer fit of indulgence,

made a point of finding out the name of the boy
and visiting him at his own cottage to give
him a present of money. It was Godfrey's first
experience of the miserable state of the peasantry
in that part of shire. But he became
less interested in mediaeval details and in
sketching the scenery of the neighbourhood
and the artistic contours of the Hall, now that
he awoke to the fact of Reuben's tyranny.

If flunk edom is worse than seldom, surely
plutocracy is more insufferable than aristocracy.'
thought the young man, with a shiver to
himself.

For many of his father's notions were absurd
and superannuated, and yet — as familiarity
without much expansion increased by degrees on
either side — it became daily more evident that
Reuben could not bear a syllable of contradiction.
Though he knew little about politics, he would
have liked to have had to settle Ireland or any
given number of countries in his own way, but
his measures would have been drastic. He was
acutely conscious of the deficiencies of those
untrained masses of the people, from whom he

boasted he had risen. He adopted a style of
conviction on all possible subjects which was
galling to the younger and more impulsive
mind of his son — a conviction too pronounced
for the trimming of practical politics. He had
tested his own faculties in a varied school, and
had a contempt for those of his neighbours.
He had no charitable tolerance for contrary
beings, and no rhetorical blandishments to deck
the sternness of his views.

1 This chap of mine will be riding a hobby to
death," he said, when Godfrey propounded a
few of those notions which his father considered
to be utterly subversive and destructive to
society. f I don't want to encourage paupers,
vaunting their rags and sores, but the men who
can raise themselves. If there was any of the
right sort of stuff in them, they would cease to
be paupers. Wait till you are a public man
before you take up these sort of questions.'

I don't want to be a public man,' laughed
Godfrey in reply. ' What is it to be a public
man ? To run a chance of having your name
placarded against a wall and bespattered with

abuse in a daily paper, to have to meet your
greatest enemy at a dinner, or hear yourself
railed at by your opposite neighbour in a railway
carnage. No, I prefer to do things in a
smaller way.'

And then he attempted in vain to speak to
his father of failing harvests, and the heavy
losses of the poorer people.

1 There are some landlords who pay more
attention to their partridges than their fellowmen,
but you at least should know better,' he
tried to say.

The words had little effect upon Reuben, but
unconsciously he was softened. Perhaps it
was the effect of Godfrey's violin music, with
its infinite variety of passion and pathos, which
Reuben had always professed to scorn, but to
which he had listened lately, unknown t3 the
performer, in an adjacent room.

Godfrey thought little of his own performance
as that of an amateur. But the instrument
formed a vent for the passionate artistic
fervour which the younger man concealed asa
rule from others, and combined with other

ideas of his own which were often unformed.
He could scarcely have existed himself without
music. But he would have wondered greatly
if he could have known that when he sang a
favourite song from Handel's ' Samson ' his
father's attention was singularly arrested.

Honour and arms scorn such a foe,'

Eeuben hummed, in imitation of Godfrey's bass
runs and trills, when he was alone,

Though I could end thee at a blow,
Poor victory !

Vanquish a foe that is half slain ,
So mean a triumph I disdain.'

How was it that Reuben could not get this

special stanza out of his head ! ' Poor victory !'

It rang in his ears in the intervals of his sleep.

It haunted him when he looked at the turrets

of the Hall.

Honour and arms scorn such a foe,
Poor victory !

To conquer thee,
Or glory in thine overthrow.'

Ah, I have it he said to himself one morning,
when, at the sights a youthful figure in
VOL. I. T

deep mourning flitting up the avenue of beech
trees which led into Rashleigh Park, a whimsical
solution occurred to him of his difficulty.
4 1 shall triumph still — and yet the sleeping
dogs will be let lie.'

CHAPTER VI.

In process of time the two neighbours became
acquainted. The acquaintance was in fact
inevitable as their grounds 'adjoined each
other, and it became necessary that certain
little matters should be settled which were
from time to time cropping up, and which Sir
Ralph was not rich enough to be able to entrust,
as he otherwise might have done, to the
management of a solicitor.

There was a picturesque little wooden bridge
joining the two estates, which Reuben with
characteristic effrontery had ordered to be pulled
down. The estates still remained 8 two ' in
the eyes of the world, especially as Reuben had
commenced building the wall which he had

t 2

threatened, regardless of the fact that the
noise was annoying to the baronet. Yet it was
an open secret that the large number of mortgages
on the Rashleigh demesne had somehow
fallen into the hands of the interloper who had
purchased the place vulgarly called Broad-meads,
with a Philistine smack about its very
title.

But a portion of the old property was still
intact. And, when it became a nice question of
law as to whether the new-comer could claim a
right of way for himself and for his people over
the somewhat venerable bridge, it seemed the
easiest way of settling the matter to order the
bridge — that stood on the portion of ground
which Reuben had purchased, but which his
servants might not use without so much discord
— to be pulled down. It was removed in
the dead of the night by Reuben's orders, and
there were tears of resentment and fury in the
baronet's eyes as he recognised his inability to
punish the offender. For, whenever it was
possible to adopt a high-handed course, the
owner of Broadmeads did so. A direct appeal

to him would have been useless, had the baronet
been able to conquer his pride sufficiently to
make it.

Yet in the course of the dispute, which was
conducted with as little outward show of antagonism
as possible, the two men met for the
first time, Sir Ralph, with circles round his eyes
and wrinkles caused by anxiety, apparently
the elder of the two.

He — having led a retired life, and having
thought it right, early in his career, to make a
sort of protest by relinquishing the hunting-field
and other healthful pursuits of which his
father had been so fond — had become more or
less a valetudinarian. His aquiline-featured,
clean-shaven face was never free from the pallor
of sickliness, and he looked with some secret-envy
at the better braced and more muscular
frame of the stranger. Ralph — who was unsocial
even to people of his own rank, and who
was accustomed to look down on anything
which took the form of exchange and barter — in
his heart cursed the fate that obliged him to
condescend to have business talks with his

neighbour, or that disturbed the peaceful life
in which, previous to the death of his father,
he had been more or less successful in keeping
disagreeable facts from his recollection.

Sir Ralph was, as the people of Torriugmoor
expressed it, a ' high-tempered ' man. His
father had been high-tempered before him, and
it was somehow considered that to be high-tempered
savoured of aristocracy. The temper, in
this case, extended itself even to the beautiful
collie-dog which constantly accompanied Sir
Ralph, and which had the family habit of barking
at people whom his master did not favour.
The meeting with such a fellow as Reuben Sell-wood
— who seemed to be the visible embodiment
of all his troubles, and whose very presence interfered
with Sir Ralph's sedulous avoidance of
anything like exposure of the family vicissitudes
which might come before the public — could
not fail to be annoying to Ralph.

He had still the house and many acres of
fine pasture-land to fall back upon, but the very
appearance of this wily neighbour, who had
established himself so close to him that he

might continually sting him like a gadfly, was
a reminder that a large part of the old property
had been sold, and that the mansion which had
been named by the ridiculous title of 'Broad-meads
' — as if those who built it had gloried in
their prosperity — was actually built upon the
land which had belonged for centuries to his
forefathers. Sir Ralph's proud and distinguished
head — well poised on his shoulders — was
held a little more stiffly than usual in spite of
his delicate health when he met the plebeian.

Reuben laughed in his sleeve. What did the
other man's petty pretences signify? Plebeian
as he was, he had already become his creditor.
He already possessed three quarters of the land
which had originally been owned by the Rash-weighs,
and he had sworn to become possessor
of the other quarter.

The interview was an amusing one. It was
a case of Greek meeting Greek. If Sir Ralph
was proud, his antagonist was equally so, and,
though it was easy to condemn the latter as a
1 born cad,' it appeared that cads were no more
free than aristocrats from the ' glorious fault of

angels and of gods.' It would have been better
policy for Sir Ralph to restrain that ' high
temper ' which was reputed to be an equally
glorious heritage handed down to him from a
long line of ancestors. He made many, but
somewhat ineffectual, efforts to do so. For
Reuben's blue eyes were cold as steel, expressing
the strength of a will against which the other
man's passionate insolence would prove weak
as clouds of spray perpetually dashing themselves
against an iron coast.

He spoke little, availing himself on these
occasions of a certain number of formulas which
he had become accustomed to repeat. He
uttered them in a deep voice, with a careful,
monotonous intonation, guarding against too
great a freedom of speech, and keeping his
adversary at a distance.

In every respect Reuben had the best of
it. One might have said that he — having
become used to restraining his own temper for
his own purposes — betrayed more than once by
a humorous twinkle of the eye his consciousness
that the more irritable baronet was proving, by

this very evident manifestation of the old Adam
from which he had sprung, his knowledge that
both were, after all, descended from a common
stock.

By degrees Sir Ralph grew less irascible as
the other proved a skilful strategist. Everything
which Reuben answered seemed perfectly
natural, except a chance expression to which he
gave utterance, as both men stood together in
the grounds of Rashleigh Park where their appointment
had been made, Sir Ralph being determined
on this occasion not to invite the
new-comer to walk into his house.

It used not to have so much moss about it,
surely,' Reuben had said, as he gazed at the
old grey pile of buildings which looked picturesque
and beautiful as in a fairy-tale in the
evening light, with its stones stained by lichen
and rain into every variety of tint.

1 Used not to V asked Ralph, looking at him
sharply. 'I did not know you had ever seen
it before.'

One would think I had seen it before answered
Reuben, righting himself instantly ; ' but

the fact is, since I have come back to the old
country, I have had a hankering after old buildings
of this sort, and, when you have seen one,
it is like seeing a lot of them.'

Oh ! I heard you caught at the adjoining-estate
directly it was put up to auction. A
man of your sort can appreciate the historical
interest belonging to places of this sort,'
answered Sir Ralph, a little mollified.

Reuben nodded.

Well, and you have also a geometric eye, and
your own theory about natural frontiers ; but I
shall keep what came to me from my ancestors.'

It was not my fault ; the theory was — I had
the best advice — Mr. '

'I can do without lawyers

i I also. Lawyers are not much in my way.
I am a square man, and I only get on with
people who are square like myself. Peace is
the best thing in the world, still to have peace
I must first establish my rights,' said Reuben,
firmly.

The baronet winced. Here was a man outspoken,
but not so vulgar as he had anticipated,

a man who was so uncommunicative that no
one knew the full extent of his fortune ; a man
who had him to a certain extent in his power,
but whose actions might be less hard than his
threats. Square enough he looked, without
the appearance of being fagged-out — whatever
he had gone through in his life — with shoulders
big enough to carry the Alps, if not the world.
Whilst Sir Kalph himself had felt for a long time
as if the machine were wearing out, and began
to require rest. Might it not be to his interest
to conciliate the unknown Atlas ?

It's a tine old place — none better in the
country he said, with a sigh, and yet with
that sort of secret satisfaction which a man
always has when he hears a thing praised that
is nearest to his heart.

1 Humph !' answered Reuben, speaking a
little slowly, as if he were well aware that
the sting of each of his words would penetrate
through the armour in which the aristocrat had
encased himself — * requires a lot of money to
keep it up, so I've heard say. That's the worst
of these old places.'

Sir Ralph drew himself up ; but that his sensitive
pride had been Abounded was proved by
his face changing colour. He shut himself in
too continually with his books and the old
pictures to have any mask of sunburn like that
which Reuben had brought from over the seas,
to help him to dissemble his emotions.

It was one of Sellwood's maxims to abstain
from pushing a triumph to its utmost, and
never to gather grapes till they were ripe. But
on this occasion the temptation of regularly
rousing the temper of the other, who prided
himself on his dignity, proved to be too much
for him.

And, as if it was pleasant to see that his
neighbour winced, he continued,

You should go over to America or New
Zealand, you people whose fortunes in the old
country are going to rags. You could lead a
patriarchal life there, feeding your sheep and
oxen. Xo come-down in that.'

Sir Ralph's unwholesome-looking complexion
was pink like that of a woman at what he supposed
to be the coarseness of the taunt. If the

baronet could have given orders to his butler
(one man-servant with that title — a sort of
survival of grandeur — had sufficed since Sir
George's death to clean the boots, and do work
of all sorts except that which fell to the coachman
and gardener) to kick the fellow out of his
grounds, his rage would scarcely have been
satisfied. But, in the midst of his ire, he was
forced to remember that he was in this wretch's
power, and that to be summoned by him for
assault, to say nothing of worse possibilities,
would not improve matters with the people at
Torringmoor. He made a feeble attempt at
meeting him with what he supposed to be his
own weapons, and said, with an unamiable smile,

Certainly — no come-down in that, if, as
report says, Torringmoor ought to be pleased
to acknowledge that — that you '

I know that all sorts of reports are about,
but by what right, sir,' asked Reuben, apparently
not discomposed — for, to do him justice, he
had intended no allusion to injure Sir Ralph's
self-respect — ' by what right do people meddle
with what I do not care to reveal V

And by what right,' roared the baronet, ' do
people venture to discuss my private affairs.
You and your financial successes are nothing
to me. It is a sheer piece of impertinence for
anyone to venture to allude to my difficulties.'

Again the mask of sunburn, with which kindly
Nature still veiled Reuben's countenance, stood
him in good stead, as, making a greater effort
to conceal the testiness which might otherwise
have betrayed itself in his voice, he answered
with a shrug,

Ah, as to that, I meant to make a suggestion
which might stand you in good stead. I
thought with the free air around us we might
talk like men. Prejudices you must have — you
have a lot of them, no doubt — but my right is
as clear as possible, and I might have been able
to put something before you which would have
been to your advantage, still '

He broke off with a meaning shrug, as if —
though it was about the longest speech which
he had been known to make since he came to
Broadmeads — it was not in his power to make it
longer.

The shrug, however, was better than rhetoric,
and the manner in which he turned on his heel,
leaving the fuming baronet to admit that he
had made a fool of himself, more eloquent still.

• So the jackass thought I was going to pour
out the story of my life into his long ears,' he
chuckled to himself, as he reached his own
grounds, ' not so fast : perhaps, when our interests
are identical, he may hear a good deal
w T which will make his ass's ears tingle.'

CHAPTER VII.

June roses were blowing on the walls of the
cottages at Torringmoor. Tall white lilies with
golden centres and waxen petals were growing
in the cottage gardens, in singular contrast
with the blazing ribbon-like adornment of the
bedding-out system which had been adopted in
the conventional flower-beds at Broadmeads.
Whilst beyond on the blue moor the river rippled
merrily over the mossy stones. Cattle were
grazing in the lowlands, and labourers were
slouching home from their work in the evening
light, as Reuben — who in his secret heart cared
no more than Godfrey for the buhl cabinets,
inlaid tables, tall mirrors, and elaborate curtains

with which the upholsterer had told him
it was proper to adorn his new house — crept
out into the lanes and fields which surrounded
his park.

The sun was setting in clouds of purple and
amethyst as Reuben left behind him the great
iron gates. Absorbed in his own thoughts, and
feeling no necessity when he found himself
alone for keeping up that appearance of stolidity
which he did not generally allow himself to
drop even in the presence of his son, the man
hurried along, his head bent upon his shoulders,
and his eyes cast down. Now and then he
glanced at the wild flowers, which seemed
mysteriously to bring back the dead past, and
to be associated in an odd way with that which
he tried to think was the triumphant and prosperous
present. There was the ' gypsy rose,' the
1 ragged robin,' the ' clematis,' the 4 moon daisy,'
the ' monkshood,' and there the blossoms were
just coming into bud which he remembered used
to be vulgarly called 'kiss-me-quick.' It was
astonishing how much in his secret heart he
agreed with his son in preferring these simple

VOL. I. U

things with the good old-fashioned names to all
the wonders accomplished by horticultural art
which he had left behind him at Broadmeads.

The sunset, though beautiful in colour, had
been stormy, and now the clouds increased and
rain was threatening. The wind began to blow
coldly over the desolate moor, but the wind was
not more bitter than his own miserable thoughts,
much as he was inclined to take praise to himself
for the new scheme suggested to him by Handel's
music — a compromise which would still
allow him to keep up the unforgiving spirit
that could not dwell with love. He was
bitter at the acknowledgment which he was
compelled to make to himself, that regions and
regions of separate existence — with ideas that he
could not fathom and motives which he had no
means of proving — lay between him and the
only creature on earth for whom he cared.

He was inclined to curse the fate which
brought his boy no nearer to him in reality —
for, though the lad might prove too dutiful to
leave him, there was always an uncomfortable
gulf between them. It did not occur to him to

reflect that an abyss of black nothingness, from
which he might shrink back appalled could it
be revealed to him, lay yet between his own
spirit aud that of the Eternal Father. Strange
thoughts were stirring in him, born possibly of
that music which reveals yearnings so little
understood in the hearts of the worst of us. And
Reuben did not consider himself by any means
the worst. He prided himself on his heroic endurance,
on the fact that through a course of years
he had grown a hard skin over wounds on
which, at Godfrey's age, he would not have
been able to endure a touch. Misfortune had
been to him, as it is to many of us, no sweetener
of the temper. He had passed through terrible
suffering — all the more terrible that it had
been quiet ; but it had left its mark upon him.
Few would have guessed that he had been
through any ordeal. The people who met him
in an ordinary way respected him as a reticent,
but keen, business man, whose opinion on many
subjects might be valuable, but credited him
with no sentiment beyond a recollection of his
adventures.

u2

I care about as much for the lot of 'em as I
cared about the opossums,' he said, with a
bitter laugh, when he met any of these people,
telling himself for the hundredth time that he
hated his own kind, and that the exception in
Godfrey's case was because the boy was all his
own — flesh of his flesh and bone of his bone —
and yet, by some cruel trick of Fate, in heart
and brain divided from him.

I'll meet Sir Ralph in his own way ; I couldn't
propose to him the other thing. After all,
perhaps it 'ud be, as the music said, a poorish
victory,' he thought, as he found his way, as if
by instinct in the fading light, to the path
over the heath which led to Torringmoor.

Much of the way was bare and lonely, with
no stars to illumine it, and only a vaporous,
watery-looking moon gazing down upon him,
with pale, cold face, as he sauntered on. He
loitered once by the river, where the perfume
of the meadow-sweet and the penny-royal
seemed to bring back some of those recollections
which are so strangely associated with
the sense of smell. And then, with a muttered

curse at his own absurdity, he hurried on till
he came to a little ruined cottage closely adjoining
the moor, and not more than a mile
from the gates of his estate. A funny old
cottage, which was a very enlivening sight,
naked and miserable, but with traces of former
occupation still to be seen in a poor little iron
gate which swung open by the ruined wall, and
was half eaten through with rust. More than one
visitor to Torringmoor had asked why they did
not pull it down, and begin building on the
site a line of villas — as had been proposed by
one of the more stirring inhabitants of the
place. But there it stood, windowless and
doorless, with the four winds of heaven blowing
through its broken thatch, and birds
building their nests in one corner of the
broken chimney.

A town-councillor who was asked to account
for this eyesore generally laughed and shrugged
his shoulders. If it pleased that lavish gentleman
who had come to live at Broadmeads to
offer a sum which would almost beggar other
people for ' this bit of a ruined barn,' just as

folks were intending to put up the land for
auction, it was really, as he answered, ' no business
of his ;' the new owner of Broadmeads had
either lost his head in his covetousness for
every spare bit of land which he seemed to
make a rule of buying up, or he wished to
astonish folks with one of the showy vagaries
of a millionaire. All that the Broadmeads
Town-council knew was that one day they
received a letter from Reuben Sellwood, saying
that, as his son was a 'bit of an amateur artist,'
and had a fancy for sketching all sorts of queer
places, he would buy up the cottage and the
piece of land on which it stood. Of course
they asked a ' fancy ' price, which Mr. Sell-wood
readily paid. He never said anything
more about it, but the good people of Torring-
moor would certainly have thought he was
crazed, if they could have known that he came
pretty often to gaze at the cranky thing by
moonlight.

They would have said, as you, my good,
critical reader, will probably say, that it was
not consistent with character. But the perfect

consistency of a ' character role 'sto borrow an
expression from our continental neighbours — is
somehow the rarest thing in the world. If an
outsider can predicate the actions of nine
people out of ten, he is likely to be utterly at
sea when he comes to the tenth. I do not
pretend to moralise on this infinite variety of
human nature.

But whatever of tenderness, pathos, sin, or
suffering lay in the past history of this man —
who had so far succeeded in eradicating from
his heart the mystery which lies hid in all of us,
that he was classed amongst the most prosaic of
the matter-of-fact — welled up in his memory and
imagination now. He seemed to hear again
the song of the nightingale which had once
come to soothe the agony of a weary sufferer
on a bed of pain, and must have chanted from
some trees that once grew on the very spot
on which he stood.

No twitter of birds disturbed the solitude
now. It was as quiet as if pains, toils, and
passions had never been enacted in it, — quiet
as the burying-ground of the poor which Reuben

visited as stealthily afterwards, where a
mound, no longer distinguishable from those
which surrounded it, might have reminded him
of the pathetic ending of all heart-burnings,
revenges, and sorrows. But Reuben gained
nothing from the story of rest which might
have been preached to him by that mouldering
earth. He was thinking again of his son
who was so superior to the common ruck of
men — he must be careful not to jar on him.
But the plan which he had to propose was
no cruel one — it was benevolent — it would
approve itself to everyone, he told himself, ashe
returned by the familiar paths past the
gorse and the heather, and past the quietly
rippling river to the roadside, where the
great laurel-trees which he had planted on
his own estate, backed by a fir plantation,
loomed darkly in the night air.

There is no time like the present. I
shall catch him in now, and if any soul on
earth has a right to tackle him, I have,' he
had been saying to himself more than once, ashe
had been walking across the heath.

He bad hitherto been too skilful a strategist
to intrude himself on Sir Ralph's solitude. But
matters bad come to a crisis now, and he smiled
a little grimly to himself as he walked on
a little further, and handed in what he scornfully
called his £ nonsensical pasteboard ' to the
shabbily-dressed butler at Eashleigh Hall. He
knew perfectly well that this would be about
the time when Sir Ralph would have finished
his dinner, and when he would be sitting moodily
over his wine — if indeed his circumstances
had not compelled him to make a virtue of
necessity, and join that teetotal movement
which, as Reuben said cynically to himself, was
now the cream of the fashion since so many
bishops and grandees had joined its

Why, he may even run a chance of having
his portrait figuring in the most popular reviews,
and may take the chair as president at
the what-d'ye-call-it — Social Science Congress,
and all because he hadn't enough tin to spare
for the stocking of his cellar,' chuckled Reuben
to himself, as the man-servant went in with his
card, knowing perfectly well that — however his

neighbour's intrusion might rouse Sir Ralph's
temper — the latter would not dare to refuse himself
to him. Had not the baronet been compelled
to borrow the offered loan of his money, when
creditors had pressed upon him so heavily, that
the question of whether he should avail himself
of the accommodation or not had been one which
no longer brooked weighing in the balance 1

The baronet's pride compelled him to allude
to the circumstance as he invited in the unwelcome
guest, who — in the softened light of
the candles which left dark shadows in the
great room — could not help admiring the old
oak side-board, carved with the arms of the
Rashleigh family, and still seeming to tell of
former splendours. It was in keeping with the
equally old massive chairs, and the spare figure,
with its worn face of somewhat ascetic expression,
which sat, as Reuben had expected, alone
at the head of the frugal board.

Reuben's eyes wandered to the corners of
the ancient banqueting-room where there was
still the faded tapestry and the damaged old
family portraits. The place could have told secrets
had it been in a communicative mood. He

bad beard descriptions of it by Mrs. Rose, though
be bad never set foot in it before. What bad
become of the great china bowls wbicb bad
been so long in the family, and wbicb bad
apparently gone the way of all flesh, as if they
bad made up their minds that they bad lived
long enough ? Had they gone the same way
as the grand old clock wbicb one oftheRash-
leigbs w r as said to bave brought from Bruges,
with figures which used to come from bidden
places and make their obeisance whenever
an hour was struck 1 There was a pretence in
the family that the new baronet's greyhound
had knocked down many of the articles of virtu.
Certainly they had vanished one by one, but it
would bave increased Sir Ralph's iciness, which
was worse than bis occasional fits of irritability,
if Vere herself had dared to hint that he had
been compelled to part with them.

This little fiction of maintaining the dignity
of the family was perfectly understood by ibis
niece. It kept her reticent, courageous, and
accustomed to exert herself, forgetting herself
in others, and ready to hide her own great unselfishness,

which was ever present as a hidden
force behind her restrained feelings.

I was charmed to oblige ye with the loan
that ye required,' said Reuben, slowly, after he
had gazed his fill, with a nod which contrasted
somewhat oddly with the stiff, aristocratic
bow.

'Without disobliging yourself?' Sir Ralph
said, slowly. ' My friend, if I judge you rightly,
you are not the man to do things impulsively.
You have some motive for parting withall
this money? You are too shrewd a fellow
to throw it away.'

Sir Ralph, who had been brooding over the
matter for some days, had at least as good a
comprehension of Reuben's character as Reuben
had himself.

Oh, a good bargain pleases two people
answered the latter, in no way abashed ; " I
don't see why all this should make any difference
'twixt you and me.'

His perfect self-assurance, and the easy way
in which he added, f I don't see why you and
me should quarrel,' acted as a moral stiffen er

upon Sir Ralph, who, sitting bolt upright and
speaking much as one of Holbein's portraits, if
it had been suddenly transformed into life,
might be expected to speak, said,

1 Let us come to business? Do you propose
to pay yourself by taking my whole estate V

1 To put it plainly, I don't see why our interests
shouldn't run together.'

Sir Ralph raised his eyebrows. To his way
of thinking, there was but one line of demarcation
in the world which signified very much
that between the man who had a grandfather
and the man who had none. Now, so far as he
had heard, the impudent creditor who had
forced himself into his presence had not even a
father, and yet he had the cool insolence to
speak of their interests as identical. Sir Ralph
was a little afraid of the self-made man, nevertheless.
Was he not in his power 1 And,
though the sherry was poor enough which stood
before him on the table, he was so far from
openly resenting Reuben's speech that he
saidi

A glass of wine with you ' adhering to

an old custom.

In real truth, I'm downright sorry for ye,'
said Reuben, a few moments afterwards, balancing
the wine-glass, which he forced himself
by way of compliment to empty, between his
fingers, 'but you couldn't tide over such difficulties.
It wasn't you who got into them, but
you found them made for you — that's the long
and short of it.'

The situation was created for me,' answered
Sir Ralph, with a chilling smile.

It w T as evident that he was now fairly subdued
in temper, and saw that there was nothing
to be gained by recrimination.

i Yes, and 1 don't see how you can flounder
out o' it. It'll take a deal to build up the
fortunes of this house, but you will not find
me a hard-fisted creditor. Indeed, on one consideration
— but I don't know how exactly to
expound it to ye

'Proceed,' said the baronet, haughtily, 'I am
ready to listen.'

'But I may shock your prejudices.'

Prejudices cost us dear. Poor people have
no business with them.'

You have old-fashioned opinions.'

Do you think so ? You may be mistaken,
and opinions are not prejudices.'

'According to my way of thinking, folks
must move a little bit with the times. If you
don't keep pace with them, you'll be left out o'
the running'"

'Ah, that's your system of ethics. I admit
the altered conditions said Sir Ralph, growing
if possible more erect and poker-like, as he
looked opposite at the rich man sitting on his
easiest chair, boasting of his prospects, and repeating
his crude theories. The state of things
at Rashleigh must be altered indeed, or else it
must all be a hideous nightmare.

'Good!'

Reuben's eyes gleamed. He was evidently
labouring under some excitement which made
his hand a little unsteady and his breathing
audible.

'Good,' he repeated. f l see it is possible
we may agree better than I expected. Our
interests, as I said, may end by being the same.
I have money enough for both.'

If you have, you needn't brag about it,' muttered
Sir Ralph, a little huffily.

'• No, I say share and share alike. I don't
want to harm ye. Why shouldn't we befriends?
He dropped his voice—his agitation
had evidently increased. ' On one consideration
it is possible I may defer all claim.'

And that V said the baronet, whose heart was
beating more loudly than he cared to admit.

1 You have a niece like a Hebe ' (Reuben pronounced
it Heed). ' Now, why shouldn't she
become the so-called " angel" which every young
woman may be to a young fellow fond o' poetry,
just fresh from his University training', and why
shouldn't the two together promise to look
after the interests of your own little lass? Keep
the estate together and share alike, no one
the wiser.'

The absolute pain which could no longer be
concealed made it impossible for Sir Ralph to
answer, as the full tide of recollection — of the
ignominy of poverty, and the humiliation to
which this niece, confided to his care in infancy,
had already been subjected — rushed back upon

him. He waved the impudent intruder into
silence with a gesture that seemed to say,
4 Why do you profane my private griefs V

But Reuben's ardour to propound his scheme
and his consciousness that he himself had
emerged from social twilight, and had passed —
not only that shadowy line which, in the eyes of
the Torringmoor folk, divided the retail trader
from the wholesale merchant, but the further
line of demarcation which separated the wholesale
merchant from the large capitalist — made
him answer, w T with equal pride,

And if 1 mention that I have a son, it will
be fair to say that he in no way resembles
myself, but is in appearance, education, breeding
— in everything of which you could think —
a fit match for the daughter of a queen.'

The reserve and hauteur of the one man had
been rivalled by the high tone adopted by the
other. Yet Sir Ralph's hard breathing, and the
way in which he stared at the speaker, seemed
to intimate that Reuben had committed an
offence for which it would be in vain to essay
reparation. The drops of perspiration stood in
VOL. I. X

beads upon the baronet's forehead. He had no
great appreciation of the finer qualities of Vere's
character, but as she was still his niece, and the
daughter of the elder brother of the house, it
had been an offence to mention her name in a
talk like this. To think that the sight of Vere
should have touched the heart of an old myso-
gynist, for Reuben was a professed woman-hater,
was in itself insufferable to him. Why
had he not managed to send the girl away from
home : why should he be compelled to submit to
such an indignity ?

Impossible,' he said, when he was able to
speak. ' You do not even know ray niece.'

Oh, don't trouble about that,' answered
Reuben, with a vague sense of disappointment
at the cold scrutiny of the baronet's gaze.
I've heard a lot o' the lass, and ha' had mere
than one peep at her, and it 'ud go against me
if she was to be left unprovided-for.'

And he rubbed his hands together with a
pleasant glow of generosity which was quite a
new sensation to him.

Sir Ralph groaned. It was as if a bombshell

Lad fallen at his feet. He had preserved his
dignity sufficiently to prevent his start from
being noticeable. But he was no longer erect
and poker-like. His cheeks and brow were
flushed.

'Disreputable!' he muttered, beneath his
breath. And then, clutching his chair with
both his hands, he smiled blandly into Reuben's
face, recognising that the more he betrayed his
mortification or showed any excitement of feeling
the calmer would his inquisitor become, and
the more inexorable in tightening the torture-screw.


You had better think of it he said, as he
rose to leave. It seemed to him that the advantage
of the proposal might be supposed to
be on his side.

Give me some days for reflection — the thing
strikes me as so extraordinary — so foreign to
our English customs. I think you have no
right to propose anything of the kind. "Why
bring my niece's name into the question V

1 1 wish her nothing but good. I wouldn't
hurt a hair of her pretty head if it were ever so.

It's not as if she'd have to many my lad
straight off the reel. Give 'em time, that's
what I say ; it's my belief they were made for
each other.'

Sir Ralph winced as if from a physical blow,
and then remembered that ruin and misery, not
to say starvation and humiliation, seemed to
stare him in the face, and that the critical
emergency could no longer be tided over.

1 If only the man were a gentleman, and not
such a horrible cad.'

He shook hands with him, nevertheless, trying
to master the indignation and astonishment
which were still betrayed by his eyes.

1 It means thousands — I might almost say
millions. There are folk who talk against
money — braying like asses a meaningless bray
when they forget all that it has done to
benefit the human race. It means in this case
that I shall be set free from the curse of my
wearing anxieties — free to feel the pure air of
heaven blowing round me again without any of
those carling cares he said to himself, sitting
still for hours after Reuben had left him.

Whilst Mr. Sellwood — well pleased with his
evening's work, and with unruffled features
which told of nothing that had taken place —
had endured to be dismissed with a royal
1 Leave me,' was walking home with a conviction
that his banishment could not last
long.

END OF THE FIRST VOLUME.

VOL. II.

PART III.

CHAPTER Vii

Reuben was so little given to analysing his
own thoughts that he could not calculate the
effect of the announcement of his new project
upon that much greater mystery — the mind of
his sou. Yet he was so pleased with himself
when a satisfactory letter arrived a few days
afterwards from Sir Ralph that he could not
resist immediately beating about the bush by
drawing the conversation confidentially in the
direction of women, considerably to Godfrey's
mystification. For whatever weaknesses his
father might have had in the past,, he had

b2

always supposed him to be free from a tendency
to foolish adulation of the fairer sex.
Indeed, Reuben had more than once given him
to understand that his own experiences amongst
women had been singularly unfortunate, and
that he had never known more than two in his
whole life who were worth their salt one of
those, of course, being Godfrey's mother. He
had seemed to have no heart for women, and
did not wish his life to be brightened or adorned
by them. He had more than once sarcastically
repeated the talk of the Torringmoor ladies,
showing himself implacable to their gossipping
ways, and declaring that the English women
were humbugging fools, and had too much leisure
by half in which to abuse their neighbours.
I'd set them to make shirts, or to scrub the
floors ; 'twould cure them o' tongue-wagging,'
said Reuben, with a fierceness which was singularly
ungrateful, considering that more than
one lady, with the recollection of the possibility
of a second marriage for the rich man, had been
courteous and condescending in her efforts
to please. * Depend upon it,' he had added

cynically, ' the whole pack of 'em are up to
mischief with their twaddle. Chatter, chatter,
chitter, chitter, 'tis all the time, just as if a
lot o' swallows were getting' ready for their
flight, when you have women-folk in the
house.'

Godfrey had never thought of asking where
his father had swallowed his nauseous doses of
experience, or whether this sad account was
merely theoretical. If he had been consulted,
he might have given his own opinion that the
companionship of a good and noble woman
was one of the most potent influences by which
a man might ' move upwards, working out the
beasts But he had not cared to discuss the
matter, and had been contented by the way in
which Reuben always ended his comments,
Now your mother was one as always knew
how to hold her tongue.'

The young man's surprise was therefore
great when — wishing to escape from the dinner-table
after a certain time, as was generally his
habit, that he might find his way outside, and
smoke a quiet cigar under a sky luminous with

stars — Reuben detained him, and commenced a
homily on the advantages of an early marriage.
He was still more astonished when his father
enlarged, after his own fashion, on the attractions
of a 'jewel of a girl,' whom he had seen
lately, and who had eyes like blue speedwell,
with dark pupils in them, and hair like that
described by Burns when he sang about ' the
lassie wi' the lintwhite locks.' Reuben pronounced
it ' Bur-urns ' with a triumphant roll of
the 'r,' which he had learnt from a Scotchman.

The neighbours might not have considered
him quite so matter-of-fact, if they
knew how he studied his Burns as well as his
Shakespeare.)

Would you like me to tell ye who the
wench may be?'

I do not see that it signifies,' answered
Godfrey, seating himself a little unwillingly —
feeling as if the whole thing jarred unnaturally
with his father's merciless condemnation of girls.
I was thinking — it might — be too soon — after
your dinner.'

Ah, you are a sly dog ! One would think I

had the gout chuckled Reuben, with imperturbable
good-humour, as he passed the claret
which looked rosy through the Venetian glass
of a dainty jug. ' One might suppose that you
would be interested to hear what a short distance
divides ye from such a dainty piece of
God's work. When a man has no longer any
teeth in his mouth, he outgrows the toothache.
Mine are already scarce within hail of un another,
like so many milestones. But you — in
the heyday of life -'

And the fastidious Godfrey winced as he saw
from the twinkle in his father's eyes that he
was again inclined to administer to him a thundering
slap between the shoulders.

I see,' he said, quickly, ' you are afraid that
I shall think it necessary to go through
epidemics of love-nonsense just as if I where
again to be nursed through measles and .
Don't trouble yourself. Even if
such were to be the case, reason would resume
its sway, after a period of abdication, and I
should not make myself a greater ass than
the majority of mankind.'

And yet you prate o' the poets, and write
some o' the stuff herself

No, 1 don't, but poets woo with vows that
are imaginary, and their skin-deep wounds are
healed directly they leave their scribbling.'

Reuben sat with his chin propped up on
his hand. What would happen if this 'vis
inertiae ' could not be overcome? He saw for
the first time that he had not properly calculated
on the tongue-paralysing indifference
of this young heart-whole Sir Galahad, who
did not even question him as to the whereabouts
of his phoenix. If the way in which he
had hitherto approached the subject proved to
be repugnant to his son's refined nature, what
would Godfrey's scruples be when he unfolded
his projects a little further '?

Yet Reuben prided himself on never being
defeated. He suddenly made a false move,
dictated by his energy and his semi-despair.
Pulling a distended-looking purse from his
pocket, he commenced eagerly counting out a
heap of notes ; and, pushing them towards his
son, he said.

you have odd ideas of your own. You
should spend money a little more. What is it
you would like ? New horses ? new books ? a
shooting-box ? a journey to Home ? more pictures
? you've but to ask and have.'

Thank you for your kind intentions,' said
Godfrey, colouring violently, 'but I am loaded
with so many good things already that it
seems to me sometimes I can hardly breathe
under them. I have enough of everything and
to spare. It is a hot-bed of idleness as it is. I
did not ask for such luxuries — you mean them
kindly. But cannot you put yourself in my
place ? I might be as eager as you were if I
were just setting out in life with a vista of possible
wealth opening before me, but now '

flies dislike of wounding other ]people's feelings
restrained him suddenly in his speech.
He could not tell his father that he had no
sense of elevation in inheriting his wealth , and
that it was with self-mockery that he consented
to sit still and do nothing.

Of course I don't expect to launch out in a
grand scale on my own account, neither should

I like it he said, more quietly, with the involuntary
flush still lingering on his cheeks, and
not without a sense of humour, which sometimes
in these encounters stood him in good
stead.

There was a certain independence about his
attitude, as he sat with his legs crossed, his
arms folded, and his head a little thrown back,
that alarmed his father and determined him at
once to make the necessary plunge.

Do you know why I wished ye to stay and
talk about this to-night ? Can't you guess V
I want you to think about marrying — soon.'

There was a silence. Godfrey was not what
is called a ready man and the aggressiveness
of his father's sudden announcement seemed to
have stupefied him.

'Surely there is no hurry,' he said, after a
pause. ' Plenty of time for that.'

Well, lad, you must think o' me. What
d'ye think I worked for, if not for the founding
of a family '^ I have been waiting to find you
the right mate.'

Confused recollections passed through Godfrey's

brain of Scott working for Abbotsford
and other like memories, which seemed to forma
comical contrast to Reuben's ambition.

In royal families it might be thought
necessary to marry, but I don't think we need
trouble about ours'' he said, a little drily.

And it's royalty, or something like it, I'm
aiming at for you.'

Godfrey could no longer control his laughter.

You talk in riddles.'

The riddles are easy to read. Blue eyes,
yellow head, straight as a larch, and one o' the
oldest families in England. A girl whose father
would have been a baronet.'

Godfrey blushed like a woman ; then a shadow
of a smile — as if his lips curled in scorn in spite
of his resolve — hovered about the lower part of
his face. Otherwise the expression was one of
intense resoluteness.

Apparently you have a purpose. Cannot I
have a purpose too ? There is something which
I don't understand between you and this neighbour
of yours.'

He sees as plainly as I do the importance of
uniting the two families.'

I wonder how he would like it, if we were
to offer a wife to him.'

Reuben laughed now, rather a coarse, loud
laugh, which brought the blood again into his
son's face. The elder man meant nothing by
it. The education on the one side and the want
of it on the other, made it impossible for either
of these two souls to overcome the formidable
barrier which forbade anything like free interchange
of sentiment. Reuben knew nothing of
the chivalrous feeling in Godfrey's heart which
disturbed his quiet self-possession, and made
him hotly indignant that such a compromise
could be even named.

Excuse me. It seems to me that you are
taking advantage of this man ; for what purpose
1 cannot conceive.'

'I am doing him a good turn.'

'And an ill turn to his niece. Excuse me
again, but it seems to me that a girl's name
should not be brought into this matter.'

Her uncle can answer for her.'

I am truly obliged to him.

She is in love with the money, poor girl said

Godfrey, in an aside to himself. ' Pity she can't
have it to pay the family debts. But to offer
her the money hampered with an encumbrance
no.' He said aloud, a little stifHy, ' I am
sorry I cannot please you. Sir Ralph would
hardly wish me to make a victim of his niece.'

He remembered with a fresh pang of repugnance,
even as he made the remark, that the
supposed ' victims ' in nine cases out of ten,
where money is concerned, are ready to sacrifice
themselves, and fully to appreciate the
advantages of an unlimited income, including
unlimited accounts at the jeweller's and the
milliner's. The girl who could consent to a
compact of this kind would be of a type which
he hated. Nothing should induce him to marry
her.

'You are mistaken about Sir Ralph'' said
Reuben, hoarsely, and Godfrey began to be
sorry for the look of disappointment in his
father's face. 'A duck couldn't take to the
water more quickly than he has taken to the
idea o' you young ones making it up between

ye.'

I am afraid I am not fit for such high " mating,"
as you call it,' answered Godfrey, with
scarcely veiled scorn in his voice. ' Bold women
who take readily to the o^ole of modern Iphigenia
to please impecunious uncles have too
much tragi-comedy about them for me. I
would rather give my love to some simple, lowborn
girl.'

When you see her, you'll pipe another tune.'
Not unless you spill some love-philtre over
me to rob me of my senses. 1 to be the one to
find the money, and my wife to bring with her
fine ways and old blood ! I have no desire to
spoil the compactness of the Kashleigh family
tree ! Really, it is time such ideas about marriage
should have exploded!'

I have set my mind on it,' said his father,
still more huskily. ' I give you notice that m7/
son can only marry so.'

No — now — you are making the thing ridiculous
! You can't get people to marry in this
country by driving them to it. It may be
different in France, but I am told the thing is
becoming less common even there — quite the

*delphi Theatre" style of thing. You are
playing us a practical joke,' said Godfrey, ashe
attempted a wry smile.

The intimation of my wishes cannot be looked
upon as '

As coercion — certainly not ; no one dreamed
of such a monstrosity. I reserve the privilege
of doing as I please with my own life. Of
course you would not wish me to take the
matter seriously added the lad, with an effort
which made him for the first time really awkward
both in manner and in speech. He bent
down his head, that his father should not seethe
hot colour coming and going on his cheeks,
and then — not waiting for further parley — he
escaped abruptly into the darkness, and stood
alone beneath the starlit sky, drawing long
breaths, as if they were necessary to him, of
the fresh, pure night air.

CHAPTER IX.

It was not often that Godfrey lingered with
his sketching materials in his father's grounds.
He preferred the stirring breezes which swept
over the moor, with the sense of space conveyed
by its receding distances. Many a time had he
tried to dash-in with full brush the masses of
wild and flying cloud — in ranges first of all
compact, tier under tier, and then with their
valves suddenly opening, pouring out tender
mists amidst golden glimpses of sunshine.
Aristophanes did well, Godfrey used to say,
laughingly, to exhibit his philosopher in a
basket in the clouds, though Socrates showed
that he knew nothing about art when he inquired
ironically if people could gain anything

bj contemplation of the heavens, and if they
could make cloud and sunshine whenever they
pleased.

But on the morning after his conversation
with his father he seemed to be out of tune
for philosophising on the moors, and sought in
preference one of those retired nooks still to be
found in the out-of-the-way corners of Reuben's
estate where Nature had been left to her own
vagaries, simply because the landscape gardeners
were for once at a loss as to how to
improve her.' The spot had been called the
wilderness ' when it had belonged to the
Rashleighs. There was a sound of Vater in
it like that which you hear in Switzerland.
For little rivulets travelling for miles over
hills and moor, through ravines and dingles,
past woods and mossy stones, gurgling and
chattering as they went, had here found for
themselves a level in the lake which Reuben
had talked of draining. It would be a difficult
and expensive matter to drain it, involving the
damming up of numerous smaller ducts ; for the
little streams, which looked brown and green

VOL. II. C

under the overhanging foliage, came rushing
in collected force to the lake, shooting over
smooth masses of stone, or creeping in narrow,
pebbly passages.

Next to the wildness of the open moor,
Godfrey loved this bowery enclosure, with its
dancing leaf-shadows and stem-shadows, as
here and there a sunbeam forced its way
through the tangled branches of fir, larch,
beech, or oak, and glittered in sparkles of
emerald and topaz on the embroiled surface
of the stream. The water itself, with its ever-moving
fringes of creamy foam, and its endless
variety of detail and colour, had alternately
fascinated Godfrey, and driven him to despair
in the attempts which he had made more than
once to represent it with its reflections, its
shadows, its curves, and its dimples, its ripples,
and its lines of light.

I am nothing but a ridiculous dilettante,' he
said to himself, puffing at his cigar as if in
contempt of his own absurdity, as once more
he set himself to study the rich colours and
individual forms which had baffled him before.

*It really doesn't much matter, as I don't mean
to show the daub to any creature on earth.'

But, after a few minutes of intense application,
the very outline seemed to mock him, to
say nothing of the witchery of colour that
lurked in the brown earth-banks, the old roots
curiously twisted the play of sunbeams on the
stones, and the miracle of multitudinous leafage
overhead. He had been so little accustomed
to persevere with anything lately that he soon
threw down his brush with a sigh of impatience
at what he condemned as his own impotence.

^I don't need anyone to tell me I am not a
Turner,' he muttered, as he drew out another
piece of paper, and this time began lazily pencilling
the tufts of feathery grass and the petals
of the elegantly-bending forget-me-nots, of the
colour which the Chinese ceramic artists have
introduced into their vases — calling it '.'
The forget-me-nots, with the waving grass
and the purple thrum, which hung over the surface
of the water, and the dainty ferns, which
had found root-room either on mossy tablets of
rock, earthy ledges, or the wider bank, occur

2

pied him for the next quarter of an hour.
'Ah, the buds of the forget-me-nots are distinctly
pink,' he said to himself. Then, in another fit of
self-mockery he added, *I wonder how humanity
will be benefited by my testing of that discovery
— for the observation is not even mine — I
don't know that any observation or any special
talent is mine, except a genius for drifting and
letting my chances go by. However, it seems
as if it will be all the same, whether I spend my
time in smoking tobacco, playing billiards, or
cramming up science. Whatever happens, it
appears that I belong to Broadmeads, to be
treated generously or meanly as if I were a
sort of human skittle. I can't roll away from
the property, whether I love it or hate it.
There is only one comfort, that T belong to the
people, written, as some one says, with a capital
P — why, I can't claim the originating even of
that feeble joke — but if this property comes tome
I will not be a selfish wretch about it, a sort
of slaveholders as my father will be, emancipating
the blacks and treading down the whites —
I will break through Oh — h — h !'

Godfrey's father would have used some
stronger expletive. But the lad had been
brought np in an atmosphere in which swearing
is considered ungentlemanly, and his fastidious
nature loathed the habit as contemptible and
vulgar. Yet he suddenly manifested certain
signs of uneasiness dropping the cigar — which
he still held in the fingers of his left hand, having
allowed it to go out again after having
taken the trouble to light it — and trying to
make his dimensions as small as possible that he
might hide himself without changing his position
beneath the branches of a spreading beech-tree.
He was disconcerted when he found that
six feet of flesh and blood were not so easily
packed into small compass.

They will see me to a certainty,' he reflected.
And to a shy man, who had meant to enjoy the
pleasures of solitude, the reflection, to say the
least of it, was disconcerting. For by the
margin of the stream, just where an oblique
band of sunlight was slanting across the path,
came tripping a bright-eyed, dark-haired child —
a child so graceful and yet so tiny in the per-feet

proportions of her little figure that through
the dim medium of the overshadowing trees it
might have been possible to mistake her for a
spirit rather than a child, so ethereal and intangible
Alas the sudden apparition. The
immaterial idea which Godfrey had first of all
connected with the little creature was further
carried out by a picturesque style of dress
which suited her fantastic beauty A wreath
of briony had been wound round her curly
locks. A bunch of roses had been arranged on
her light muslin dress. She carried her hat
as a basket which Alas filled with wild-flowers.

Oh, if Millais could paint that picture, it
would add another to his unique portrait-gallery
of children — some of the few faithful and
original Avorks Which the age has produced,'
thought the amateur artist, as his eye followed
the dancing, elf-like little one.

If the child had been alone, it might have
been possible to make friends With her, or to
coax her to let him murder her beauty on spoilt
paper. But there, apparently, was the governess.

*A lady, certainly,' reflected Godfrey, not

using the word in its liberal and catholic sense,
as he would have used it had there been occasion
, even to a woman at the washing-tub, but
unconsciously in its narrower, more conventional
sense. A lady, yes, a perfect gentlewoman
— clear-eyed, clear-skinned, straight-waited,
straight-stepping, looking quietly before
her with her passionless, guileless eyes,
not the least disconcerted by the sight of himself,
or at the thought of — did she know it ? —
that she was trespassing.

But then her dress ! The theory of the
age had not yet been defined as 'Darwinism
tempered with La FoUetJ But Godfrey had
been brought too often into contact with girls
who could dress ridiculously not to see that
there was something queer and shabby in
this girl's attire. He had witnessed the apotheosis
of the Dolly Warden, if not of the princess
robe, and had had in his short life just sufficient
experience of the * girl of the period' — who
had a knack of asserting herself not only by
her talk but by her love of personal adornment
to see that there was something odd in the

washed-out cotton dress, large, ribbonless, flapping
bat, and cotton gloves of this young lady.
Doubtless, she must be one of those strong-minded
people whose greatness of soul had
taught her that it would be impossible to look
heroic in frills and furbelows, and that it was
more easy to invest a faded cotton-gown with
mystery and romance.

She might be Tennyson's gardener's daughter
— her colouring was beautiful enough for the
part. He was not so sure about the expression
of the face; she was probably one of the
women who talk philosophy and go-in for
examinations. Well, after all, that was a move
in the right direction — sure to be a little exaggerated,
like all reactions, at first, but better,
all things considered, than the curate-worshipping
girl, who had only one type of male
perfection, or the modern Venus who painted
her face and pinched her waist.

Godfrey thought it his duty to rise. He would
have to do the polite to this little child, who, with
her governess, had wandered into his father's
grounds. It was not much in his way. He

bad never yet been en rapport with anyone
of the sex, and, not baying a mother or sisters,
was never quite sure that be bad said the
right thing when he addressed one of Eve's
daughters.

But, before he emerged from bis partial concealment,
the child had slipped past bim and
was kneeling down by the lake, while the
elder girl followed slowly, not deigning to
turn her head to look at Godfrey, a flush on
her cheek being the only sign that she was
aware of his proximity.

Leave the flowers alone, Dot ; they look so
pretty where they are. And I am afraid the
grass is too damp for you to float your paper
boats,' she said, as she followed the child, and
raised her from an attitude which would be
sure to spoil her frock.

A few minutes before, Godfrey had been unreasonably
irritated at the discovery that his
lazy delight in that lullaby of waters and twittering
of birds was to be somewhat interfered
with. But there was something in that woman's
voice which brought the first brightness

of a spring day with it, and reminded him of
the warbling of his favourite songsters. He
forgot the deep shadows on the water, the
air spicy with the aromatic odours from the
trees, the penetrating perfume of the meadowsweet,
and began to meditate about that voice.

'Now, if I were ever to write a novel, I
should talk stuff about a voice, I knows I should.
They all do it ad nauseam. But this is certainly
a very curious, unusual type of voice —
power in it, and yet, elle est hen femme, as
the French say. I wonder whether it means
anything at all. Not, " What's in a name ?"
but what's in a voice?' he said, exasperated
again in a most inconsistent way by a feeling
that this girl was altogether ignoring his
presence.

He raised himself slowly — a little languidly
and lazily — for he knew that it was one of
Eeuben's crotchets to wage war with trespassers
on his own domain. He always considered it
desirable, whenever it was possible to do so,
to avoid bandying words with his father, and
yet, in a matter which involved politeness to

a lady, Le would be ready to vindicate bis own
quixotic cbivaby.

'Allow me,' be said, coming forward and
raising bis bat. ' Tbe flowers are just near
enough to the water to make it scarcely safe
for ber to reach them. And as to floating
paper boats, they will be all swamped, if series
to do it for herself. It will be quite easy
for me to help ber.'

Tbe young lady, whose face bad attracted
bini the moment before, returned ibis
bow with — was it possible ? — a look of unwillingness.
It was as if a shadow bad suddenly
fallen on ber, as sbe fixed ber beautiful eyes
on bim, almost as if sbe did not see bim, but
was looking through bim and beyond bim,
thinking out some train of thought.

Godfrey's pale cheek flushed.

Thanks,' sbe said, a little coldly. And be,
gazing still at ber face, saw a dignity wbicb
was unexpected in it, and wbicb somehow made
bim ill at ease. ' Thank you for your kind
offer, but Ave bave no need of the forget-me-nots.'


And before the young man could get over
the impression of being thoroughly and unmistakably
snubbed, and that by a lady who was
trespassing in his own grounds, and to whom
he had intended to be polite, she had called
again, with a slight trembling in her voice
owing to some agitation which he did not
understand,

Dot, come here when I tell you, or I shall be
angry. Leave the forget-me-nots, naughty
child, or I must come and fetch you.'

Perhaps it was the unusual imperiousness of
tone which jarred upon the nerves of an evidently
spoiled child. But the little one, far
from moving, stamped her foot with an angry
gesture, pointing at the flowers with her
forefinger, her pretty face convulsed with
passion.

Pray allow me,' said Godfrey again, ' she
has evidently set her mind on those forget-me-nots,
it will be so easy to get them for her.'

And, before she had time to expostulate,
Godfrey — who could no more endure to see a
child's pretty features transformed with rage,

than he could hear of details in the controversy
about vivisection — was wading two or three
feet deep in the muddy water, regardless of his
polished boots and one of Poole's best-fitting
suits. He returned with his hands filled with the
forget-me-nots, golden moneywort, and purple
thrum.

Dot held out her arms for them, but he shook
his head.

No, they will soil your pretty dress. I am
sure your governess will kindly carry them.' For
she whom he called the governess had now come
up to them, and he had time again to remark
her splendid physique, the healthiness of her
cheek, the well-poised head, and the elastic
movements of her limbs — showing that she
had been brought up in no hot-house atmosphere.


A daughter of the people — and how superior
to the sluggish creatures with gaslit colouring,
who are so languid in their movements and
whose veins are so ill-fed with blood that they
can only talk affectedly,' he was thinking to
himself admiringly, as he said, holding the

flowers out of the child's reach and smiling at
the older girl,

You will take them for her,, I am sure. The
stalks are not dirty — only a little weet.'

'And they will not soil my dress. Oh, yes, I
will take them,' she answered, with a smile
which began in her eyes, but seemed scarcely
to have reached her lips, before her little
charge, with new and unreasonable wrath —
puckering her small forehead into fresh furrows
— cried, in shrill anger,
She is not my governess.'
Caprice, thy name is woman, ' thought
Godfrey, with wide open eyes, ' what have I
done to offend them now, that they are ready
to put out thorns again like a pair of porcupines
f

I am sure wee are very much obliged to
you,' said Vere, as she held out her hand for
the flowers. ' And it is quite true — I do — teach
my cousin.'

Oh !' — disconcerted, he scarcely knew why —
for he was one who believed in the dignity of
labour, and thought that a gentlewoman was no

less truly a gentlewoman because she made nse
of her talents to serve her generation. ' This
is surely the proudest woman in the world,
but it is tomfoolery for her to be mortally
hurt because I took her for a governess,' he
said to himself. And then aloud, with the
usual untruthfulness which is supposed to elevate
educated people in matters of courtesy
above the plain-speaking of savages,

I am sorry. I beg a thousand pardons.'

'What for? Because I teach my little cousin
V she said, so simply and straightforwardly
that he could scarcely have a suspicion that
she was laughing at him when she looked so
innocent. 'I can't say I can't grasp your
meaning.'

Meanwhile he had been carefully wiping the
flowers with his white pocket-handkerchief,
and was about to hand them to her before he
answered, when a new and unaccountable
change came over the little creature who still
stood as if planted by the lake.

She had been listening to the few words
which had passed, fixing a pair of bright,

keen eyes first on Godfrey, and then on her
own companion — surveying them both as if she
were a little person accustomed to comprehensive
criticism, and determined to detect why
her cousin had held back with an involuntary
horror of meeting some one when she had that
morning suggested that they should float paper
boats in the old lake. Suddenly she seemed
to have found the clue ; for, with authority,
she stretched out her little arm, and shouted,
not a whit mollified by her cousin's entreating
looks,

Go away, naughty man ; you had no right
to come here and steal my papa's pretty
places.'

Godfrey was silent and annoyed. Plis cheeks
became aflame as a new light broke in upon
him. And his confusion was reflected in Vere's
expressive face.

Forgive her,' she said, pleadingly, ' the
story is common property; she must have
heard other people talk about it — and, you
know, they will put their own colouring on
things. We should not have ventured here,

had I known that we should intrude upon
you.'

He still held the flowers.

Spare me she said, ' and keep them. Oh
I do think the child is right ! What would
your father say if he knew that we, of all people
in the world, had robbed him of his flowers ?
There is said to be a passion for possessing
things in your family.'

You are pleased to be sarcastic. I daresay
it is excellent discipline for me to find that
people can be rough on me for offences committed
before I was born. But really you
might soften the heart of your little cousin, and
persuade her to take the things which caused
me some amount of inconvenience to pick.'

It was Vere's turn to blush. She had intended
to preserve a strict incognita, but the child's
exclamation had deprived her of her prudence,
and now — it was her own fault — she had put
herself in the wrong.

I did not mean to be impolite. Oh ! you
can give her the flowers; they will not hurt
her frock. It was washed at home, and I

VOL. II. D

I ironed it myself. I claresa}^ you think
me proud, but I have enough to make
me humble. I cannot even afford to sit still
and listen, day after day, to my uncle's forebodings.
I promised her mother on her deathbed
that Dorothy at least should be properly
cared for, and always look nice.'

There was suppressed passion in the speech,
and he interpreted it correctly as less of a
confidence than uttered in heat and pain , and
aimed in some way at himself.

If I might presume to offer sympathy — ' he
began, impulsively.

How can you offer it ? You are a perfect
stranger,' she answered, regaining her calmness,
and smiling at him as if she had been
accustomed to smile at people all her life. ' I
know you mean kindly. You can give Dot the
flowers, and that will be quite what they call
romantic'

We are neighbours more than strangers,' he
continued, speaking rapidly, determined not to
be left 'out in the cold' in this fashion, and
therefore ignoring the somewhat stiff little bow

"which she was beginning to make to him in
token of farewell. '1 was just going to say
that it is nonsense about forebodings. Why in
the world should an earthquake come to your
uncle ? Why should not the close of his life
be happier than the beginning? We have
both had some of the same misfortunes; I also

have lost a mother — and '

She checked him by a look which, for the
instant, brought back his shyness. The passing
touch of her astonishment made him for the
first time discern that he had done something
unconventional. And yet, was it not her
fault? Had she not felt uncomfortable the
moment after she had unwittingly spoken of
the death of Dorothy's mother, recalling the
own mother who was more to her than a
shadow — a memory ever living, sometimes
causing her tears, sometimes brighter outlooks
to the better country further on ?

You mean kindly,' she said, once more, but
I don't like consoling speeches.'

Don't let your uncle have forebodings. I
am sure there can be no possible cause.'

D 2

You might guess that the cause of his
trouble is simple enough,' she said, ' glancing at
her dress, the plainness of which gave significance
to her speech.

Are you really one of those who think that
happiness depends on riches V

I told you I did not like consoling maxims,'
she said, a little impatiently, ' they may do to put
in books, but they won't bear pulling to pieces.
Riches do confer happiness, it is nonsense to say
they don't.'

There is a higher happiness with which I
fancy they have nothing to do.'

She answered him with raised eyebrows and
a slightly cynical shrug of the shoulders. Her
expression seemed to say, ' That is sentiment.
I should not have expected that sort of poetry
from your father's son ;' or it would be truer to
say that his sensitiveness interpreted her meaning
as such.

He bowed in his turn somewhat coldly, and
she, calling to her cousin, turned to retrace her
steps by the pathway which wound beside the
beck.

You forget,' he said, Mt is a long way round
by the bridge which leads to the fields, and just
close by there is a door that leads straight into
your park.'

Guarded by chains and bolts,' she answered
thanks to your father. Yet to-day sone of your
men left it open.'

How prejudiced you are against him ! Nothing
is easier than to undo the bolts.'

And run the risk of a lawsuit she replied,
with another bow and the air of one accustomed
to give neat little retorts.

Godfrey had had little experience of women,
except of those who fawned on him as the heir
of an immense property. He had fancied himself
' shy ' because he had been spoilt by women,
buttered,' as he would have called it, by their
flatteries. But, though this girl had seemed at
first inclined to be resentful a sort of freemasonry
which neither had been able to avoid
had already been established between them.

Oh, you are too hard on us,' he said. And
both of them laughed.

It is not until people have received a certain
amount of education, or till there is some sort
of mutual understanding that they can afford
to laugh. If we did not laugh when there is a
sort of crisis at times, there would be more
quarrelling and heart-burnings, and more
weeping philosophers. Godfrey laughed, and
Vere laughed , the former till the tears stood in
his eyes, and the laughter did something to clear
the uncomfortable atmosphere.

It is very stupid, but you know we may betaken
up for trespassers.'

You really think it '^ You really thought it
possible that you might see a coarse brute with
red face, barring your passage. My father is
not a bit like that,' said the young man, suddenly
becoming grave, and looking at her
without a sign of evasiveness in his affable
face.

*He believes it,' she thought, shaking her
head, sit will take him a long time to know
his father. His is evidently one of those sweet-tempered
natures which are too often wanting
in will. I wonder how long it will take to

shake him out of his complacency, his content.*

Aloud she said,

No, I thank you. It is not my way to ask
favours. I prefer to go by the way in which
we came, as sou are quite sure we shall not
have a bailiff after us. Tell your man not to
leave open the door again, if he does not
wish us to claim a right to come through it.'

I trust you will always claim that right.
My father pulled down the other bridge to
save disputes. But I am very sorry he did it.'

*I did not mean to intrude into your father's
private reasons. We Rashleighs are not
supposed to be versed in the secrets of your
family.'

The tone in which she answered was so decisive
that he did not speak again.

He sat down once more on the grass when
she had gone, and tried to occupy himself again
with pencilling little scraps of scenery which
might be useful to him in his studio. But that
wise passiveness ' in a man's heart which is
said to be necessary for the full revelation of
beauty had utterly deserted him for the day.

The significance taught by Wordsworth of the
simplest things, did not seem to be as real to
bim as usual. But, instead , his memory was
troubled with a couplet,

Then felt I as some watcher of the skies,
When a new planet swims into his ken.'

She likes the forget-me-nots — the child will
probably bring her again,' he said to himself,
as he closed his portfolio, determining that, in
future, modern sanitary reform should be to him
as a red rag to a bull, whenever his father
talked of draining that lake and doing away
with the wild flowers.

The prize was certainly great, but he must
move cautiously. Allowing as little as possible
for the influence of artificial distinctions, here
was a girl who was not to be easily moulded to
anyone's hand. To think of winning her by the
ordinary baits would be unutterable insanity.

'Good heavens,' he muttered to himself, 'how
I blundered ! I ought to have guessed at first
that my father was fibbing atrociously when he
talked of her as ready to fling herself at anyone's
head. I ought to have known that the

very sight of anyone of the name of Sellwood
would be likely to make her sore and miserable.
I ought to have known she was in trouble.
How atrociously cold she must have thought

me!'

CHAPTER X.

It is just a question of time as to when that
little petulant rogue, who is so determined to
have her own way, brings her cousin here again
to float her paper-boats,' said Godfrey to himself,
not ill-pleased at the idea.

He left the garden-door unlocked, forgetting
that Dot, who had shown herself so intolerant
of contradiction, and who had listened to the
conversation between himself and Vere, would
be likely to find her way alone when she chose
through the unfastened door. By his carelessness
he proved that he knew little of children.
For had he not lingered in the sleepy hollow
himself, preferring — in a new frame of mind in
which everything seemed vague and undefined

to listen to the murmur of the waters aud
the soughing of the trees, instead of amusing
himself on the more open moor, the comedy-might
have been turned into a tragedy.

He was busy as usual one morning over some
pencilled notes when a shriek, and a slight
splash like that of a big water-rat, roused
him to the discovery of the child who was in
imminent danger of drowning in the lake. It
would have been impossible to have seen Vere
to better advantage than when, with a suspicion
of moisture in her velvety eyes, she thanked
him as if he had performed an act of bravery,
for rescuing the little one with such promptitude.


'On the contrary, it was my fault that she
strayed,' answered the young man, with a
twinge of conscience.

And from this time Dorothy, instead of eyeing
him strangely, with uncomfortable insinuations
about men who were 'naughty,' liked
instead to climb on his knee, nestle her head
against his shoulder, and prattle her childish
secrets into his ear.

Then came a formal invitation from Reuben
Sellwood, begging that the young ladies would
make any use they liked of his grounds, and
more than once Vere, in her visits to the poor
in the neighbourhood was passed by Godfrey
on a thorough-bred horse which his father had
purchased for him.

*Ah, he is a sly dog,' thought Reuben, in
secret satisfaction, ' there was that horse for a
long while eating its headofi in the stable. And
now he has found out that he likes to ride. He
knows that he looks well on horseback. It is
as if he had arranged everything to make the
best impression on her. He did not care a bit
about the Torringmoor people, but now he
wants to be seen in all his glory.'

For the first time Godfrey had found someone
to whom he could talk of the stirring days
which he had spent at Oxford, and who could
value as he did all those influences which deepen
life and broaden culture. But, though he
met the cousins occasionally and had a little
talk on each occasion, Vere was charms of accepting
his father's invitation.

He could not help remembering afterwards
how it was, previous to Reuben's invitation,
that Dorothy had fancied some honeysuckle
on the opposite bank. He would never forget
the day when the child's convenient fancy had
led him to untie the old boat, which had not been
used for some time, but was chained to the
bank, and had furnished him with an excuse
for rowing the cousins until he was obliged
to admit,

We cannot go further ; there are so many
weeds. My father is right. The lake needs a
little clearing. We are already close upon the
brushwood.'

As he spoke, he gave a push with his pole
for the oar had somehow disappeared— and
there was a fresh scream from Dot, who had
curled herself up in the bottom of the boat,
and was listening to the rippling of the water.

After this, Vere refused to venture again
on the water, and he — too fearful of forgetting
himself, and showing his hand betimes,,
if he over-urged her — contented himself often
with lying on the greensward smoking, and

watching the girls at a respectful distance.
It is always a critical, if not a dangerous, thing
as persons of a match-making tendency are
very well aware — for two young people of
opposite sexes to be constantly with each
other. For they will either get to hate each
other, or to know each other too well.

Now it so turned out that Vere was the first
girl with whom Godfrey had ever exchanged
partial confidences. She was, likewise, the
first girl with whom he had come in contact
who could appreciate his dreamy ideas, and
be ready to talk a sort of poetry. She was
downright, and, on occasions, full of fun, and
yet , like himself, she had what may be called
the religious tendency to a marked degree,
without having any definite opinions about
religion. She also had her artistic theories,
and therefore was not ready to laugh at his.
She differed from other girls with whom he
bad met, in not calling Wordsworth 'an old
stupid,' and being perfectly able to appreciate
that new way of looking at the beauties of
natural scenery, which was perhaps first inaugurated

by Rousseau, but developed by our
insular poets to finer issues.

Had the match-makers left them alone, to
get to know each other without that bungling
interference which is so often fatal, a feeling
of interest, mingled with curiosity, which
both these young people began to feel for
each other, would have merged, sooner or
later, into a more tender sentiment. But
Godfrey scarcely knew whether Vere was in
jest or earnest, when she said one day, with
a new appearance of coldness,

I do not see how — when your father behaves
so strangely as he does to my uncle — it can
very well be possible for us to be friends.'

He would have resented the speech from
anyone else, but this girl had an odd way of
speaking her mind, as if she had been privileged
from her cradle. He knew that she thought
his father vulgar, and the set of people with
whom he associated at Torringmoor underbred ;
and he was a little vexed with himself for
taking it as a testimony to his own superiority,
that she could speak freely to himself not withstanding

such drawbacks. These were days
in which Reuben seemed to him a very undesirable
father, a most awkward father to
have, viewed in connection with the fifth commandment;
when he felt as if that father
was setting up a barrier between himself and
the woman in whom he was interested, by
his cruel want of refinement and the freedom
of his comments. Poor Reuben, in his radiant
eagerness, had no suspicion that he was transgressing
beyond the bounds of conventional
decorum when he exclaimed one day,

1 knew that you would take my lady's
fancy.'

'How could yon imagine that I should be
such a coxcomb as to flatter myself that any
girl could fall in love with nef answered the
young fellow, reddening and indignant.

And why not f snorted Reuben, like a warhorse
scenting the battle. ' She's none so
handsome, after all, nor so rich, that she need
set herself up.'

for heaven's sake, don't speak of it anymore.'


The determined old man would not be so
baulked of his prey, and began smoking the
large pipe which held an unusual amount of
tobacco.

The sort of beauty which she has soon
passes,' he said, after a pause, remembering
that he had the letter by him in which Sir
Ralph had promised to do his best to promote
his niece's marriage with Reuben's son,
and that there was not the slightest reason
to anticipate the possibility of Vere declining
to carry out the conditions, since, in that case.
Sir Ralph would be beggared, and he had
implicit confidence in his honour.

'Beauty is but skin-deep,' he continued,
meditating aloud. ' Now I used to be told
that the girls in Europe were like a lot of
dolls, with their heads full of sawdust.'

And no doubt you had a great curiosity to
see those marvels of civilization,' said Godfrey,
lightly, thinking it wisest to ignore his father's
other allusions.

How could he tell such a man as Reuben
that beauty seemed to him only occasional,

VOL. IT. E

never perfect, always fluctuating, but that love
continually suggested it in the features of
others, and that it need never be wholly absent
from our eyes ? Would not the old man laugh
offensively if he had the faintest idea that his
boy ' looked upon his fellow-creatures less as
bodily presences than as spirits clothed with
bodies, and that not only did he consider a
woman's physical aspect to be a correct index
of the spiritual, but that it occurred to him, at
times when his father jarred upon him, to think
of his own spirit as independent of relationship
and accident, and to wish he could be free
from the trammels caused by such ties of
blood V

He hated these constant allusions to Vere,
which ran like a vein through the elder man's
conversation. But, though the drops of perspiration
began to stand in beads on his forehead,
his unruffled features did not betray his
agitation as he answered his inquisitor,

I don't know whether Miss Rashleigh is like
a Venus or not. I only know that I have seen
a good many women, but never that sort of
woman before.'

It was a very ambiguous compliment, and
not one which Reuben understood. He understood
still less when Godfrey said, slowly,

It is a terrible thing — this lottery of marriage.
People talk as if love-making were a
passion for boys and girls, beneath the older
people, and not worthy of them. If it were so,
I would rather have nothing to do with it. I
do not know whether I can expect you to follow
me when I say that I think a great step like
this must affect our moral being to '

He stopped and cleared his throat. Had he
been a woman, he would have said, * To all
eternity.' But just as he had never talked to
his father about the stirring days at Oxford, or
discussed his friends and college tutors with
him, so the deeper matters of existence lay
untouched like an abyss between them.

I — I have a feeling,' he continued, with an
effort, ' that the wife I may choose will influence
me, not only for all time, but — but —
beyond it. I might by chance pitch on a wife
with whom my life might be led — in — in such
a way as I could wish, but there may be ninety

E 2

nine others with whom it would be a failure.
I cannot, of course, say this to the majority of
people ; they would take me for a humbug, or
perhaps a maniac'

'Maniac' seemed to Reuben to be a mild
word, as he literally gasped for breath, and
stared in astonishment at his * poet.' He
himself was accustomed to speak of the most
sacred topics as he would have spoken of Free
Trade Women's Suffrage, or any other political
matter. Nothing, in fact, tuas sacred to
him, and he blessed his stars, as he gave another
whiff at his pipe, that he at least was free from
the endless detail of this complex and worrying
civilization, in which folks were so squeamish,
and made such odd distinctions for
themselves.

Something to do with the Greek and Latin,'
he muttered to himself, with just sufficient
light upon the matter to be aware that Godfrey
showed more repugnance than enthusiasm
to his way of putting things.

In my days,' he began, in rather a surly
tone of voice, ' every Jack had his Jill ; but — '

'Ah I bates a joke,' interrupted Godfrey,
glad to catch at any straw for refuge. ' 1
thought you must be joking — it's the best way
to joke at such notions. I don't think you
would wish me to take the matter too seriously.
Really it is too absm-d for us to harp
on any idea which is so thoroughly exploded
as that of compulsory marriage.'

Why, I thought you yourself saw the
sense of the possibility of a match between '

'1l\iq possibility yes, but you can't get people
to marry in this country by driving them to it.
It is really too ridiculous.'

And why is it too ridiculous f thundered
Reuben, on his side growing angry.

Oh, because — don't you see, no people whc
have any stuff in them— men or women — could
think of simulating love — the thing would not
only be irksome, it would be disgusting.'

Both men had their blood up. There was
something of a likeness between them just then,
in spite of the way in which Reuben had disguised
his features.

'- You use strong language, young man,' said

Reuben, between his set teeth. 'Ah, you are a
man of the world because I had ye taught.
You know its customs, its false ways, better
than I do, for all you are so fastidious and
exclusive. 1 know these aristocrats, and I know
what will humiliate them. It's not so ,
even in this country, for folks who
wish to keep an estate together to join families
like the houses o' York and Lancaster. You
may stand out against me now, but you'll
have to give in.'

Godfrey winced. He could not trust himself
to answer.

*Look at your hands now cried the elder
man, stung into fiercer rage by his son's silence,
*they are the white helpless hands of a girl
who never worked for her living. I should like
just to ask you who nourished you, who educated
you ? Who paid your debts, to say nothing
of who gave you life? Ah, and after all.
you are mortified before your world by my ignorance
of its ways. And the first thing that
I ask you is to be denied — my dearest wish
disobeyed — my '

'Father r

Ah, yes, I frighten you, but you think
nothing of my wishes. ^^ Do this to please
me " has no effect on your fine feelings. But
did you ever know me give up what I had set
my heart upon ? I can tell you it has never
yet chanced to me in the course of a longish
life to be beaten in anything, and what is more
I never mean to be.'

One may defy the Fates once too often,' said
the younger man, trying to speak lightly
though the veins were swollen like whipcord
on his forehead. ' Pray, don't agitate yourself
until you know there is something really to
cause the agitation.'

It was not true that he was frightened, but
that he was humiliated to the dust by this
exhibition of blind rage in the man who had
given him being. Fortunately, however, it
takes two to make a quarrel, and Godfrey — who
had no fancy for bandying angry words, which
would only embitter feelings and discredit the
respectability of the house — rose and slipped
away quietly before his father had accomplished

bis purpose of extorting from him a promise
which might have been easy to give, but difficult
to fulfil.

CHAPTER XL

At Rashleigh Hall a conversation no less awkward
had been taking place between uncle and
niece.

Vere had been used from her babyhood to
all sorts of disagreeable surprises. Her own
anxieties ever since she had come to years
of discretion had been far-reaching, but she
had never thought of blaming her uncle for
the uncomfortable state of matters. It was
not his faulty she reflected, that he had become
accustomed to associate his niece with all the
meaner devices of household economy which
she would gladly have hidden from him. There
was no poetry about such poverty, and she
could in certain states of feeling sympathise

\vith him in wishing to ignore it and keep it at
arm's length. She was perfectly well aware
that his eyes generally rested with pleasure on
the pretty little daughter whom she managed to
dress artistically; also that he had a myth of
his own by which he attributed her own meaner
attire and the poverty-stricken appearance
of the house partially to her perverseness
and love of feminine contradiction. Therefore
a secret air of watchful interest with
which he had lately begun to look at her was
a surprise. She was afraid that it boded ill.

Her fear was not diminished when he said to
her one evening,

What pretty hair you have, my dear ! It is
a pity that you do not take more pains in
dressing it.'

I have never heard you say so before.'

It strikes me particularly lately. I have
never seen prettier

She laughed a little uncomfortably.

Why did he touch her cheek patronizingly as
if she were some domestic animal? His hand
shook a little as he did so, and she noticed

that it was growing wrinkled. His state of
something like premature old age grieved her.

A sudden pallor overspread his features,
and his lips were pressed tightly together, ashe
added,

You mustn't blame me for making the most
of your personal advantages. I am practically
a pauper. I am weary of keeping up a poor
pretence of being as well-off as my neighbours.'


It was the first time she had heard him
speak in this cynical manner about money
matters. But after all she was inclined to
welcome any stoical resolve by which he
could show that he could face inconveniences
and the changes of fortune like a man.

So she plucked up courage and answered,

If all the people about us were once for
all disabused of the false idea that the Rash-weighs
can keep up appearances, it would be
easier for everyone. I should say that the
sooner we make everyone understand it the
better.'

How was it that she could never please

him by her answers ? He winced as he said,
I suppose you would like to see the house
shut up, the servants discharged, and the
park let out in building lots?'

Not exactly that. But it seems a pity
for you to worry yourself so much about
trifles.'

Trifles,' he said, ' trifles ! Would you like
to leave the home of your ancestors ? Would
you like other eyes and other feet to desecrate
this place? I am being robbed of all that
makes life dear.'

There are other spots of earth as beautiful
she ventured, timidly. *Who can deprive us
of the right of property in that which we
admire ? We make it our own as much as if we
had paid for it in money.'

He rose and walked about the room, trembling
visibly as he did so. Then he faced her
and said, abruptly,

I am being robbed, and you do not care for
it. For me to seek a refuge or a shield in
you is, I ought to know already, worse than
useless.'

She was used to these changes of mood in
her uncle, and yet there was an anomaly in the
somewhat unusual expression of his face which
startled her. She had never trusted herself to
answer his bitter words. She could not expend
on passion or on undutiful rejoinder the
strength she had to husband for her hard everyday
struggles.

It is this upstart, — belonging to the riff-raff
who has supplanted me.'

Oh, I thought that he had helped you she
said, beneath her breath. She could not venture
to acknowledge the thought which was in
her mind, and which was somewhat hard to
stifle — how it seemed to her that her uncle was
jealous like the elder son in the parable who
forgot, in his murmuring, that all which the
Father of mankind had was his, and that, however
the younger brother might succeed , he
could not be robbed of his birthright.

She stood still as if rooted to the ground
beneath Sir Ralph's piercing gaze when he added,
abruptly,

This Sellwoodis a vulgar upstart, but he has

an unusual son. Tell me what you think of
him V

It was imaged upon her brain, as if by a sudden
flicker of light, that the conversation had
some sort of connection with Reuben's son, so
she said, hesitatingly,

Why do you ask me V

Women's brains are not suited for ' he

answered, impatiently, the rest of the sentence
being muttered to himself. ' Why do you force
me to put the matter baldly ? This chef-d'oeuvre
of perfection — Sellwood's son — I have seen him
myself — is not only remarkable but exceptional
— gifted with extraordinary talents '

Well, what does it matter what I think of
him 'i I should think it would be a good thing
not to quarrel, to — to '

'To patch up a kind of reconciliation,' he
exclaimed, with his fingers closing convulsively
over Reuben's letter. * You know well enough
that you are distressing me. You might guess
at my meaning, without obliging me to put it
vulgarly. Am I not humiliated enough? These
people wish to keep up the old estate — to join

the two families. Such things are sometimes
done. Living out of the world, as we do, you
could not even hope to many a younger son ina
good family. Our acquaintances of yesterday
have flung us aside like old gloves to-day.
That is the way in society, when you have nota
shilling to count upon. But here are people
ready to worship the very ground you tread
on. Young Sell wood will make a capital husband.
These are times of transition, when even
old families do not inquire very much into anyone's
forbears. These people are up to their
necks in gold. I have long made up ray mind
that it will be better for yon to marry a '

He had been speaking rapidly, and pacing
about as if he were a caged animal, but he had
ceased to look her in the face.

She had recovered her voice by this time.
The new surprise had shaken her a little, but
hers was the dominant nature, and she had
generally had the best of it hitherto in any
encounter of wits.

'Ah, that's your idea about marriage,' she
said, in her firmest tones. * Mine differs from

it completely, and I think my mother's would
if she had lived. Let us talk of something
else.'

You have no enjoyment in your life. You
are ground down by this miserable poverty —
you have seen nothing of life.'

Pray, don't pity me. I like my life as it is.
A life all of dressing and gaiety, with afternoon
teas squeezed in between balls and concerts,
operas and lawn-tennis parties — hurrying here
and there. I can't bear even the thought of
it.'

You don't mean to say '

'I am quite content. I don't want a husbands
'

A complexity of instincts checked her speech.

It really seems so funny she said, and then
laughed uncontrollably, till the tears came into
her eyes.

It seemed to help her to keep the indignation
from being concentrated in her voice. For she
had made a rapid induction, and reproached
herself already with a conclusion to her speech,
which had not been quite artless.

Then, dropping her voice, she added,

You must give me time to think a little. It
is so easy to be misguided, when one wishes to
please kind relations, and to do a thing which
is wrong — terribly wrong in itself — from, apparently,
a right motive.'

If so, a merciful Judge would not lay it to
your door,' the voice within her seemed to
answer, as she stood pressing her hands to her
eyes, in a very different attitude from the
compliant one in which her uncle had supposed
all young girls would let their womanly impulses
sway them. 'This — this man must have
some hold on my poor uncle — some claim —
which he has promised to forego — on a consideration
— and that consideration ' She

could get no further.

She moved her hands from her eyes, and
looked down at the faded Turkey carpet — full,
in spite of its shabbiness, of subtle gradations
of colour — and fancied she remembered to have
read somewhere that there used to be a law
which allowed debtors in old, benighted times
to offer the hands of their daughters and even

VOL. II. F

of their wives, to their creditors, and that the
creditors accepted these women in lieu of their
debt, if they were sufficiently pleasing.

I wonder if the Archaeological Society could
fix the date of the last time a woman was sold
in England?' she said to herself, with a pain
which rankled in her heart. Then aloud, and
with a sort of scorn which she could no longer
attempt to veil, she added,

Some one says that there is no such happy
life for a woman as that spent in suffering for
those she loves — that a woman can transform
self-denial into pleasure — that such suffering
ought to be a great angel to her. But it depends
on what sort. If, for instance, I were to marry
a man whom I could not tell that I could like,
and afterwards see many others who were superior
to him ; if I were to please you by joining
two families without even the pretence that I
was chosen for myself and that I was one of a
special pair of people predestined for each other
what becomes of the " 
" theory, and all the rest of those ideas V

You take away my breath cried Sir Ralph,

impatiently. ' Why express yourself so coarsely?'

I am simply thinking out the problem of
how to do my duty to you, and yet not to
stain my own conscience,' she answered, with
a pathos that grew piteous in the eyes which
could sometimes be full of fun and sometimes
of pathetic entreaty. ' I — I don't quite understand,
and I should like to ask just one other
question. If this appeal comes to you from
young Mr. Sellwood, why did he not address
me in the proper way? In matters of this
kind it is not usual to refer to such businesslike
arrangements at all.'

The question took him aback. He was not
prepared for it, and, after reflecting a minute,
parried it by another.

'You do not find him so disagreeable then,
and if '

Now it was her turn to shrink from the gaze
of the questioner. She had never prevaricated,
and did not mean to begin now, however hard
she might be driven.

'There is no occasion to talk of "ifs" at all,'
she answered, trying to be conscientious, though

f2

evasive. * But it seems to me that Mr. Sell-wood
can speak for himself, and it will be time
enough to consider the subject when he does
speak.'

He must like you — he will feel himself honoured
— he will never dream of thwarting his
father's purpose.'

Can 1 not have my purpose too f she said,
drawing herself up — and looking, as her uncle
afterwards said, as if she were Sappho and
Hepatic rolled into one — ' one cannot live with
one's eyes shut, and of course I cannot help
seeing how terribly people suffer when they
make unhappy marriages.'

On the lips of a person advanced in life such
a statement might be tolerated, but from a girl
it seemed to him to savour of worldly wisdom
and almost of arrogance.

'You are young to be already acquainted
with the miseries of life,' and the bitterness of
his tone touched her.

I have need to be acquainted with it when
you talk 'of me as if I were a bale of cotton
she cried, indignantly, suddenly forgetting her
dignity.

The day is stormy — there is a good deal of
electricity in the air, and you have a nervous
attack he answered, pleased with his diplomatic
talent * girls of twenty should have no
nerves.'

Uncle,' she said, beseechingly, and laid her
head against his shoulder, ' you will promise me
not to speak of this again.'

I will promise you not to urge you or
to force you to anything. We will do nothing
prematurely,' he replied, still confident in his
own diplomacy, and not thinking it necessary
to excuse or explain away any act of hi?.
own.

CHAPTER XII.

Sir Ralph was too much occupied with his own
anxieties to notice his niece's heavy eyelids, and
tightly-drawn lips as she appeared at the
breakfast-table on the following morning.

She escaped as soon as she could into the
wilderness in which lately she had seen a thousand
minute beauties which even Godfrey
would not have noticed. But she did not see
them now as she hurried along, hoping that
rapidity of motion would help her to calm her
thoughts.

Was it possible,' she went on crying to herself,
' possible that they should even dream of a
bargain so degrading?'

Shame had prevented her from speaking out

as she would liked to have done. She had
done little more than pull the check-string,
but now delay would give her time to regulate
matters in her own way. Her usual honest
way of looking at things had come to her assistance,
and with it a reaction of feeling which
was certainly hard upon an innocent man.
She would have liked to have been able to say
with truth that her inmost feelings were
against the match, even if Godfrey had been
desperately set on it. But a belief that a trap
had been laid with his connivance made her
wild with indignation.

On the previous evening her uncle had
spoken of thunder in the sultry atmosphere.
For a morning early in July, there was an
unusual feeling of languor — a heat as of burning
summer in the air. In the garden of Broad-meads,
which was all ablaze with flowers,
there was here and there a drone-bee, but even
the butterflies which ventured out of their
hiding-places seemed to swim languidly in the
sultry atmosphere. Far away on the moor —
glimpses of which could be seen through the

branches of the trees — the heather was already
being fired to crimson by the unusual
force of the sun, and in the early morning a
sort of luminous mist hovered over the river.
Here, even in the wilderness, there was a perceptible
weight in the air, a rippling of the
water which made one sleepy, and a lazy droop
of the leaves.

Godfrey, who was peculiarly susceptible to
all atmospheric influences, and to whom that
languid ripple of the stream had all the force
of a narcotic, roused himself at the sound of a
footstep from a dreamy trance which was overtaking
him in the midst of what he considered
to be a most unsatisfactory sketch. It was
with a feeling of self-mockery at his own weakness
and want of decision in a difficult crisis
that he also had sought the ' Wilderness,' knowing
perfectly well that, since his father had
invited Miss Eashleigh to make free use of this
portion of the property which originally belonged
to her ancestors, it had become her
favourite haunt in hot weather.

He raised his hat as he saw her in the distance,

but she gave bim a stiff, sweeping bow,
-and was passing him a few minutes afterwards
with a strange, fleeting glance, her eyes resting
on him for a moment, as if she had not thought
it worth while to go out of her path but
was scarcely aware of his presence. At that
moment the sun fell on her through an opening
between the branches, and he saw more plainly
than he had ever seen before a want of regularity
of feature which in general was not
noticeable. Her usual lovely colouring seemed
to have deserted her, and her face looked
severe in a sort of Holbein shadowlessuess.
It was as if a different coloured light had been
turned on her since he saw her last. She was
not changed, but the medium was.

'Ah! 1 might have known it,' he mattered
to himself, turning pale, in spite of a strong-effort
to conceal his annoyance. * I might have
known it. Some horrible gossip has possibly
reached her, and the disgust which she would
naturally feel would be sure to set her against
me.'

Had there not been a natural recoil of his

own heart at the first sight of her in the
distance — a recoil which, in the case of the
woman, would be a hundred times intensified?
Shame on those who had caused it !

He hesitated no longer, but, jumping up with
a ready joke, laughed,

I am spoiling paper as usual.'

She felt frightened and shaken when he
addressed her, for she likewise had felt it impossible
to decide exactly what should be her
line of action. Her heart swerved from its
regular beat, and she felt herself growing red
and tremulous as she answered,

If 1 could afibrd to buy splendid pictures, I
should feel it lost labour to be always painting
them.'

It was less the words than the tone in which
she uttered them that had to his ears a condemnatory
sound. Could it be the same voice,
the cadence of which he had first of all admired
for its bird-like tones ?

Ah ! that is the bother of having money,' he
answered, eagerly. 'Don't remind me of it;
one loses the spur to actions

Perhaps the reply was unexpected. She
acknowledged it with a regal inclination of
her head, trying to appear as indifferent as
before, but being unable to prevent a sharp
flash out of that pair of dark-blue eyes which
had never looked at him with disapprobation
before. Possibly the young fellow would rather
have seen that sign of her ill-favour than no
intimation at all that she was aware of his
presence. As it was, he continued, in low-voiced,
mock melancholy,

Don't you see that if I were to purchase
yards of pictures — as many as they have in the
Crystal Palace — I should learn more by coming
to Nature as a meek student myself. I have
made such a mess of lots of things that it comforts
me to recollect that the most dismal
failures are, after all, sometimes the path to
success.'

Sometimes,' she repeated, a little ironically.

We'll say that a turned lesson is a condition
of most people's knowledge, a path retraced
sometimes leads to a better thing — its all a
lottery about success.'

" 'Tis not in Nature to command success,

But we'll do more, Horatio, we'll deserve it,"

she quoted, with a facetious toss of her head,
but still with the air of a young woman who
speaks little to a stranger.

It was surprising what an honest intention
each had of being disagreeable to the other.
He could not help remembering, with a slight
amount of sarcasm, how — a day or two before
she had told him, more by hints than in a
direct manner, some of the little experiences of
her life, and how eagerly he had listened to the
unconscious revelation. Now he himself had a
sense of talking to her as if over a fence.

I don't know about deserving ii' he answered,
a little sadly. Some men are more conscious
of failure than others. They start with such
fine ideals and turn heart-sick when they are
none of them realised. Don't you hope sometimes
that through pain crooked things may be
made straight V

She was intending to resent his way of talking
to her as if he should dare to lay claim to
a certain proprietorship — a sort of understood

arrangement between himself and her uncle, in
which he might venture to take it all for
granted. And, to her surprise, he was only
asking a deferential question.

I forgot,' he said, ' you are too young to
have gone through any such tedious process.'

It is exceedingly kind of you she replied,
with a suspicion of laughter in her eyes, ' to
make me out to be young when there is not so
much to choose between our ages.'

She was more like her usual self with that
look of natural fun just dawning in her face,
and he drew a sigh of relief as he answered,

I meant to be most tremendously civil. It
seemed to me there was some new sort of ritual
to be observed this morning. I never studied
formalities, but possibly amongst the numerous
books which are published there may be one to
regulate etiquette between neighbours who
meet in each other's grounds.'

It is your park — it is good of you to let meuse
it.'

It was a momentary tribute to fairness which
any honest Englishwoman might wish to render,

and at the moment it occmTed to her that he
had been exceedingly polite, and that it might
be a prudent thing for her to become such good
friends with him that her uncle might see any
other arrangement to be impossible. While he
was saying to himself,

She calls me good. Good, forsooth ! What
would she say if she knew how my father has
positively insulted her by his ready-made
schemes.'

Aloud he answered,

sit is straining a point to call it mine. It
belonged to your ancestors.'

She made a gesture of impatience.

'At any rate, your presence graces it. T
never have been able to forget the first day
when I had the happiness of meeting you in
it.'

She shrugged her shoulders more impatiently
still. Indignant as she was at the idea that
love could be a bargain in which souls were to
be bartered — instead of being a blessing and a
mystery, a lightened of human woes, a helper
of human sympathy — it seemed to her as if his

last sentence bad not been invented on the
impulse of the moment, but bad been drawn
out of a store of ready-made compliments.

There was a pause. Sbe looked at bim with
a proud, burt look, and then sbe said,

Ob, this is too much ! It is all very well if
you are in fun, paying compliments to my
birth and that sort of thing. But why do you
find out this exactly this morning.'

Find out what f

But a few moments before be had made the
plunge with a sense of elation rather than
despair. And now sbe looked at bim with
an incredulous and disdainful air, contracting
herself into as small a compass as possible,
as if sbe could not bear to stand near to bim
on the same path.

Wby — 'that — the place — is graced by my
presence, and that — that — you will never forget,
and all that nonsense. Wby do you say
what you do not mean?'

^I know I made a clumsy attempt to express
my feelings. You may meet some one else
another day who will be more fluent.'

A few days ago I might have believed you
but novo ' — with a flush of indignation, and
a look of cold dismissal in her eyes — ' I know
more about it than I did yesterday.'

How so V

There was a gruff emphasis in his voice, as
unmusical as the forced tone which he had
blamed in hers. He was generally so calm
and almost languid in his manner, that there
was something constrained even in his excitement.


^ You know,' was all she would deign to
say.

I beg you to explain yourself.'

To what purpose V she asked, drily. ' Oh,
T don't like all this sort of sophistication anymore
than you do yourself ^I can't endure it.
I don't want mere glib phrases — compliments
to which I have never been used. But, if I
were to speak out, you would not like it.
There are more urgent matters for you to
attend to than listening to my explanations.
The cries of the poor — who are ground down
on this estate — might reach your ears, and,

if you are so rich, sou might help them. The
reputed landowner is my uncle, the rightful
one is your father. My uncle is powerless to
help the suffering which he is condemned to
witness. He is tied hand and foot, and not
allowed to interfere. My ancestors could do
little enough to alleviate the growing misery,
but, at any rate, they were not grasping landlords,
unfairly trying to raise the rental of
the land — not almost more cruel than slave-owners,
in considering their own profits to
such an extent as to drive the old families
off the estate. They ask mercy of your father,
and he has absolutely refused. He rules with
a rod of iron — in your interests, as I am told.'

VOL. II.

CHAPTER Xii.

Before he could draw his breath to answer her,
she was gone. The sudden passion had dismayed
herself almost as much as Godfrey. She had
been brooding on these things for weeks, and
now the fire which her musing had kindled had
suddenly flamed up, though she had thought
it well covered in. She had delivered herself
of her sentiments with curiously mixed feelings
of guiltiness, and yet of having done her duty.
She told herself that she had been right to
stop a pretence at unreal devotion which was
derogatory to her, and that she would continue
to stop it in the future, whatever it
might cost. Her natural protector her uncle,
had placed her in a false position. She was

purposeless and defenceless, and had Wildly
attempted to turn the man's thoughts in a
contrary direction. Her knowledge of his disposition
had helped her to guess that the sarcasm
with which she left him would tell upon
him more or less.

It can't be the case,' he said to himself.
My father is a partially uneducated man, like
all men who have had to make their own way
in life ; but the very fact that he has risen
would prevent him from acting like a brute.'

At the same moment the thought occurred
to him that Miss Rashleigh would not have
made the insinuation had it not contained at
least a modicum of truth, and that it was
just possible that men like his father might
be tempted to despise and tread down those
from whom they had risen, looking upon
society — as some savages do — as a struggle
for the survival of the strongest.

It will be easy for me to test the thing
myself,' he muttered — feeling for the moment
no longer like a love-sick swain, but like a man
who had talked, in high-sounding words, grand

about ideals, and had been caught by a
girl in a dereliction of duty, which was fatuous
as well as arrant. For, if his father had been
making a mistake about his mode of dealing
with his poorer neighbours, surely a word ora
hint would be sufficient to pull him up,
and it was the part of the son to give such
a hint.

'And I never took the trouble to inquire,
though all the money is to come to me,' thought
Godfrey to himself, as a hot wave of colour rose
to his cheek when he remembered that, in the
case of the boy who had been blamed forgathering
flowers, he had been told that the
child's father was an ordinary farm-labourer,
who, for the support of himself and a wife and
eight children, received about ten shillings a
week.

I am shamed by a girl. No doubt she
thinks I must be a selfish scoundrel not to inquire
if there are others in such a plight, and not
to see that such pay must be thoroughly inadequate
for the support of human beings,' he
reflected.

A couple of hours before, Godfrey bad been
speculating — as it was bis habit to speculate
about all sorts of things — as to better it
would be better to bave one's own happiness
spread out in a mild way, like gold beaten into
a leaf, over a series of Arrears, or to enjoy the
very essence of it in one period like a big nugget.
But now the thought wbicb principally
occupied bis impressionable mind was no longer
better he should be able to say, * I bave bad
my golden time of this blessing of life. I
have fulfilled some ambition, or I bave known
the truest sympathy in the love of some
faithful heart.' It was, * Would the happiness
be worth calling by that name if it
were at the expense of the misery of others ?
Shall I add one more to the lackadaisical
wretches who are whining, as Carlyle says, to
be '•bap-happy'"?'

The day was still hot and heavy when he set
out for an unusual walk of investigation among
the cottages of the labourers and the smaller
farms. Bees were still burying themselves in
the hearts of flowers and sucking the golden

nectar, whilst grasshoppers like tiny acrobats
leaped on the blades of grass. In the wilderness
a blind worm — innocuous and beautiful —
was stretching his snaky length close to the
box of paints and unfinished water-colour
sketch, which Godfrey had forgotten. He was
hurrying from cottage to cottage to detect if
possible some weak point in what had seemed
to him almost a cruel accusation of his
father.

What did he find ? My reader, I am not
going to weary you with descriptions which
might fill a book instead of a chapter. The
wages of labourers in that district varied
from eight to nine shillings a week, and
there was scarcely any space for kitchen
garden allotted with the cottages of the
tenants.

Sir Ralph Rashleigh's agent, when he could
afford to keep an agent, had always attempted
to rectify the poverty-stricken condition of
the estate by increasing the size of the large
farms on it, and by throwing into them the
plots of ground which had previously been

used as kitchen or potato gardens for the
peasantry .

By degrees, as we know, these farms had
been mortgaged and had passed into the hands
of the owner of Broadmeads. Sir Ralph had
long since ceased to keep an agent, but Reuben
Sellwood employed no less than two, who in
the opinion of his son deserved to be compared
with jackal purveyors to the hungry needs of
the king lion.

Why, when my father has so much already,
should he be continually hankering after more f
thought the young fellow, as he plodded home
that evening, fagged and sorely perplexed, a
sadder and a wiser man, but with no solution
to the riddle.

He had come to the conclusion that the
want most severely felt in the neighbourhood
was more cottages. Those which he had seen
were badly built and badly drained — built on
the mud and with rubbish scarcely better than
mud for their rickety walls. The overcrowding
was horrible, and yet, as one of the agents had
suggested, there was nothing to prevent Reuben

Sellwood from building on some of those thousands
of acres of moor or common, which
Eeuben had bought up by degrees. A small
portion of which would have served as an
admirable site for cottages. Godfrey had seen
meagre-looking, ill-fed children who could not
be fed upon milk, because milk in the larger
farms was reserved for cream and cheese, the
greater part of the better-milk being given to
the pigs.

AVhat was to be done ? Godfrey had been
occupied in teaching some of the choir boys
to sing, and had never informed himself as
to the rags which they wore under the surplices
so pleasing to look at on Sundays. He
had been so far from intending to neglect his
duties as a future landlord that he was full of
new plans about agriculture, and had intended
to open a working men's club in which it
might be possible to give the working-man
some philosophic insight into the mysteries of
the universe.

But — dreamer though he had been — he was
compelled to admit that at present he had nothing

to do with theories ; he had to keep to realities.
Civilization itself, if such realities are allowed
to continue, would soon become impossible.
On passing through one of the village slums,
Godfrey's attention had been attracted by the
dirty face of one of the lads, who looked very
different in his surplice on a Sunday, and who
formed one of a small crowd of little children
collected round a narrow doorway. He had
always fancied that this lad was sickly, and Ins
conscience smote him as, stooping under a
doorway, he passed into the interior of the
cottage, and was invited to seat himself on the
old arm-chair, w^bich served the ' gudeman,' and
was apparently the only article worthy the
name of a chair that stood on the broken stones
of the floor. Boxes and three-legged stools
seemed to suffice for the accommodation of the
other members of a large family. And on a
miserable pallet a dying woman lay groaning,
with no one to minister to her wants, or alleviate
her suffering. Godfrey, forcing himself to
conquer his distaste to the surroundings, sat
dow^u beside her, trying with his owen hands to

raise her head, while he posted an urchin in one
direction after the doctor, and another to the
village shop to purchase nourishment.

Alas ! it was but one case among many, and
this dreamer — who had pictured peasant-life to
himself as a romantic and interesting thing —
heard for the first time the details of a
modern wretchedness and degradation, in
which it seemed to him that the progress of a
thousand years had done little to raise the
condition of the labourer either mentally or
physically. His heart waxed hot within him,
and he could scarcely believe the evidence of
his senses. Not one of the members of this
household ever tasted animal food except as a
rare indulgence, and the wife had been compelled
to supply the place of the too luxurious
bakers' bread by her own rough baking of a
coarser meal.

It took a good deal to rouse Godfrey into indignant
action, but he forgot his own mortifications
as he made his way late in the evening through
the slush of unmended roads, and passed another
cottage where some sick creatures were

huddled together over the embers of a miserable
fire. It made him irritable to see the afflictions
of the people. There might be improvidence
or other hostile circumstances which accounted
for such a state of penury. But, if it were so,
they must be taught better. He was shocked
at what he had seen, and determined forthwith
to remonstrate with his father.

Where should he seek him ? Not in the
room which he had hitherto been told was to
be kept for ' business purposes and from which
Godfrey began to shrink with a new horror
of the deeds of cruelty which for the first time
he imagined had emanated from it. There had
been a sort of understanding between the
father and the son that the latter should have
nothing to do with ' business.'

This room had been built out from the main
building, so that the villagers could have access
to it through a back door opening on the common.
Reuben, who was careful to separate
anything that savoured of work from the atmosphere
of his new and luxurious home, had spent
no money on the adornment of this apartment.

It might have been a room in the backwoods
from its appearance, so bare and unfurnished
was it. At a large deal table, on which stood a
plain desk and a large glass inkstand, the agent
on certain days Alas seated — those were the
days on which the cottagers, whose rents were
not forthcoming, were summoned before him
and threatened with eviction, and when Mr.
Newton, having received directions from his
master, spoke to them in. a harsh, rasping voice,
and refused to hear the complaints of those
who said that the soil was meagre, and that only
the barest subsistence could be wrung from it.
Mr. Newton himself owned a house with four
bare matter-of-fact walls and plate glass windows
a little outside the grounds, and preserved
his dignity as an official by having a separate
entrance up a staircase, which had been made
for the purpose, to this chamber of horrors.

The very aspect of the place was distasteful to
Godfrey. He hated it as much as he hated the
agent's house. To his excited fancy, it seemed
as if there was a sinister contrast between the
velvet arm-chair in which one man, with his

eyebrows drawn together and a harsh expression
of face , was accustomed to sit in state, and
the cane-bottomed chairs, ranged in a corner
opposite, on which others were used to await
their doom. He had had an interview with Mr.
Newton, the agent, in the so-called 'business'
room, and the information gained during that
interview was certainly not reassuring.

Newton was low-browed, with small, penetrating
eyes. He himself had to toil like a
mill-horse through the weary months of the
year, and found it so hard to ensure a day's
holiday for himself or his wife and children,
that he could not be expected to have much
sympathy for the people who lived in a state of
squalor, and were exposed to a few more physical
hardships. For him as for the labourers with
whom he had to deal, there was little prospect
of rest on this side the grave. Each had to
drive the bargain which was best for himself*.
Each was a sad specimen of the hopelessness of
the lot of the ordinary working man, the few
alleviations which were to be allowed to him.
in reward for his thrift. Newton was perhaps

after all, the most to be pitied, as all the ' dirty
work ' fell to his share. And, as he repeated a
few of his experiences, it seemed to Godfrey as
if the very atmosphere of the room was impregnated
with hopeless heart-burnings, useless
strivings, and tales of despair. The pendulum
of the large clock which stood on the mantelpiece
seemed to echo the refrain of one of
Longfellow's rather hackneyed, but very popular
poems, ' For ever, never — never, for ever !'

Was it true, he asked himself with some
revulsion of feeling, that his father showed the
worst side of his nature in his treatment of the
people from whom he had risen? — true that
Reuben , who must know the misery of such a
state of things himself could be content for
these people to lead swinish, miserable, disconsolate
lives, while he and his were to fare
luxuriously, and be clothed in purple and fine
linen ?

I have something to say to you — something
rather important. Can you give me five
minutes?' he asked his father, a few days
afterwards, when he met Reuben strolling in

the grounds of Broadmeacls. ' Just a few
minutes' conversation V

Half an hour or more, if you like it, my lad
answered the elder man, somewhat pleased at
the new sign of cordiality on the part of the
younger.

He did not notice that Godfrey was pale
with mysterious fears, and that there was a
heavy-hearted look about him as he tried to
assume his usual manner, stopping every now
and then to call attention to some new beauty
in the wilder part of the park. Unconsciously
his footsteps always strayed to the older part
of the property, and he felt as if it would be
easier for him to speak on a painful subject in
this sheltered nook, with the sun gleaming
through the interstices of waving boughs
of trees, and with fern-like moss beneath his
feet, than it would have been in the fuller
light and more invigorating air which blew
keenly on the open moors, whispering to him
of hope and aspiration, and of all that was
ideal within his own mind.

Something in the expression of his face, and

the evident difficulty which he had in opening
np the conversation, led Reuben to ask,

What has gone wrong with ye ? Could ye
not tell rae as well when we meet at dinner V

Hardly, before the footmen, who are always
standing about and staring at us,' answered
Godfrey, with his impulsiveness already somewhat
dashed by the sight of the hard and impenetrable
face. ' I want to talk to you about
some of these poor wretches who seem to have
such a difficulty in keeping the wolf of something
like famine from their doors. They are
hungry, and want food. If we do nothing to
help them, it seems to rae they will be bound,
to do something to help themselves.'

'Humph,' said Reuben, surveying his son
with a long stare of bewilderment. * Who's
been a-fooling you with this overdrawn picture?
Tak' my advice. It's evident you've
not been brought up to business. Would it
not be better for you to keep to your paint-box,
and yer fiddle, and '

'My other toys,' hotly responded the young
fellow. ' No, I think that I have been wrong

to allow myself to be lumped with that half
of the world, which is so indifferent to the
struggles of the other half. I am not a child to
be content with toys.'

Ah — h,' said Reuben, giving him another
stare. It was an effective and deeply guttural
interjection, which seemed to Godfrey to imply,
Are you sure of that V

To do the father justice, he was sorry directly
he had uttered it. He had not intended to betray
the cynicism which he generally controlled
in the presence of his son. But Godfrey was
easily moved. He hated everything which approached
a scene. And the perspiration stood
on his forehead as he awoke to the thought of
how difficult it would be to keep his temper, now
that the moment had arrived when he would be
forced to put questions to his father, and expect
to have them answered. It was not only that
from his childhood he had stood in something-like
awe of this iron man — obeying him to avoid
discussion, and hedged-in by an authority
which he had occasionally hated — but he began
to wonder how he ever could have been so

VOL. II. H

carried away by his emotions as to be sanguine
enough to imagine he could accomplish any
purpose by demanding an account of his
father.

Perhaps you think it weak-minded of me to
be shocked and horrified — in an age when we
have heard so much of material advancement
and the strides of civilisation — to find human
beings living on our own estate much as they
might have lived in — in — the days of Noah.'

It was rather an anti-climax to a speech
which he had commenced a little grandly, and
it did not improve matters that Reuben laughed.

But Godfrey had avowedly a horror of rhetoric,
and continued, more quietly,

I mean that there is no sign whatever of
progress — the commonest drainage and tillage
the merest creature-comforts are wanting.'

Well, and whose fault is it V answered Reuben,
gruffly. * If they are content to live in the
mud, let 'em live in it, but let 'em remember
that they have to thank the Rashleighs for it.
Who ground 'em down in the mud, I should like
to know?'

He stopped short at the brink of his own
conclusion as he asked the question. It passed
through his mind with a grim sense of humour
that he ought to know much more about the
inequalities of human existence — with life at one
extreme and life at another practically two different
things — than this young fellow who had
been so delicately reared. No one needed less
than Reuben to have the painful features of that
struggle for existence exaggerated. He knew
little of science, and would have been a good
deal surprised if the * evolutionists ' had told him
that the same struggle went on with fearful
acuteness in the air, the water, the woods, and
even the grass. But he perfectly comprehended
that amongst human beings that process which
is described as the ' survival of the fittest,' and
which had brought himself uppermost, must
relegate others to comfortless homes and lower
conditions of life. He was not good at speaking,
and could not help being aware that the
deduction would not be so clear to his son's
mind as it was to his own, that the people in
the neighbourhood were suffering from the

h2

tyranny of successive generations of Rashleighs.
He despised them for having so long submitted
to the old regime, which imposed inequalities of
a certain kind between man and man, but at
the same time he saw no occasion to bother
himself about the vast gulf which must inevitably
exist between poverty and wealth. It was
fair that the man, who, by dint of his own
energy and labour, had struggled out of the
mud, should exact his due from the tadpoles
who remained in it, and who had made no
effort to help themselves.

Godfrey did not answer. How could he tell
his father that he not only sympathised with
the suffering creatures, but was an ardent propagandist
of new opinions against which the
old traditions, that had been thought absolute,
would have to be defended. English or Irish
people had never as yet dreamt of finding out
the use of dynamite or petroleum, but it had
dawned upon the minds of a few of the more
advanced Radicals that wealth, such as that
which Reuben had accumulated, and which he
looked upon as a means of enjoyment for his

clesceDclants, might in due time have to be
shared more or less by the people.

Well, my time is important,' said the older
man, after a pause. ' When ye're done dreaming',
I'm ready to listen. I suppose this is what
comes of all the Latin and Greek. Never mind.
I deny ye nothing. Have yon been getting' into
debt ? Are yer pockets full enough f

The allusion was unfortunate. The fact that
luxury, diverted to the production of superfluities
was depriving the people of necessaries —
was hanging like a millstone of ignominy round,
the young man's neck. He hated to be lapped
in swan's-down, and fed, as he thought, on
sugar plums, whilst others were toiling and
ground down. The thought seemed to choke
him, and make it difficult for him to find his
power of articulation.

'My allowance is too large he answered, a
little sharply. ' Make it a quarter of what it is,
and build the labourers better cottages.'

The sound of Reuben's long, low whistle was
not calculated to allay the young man's growing
irritation, nor the increasing feeling that

he wanted to get the yoke of this wealth from
his neck, and dash it, if need be, in somebody's
face.

what exaggerated nonsense you young
chaps git into your heads,' answered the father,
a little roughly. ' I tell ye, if the soil is bad,
it's their booty to make it better. But you
speak of what you don't know. How can you
as a stranger — be acquainted with the facts V
It seems to me, it becomes my duty to
acquaint myself with the facts, if — if this property
is at any time to come to me.'
Reuben laughed bitterly.
'I've told you that 1 am not responsible for
the state of the cottages. Let the curse light
on them as built them. Meanwhile, if ye want
to impress me wi' the elevation o' yer character
go , like the French princess, and feed folks
with buns.' *

Out of my allowance ? It is not charity
they want, though some of them are starving,
and one at least down with fever.'

Humbug!' retorted Reuben, with some attempt
at a sneer, though he had not the faintest

appreciation of what his sou was driving at.
Why will you put your oar into affairs which
don't concern ye V

Godfrey thought again ; this time in a state
of despair.

Was there any means by which he could
make his very different theories intelligible to
Lis father? Things which were hackneyed
platitudes to him, would be incomprehensible
paradoxes to the more untaught mind of Reuben.
At last he said, speaking slowly,

You were just now saying about these unfortunate
creatures, why couldn't they be content
to live like their forefathers, in what you
called the mud ? Their forefathers, for instance,
were accustomed to empty pails of water into
the gutters, and to let the cocks and bent
strut into their houses ; and their lives were
supposed to be undisturbed pastorals. These
people are a good deal like them, except for
the pastoral part of it — their lives seem to be
more like tragedies. 1 hate to see men who
are pinched and broken down, and who look
as if they are systematically underfed till they

have no strength to stand together ; and help
each other against the tyranny of — of the upper
classes.'

He stopped. The hatching of any sort of
eggs is supposed to require some genial warmth.
There should be an atmosphere of some sort of
sympathy, instead of freezing indifference in the
hearer. The cold expression of Reuben's face
seemed to say, * Don't meddle with me. There
is so much that is visionary and unpractical
about you 3^oung fellows, that it is only a waste
of time to listen to all your nonsense.'

He was much tempted to say, aloud, 'Fiddle-de-dee
!' but mastered himself by an effort, only
betraying his increasing vexation by the twitching
of his hands, and the restless crossing and
recrossing of his legs.

Godfrey continued, now a little hesitatingly,

'There are hundreds of acres of untilled
land, as I understand, belonging to your estate.
Why should we suffer from the effects of a
large population congested on a small area of
ground V

Then sake out Reuben,

The cottages will do well enough. I
belong to the coofimon ruck of matter-of-fact
men, and I don't understand new-fangled ideas.
As I told ye before, they are out o' your beat.
If you're a wise chap you'll stick to your own
concerns.'

Sheer desperation forced the lad to speak out
more plainly.

My facts are true enough. At least you can
allow me to acquaint myself with the details
of what it seems is some day to be my own
calling. / can't deal with men as if I where not
responsible for my dealings — and you — if — if —
your good name is spoken against, don't you
suppose that 1 suffer?' he asked, turning a
little paler and unconsciously dropping his
voice.

Then for the first time the passion and
feeling as well as the latent coarseness, which
were ordinarily concealed beneath the marble
coldness of Reuben's demeanour, burst forth,
making him dash his hand heavily on the table.

'My good name be d — d,' he cried, to his
son's astonishment. ' Do you think I should

care one jot if all the devils in hell were to
speak against me ? Go and paint your flowers
and play your fiddle, make the money, and
it is you who spend it.'

'T wish you did not make it. We should
have been happier without it.'

You think so T he said, ironically.

Yes, money is not everything.'

Then perhaps you would rather I did not
make you my heir V

Godfrey had anticipated the question, and
already his active mind had been planning
schemes of domestic economy, and thinking how
delightful it would be to combine ' plain living
and high thinking,' and to manage artistically
on a moderate income. He had always hated
his father's lavish and ostentatious expenditure
and had been secretly exasperated by unnecessary
display. But now he began quite to pity
the people who were rich and who could have
no opportunity of practising economies.

Money is not everything he tried to explain,
forgetting for the moment the feeling of
constraint which had prevented him from expounding

his schemes to one who would not
understand them. * But in this case it will enable
us to take down those cranky, tumbledown
cottages and build new ones on better
sanitary principles. I have no wish to demoralise
the people or to loosen the Lands of society
it is no part of my programme to move too
fast, but to encourage better relations between
landlords and tenants, and not to give our
neighbours stones when they have a right to
ask for bread. Let us teach them to help
themselves. Why shouldn't there be associations
of manual labourers — co-operation,, if you
like to call it so — don't lue have co-operation ?
Why shouldn't they have higher wages, and
better articles for the small amount of money
doled out as wages V

Once launched on his pet ideas, he had almost
forgotten his usual reticence of speech till he
Alas roused by a stentorian voice, which made
him instinctively put his hands to his ears and
long to remind his father that it was not necessary
for him to exert a voice of apparently
unlimited power.

What kind of man do you take fine for V cried
Reuben rising from his chair as if he found the
conversation unsupportable, and beginning with
hurried steps to parade the room. ' I don't
want you to be one of those dutiful, obedient
sons who say '* Amen " to all that their fathers
want, but I expect ye to understand that these
sort o' matters need a lot of experience — it
takes a lifetime to git it. Any fool ought to
know that money is a force, a force given to the
fellow who sweats to git it. Repose by pains
and a lot o' hard grinding work one o' us has
climbed atop o' the tree, ain't he a right to lev'
his wages for what he lev' done ? Ain't it a
good thing for such as him that there area
precious lot of idiots in the world who will
never do the thing he has done ? Every capitalist
will tell ye as business is business. Sentiment
may do for such as you. I don't say as it
mayn't be right in its way. But clap it into a
separate compartment and keep it there.'

Godfrey was silent again. His eyes were
being opened by degrees. Reuben — in desiring
to assert himself, and to force his boy back

again into that tacit submission which had
been his normal state — was unconscious of the
sting which lay hidden in his words. Was not
every man naturally a labouring animal and
Alas it fitting that the son should be so entirely
dependent on the father ? Godfrey, whose
sensibilities were so easily made to smart, and
Who had not felt the gall before was beginning
to chafe under it.

The new sensation was the more intolerable
because Reuben, in the loss of his good-humour,
had not been able to keep up the
thin veneer of social polish — for the aping of
which a good deal of reserve had been necessary
— but appeared for the first time in a new
phase of bullying coarseness.

Well,' he said, looking discontentedly at his
son's troubled face, ' we are coming to the end of
our half hour. It's a precious long five minutes.
You've had your say, and done wi it. You
may be clever enough, but your training don't
fit ye for threshing out these sort o' questions.
You don't know the world, and, natural
like, ye don't allow for the winnings of the

foxes who've got to put np with the green
grapes. How preciously happy ye ought to
be, with everything as you can think of provided
for ye. 1 have never felt like that. I've
got to wonder what it feels like.'

'Ah! there's the pity of it,' said Godfrey,
beneath his breath. * How much better it
would have been if I had been allowed to toil
for myself T

For the first time in his life he felt a sort of
indignity in the fact that he had been devoted,
as it were, to ceremonial purposes.

Why did he give me a first-class education
if his only object was to boast of it, and to
make me feel the pinch of it in not being able
to betake raj-self to any of the pursuits which
are supposed to be incompatible with the elegant
repose of a university man V he thought
to himself.

It is altogether a false position he said,
aloud, as he listened in a sort of stupor to
Reuben's surly words.

The room had seemed to grow darker as, oneby
one, his illusions had been demolished by

the pitiless blows of this ill-mannered Iconoclast.
A feeling of disgust — almost of repulsion
— seemed to be clutching like a hand at
Godfrey's throat, and rendering it impossible for
him to make any further efforts to modify the
opinions which probably nothing would ever
alter.

Humph ! I've astonished ye,' said Reuben,
seating himself in his arm-chair, and indulging
in a chuckle. ' You've been too long like that
fine Greek lady, shut up in a tower. If you'd
had to work as I have you would have known
all the ins-and-outs of business long before
this.'

Godfrey put up his hand with a movement
which was instinctive. He had no idea of
opening his heart just then to his father, but
the latter saw that he had gone too far.

'Well, never mind — it was not your fault if
you were born with the tastes of the aristocracy.'
(Reuben very rarely aspirated his
vowels, and the slip at which his son winced
was caused by his excitement.) ' You'll be as
rich as any lord among 'em.'

I wish the lords were not so rich,' was a
retort on Godfrey's tongue. Bat he checked
it, remembering how once in the Union, when
some man had ventured on such an observation,
there was a cry from the Opposition
benches, 'Rank revolution, sir,' the young
orator responding, * Revolution, sir — that is
the very thing we want.' He laughed at the
remembrance of the audacious fun, and scarcely
followed his father as the latter continued,

You'll be only young once. It is I who've
made the golden eggs, and you who'll have to
spend 'em. That'll be better than mooning
about and wasting your time on Virgil's idles.'

Virgil never wrote idylls ; perhaps you are
thinking of Theocritus?'

I thought you wanted to be like one o' his
shepherds — I read it in a translation.'

'I'm not much like a Virgilian shepherd,'
answered Godfrey, with a faint smile. 'And,
as to my poetry, you do your best to cure me
of it. The day is a long way off, I imagine,
when my ears will be gladdened with the
triumph of fame, or that "softer, social fluting "

which might perhaps cost me money. Meanwhile,
I have more than enough to spend on
myself ^

• You have more than enough echoed Reuben
opening his eyes. ' You're the first
youngster I ever heard says so. If you hang
back in that way, you'll make me think you're
in debt. Why, if you'd like to live like a
Monty what-dy'e-call it, I'd find the way tolet
you do it ! You don't go in for enough
shine," as the Spaniards have it. Be always
the best-dressed man in the place.
That reminds me, there's a new hunter as I
want ye to buy. And the carriages — it's not
much odds that we've got one already with a
couple of horses,' he continued, thinking with
some sort of gratification of the obsequious
salutations which he had received when he had
first startled the country people with his equipages
and liveries. ' I want ye to drive 
— something that will cut a splash — a
four-in-hand now? What d'ye say to that ?^
he asked, jauntily, reproaching himself for the
cloud of anxiety which was settling more and

VOL. II. I

more on the face of his sou. * From the time
you were a baby, I spared ye nothing — only
don't plague me about matters which do not
concern ye.'

At that moment Godfrey could feel almost
grateful to his father for the impassable gulf
he was digging between them. There was
something in Reuben's tone which sent a shiver
through him, and made him feel that it would
never be possible to explain that, though he
cared little about money, he had not been without
ambition — the ambition of standing high in
the opinion of his fellow-men, and of doing his
best to serve his generation. He got his temper
sufficiently under to be able to answer,

I hope I am perfectly grateful, but I
prefer my dog-cart and my horse to a four-in-hand.
I don't want to be a Monte Crista.'

Unconsciously as he spoke he put his hands
behind his back. To sweep the bank-notes
into his pocket, as he was expected to do would
be to enter into a new contract of subservience
to Reuben's will, while to refuse him would be
to irritate him to no purpose.

There is Newton. I was expecting him. I
must ask you to leave us together,' remarked
Reuben, with the first humorous expression on
his still angry face, as the sound of approaching
footsteps roused Godfrey's horror of the
agent, and made him retire with a sort of dignified
rapidity.

'Ah — I thought as much. I won't stir a
peg from my decision. He'll have to learn that
I'm master, and can put my foot down as well
as any of 'em, in spite of his poet's airs and
graces. Here a lot to complain of with his
good eating and drinking, his carriage and his
servants. It's a fine thing to have everyone
bowing down to you when you are young, to
have all the money made for you, and not to be
asked to soil a finger in working' for it — a precious
nice thing !'

i2

CHAPTER XIV.

As to the peoples of the America continent y
beginning with the Eskimo and ending with the

Terra del Fuegian, we need not say that '

A fit of coughing interrupted the reader,
which might have been accounted for by the
cloud of smoke from an old-fashioned meerschaum
which Sir Ralph was smoking. He was
leaning back lazily in the arm-chair through
which the horse-hair protruded in patches, and
Vere, who was seated at his feet with a favourite
greyhound crouching by her side, looked
picturesque enough with her fair colouring
thrown out to advantage by the faded tapestry
on the walls behind her. The tapestry had
once represented knights in hauberks of chain-mail

and ladies in wimples, but all were
indistinguishable now in consequence of
the depredations of moths and general moodiness.


She cleared her throat and began again,

We need not say that the continent was
peopled from the west by continuous immigration,
and the various tribes became strongly
differentiated, in language and customs, by
living widely apart, and always in a state
of '

A series of sharp little barks interrupted her
again.

Vere was not sorry for the interruption. She
had been reading for more than an hour , and
was as tired as the dog of the newspaper
and magazine reading so constantly inflicted
on her without any deference to her tastes
in the choice of a subject. Yet the girl never
complained. Her voice rose and fell as mechanically
as before, till Sir Ralph exclaimed,
irritably, ' Put the creature out,' in the somewhat
harsh voice to which his niece had become
accustomed.

He meant no harm she said, as she rose and
opened the door.

The silence of the long, barely-furnished
corridor — the atmosphere of which seemed to
be full of romantic and historical interest —
seemed to be rudely disturbed by the hoarse
barks of the delighted animal, as she led
him through it to the outer doors and gazed
for one moment at the pale, familiar stars
of the dear, homely, English sky which had
taken their places, like sentinels, for the night.
She gave a sigh of relief, as she had just time
to nod at the Great Bear, Cassiopeia, and the
Polar star, as if they had been old friends, to
whom she could confide her secrets while she
drew in fresh breaths of the outer air — sweet
with the odours of the tangled flowers and the
smell of damp earth.

Rain had fallen during the day, and she had
been kept closer than usual to her increasingly
difficult task of amusing her uncle. Sir Ralph
was now often irritable. His normal temperament
seemed to have changed. But she
preferred a little artillery thunder — flashes of

anger, Which might perhaps clear the air —
to the vagueness with which he had hitherto
answered her whenever she had inquired concerning
his affairs.

She guessed that there was some important
reason, kept in the background now, which, if
explained to her, might excuse his increasing
irritability But she could not know that he
was brooding over what had seemed to him
to be the vulgar condescension of a letter received
from Reuben apropos of herself that very
morning, and that the indignity of being patronised
by his upstart neighbour, and of feeling
that there was no means of escaping from his
clutches, was maddening him, while he pretended
to be interested in the 'Eskimo.'

She returned to the room, and seated herself
again in her old attitude, reading in a voice
which she tried to make less listless.

•' '^ Their physical peculiarities bespeak a common
origin, and their differences '

There — that will do,' said her uncle, abruptly.
' Your wits are wool-gathering.'

It was true that her manner was dispirited.

and that her voice, which was usually as refreshing
as a clear stream of water, had become
monotonous ; true, also, that the expression of
her face alarmed him a little. There was a
look of unconquerable v/ill which crept into it
at times, and reminded him that Vere had
possibly inherited from the Kashleighs a temper
which made against absolute perfection, and
a strenuous hate of injustice apt to break into a
flame.

She said nothing to excuse herself now, but
answered by a scarcely perceptible movement
of the eyebrows, as she laid down the book, and
stood upright, looking across at her uncle interrogatively,
with no piteous expression in her
face, but with an entire absence of that fine,
childlike mirth which she knew how to combine
on other occasions with her underlying seriousness.


Sir Ralph had no key to the girl's thoughts,
though he believed that he had a remarkably
profound knowledge of womankind in general.
He had often lamented, even in her presence,
that his own daughter had not been a son,

who could Lave helped him with the difficult
task of his life. A boy, who could have been
churned into some sort of shape by rough
treatment in a public school, would have been
able to grapple with the stern realities before
him. But of what use were maids? and this
niece alarmed him with her large amount of
undeveloped power, and her readiness to assert
herself, even in a comparatively immature stage
of womanhood.

'It is a pity I could never afford to let
her have a proper governess, and be trained
like other girls,' he thought, as she stood looking
at him expectantly, with the large, dark-blue
eyes which seemed to have lost their
sermo-playfulness.

He could guess that the spirit of opposition in
her temperament, with which he had sometimes
to deal, possessed her now as she stood
before him — taller and fairer than any golden-centred
lily that had grown in the outside garden,
with a hazy lustre from the candle-light on
her delicately-tinted hair.

Beautiful as a whole,' he said discontentedly

to himself, yet with no certainty that her
beauty would continue, since no one feature, asa
question of perfection of lines,, could be called
absolutely correct. He prided himself on his
well-formed taste, and could be cynically critical
even of his brother's child. He knew that
the little feminine methods of other women
were hateful to this girl, that duplicity in others
made her angry, and that, if ever on previous
occasions there had been a difference of opinion
between them, she had preferred to go straight
to the mark. A recollection of such encounters
made him a little afraid of the level, fronting
eyes, and all his cut and dried maxims a la
Kochefoucauld seemed to be dispersed. He was
apparently bestowing his attention on the amber
end of his meerschaum as Yere said suddenly,
in a voice which struck sharply on his ears, and
threatened to make him lose his presence of
mind,

It hurts me that you should treat me with so
little confidence.'

How so?'

He kept his eyes fixed on his pipe, and considered

how it would be possible to make her
understand that the want of confidence of
which she complained had in reality been the
instinctive concealment of the disquietude which
he had begun to feel respecting her.

How much better it would have been for this
uncomfortable project of his, if his niece had
been like most girls of her age — with a mind
like a sheet of white paper on which he might
transcribe all that suited his purpose — instead
of being a young woman of many theories,
sometimes dogmatic in spite of her simplicity.

Why are you so short with me V

So short !'

I mean so cold — so irresponsive. I know
you have something weighing on you now.
Why cannot you open your heart to me V

Sir Ralph did not speak for some moments.
When he did so, he parried her question with
another.

I thought you would have a definite announcement
to make very soon to me. By the
way, you are twenty, are you not T

Yes, uncle, but '

It is natural I should be desirous to know
how matters stand. I hope you are not going
to visit the father's sins upon the very inoffensive
son. It is, as I said before, an absurdity
for you to talk of marrying a man who has
not plenty of money. Whoever has you, must
expect to pay a heavy price for your hand.'

A crimson colour rushed to her temples.
Hitherto she had been proud of her uncle,
because she had considered him so perfect a
gentleman. But now it seemed incredible that
he who had so often been cold, who had refused
to notice her or appreciate her, should be so
ready for his own purposes to scheme for this
marriage. There was a point at which she
must assert her human rights. She was determined
to tell him that she would have nothing
to do with a scheme in which she was to be
"used by a rich man as one of his levers. She
had never heard much of the claims for women's
emancipation, but a chord had been struck in
her nature which suddenly began to vibrate.
A whole category of women's rights seemed to
be ready for assertion, as something of defiance

blazed np id her flaming cheeks. She had
determined to tell her uncle that she had
nothing of that false sentiment which made
other girls ready to offer themselves as a sort
of filial holocaust ; that she would rather
continue to exercise any amount of thrift than
marry for the sake of living objectless, luxurious
days ; and that she had fortunately not been
educated in the benighted times when young
women could be treated like dolls and kept in
ignorance of all sorts of things which were necessary
for them to know.

But all her words forsook her at the crisis.
The dilating of her nostrils and the tightening
of her hands, as if she Avould plunge the nails
into their delicate palms, betrayed something of
the inward tumult of her feelings. She hated
herself for the strong, ungovernable anger which
seemed to sweep over her, making her shiver
and feel fevered when she needed all her courage,
and felt it necessary to assume the unruffled
calm of a philosopher.

She choked back the rising tears, and said,
in a tone of inquiry which she attempted to
keep steady,

Our fortunes must have fallen low indeed?'

It was she now who was the inquisitor, and
was unconsciously applying the torture-screw.
The moisture stood on Sir Ralph's forehead ashe
answered, also dropping his voice,

So low that the ordinary reason for such a
match is quadrupled.'

She had expected some such announcement,
but received it in blank silence. Her uncle
gained courage as she stood pondering. There
was something of his old manner * de Jiaut en has '
which had always somewhat fretted her, as he
added, in explanation,

'It seems that our family history has a romantic
interest for these people. The son cannot
do without you.'

Her eyes flashed, and she put up her hand as
if warning him to be silent.

He told you so himself?' she asked.

His father did. Come, you must be reasonable.
Reuben Sellwood is a good sort of fellow
up to his lights. Only a little more plain-spoken
than we are in our world, you know.
But, after all, what he says is the truth.'

He began to talk rapidly about mortgages,
unfortunate investments, and the tendency of
other people's money to accumulate like an
avalanche. He risked cheerful prognostications
as if to convince himself. He did not
think his niece capable of not being able to
rise to the emergency. He comforted himself
by reflecting that she was too healthy to develop
nervous fancies and morbid humours.

She stood as if turned into stone. It might
have been for want of something to say. He
supposed that his revelations must have overruled
her scruples, but saw that no good was to
be gained by continuing the conversation.

She rose,
As in the act to speak. The sudden thought,
And unconsidered impulse led her on. Yet anon
With recollections clear, august, sublime.
Of God's great truth and right immutable,
Which, as obedient vassals to her mind,
Came summoned by her will.

Clough. ,

VOL. II. ' K

CHAPTER I.

Meanwhile, after the unusual curiosity and excitement
caused by the arrival of the mysterious
owner of Broadmeads, Torringmoor and its
environs had relapsed into something like
dulness.

Not only did Reuben Ellwood remain an
enigma, but the ' son of the millionaire,' as
Godfrey was called, seemed to be likely to prove
as disappointing as his father.

Godfrey's appearance had been pronounced
pleasing to the eye, and his manners, though
somewhat reserved, had been said to be those
of a gentleman. But he too showed a provoking
inclination to prefer the pieces of symbolic
pasteboard, left at Broadmeads with a

k2

view to making his acquaintance, to seeing the
people themselves. Some suggested that his
pride would be ready to kick at the tone of
patronage too likely to be adopted towards him
as the son of a parvenu, and that it was only
natural a young fellow of any spirit should resent
the patronising graciousness of the grandees
of the neighbourhood. Others had another
theory that his health was constitutionally delicate,
and that — with the exception of occasionally
visiting his club, where he read a good
deal, was properly polite, but made no intimate
friendships with anyone — he had been condemned
by medical advice to lead the life of an
anchorite.

It favoured this theory that Godfrey had
latterly hidden himself a good deal in his private
grounds, preferring to walk rather than
to drive, and creeping out like the owls and
bats to visit the cottages in lanes and fields.
Some surmised that his tastes were * decidedly
low,' quoting proverbs, which were not the
most refined, to prove that the ears of swine
were not convenient material for the manufacture

of silk purses, and that that which was
bred in the bone would be sure to come out in
the blood. The inventive skill of the Torring-
moor folks was really most interesting on this
occasion. It showed a love for fiction latent in
the feeblest imaginations, But not only were
the cleverest people in Torringmoor beating
their heads ineffectually against the closed door
of a mystery — Godfrey found himself puzzling
over it also.

If Vere Rashleigh hated his father, as it was
natural under the circumstances that she should
hate him, the filial relationship on his part
remained obligatory. With all Reuben's faults,
the fact still remained that he tuas his father.
Reuben had not advanced one step to meet
him in any of his benevolent projects. Godfrey
was checkmated and ashamed. Though Mr.
Sellwood had gloried in giving money to
certain subscriptions that his name might
figure on printed lists, sooner or later the
fact must become known that the people
who came under his pitiless rule were made
to crawl and kneel in the miry clay, at the

foot of a most degraded Mammon. The desperate
obstinacy which possessed Reuben in
refusing to consult anybody about the management
of his property, was as perplexing as
his odd determination to humble the pride of
the Rashleigh family. In an unguarded moment
he had said before his son that he
would bring Sir Ralph ' on his marrow-bones '
before he had done with him. Now, it did not
lessen Godfrey's anxieties that he began for
the first time to speculate as to why his
father had so skilfully laid his schemes for
years to buy up nearly all the territory which
had belonged to this particular family. He could
not suspect him of any causeless animosity.
The desire to purchase an ancestral estate
and to settle down as a landed proprietor
among people — who could be taught on which
side their bread was buttered, and be compelled'
to pay some sort of deference to the fabulous
wealth of a man whom they might otherwise
shun as an Upstart — was not so strange as that
there should be an ulterior motive affecting the
well-being of Sir Ralph Rashleigh and his niece.

If any such motive existed, there was the possibility
that it might be excusable instead of mean
or unworthy, and Godfrey was bound to allow
the utmost for this possibility.

Yet the uncertainty was a fruitful source for
mental uneasiness.

^ And oh, the wretchedness of inheriting
this money,' he said, more than once to himself,
with all the agony of a conscientious
nature of which Reuben had not the faintest
comprehension. Money, which had been
amassed he did not know by what methods.
How he wished he could make it flow back
into the sources from which it came ! Of one
thing he was perfectly determined, that he
would not be Reuben's accomplice, or take
take part in any transactions of which he-did
not thoroughly approve. On another
point he had also made up his mind. He
would himself visit the sick, and supply the
wants of the most needy, and he would do
so in such a way as to make the people
think that Reuben had given him money for
the purpose of relieving their wants.

A dozen schemes and ideas filled ibis
brain, but he would have nothing to do with
shifty business morality. All thought of love
for Vere had fled for a time before the discovery
that he was to be imposed upon her,
under circumstances that would be love-destroying.
He would take advantage of no
Avoman in a case like that. He would go away,
if possible — he would resist the temptation. The
bare suspicion that his father intended to use
him as a sort of cates-paw for a scheme
which was probably a mean one, made him
hot with vexation and shame, and he determined
if possible to keep away from Vere.

Half-way between Broadmeads and the town
of Torringmoor — just at this crisis — lived a rich
widow of the name of Austin. Whispering and
meanness, with underhand dealings of all kinds,
were detestable to her. Mrs. Austin was on the
shady side of middle-life, and had made the
best of her privileges in assuming betimes for
herself the kindly prerogatives which are supposed
to belong to the ' old.' Generously

modelled, if a trifle too richly coloured, with
ibe large, well-shaped hands of a capable woman,
famed for her well-managed household
and perfect appointments, she had succeeded
more than once in putting down unkindly
gossip.

Few chattering women, whether belonging
to the 'county families' or to the more easily
cowed Torringmoor matrons, who could not
affirm that they had had ' grandfathers,' could
bear the scrutiny of her steady eyes as she
would say,

Dear me ! May I ask to whom all this
refers ? I am rather confused between the individual
and the universal. May I ask if all
these observations are to be taken in the general,
or if you could vouch for them in a court of
law. I have somehow got into the habit of referring
half the talk I hear rather to the neuter
than to the masculine or feminine.'

Nevertheless, in spite of her common-sense,
which was sometimes slightly dashed with
cynicism, Mrs. Austin had a kindly nature, and
prided herself on having deserved on more than

one occasion the 'kiippel-pelz,' or reward given
by our German neighbours to the person who
has been clever enough to bring about a raatch.
She was capable also of arranging the most
heterogeneous blossoms in the same social
flower-beds. She was not one of those women
from whose tongues endearing epithets fall
glibly, but she was fond of young girls and had
a natural liking for young men. She had
formed her own somewhat sanguine opinions
about the new-comers at Broadmeads, and
while she thought that the father needed only
a woman's humanizing influence to lead him
into tractable habits, she concluded that the
son was really in frail health, and that he
shrank, with the sensitiveness of one who was
acutely nervous, from being thrust amongst
persons who might either toady him for his
money, or whose condescension might irritate
his pride.

We must try to shake him out of it,' she
said to herself. * But what is one to do ? His
is the sort of nature which is apt to withdraw
altogether into its shell, and to administer

a gentle prick would be worse than
useless.'

Nevertheless, she issued invitations for a
garden-party to which the people who remained
in the neighbor-hood in the month of August
were specially invited, not excepting the
owner of Broadmeads as well as the county
magnates.

My dear, they will be rather pleased than
otherwise to meet each other. I must go through
with it now. ^Yhen once I have placed myself
in the position of attempting these sort of experiments,
it would be sheer cowardice to back
out of it,' she answered one of her intimate
friends, who reminded her that the owner of
Broadmeads not only occasionally muted his
h's, but was beginning to have a bad name in
the neighbourhood for his undue severity to his
poorer tenants. ' I make a point of never cutting
anyone — and never sending anyone to
Coventry pointedly — it is the worst possible
taste. Besides,' she added, dropping her voice,
there will be an end to all these innuendoes
when Sir Ralph's niece marries as you will see

she will, this Godfrey Sellwood who is, after allan
uncommon-looking person''

Reuben Sellwood did not accept the invitation.
But Mrs. Austin managed to bring her
persuasive arts to work so successfully upon
Godfrey that he could not without rudeness
back out of the quasi-engagement which he formed,
for the sake of not being rude to a lady, when
she purposely waylaid him on one of his walks in
the gloaming.

Meanwhile, the clever woman — who was
accustomed to say to the younger friends of
her sex, ' My dear, you must not gossip
accompanying the motherly admonition with a
little playful tap of her fan — managed to keep
the monopoly of kindly chatter to herself, and
set the ball going skilfully respecting Godfrey's
devotion to Vere.

It is no wonder anyone should be smitten
with that girl with her taking face — a little
quaint, perhaps, and with no great regularity of
feature, but with a mouth as fresh as a rose-bud,
and eyes you can never forget — dark in the
centres — but with that colour which they call

bleu de roi," when you see it in Sevres china,

about the irises Although I am stupid to

mention it ; for, after all, one knows that it is
not the looks, but the mind and soul which are
of real importance,' Avould be her invariable
peroration.

Mrs. Austin thought a good deal about
Vere in the days which intervened before the
giving of her garden-party. It was not Miss
Rashleigh's fault, as she was in the habit of
remarking, that she should be called ' Vere,'
which seemed to recall the haughty creature in
Tennyson's poems, and was after all ' a senseless
sort of name.' ' But all these things have a
sort of fashion. It is one of the advantages of
growing old,' she said, confidentially to one of
her friends, smoothing affectionately her few
grey hairs, ' that I can remember the days
when girls were christened "Charlotte" in
remembrance of the " Sorrows of Werner," or
Sophia," in honour of the '' Vicar of Wakefield."
'

She was shrewd enough to suspect that
something had gone wrong if there had

really been any love affair between the two
young people, but reminded herself that accessibility
was a great point in matters of the
heart, and that if the feelings of either had
been hurt by the misfortune of possessing mismanaging
male guardians rather than sensible
mothers, it might be her part to propose some
slightly modified arrangement.

CHAPTER 11.

Good-natured Mrs. Austin prided herself on a
superstition which prevailed in the neighbourhood
that whenever she entertained she
was certain to have * Queen's weather.'

The sky was blue and the sun was shining
when the carriages drew up to her pretty but
unassuming house, with abundance of stained
glass in the hall, and a mat inscribed ' Salve '
on the inlaid tiles. There were dogs of all
varieties to greet the guests, from a little greyhound,
which Landseer would have liked to
paint, to a bright-eyed King Charles, whose
elegant proportions had been damaged like
those of his mistress by an inclination to embonpoint.
There were sleek horses in the surrounding

meadows and fine Alderney grazing
in the shade. The very maid-servants who
presided over the tea and coffee (Mrs. Austin
always set her face against the introduction of
men-servants into her house) looked trim and
well-kept in snowy white aprons and caps.
The lawn was indeed not immaculate of daisies.
But the widow loved the ' wee, modest crimson-tipped'
flowers, as much as Burns loved them,
and always declared that her income did not
allow her to vie with her richer neighbours in
employing enough gardeners to cut her grass.

The girls whom Mrs. Austin had invited where
mostly pleasant and pretty to look at, though
in this as in other matters the lady scorned to
limit herself to inviting the damsels of any particular
' set.' There were girls of the pensive
beauty role, and girls with a dash of fastness
supposed to give a flavour to their talk ; girls
dressed in quaker-like hues of drab and grey,
and others in a brilliancy of tint like tropical
birds.

There were plenty of good-looking young
fellows, with easy, assured manners, to flirt with

them in the intervals of that now bv-gone
croquet which was then an easy amusement as
compared with the harder and less idylls
lawn-tennis. The tennis-player of to-day
must be a hundred times more ready agile, and
attentive than her fore-runner of the croquet-field,
who could dawdle through a pastime in
which balls could be driven at leisure between
facile hoops, before all games — including croquet
itself — had the misfortune to become
over-scientific and fatiguing.

Both Godfrey and Yere instinctively avoided
the bait of croquet. The former had no suspicion
that he had to thank his well-meaning
hostess — who gave out that he was as good as
engaged — for the fact that no one pressed him to
take a mallet. In ignorance of this, his meeting
with Vere was unexpectedly free from constraint.
If he had not felt himself to be quite equal to
meeting her on the same footing as before, she
on her side tried to show neither vexation or
shame-sacredness. An acute observer might
possibly have guessed that her cheerfulness was
somewhat forced, and that the apparent indies

II. L

terence with which she wandered away, in company
with one of Mrs. Austin's matronly friends,
to the shadier walks of the grounds, was possibly
assumed.

When the sun had set — leaving the sky with
its blush of pink, and its rifts of pale green
light still between the sunset clouds — busy preparations
were being made for the evening
dance, which was always an important part of
the programme at Mrs. Austin's garden-parties.
A canvas passage lined with rows of pyramidical
azaleas and fanlike palms had been prepared
for the refreshments, and led into the house
where those guests could retire whose limbs
were no longer young enough to desire to
keep time to the scraping of fiddle-strings.
But under an awning at the head of the lawn
were musicians with harps and violins, and
strains of a brilliant waltz were intermingled
with the rippling of laughter and the chirping
of voices as the young people began to dance on
the turf. Young and old somehow lingered as
the coloured oil lamps which had been hung

on the adjacent trees lit np a scene which vas
as unusual as it was pretty.

'Ah, well, it does not matter, there is plenty
of ventilation for us all in the open air,'
laughed kindly Mrs. Austin, as she noticed that
the house was abandoned, *the mixture of all
ages gives a charm to the scene — the white
locks and the fresh young cheeks — how very
much more charming the contrast than the
fabled gift of eternal youth. Now, I call it quite
pleasant when one grows old oneself to be able
to witness the gyrations of the young ones.
How does it feel V she added, turning to
Godfrey ; ' don't you feel as if you are a spirit
set free from inconvenient gravitation ? — I am
afraid that simile of mine is ridiculous rather
than sublime,' seeing from something in his face
that he did not like her choice of long words.

I confess I am an infrequent dancer,' answered
the ' son of the millionaire,' with a touch of
that refined hauteur which is supposed to belong
to another class.

Ah, 1 see,' she answered, as she looked significantly
at some of the girls, like pretty wax

l2

dolls, whose faces wore perpetual smiles and
whose voices rose and fell in soft interchange
of remark to the men on whose arms they
leant as they floated past them in the dance,
your heart is elsewhere — at your books or with
your landscape paintings. What a pity you
look as if yoa ought to be a good dancer.'

Once only had Vere appeared among the
dancers and then the simplicity of her attire
had been noteworthy, and had possibly furnished
her with a good excuse for speedy withdrawal.
But how kind had been the gaze of
her bright, clear-looking eyes, how frank and
pleasant her gentle forehead, how playful and
natural the curves of her rosy lips ! Godfrey,
watching her more closely, thought he saw a
slight change in her — a change that he could
not fail to attribute to something which had
taken place since their last conversation. He
was glad that she at least lived in no atmosphere
of conventionality. For he had in one respect
been a true son of the people. He had often
thought, ' How can men bear with all those
little airs and graces among girls, this posing

-and acting, this mincing as they go, as if it were
not a world of reality and earnestness, and close
to ns, even in this very neighbourhood, sorrow,
deprivation, misery, sickness, and death ?'

He did not mean to be hard on the enjoyment
of the other women ; but some instinct seemed
to drive him to leave the crowded lawn, tired
of the shimmer of silk and the rustle of lace,
and to loiter in one of the side-walks illuminated
with Chinese lanterns in which Vere — with
some cloud-like wraps round her head and
shoulders — had taken refuge not far from her
older chaperon. The seat which she had chosen
was close to a mossy bank. A cedar With its
velvety branches and a couple of ancient beech-trees
overshadowed the seat. Vere's hands
where filled with some pretty crimson fungi,
and near her stood her late partner, somewhat
younger than herself, who had plucked the
fungi for her and looked as if he would very
much like to renew a conversation.

Happy boy,' thought Godfrey with a jealous
pang, ' there is no barrier between them as
there is between us.'

Take care you don't poison yourselves,' he
said, as he drew near to them. ' How is it you
have hidden yourself here T

I think it is a lovely spot,' she said, with
one of her bright smiles.

You are easily contented, you think everything
lovely.'

Oh, but this is a dear old place. I have a
special fondness for these beeches.'

but is it fair to hide yourself? You are losing
ail that is going on.'

^ About a dozen people have been here to
look after me. I assure you I am not at all
neglected.'

Her clear eyes and her still smile did not prevent
him from noticing a faint pallor, and that
new expression in the face which seemed to
foreshadow something — he knew not what. It
was noticeable that he did not ask her to dance
the recollection of his last conversation with
her was yet too vivid. But he dropped into
the seat beside her as soon as the other man
had left, and understood something of the new
expression which had puzzled him when she
said, softly

I have heard of your kindness to the Hargreaves.'


*Youheardofitr

Of course, they told me — didn't you know I
visit them?'

We can talk of it better to-morrow he said,
a little impulsively, his heart beating with pleasure
at her slight encouragement, * if you will
come into the wilderness, as you used to. There
are two or three plans I should like to tell you
of,' he answered, in a low tone, under cover of
the semi-darkness.

Nothing apparently had happened and yet
the girl's heart was stirred by some new antagonism.
And the man knew that he dreaded
that interview which was to take place on the
morrow. It had been revealed to him as if by
a lightning's flash that because Fate seemed to
require of him that he should choose this woman
as his wife, the woman's will would probably
be set with all its force and strength in the
opposite direction. Dame Fate seemed to be a
nuisance, even as far as his own feelings were
concerned ; she hindered spontaneity and rubbed
the bloom from the thing.

Hours passed. The majority of these foolish
young people were still spinning' in the dance,
while it seemed to ordinary observers that,
though Godfrey still lingered in Vere's proximity,
both he and she were in a mood alien
to jollity. A few of the dancers, like children
tired with sport, were resting in corners of the
grounds, or behind the fan-like branches of
palms in the canvas passages. Godfrey tried
to get a little comfort from the fact that the
smile had died on the lips of more than one
of Miss Rashleigh's admirers who had sought
her again and again, and who had not unnaturally
objected to another man being the witness
of their discomfiture.

At the repeated 'No, thank you. I am very
comfortable here,' the would-be dancers retired
altogether as if unwilling to risk another repulse.

It is the taint of pride in her blood,' thought
Godfrey, who had never seen her under such
circumstances before. ' Pity that a nature so
noble should be contaminated by this detestable
pride. Yet it served that last fellow right.
He was too self-conscious''

The chaperon, who knew that Mrs. Austria
was interested, and who had been 'looking
after ' Yere to gratify the fancy of her friend, —
having been privately assured by the hostess that
'she bad not brought a lot of people together
for nothing,' — gave much the same account of
th e girl's treatment of young Sellwood.

Very snubbing to him,' said that lady, by
no means disconcerted at the failure of her plan,
but, do you know, they say that is the way
in which some of our sex begin — by snubbing
the man whom they mean afterwards to
favour.'

Nevertheless, Mrs. Austin took occasion to
saunter in the direction of the secluded walk
and that seat by the beeches. She saw for
herself, as she afterwards declared, that the lad
could at times be very serious and self-contained.
Why could he not speak out ; she had no
patience with him ! Her supposed omniscience
about the affairs of the heart led her to suppose
that the two were at variance, and that it
might soon be too late for either of them to
practise frankness. Her theory was endorsed

by the fact that, when Godfrey rose, Vere bowed
to him as calmly as if she had been a young
lady of fashion anxious to get out of an engagement
with a partner who did not please
her.

Unfortunately for the progress of affairs, Mrs.
Austin made up her mind to speak to her young
friend that night as soon as her other guests
had departed. It was easy to put her plan into
practice, for Yere — who was occupying a bedroom
in Mrs. Austin's house for greater convenience
and by special invitation — was sitting at
the dressing table brushing her long fair hair
as the elder lady entered, and began to caress
the soft silken masses which fell in a shimmer
of pale gold below the young girl's waist.

*■ How long it is !' she said, by way of commencing
conversation, and conscious that the
blue eyes were gazing at her with an almost
defiant expression from beneath the overhanging
tresses, like the eyes of a shy animal within
the covert.

Somebody admires it very much,' she said,
after a pause, in which she found it somewhat

difficult to begin. 'It is not difficult to guess
who it is.'

A blush had sprung up in the girl's face, for
she had suspected her friend's strategy; but,
as if determined to ward off further questions,
she said, with a laugh,

Do you mean Mr. De Courcy ?'

De Courcy is poor and as proud of his birth
as you are — you would not have a penny between
you answered her inquisitor. ' No, you
know perfectly well whom I mean. There are
depths of perception included in your simplicity.
Do you know that I think you are
rather fond of having your own way V

Yere, who was blushing scarlet, would have
found it impossible to answer these insinuations
directly. But the way in which she raised her
eyebrows with an air of incredulity seemed to
answer for her,

Do you indeed?'

Yes, and I am very sorry for your poor uncle,
and for the little cousin whom you profess to
love. Certainly it is from your uncle that you
inherit this strong will, and he on his side — his

pride will certainly keep him from speaking out
to you. Do you know that this man weill have
little short of millions. My dear, consider, bea
little practical for once. Many men would
be glad to accumulate money, but in ninety-nine
cases out of a hundred the inclination stops
short of fruition. Now in this case the capital
has been left to accumulate till '

The listener could bear it no longer. A frantic
desire had grown in her to push away the well-meaning
lady, whose grace and amiability had
led her so successfully to act the part of mother
to man' bereft damsels. But Mrs. Austin had
so placed herself that the slightest movement
on the part of her victim would infallibly have
knocked her over.

Vere's breath came quickly, and wild schemes
were being formed in her brain as the unconscious
tormenter continued,

Lots of girls would be glad to be in your
place. Society used to exact birth and manners,
but now-a-days it exacts — money.'

The girl stood looking at her stupidly and
vacantly. In her readiness to accuse herself,

it seemed to her as if she must have done
something that was wrong for any one to
venture to speak to her, of a subject which
should only be treated reverently, in that hard
and common-place manner. Yet even in her
excitement it struck her, with a sense of humour,
that Mrs. austin spoke of Society sympathetically
and caressingly, as if she were a delicately
organised female friend.

Now I admit that in this case the father
seems to belong to the true Bohemian class —
how he made his way people don't exactly
know. But believe me, my dear, people will
never inquire. He seems to be a most convenient
old gentleman, determined to hide himself
from public view. And you,' continued the
good woman, emboldened by Vere's silence, ' why,
it would be like actual wickedness — wickedness
to your own uncle, for you to do nothing to
relieve him of his anxieties — I might even say-ibis
debts. Will you let him die with '

At the risk of removing the mask which she
had carefully worn till now for the sake of the
dignity of her family, the outraged girl at last

found her voice. It seemed to have changed
from a clear soprano to a contralto, strangled
in the lower notes, as she answered,

I do not acknowledge anybody's right to
press me to marre any man — not even the
right of my own uncle.'

That is not practical. Excuse me, it is
high flown nonsense — there is the man ready to
marry you, and there is the money — that is
partly why I have spoken to you''

Mrs. Austin had let her arms fall, and Vere,
observing the opportunity, rose to her full
height.

He has never given me the chance of which
you speak. Certainly we had a few words
about it some time ago, but latterly we have
had so little conversation.'

'That's unfortunate.'

Unfortunate for me and ray supposed attractions,
you mean. I daresay it is.'

The girl had an abrupt way of unexpectedly
turning the assumption against herself, and
putting an end to the conversation, which took
Mrs. Austin by surprise.

She had a shrewd nature as well as a kind
one, prompt to recognise a mistake, and she
began to deplore her own misconception and
to be somewhat indignant with the girl's uncle,
when, after a moment or two of inward struggle,
her young guest answered, in that altered
voice,

'Oh, don't you see that it is a joke?'

CHAPTER III.

A CERTAIN fear uuderlay Vere's bolder feelings
as reminding herself of the words, ' Will you do
nothing to relieve his anxieties — will 3'ou let
him die?' she returned to her uncle the next
morning. He noticed that she looked cold and
white, that her eyes were cast down, and tried
to find out whether anything had been accomplished
by Mrs. Austin's mediation or by the
meeting on the previous evening.

He saw that a change had passed over his
niece, and that there was a new sort of despairing
tone in the way in which she answered, ' You
are always harping on that string,* as he spoke
about his difficulties. The shade of annoyance
did not escape him.

And you are always a good girl,' he said.

ill a tone of encouragement, which he had not
been apt to use to her.

I try to be good, though not always in your
way,' she said, with a sort of smile, in which
a little humour lingered, but with a conscience
not altogether clear.

It was hard that — when her life seemed to be
commencing in real earnest — it should be so difficult
to remind her uncle that she was not only
grown up, but had a right to that independence
which should belong to every reasonable human
being. That she — because she was an unprotected
orphan — should have that independence
taken away from her ; or that — worse still — she
should be made the accomplice of a sort of intrigue
was not to be tolerated. The openness
of her character made her not only rebel, but
determine to free herself from any entanglement,
whatever it might cost her. She would
not engage in any conflict of words, but there
was a look in her face which made Sir Ralph
a little afraid.

If you have anything to tell me,' he continued,
anxiously, ' I shall be glad to hear it.'

VOL. II. M

'Thank sou, — we live in an out-of-the-way
corner of the world, and it is the rarest thing'
for me to have anything new to tells

The tenacity with which he approached
the subject, irritated her. She could not get
over the feeling that she was to be offered
to another man on humiliating terms; the
very idea of it filled her with shame and
loathing. She walked rapidly when she found
herself in the open air, up and down the path
in the wilderness with the tragic air of one who
is torn to pieces by conflicting feelings ; the
greater was merged into the lesser, she almost
forgot the small conventionalities of custom
and habit. She rather prided herself on not
making a show of being sympathetic. It had
always seemed to her a little absurd that other
women should be so easily moved to laughter
or to tears. Owing to the circumstances of
her life, and to the responsibilities which had
brought premature womanhood upon her, she
was, as a rule, self-poised, and with nerves
equal to any occasion.

She did not like losing her placidity, and

made an effort to control the immoderate emotion
which was taking possession of her. She
succeeded to a certain extent. But Godfrey
could not fail to notice that her face had grown
a little hard, and that her eyes were, for the
first time, almost wild with some intense feeling
which he could not comprehend.

The very weather seemed to be against his
chances of success. But a few days before he
bad passed her near the moor, unknown to
her, and had gazed fascinated at one of those
pictures which remain photographed on the
memory. Vere had been sitting on the trunk
of a tree which overhung the water, the
birds singing overhead, Dot and some little
friends, younger than herself, clustered round
her, the little ones laughing, and Vere's owri
rosy face — free from the look of care which
sometimes shadowed it — dimpled with smiles,
as she sat on her rustic throne like a queen.
The Little savage,' as Godfrey had sometimes
christened Dot, was certainly a good deal spoiled
by Sir Ralph. But the child, bounding and
rushing about in the buoyancy of health, had

m2

seemed to have something in common with the
blessed sunshine with the trees, the flowers, and
the fresh perfume of the summer. One could
imagine how she felt in every vein of her body
the joyful intoxication of her physical life, till
she seemed to communicate some of this animal
exhilaration, this bounding sense of freedom
to all around her. Theoretically, the young
man held ideas about the management of children
which were much opposed to Sir Ralph's
plan of bringing up his only child. But when
he had seen \^ere surrounded by these merry
little ones — all chattering like, starlings — he
had acknowledged to himself that any sort of
pessimism would be inexcusable in the presence
of such sunbeams. He had got over his prejudice
against the child, and yet he had ventured
so far as to suggest the possibility that Vere
Rashleigh should come to meet him, and alone.

He had dreaded the presence of a precocious
child, and had judged from the girl's disposition
that he should have more hope for his
suit, if he could get her to meet him in the
free, open air, and so avoid the stiff conventionalities
of calling on her in the house.

Something in the atmosphere of that home
seemed to be chilling and fatal to all spontaneity,
and he had never yet asked for Miss
Rashleigh without her uncle.

When the plan had first occm-red to him as he
was smoking and half-dreaming over a book, it
had seemed to him a good one. But looked at
now, in the prosaic light of a dull, commonplace
day, he began to fear that the request
had been a liberty, as he advanced to meet
her, with a face which wore a smile, yet a
smile which was by uo means confident.

Meadow-sweet was blooming, mixed with the
tall spikes of the purple thrum, on the
borders of the stream and ever afterwards
the penetrating sweetness of the subtle odour
of those blossoms seemed to be associated with
the conversation which followed. The brilliant
weather of the previous days had suddenly
changed, The morning was damp and
uninviting, with a stifling feeling in the air.
A few drops of rain fell every now and then,
and desultory gleams of watery sunshine occasionally
struggled in vain to disperse the gathering
clouds. There was not a breath of wind to be

felt ; not a bird or insect stirred, not a leaf felL

But Vere, in her state of unusual mental
excitement, was unconscious of the rain which
fell upon her face. She had weighed her
power against the forces which seemed to be
arrayed against her. The circumstances were
strong, but she thought herself to be stronger.

After a few moments of awkward constraint,
during which they fenced with common-places
about the weather, she made a desperate rush
at abrupt speech ; for had she not determined
to take the initiative, and deprive Godfrey of
the advantage of getting out his pawns first ?

'What do you Avant of me? Is it anything
about the poor people?' she asked, in a voice
which seemed to imply, 'I mean to play my
part well.'

The voice was tremulous, in spite of her
resolve, and the eyes — which were bright with
that indefinable restlessness which had attracted
his attention when he saw her coming to meet
him — gave him an annihilating look, at which,
under other circumstances, he would have been
inclined to smile.

He noticed that her head was thrown back.

her lips pressed together, aod that her fingers
were interlaced in a fashion which she had
when she wished to give herself strength to
say a difficult thing.

The style of her address was so strange that
he did not answer. There was interrogation
in his look, a sort of surprise, but he had not
the slightest inclination to laugh. The woman's
emotion had communicated itself to him. He
felt his pulses start; he was full of intense
expectation.

I suppose you think you have a right to
invite me here.' It was as if she had said, ' I
wonder the ghosts of the Rashleighs don't rise
to disabuse you of the idea. Every inch of this
ground has been trodden by the feet of my
ancestors.'

Ah, you think that my father robbed you of
this piece of ground V he answered, surprised at
her defiant tone. ' You are mistaken there. He
bought it fairly. There was no robbery in the
case.'

There is no occasion for us to argue about
that. I don't dispute your right,' she answered
with no hurry of manner or sign of being

affronted at the quick retort which was unusual
with him. ' ' We have to deal with matters
as they stand. I am a girl, and do not
pretend to go into all these business affairs.
But it has been explained to me that the property
is not what it was — I believe no landed
property is — and my uncle, because he doesn't
wish to grind down the people, would only
have been likely to make a worse paying thing
of it than before. You know as well as I do
that it is no fault of his if he is deeply in debt,
and if — if there are what they call mortgages
on the estates and that the estates themselves
belong more or less to your father.'

She felt that she was already becoming
almost bookish, although she really knew nothing
of law, and would have to seem a good
deal more so before the interview was ended. If
either of the two could have seen the humorous
side of the matter, instead of being so desperately
in earnest, they might have understood
each other, without more need of studied speech.
But Vere's nerves were too agitated for her to
be as sensible as usual, and every pulse in the

man's body was throbbing now. He fired at the
thought that she should ask questions in so direct
a way, as if her superior position gave her a right
to question, or to express her opinions plainly.
He would have liked to answer that, if he had
anything to do With the matter, he would
never evict a tenant, and that he had already
incurred his father's anger by vehemently denouncing
the behaviour of the present agent in
his dealings with the people. He vas ready
to assure her that, if ever the property came
into his own hands, he would see that the
factor, or agent, of the estate should be chosen
for the justice and liberality of his administration.
He would dismiss Newton at once, make
the little farm-holdings as comfortable as possible,
raise the wages of the labourers and
then he believed that the present agrarian
difficulties would be quite easy of adjustment.

But her unexpected mode of address made
him feel as if he had nothing to answer. And
she continued — as if her ideas had been in someway
arranged between the snatches of sleep
which had visited her on the preceding night —

^ You are aware as well as I that our elders
seem to have hit upon a plan, which strikes
them as a good one, for sparing ray uncle grief.
I do not suppose that you have much to do
with it , but it would be absurd for me to imagine
that you are not aware of it as well as I.
Indeed, your invitation to me to present myself
before you at your bidding this morning, as if
you were King Ahasuerus and I poor Vashti,
proves that you are a party to the — conspiracy.'

He made a deprecating movement, for his
heart had leaped to his mouth, and he would
have liked to say, ' Ah ! I see — you cannot hide
it from me — you do not come to me of your
own accord,' but he saw that she did not wish
him to reply at once, and it was with the
greatest difficulty that he restrained himself
from interrupting her.

Wait till I have done,' seemed to be conveyed
to him by a wave of her hand, and he
stood helplessly listening whilst she continued
a sort of speech in which her soul seemed to
take no part. The sad plaintiveness in her
voice had touched him a little, but the perfect

deliberateness of her authoritative manner surprised
him more than ever as she continued,

If conspiracy is too strong a word, I will
withdraw it. I mean to be perfectly polite,
but I must ask you to forgive me if I am unable
to restrain the utterance of some truths
which may seem bitter. I am not really bitter
I am disappointed and humiliated.'

There was another pause. The colour was
still on, her lips, though it had flown from her
cheeks, and the excess of some feeling which
he was unable to understand had given a
deeper intensity to her eyes as she added, with
more passion than she had shown before,

You have tried to humiliate me — you need
not deny it. Do not think that I care for it
personally, but it strikes me, as it must strike
you, that — that the amount of feeling which
you have for me must be terribly slender, when
you can claim a woman's hand because others
dictate to you.'

fle interrupted her now. The undemonstrative
manner which she had hitherto adopted,
as if with the intention of repressing advances

had taken away bis power of speech, but the
wild anger which seemed to be rising np in her
helped him to respond.

There can be no thought of claiming a thing
which should be freely given ; I — I had hoped — '

Go on,' she said, in a way which effectually
stopped him, ' I am here to listen to whatever
you have to say to me that is serious and
pressing. I understand that you have learnt
your lesson, and 1 ought to let you repeat it.
But, considering that we can reckon up the few
hours of our acquaintance, does it not strike
you that to count on being accepted after so
slight a knowledge of a girl might seem to her
little short of an indignity?'

I counted on nothing.'

No ? — then I beg your pardon, it was your
father who was so certain. Tell him I will be
discreet and not take too great an advantage
of his intended kindness,' she continued, with
that strange scorn in her voice. ' Why need
we make any pretences about it ! I perfectly
understand that I stand face to face with the
man whose father has power over my unfortunate

uncle, and that father wishes me to
favour his son. We are neither of us good at
acting, and it is useless for me to pretend not
to know that — monstrous as it seems — my hand
is to be thrown-in as part of this property, and
that, if I dare to refuse, my relations will suffer.
Is not that true ?'

She asked the question looking straight into
his face, and with that look which told him
that she had counted on his being ready
to quail at the reproach conveyed in her
eyes. Yet her passion was mastering her now.
She had planned the scheme deliberately, intending
to pride herself on her skilful reservations,
and the coil which she should inextricably
twine round her own real feelings. But she
could no longer control her natural womanliness.
Shame, anger, a sense of outrage, and
a vehement desire to revenge herself upon
some one showed themselves by turns in her
mobile face. Perhaps the shame predominated,
for she was painfully conscious that she had
lost hei' usual coolness, and the clearness of her
head, and was being hurried in her excitement

into saying more than she meant. A suitor
who could be drawn into any underhand scheme
to win her had to be confronted like an enemy ;
but somehow, Godfrey looked little like an
enemy as he stood gazing at her — discomfited
and surprised.

Her own consciousness of her transformation
from her usual calmness and modesty, and of
how that transformation must be astonishing
the man to whom she spoke, suddenly flooded
her cheeks and neck with scarlet and she hid
her burning face for a moment in her hands, as
she said — making a vain attempt to resume the
forced politeness of a society tone,

There are some people who are accustomed
to treat these things as a jest. I hope sou
don't think — I mean — I don't want you to think
that I am one of those people. I — I am not
turning you or anything else into ridicule. I
only think that in a sort of thing which has to be
stopped, for your sake as well as mine, definitely
— it — it is better to be frank.'

I scarcely know what to think,' he answered,
slowly, gazing with a dazed sensation of unreality

at the girl who had hitherto seemed
to be his dream-incarnation his ideal found.
It was true he had had a sort of feeling that the
next minute she would laugh, and say it was alla
hoax. ' Surely you do mean it for a farce,' he
faltered.

And you are going to say that the farce is
unworthy of any woman?' she answered, pressing
her fingers on the dry. aching balls of her
eyes, and still setting her will resolutely on the
repression of an odd remorse about the sayings
of the strange new self which had been performing
such an unconventional feat.

I know it must seem horrible. But was it 1
who invented it ? Was it I who made it the
only way out of a more horribly false position ?
Ahj I daresay you are like most men, and know
little of the feelings of most women. Oh ! my
feelings are of secondary importance, of course,'
the * oh ' had popped out before she knew it,
and she recognised at once that she was coming
down from her stilts and swerving from the
programme in which she had determined not tolet
herself be weak, finding her only alternative

with a fresh sting, and, conquering her indications
of weakness, she continued,

'No; I make no pretence to be what I am
not. There is apparently no room in my life
for romance. But I hate the cold, shallow
theories which some people are pleased to expound
about marriage. It is profaning the
name of love to talk about it in such manner.
If you Avant to make your own life bearable,
you will say that it was not my fault, but you
did not like me. Is it because I have neither
father nor mother that I have been placed
in such a cruel dilemma Do you know
that my aunt, on her death-bed, made me
promise to do my utmost for the little one
whom she left behind her ? I have never regretted
my promise, and I am trying to keep
it now. I would lay down my life for
that little Dorothy, and even for my uncle.
It must not be said that / refused you, and
deprived them of your money. But what I ask
is perfectly simple. I throw myself on your
generosity. I have adopted the only means
of dealing with you in earnest. If I say that I
was ready enough to accept you, and you were

disenchanted with me, and yet promised to do
something for my little cousin, you will be helping
me amazingly. I see you are surprised,' she
added, pressing both her hands on her now
burning cheeks, 'but that is because you know
me so little. Could I refuse to help my uncle
in his present strait? But I owe something to
my womanhood. I give my relations their
due, neither more nor less. It would be hard
on my uncle to say that I act in this way by
compulsion. I suppose it is necessity — but the
necessity is no more likely to be agreeable to
you than to me.'

He bent his head, and she continued, rapidly,
If I were a man, I might persuade myself
I was performing a chivalrous act in conferring,
rather than receiving, a favour. My happiness
may be safer in your keeping than in my own
that seems to be an idea to which other
people have made up their minds. But — but
both of us know how many wretched marriages
there are in the world, and that a happy one
is scarcely likely to be made in this way. I
will not believe that you have anything to do

N 2

with a fresh sting, and, conquering her indications
of weakness, she continued,

'No; I make no pretence to be what I am
not. There is apparently no room in my life
for romance. But I hate the cold, shallow
theories which some people are pleased to expound
about marriage. It is profaning the
name of love to talk about it in such manner.
If you want to make your own life bearable,
you will say that it was not my fault, but you
did not like me. Is it because I have neither
father nor mother that I have been placed
in such a cruel dilemma? Do you know
that my aunt, on her death-bed, made me
promise to do my utmost for the little one
whom she left behind her ? I have never regretted
my promise, and I am trying to keep
it now. I would lay down my life for
that little Dorothy, and even for my uncle.
It must not be said that I refused you, and
deprived them of your money. But what I ask
is perfectly simple. I throw myself on your
generosity. I have adopted the only means
of dealing with you in earnest. If I say that I
was ready enough to accept you, and you were

disenchanted with me, and yet promised to do
something for my little cousin, you will be helping
me amazingly. I see you are surprised,' she
added, pressing both her hands on her now
burning cheeks, 'but that is because you know
me so little. Could I refuse to help my uncle
in his present strait? But I owe something to
my womanhood. I give my relations their
due, neither more nor less. It would be hard
on my uncle to say that I act in this way by
compulsion. I suppose it is necessity — but the
necessity is no more likely to be agreeable to
you than to me.'

He bent his head, and she continued, rapidly,
If I were a man, I might persuade myself
I was performing a chivalrous act in conferring,
rather than receiving, a favour. My happiness
may be safer in your keeping than in my own
that seems to be an idea to which other
people have made up their minds. But — but
both of us know how many wretched marriages
there are in the world, and that a happy one
is scarcely likely to be made in this way. I
will not believe that you have anything to do

N 2

with such a bargain ; you could never be so
petty, so ungenerous.'

He had no time to think how shortsighted
were the people who had placed a high-spirited
gh'l in such a position, but as he looked at
her flashing eyes, feeling as if he were unable
to move his tongue, or even to unclench his
teeth, he was too confused to be aware that
his continued silence was a tacit admission of
her impeachment.

The silence irritated and perhaps disappointed
her. It maddened her to recollect
that, when she had not intended to be surprised
into any sort of confidence, her weakness
had, after all, mastered her, and that she might
even have seemed to be making a parade of
her opinions for nothing. She cared less of
what he thought of her, and made less attempt
to check the headlong impulse which was so
unusual with her, but which was still hurrying
her into this passionate speech.

Ah ! perhaps you are weighing the advantages
and disadvantages of the match. You
are learned, you have had a university training

she continued, in the same barbed words
which he had found so difficult to answer —
pity you cannot turn it into a mathematical
problem. You see, it has nothing to do with
feelings — you must view it in the abstract.
There are lots of people like that, they say, in
the world, closely bound together, without '

Her voice broke down at last, for there was
something in his face which reminded her that
she might lose her self-respect in talking thus
wildly. Already the sickening feeling that this
wild talk would be a haunting, tantalising
recollection in after years was beginning to bea
sharp pain from which it was impossible to
escape.

In five minutes it would all be over, and
although she knew that the hard-fought victory
would be won, and had felt that she did
not lose an inch of the ground, the reaction
had already come, and she felt as if she could
be almost thankful if he were to assert himself,
and show some spirit on his side.

He roused himself at last from his monotonous
silence, and from that tendency to stammering

slowness in expressing himself which
had always been his bane when he had been
indignant with other men for illiberal condemnation
of opinions which did not happen to tally
with their own.

Charles Lamb himself could not have stuttered
more than Godfrey did as he answered,
with an effort,

I — s-s-suppose you k-know there is a sort
of r-r-risk in this. If — I — I were to t-take you
at your w-word V

You could not do it. You would be miserable
she answered, quickly, for there was that
in his face which prevented her from being the
least alarmed and which made her look back
upon her own speeches, and wish she had had
the subtlety to treat the whole thing with a
lighter touch. ' I know you think in your
heart that a marriage would be terrible founded
on this sickening consideration for money advantages.
I could wish for your own sake sou
had not the money — you, who used to talk so
generously and benevolently, and for whose
future one might have prophesied such great

things ! Oh !' — looking him again in the face,
and thankful for the opportunity of putting
herself a little on one side — ' I thought, when I
made up my mind to speak to you the other
day, that I might reckon on your sympathy,
your active help, that what the poor people
round us were suffering would have been of
more importance to you than any personal
advantage. But I — I have diligently inquired
I have tried to do yoa justice, and I find that
the little money you have doled out to these
poor dependents of ours is a mere drop in the
bucket, and that no benevolent plans for helping
them to help themselves, such as you talked
of at Oxford, are to be carried out.'

He made a deprecating movement with his
hand, but she continued,

Ah ! yes, I understand ; you are to be helpless
in all this. Crying evils are to go unremedied,
because you are a sleeping partner, or
no partner at all , in these injustices, and meanwhile
the profits are to come to you, and' —
lowering her voice and covering her face again
' to — me.'

He bowed his head ; he could speak now
without stammering, for he was more angry
than he had been at all.

I will not stoop to justify myself he said,
coldly, ' or I might have troubled you to hear
my side of the matter. You talk of these
things as if they were new to me, and, after
all, it strikes me as somewhat grotesque to
remember that no man at Oxford railed more
against *' Midas-eared Mammon," or talked of
the enfranchisement of the masses from the
reign of squalor and misery, than I did ; but —
it has pleased you to ignore my side of the
question.'

It is precisely because I do not ignore it —
that 1 think action is better than talk, and that
when you came home I thought it would be all
so different she began to explain, a little despairingly.


But it seemed as if he did not hear her; it
Wets as if the ringing in his ears and the thick
beating of his heart had made him a little
deaf.

There is only one comfort in all this he

said, a little slowly, ' that you have opened my
eyes to another mistake. You have done your
best to make me go from here — heartwhole.'

He raised his hat and was leaving her.

She had accomplished her purpose. The
part had been played well ; the game was
won. And yet what inconsistent change had
taken place in her heart, that she was beginning
to think of the whole episode as an
unhappy fatality ? Why should there be
tears of wounded feeling in her eyes, and why
should she suddenly wish to spoil a-U the effectiveness
of what she had already said, by what
seemed to her might be an explanation of her
strange behaviour, but which after all could
only amount to hysterical re-iteration.

You are an enigma to me — as great an
enigma as your father,' she said, in a voice
which sounded as if a little more would
make her cry. but I should like you
thoroughly to understand me. I admit that I
thought well of you from what I heard of you
before you came, and I have been perhaps
wrong to put a bad construction on what is a

puzzle to me; but that you should have talked
to others as if you were ready to stretch out a
band for help to your fellow-meu, and now —
now when you have an opportunity — show no
resolute desire to do your best — it is — odd —
you must admit. And,' with a sort of thrill of
pain shaking her, ' that you should insult mein
this way is more of a strange disappointment.
I try not to mind, for as a woman I
represent women — and,' with her hands fidget-ting
with the fastenings of her cloak in a wandering,
uncertain way, 'and — it may have
been thoughtlessness on your part — or ignorance
of how we women may feel. If so, I am
sorry for being unguarded in my language ; but
as a man of — of — honour, you must see that
the part you have been playing here is a part
likely to pain any woman. The brigand who
demands a man's life or his purse at least
allows him the liberty of choice. And you —
what liberty was left for me or for yourself ina
bargain like this ? You were to be drawn
into this calculating scheme, to be sacrificed
whether you liked it or not?'

Agitated as he was, he tried to make a sign
of smiling dissent.

But the growing anguish in her voice seemed
to deepen the gulf between them, as she continued,


Men mistake sometimes — they pay too much
for a horse or a dog. How much more likely
are they to be mistaken in a woman. I am
trying to think what could have led you to
entertain such ideas about me. If I were
good-looking it might be different — my hair
might be worth so much, and my smile so
much. It is not so long since they used to put
quadroons up for auction in India. The sale
could have nothing to do with their hearts,
that could be no part of the bargain. Oh, forgive
me. I am proud of my birth, proud of the
blood which flows in my veins, but if I had had
a negro mother I would have killed myself
rather than be turned into merchandise.'

She no longer made an effort to hide the
gathering tears, as she stretched out her hands
and said,

I believed in your kind words, your chivalrous

conduct towards women, your sympathy
for our troubles, your readiness to help us. I
liked to believe in it ; but now it seems it was
all — a — a mistake. I ought to have made
myself more agreeable to you. I know if [
had done my duty I should have done so,
instead of staking all my hopes on the certainty
of your refusal. If you could have had
the title, for instance, there might have been
something for you to gain. But oh, I have
heard so much about marriages in which there
was no congeniality of thoughts and tastes.
Think of two people living under the same roof,
unable to accommodate themselves to each other,
and too often with private disagreements. Can
you imagine any greater misery ? And what
blessing could there be upon our marriage if we
were to commence in a way like this. I did
not mean to make you angry. I was thinking
of you as well as myself. And I was sure you
would see as plainly as I do that it could
not be.'

He knew not which had been the hardest to
bear, the impetuous rush of words which had

been so little like her usual calmness, and
which had seemed to beat upon him like a
storm of shot and shell, or the low voice which
was diffident and trembling, but just as determined.
During the long compulsory silence he
had more than once told himself that this was
one of those deep-natured women who are seldom
openly stirred by strong emotion and who
rarely assert themselves, but who, when they
do, display a fixity of purpose and a strength of
will sufficient to sweep away any amount of
gainsaying.

I meant to have shown better tact, but I
have failed most dreadfully. I should make a
very bad diplomatist,' she continued, conquering
her emotion, and looking at him without
flinching.

Had he been less confused he would have
taken advantage of the undefinable something
in her manner, which showed that she was
anxious to prolong the interview. He might
have lost his opportunity. He thought so long
afterwards, when he remembered how, instead of
answering her at once, he stood staring at her

dumbly, feeling as if the seal were still set on
bis lips, and as if be bad not yet recovered ibis
senses sufficiently to answer ber. Could be
expect to understand all at once the innermost
sanctuary of a woman's heart ?

^ I do not blame you,' be said, after a pause
during which sbe noticed that be was powerfully
moved, *you bave scarcely given me time to
realise the situation. But I think, if you allow
me to say so, that you are not free from the
invincible pride for wbicb perhaps you are not
responsible. It is one of the vices of your rank.
Had you not been so bard on me, I might bave
cleared myself. But your words struck me. A
thunderbolt could not bave surprised me more.
If you allow me to speak now I swear to
you that, if I was not absolutely ignorant of all
that you mention, I was at least concerned in
no conspiracy.'

He could say no more. For a man of refined
instincts to be reminded by a woman that be
bad allowed himself to tamper with ber finer
feelings, and to be drawn into an arrangement
of this sort, was unbearable. He ought to bave

been able to falter and equivocate. He should
have been dignified and subtle, ready to suggest
excuses for himself, but he had quailed, as
if he were the weaker of the two in the emergency,
and novo ! he could only bear the burden
of his indecision and embarrassment.

A pang of humiliation, a sense of physical
pain of which he was ashamed as of a weakness,
could not be entirely hidden. For the
hand which he stretched out to her visibly
shook.

Good-bye he said, 'you were afraid of a
mesalliance, you need be afraid no longer. Your
pride would not allow you to brook the idea of
owing anything to a husband of plebeian blood.
And — and you are too frank by nature to keep
up a permanent reticence about anything.'

No, no, you are mistaken,' she cried, in horror
at the idea.

But it was too late for him to listen to her.
He tried to think of her in much the same way
in which he would have thought of a far-soli
star predestined to an orbit in which he could
not move. He had hesitated about asking.

Do you think I could be of any assistance to
you as a sort of elder brother ? I am very much
at your service. Sons^cannot always dictate to
fathers, but I flatter myself I have a fair
amount of influence with mine.'

But on second thoughts he dismissed the
idea of making any further advance as absurd.
And she too was conscious of that strange
revulsion of feeling which, when he had gone,
made her strain her eyes to look after him.
There were tears still in her eyes, which she
was forced to brush away, as they blinded her
sight. Her sense of injury ought to have been
soothed, but his last words had distressed her
singularly.

'It is all over now. I have set up a barrier
between us which nothing can remove.
Perhaps it was madness,' she said to herself.
But we never could have been happy in that
way. It was best to end it so ; but oh — if
he should think me forward and maidenly.'

CHAPTER IV.

As Godfrey left the shrubbery and returned to-his
house, he felt exasperated with what he
called his own weakness. He acknowledged
that be had been hard hit ; he who had never
yet been seriously crossed in anything. It
was as if his nerves still thrilled with the
effort of longing to speak and defend himself,
and of being unable to tell out the longing-concealed
in his heart. He knew that he had
answered stupidly, and felt as if he must have
looked like a dumb and ridiculous dupe. She
had made a direct appeal to his manliness
and sense of right, and his tongue had been
tied, owing to the double embarrassment of
feeling that there was a modicum of truth in
VOL. II.

the charges which she brought against him,
and the impossibility of explaining how little
he was to blame. He was worsted, discomfited,
routed. The whole scene had been incongruous,
and he felt shaken by it — so shaken
that he had to steady his steps. His arteries
throbbed, his temples were burning, and he
felt as if he would like to rest his aching head
on the wet grass.

It would have been possible, if he had wished
to attempt self-exculpation. It would have
been easy even now to moralise flippantly
about the impulsiveness and injustice of women.
But as his thoughts travelled quickly
over the history of the past, and as he tried
to consider the matter in a perfectly impartial
spirit, it was more natural to him to see his
own shortcomings with a cruel distinctness.
For his was one of those dispositions which
are ever painfully alive to their own deficiencies.
And the gifts words still stung him, as if she
had poison under her lips. For a moment
he tried to assume his father's cynicism, and
to congratulate himself on his escape from a

woman who was as formidable as this. But
the remembrance of the blue eyes, with tears
hanging on their lashes, and the quivering lips,
made this impossible. Yet it had been 'hard
lines ' for him, * cruelly hard lines he repeated
to himself How could he have allowed himself
to be placed in a position in which such
a woman could turn on him ? He had been
conscious of standing before her like a simpleton,
with no word to say for himself. But, if the
whole thing were to come over again, he would
be just as dumb with wounded pride, and with
nothing to sweeten the bitterness of his mortification.
For all the instincts with which he
honoured womanhood had arrayed themselves
on Vere's side, when she had stripped his father's
motives bare, and made him acknowledge himself
a culprit.

How direct and good she is he said to
himself, ' in spite of her anger — there was something
noble even in that anger. And I — I to
place her in such a vexatious, disagreeable
situation ! A sorry and contemptible figure I
must have cut,' he added with a laugh at his

o2

own expense, * as I stood before her, morally
detected, mentally stunned, and could only beat
a most cowardly retreat.'

All emotion is, as George Eliot says, ' obstinately
irrational,' and it would have been
useless to argue with him in his present
humour, or to make him see, as Vere was
beginning to see painfully already, that excessive
feeling, like ambition, may at times ' o'er-leap
itself, and fall on t'other side.' In real
life it often happens there is an irresistibly
comic element, never intended by the actors,
in tragedy itself; and the girl, who had a
keen sense of humour, was already taking
herself to task for her absurdity.

^ It would not have happened, but for this
wretched money. I v/ish I were out of it,' he
said again to himself. It had long been an
annoyance to him that he had never been able
to get a clear account from his father as to
how this money had been made. The consequences
of its possession, when there was a
mystery connected with it, had long disturbed
his slumbers and hindered his peace. He

determined that it should be so no longer.

Are ye so absent that ye can't see straight
before ye V asked Reuben, who met him as he
went towards the house, finding it somewhat
difficult to steady his steps.

The father had almost uttered one of his
guttural exclamations, which were apt to sound
like a stifled curse, as he saw his son's excited
face. There was no embarrassment or hangdog
look in it, but something which he found
it difficult to understand.

What has happened to ray dreamer ? you
come like a thunderstorm. We ought to strike
up, " See the Conquering Hero comes." '

What conqueror V asked Godfrey, feeling as
if hammers were still beating on his brain, and
struggling in vain to assume an indifferent
manner. ' Don't you think that about the
"conquering hero ' is a trifle hackneyed?'

He was ashamed of his rudeness directly he
had uttered the words. But Reuben was not
thin-skinned. He contented himself with vague
and facetious allusions by which he tried to
hide his evident anxiety.

The tone of bis voice was a trifle hoarse ashe
said,

Pluck up heart, my boy, you seem to be cast
down. Faint heart never won fair lady.'

You may spare yourself the trouble of
alluding to the subject,' murmured Godfrey, ina
low voice, ^ I only regret taking advantage
of Miss Rashleigh's painful position. I was
unskilful in my wooing. 1 do not deplore
it.'

The veins on Reuben's forehead stood out in
strange relief — the colour on his cheeks became
too deep and too blue.

Do me the honour to repeat that.'

There was an ominous pause. The young
man resented the bullying tone. The blood
leaped to his usually pale face, and for a few
moments he held in check a fiercer heat than
he had ever felt before in his life. Then the
tussle was over. He got his temper sufficiently
under his command to say again, in a low
voice,

I only regret taking advantage of Miss Rashleigh's
defenceless position. I have completely

failed, and the failure is not to be deplored.'

The pause had given Reuben time to see that
he had made a mistake, and he said, in a jaunty
tone,

Why, you are precious easy discouraged,
seems to me. You don't expect a gal to jump
down your throat without the asking?'

'No, we have spoken together on the
subject.'

And the minx refused you,' cried Reuben,
dashing his hand with fury on the table.

She had too much good taste to refuse
point-blanks''

What did she say V

That she was the victim of a conspiracy, and
if she consented to marry me under such circumstances,
it would not be for my own sake,
but only on account of her relations, and the —
money.'

Well, that's one for her — she scored a point
there. She has sense enough to see that money
is the great force which turns this world's
clappers.'

Oblige me by not bringing her name anymore

into the conversation,' answered Godfrey.

But the man's passion would have its way.

D — ce take the women,' he muttered, beneath
his breath. 'A cantankerous, ill-made,
thin-skinned, mawkish, mulish sex. One can
only tolerate their existence because the world
would stand still without 'em.' Godfrey drew
himself up to his full height. But, seeing the
expression in his son's face, the elder man tried
to laugh good-humouredly. ' I tell ye that
beggars can't be choosers. She ought to be
thankful enough to marry ye.'

Godfrey controlled himself again. He knew
that his father was not of his world, nor could
comprehend his chivalrous respect for womanhood.
Yet his voice vibrated strangely, and
jarred on his father as he tried to explain.

If I could have one of those dazzling birds
of Paradise which I used to admire when I
was a child,' he answered, still speaking deliberately,
as if he had learnt from Vere her
tone of assumed calmness, ' to perch on my
shoulder or nestle in my hand, I might thank
you for the present. But do you think I
should care to deprive it of its liberty, to see

it sitting movingly on its perch as quietly as if
it were stuffed and stuck up in a glass case, or
wild, and battering its poor wings against the
bars of its cage? Let it come to me of its freewill,
or not at all.'

That may be all very well for you. A chap
given to sentiments with eyes which look for
all the world as if he's a-seeing visions when
he had ought to be wide awake,' retorted
Reuben, with his words readier than usual,
but relapsing into the vernacular in his violent
irritation, and speaking half as if to himself.
A. thing that might have been brought to a
splendid end, frustrated, spoilt, because two
children pout. Because,' he continued, as if he
were quoting, 'the boy dishes "the favour of
the girl," and loves some doll instead — and the
girl Heaven grant me patience !'

I do not dislike the lady in question.
Miss • Rashleigh is irreproachable, and I cannot
have her spoken of in that light way. She
was naturally angry with me for proposing a
mysterious rendezvous ; she divined the meaning
of it, and treated me as I deserved.'

You were a namby-pamby fool.'

I agree with you — I was a fool to be drawn
into such a project. I think that Miss Rashleigh
reasoned soundly — more soundly than the
persons who drove her to speak out.'

Hold your tongue, simpleton !' shouted
Reuben, fairly beside himself with rage.

*You must let me have my say. I repeat
she is right. I could not give her the reparation
she required. I could not tell her the
accusations were untrue. She might have
loved me, had not her mind been prejudiced
against me by this absurd project. But, as it
is, you have opened an abyss between us.'

Truly, you must have milk in your veins
instead o' blood,' said the older man, with
another scornful glance, * and she as proud as
Lucifer V

Who can wonder that she is proud ? She
comes of a race in which pride is considered to
be a virtue. She is possessed of that sort of
innocence and candour one generally associates
with superhuman beings ; but she is courageous
besides. I do not think the less of her for
her remarkable firmness of character. She did

not address to me one Avoid which was too
bitter, considering the circumstances which
were likely to tm'n her heart against mea

new sort of fear occurred to the father,
especially when Godfrey added,

Let me alone ; it is not myself that I care
about — it is because a woman has suffered, and
that woman, if you care to hear it, I love dearly
as my own life. Under other circumstances,
we might have been happy together, and now
I could only leave her with a sensation of
shame."

Don't expect me to care about the ins-ardours
of your love affairs,' said Reuben, beginning
to be a little more alarmed. ' There's
more fish in the sea yet. We'll show her that
there are others as well worth the having.
It's right that you should marry, and that little
girl Dorothy will grow up prettier by half than
her cousin. And I can answer for her accepting
ye. I'll have no more half-measures about
this here estate.'

Reuben's grammar was becoming wild, but
his son's face remained impenetrable.

You try ray sense of duty too far he muttered,
between his teeth.

His father did not hear him. He continued,

This'll tame the shrew. Though, dien I
think on't, if you'd urged her — spoke to her
more lover-like '

'\ told you I would not allow her name to
be brought into the conversation.'

The load, concentrated voice was not to beset
at nought, and Reuben said, more gently,

But the other maid.'

'the idea is monstrous. Before I consented,
on this last occasion, to make love to any lady
according to your primitive notions, I ought to
have been pretty sure that her wishes lay in
the same direction. This infatuated pursuit of
her was, to say the least of it, undesirable.
But I absolutely repudiate any idea of repeating
the mistake. I wall have nothing to do
with such a lunatic bargain. Good God — does
it need saying? — 1 would rather eat the dust
off my shoes !'

And Reuben, looking at him, saw that the
lad's face was as white as the face of a corpse.

The strange, self-reliant man who had borne
every vicissitude of hunger, fatigue, endurance,
and self-denial for thirty-three years — always
with a view to the accomplishment of a wild
purpose — was almost ready to hate himself at
that moment. In his son's apparent weakness
lay his strength against him.

He approached Godfrey with a curious tenderness,
placing his arm so as to support him.
But the lad motioned him away with a movement
almost like disgust.

No, I can walk quite well,' he said, turning
instinctively in his agitation towards the
shadier plantation. ' You talked to me once
before,' he muttered, as soon as he could command
his voice, ' about bringing Sir Ralph on
his " marrowbones " before you. Why do you
bear these Rashleighs such a grudge V

Then for the first time he heard his fathers
tale.

A grudge ! If to bear a grudge was to
wish as he had washed for years to see another
man humiliated and stamped on as he had been
stamped himself with the marks of degradation V

Reuben laughed aloud. He could not have
told why he laughed, unless it was at the incredible
irony of Fate. To have spoilt his own
life in the mad fury of his desire for vengeance,
and every time to be foiled — so as to feel sick
and ashamed of his deeply-nursed revenge —
to be opposed by his own son on the second
occasion when the time for his reckoning seemed
to have come, and when he was near the
achievement of a purpose which he had cherished
for so many weary years! It made him
laugh like a madman It was something to be
able to pride himself on the steady working-out
of his own will, and to witness the fulfilment
of a curse which had turned the human
kindness in his heart to gall. But somehow
the Fates had been against him, and the curse
was scarcely so pleasant in its fulfilment as he
had expected.

It is the unexpected (as Disraeli said) which
always happens. And once before at the
very moment when Reuben was holding the
trump card — after a series of almost unprecedented
successes, following years of treadmill

work — it had been dashed out of his hand. Was
it accident, or was it some spiritual agency outside
his fell purpose, Which had so ordered it
that on the very day when— fearful of revealing
himself for an instant to his simple countrymen
Reuben was driving to take possession of the
property which he had purchased the man
whom he had intended to see writhe under his
threats was struck by the hand of death which
disarmed his human arm. There had been a
feeling akin to murder in the heart of the
self-made man who had returned triumphant.
He had intended his enemy to sue to him for
mercy, and to acknowledge the bitterness of a
thrust which he could entrust to no deputy.
He had reminded himself, when Sir George was
dead, that into his deeply-laid plan of revenge
there had entered no question of personal violence.
He had simply intended to poison the
baronet's life for him, just as his own life had
been early poisoned by the injustice to which he
had imagined Sir George had subjected him. He
had meant to humiliate him through bitter experiences
of poverty ; he had intended to grind

down by slow degrees that tormenter of his
boyhood, the remembrance of whom had been a
thorn in his side all his life — a shadow in his
path. But he was just too late.

He tried to explain something of this to his
son.

^ I had not forgotten. It was impossible forme
to forget. I bear the marks of his cruelty
stilL'

He repeated this almost mechanically ; he had
repeated it so often before. But somehow the
old argument did not avail when Sir George
was dead. The difficulty which' had made it
impossible for Reuben to accept a religion'
which said to him ' forgive,' seemed somewhat
to have melted away. He began to perceive
that the revenge which he had nursed was out
of all proportion to the offence supposed to have
been committed. He had prided himself on
not being superstitious, but he certainly was
uncomfortable when old Sir George's funeral
had filed past his house, for it seemed as if
his desire for vengeance had been anticipated in
rather a ghastly way.

Under any circumstances, it is a curious experience
to come back to a place which you
have photographed in your memory for years,
to find the place itself and the whole train of
associations connected with it — utterly changed.
If the memory of it has been like an old
tune breaking unpleasantly on your present
associations, and if the mood in which you left
the spot has been an evil one haunting you,
and pre-occupying you to the detriment of better
things, the best way to destroy the disagreeable
illusion is to go back, and see it with the
matter-of-fact, work-a-day eyes which may
help you to sweep away the unhealthy fabric
of the dream at once.

But if at the same time there has been one
of those strange coincidences which so constantly
occur in life— a coincidence difficult to
dismiss from the mind, as one of those mere
accidents which are supposed to have nothing
to do with an over-ruling Providence — a coincidence,
moreover, which arrests you in a
purpose, stands in your path in an obstinate
fashion, like Balsams ass — you will be apt to

VOL. II. P

feel at the same time a little staggered and
ashamed.

I suppose each of ns might imagine a mental
agony which we might define, according to our
several temperaments, as the greatest imaginable
unhappiness in life. But could anything
surpass the pang of a martyr chained to a
stake, and realising just as. the flames were lit
that the purpose for which he was to suffer
was, after all, a mistaken one? It was with
a feeling akin to this that Reuben, who had
spent years of painful deprivation in order that
an old man might feel the anguish of mental
blows as poignantly as he himself had felt
the physical blows — the marks of which he
bore yet — had acknowledged that the triumph
had been taken from him, and that there was
little of the expected aroma of vengeance in
reflecting that Sir George's sins might be visited
on his children.

After all, the reckoning had to be with Sir
Ralph, and the sight of Sir Ralph's niece had
suggested a project as ambitious, but more
benevolent to Reuben's busy brain. Sir Ralph

was not the roan who had wronged him ; the
son could not be responsible for the father's
mistakes. And Reuben, who had one tender
place in his heart, shrank from aiming blows
that might threaten other interests which were
dear to him. He told himself that he was
human, and that there might be, after all, some
truth in the teaching of the parsons. In his
own case, he had felt as if he could never
respond again to human weaknesses, except
in the matter of his only son. All women, from
his point of view, were but toys. He had
never thought of his own wife as different
from the rest of them, But when Godfrey
had been born — a new kind of child, with a
love for-flowery lanes and green fields — a child
of a romantic habit of mind, who passed his
time in dreams and imaginative reveries — he
regarded him with tenderness, mixed with a
modicum of contempt.

The idea of righting himself from injury was
as strong as ever, but it had assumed another
form. If he had had no other interest, no
concern in the world but himself, it might still

p2

have taken the form of hatred. It would have
been easy then, but now he could no longer
persuade himself that all the love in his nature
had turned to gall. His triumph might be
used to humiliate Sir Ralph, and at the same
time to spare him to a certain extent by raising
Godfrey. Stubborn and unforgiving as Reuben
was at heart, he was still a little tickled
by the humorous idea that old Sir George's ghost
supposing it to be conscious of that which was
taking place on this earth of ours — would be
maddened at the thought that his grand-daughter
had been forced to marry the son of that
thief whom he had caused to be flogged and
imprisoned.

Reuben had wished the old baronet to ^ die
a dog's death,' and his conscience was sometimes
troubled by the remembrance of this wish.
But there would be a sort of poetic justice in
the other finale. He had several times rehearsed
the scene in which he intended to disclose
his origin to Sir Ralph , as soon as the
marriage had irrevocably taken place. He would
like to see the expression on the proud man's

face ^vheu he beard that his niece had
married the son of a gaol-bird. But Godfrey's
fastidious scruples had ruined the ^'ell-laid
plan.

CHAPTER V.

There was silence when Reuben finished his
tale, which had been told by degrees in abrupt,
jerky sentences, in the plain, incisive English
of which the man had a fair command, though
he did not always speak it with grammatical
correctness. Both men, by common consent,
had seated themselves on a rustic bench, and
the elder one did not look at his son when he
had finished, but settled himself again on the
bench from which he had risen in the excitement
of the narrative, dropping his arms by his
side, while that part of his face which was not
covered by the beard assumed again the hard
rigidity which for a time had relaxed.

He was waiting his son's answer with an

intensity of expectation. If be did not expect
applause, he had counted on his sympathy.
But the heart-drawn sigh of the younger man
was certainly not encouraging. Godfrey, indeed,
was stunned, and trying to think. He
had heard the tragic tale with his outward ears,
but his inward senses had refused to take it in.
Waves seemed to be passing over his mind in
which his intelligence was submerged. The
bitterness of his father's speech had been as
painful for him to listen to, as his excitement
had been painful to witness.

Reuben's eyes had been wild and troubled ashe
told the story, and his hands had trembled
like those of a drunken man. It was a strange,
unnatural story for a man of Godfrey's refined
instincts and cultivated tastes to hear. Yet
Reuben was his father still ; and, if he had
nursed his revenge beyond the ordinary course
of nature, somehow he had conquered it at last.
His success in life had probably been owing toit.
In Reuben's case, the generalisation of ' La
Buyers' with regard to love had only been
exemplified in another way. Hatred and vengeance

had led to ambitious but Godfrey — as socii
as his thoughts became clearer — had a hope
that in his father's case ambition would never
be likely to return again to the meaner passion
which had inspired it. Reuben had tried to keep
the passion np ; but more than thirty years was
too long a time, and for want of fuel it had died.

Thank you for telling me. You were treated
abominably. But the time which has passed
should wipe out the score,' said the younger
man, after a painful pause.

And yet you sit there and refuse to help
me!'

I haven't it in my power,' answered the
other man, slowly. * If I had, would you wish
me to take part in a wrong? Sir Ralph's niece
had nothing to do with it — nor Sir Ralph himself.
Don't think me unkind, but I confess, if I
had heard all this before, it would have made
it more difficult than ever for me to address
Miss Rashleigh.'

'As how?'

Godfrey could not answer, but muttered
something about its being more difficult than

ever, in case of bis parentage becoming known.
He himself would think none the less of his
parentage and be was careful, even in trying
to explain himself, to bide bow great a shock it
bad been to bim to bear of bis father's irregular
birth.

It is bard to make you understand,' be said,
a little feverishly. ' It is well for you to have
told me all this story — there ought to be nothing
bidden between us ; but it might — it
might be an impediment to '

You tell me this to my face !'

'Why not? I can understand bow the
cruelty practised on you in your childhood may
have haunted you in the way which you describe.
It is horrible to think of you passing
through the years, unloved and misunderstood,
with a nightmare like this driving you almost
to madness. But the thing is past. Would
you have me bind a curse like this up with my
life? Should a marriage have anything to do
with revenge?'

He could hear bis father's bard breathing in
the second pause which ensued. The two

characters were so utterly different that it was
difficult for Godfrey to understand how any
injury could so have eaten into a naturally
loving heart, as to make Reuben go on his
unforgiving way week after week, month after
month, year after year. In this world of death,
where there are so many sorrows to be healed
— so many wounds to be bound up, so
much suffering to be hidden — it seemed almost
beyond the bounds of possibility that a
man could deliberately have gone on creating
a worse horror — a hell for himself shut out
from the sweet light of heaven. Self-mutilation
of this kind , lopping away all the joyousness
and real happiness of life — condemning
oneself to the outer darkness while the 
was going on and the door not
shut, was incomprehensible from any point of
view in which the younger man could look
at it.

He was sorry, but he would keep his own
soul unspotted. He had his own honour to
think of ; he needed a quiet brain — to be still
and think.

Then Reuben's voice broke forth again in
angry protest, and, as he looked contemptuously
at his son, he cried,

I compliment 'ye on your womanish weakness,
yer mean-spirited cowardice. But unfortunately
I can't take yer advice. The family
has made me suffer, and it's right as the
family should suffer in its turn. I don't
credit Sir Ralph with fine feelings, but I compliment
you on yours.'

Thank you,' murmured his son, suddenly
chilled.

The moment has struck when I shall be
able to pay the family in good coin for the
turn it did me. No audacity on the part of
a gal shall stop me, and I think I may add,
no audacity on the part of my own boy.'

I think it is your duty to do all you canto
repair the mischief from which you suffered
— no such cruelties are practised in our
time — but not to make the innocent suffer.'

'My duty! 1 tell you what, young man,'
answered Reuben, buttoning his coat, while
he tried in vain to keep his blood cool, ^ you

altogether forget herself in the way you
allow herself to speak to rae. They may
well say that nowadays children dictate to
parents, and parents obey children. But this
is question of right and justice. I've bought
the property, 1 can do what I like wi' it.'

'It is not a question of justice, but of pure
humanity. You bring this accusation against
the grandfather, and it rebounds upon the
granddaughter — a helpless girl of twenty whose
dignity is injured.'

Ah — h !' answered Reuben, with the guttural
sound in his throat which jarred disagreeably
on Godfrey's nerves, 'there's the explanation
of all this palaver, you think a deal more of
this fine lady than you do of me.'

If you mean that I love her, you are right ;
and yet I don't wish, under present circumstances,
to marry her. You can't strike
her without striking me V

Reuben smiled ironically.

My boy, you don't know me. If I've once
said as a thing can be done, no tall talk o' this
sort can shake me.'

If a blow is to be dealt, it should be at once,'
he said to himself. ' Short and sharp, that's
my way.'

Godfrey did not answer, though he rose to
go. He wished he did not know a secret which
he must not be so rash as to tell, but which
haunted him as if the very air could tell it.

CHAPTER VI.

Godfrey, who slept but little that night, was
up as soon as the day began to dawn. It was
almost instinctively that he bent his steps to
the old burial ground at Torriugmoor which his
father had described. It had been too late to
put a headstone over the undistinguishable
grave of the woman who had done her best to
influence the waif for good. But Godfrey
noticed that the weeds which grew rankly in
other parts of the graveyard had been cleared
in the corner where all that was earthly of
Mary Burton had been laid, and that a few
flowers had been planted.

There is more than one weak spot in his
heart after alL It explains a great deal,' reflected

the young man a little tenderly, as he
put his hand within the rails and plucked a
moon-daisy, 'and yet it will be better for us to
part.'

His hot human protest, his determination to
assert his will in this crisis, seemed somehow. to
be calmed by the recollection of the quiet
sleepers for whom the love and hate, passion
and madness of this life had passed away.
They had been paupers, knowing not so much
of the joy as of the sorrow of this world. Their
hearts must have throbbed as his did once.
Human tragedies must have been enacted by
some of them. And yet — one could not think
of them now in connection with pitiful heart-burnings
and raging passions. He put the
moon-daisy in his pocket-book, and returned
saying nothing of his long walk — to the
breakfast-table.

He had made up his mind, and had said over
and over to himself, in that quiet walk over the
moor,

'Stay here! — to be ground down to a moral
level which I have always scorned ! To have

the life worried out of me, and to learn at last
to despise myself — it is not to be thought of.'

All his wishes, which had long been curbed,
were now turning towards a freer life — where
the race was to the swift, and the battle to the
strong. He did not over-estimate his own
capacities, and yet he was conscious of a
longing to measure himself with others, who
might be better men than he. Anything rather
than remain in this dull mediocrity. His last
conversation with his father had been like the
scattering of mists, revealing ' rocks ahead ^
which he had hitherto scarcely suspected.

The very thought of the money which he was
to inherit was a torture to him. He had been
right when he had told Yere that he had always
despised it. The comforts with which he had
been surrounded from his earliest boyhood came
as naturally to him as the air he breathed, and
it was difficult for him to form the slightest
idea of what it might be for him to miss them.
His father's treatment of the tenants had done
much to arouse him, and Vere's allusion to the
the way in which action in his own case seemed

to be divorced from duty had determined him
more than ever to be no longer like a sleepwalker
among drowsy men. It was no time
for ease and comfort.

In his somewhat morbid state of self-reproach
he thought that he could guess how Reuben
had made his money, from the knowledge of
how it was left to gather now like a cruel avalanche
sweeping away everything helpless
before it. He could not redeem the past by any
self-sacrifice, but he was responsible for the
present. The evils of which he was conscious
around him seemed to him no longer for slow
cure, but for rapid and slashing amputation of
everything that offended.

His last conversation about the poor people
had been utterly useless. He could not improve
the cottages or interfere with the tenants
without leave from his father. Further discussion
on the subject had long ago threatened
to become violent. Reuben had not advanced
one step to meet his son inane of his benevolent
projects. Godfrey was checkmated. He had
heard that, since his father had bought up

VOL. II. Q

nearly all the territory originally belonging to
the Rashleigh family, the agent whom he employed
had driven out many a peasant to starve
or to betake himself and his wife and children
to the Torringmoor workhouse. None of the
accusations hinted at by Vere had been unfounded.


And so, at the first allusion to money — Reuben's
favourite subject — the young man spoke
out.

I wish it did not belong to you, or that it
was not to come to me,' was his passionate cry.
It seems to me that this constant desire for
money, money, money must dwindle and wither
all that is best in us. I honour you for your
work, I honour you for your self-denial, but it
may be better for me to labour as you did before
me. Not for hoarding, not for saving, not
for leaving a fortune before me when I die — for
it seems to me that directly we begin to care
about money for its own sake we are digging a
ditch, or widening the breach which already
exists between us and all that is best. The
money becomes like a heavy weight keeping one

down to the slums of life. After all, what can
it purchase but the poorest of food for the wants
of — he was going to sap, 'our higher natures?'
but he stopped short.

A humorist would have been tickled by the
puzzled expression of Reuben's face, as his son
tried to pull himself up and continued, with a
sort of half-apology,

I suppose I have something of the vagrant
in my blood. You will think so if I confess
that I dislike to be chained to a part of the
world, to feel that here I must live, and have
^11 my little amusements, and suffer and die
and be buried. It makes me inclined to hate
the place. In what sense do we really possess
it. No man can possess any part of God's earth
in such a sense as to keep his brethren from
enjoying it. If he does, his selfishness is arrant.
And if he lets the other men feast on it with
their eyes, so that its beauty can sink into their
hearts, and it becomes a part of their ' — he was
going to say ' individual consciousness,' but
corrected it into plainer English — ' their very
selves, in a certain sense they possess it too.'

q2

'Are you joking?' asked Reuben, leaning
his elbows on the table and looking at him
as he would have looked at some natural
curiosity.

No, I am in earnest. If I never talked to
you in this way before, it was because I knew
you would think me mad. But it is not madness.
I am in sober earnest when I tell you
that long ago, as long as when I first
began to think, it seemed to me that what we
call the " economic relations " of society are all
rotten and confused. That one set of men
should claim the land for themselves and others
should be condemned to stifling fireplaces
with insufficient wages and piastres for houses,
seemed to me something terrible. And what
do we gain by it ? When we are dead, both of
us, these trees may be cut down, or the ground
let into building leases. The water may go on
sparkling as merrily as ever, or it may be blackened
by manufactories. In either case, six feet
of earth will serve us for our graves, and it
will be of little consequence that we once had
the temerity to call the place ours'

Eeuben's face looked only somewhat paler
aud more mask-like than nsnal, but the hands
shook which he still rested on the table.

He was a Radical in so far that he would like
to humble the pride of the aristocratic class of
the human race ; but he had nothing in common
with the democrat who should relentlessly pull
down the very heights which he had slaved to
reach. There were certain 'distinctions of
wealth which he considered to be binding upon
the world at large, and the people who rebelled
against them should, according to his creed, be
treated as lunatics or criminals. To attempt
to alter these distinctions by the slow processes
of evolution, which were not in keeping with
the ideas of vehement youth, would have
been almost as abhorrent to him as Godfrey's
denunciations. He himself was ready to fly
out in imprecations and furious words, and his
passion was almost aggravated by his attempts
at self-control.

He got up and paced the room with heavy
steps, the perspiration standing in beads on his
forehead, and there was such a concentration of

wrath in his low, vehement voice when he murmured,
' What are ye driving at now T that it cost
the son a greater effort to answer than if he
had been addressed in the roughest and coarsest
tones.

The old tendency to stammering which, in
the earlier part of his life, had prevented Godfrey
from ever making an orator, with real success,
and which had so effectually closed his lips
when he would have done better to answer
Vere, came upon him as he tried to reply,
courteously yet firmly,

'I beg you to rid me of this wealth. Enjoy
a part of it during your life-time, and after
your death let it be divided amongst the people
who need it most. My own belief is that, as
the world goes on, the personal possession of
large tracts of land will become a thing impossible.
It will no longer give some few
undue control over the happiness and industry
of the majority. That moor, or even a part
of it, is not yours. That we should fancy weare
the sole possessors of even a part of it is
inconsistent with the freedom and welfare of a
large number of people hereabouts.'

He spoke hesitatingly, as if he were reciting
a lesson, as in truth he was. He had repeated
the words to himself previous to the interview,
as if he were aware that his was one of those
natures with impressionable nerves ^vhich are
likely to appear at their worst in a difficult
emergency.

His keen sympathy for suffering of any kind,
especially the inflicting of disappointment —
hardest of all in the case of his own father —
made it well that he had done so. For Reuben
— who had been annoyed beyond expression
on the prcA^ous night, and could not bring
himself to believe that he was face to face
with an obstacle which he had not strength
to overcome — was now fairly dazed.

Bosh !' he muttered, ' the lad is worried and
queer.'

That the prize on which lie had so certainly
counted should be ready to escape him seemed
incredible enough. But that his son should be

losing his head! He began to think of

medical nostrums, and determined to consulta
doctor that very afternoon.

I don't know hove to make yon see my side
of the question without seeming to be priggish,'
said Godfrey, in tones of apology.

He was perfectly well aware that his father
must think he was endeavouring to bring down
the existing structure of society, and he did not
feel much like a vigorous Samson to make it
totter to its foundations.

'Ridiculous humbug!' again growled Reuben,
who had certainly no fancy for the re-distribution
of the property which he had worked so
hard to acquire.

How would it be possible for Godfrey to
break to him the novel idea that he might distinguish
himself by taking the part of a philanthropist,
and be thankful for the opportunity
of getting rid of his millions by sharing them,
as a means of enjoyment, with the people ? It
would have taken generations to produce a
man like Reuben, who could be properly grateful
for the coming change. His son represented
himself. All his hopes for the future had been
centred in him.

The purple shade on his face grew darker

and deeper, as Godfrey tried to explain.

• You told me the story of your childhood
last night — it was kind of you to do so — but
you told me nothing of the means by which
you made your wealth. Forgive me if I say
that some sort of confidence of that kind is
needed between a man and his heir — I do not
say a father and a son, though one might
suppose the confidence would be increased by
ties of blood — but some lessening of reserve
in most cases is necessary for the proper enjoyment
of a property which has been acquired —
in — in '

So you wish to make conditions before you
accept what I have to offer ye ? I call that a
queer start,' said Reuben, irritated into vulgarity.

'And yet you, on your side, wish to make
the inheritance of your fortune conditional on
my marrying some lady whom you choose,
though ■ that condition may not be agreeable
to the lady. You have a perfect right to do
so,' he said, with an apparent calmness which
Reuben felt to be still more irritating. ' No
cue can dispute your further right to reserve

to yourself the secret of how that fortune has
been acquired. I should be impertinent to
inquire into more than you have chosen to tell
me. But, at any rate, I may withdraw from
my share in arrangements of which I know
nothing. Our opinions as to the management
of such property are altogether different. My
position was difficult from the first ; I do not
see any hope of its becoming easier. Your
money can only be mine on conditions, and I
foresee that fresh difficulties will constantly
arise between us.'

One might think you'd been rehearsing in a
penny theatre,' sneered the angry father, as he
continued,

^ Some of these difficulties are conscientious
ones to me, and a man cannot easily submit to
conditions where his conscience is concerned.
It is not merely your opinion about marriage,
but your opinions about nearly everything are
the opposite of mine. This is our misfortune —
not our fault. Heaven grant that you may
live to a good old age, but by that time I shall
be a middle-aged man, forced for the best years

of my life to submit to spending money on my
own luxuries — money which has been wrung
from others by modes which '

He was going to add ' which do not commend
themselves to me,' but stopped himself intime.


Reuben muttered something about the infatuation
of the lad, and his indifference to all the
gold which had been lavished on him.

There are plenty of philanthropic institutions
which would be glad of it. Why not leave it
to them f Godfrey said, beneath his breath.

But, low as he spoke, the older man heard him.
It was the final blow. All his plans were foiled.
The dream of the projected marriage had collapsed
like a soap bubble. Only in a heated
moment had he let words fall about the history
of his life which he now would have given
much to recall. It was what Godfrey had
said which had forced his secret from him.
He regretted too late the moment of weakness,
and said, in his loudest voice,

Then if you are in earnest — if you prefer to
make me miserable — to see me beggared in my

old age rather than remain and make me
happy, you must go your own way. You
would curse me wi' beggary, and in spite of
all I have done for ye — you refuse to remain
by me. Go, and be d — d.'

The ugly purple was deepening on Reuben
face, and he looked as if he would have liked to
detain his son in the vice of his strong grip.
Tragedies in real life are generally quiet. In
this case as in others there was little more
froth of words to betray the turmoil which was
raging within the hearts of both men.

The same spasm of pain which had passed
over the elder man's usually impassive face
was repeated on the son's.

Look here ; I don't mean to be rude to you,
father. I owe you a great deal. But we have
had too much argument already on some of
these matters. We shall never agree. Spare
me your reproaches.'

The storm of passion in Reuben again tried
to get to the front ; but the evil words which
he was ready to utter seemed to be strangled
in his throat.

I will not be cozened into ' he began,

but could not finish his sentence.

Overborne by his son's unexpected energy,
and his vain attempts to cow him into submission,
he gazed at him for a few moments in
stupefaction, and then broke into half-derisive
laughter.

Godfrey fairly hid his face in his arms and
groaned. The indelible recollection of that
laughter haunted his memory afterwards. It
was even a relief when Reuben regained his
voice sufficiently to say,

I wash my hands of ye ; I cast ye off from
this moment. Let me never hear your name
again.'

Perhaps it will be better,' said the younger
man, trying to speak calmly. ' It is a solution
of the difficulty which should have come badly
from me ; but, now that you suggest it yourself,
it may be the only one for both of us. You
tell me things with no permission to reveal
them, and our way of looking at nearly everything
is diametrically opposite. 1 have too
long stifled my convictions, and dreamt the

dream of an epicurean. It is time for me to
prefer labour to slothful indifference. It will
be better for me to be independent of substantial
aid. Do not think I am raving, and do not
trouble yourself. I shall not bother you. I
will leave so quietly that there shall be no
scandal about it,' answered the younger man.

It was like a bad dream to him afterwards to
remember his father's answer.

^ Go and try to earn money, to be free from
the burden of my charity. Go and get enough
with your white hands, and fling it in my face.'

The words rang like thunder in Godfrey's
ears, who had a sensation as if he had been in
long confinement, when at last he reached the
outer air.

In less than a couple of hours afterwards he
was turning his back on Torringmoor. Still
the echoes of that angry voice seemed to be
ringing in his ears, 'Go and try, you simpleton;
ye can do nothing for yourself,' as with a small
portmanteau, containing all that he cared to
take away of his worldly goods, he made hi
way across moor and lane. Long afterwards

he remembered the clucking of the hens in the
poultry-yard, and that it was the time when
the clematis began to run to seed, as his eye
had been attracted by the appearance, like
white foam, on some of the bushes — in spite of
his dizziness. Voices were calling, and dogs
barking from some of the gardens which he
passed, and a girl lingered at the door of one
of the houses, watching him with some curiosity.
At Torringmoor he surrendered his
portmanteau to a small boy, and quietly nodded
to some of his friends as he took a third-class
carriage to London.

He had always travelled first-class before;
he thought it was a pity he had been so lapped
in luxury. Unfortunately he had been brought
up like a gentleman at leisure, and had led a
useless, if a harmless, life.

lyell, it is never too late to mend — and to
show that I can do something for myself,' he
thought, trying to laugh at his own excessive
feeling, which seemed to be out of all proportion
to the change in his circumstances.

It is only that I pitched my ideas too high ;

but that would scarcely account for ray being
so terribly unstrung,' he said again, as he wiped
the moisture from his brow, and knew that it
was not only for his father's mortification, but
for the woman whom he had left behind, for
whom he was so distressed. ' Better, after all,'
said the same inward voice, ' better that you
should go away even for her sake. You will
be a dozen times as strong to resist the temptation
of falling into a plan of which you do
not approve, and resisting temptation in her
absence.'

^ If I love her,' he repeated, ' should I wish
to work her misery V

The very argument made him realise that he
was hoping one day to regain the affection
which, he told himself, he had been so unfortunate
as to lose by a blunder.

My motto is — content ^vith this :

Gold. rank. I prize not such.

That which I have my measure is ;

\Yise men desire not much.

Men-wish and wish, and have their will.

And wish again as hungry still.

From Claudius.

VOL. I!. ■ B

CHAPTER I.

It cannot be said that Reuben Sellwood had
any serious fear of the result of the angry conversation
which had taken place between himself
and his son. That Godfrey should leave
his luxurious home as suddenly as a nomad
leaves his encampment — who strikes his tent,
and, when the morning comes, the place which
had known him knows him no more — had
never occurred to him as possible. It was
true that Godfrey had shown a special aversion
for the pageantry of wealth, but there
could be no doubt that he enjoyed all the
little comforts to be derived from unostentatious
luxury. And in this respect Reuben had
deferred to his son's taste. Reserved as he

h2

was himself, he was not sorry to learn by
degrees how essentially the details of an
English patrician household of the nineteenth
century differed from the somewhat more barbaric
show of the century which had preceded
it.

Godfrey had persuaded his father to dispense
with unnecessary servants, to prefer swift and
smooth-rolling carriages to the spectacle of
gorgeous liveries, and simple meals perfectly
served to more costly dinners. But these
things, as he knew, were second-nature to
his son. Delicately nurtured, and with the
refined tastes of a woman, it did not seem to
Reuben possible that his * poet ' could exist
without the gold of Dives to minister to his
tastes.

Consequently he whistled to himself more
in amusement than in discomfort when it appeared
that the young man had not occupied
his bed on the night in question.

He had taken a constitooshinal,' so Reuben
pronounced it ; 'it 'ud cool him, and bring him
back to his right senses.'

But when he waited a week, and there came
no message from his sou, he began to think that
Godfrey's ferment of opinion was unusually
long in subsiding. Another week passed, and
still no message or letter. Then it was that
by degrees Reuben began to comprehend how
the young man had taken him at his word, and
how it was possible that Godfrey might, after
all, have acted not from impulse, but from
definite purpose.

Had Godfrey's nature been more superficial,
or less easily wounded by that which seemed
to him coarse interference with his own personal
feelings, there might have been more hope
for Reuben. He had insulted his son and bid
him depart. Nothing could recall that son
now.

After a week's interval, the expected note
arrived. It bore no date and the post-mark
proved to be misleading.

If I had thought it possible,' Godfrey wrote,
to say good-bye without rousing further ill-will,
I would gladly have done so. I thank you
for all your kindness in the past. Yeu were

right to take the opportunity of getting rid of
me. I could no longer have satisfied yon, or
have fulfilled your wishes, and you v^rould have
taken umbrage every time that I ventured to
declare my opinions. Even if I could have
succeeded in generally stifling my thoughts, the
situation would have been strained, and you
would infallibly have tired of me. I could no
longer find nourishment out of the narrow-necked
bottles which you thought would be
sufficient for me. It might have ended horribly.
Fate has spared us both much misery in
bringing matters to a climax so abruptly. If in
any way I hurt your feelings I beg a thousand
pardons. Vont trouble about me. Why should
I be pitied even if I were to return to the people
from whom you now have told me I have
sprung? I have hands and can work. I have
brains and can use them. I hope, when you
think of it seriously, you will find nothing worthy
of condemnation in the step which I have
taken. Since I cannot recompense you in the
way that you wish, nothing remains for me but
to take you at your word, and relieve you of a

presence which has become wearisome to yon.
To renew the contest would be worse than
useless. Silence, in a case like this, may be for
our common interest. But, if I may ask one
favour, 1 would say arrange everything with
regard to money independently of me. You
know the amount of your fortune ; I. neither
know nor wish to know anything about it.
But, if possible, I should like you to make the
lady, whom you used so justly to admire, sufficiently
independent to be able to continue to
live in the house which belonged to her forefathers.
Do not blame me for pleading he?' interests
rather than my own. She and her little
cousin have been brought up in a way likely to
make privation exceedingly painful to them, and
Sir Ralph's health is in a state which is far
from satisfactory.'

The letter had been a rambling one and
difficult to write, for how could he tell his father
that, if that father had trusted his secrets to
him before, he (Godfrey) would have refused to
be made an accomplice in such folly.

But the following mysterious missive which

Vere Rashleig'h received about the same time
had been more difficult still to compose. Godfrey
felt, in writing it, so much like the hero of
a French melodrama, whose situation resembled
his own, that he was abrupt rather than sentimental
in composing it.

Thank you for opening my eyes to see the
ridiculous figure which I must have cut, not
only in your sight, but in that of all other
sensible men and women. Pardon me for having
made you suffer. I will do my best to
make amends, even though I do not feel yet as
if I were equal to making a defence. To enter
into a lengthy explanation, and to shift the
burden on other shoulders than mine would dono
good to either of us. I feel as if I have
been guilty of a foolish act, and have brought
fresh misfortune on one whom I love better than
anyone else in the world. My only resource is
to leave the place in which I ruined myself by
my own imprudence, nor shall I venture to
address you again at present. I have no cause
for complaint.

• It is no hardship to break with the past, and

to set out as other men have done before me,
"smith my little boat, alone into unexplored
waters. Probably it matters nothing to you
whether I sink or swim. To prevent the former
catastrophe , I may hold on to some bit of
wreckage, but in that case you will never hear
of me. If, to take a more hopeful view, 1 can
grapple with the current as other nobodies have
done before me — if I can make a name or have
something to offer you worthy of your consideration
— I may again address myself to you
in the future. Till then be kind, if it is not
too much to ask from you, to my father. I
leave him with some anxiety ; and, if you can
do something to help him from falling a victim
to melancholy or cynicism, it will be such an
act of kindness that I may perhaps take it
as a token of forgiveness.'

He wrote this last letter from a boardinghouse
in a crowded part of London, intending
to give it to a north-country woman, who was
passing through town, to post. ind, as he
finished it, he dared not scrutinize it. Some
instinct which he could not resist had prompted

him to write the two last sentences. And he
knew that the one touch of nature might read
like an impertinence. Was it vanity, or something
which Alas naturally sanguine in his temperament
— and which, in spite of his self-distrust,
had kept him up more than once in his
past life — that had led him to talk still of the
possibility of making a name, when the chances
were becoming less and less in his favour ?
He asked himself the question in self-mockery ;
for he no longer felt like one who had a mission
to help his fellow-men. All enthusiasm to
put straight the things that were out of joint
in this world's economy, had been damped by
the personal necessities which were already
forcing themselves upon him.

The story is one often told. This device of
coming to London was simply a manoeuvre for
losing himself. And the rate at which London
was growing was so rapid that it made the young
man hope he might easily elude all pursuit in
it. A corner of a city in which speculative
builders were beginning to calculate that sixty
thousand fresh comers might require housing

every year, was the least likely place for a man
who wished to hide himself to be easily found
out.

Godfrey (he had determined to drop the
name of Sellwood, but scorned to practise deception
in the matter by assuming another
surname) came to London, with a fair amount
of money in his pocket, in the month of September,
when the Parliamentary session had
been for some little time over, when the usual
exodus had emptied the great city of some
of the more influential of its citizens, and when
a man could walk the streets without being
jostled or elbowed by his neighbours. But
for this very reason, as he quickly realised,
there was more fear of attracting notice than
at other times.

At the great hotel at which he stopped for
the first night, he remarked with a sort of
alarm that guests were no longer kept waiting
for their newspapers or their claret, and that
they could eat their mutton cutlets in an atmosphere
no longer so heated as to drive sanitary
reformers wild. Out of doors, it was the same

metamorphosis. The cabman had adopted a
tone of most unwonted civility, and the attractions
of Kensington Gardens could be feasted
upon by a lover of Nature without fear of being-disturbed
by the presence of a fashionable mob.
Godfrey could almost have sketched in Hyde
Park, and the waiters at the hotel were sofar
more attentive than he had intended them
to be, that he made up his mind not to linger
in it more than one day.

During his wanderings on that day, his attention
was attracted by a private boardinghouse
in the neighbourhood of Great Coram
Street. It was as shabby as it was possible
for a house of the kind to be, and the terms
were certainly very inexpensive. And to listen
to the high-flown account given by the lady
who * had seen better days,' but who now
deigned to preside at the head of this establishment,
it appeared that Wealth no longer had
it all its own. way in this world of ours. The
amount of influence, quiet society, usefulness,
amusement, and variety which a man of happy
disposition might secure for himself by paying

a small sum of money for the treat of residing
in that house proved that rich dullards were no
longer to ' rule the roost,' as they had in former
years.

Madame de Maurice proved to be the widow
of a retired naval officer, and some of her
envious female friends suggested that it was
'in no way consistent' to put a 'de' before
her name, and that she had obviously no right
to the title of ' madame.' But she was certainly
affable. And such a tempting picture
did she draw of retiring friends, who liked to
be as quiet as Godfrey himself, but who by
their looks, accomplishments, and conversation
would adorn the rooms of any duchess in
England ; of the simple music in the evenings,
the attractive little dinners, and luxurious easy-chairs
afterwards , that Godfrey — reflecting like
Milton of Mirth, ' these delights if thou canst
give,' — decided that many a homeless wanderer
might do worse than live with her. He certainly
remembered with a sort of pang that
finished household cleanliness had been a desideratum
in that programme of comfort which

he had been wont to picture to himself with
paradoxical complacency as ' Having simply and
self-denying ' in the past. But beggars could
not be choosers. And Matthew Arnold himself
supposing him to have a pocket which was
rapidly becoming empty — might have been
obliged to put up with a few Philistine atrocities,
or even with a lack of 'lucidity' in his
enforced companionship. Besides, as Godfrey
reflected, no one would be likely to seek him
out in a house of which the windows were
rarely cleaned, and where the Venetian blinds
had contracted so artistic a covering of dust
that it was impossible to guess their original
colour. To sleep in a stifling attic and to dine
in a dingy parlour in this nondescript place,
seemed to him far safer than to linger in any
hotel. In this place he would have a breathing-space
to look about him and determine what he
would do next.

The dinners turned out to be badly cooked,
and the society which he had been promised
altogether dolorous.

But he was already beginning to arm himself

unconsciously ^vith a new sort of callousness
for these small disappointments, and was able
to find a sort of attraction in studying the
strange characters who would have been
bruised like himself, in their battle with life,
if they were not to a certain extent impervious.


To be sure the ladies in general were loquacious
enough. There was Madame de Maurice,
who appeared with untidy cap and yellow,
wrinkled face while superintending the unappetising
dinner by daylight but who emerged
like a gay moth out of a chrysalis in the evening,
with plaits of hair of a different colour
from those which she wore in the morning, and
a soupgon (as she called it) of rouge on her
cheeks, as a compliment to the inmates of the
house. Then there Alas the old maid, who had
been the beauty of a provincial town in her
youth, and who liked, as madame explained,
to keep it up ' by introducing sentimental
stories respecting her conquests in the past —
anecdotes which generally could be skilfully
Med up to,' whenever there was a hiatus in

the talk at the dinner-table. She still sane:
sentimental songs, and accompanied herself on
an old cracked piano, while a genuine young
lady would stuff a pocket-handkerchief at the
same time in her own little red mouth, and
indulge in bursts of explosive laughter whenever
she thought it safe to do so. The * mamma'
of this young lady allowed it to be an open
secret that she had an object in going about
from boarding-house to boarding-house , because
as she gave out in loud and pointed whispers
she thought it right that all young people
should be allowed the opportunity of looking
about them a little, otherwise how could one
expect them to ' settle in life ' ?

There was an open competition between this
girl and another who prematurely wore spectacles,
talked of nothing else but the higher
education for women, and gave out with clasped
hands that she thought life was far too short
for all one had to learn in it, and that she, for
one, would ' never, never' think of submitting to
such a yoke of bondage as marriage.'

Wait till you are asked, my dear,' retorted

her rival, with another little burst of sarcastic
laughter.

But worst of all, perhaps, vas the middle-aged,
aggressive-looking woman, with red face
and hair cropped short, who supposed that she
had a mission for reforming the diet of mankind,
and was in the habit of taking a subscribe
out of her pocket and handing it to
everyone with a semi-defiant air.

The old men — Godfrey did not see au'
young ones — talked comparatively little. There
was the respectable literary gentleman, of whom
Madame de Maurice spoke with bated breathy
who was supposed to edit some social magazine
or newspaper — nobody exactly knew what —
and who had a habit of gazing sublimely before
him in mid-airs as if he were superior to all
mundane concerns.

There was another old man, said to have
great interest on the Stock Exchange (he
had just retired from the head partnership
of a haberdasher's shop), who snored away
most of the evening in a comfortable armchair
which, when he first saw the drawing-vol.

II. S

room, had been one of the special attractions
to Godfrey.

He invariably led the conversation to the
subject of gout and sciatica and the advantage
of wearing electric belts, but could discourse on
no other subject. The other lodgers consisted
of a sickles-looking, middle-aged man, respecting
whom there was also an on dit that he was a
great tragic actor; an unknown artist said to sella
number of his pictures in America — nobody
heard much about his selling them anywhere
else ; and a spiritualist who was more mysterious
than the others, because he always put his
finger on his lips whenever anyone mentioned
the subject of spiritualism, talked in an impressive
style about seances, and said ' Hush,' in a
solemn way, when anyone requested him to enter
into detail.

Godfrey's impression after the first night was
that he had entered a sort of lunatic asylum,
but, on venturing to suggest this idea to the
mild performer of tragedy, that oppressed-looking
person was startled into answering,

Oh, no. Of course not, si — very respectable
people here.'

'People out of the common?'

That's it — people out of the common
groove — as I should put it. Superior woman,
very superior woman, sir, Madame de Maurice.'

The question did not seem to require an answer,
and, as it was always vexing to Godfrey to
stand in the attitude of a cynical judge of other
people, he tried to accommodate himself as
much as possible to the discordant elements of
the somewhat eccentric phase of life into which
he had been introduced. It was something to
escape for a time from ' Society' (as Mrs. Austin
called it) with its convenient hypocrisies and its
bland untruths which he began to think were
too often a mask for treachery and backbiting
something to be able to try his theories ina
new atmosphere in which people were neither
rich nor vain of their antecedents. If a cannonball,
as he said to himself, had taken off one of
the legs on which he had been accustomed to
depend, why, the sooner he got used to a wooden
substitute, the better.'

" The necessity for pinching," as Charles
Lamb says, "■ adds to the enjoyment of possess



sion," ' he remarked, airily, that evening to the
uncommunicative literary man who was said to
edit a magazine, hoping to enlist his interest ina
shabby copy of Wordsworth which he had
just picked up at a book-stall.

'Charles Lamb got money for Its mots,'
growled the old fogey by way of answer,
looking as usual straight in front of him with
two bleared eyes which seemed to have been
too hard at work to become accustomed to the
sights of the world around him.

CHAPTER II.

If Godfrey did not make much progress in the
good graces of his new friends at the boardinghouse,
he had a still more damping experience
of the outside world. Vexation and disappointment
such as he had encountered at Broad-meads
were not likely to take a firm root in the
nature of one so young. Even as he wrote to Vere
Rashleigh, risking that rash prophecy about the
possibility of ' making a name ' for himself and
offering it to her, he had been conscious of an
springing of the heart to meet his altered
circumstances. He had all the intense hopefulness
of most young aspirants for literary
fame , for after all he had little to depend upon
but his pen. His violin-playing was useless for

making money, and he did not suppose there
was any back-door for making his way into
that which used to be called the * sister art.'
And even if he had exerted himself to take high
honours at Oxford, which he had not, his change
of name would have rendered such success
practically useless.

He had at first said vaguely to himself that
there were 'secretaryships, clerkships, and all
sorts of appointments by which a properly
educated man could earn bread-and-butter for
himself.' But he had no introductions, no friends,
and began to understand, after a few useless
applications, the blunder of which he had been
guilty.

It had rankled in his mind that Vere had
misjudged him, and he did not like to 'be
lumped with the rank and file,' who were
worth nothing for their intrinsic merits, but
were to be valued simply by the amount of
worldly goods which had fallen to their share.
But it soon appeared that the editors of London
newspapers and magazines misjudged him
also. On the second and third occasions when

bis brain-children were ' returned with thanks
be was collapsed as with a shock of cold water.
He was one to be keenly alive to the atmosphere
of censure, measuring himself very
readily by the opinions of other men who had
more experience than himself; and it was as if
a blighting wind had passed over him, paralysing
his energies. The latest poem, which
had been dandled like the latest baby
by a tender mother was not returned to
him at all. Probably it went into the editor's
waste-paper-basket ; and Godfrey — who
needed a little approbation on which to prop
his small remnant of self-appreciation — found
himself all at once without a spur for his
powers.

At St. Anne's, though he had been reticent as
to speech, he had found satisfactory occupation
for his pen. But the essays of which his college
tutor had sometimes spoken in high terms
of encouragement, and the poems which used
often to find a corner in the columns of
the undergraduates' magazine, were useless
now, when, for the first time in his life, he

bad intended to work his hardest at them.

Truth to tell, he had not been so assiduous
at his studies in the past as to justify him in
hoping for a sudden success. But at St. Anne's
bis surroundings had been congenial, and his
faculties had developed with very little personal
effort. It was very different from entering
upon this new chrysalis stage, which had to
be gone through in a chilling atmosphere, quite
incompatible with the unfolding of deadened
wings.

For the first time he saw how foolish he had
been in breaking prematurely with his connections.
He was too proud to apply to friends.
To do so would not be compatible with the
letter which he had written to his father. And
though he soon began to think he was no better
than the stupid herd, and that it would be
impossible for him to establish a proper footing
anywhere, yet he felt as if he would rather
pay the penalty for all that he had forfeited —
rather die than go back to the old state of
things at Broadmeads. If his father had cared
anything about him, he would have advertised

for the absentee. But no such advertisement
had appeared in any of the daily papers. And
Godfrey was perfectly certain that Reuben's
pride would be as great as his own.

He may marry again he said to himself.
That is the likeliest thing for him to do. But
he will never revoke a single word that he
uttered to me. This sort of thing may pull
<i man about horribly, but he ought to defy it
to break him,' he reflected, trying to rally
himself from the depths of despondency, dien
a short MS. on one of the social subjects of
the day — on which he had flattered himself he
had really something to say worth hearing —
was returned to him with the usual formula.

I have no introductions ; not time for sufficient
thought. You mustn't shake a thing,
if you want it to set into crystals ; and here
am 1 pounding my poor brains. I can take
to wood carving, and then perhaps I shall have
a chance to think a thing out, and may perhaps
find a sale for my manual work.'

But the rebellious nerves and over-taxed
head seemed to make the ' thinking ' more

difficult than ever. He determined one day
to take a walk for the walk's sake, since the
absence of riding, of cricket, and of football —
all the exercises with which he had used to
brace a naturally delicate frame — were beginning
to tell upon his health.

It was an October afternoon, misty and cold,
and as he made his way towards the slums in
which he knew he must presently seek for a
lodging, since even Madame de Maurice's
modest tariff would soon be utterly beyond his
means, the thought of this great, overcrowded
nest of human ants — in which he himself was
only one amongst thousands of little, fussy,
restless fidgets hurrying hither and thither,
each with its own fragmentary burden — became
somewhat overpowering. By-and-by the sun
would set, and other ants would come to carry
ther little particles of grain, and all this human
restlessness would take some other form. A
man ought to be myriad-eyed and myriad-hearted,
if he were to feel for all the aggregate
of sorrow, disappointment, bereavement, and
despair going on in the great ant-hill at that

moment. So thought Godfrey, asking himself
was there not a tendency in the self-seeking
life which he had been obliged to lead of late
to make a man gravitate lower, morally as well
as mentally? He felt too weary and fainthearted
to be equal to any wide-sweeping flight
of imagination. His own disappointments had
certainly narrowed his horizon. But his thoughts
reverted to Yere, who took the troubles of her
neighbours to heart as if they had been her
own. And a new idea occurred to him that
as the old fogey in the boarding-house was
said to be the editor of a social magazine, he
might break through his reserve and offer to
write for him. The land question, which was
then comparatively new — though he could
scarcely expect it to be understood by the slow-moving
countrymen who were content to live
and die as their fathers had done — was attractive
to him.

And still more interesting was that greater
question of promoting sympathy between man
and man. If it was too much to hope that the
present generation could reach by rapid strides

a perfect system of ' political jurisprudence
class might surely draw nearer to class, and so
might the consolidation of society be effected.
These and a dozen other subjects occurred to
Godfrey, as likely to be useful for essays. And
he tried to draw the so-called editor into conversation.
In this there was more difficulty
ian he had anticipated, as the somewhat surly
literary lion insisted on gazing in a rapt way in
front of him, and only glanced askance at his
enthusiastic interrogator. When he spoke it
was with a slight huskiness in his voice, and he
said something, as if he had come down from
the clouds, about the ' unsatisfactory nature of
the commonly-accepted explanations of the
problems of life,'

The lady who had a mission had overheard
the last words, and commenced, in a loud,
rasping "voice,

^ It would be as reasonable to look for grapes
on thorns or figs on thistles, as for a strong,
healthy body and a pure heart fed on intuitions,
injudicious food. The impurely-fed body
engenders every species of disease and '

Madame de Maurice fidgeted nervously on
her chair, and Mrs. Smythe, noticing it, proceeded
condescendingly,

I am trying to explain to these gentlemen
that excess in diet is too often a form of starvation.
Yon, ray good friend, do not aim at
excess. But, at the same time, if you could
contribute to the Company which I am just
now founding for the condensing of Swiss milk,
you would never regret it. The advantages
which we shall ensure for posterity are incalculable.
Doctor Dawson — you do not know Doctor
Dawson, do you ? — he is one of the most
celebrated medical men of these times. He
said to me the other day, ^' Mrs. Smythe — you
do not estimate the importance of your own
mission " — the gigantic importance I think he

said— "for " Mr. Nicholson, Mr. Godfrey,'

she suddenly exclaimed, observing signs of
growing impatience amongst her hearers, ' may
I ask you to do me the favour of looking again
at this subscription list f

But both the men had taken refuge on the
landing outside the drawing-room.

We must be liberal to women,' said Nicholson,
speaking huskily, and looking straight into
space still. ' For my part, I adopt the plan of
never seeming to observe them. The race
should not continue without them, but we must
not expect too much from their mental faculties.
I suppose you are a German scholar. Schopenhauer
says '

What Schopenhauer said about women
Godfrey did not hear; for a strain of music
began on the old cracked piano, which made
him start and peer into the drawing-room.
It was a part of Beethoven's * Sonata Pathetic,'
and the woman who played it, even on
that worn-out instrument, brought sounds of
ecstacy from the notes, as if her soul were
rising above all the pettinesses and irritating
meanness of that narrow room.

She teaches music — she's the actor's wife,'
said Mr. Nicholson, contemptuously. 'I was
going to observe that our review is not
yet started. We need money for the
undertaking.'

He took no notice of his companion's ingenuous

embarrassment ; it was most likely that he
did not see it.

If we wish to build up, we must begin with
demolition. You are acquainted with out-vie
ws.'

Godfrey humbly observed that he was
not.

I need scarcely tell you that we have some
of the most subtle and acute thinkers of the day
among those who have promised us contributions.
To explain our principles they are .'


Anti-mormon, or anti-ionian, did you
says asked Godfrey, who did not catch the
word.

Mr. Nicholson gave him a withering glance.

To put the thing shortly, we make a clean
sweep of the hypocrites — we scorn the conventional
masquerades which others look upon
as venial — parsons, for instance — especially
bishops.'

Oh, I see,' said Godfrey, disconcerted, * I
should say that the parsons were some of the
best people going, and that it would be impossible

to find anywhere a body of harder
working, more self-sacrificing men than the
bishops

You are at liberty to hold your own
opinions, sir. As society is constituted at
present no one can prosecute you for your
mawworm ideas,' said Mr. Nicholson, in great
wrath. ' You will please to remember that it
was you who entered into this conversation, and
proposed yourself as a writer for our social
review.'

^As I understand it, the social review ha
not come into being. I will have nothing to do
with attempting to break a link of that chain
which binds the affections of the English people
to a noble and humanizing institution like the
Established Church,' answered Godfrey, a little
hotly.

That is, you will talk about the progress of
the species, and attack the little fry, but have
uo hits at the big guns,' retorted the other,
scornfully.

Meaning the bishops V asked Godfrey, with
a laugh, ' I don't flatter myself that my hits

-would be likely to affect them iii the least in
one way or another.'

Much you know about social reform.'

'I never thought that I did know much,' answered
Godfrey, as he reflected that it was one
thing to sympathise with the divine wrath of
such reformers as Savonarola, even to the
extent of letting one's own life be burnt up
with the wrong, and quite another to go about
like a maniac rooting up all that was beneficial
under pretext of destroying noxious weeds.
He had made another enemy, which he could ill
afford to do.

But after a time there came a little turn for
him in the wheel of fortune. Not only did
he obtain a small clerkship at a bank which
occupied him during the day, but a minor
magazine, entitled the Family Enlightener — in
writing for which he flattered himself he could
be of some use to the people — accepted some of
his smaller articles. At one time it would have
seemed to him intolerable to be obliged to turn
himself into a reckoning machine in which the
mind of a man must after a time be wrecked or

VOL. II. T

suffer loss, but now the bread-getting had
become so much of a necessity that there was
no longer time for indulging in fastidiousness.

CHAPTER III.

• I MUST dare to be myself and to follow out my
own bent,' Godfrey had said to Mr. Nicholson
when he declined to write for his periodical —
which by the way never was started. But a
duller or an uglier life it would have been impossible
to imagine. To get out of bed betimes
on a cold morning, to swallow down some bad
coffee which has only just been made and consequently
scalds one's throaty to ride on the
top of an omnibus in a depressing fog, and
only to reach one's destination in the city in the
nick of time so as to escape what the other
clerks called a ' wigging,' to be subjected daily to
a sort of^vork which involved pressure, anxiety,
hurry, and so much expenditure of brain and

t2

nerve-force, and then to return in the evening
to toil till past midnight at the fabrication of
moral essays which could not please the editor
of the Enlightened unless they were the very
quintessence of commonplace.

Night by night, with a compunction which
availed him nothing, Godfrey had to turn out a
little string of the mildest platitudes. Anything
of a sterner and more daring nature was invariably
returned to him, and became so much
waste-paper. He had to address himself to
the ' gallery,' and it soon appeared that the
gallery liked thin and watery jokes mixed with
a little good-tempered philanthropy. He found
that the right thing was not to be afraid of
boring his readers, but to repeat the same
opinion or sentiment in a hundred different
ways. No barrister had to be plainer when
addressing himself to the capacity of a common
jury. It is exhausting work to have to burn
the midnight oil proving to one's readers that
two and two make four, especially when a man
has to be up by daylight, and to break his back
over a desk at another weary process of calculations.

Life held maun prizes, but it seemed
to the poor fellow, in these dark, wintry days,
as if she held none at all for him.

Other men had companions, but he was
frightfully alone in the great city, with no
single friend. A sigh would sometimes escape
him when he thought that, had Vere Rashleigh
been of lowly rank, she might have sympathised
with him and helped him in the poverty and
the struggle with some sense of blessed companionship.


A single word would have answered his
father. But, if it was to come over again, that
answer would be 'No.' He sometimes thought
that he had been wrong in hiding himself and
dropping his surname, so as to cut himself off
from the friends of his boyhood. More than
once he had caught sight of one of his Oxford
acquaintances, and had felt a little like Adam
exiled by his own fault from a home which was
as luxurious as a Paradise, but which he had
somehow not appreciated, as he hurried on,
looking, like old Nicholson, straight before him,
hoping that no one would recognise him in his
shabby clothes.

The only stimulant which he ever had for
his jaded palate — amongst the charlatans and
sentimentalists at Madame de Maurice's — was
the music which now and again was played by
Mrs. Shelton, the actor's wife. She had ear,
feeling, passion, and though the voice was
wanting, and the execution might scarcely
have satisfied a modern audience, her music
was so distinctly different from the jingling
and strumming of other women that he wondered
it was not more known and better
remunerated.

The fellow who eats his bread in the sweat
of his brow, and helps his neighbours who do
likewise, can scarcely be the better for a tendency
to philosophise,' he said, sadly, to himself
one night.

And yet his pitifulness was growing stronger
day after day for those other stragglers in the
battle of life who were being worsted by his
side, few of them having any idea of the unfathomable
endowment of their individual souls,
or a belief that God's eye was on them in their
toil.

'They have enough to do to procure the
barest necessaries of this material life. Even
Mrs. Shelton, whose music can only take her
to the threshold of what is better, and poor
Nicholson, who argues that humanity has been
injured by striving after a will-o'-the-wisp-like
immortality, or Madame de Maurice, who contentedly
paints her face every evening and
surveys all the questions which trouble the
world with more or less equanimity — they are
all alike in one respect : they have little thought
for anything beyond the dreary present.'

Never had Godfrey realised before how little
opportunity for serious thought of any kind
there was, not only in the lives of the poorest
people, bat also in those of the lower middle
class. He had often, in his previous life, been
startled, as other people were, at hearing of
the real state of the • s1iid?s ' in London, and
could understand how a rich man was now and
then glad to relieve his conscience by sending a
cheque to some institution, and inquiring as
little as possible about matters which his instincts
told him had better not be stirred

overmuch. And, ^vitbout wishing to indulge
in pessimism or undue sentimentalism about
the state of the labouring class at Broadmeads,
he had recognised the true proportions of the
difficulty, and had disdained the money which
was to make him important at the expense of
the sufferings of others.

But he was conscious of no glories, fabulous
or otherwise, connected with the toil for daily
bread and the life which he was now leading
at Madame de Maurice's boarding-house. Instead
of stepping as a matter of course into an
intellectual heritage, he was conscious of having
to contend daily with the poorer side of
his nature. The people with whom he associated
had not only no time for church-going,
but no time for self-recollection. The majority
of them were humbugs, and the others ground
down as he was himself, just as a steam-engine
might be Adorn out by the incessant wear and
tear of crank, and wheel, and boiler.

Oh ! for a little rest,' sighed Godfrey to
himself, 'for the sight of a green field — some
release from this perpetual harness

poetical and emotional side of the man's
nature inclined him to think sceptically, almost
cynically, of the perpetual panegyric of work of
which the world had heard too much. He was
beginning to be over-tired by severe strain and
mental effort, tossed about and ground out of
shape like a poor waif of useless seaweed in
the unfathomable depths of the ocean, carried
hither and thither by the tide. He felt a pang
of remorse when he acknowledged to himself
how very small a portion of his time or thoughts
he had been able to give to those benevolent
schemes which had exercised him so much as
to cause the first rupture with his father.

*A fine sort of Gracchus I should make,
pretending to take up the cause of the people
when I have hard work to get my daily bread,
with melancholy on the point of marking me
for her own lie said, mockingly, to himself.
'I must get out of this. I am doing no goodby
this treadmill labour to anyone else, and the
work is killing me — soul as well as body.'

He tried to rally himself from nervous suffering
by recollecting a treatise of Kant's — which

he had come across when he happened to be
reading for 'Greats' — on 'The power of the
mind to master, by sheer resolution, the diseased
feelings of the body.' But the philosophy
proved to be worse than useless, and he ended
by spending some of his last shillings in consulting
a doctor.

The doctor's opinion was decisive. The
patient was ordered a rest — rest in the sense
of change of employment, if not in actual
cessation from work.

'Man is a mutable animal, and should be
subjected to alternate emotions,' said the scientific
adviser. ' Now, my good friend, all this
nervous suffering is partly your own fault.
This growth of your brain, while you starve
the other parts of sour body — exhausting your
system — will take its revenge on you. You
must keep the balance more even. Have
a little fresh air, a little more recreation, a
more generous diet, and you will need no
medicine.'

Godfrey smiled to himself as he glanced at
bis threadbare coat, and paid the necessary fee.

One thing was certain, that he must give up
the ill-paid clerkship, or the writing for the
Family Enlightened, or possibly both, low,
then, was he to live? The doctor's words had
cheered him a little, just as stars come out
in the sky when a man looks up at them from
a deep well. Godfrey, as I said before, was
sanguine as well as sensitive, and he suddenly
thought that he had not made enough of his
love for art. Mrs. Shelton's music — which had
revealed to him, even in the miserable atmosphere
of Madame de maurice's, depths of which,
in his happier life, he had had little conception
had disgusted him more than ever with his
own feebler efforts on the violin.

But his painting ! If he could only sell his
little sketches for a few shillings apiece, after
all he might get as much by them as by hi
miserable clerkship. At St, Anne's they had
looked upon him as an artist in embryo. x\nd
though the very recollection of this had hitherto
kept him from forcing his way into Art — since
he had not sufficient vanity to think he could
enter its domain without undergoing a long

course of training — be now began to think of it
as a change of employment. Tbe vicissitudes
of fortune bad made bim so miicb more modest
that be tbougbt^ if be could only paint pictures
■wbich be could sell at the rate of half-a-crown
each, there would be the joy of self-forgetfulness
in producing these things, and the work
might be lightened by the philanthropic fancy
of supplying something wbicb might be within
the reach of those poorer ' Philistines,' the
masses of whom doubtless needed some refining
and elevating agent.

There was the artist at Madame de Maurice's
a Mr. Paul Hunter, wbo at first bad seemed a
trifle cold and unapproachable but wbo bad
improved on acquaintance — perhaps be could
give some hints. Hunter was more genial than
Godfrey bad expected. He styled himself an
'assistant commissioner and said, with a laugh
at bis owu expense,

^ L belong to the despised branch of the profession.
But I used to bave a friend wbo
painted figures into my landscapes, always preferring
to do the backs. Tbe poor wretch died

from overwork. If you think you cau have a
try at it — there'll be no harm clone.'

Hunter — who liked to keep up a delusion about
his paintings — proved to be the producer of a
number of tolerably capable drawings. He never
dreamt of attempting a masterpiece, and his
landscapes had all the faults of artificiality and
rapid drawing. None of them were realistic,
and all went for a low price. The conventional
grace of his sylvan scenes, and the ordered
pomp of his sunset skies — all more or less
manufactured on the same ideals — would have
called up a smile on Godfrey's face at any other
time. But the artist was shrewd enough to see
that the stranger had reached a feverish crisis
of his life, a crisis that he had seen approaching
inch-by-inch during the last few months.

'You see I have no friends,' Godfrey explained,
with a simplicity and want of reserve which
was scarcely wise under the circumstances,
and my gifts are scarcely of the bread-winning
sort.'

With the tough, mechanical difficulties of
oil-painting he had never properly grappled ;

but necessity is a stern mistress, and the delight
of giving up the hated clerkship seemed
to gift his fingers with unwonted cunning.

The ' backs ' of the figures proved to be so
satisfactory that Hunter — who hated this part
of the work — offered a modicum at once.

I have not had sufficient training,' said Godfrey,,
humbly.

Oh ! I don't believe in that said his new
friend, encouragingly. ' Phidias never learnt.
Half the anatomy of the R.a's is said to be at
fault. Chemistry was never required to produce
the colours with which Raphael painted.
Michael Angelo never practised freehand — you
stick to what I tell you ; you'll do well enough.'

The partnership went on jauntily, but Godfrey
had to move to lodgings in a lower
neighbourhood, where for a time he slept more
soundly with some of his bewildering uncertainties
and forebodings at an end; but soon
realised that, instead of his diet being better, he
would have to take to potatoes and dripping,
with a flavour of Yarmouth bloaters. The

small cheques from the Enlightened had not
come in as steadily as usual. It was becoming
painfully apparent that this ' family paper ' did
not make its way in the public favour. And
though Godfrey still fagged like a galley-slave
for his new task-master, working-iu.
the ground colours of all Hunter's pictures,
and a good deal of the detail as well as the
figures, there was apparently a plethora of
these productions in the market. At one time,
however, there 'came an order from a rich
Australian, at another from an American. The
bright idea occurred to Hunter that as etching-was
in fashion, and as it was an obvious disadvantage
to himself, in whom the sense of
colour was strong and keen, to take to black
and white, his partner might try etching, as
well as the other laborious parts of the joint
trade. Manifold and delicate were the gradations
which had to be employed in the black
and white, and weary became the hand which
laboured over them. Godfrey looked at them
with a sigh when Hunter praised them. Freedom
of line and spontaneity of touch were

naturally wanting in them. Alas ! they had to
be produced like the essays for the Enlightener
at so much a yard.

I used to think,' he said one day, with one
of those sarcastic smiles at his own expense,
with which he had to swallow down the dripping
and potatoes, ' I used to think that pictures
were the waking dreams of men, in which they
tried to give their neighbours some idea of the
visions which had been vouchsafed to them of
the Unseen. I have no doubt that every artist
sees differently. Colour always is a delusion.
One man has a good eye for blue, another for
red, and so forth. If one could get into the
innermost sanctuary of somebody else's mind,
what a revelation it would be. But I have no
time for such thoughts now. Hunter is only an
artist's fag, and I am less still — I am Hunter's.
fag.'

Oh, my heart is sick a- wishing and a-waiting,
The lad took up his knapsack, he went, he went his way ;
And I looked on for his coming, as a prisoner through the

grating
Looks, and longs, and longs, and wishes for the opening
day.

Jean Angelo.

VOL. II. U

CHAPTER I.

Drip, drip, drip went the rain at Broadmeads
towards the close of that August when Godfrey
had so suddenly taken his father at his
word, and set out to lose himself in what the
Torringraoor old ladies called sentimentally the
Great Babylon.' The drip of the continued
rain settled on the corn which was already cut
in the fields, searching into its pith and marrow.
There was no harvesting to be done while the
dismal weather continued. Even when the
wheat could be garnered, it would be sure to be
damaged, and the yield of the year could not
fail to be ruinously small for the farmer.

Sir Ralph Rashleigh stood looking gloomily
out of the window of the breakfast-room at the

U2

dismal prospect, as if he saw the gaunt phantom
of poverty standing before him, which indeed,
to speak figuratively, he did. For the two
neighbours were now — to use the expression of
the common people round them — ' at daggers
drawn.' Reuben Sellwood had not meant to
force a quarrel when he upbraided Sir Ralph
with his niece's pride. It was as if the words
sprang from his lips without his will ; and,
though the baronet made an heroic effort to
restrain his own temper which he was rapidly
losing, there could never afterwards be even an
appearance of courtesy kept up between the
two men. No thought of real friendship had
ever indeed been generated in the baronet's
mind, but the horror which he had ever had of
eating this man's bread and condescending
to accept his favours, was greatly increased by
Reuben's furious manner during the interview.

'The fellow cursed everything in heaven
and earth — he talked as if he was cousin-german
to the fiend incarnate he said afterwards,
in justification of his niece's conduct.

In the bottom of his heart he bitterly felt

that Vere had neglected his interests in refusing
to be the link which was to join the two
territories ; and as the days passed on, and
Reuben's son did not return to him, but seemed
as if he had really left his home determined to
fight-on in a hostile way opposed to his
father's wishes, Sir Ralph could not help being
sorry that the girl had taken any part in
the tragedy.

He remembered that the fellow had had a
melancholy way of seeming to disregard the
good things which had fallen to his lot in
life, as if he were above them all. He remembered,
too, the young man's delicate appearance,
with fair complexion and blue eyes like a
maiden's. He certainly did not look the sort of
man to bear hard, unremitting toil, and to
clench the nails into any sort of finished
work.

He will come back. He will change his
mind,' he said, one day to Vere.

This hypothetical optimism she knew to be
vain. She only shook her head.

He will never change his mind.'

There will be nothing for him to do without
introductions in London. And if he has
changed his name, and given up all the benefits
of his University training, the fellow is a fool.'

He is not by any means a fool,' said Vere,
speaking quietly, ' but the wisest man cannot
be content to do what fools can do sometimes.'


You mean to say he will take what common
men may do T Sir Ralph shrugged.

why not? There is nothing derogatory in
work — if I had been a man now '

Her voice was vehement and a little bitter,
but she broke ofi: in her speech, remembering
how she sometimes reproached herself for not
having better received her uncle's confidences.

Why should she feel so unutterably desolate ?
She had refused the man, and could not help
the consequences of her refusal. It was not
logical,' she said to herself, at times.

Strangely enough her uncle did not reproach
her with being too precipitate. His prospects
as she knew were inexpressibly cheerless. She
began to think that she had behaved scandalously,

if not dishonourably to him as well as
to Godfrey. But these ideas came too late.
Unfortunately it was a part of this girl's character
to have the impulse of expansive tenderness
when the occasion for it was past. Over
and over again she tried to reason soberly with
herself, seeing as plainly as ever that any fate
would have been preferable to that of commencing
a married life with a sort of utilitarian contract
which would be likely to rouse antagonism
; and that nothing in all the world would
have been so terrible as to add one more to
those unhappy cases of a man and woman
bound together by an indissoluble bond when
neither could have any pity or sympathy for
the other.

I did right,' she said to herself, ' I would do
the same if it were to come over again.'

But unfortunately the exalted mood in which
she had at first felt strung up to the highest
pitch could not last without reaction. It might
have softened the blow to Godfrey if he could
have known that she sometimes burst into
convulsive sobs in the privacy of her own room.

Oh, I could not help it, but I must have
seemed so ill-tempered, so hard, so unsympathetic,'
she said to herself, as tears fell fast
and thick, and seemed to relieve the feeling of
wild indignation so unusual with her, who
rarely yielded to passion. ' I could not have
thought it possible I should turn into such a
virago she repeated more than once when,
trying to ease the mental pain by physical
exertion, she tramped as before through the
muddy lanes, ministering to the wants of her
poorer friends. But by degrees a new apathy
seemed to come over her.

It — it has lost me a friend,' she said, ' I
hadn't counted upon that. He was better than
any friend I ever had before.'

She did not even then comprehend how
anxious she was about Godfrey's fate, nor the
necessity for loving which had been awakened
in her too late.

Her uncle's conduct helped to open her eyes.
Having nothing else to comfort him, he tried in
an icy way to soothe himself with the oft-repeated
declaration that he ought to have

known a Rasbleigli would have had too much
ephit to submit to an alliance with the son of a
neighbouring upstart. It took Yere's breath
away to hear him speak of the marriage now as
of a thing to which he could never have given
his approval.

The reserve and hauteur had returned to his
manner, and he confronted Reuben when he met
him with a look of cold dismissal. The whole
transaction was one which he Avould willingly
have forgotten, and it was almost absurd to see
him trying to resume his place amongst those
social idols which are balanced so high that
it is difficult for them to maintain their balance
without tottering.

Sir Ralph's outlook for the future was dismal
enough, and his daughter felt a little ashamed
when she saw the efforts which he still made to
stand correctly poised at a dignified eminence,
while the life that he led was almost as devoid
of luxury as that of Stylites on his pillar. The
attempt was somewhat contemptible to Vere,
who tried to calm herself by realising as she
had never realised before, the small importance

of her own short life and her trifling mistakes,
compared with the immensity of life around her.

Pride is a mean thing,' she acknowledged to
herself, ' and one of its meanest ways is to think
itself grand.'

The Infinite ! if I had only thought what that
meant,' she reflected another day, in the same
strain of thought. ' I should surely have had
more humility.'

She had no one to teach her. But she began
to ask herself with some compunction if her behaviour
had been free from fault when she had
acted as her own self-will had dictated to her.
She thought pitifully not only of her own uncle,
but of the other lonely man in the neighbouring
house in a ' wilderness-state ' of loneliness and
desolation, for which her own conduct might be
partially to blame. Since Godfrey had taken
her at her word, she was almost as lonely as his
father. But she was learning to pray, while
Reuben was cursing — the whole experience being
not without fruit to her spiritual life.

The d'dys dragged their slow length into
weeks, and the weeks into months, but no

news had been heard of Godfrey. Reuben,
winding himself up into a pitch of further anger,
refused to advertise or to take any efforts to recall
him.

I told him I washed my hands o' him, and I
meant it. What manner of man is he ? I fed
him, educated him, and brought him up i' luxury,
and this be the return he makes me. It i&
vile ingratitude thundered Reuben. In the
visions of the night he saw the young fellow
looking pale and thus and remembered how he
had sworn to his dead mother, ' I'll always
stand by him and help him. The lad "ill never
ha' to contend wi' ill fortune as I have done.'

But Reuben did not believe in dreams anymore
than he believed in the pains of hell or
the joys of the blessed. All was naked and
open to him, since he had eaten but little of the
tree of knowledge. He thought he could
fathom with his limited intelligence all the
problems of life in the past and present, as well
as its possibilities in the future. His assumption
of omniscience might be a little funny, but
the land of vague shadows seemed to him to bethe

inheritance of the poet. And poets were to
be despised and pitied.

Had not his lad had something of the poetic
temperament? To natures as weak as Godfrey's,
he would leave it to feel the pressure of
the hand that was dead for ever, and the echo
of the footstep that would never be heard
again. Now that his son had left him, he saw
how the antagonism had been great between
them, and how there had not been one drop of
the oil of mutual understanding to make their
mutual relations work more smoothly.

He seldom ventured out now beyond his
grounds, but once when he did so he met Vere
Rashleigh, dressed as simply as ever, and with
a new humility in her way of carrying herself.


She was determined to go out, not being one
of those women who shut themselves up with
any sorrow and nurse it. The whole neighbourhood
had been ringing with different versions
of her conduct as connected with the
mysterious disappearance of young Sellwood.
But it was a part of Vere's disposition not to

care in the least for what anybody might
think.

She had received her little note from Godfrey
about that time, and a new sort of joy had
sprung up in her heart as she repeated to herself,


He loves me — he bears me no grudge and
he has shown that he forgives me by giving me
something to do.'

'Be kind to my father he had written to
her. Was not the injunction an absurd impossibility
? She feared so. As she passed his now
forbidding-looking father, she tried to smile
with a nervous trembling of her lip.

Curse her !' the unhappy man muttered to
himself, with that thirst for vengeance which
had been so inscrutable to Godfrey, vulgarising
the higher attributes of his father's nature, and
rendering his very motives unintelligible.

But, as Reuben muttered the curse, even his
duller perception could not fail to make him
notice the look of dumb sorrow on the girl's
face. There was an appealing look, also, more
difficult to interpret. Could he have understood

that look aright, he would have seen that
there was anxious questioning in her large eyes,
an expression of doubt which, without any intention
on her part, seemed to say, ' What is
he? Where does he come from? Are the
stories which they tell about him true V as —
fearing still that the task which Godfrey had
given her would be for ever too difficult, and
that no one of the weaker sex could venture to
interfere with this man of iron — she passed
on.

'Others as young as I am have suffered far
more — of course I knew that ray turn would
some — there is nothing for me to complain of,'
she thought, in almost the same words which
Godfrey had used of himself. She had always
been one of those who take readily to self-sacrifice,
and can scarcely think of good, as concerns
self, apart from the good of others. This
tendency made her liable to self-reproach, and
it was with a feeling of numbness about her
heart that she asked herself now, ' Were there
not countless Rubicon of hasty words, rash
impulses, and unwise resolves which people — -

penitent like herself — could never cross again ?
We cannot live our lives over again. Regret
may prevent mistakes in the future, but I don't
see how it can help us about the past. And
yet suppose any post or newspaper brought
the news that Godfrey was dead — should I not
feel guilty of manslaughter, and should 1 not be
too severely punished?'

I am so young,' she muttered again to herself.
"But was he not just beginning his life
as well? And they know nothing about it —
they can never guess that I really cared for
him.'

By an energetic effort of her will, she determined
again not to show herself weak. Had
she not heard that if we try to bear ourselves
bravely, and to do our little tasks of work industriously,
the daily commonplaces of life will
become more insignificant and the little woes of
life dwindle into nothingness '? She told herself
that nothing should make her morbid, but
there was little to help the young philosopher
just then in the dark and dreary outlook of
her life.

Sir Ralph's icy manner to her had become
harder to bear than ever. He did not even ask
her to read aloud to him. He had his meals at
times in his own apartments, and, when he met
bis niece in the evenings, he spoke no more
than was absolutely necessary. If the life before
her had not been so small and dry, it
might not have been so hard for her to get
through it. But Vere was not one of those
people who find a martyrdom for themselves
in the violation of natural law, profiting no one,
helping no one. The determination not to be
sentimental helped her to fight against the feeling
that everything had grown nauseous to her,
every dish, every dress. The environments of
her life were meagre and dull enough, but
even had they been comfortable and splendid
she would have derived no happiness from the
comfort or splendour at the expense of Godfrey's
self-immolation.

She was rather glad that she had no pretty
boudoir, as its right use, according to the derivation
of the word, was said to be for sulking;
rather glad too that she could devote herself

to the education of her cousin, who had lately
taken to growing, and whose lank girlhood
seemed to herald the fuller development of
womanhood. And she would have been wholly
glad if her uncle could have been made to see
that his loss of money would furnish her with
some sort of excuse for helping him, also in
some definite way, so as to escape the workings
of restlessness and discontent.

There was a ring of triumph in her voice
when she said to him one day, as if she
rather liked the excuse for saying it,

'If we had only belonged to the middle
class! There, they tell me, it is getting quite
the fashion for girls like me to do something for
themselves, and such a fancy would never bethought
strange, or excite remark.*

But we do not belong to the middle class,'
answered her uncle, waking from his evident
pre-occupation to answer her.

Only it seems to me mortifying to waste the
best years of one's life in doing nothing when
one could help she answered, with a deliberate
slowness of speech which showed that the sub-vol.

II. X

sect was not new to her. The calmness of her
voice had the effect of rousing Sir Ralph from
his usual indifference and apparent inability to
answer.

Are you becoming a utilitarian democrat
like our neighbour's promising heir V he asked,
lashed into sudden anger.

'Oh! I did not mean to vex you. I would
not distress you for the world,' she answered,
as she saw her days lengthening out interminably,
and could almost find it in her to wish
that the years, which seemed to be so tedious as
they stretched out before her, were some of
them over.

There was, at any rate, the guiding and
orderly managing of the present rather assuming
but poverty-stricken mansion. It required
something like a stroke of genius to rule it
with anything like a sense of beauty, combined
with the needful thriftiness.

And, if Vere was forbidden to look out for any
other outlet in her life, it calmed her strangely to
think that the time would come sooner or later
when the tiny spark, which she called her own

earthly life, would be quenched with its small
difficulties — if only she had done her best
with it.

But, as regarded Godfrey, there was the
possibility of the Terrible, the Unknown overtaking
him in some form of calamity, and the
possibility seemed to haunt her.

END OF THE SECOND VOLUME.

PART VI.

(Continued.)

VOL. III.

CHAPTER II.

AMONGST all the friends whom Godfrey had
formed during his public school and university
life, there was but one who was determined to
set his own resolution counter to that of the
man who seemed, for some inconceivable reason,
unwilling to keep up even a corresponding
acquaintance.

The Hon. Charles Llo^'d could bear any
amount of snubbing, partly perhaps because,
owing to his pleasant geniality and the circumstances
of his birth, he had never really encountered
it in its grosser form. He had three

B 2

reasons for wishing to renew the friendship.
First, he was curious on account of the air of
mystery which it seemed to him Sellwood kept
up about his belongings ; secondly, he had a
high opinion of Sellwood's capabilities, and
thought it quite possible that some time or
other in his life these talents might prove useful
to himself; whilst thirdly, and not least, he
had really an affection for the man. Armed
with this triple reason, he determined to procure
an invitation from some one residing in
Godfrey Sellwood's neighbourhood. Fortune
favoured him. He made the acquaintance of
Mrs. Austin at a fashionable watering-place, and
promised to come and stay at a Torringmoor
hotel in the month of September to be near
the widow lady, and to be introduced to some
of her friends. If Mrs. Austin, who was his
match in shrewdness, had her own surmises on
the subject, it was to her credit that, as usual,
she prided herself on entirely refraining from
gossip.

Charlie had lost his time, as he speedily saw,
with regard to the main object of his visit. All

he could understand T\^as that there had been
some quarrel between the Ellwood, and,
though he was too much of a man of the world
to suppose that his old friend would remain in
hiding, it was somewhat vexatious to be unable
to gratify his curiosity respecting Reuben, who
now refused himself to visitors.

There was but one set-off to this disappointment,
and, faithful to his character of making
the best of everything, Mr. Lloyd speedily forgot
Godfrey in this compensation of Fortune.
Mrs. Austin had introduced him to Miss Rashleigh,
and Charlie was fascinated. Her colouring,
he declared, was that of a perfect Hebe, if
the expression of her face had not been too
subdued for that goddess. He was ready to
speculate with all his usual enthusiasm as to
the untoward causes which had condemned so
resplendent a woman into such a gloomy corner
of life.

September had set-in with splendid weather.
The farmers' carts were busy loading from
morning to night, and though the wheat was
much damaged, still the barley was pronounced

well, and it was prophesied that there would
be a plenty of sweet aftermath for sheep and
cattle. Yere, ever interested in the prospects
of the poor, was flitting about like another
Ruth, helping the women to glean for as many
hours as she could spare in the day. It enabled
her to forget her own misfortunes for a time.
And when Charlie saw her, and followed her
into the fields — full of that little chaffing small-talk
which he had found to be peculiarly successful
in flirtations — he was annoyed by the
dreamy look of absence in her face, as if she
were only half with him in spirit. He had
come in contact with so many other girls who
bad looked upon him as a ' possible divinity,'
that he was a little disconcerted at this new
experience of a young woman whose wits
seemed to be wool-gathering, and who did not
pay any particular attention to his remarks.

Vere, who had been so often full of life and
spirits, tried to seem joyous still to others ; and
though there was sometimes a drooping of
those spirits now — a sinking down to semi-despair
when she was alone — it was evident

that she strove with all her heart to bring her
thoughts back froth some far-off region, and to
answer Charlie in the mood in which he would
have liked to be answered.

Otherwise he was conscious of making no
progress. She did not recognise the flattery
of herself; she was untrained in these things,
refreshing and unlike most of her sex. And, if
she every now and then answered him with a
mild sarcasm which gave him the sensation of
being mentally rubbed, it was not — as he supposed
— because she had been trained in that
subtle school of society which makes so many
women skilful actresses, but because she had a
habit of speaking out her thoughts.

I am getting the worst of it,' he said to
himself one day, when he had hazarded what
he had supposed to be a neatly-turned compliment
about the unkindness of keeping her
hidden from the world 'like another Dana? ina
tower,' and when she faced round upon him
and answered, with a flush on her cheek,

I am sure you do not mean to reflect on my
uncle.'

Oh I no, of course not,' he answered, a little
startled, as she continued,

I beg your pardon, but here, in this gossiping
place, they have got into the way of saying
ugly things against people. Now, there is Mr.
Sellwood '

Sellwood j:)^^^?' he interrupted. ' Oh ! they
say ugly things against him, I know Now I
should fancy he deserved them V

'Do they? Oh. dear, I should feel as if it
were almost as treacherous of me to allow a
word said against him as against ray own
relations.'

She spoke as if she were speaking to herself;
but her fair face was puckered with trouble.

The amused smile with which he had been
listening to her changed to something more
serious. She was inadvertently throwing some
light on a little of the gossip which he had
overheard.

*Ah ! yes,' he said to himself. 'If Godfrey
Sellwood has taken a fancy to her, they are
just the two to get on together.'

'You mean T he began, tentatively ; but

there was something in his tone which set her
immediately on her guard. And with an effort
to disguise her depression, and to look at life
in its common-place aspect, she answered,

I mean nothing at all. They say all sorts
of things about Mr. Sellwood's past life ; but I
know absolutely nothing. It is all a puzzle.'

Ah ! and the most miserable common-places
are the enigmas of life. ^Vhy, in the world,
should we torture our brains over the riddles,
whilst others never lose appetite or an hour's
sleep in consequence of them T asked the glib
Charlie.

'Why, indeed?' she answered, taking his
cue, as she handed a bundle of gleanings, with
which he had positively been helping her, to a
little, smiling village child. ' I really can't
afford to spend my time in speculating and
discussing them, any more than I have time to
deplore being shut up like a Dance because my
uncle is not rich enough to go to town.'

No'' she thought, as she forced herself to
hum a tune on her way home. 'Here at least
I can make a few people happy, whilst a

Thoughtless life spent in gaiety — in a round of
constant dressing, eating, and sleeping — would
not help me to get rid of the inevitable.'

Mrs. Austin gave another garden-party in
that September. It Twas one of those calm,
ominous days which sometimes precede a raid-night
storm. The corn had been sheaved ;
there was no longer any reapers in the field,
and a sort of Sabbath hush seemed to have
fallen on the day. The garden was as stirred
by wind as if the leaves of the trees had been
cut out of paper and exhibited by artificial
light, like the skilful imitation sometimes seen
on the boards of a theatre. Only by the twitter
of a swallow preparing for its flight, and the
smell of upturned earth, might one realise the
scene.

Are you going out ? It is too hot. Surely
these errands of mercy might wait,' Verses
uncle had said in the morning. But in the
afternoon he had put no such restriction on
her liberty. Young Lloyd seemed to be giving
every possible guarantee of his devotion. And,
though Charlie Lloyd was not rich, his elder

brother was said to be in delicate health, and
he might possibly come into the title.

And even if not 'f The lilies and roses
would soon fade on Yere's young cheek ; her
eyes would soon lose their brightness. Sir
Ralph's own health was growing still more
weak and, if the place which belonged to his
ancestors was to revert to Reuben Sell wood, it
would be best not to leave poor Sir Richard's
child in the world without some natural
protector.

Mrs. Austin had undertaken to see to Vere's
toilet that afternoon. As usual, it was not expensive.
But few could carry off a plain,
closely-fitting white cashmere dress better than
this fresh-looking, country-bred girl. She wore
a wide-brimmed hat, trimmed by her own hands
with daisies, and beneath its shade the eyes
so strangely of the same colour as Godfrey's,
although of a deeper tint — seemed only to have
gained a greater intensity by the anxiety which
she had to bear.

Mrs. Austin tapped her playfully on the
cheek, and whispered.

You are looking lovely, child. The London
ladies with their cosmetics may well
envy you your clear skin and that chanting
pink.'

And yet the far-seeing matron thought to
herself, as she watched Yere at a little distance,
with the curly light hair wound becomingly
into a knot, and the pretty girlish dignity
shown in her unconsciously graceful attitudes,
yet though she has all the signs of pure
breeding from the neat little head to the pretty
toes of her rosette shoes, it is as the baronet
says, the " beauty is but skin-deep." The
features are not sufficiently regular to carry her
through to my age.'

It may be supposed that Charlie Lloyd did
not look on so far. For as Yere stood in the
doorway of the ivy-decked drawing-room —
where the young people were to dance that
autumnal night — divested of her hat, with her
mother's jewels flashing on her neck, and the
train of her simple dress falling back in shadowy
folds, she looked to him a perfect picture framed
by a becoming background. She did not see

him at first when he came up to her. For another
figure had risen unbidden before her, and
she tried in vain to dismiss it from her imagination.
Where was Godfrey that night ? Were
his surroundings miserable ? It was a strange
freak for her fancy to play her. She had dismissed
the man of her own free will. Was his
shadow to be always haunting her?

It did not escape Mr. Lloyd's notice that,
when he addressed her, she started as if from a
reverie, and shivered as if a ghost-like memory
had passed over her.

'Of what were you thinking?' he asked,
ironically.

I shall startle you if I tell you,' she answered,
unexpectedly.

He smiled in rather a superior way, and
shook his head.

'I have lived too long in this world to be
startled at anything.'

I was thinking,' she said, slowly , ' of an act
of ridiculous pride which I shall always associate
with this room. I did not mean to do
harm ; but it seems impossible to tell at present

what evil consequences may result from that
foolish act.'

Oh !' he said, beneath his breath. And then —
as if guessing the reason of her confidence, and
startled by the bitter dejection which was revealed
to him — he added, ' I can hear nothing
from any of the Torringmoor people of my old
friend Mr. Sellwood.'

'No, and something tells me we shall never
hear anything but bad news.'

'That is superstitious; he answered, 'and
yet, I confess, I am a little anxious. He had no
idea of taking care of himself, brought up in
that way,'

'I have sometimes thought,' she said, hurriedly
' that we may hear of his death, and
then I have dismissed the horrible thought as
impossible.'

Charlie Lloyd did not answer, even when she
added, beneath her breath,

I could fancy him dying in London and
making no sign.'

He is just the fellow to do it,' he thought
within himself; then, aloud, he said, turning

quickly to her, and noticing that she was
strangely pale,

There is really no occasion for you to distress
yourself. I mean to advertise.'

There is that clever Miss Rashleigh at her
deep games again,' said a lady who came into
the room at that minute, and glanced meaningly
at Vere. She smiled a sarcastic smile,
and, if Miss Rashleigh had not been a baronet's
niece, it is possible she would have passed
her without any notice. She looked upon
cleverness as an infectious disease, which, owing
to her careful bringing-up, it was fortunate her
daughters had escaped.

Vere noticed the sarcastic bow. It rallied
her to the consciousness that her head was
swimming, and that she did not want to make
an exhibition of herself. An impulse to get help
made her lay her hand lightly on Charlie's arm.

I don't want to dance any more ; the waltzes
make me giddy to-night. Take me out into
the moonlight, into the greenhouse — where
I can get away from them all she said, in a
manner which made him understand, as he had

never understood before, why she bad always
controlled signs of agitation, and yet bad
seemed so strangely absent. All was clear to
bim now, even in the whirl of bis senses. For
the first time he comprehended the curious
absorption in herself ' which had hitherto
seemed to make her deaf to bis prettiest
speeches.

She staggered as they went out. He felt
her trembling, and found her a seat as quickly
as possible in the conservatory. Ever afterwards
the faint, sweet, subtle odour of the
flowers which seemed to be in harmony with
her sensations, recurred to her as disagreeable.

'What was it? A little attack of faintness —
giddiness — it was nonsense to make much of
it,' she said in self-excuse. She was battling
still with the sense of pain and mystery — the
uncertainty which had lately haunted her with
respect to Godfrey's fate. She had almost forgotten
Mr. Lloyd's presence. If she thought
of him at all, it was vaguely to wish that, without
being guilty of impoliteness, she could send
him back to the drawing-room.

Presently he said,

'Have you uotbiug to found a guess upon?
I would help you if I could.'

Ah, you can't — it's beyond your power.'

You mean that this generous anxiety
which troubles you has* become a demon not so
easy to exorcise. But, Miss Rashleigh, you
must rise above the weakness — you must dismiss
it, and not let it agitate you like this.
There are others to make you happy. If I '

There was something in his tone Which sent
a new dread through her. She looked altogether,
as he thought afterwards, as if she were
afraid of ghosts.

Mr. Lloyd, you have laid me under an
obligation, a great one already,' Her eyes,
which were wide open, had still a look in
them as of remonstrance, and as if they, more
than the other parts of her body, were endowed
with vitality. ' Don't be too hard on my foolishness,'
she entreated. ^I have made one
mistake in my life already — don't let us make
another. Had we not better talk of something
else?'

VOL. III. C

CHAPTER III.

You foolish, foolish child ! how is it you will
always be your own worst enemy?' said Mrs.
Austin, about an hour afterwards, when she
found Vere sitting alone in the conservatory,
and coupled her disconsolate attitude with the
abrupt disappearance of one of her most honoured
guests from the ball-room.

Vere had sunk into a chair, and was feeling
just then as if she were unable to stand, looking
at her quiet companions, the flowers,
through the chinks between her fingers. She
was alone, and never in her life before had
the motherless girl felt so much as if she would
have liked to have wept in the arms of some
tenderly sympathising woman like any other

girl yearning for help and advice. She had
passed through a struggle, not an exhilarating
one, which made her still feel more excitable
and highly strung than usual. It was not in
her to be conventional, or to attempt to hide
the conscious red on her cheek. And as Mrs.
Austin quietly closed the door of their retreat,
Vere was debating the question within herself
as to whether it would not be better to confide
in some one, when that lady, in a direct, incisive
voice, continued,

To think you should be so good, so self-denying,
and yet one of the proudest girls I
ever knew ! It is really quite odd that you
should look so fresh and simple-looking, and yet
have the — the '

'The pride of Lucifer,' exclaimed the girl,
sitting instantly upright, no longer blunderingly
trying to make amends for disappointing
Mrs. Austin in one of her most deep-laid plans,
but longing to break down the conventions by
which her life was trammelled.

I suppose pride is a taint in the Rashleigh
blood,' she added, a little sadly, and then the next

c 2

moment she determined to keep her own counsel,
and even had recourse to a feeble womanly
pretext, though she hated herself for it. ' I — I
was feeling rather faint — and came in here to
be alone, and not attract attention,' she stammered,
knowing the half-fib as soon as she had
uttered it.

And the faintness was not associated v/ith
the friend on whose arm you leant V said Mrs.
Austin, quickly, excusing herself for the impoliteness
of her speech on the score that Yere
had no mother, and she was responsible to Sir
Ralph in trying to influence her.

'Are you not apt to fancy things?' answered
the younger lady, saying to herself, ' This sort
of interference must be put a stop to.'

^Ah, I was right — she is not quite heart-whole,'
thought the experienced woman, who
prided herself on second-sight in these matters.
'My dear, there is some one else,' she said, seating
herself beside her, and stroking her hand, ' I
knew it all the time.'

What did you know ? excuse me for saying

you fancy things,' exclaimed Yere, withdrawing
herself from the caress with a look of supplication
as well as terror.

'Don't be afraid of me — I shall not betray
your secret. You sent that poor young Sell-wood
away in a tiff — excuse the word, but you
are like myself, and I am conscious at times of
yielding to a little infirmity of temper — oh, he
will come back again.'

The girl rallied herself. However kind the
elder woman might be, she was C[uite certain
novo that she was not going to betray her
feelings.

This sort of vivisection was intolerable. She
suddenly found that she could rise to her feet.

I don't like this kind of talk — you know I
do not. I don't fancy most girls have those
sort of ideas — that they can't be friends with a
man without thinking of marrying him. I am
not obliged to marry at all. I like my liberty
too much. I don't feel as if I could give up my
independence.'

But,' said Mrs. Austin, in her most soft and

purring tones, ' you forget all the circumstances
there is your uncle.'

You may be sure I shall never marry against
my nucleus wishes.'

Exceptional women may not care for marriage.
A good many will find that they will
have to do without it answered the matron,
significantly. And she turned and left the
friendless girl to feel still more friendless than
before the interview.

Throughout that night, which was unnaturally
hot, Vere sought relief at intervals in long-drawn
breaths. Her limbs seemed to have
grown stiff, and there was an odd sort of aching
in her bones. The storm which had been expected
came about two o'clock ; and the girl,
finding her remedy for sleeplessness did not
succeed, rose softly and undid the lattice of her
window. The air seemed to refresh her and
help her to struggle against the nervous restlessness.
And yet as she gazed over the soaked
heather and reeking ferns of the moor which
was close to the garden of Mrs. Austin's house,
and as she listened to the murmur of the river

swollen into eddies, she thought of another
almost outcast life, hurrying as restlessly as
that river towards the vaster sea. One might
have thought that she was listening for a whisper
and for softly-falling footsteps, as after a
time she gently closed the lattice, and divested
herself of her warm dressing-gown that she
might force herself to sleep.

The storm, and with it the great darkness of
the night, was over. The stars could still be
seen overhead. They would soon be fading in
the morning light, and the busily-peopled
world would be rousing itself to its usual
routine.

What was her life ? — the merest atom — like
one of the dead leaves blown down on that
soaking moor, add borne on in eddies and pools
by the melancholy mud towards the darkness,
the silences. She shuddered and drew the
curtain. After all, w-hat right had she to
any of these wild, yearning thoughts ? What
could it avail to look into any mystery with
startled eyes?

Oh, God !' she cried, as she tried to compose

herself for sleep and to put out of her mind
self-reproachful thoughts concerning that other
soul — which possibly had been carried on to the
dread expanse of another life where the hope of
meeting seemed to be so small — or at best was
being buffeted in the struggle for existence amid
the busy thoroughfares and highways of earth.
*And yet bow I cared for him all the time.
And it is I who drove him away and will be
responsible if he dies — Oh, God, have mercy !'
It was so short an exclamation that she did not
recognise it as a prayer. And yet it was one
of the first cries of a troubled heart which was
athirst for God.

Mrs. Austin had not left her bed-room when
Vere — scribbling a farewell message to her, and
taking care to avoid Charlie Lloyd — set out
waterproof and polished on her homeward
walk.

^ Who was the young fellow making love to
you, of whom Mrs. Austin tells me f asked Sir
Kalph, a few mornings afterwards, with one of
those little flashes of irony in which he had
begun to indulge of late. ' Well, there is no

accounting for tastes. Women are known
by their lovers, whether they are of the
vulgar and mean sort, or vice versa. It seems
to me, from the innuendo which Mrs. Austin
makes, that I have been mistaken in you,
after all, and your tastes are of the degrading
kind.'

Oh, uncle !' said the poor girl, as she tried to
sink into the deaths of the old armchair, 'I
assure you, Mrs. Austin knows nothing about
it.'

Why should I dwell longer on this part of
Vere's life ? Biographies may be written at
length, but stories are bits of a man's or woman's
life. And the years which followed for
Vere were to all human ken very unpicturesque
bits. What such years are in the life of every
man or woman, or to the ' great army of
witnesses ' watching their warfare no human
prophet can pretend to know !

They were years of trial, of struggle, of self-reproach,
and of much misunderstanding, during
which Yere did her best to be loyally true.

She went her rounds of duty in the house or in
the village like a child, her heart at times
deeply stirred, and yet determining not to give
way to her depression.

The mere behaving ill to his niece had
done Sir Ralph's character incredible harm. It
had not only established what was evil in his
nature, but had blocked up the natural channel
of his affection. He persuaded himself that
Vere did not care enough about him to show
resentment when she was unjustly blamed.
And when the soft-footed avenger was closely
on his heels and the inevitable lot of all men
looked him horribly in the face, when a new
disbelief in himself began slowly to dawn in his
mind, his conscience gave him a few twinges,
and Dot as well as Vere had to suffer from his
irritable speeches.

The child began to hate her home, and thea
it was that Mrs. Austin who had shown a lack
of her usual social dexterity in the way ia
which she had visited her disappointment on
the elder of the two girls, took the younger one
in hand. She persuaded Sir Ralph to send his

daughter to boarding-schools, first to London,
and next to Paris.

You can't make young hearts beat in time
to all the dry stuff written on your nasty old
parchments,' she exclaimed one day, when she
had intruded into the baronet's study, and
found him stooping over learned folios, though
it was no greater secret from her than from the
other gossips in the neighbourhood that the
doctor's mandate had gone forth. Sir Ralph
was suffering from heart-disease, and ought to
have fresh air and little fatigue.

An old place fit for cats and mice,' was Mrs.
Austin's verdict, when she returned to her
bright house. It was no wonder to her that
the little vivid-hearted Dot had shown a
thorough scorn for the ' musty hole.' The child
was impulsive to a fault, no doubt, but it was intolerable
to think that she should be condemned
like her cousin to trying all her life to pick
grapes off thistles. The mediaeval influences of
the house and lands had, no doubt, told upon
Vere, who did not resemble the ultra modern
type of maidenhood, and whose bringing-up

had been remarkably iu keeping with her
surroundings.

An odd girl — a very odd girl indeed Mrs.
Austin invariably moralised; ' but what can you
expect when she has always been kept cooped
up at homCj with nothing to feed upon but the
old leaves of this genealogical tree ? Why, my
dear, she can't even look out for dead men's
shoes — the property's mortgaged — and, as to
the family', why, her uncle's the last of his line.
It's quite romantic. Interesting people in themselves,
but moving in such a morbid atmosphere.'

The remark about the morbid atmosphere
became a hackneyed one, and at last was repeated
to Yere, doing more perhaps to shake
her out of her hardheartedness than anything
else.

^ Morbid atmosphere P she repeated, indignantly
to herself, remembering that the sun
partially behind clouds can never be precisely
the same fertilising sun as if the skies
Jure blue. To live a lonely, uncoraprehended
life had seemed to her at first, as it seems to all
young things, harder than to die. She knew

that she had been sometimes in a morbid state
that autumn — a mood in which a shower of
dying leaves on the chill, wet earth, the half-stripped
branches of a tree blowing against the
sunset sky, or, for the matter of that, even a
barrel-organ brought by a wretched little Italian
boy from Torringmoor to be played beneath
the park gates, could bring ^ thoughts which
lay too deep for tears.'

But when she heard Mrs. Austin's remark
she began more than ever to scorn herself for
helplessness, and to show the courage and
nerve of a dozen men.

She no longer said, 'T can't drag on next
year as I have dragged this.' She no longer
felt a sense of the intolerable slowness of time,
as if the moment must come when she could sit
still no longer; but she determined that the
eddies and the gusts of wind which must come
to her in the future should not interfere with
the calm depths of her life.

I remember once hearing a story which was
repeated in mockery of prayer. It was of a poor,
untaught old woman, desolate and sorrowful,

and knowing very few words, who complained
to her priest that sometimes she could think of
no prayer but an inarticulate one — it was
^ Oh-h! oli-lil' The man whom she consulted
did not laugh at her, but told her that his own
prayers had at times been almost as difficult to
resolve into words.

Vere had been so far unfortunate that
hitherto she had known no living people, with
lives beautiful as their teaching, to help her
forward. But the sense of awe at the depths
which may suddenly open out of any thinking
life, lifted her heart to the Eternal Father. And
if her prayers where at first not much longer
than those of the child with ' no language buta
cry,' at any rate they were intense ones :
^ Lord, make me real — make me forget myself

She remembered that the essence of sin was
selfishness, and determined not to spoil the
lives of others by her regrets.

Painful as it was to part with Dot — the
little one looked such a bud of youth, so
bright-eyed, and yet from over-indulgence so
ready to take the least tault-fiuding to heart —

Yere bad not the heart to chain her to her own
dull, grey present.

Her principal object in life was her uncle ;
next she thought of Reuben, and the task laid
upon her in his case was doubly trying. But
the outlook, which had been habitually sombre
to Sir Ralph, became considerably lightened
when Yere set herself daily to amuse and
interest him. The old man had always tacitly
counted on his niece's help, and the feeling
that she was more than ever indispensable to
him was in itself enough to make her life
enjoyable.

Her attempts with Reuben were for a time
entirely unsuccessful. But she persevered with
the recollection of the good which she knew
to be latent in every man, and which — as some
means of making amends for her pride in the
past — she thought it might be her duty to
awaken in him. Her womanly intuition seemed
to tell her that, if she could but look into his
eyes with her own true ones, the harshness of
bis manner would be lessened ; if not, she could
only be repulsed, and she, in her new humility,

had ceased to shrink from the thought of hardness
to herself.

Godfrey asked me to look after him, and I
can only try my best,' she repeated to herself,
as, with a new sort of tact, she waylaid Reuben,
and presented him with flowers. Next, she
humbly asked permission to look at his books
and pictures. And at last, when she had installed
herself in the housekeeper's good graces,
she took the old cynic's heart by storm, merely
by obeying one of the sudden promptings of
her heart. Sir Ralph had one of his fainting
attacks and it occurred to Yere that, painful as
the wrench might be for her pride, it would bean
opportunity to send a pathetic message to
her neighbour, and easier than to let one of
her necessarily small band of servants plod all
the way to Torringmoor.

Even ' Willis,' as the self-made man put it,
had a ' humane place in his heel.' And Reuben
had himself just such a spot in his heart, had
Godfrey known how to touch it. He not only
sent dainties, and port wine supposed to have
existed as many years as old Parr, but he took

to the 7vle of benefactor so heartily that he
wrote a letter to Yere, and she answered it in
person.

To be sure it was only one step of the ladder
which she had decreed that he should mount.
But as she reasoned — when she sometimes
talked to herself, for want of somebody else to
talk to,

If I can get him up one step of the ladder,
it will be easier for him to reach the next.
And then, Godfrey — oh ! ray dear, if you never
know me as I really am — you will have your
father.'

VOL. III.

CHAPTER IV.

Seven years had passed — more than six since
Godfrey left the boarding-house — and spring
was coming round again. The same season of
the year which witnessed the opening of the
Royal Academy and the Grosvenor Exhibition
was brightening the hedges and ditches with
primrose and cowslip, bluebell and violet.
Godfrey Alas busily painting on china some
of these products of the fields. His 'bread-getting
work,' as he was fond of calling it,
had little in common with that ' transcendent
capacity to take pains ' which is apt to be more
successful than all the doubts and tremors of
despondent genius. It was difficult to associate
a man whose manners were still so refined with

what is vulgarly called ' BobemiaDism,' and yet
the manner in which Godfrey picked up his
living* might have been fairly called Bohemian.
He was quick to avail himself of the motley
advantages provided by the art-revival which
had already set in. All was grist available for
his unpretentious mill — whether it was an
engagement for painting sunflowers on kettledrum
tables, or storks and swallows on grey-green
satin to be stretched dado-wise round a
West-end boudoir. This was perhaps the best
paid work that he had done — the more so that
Hunter, the vulture, could not claim any premium
on it. And Godfrey, as well as many
other workers from hand to mouth, reaped an
occasional windfall from the fact that the
Englishman — who had been amused from his
childhood with hideous toys, taught his lessons
in a hideous school-room, and condemned to
eat his dinner sitting on a hideous chair and
eating off a hideous plate — was beginning to
rise to ecstatic adoration of the somewhat
ghastly beauties of Mr. Burke Jones, and the
Nocturnal ' of Mr. Whistler. The Eastern

D 2

carpets and Japanese knickknacks which were
already being introduced could scarcely be said
to add to Godfrey's profits. But the rushes
and Lent lilies which had to be painted on
looking-glasses — for the delectation of fair ladies
with filleted hair, attired in what they supposed
to be Greek costumes — opened to him a fresh
source of making money.

Still his sense of failure had become painful
his disillusion remained most trying. He
was not a step nearer to making the ' name '
of which he had spoken to Vere, and he had
heard nothing from his father ; but, in his desire
to free himself from the companionship of Hunter,
he had disregarded the doctor's warning.
He had been glad to take anything that offered
in the literary way. One day it was a small
pencilling for Judy — not of course one of the
larger cartoons — and on another some society
verses to fill a corner in Vanity Fair ; and there
was often the same dreary penny-lining for
the Family Enlightener.

It could scarcely have been possible for him
not to have made some sort of living after

battling for so many years with the world.
He could afford better food, but the continuous
strain of overwork, disappointment, and mental
anxiety — to say nothing of the want of sufficient
nourishment in the past — had weakened
his powers of resistance against the inroads
of disease. The new lodging which he had
chosen was in the neighbourhood of Tottenham
Court Road. The locality was squalid and the
rooms ugly. Godfrey's own little sanctum —
which ho had adorned with flowers at the
windows, and with some of the wood-carving
which he was accustomed to sell for brackets,
book-slips, and paper-knives — was somewhat
better than his surroundings. But he heard
enough just then of the jargon which was
talked and written of men who called themselves
'aesthetic,' to make him sometimes remember
that Nero had been an aesthete, and
that great art epochs had been periods of
cruelty and corruption. He began to be a little
sick of the ' art slang. For behind his lodgings
were miserable slums, in which the poorer
classes were herded together in a state of degradation

bordering on starvation. And he
longed for a little more of the robust commonsense,
for which the nation was supposed to be
renowned, that these people might be helped
out of their swinish lives and roused, as by a
trumpet-call, to a sense of something more
exalted.

All his own nostrums seemed to have failed,
for these men did not care to be preached to
about ' Art,' and, till their miserable habitations
were pulled down, it seemed to be useless to
lecture them about drunkenness, or to get them
to bestir themselves to get out of the mire.

They are the people, and 1 belong to the
people; yet if I were in their condition, I
daresay I should think as they do he said to
himself, disheartened, when Hunter rallied him
on the absurdity of his attempts.

Some of Godfrey's friends would have said
that it was characteristic of his eccentricity, if
they could have been informed that he had
chosen this uninviting retreat, fascinated by
the refined and motherly face of the woman
who presided over it. And, now that his

monetary circumstances had improved, he never
regretted his choice. For Mrs. Morton was
more fortunate than he had been. He was
surprised at those whom she managed to discover
amongst the very poor — leading noble,
thoughtful, and even dignified lives. He began
no longer to think of poverty and degradation
as if they were convertible terms. Mrs.
Morton informed him, after the two became
intimate, that some of the people in the ' back
slums ' were by no means so terrible as they
had been described. She, at least, had been
always amongst them, and had never experienced
insult or rebuff. If Godfrey had not
already realised the mistake of the exploded
idea that riches are necessary to refinement,
his new acquaintance with Mrs. Morton would
have been enough to make him do so.

I am tired of being wandering and unsettled.
I don't see why I should not settle down
here,' he said to her, after the first week spent
in her house ; and she answered him with a
smile which he found hard to interpret.

A glimmering of suspicion crossed his mind

that she was as well-bred, and nearly as well-read
on some subjects, as he was himself. She
had a fine, honest face, which looked somewhat
old for her years ; but when she smiled it was
transfigured as with an inward light. It was
not till long afterwards that Godfrey heard
that his surmises were correct, and that Mrs.
Morton — after passing through many more of
the shocks of fate than he had ever encountered
— had voluntarily selected this spot in her
childless widowhood, that she might, as she
expressed it, * keep herself without being a
burden to her friends ;' though she said nothing
about her much stronger motive of being able
to hold out a helping hand to those who were
struggling in the darkness and with the dangers
of the place.

A God-forsaken hole !' one man had called
it. But to Mrs. Morton no place was God-forsaken.


The message of the first age of Christianity
to the sorrow-stricken, jaded, and down-trodden
social outcasts had lost none of its import for
her — that message of the kingdom had a special

meaning still. She never weaned of proclaiming
it, losing none of her courage amid the great
whirlpool of human beings, the seething multitude
of souls among whom she had chosen to
cast her lot, and some of whom were besotted
with evil ways and with sins of every dye.

It was astonishing how this woman had managed
to become a centre of influence to those
around her. Every day she sallied forth with
her basket — as Godfrey at first supposed, to purchase
the beef-steak or chop which now took
the place of the potatoes and dripping — but ashe
heard afterwards to minister out of her own
pocket to the moaning, despairing, faithless
men and women, who seemed to be in ignorance
of the ordinary principles which regulate
human life.

She was too wise to take upon herself the
appearance of instructing these desperate,
sullen men, whose children were perishing of
disease and hunger, of ignorance and vice,
and whose new gospel was the inextinguishable
war of classes. She knew that they
bad an aversion to precepts which seemed to

be cut and dried, and to formulas which had
become to them too much of a dead
letter. But she won them by degrees, and
strangely enough without having money to
give them, and without sensational excitement.
The outstretched hands of those wretched ones,
who were some of them crying for bread, might
have clutched at her bounty had she been rich
and become dependent on her. Silver and gold
she had none, but the revelation of the Master's
life had penetrated to the very core of her own
being, and she transmitted it to others by living
it as well as by gently teaching it. She
toiled day and night to get the people around
her to be more honest, more cleanly, more industrious,
and to let them have some glimpse
of those delectable mountains of which she
herself in the darkest days never seemed to lose
sight.

It was characteristic of Mrs. Morton that
when some one spoke to her of ' those terrible
sceptics which were springing up everywhere
like toad-stools she answered, brightly confident,


'Those are bard words to use. I should
think it wiser not to use them. There are
doubts which shake faith but cannot destroy it.
Who can wonder that they have them f

'But are you not afraid V

Not a bit of it. I believe in regenerating
love — in a redemption which is being wrought
out by suffering, especially for the poor. Did
not He say, " Blessed are the poor "? Did not He
come to teach them how their very discontent
is blessed and to " turn their sorrow into joy ''?
But go to them and tell them that it is all a
bigot's dream — that there is no Father, no future,
and no justice but in the name. Then
what you fear will happen. The masses will
rise. How will they be able to bear the long
toil of their monotonous lives ? There will be a
struggle for human existence in which the
weakest must succumb.'

It was wonderful how this woman, no longer
standing on the vantage ground of youth,
seemed to be a living embodiment of Thekla's-
epitaph, in a far wider significance,

We have lived and loved,
We live and love.'

It was well for Godfrey that he had taken
refuge with her ; for returning home one day
past a house which had caught fire, whilst the
Fire Brigade — of which there was always a
smaller attendance in the daytime than at
night — had not arrived, he stopped to make
inquiries. The people on the ground floor were
busily occupied in securing their property, and
it was not until after some delay that Godfrey
obtained the information that a child and
its mother were upstairs and could not be got
at.

'Are none of you going to do anything?
Do you call yourselves menT he asked, as some
of the people who were standing about stolidly
shook their heads and muttered something
about having to ' think o' their own wives and
children.'

One of the more intelligent grumbled something
more about the inefficiency of the Fire
Brigade. But Godfrey did not wait to hear him
grumble. He rushed up the wooden stairs, half-blinded

by the smoke, and succeeded in reaching
the second floor. The rooms had been
deserted and tongues of fire were darting from
them. But the crowd outside was already stirred
to sympathetic excitement, and — though no
one offered to follow Godfrey in his mad adventure
— voices shouted to him from below that the
mother and little-one were on the third floor.
With ready presence of mind he forced himself
to face the flames which were issuing from the
doors of the rooms, contriving to shut both doors
in spite of singed hair and the scorching of skin.
Then, hardly conscious of the physical pain in
his state of excitement, he dashed up the remaining
stairs, never forgetting the sight
which met his eyes, of the young mother who
sat stupefied with smoke and fear, and looking
at him as if her eyes alone belonged to the
living. He called to her, but she did not hear.
There was no time to make her understand.
Seizing her by one arm and dragging her by
mere force down the stairs, he took the baby in
the other, and, regardless of its terrified cries,
succeeded in saving both. His re-appearance

was greeted with enthusiastic cheers, the more
so that a few minutes afterwards the staircase
fell in, and the firemen arrived amid the execrations
of the mob, when it was too late for their
efforts to be of any avail.

Amid that volley of curses and wailing
exclamations — leading to a scuffle with some
police who came up at that moment, and valorously
took the part of the other officials — Godfrey
managed to escape. He returned to his
lodgings, ashamed of his sensation of faintness
a nausea which was caused by intolerable
pain, a sense of thirst which was hard to bear,
and a throbbing of the temples against which
he struggled in vain.

Any other lodging-house keeper might have
exclaimed at him in horror as he tottered,
apparently in a semi-drunken condition, to the
steps of her house. But Mrs. Morton's motherly
heart went out to him at once. Avoient who
have no direct duties, and are above the
drudgery of common life, are apt to become
fastidious and fine. But a man's greatest extremity
was this good woman's opportunity.

She bad known that Godfrey was suffering,
but the intimacy had hitherto been principally
on her side. He had been naturally reserved
with her about the circumstances of his life.
She knew little of his antecedents, and sometimes
wondered sorrowfully if he, with his refined
instincts, was aware of the downward
path taken by some of the men with whom he
consorted. Hunter, the man of trembling limb,
of withered brain, and with the pitiable premature
decay of old age induced by drink, had
been his associate. The partnership puzzled
Mrs. Morton. Not that she deplored the premature
decay in Hunter ; she looked upon it
as the Lord's merciful fashion of weaning His
self-willed children from love of that which is
loathsome and plague-spotted, so that the
poison-plants may be eradicated which lead to
disease and death.

None of Godfrey's friends came near him at
this crisis. For days, and even for weeks, he
was in the valley of the shadow, tossing in
fever and in delirium.

The fever proved non-infectious, but some of

Mrs. Morton's other lodgers thought it necessary
to forsake the house. It gave her the more time
to attend to the invalid, and she could not help
obtaining the key to a good many of the mysteries
which had puzzled her, when she listened
unwillingly to Godfrey's delirious ravings. But
the very ravings reassured her. They convinced
her that there were no germs of meanness or
untruthfulness in the soil of this man's heart ;
and though she did not like the fierce intensity
of feeling with which at times he railed against
fate, still she considered that, though the oversensitiveness
was unfortunate, it had probably
been due to the weakened and morbid state of
his bodily health.

Godfrey had a sensation in the intervals of
consciousness — in which he seemed to be lying
almost within the veil, and was powerless in
his state of physical prostration to do more
than make a sign to be supplied with some
cooling drink — of the brightness of the countenance
which was bending over him, as if,
more than any other person whom he had
ever met, this woman seemed to be standing

face to face with the Divine glory. It was the
encouraging brightness of this smile which
helped him to rally his strength in the most
terrible crisis of his illness.

His room seemed to be full of some soft diffused
light as his clouded brain cleared at last,
and memory — returning to him in slow waves
led him to recognise the fact that the spring
sunshine was pouring in through the one
window. The blind had been slightly drawn
up, and some daffodils, which he did not
remember to have purchased, were standing
in a glass of water on a table by his
side.

Where am I V he asked, trying to raise himself
in vain, and becoming conscious of his own
impotence, as Mrs. Morton smoothed his pillow
and answered, with a bright look,
Where else but in your own room V
Ml own room ! You are laughing at me. I
have made no money — I have nothing to repay
you he muttered, looking anxiously, first in
one direction, and then in another.

Hush, hush ! you must not excite yourself —
VOL. III. E

I shall be abundantly repaid,' answered the
soothing, motherly voice. For this woman,
from long habit, was accustomed to think of
the sick as if they where her treasures, and of
sufferings of soul and body as if she was never
to shun them — they were her natural domain.

I do not understand,' he repeated, almost
irritably, as soon as she allowed him to speak
again ; ' you ought to turn me out in the
streets. I tell you I cannot repay you. Let
me die like a dog in the gutter — I can't take
advantage of you.'

That is one of your morbid sayings,' she
answered, as she held to his lips a cup of beef-tea.


Then you do not think I am going to die V
lie questioned a little anxiously, with that
dread of seeming cowardly which made him
not like to admit how death at the threshold
of a life in which so little had been accomplished
seemed to him to mean loss, solitude, retribution.


You cannot live on air she answered,
good-humouredly. ' You tried that experiment

too long before you came to live with
me. The love of life is a divinely ordered law —
but sone day when you are stronger I will tell
you Avhat I think of what men call death. Tome
it has nothing to do with ghastly shadows —
nor do I see why there should be anything hardin
the unconscious dropping of the garment
of mortality.'

He listened, conscious of not following her
with the interest which he might have felt
before his dreary period of disillusion.

Years of disappointment and mortification
stretched behind him in which it had been hard
to believe in the goodness of God. He used
to think he believed in it, but of late he was
not shire. His mind previous to his illness had
been in that sort of state which is commonly
called ^ unsettled,' while Mrs. Morton's sure
trust resembled the ' steadfastness ' of the
apostles.

sall this sounds eloquent enough,' he remarked,
a little wearily, 'if this sort of thing-were
true. But you know as well as I do that
the majority of people go on now as they ale

2

ways did as if they did not believe in it.*
Do they not T she said, laying down her
needlework for a minute as if considering, but
with nothing of that disconcerted look in her
face which he had expected to see. ' Then
it is better they should speak out. I have
had much to do with sick nursing, and I know
that when there are certain diseases in the
blood it is better that the malady should come
to a head. Nature sometimes cures it then
without the intervention of the cautery and the
knife. But at any rate it is better it should
come out. The conflict with unbelief in our
days,' she added, a few moments afterwards,
'is to my mind not at all calculated to make
one despair. For when men question anxiously
and soberly, and are even desirous of being
convinced , one cannot help being very hopeful
about the final issue.'

He thought he should like to paint her portrait
as that of a living^embodiment of faith, as
she looked at him with shining eyes, and gave
him that unexpected answer.

CHAPTER V.

Godfrey's recovery was retarded by his impatient
desire to repay this good Samaritan who
had lost so much for his sake.

The food which she continued to purchase
for him when he could not even pay his rent
seemed to choke him. And, had he been still
sufficiently ill to entitle him to enter a hospital,
he would have fled from her rather than continue
to live at her expense.

At the same time he had but just emerged
from one of those heart-shaking crises — when
he had seemed to see more than is discerned by
mortal eyes — and to have passed through one
of those unutterable experiences, of which the
invalid returning to life finds it impossible to

speak, but which are no doubt vouchsafed to
the dying. The spiritual world, on which he
had often speculated before, had become an
awful reality.

Whilst the mood lasted, nothing could be
more congenial than Mrs. Morton's friendship.
Godfrey had all his life been denied
the natural outlets of tenderness, and the discovery
of Mrs. Morton's perfect gentlefolk as
well as the culture which she betrayed by her
conversation, and the fact that he could speak
to a woman of her age more frankly than to a
younger one , did much to cheer hiui. It made
him sometimes reflect that it was a good thing
for him to have been brought into connection
with life in all its phases, if only that he might
know how, under such conditions, a noble woman
might live a simple and elevated existence,
breathing the invigorating air of the heights,
while her feet were hurrying on busy errands of
usefulness in the by-ways and paths of the most
unlovely flats. The discovery of greatness in
the midst of folly, and of nobility ia the midst
of meanness, would at any time have pleased
his artistic instincts.

Yet now when he was recovering from so
severe an illness that he seemed to see men
through a mist like trees walking ; now whenas
yet he was unable to shake off the sensation
of how the world and all its objects had seemed
to be reeling away from him — so that it required
an effort of the will to rally the steadiness
of his brain — there was much in the unselfish
devotion of this motherly woman to gratify
that yearning for sympathy — the unutterable
and insatiable need of such a man — which had
long been pent up in him.

Godfrey, under other circumstances, would
have been the first to refuse to be taught,
schooled into proprieties, or patted condescendingly
on the back by a stranger. But, unconsciously
to himself, he was just in that crisis
of a man's life when the iron is heated and
malleable, and when a few strokes serve to
fashion it as a weapon for usefulness or an instrument
for evil, and day by day Mrs. Morton
was doing more to mould him than he ever
afterwards knew.

I can easily understand that you did not like

to have this money showered on yen when you
did not know how it had been obtained. But I
should not have thought it was like you not to
keep up some communication with your father.
Think how a man of his strong nature must
have suffered,' she said to him one day, when
she had heard his story.

He cast me off with curses.'

'And how would it be if God were to forsake
us for ever, when — in our wild passion — we castoff
His mercy?'

He has made no sign.'

You acknowledge there were advertisements.
If not actually in his name, you may depend
upon it that they were worded with his consent.'


Godfrey did not answer.

I have conveyed a wrong impression if I have
made my readers fancy that this was a woman
who ' preached.' On the contrary, she was one to
shrink from any exhibition of feeling which fell
short of action, and had a horror of that incipient
hypocrisy which borders on immodesty.

The formal and coutiuaal introduction of religious
emotions and opinions into intercourse
with others would have seemed to such an one
to be in a measure unreal, and an unnecessary
waste of spiritual strength.

But there were times when she could not be
put to shame, when it seemed to be necessary
for her to speak out, and when she had inspiring
thoughts for the harassed, the defamed, and
the dejected.

Well, after all, you could hardly have expected
to succeed without credentials, without even
being able to make use of your degree, because
you had determined to withhold the name which
was your own. I don't see, as you say yourself,
that you have much to complain of. No
fair man will feel being beaten in competition,
and I am sure you are not one to trumpet your
own slights and injuries,' she answered, in a
cheery voice.

And so it was that, with the returning
strength of convalescence, Godfrey felt unable
to take an unhealthy view of his own trials in

life. He felt ashamed of even mentioning tbera
when he heard of how this woman, whose joy
so continually surmounted her depression, had
been called upon to part with four of her children
— one of whom, a son, had lived to be as
old as he was himself.

They have not really been taken from me.
The world of spirits unseen is as real and, perhaps,
more so than the material world — not
future, not distant, but present in a sense
which we cannot understand. *' We look,"
as St. Paul says, " not at the things which are
seen"' she tried to explain.

If the comforting thought was a mistaken
one, it was not Godfrey who would disabuse
her of it.

He cannot have given us these strong affections
which rivet us to each other to destroy
them, and to torture us,' she exclaimed, with
what seemed to him at first such an astonishing
sense of certainty. she is justice and love.
My dear ones are not even separated from me
now, and, when I go to them in His good tioie.

Ave shall know each other again, for He is good,
and they live in Him.'

It would be difficult to describe the exact
time when Godfrey, who, if he did not become
imbued with all Mrs. Morton's opinions, yet
recognised the reality of a religion which did
not consist in sudden emotions, nor in aptness
in controversy, but in a life the mainsprings of
which were hidden from the eyes of men. He
did not adopt her way of talking, but he began
somehow to feel that she was right in speaking
of the relationships between men and women
as if they were symbols of relations to a higher
Power, and to long, in a conscience-stricken
sort of way, after the well-being of his own
father. He had heard of religious people —
women especially — who supposed Christian love
to be so diffusive as not to admit of concentration
on the individual. He had had a horror
of those who neglected the charities of private
life. But Mrs. Morton was a new revelation to
him. She believed because she loved ; she
loved because she believed.

The effective way of loving the world at
large is to begin by intimate affection or friendship
for those about us,' she told him, with a
motherly smile.

And, whether he agreed with her or not, he
had no heart to contradict the woman who had
borne her own troubles so bravely. It was
almost as if she were laughing him out of his.
He had never seen her laugh at him, but her
cheerful way of taking everything had much
the same effect.

We each of us feel as if our own peculiar
burden were the worst,' she said, merrily — stitching
away at some fancy-work which just then
she was thankful to undertake — not having told
him about the other lodgers, whom no argument
on earth had been able to convince that
nervous fever was not infectious. ' The mystery
of why such troubles are laid upon us is
one which neither you nor I, nor thousands of
our fellow-creatures, are likely to be able to
solve. But what does it matter? We shall
know all about it in such a very short time,'
she added, in the manner which at first had

seemed to him so quaint, as she held up the
garment on which she was working'. It was
some pretty, dark, clinging stuff, and she was
embroidering it with irises in different shades
of blue.

He could not help thinking how handsome
she would look still in such a dress herself, and
then decided that she was better as she was, in
her rusty black and clean white tippet, and
that expression in her face which reminded him
of St. Augustine's mother, Monica.

He was turning over the paper, busily searching
for advertisements. In his anxiety to be
no longer dependent on her, many seemed
to him to suit his case which in the old
days he would have discarded for fear of discovery.


One met his eye now, appearing in several of
the morning papers.

Wanted, a secretary. A clear handwritings
prompt, business habits, some classical knowledge,
some acquaintance with continental languages,
and some aptness at English composition
will be required. Preference will be

given to applicants who have had experience
in journalism, and especially to graduates of
Oxford or Cambridge. Work not fatiguing,
and salary fair.'

Godfrey pondered. Nothing would have
been so trying to him as to offer himself for a
post for which he felt himself to be incompetent.
But here was an appointment which
seemed to be made for him — a round hole
waiting for the proper ball to fit it. Dozens of
more independent appointments, in the Post
Office or the Treasury, would have been open
to him before through the door of the Civil
Service examinations. But these had been
more or less public. He had not been afraid
of the necessary fag for these things, but he
had a terrible fear of discovery.

Looking at Mrs. Morton, busily occupied
with her daily work, he wondered where all
these scruples had vanished now.

As he answered the advertisement, succinctly
and in his clearest hand-writing, he thought
low little the round, school-boy telegraphy
resembled the hurried scribble which he used
to write at St. Anne's. But to learn to write

clearly and in a larger hand — instead of the
Oxford characters, reduced to their tiniest proportions,
of which one London editor had facetiously
said that he required glasses unusually
strong to read them, and must therefore decline
Mr. Godfrey's lucubrations — had been one of
the new accomplishments which he had obliged
himself to cultivate.

In twenty-four hours he received an answer,
appointing a certain time for him to go to a
bouse in the neighbourhood of Pall Mall. A
man-servant in plain clothes opened the door,
and Godfrey was shown into an ante-room,
which was filled, as well as the hall, with a
crowd of grave, anxious-looking men. He
counted thirty-five, and gathered courage from
the fact that, though several of them had gentlemanly,
intellectual-looking faces, most of
them wore clothes more seedy than his own.
There was a murmur of talk and some low
grumbling among the few who seemed to
be acquainted with each other ; while the manservant
— who surely wore felt slippers — ascended
noiselessly to the upper room, and came

back, after a time, with the information that
it would be necessary for his master to speak
personally to only six of the thirty-five candidates.


The names were read aloud from a strip of
paper with which he had been provided. The
first name was 'Allen,' the second, in alphabetical
order, ' Godfrey.'

Mr. Allen — a half-starved, unprepossessing
man, and whose face unmistakably bore the
mark of Grub Street — was not long upstairs.
Evidently no conclusive answer had been given
to him, and Godfrey found himself next, following
the servant with catlike tread up the stairs. His
own boots were splashed, and grievously old;
his garments — too large for him since the
emaciation caused by the fever — fell round him
in loose folds, and the hat which he held in
his hand was dilapidated. A humorous smile
crossed his face as he saw his own figure reflected
in numerous looking-glasses as he
ascended the stairs.

Sydney Smith would say this wis a meeting
of beggars, instead of a meeting of the clergy,'

he thought, as the figure on one occasion, duplicated
and trebled, looked haggardly at him
from an arrangement of the mirrors.

In another minute he was being ushered into
a back room on the drawing floor. A gentleman's
study, furnished with all the new appurtenances
— a square Turkey carpet, parquet
flooring, dark sage-green walls, with a dado
supposed to be of a deeper sage than the walls,
a brass fire-place, and fender of the same irreproachable
material, a large carved-oak writing
table, and comfortable carved-oak chair.

The room seemed to be so dark that Godfrey,
still dazed and weak, could at first but
faintly distinguish the figure of a man, standing
with his back to him, as the confidential valet
disappeared.

In the moment which elapsed before the man
turned round, Godfrey was conscious of a
strange sensation. The figure was familiar to
him. Surely he had fled from it on more than
one occasion, when he had hurried back from
the ^Yest End and other crowded thoroughfares,
thanking his stars that his old friend

VOL. III. F

would be unable to recognise him, and knew
nothing of his less frequented haunts. It was
but a short time before his illness, when Godfrey
— feeling the want of air, and straying, in
urgent need of it, through Kensington Gardens
had seen the same man turning away from
the path in which the two might have come
face to face with each other, and taking a shortcut
in the direction of the Albert Memorial.
Godfrey had resisted the impulse more than
once to run after him, and make himself known.
His heart had yearned after the man who
seemed now to be happy and prosperous, but
this very prosperity had made it impossible for
him to seem to ask alms of Charlie Lloyd.

There Alas no escape now. Charlie Lloyd
had turned round, and though both men had
altered — Godfrey the most of the two — it Alas
impossible for either to escape recognition.

There was no exclamation, as there might
have been between women. Both looked at
each other — one with startled eyes, and the
other with something like triumph. It was an
embarrassing moment for both. Neither could

help feeling a little confused, being hardly
able to pursue the ordinary code of manners,
which may fit the requirements of ordinary life,
but is certainly not equal to such dilemmas.

At the first glance Godfrey saw that Charlie
was more shrewd and sharp-eyed than he had
been in the past. Time had broadened his
figure somewhat prematurely ; luxuriously-reared
men of moderate height, accustomed to
plenty of wine and to a good deal of dining
out, being apt to lose the trimness of their
build before the less self-indulgent. The
second glance showed that though he was
quick-witted as ever and ready to pose in becoming
characters — a habit which he had contracted
in the past, a consequence of being petted
— still he was probably as loveable as
before.

Immensely loveable,' Godfrey still thought
him, as rallying himself instantly, Mr. Lloyd
strode across the room, and grasped his old
friend by the hand.

Not a word,' he said, as he pushed Godfrey
with gentle force into an arm-chair, and placed

f2

before him a cordial, from a cupboard in an inner
room, in the shape of a glass of wine, ' not a
word till you have taken this.'

Godfrey gently pushed it away.

I have seen enough of reduced wretches
like myself taking that sort of stuff at all hours
between meals.'

'You don't look as if you had had many
meals. Even Pharaoh's lean kine would have
put more flesh on your bones,' said Charlie, ashe
retreated to the brass fender, to which he
turned his back, and, standing with his legs a
little apart, surveyed his old friend meditatively
' Well, my Gracchus, I always said you
had what some of the Americans are supposed
to call a " darned lot of queer notions in your
brain," — not that any American in real life ever
talked like that — but I couldn't have prophesied
that such clever notions would have brought
you to such a passes

I have been ill — any man may be that,' answered
Godfrey, with a flush on his cheek, and
tossing back the fair hair Which apparently had
run to seed like the rest of him — being longer

and earlier than iu the 'Auld Lang Syne.' He
added, ' You had better let me go. I think it is
a pity to spoil an old recollection. I — I should
have liked you to keep a green place in the
corner of your memory for me. It is weak of
me, but if I had known it had been you wiio
advertised I should not have come.'

More than one person can hide his head
like an ostrich in the sand,' answered Charlie,
with his coat-tails still towards the brass fireplace,
but surveying Godfrey critically, and
ready to produce more wine and even cognac,
to the extent of interfering with the liberty of
the subject, should that queer pallor increase,
but I simply kept back my name for business
purposes, and you — what excuse have you to
offer for coolly dropping your family patronymic?'


It is a pity to brush the bloom of a remembrance
off an old friendship.' muttered Godfrey,
hardly knowing what he said, * you must be
ashamed to think how often you were my willing
guest at Oxford

*And I should be glad enough to be your

guest just now, if it were possible, old fellow.
No, never talk of an ideal being destroyed because
a friend is poor and in difficulties he
retorted, with a flash of boyish enthusiasm.
It is you who have treated us badly never answering
our other advertisements.'

I did not see them. It must have been when
I was ills or too hard at work to look at
advertisements. When I mentioned my real
name to her, my landlady informed me of the
fact of which I was ignorant. You must not
over-estimate my passion for self-sacrifice.'

How was it you did not pursue the clue
when your landlady told you V

The advertisement was not from my father.'

It was from friends who cared for you.'

You mean that because I am a pauper, if I
apply to my friends, they will be ready with
their stray shillings. You do not understand.
I might come to sweep a crossing, but as to
alms I would accept none of them.'

But surely your father V

Godfrey felt it his duty explain. The upshot
was that for the first time Charlie Lloyd

thoroughly understood how absolute the breach
had been between Godfrey and Reuben.

He became accustomed to the answering of
the subdued voice and realised how this man
had been over red-hot ploughshares, and had
drunk of the dregs of the cup of humiliation in
the seven years struggle through which he had
passed.

Ah ! I see he answered, after a pause ' you
Avant, without exactly knowing it, to reverse
in your own case the private selfishness which
led to your father's determination to rise. You
were actuated by a bene violent desire for the
welfare of the human race ; but — it was impracticable
— quite Utopian. Well, what have
you done for the working-man V
I have been one myself.'
You one of the great unwashed V
The name has no meaning. I have supported
myself by wood-carving at times, and found
it as lucrative as ill-paid painting. I took my
work to the shops. Why — there is all the
difference between an honest British workman
and a slave of Sesostris.'

It was a whimsical sort of consolation, so like
the old Godfrey. His old friend smiled to himself
as he listened to it.

• It would be a pity if, after all , you regretted
it. That would spoil the romance,' he said,
speaking a little dryly. ' Now 1 — I never cared
to be heroic ; but I should not, if I were one,
be a reluctant hero.'

But you have always tried to do your duty V

Every honest man does that.'

Mr. Lloyd laughed again as he uttered this
platitude ; this time a little harshly.

Ah !' he added, ' you have ' been battered
about in the world ; but, after all , I know more
about it than you do.'

^ I was not in a position to learn much. The
struggle was too great for the necessaries of life.'

It is better to fail sometimes in trying to do
what is right. ■*

It sounded again like a copy-book maxim
Avhen Charlie had uttered it. He was not given
to moralising, and was rather amused when
Godfrey took it seriously, and answered, quietly,

Yes, I believe there are successful men

\vJiose hearts acre more bitterly than those of
the unsuccessful.'

Is all this struggling after one's ideal worth
while f asked the other, lightly.

Not perhaps if this were the onJij life an-silvered
his old friend, With a far-away look
which staggered Charlie, and made him fear fora
moment that it would scarcely do to engage
this man as secretary, since it might bring him
in contact with a funeral. ' And yet I don't
know,' said Godfrey, correcting himself. 'Even
if it were so, it would be infinitely better always
to aim high, and do one's best for the race.'

Well, you must have the courage of your
opinions. But you must understand that , as
ray secretary, they have nothing to do with
mine,' answered Charlie, with a little more of
the high-born Maecenas, who thinks he can
patronise a bread-getter, about him than, a few
minutes before, Godfrey had thought possible.

My opinions on some points are not so
settled as they used to be. As a man grows
older, he sees both sides of a subject better
answered Sellwood, quietly.

He was used to wet blankets and wasted
opportunities. Disappointment had been his
daily bread, and he began to think that this
interview would turn out as others had done.

But Charlie Lloyd seemed to regret the
sharpness of this speech as soon as he had
Tittered it. He rang the bell before he spoke
again, and, when the man-servant appeared
gave orders.

Bring coffee and biscuits. This gentleman
does not take wine before his dinner. And tell
the other men downstairs, with my compliments,
that I will let them know again if I have
any need of them.'

The man brought the coffee, eyeing Godfrey's
long hair and his mis-fitting, shabby coat
with a look of the keenest disapproval.

Well — you belonged to the reddest of Red
Republicans, if I remember rightly, at St
Anne's, though you were too shy to talk yourself
into fame at the Union. I — I know I talked
a lot of nonsense, and had the intellectual
measles as bad as anyone said Mr. Lloyd,
when the valet had left, with a genial laugh, a

return of bis happy, confident manner, and that
comfortable security as to the fact that everybody
was going to like him which had made
the world from his boyhood more or less of a
fairy-tale to him.

I don't think I was quite so bad as that,
though I did not see so clearly as I do now
that, if the cause of order is to be deprived of
its present powerful auxiliaries, the selfish instincts
of mankind may come to the front somewhat
disagreeably,' answered Godfrey, with an
echo of the laugh which was good to hear.

'You didn't talk so didactically in the old
days.'

'No ; if one said a thing then, one had to be
striking as well as amusing. Do you remember
talking once in my room of " those soft undercurrents
of sound which grease the wheels of
time"? And you were angry with me for
wanting to abolish the House of Lords as a
"grotesque anachronisms And both men
laughed heartily again. They could not help
being tickled at the recollection of the charming
insolence, the naive assurance, and the

fresh pertinacity of the youthful convictions of
the young orators at the Union. 'dreadful
young Radicals !' they had called each other
iu badinage ; but more than half the startling
opinions which had been broached by them had
been taken up for the sake of argument.

It was good practice. I know I was bad
enough ; but then I had no mother to shock.
Well, I shouldn't be honest if I did not confess
to you that I soon found there were questions
of more importance than vague schemes of
philanthropy to be settled amongst the working
men, whom I tried to think of as my
mates.'

Charlie's laugh rang out again as it used todo
in the old days.

So far as I remember, we arraigned principles
and not things,* he said, by way of turning
ofi the subject. ' At any rate, we thought we
went to Oxford to study and not to gain prizes.
If I remember rightly my studies were principally
in the way of breakfast-parties and human
nature ; and yours — you had a fair smattering
of classical knowledge and a first-rate acquaintance

with English literature — that is the very
thing I am looking for now. By-the-by , your
frankly-expressed opinions were greatly exaggerated
at Torringmoor.'

'And you have been at Torringmoor?' asked
Godfrey, flushing again, the change of complexion
betokening, as his keen-eyed new employer
thought, either some unusually strong
emotion or great delicacy of health. ' Did you
see '

I saw more than one person who was very
charming answered Charlie, pointedly, as he
pulled out his watch and looked at the time.
Do you know we had better get to business ?
I never like to discuss friends whom we have in
common.'

The pucker on his brow did not escape the
notice of Godfrey, whose transient colour
quickly faded, leaving him very pallid.

'All is fair,' thought the other man, 'in love
and war. The poor dear fellow has behaved
like an idiot, and when the girl ceases to pity
him, he will quietly be let down from his
pedestal.'

He was glad for many reasons of the meeting,
for he prided himself on not letting love
overbalance his friendship. But, now that the
start would be a fair one between them, he
could scarcely help thinking, as he glanced at
Godfrey's stooping figure and pallid face, that
the innings would be certain to be all on his
side.

To return to our muttons, as the French put
it. I remember you where a smart writer, a
great reader in the old days,' he said, encouragingly,
' and that you were apt to bother
your brains about more things than were good
for you. Forgive me — I was a little careless
just now — T ought not to have alluded to the
past. But I think it fair to tell you that your
father is much improved. Miss Rashleigh is a
witch ; no one knows how, but she has quite
won his heart. The old cottages are pulled
down, and new comfortable dwellings have
been put up. She goes to him and reads to
him as she used to do to her uncle.'

Did Godfrey hear aright ? The buzz in his
ears, and sparks which seemed to come before

his eyes, illuminating a sort of darkness , prevented
him from hearing much, as Charlie proceeded
to give an account of his own affairs.

Was it possible that Charlie Lloyd could
mean such a thing as that?' he asked, as he
tried to put away the thought about Vere.

Rid dimly heard that Mr. Lloyd's elder brother
had lived for some time a sort of ,
that it could be only a question of time as
to when the paralytic sufferer would be released
from his log-like life, and that meanwhile on
the second brother devolved all the management
of the estate.

One can scarcely desire him to live, and
yet, you see, I may some day be a member of
that effete institution — the House of Lords,'
said Charlie, with difficulty suppressing another
of his hearty laughs. * There are peers who
have been nobodies, but who worked hard
when they were young. There are some who
have earned rank, and others who have inherited
it. But I shall be a sort of piebald horse
a peer who has positively inherited his rank,
and yet has known what it is to earn his bread.'

I daresay you will make a very calm, sensible,
jovial old gentleman,' Godfrey would
have said, if he had uttered his thoughts aloud.
As it was, he muttered,, with a little gaucherie,
that ' he looked upon the House of Lords as a
most important breakwater.'

Nothing like the march of Time for taking
the priggishuess out of people. Well, if you
undertake this post, 1 shall look to you to help
me with my correspondence and my literary
work. I have a good deal of that. I produce
an article in the rough, and expect it to be
polished for me, and put into form. You see,
when one is expected to say something, and is
not particularly fertile in ideas oneself — a little
stale, if I may put it so — it is a decided advantage
to have a secretary who is more productive
— well, perhaps that's not the right way of
putting it — more practised at that sort of thing.'

And does the world talk about your articles?'
asked Godfrey, facing a fresh conscientious
difficulty, one which he knew had to be evaded
by most hack-writers in London.

No — it's only intimate friends who know

much about it. I wait to get the right knack
before confessing my identity. I want to get
influence — there is no influence like that of
journalism — to have a newspaper of one's own ;
a project which I have talked of more than
once — is a means of impressing one's opinions
on tens of thousands of the people.'

VOL. III.

CHAPTER VI.

In less than a week Godfrey was bard at work
as the secretary of his old friend. It seemed
to the astonished Charles that he worked tremendously,
neglecting nothing which industry
could accomplish, shirking not the smallest
item. That this man of shrinking nerve, who
was not ashamed to proclaim himself the son
of a labourer, should not only know more about
politics than Mr. Lloyd himself, but should be
able to say it still in the most fitting words,,
after living so long among the people, seemed
sometimes to be a little marvellous.

Charlie had had a secret suspicion that the
^ penny-lining ' must have destroyed the refinement
of his secretary's style. But, when

be brought what be called ' bis own ideas ' in
the rough to Godfrey over-night, be was pretty
certain to receive by the morrow's noon a composition
wbicb no more resembled the old rags
that be bad hastily thrown together than the
delicate white paper which has passed through
the last process of the paper-mill resembles the
pulp. Godfrey winced when his new employer
praised him. What could Charlie know of the
number of those manuscripts which had vanished
during the last fev^ years as completely
as if the earth bad opened and swallowed them
up, and wbicb were possibly reposing still in
the lowest depths of editors' waste-baskets '^

He felt as if the bloom bad been rubbed off
all his earlier aspirations, and could only be
thankful that, before he knew Mrs. Morton, be
bad sedulously kept away from the purlieus of
some more recognised Bohemians, who did their
best to help each other by boozing in public-houses
between Temple Bar and Lydgate Hill,
recognising the old axiom that water is best,
especially when it is plentifully flavoured with
brandy. Not even to Charlie could be tell of

g2

the time when the problem of how to live had
been very difficult to him, of when his watch
had just found its way to the pawnbroker's,
and a magnificent diamond ring, the gift of his
father, had quickly followed its example.

His new work seemed to him light. It consisted
of but five hours a day, three in the
morning, and two in the afternoon. By that
time Charlie's accounts, as well as his literary
matters, and the correspondence which had
been more bothering still, were all comfortably
disposed of. Indeed, on some days the work
was a sinecure, and on those occasions Charlie
would ensconce himself in dressing-gown and
slippers in his secretary's room, and show himself
heartily disposed for a chat.

You used to take such an interest in class
struggles,' he said to him, on one occasion. ' I
was half afraid that I should be engaging a
demagogue for a secretary ; but now you seem
to have a new dislike of offending other men's
prejudices.'

I am no longer likely ever to be a capitalist,'
answered Godfrey, * nor am I so certain that I

know all about a great many questions with
which I once thought myself well acquainted.'

But your brother, as you call him, the
working-man V

*I think of him as much as ever. Only I
remember the saying to which even Diderot could
assent that there is a worse evil for society than
the loss of liberty, and that is the loss of God.'

Both men had much to keep them grave.
The brother of the one remained in a critical
state, and the other was still cut off from news
of his father, if the flying visits of Mr. Lloyd
did not supply him with occasional information.
After one of these visits, Charlie startled him
by the information that Sir Ralph was dead,
and that Reuben had behaved like ' a brick,'
allowing the daughter of the bankrupt man
undisputed possession of the house and park.

Ah, I doubt if you ever did justice to that
father of yours. Harsh nerves without which
a man could never have lived such a wearing
life — three days of such knocking about would
have jarred most men into idiocy — lead to
harsh words ; but, bless you, he never meant

them. He is prose itself, he had not the nature
to comprehend you — but his feelings are strong
as iron ; he'll have his grip on you still.'

Godfrey was silent.

But when a year had passed, and spring was
coming again, his life, which was now a tolerably
happy one and evenly-balanced, was disturbed
by the following exclamation,

'Who do you think has been in town? I
did not tell him you were here. But if you do
your duty there'll be a lot for you to see about.
Mr. Sellwood has no more idea of conducting an
election on a decent, new-fashioned basis than
Johnnie Gilpin had of riding.'

^ My father! — what, Mr. Sellwood f repeated
Godfrey, in bewilderment, and suspecting
Charlie of being again engaged in a plot.

Yes, it's not altogether a bad notion,' said
Charlie, considering with apparent attention
the pattern on his plate. (For the men now
generally lunched together, and Charlie was
kindness personified to his secretary)

Godfrey sat staring at him. He did not take
the notion in.

^ Come continued his patron a little impatiently,
'you're nearly thirty years old — or is
it thirty-one. You're not behindhand in your
politics — you wouldn't suit me, if you were.
And you will quite understand that, as there is
a talk of a coming election, some of the 
folk, who are more go-ahead than the
rest of them, would like to have the place freed
from the thraldom of Toryism — not that your
father knew whether he was a Tory or not,' and
here Charlie began to laugh.

'I told him that as a rule when candidates
mean to solicit the suffrages of a constituency
it is generally necessary to toss up and make up
their minds beforehand whether they shall v/ear
the orange or the blue. But come, this will
give him an opportunity for settling some of
your burning questions. He'll fall into everything
that you suggest,' said the future Lord
Newderry, stifling his laughter.

I don't understand,' began Godfrey.

'Oh, wait, I am coming to it — all * in good
time. You know your father is immensely improved.
I have the profoundest respect for

bim — I assure you I have. But I will confess
that I was just a little taken aback when Mrs.
Austin wrote at the request of Miss Rashleigb
to make the startling announcement that Mr.
Sellwood meant to go into Parliament. It
seems that be has been invited to come forward
by the local Liberal Association. But I doubt
if he knows the difference between one party or
the other. Bearing that in mind, I wrote back
to her to tell him that it was immensely good
of him , but that I should object to his being
kept on his legs for the amusement of the
roughs, and that I had too much respect for his
constitution to like to see him deprived of his
natural sleep.'

'Weir

'Well, you may depend upon it he is not the
man, when he has made up his mind , to shilly-shally,
or let the grass grow under his feet.
And it seems that a Mr. Tatian, whose family
has owned the seat for two generations back
has offended some of the Torringmoor folk bj
seeming to count on a perpetuity of tenure and
they are anxious to get rid of the present incumbent

— or cumbered of the ground. All this
is an opportunity which your father will not
let slip. Down comes Mr. Sellwood by the
next train, with a persistent idea that an abundance
of spare cash always put out to usury
will be sure to weigh heavily in his favour.
Now the comfort is he is not of feeble fibre. But
he has got wrong notions into his head about
five-pound notes, and flags which are illegal,
except, I suppose, in churches — he'll want
drums next — to say nothing of tea and sweetmeats.'


'Had we not better go on with what we are
doing ; I don't know how all this talk will help
my father?' asked Godfrey again, pallid as at
his first interview with Lloyd.

Ism coming to it as fast as my breath will
let me. Well, when your father shows himself
in town, his object is this. He says he takes the
liberty of coming to me because he thinks I
might know some gentleman of experience who
will manage his affairs as a candidate. He says
he wishes to do the thing handsomely, and
therefore, whoever will come down as his friend

will be magnificently paid I make no doubt,
but for certain reasons I advised him not to
state the sum.'

Thank you,' said Godfrey, quietly— his eyes
were cast down, and his hands had a firm grasp
of the table.

Now, you know he is already inviting burgesses
wholesale to dine with him. He is much
struck by the notion that the thing is to be
done by money, and — to be honest with you —
if he is to keep within prohibited limits, it is
only his own son who will dare to hint at the
existence of a scruple.'

There was a glass of water on the table.
Godfrey raised it and put it to his lips. Then
he asked, with apparent indifference,

^ And you think that it is — a lady — who is
tempting him to this V

Yes, she has reason to be grateful to him.
he has been generous to her. But it is like
skating on thin ice for Miss Rashleigh to try to
interfere with him. She says it will be a good
thing to turn his thoughts. He has never been
the same man since you left him. But you see

a woman does not appreciate as well as we do
the danger of corrupting the electors.'

What do you advise me to do V

'Accept this engagement — you will be beholden
to him for nothing — you can take up
your quarters in another house if it please you.
But go and take care of him. It is your
manifest duty. I had nobody else to recommend
but you. And you know there is no occasion
to put i/ou through your facings.'

There was again a pause.

A man who can write short articles or paragraphs
for the papers seems to him especially
desirable.'

'But I could never puff him in my paragraphs.'


lyell, you'll put it all straight. Explain that
to him yourself. It's no good beating about
the bush. I'll write and tell him that you'll go
down.'

And you V said Godfrey, raising his eyes.

Oh, 7. I expect to be summoned to poor
Greville any day. Then all my affairs will be
different.'

Ah ! you are throwing your bait again with
the certainty that the fish will rise — you have
been considering how you can patch up the
quarrel between myself and my father, skilfully
humouring the pride of both. It is good of
you, but you must give me a few hours to
think,' answered the other as he rose to his feet.

He wanted to be alone, and to talk to Mrs.
Morton.

I am so tired,
If I would comfort me, I know not how,
For I have seen thee, lad, as I desired,
And I have nothing left to long for now.

We two, that had so many things to say,

So many hopes to render clear,
And they are all gone after thee, my dear.

Jean Bigelow.

If thou art rich, thought poor,
For when in age, whose back with ingots bound,
Thou bear'st thy heavy riches but a join-ney,
And Death unloaded thee.

Shakespeare.

CHAPTER I.

It was on one of the last mornings in
March 1880^ when the sun was shining after
a slight shower, the cocks crowing, and the
little birds with wet wings beginning to sing,
that Godfrey — sparing a few minutes from the
absorbing business for which he had returned
to Torringmoor — found his way to the old
gate of Rashleigh Park. Godfrey, who had
not seen the venerable trees and the ancient
greensward for years, felt as if the antiquity of
the place gave it an added beauty. He thought
of the stuffy smell of Piccadilly, Pall Mall, and
even the Park with a contempt which would
have been ungracious but a few days before , ashe
breathed in the fresh ozone and odour of
moist earth.

The forsaken aspect of the place seemed to
invest it with the deeper serenity of Nature.
He was in a humour to be pleased. Coquettish
April was heralding her approach, and just
touching with her lightest tints of green the
branches of an antique avenue of trees, the
arches of which looked like Gothic vaults.
The ' wandering voice' of the cuckoo, redoubling
its initial note, was not heard as yet, but
any day, if the wind were to shift, it might
come ringing merrily and sharply through the
air, and gushes of wild-bird music seemed to
tell every now and then of the exquisite joy of
the coming spring.

Can anyone fail to be glad on such a morning
T Godfrey asked himself, in his new delight.
Reconciled as he was to his father, through
the skilful ruse of that good friend Charlie
Lloyd (who would have given him credit for
such a stroke of diplomacy ?), and with every
prospect of success in the election — which was
rapidly to take place before there was time for
the Torringmoor people to rake up stories
against Reuben — could there be anything more

delightful than this relief from imprisonment ina
great city. With life no longer a war waged
against the great tyrant Necessity, who crushes
our ideals and lays his chilly hands on our enthusiasms,
and with his father's opinions now
more in unison with his own — owing, as he
sometimes thought, to that suffering which had
seemed at the time to be almost hopeless in its
uses — Godfrey felt as if his highest aspirations
might after all be satisfied and was elated by
the hope that not only might he be able in some
simple, unambitious, and unobtrusive fashion
to realise his dream of helping hundreds of his
fellows in their moral and physical destitution,
but that pure, domestic happiness might after
all be his.

He felt as if he had gone through a little
wholesome depression from which he had risen
emboldened and not weakened in love for
the brotherhood. Flowers there might be in
London in abundance, raised by skilful market-gardeners
to smile in uncongenial scenes.
But they had not the poetry of these flowers.
He remembered where they all grew in summer

VOL. III. H

myosotis, moneywort, and golden-rod. He
never recollected to have seen so many wildflowers
in the fields — lifting up their radiant
heads unassailed by the scythe of the mower —
as there where at Rashleigh in the month of
June. And just at present no one seemed to
disturb primroses, Lent-lilies, marsh-marigolds,
and wood-anemones. Perhaps it was because
no one was rich enough to disturb them. He
smiled to himself.

How the utilitarian tastes of most rich people
would lead them to neglect nothing which
would deprive this place of its picturesqueness
and grandeur. Those magnificent old chestnuts
would be trimmed till they had lost the
graceful droop of the lower branches, and the
upward spring of the higher ones.'

A few steps further on he hesitated.

I'm making a fool of myself, and can scarcely
spare the time. But I can't for the life of
me keep away from the house.'

A man passed him on his way from the
private garden. Was it Godfrey's fancy that
he stared at him blankly ?

If she is not alone — if there should be anyone
else with her?' he asked himself, with
another sort of shock.

The clock from the turret of the old stable
struck nine. A purple shadow passed over the
distant view of the moor. He glanced at it,
with the river like a silver ribbon meandering
and thought — with that sort of pang which he
had always found it hard to prevent — of that
part of the old Rashleigh grounds which his
father had appropriated, but which Vere loved
60 tenderly. There the stream which fed the
river, on a moist day like this, would be
bounding in capricious leaps from stone to
stone, from boulder to boulder, singing its own
little song of triumph.

He wished for a moment that he had appointed
the interview there, and then pulled himself
up.

'Xo;it would have been taking unfair advantage
of her. There are sentimental associations
connected with the place. It is best for
both of us to forget them.'

He was near the house by this time, and

h2

could see the Windows garlanded by the passionflower,
always more or less in leaf. He could
distinguish the brilliant colour of clumps of yellow
jonquil, and tulips thickly blooming in the
flower-beds and even the undulation of a red
curtain at one of the windows.

His sensitive shyness about women — a shyness
which he had not yet conquered, though
he had often reproached himself for losing an
opportunity by excessive bashfulness — caused
him instinctively to draw back, and stand
screened for a few moments by a bank of evergreens.
For at that instant a girl, very slender
in figure, and of rather less than middle height,
in a light-grey dress with a black sash and a
large hat with black feathers and ribbons, came
down the steps of the house. She was wearing
a heavy, fur-lined mantle, from the folds of
which she seemed to be desirous to escape.
For directly she had tripped past the immediate
vicinity of the windows, she tore off both cloak
and hat, and stood revealed in a puffed and
gathered artistic costume, displaying the perfect
lines of the tiny figure, and crowned with black,

<i-iirly hair, on which the sunlight played, lighting
up the neat little head, with its double rows
of fringe cried, twisted, or tortured into
shapes which might have rivalled the locks of
the Medusa, only in this case they were so
diminutive. The ' back hair,' as our grandmothers
used to call it, had been clipped away.
The lowered eyelids had long, black lashes
sweeping the cheeky the complexion was dark
but clear and healthy the outline of the mouth
delicate, but a little pouting.

She walked slowly, as if she found something
melancholy in the place. Her hands
hung down in a meditative attitude which
was evidently unusual with her. In another
moment she began to sing. She had a voice.
but it was almost drowned by the warbling
of the birds. She was approaching the turn
of the road where she would come upon Godfrey.
Without more ceremony he advanced,
holding out both his hands in cordial greeting.

It was prosaic, but this little woman was
terribly afraid of live stock, pigs, or cows. She
had even been known to run away from a

turkey, and the rural habits of the people in
this part of the country— with the poverty
which caused many fences to be unmended in
this neglected park — led her to associate a footstep
with something that might be alarming.
It was an illogical fear ; but when a girl is
given to tremors of this sort it is rarely that
she thinks of anything logical. And the Lilliputian
feet were already trampling wildly on the
flower-beds — where it did not seem to Godfrey
that they could inflict any great amount of
mischief — when she saw the stranger following
hers raising his hat.

'Don't you know me— little Dorothy?' he
asked with some emotion in his voice.

The girl receded a few steps. There was an
expression of often ded dignity on the face which
made him hasten to remedy his mistake.

^ Will you forgive me for calling you by your
Christian name T

She examined him without answering, mentally
cataloguing the advantages and disadvantages
of the figure before her. A man still
young, with a complexion which told of delicacy,

expressive features, and a few lines on the forehead
— of light build and somewhat thin. The
whole physique was unusual, especially as the
colouring was so fair , and the hair almost
flaxen. She did not remember ever seeing
anyone exactly like him before, and perhaps he
was the ' something which might happen.' She
hated the life which she had been forced to lead
since her return to Rashleigh Park, and was always
waiting for the ' something.'

My name is Dorothea Henrietta — a most
abominable name ; but in Paris they called me
Henriette,' she answered, with a look of humour
lurking in the flexible corners of her mouth.

^ I prefer Dorothy to Henriette,' he said,
smiling. ' You used to be Dot when you were
my little sister — do you remember it at all V

She stood silent, her eyes wide open with
surprise.

The years, for the first time in his experience,
seemed to thrust themselves into disagreeable
prominence as he stood waiting for her
answer.

Que voulez-vous T she said, at last, with a

shrug. And he "wished they had not sent her
to a French school.

Let us talk English — yoii are eighteen V

And four months.'

He smiled.

You Vv'ere ten years old when I saw you
last. I used to carry you on m}^ shoulder. You
went to sleep in ray arms.'

It was the prettiest little expression which
came into the astonished velvety eyes now, the
most charming rose-tint on the smooth young
cheek, and she tapped one tiny foot impatiently
on the gravel. He felt so old, and had lost so
many illusions during those dreary years in
London, that he could not help smiling again,
and thinking of the enchanted land of Oberon
and Titania. Did Shakespeare plan his ' Midsummer
Night's Dream' after an experience of
ugly lodgings, or London coffee-taverns? Did
it save him from melancholy? So little was
known about Shakespeare that all theories
Were possible.

Henrietta woke him from his reverie. The
little flute-Hke voice was saying,

But you — you were not like this the.'

Nevertheless, I am the same man. Has your
cousin heard of my return ? I thought of taking
her by surprise. Has she — has she — ever — 
to you V

It was a difficult question to get out, for,
though Godfrey had conquered his shyness, he
had awkward recollections about the past.

Henriette's varying face, reflecting — small as
it was — every passing change like a landscape
under our varying English sky, had spoken for
her before she said, in a puzzled moment in
which she could think of no ready answer,

Why should she mention you 'l She is not
young enough to talk about things. Besides,
you know '

She stopped, and rushes of colour suddenly
flooded both face and neck.

Well, you see, when a girl is fixed in one
groove, and when things have become a little
out of date and old-fashioned, and when one is
obliged to grind down servants — well, not
exactly that, perhaps, but she works as hard
as any of them herself,' explained Dot, lapsing

suddenly from the indefinite to the definite —
sou can't wonder if her ideas get a little
severe.'

The perplexed expression of the girl's face
made him feel sorry for her.

It is a pity,' he ventured, ' if you are not
happy together.'

Oh, we are so different ! I am always trying
to keep quiet like her, and not to grumble.
She talks to me, you know, about the misfortunes
which bloom as thickly as daisies for a
repining mind — there, look at them ; we have
enough in all conscience on our lawn ' (he could
not help noticing how deftly and expressively
she used her hands) ; ' but ah-h ' (it was something
of a French interjection), ^ it is triste here
I have migraine half the time. She calls it
retirement' — 1 call it stagnation

After all, I prefer the daisies on the lawn
to closely-shaven baldness,' answered Godfrey,
with an impulse to help.

He could not have told how or why, but a
sadness had crept into his voice, the spring
morning had clouded over, the birds had ceased

to f^iDg. The naivete of these childish confidences,
the freshness of the little unoccupied
heart, would have been charming enough ia
themselves, if they had not suggested a vague
sort of shadow. ^Yas it possible that solitude
and misfortune could have petrified a character
like Vere's. He had a horror of women who
were hard.

But your cousin V he began, intending some
sort of rehabilitation of his ideal.

Oh, don't tell her of my nonsense. She
prides herself on avoiding exaggeration of sentiment
; she does not like me to read novels
which excite my sensibility.'

It did not escape Godfrey's notice that she
said * sensibility ' like a Frenchwoman, and that
there was just a touch of the shrew in the
manner in which the little forehead was puckered
up, and the pretty foot stamped the
ground.

There are novels and novels,' he suggested,
gravely, 'just as there are women and women.'

Yes,' she answered, her conscience smiting
her a little as she remembered the demoralising

sensational romances, which she herself in her
better moments heartily despised, but which
she had smuggled into the house in their cheap
paper covers, adorned with ghastly pictures,
awful to look at. ' I don't mean to say it's
Vere's fault — she's without a fault, perfection,
and she's made the maids a good deal like her
■ — " careful training," don't they call it? They
are all too good here,' she added, with a sigh ;
*it would be nice to do something awfully
wicked for a change.'

You think goodness monotonous V
'A little dull and flat — don't you sometimes?'
'You'd like to vary it by a mountain of
some sort?'

No — now you're laughing at me.'
This spontaneous young creature, who had
so many new ideas and so many unsatisfied
longings, was a new revelation to Godfrey.

'Not laughing at you at all,' he answered, ashe
looked a little wistfully towards the house.
I ought to have heard all this before ; but I
might as well have been at the Antipodes, so
little have I heard of old friends.'

There was a cloud on bis l3row. The conversations
which had taken but two or three
minutes, had somehow damped the buoyancy
of his spirits.

Her eye instantly grew bright and keen. He
was ashamed of feeling that he shrank from
their inspection — he who was no longer a boy,
and ought to be able to endure their inquisition.

She recognised for the first time that he was
visibly agitated, and tried not to appear surprised.
She thought it odd that he took her
hand, and did not look her in the face.

His own hand trembled and she had no
longer any desire to babble her silly little
confidences.

Come, 1 mustn't keep you talking,' she said ;
I will go and call Vere.^

And, with no further warning, she fled from
him, half terrified.

It can't be always now — surely something is
going to happen. I couldn't live long in a dry
way like this,' she repeated to herself, as she
flew rapidly over the lawn.

CHAPTER II.

Vere found herself forced to act a part for one
of the first times in her life when, a few minutes
afterwards, the little head poked itself in at the
door.

The effort to keep disappointment and anxiety
out of her voice made it almost sharp as
she said,

Oh ! dear child, is it not understood between
us that I am not to see visitors in business
hours f

The elder girl liked intervals of solitude,
perhaps because she had accustomed herself to
them. It seemed to her she had no possible
right to consume any inordinate amount of
other people's time. And, since her uncle's

death, she had used herself often to sit alone
in the study or to superintend in the kitchen.

It is thanks to Mr. Sellwood's charity,' she
sometimes said to herself, ' that I am able to
keep to a little corner of God's earth, and do
my best to make it green and bright.'

She would not have accepted the charity for
herself, but she reminded herself that Henriette
was of a delicate nature, suffering from all sorts
of minor things which, to people of stronger
nerves, could not be called by the name of ills.
It was a misfortune,, an hysterical malady.
Vere had a slight contempt for it which she
never allowed herself to show.

We two are alone,' she had said to her
cousin, on the first day when she had welcomed
her from Paris. ' We must try to make each
other happy, and help oue another.'

She had heard that Godfrey was in the village,
but had not spoken of it to Henriette.
To do so, she knew from sad experience, would
be to have her private affairs blazoned about
the place. She had been certain, as she said
to herself, that Godfrey would return some day,

and that be would find she had been faithful to
the trust which he bad confided to her.

He's a wretched cynic,' people had been
accustomed to say of Reuben ; * he talks as if
he did not believe in anything in heaven or
earth

But she had been able to answer, quietly and
proudly,

He believes in a good deal more than he
lets people think ; he is no cynic at all. What,
for instance, should ice have done without him?'

The constant thought of the trust which had
been confided to her, and the care which she
had had to give to two somewhat morose old
men had made her seem a little older than her
years. She had led a home-spun, monotonous
sort of h'fe, with passions suspended in the
solitude which had been enforced. She had
feared even to trust herself to the power of the
imagination, or to allow herself to picture the
first meeting after a separation of years. Sometimes,
in spite of this, she had caught herself
rehearsing the very words she and Godfrey
would be likely to say to each other.

But alas for the difference between fancy and
Reality ! When, wearied with her account-books.
Vere had got up to look through the window
— a minute or two before her sister ran into
call her — had she not seen this apparition of
her dreams ? — the man who had been expected
for eight long years — aged and paled, just as
she had pictured him ? No — could it be he ? —
standing io a nonchalant attitude, listening to
the confidences of the talkative Henriette ? Did
her imagination mislead her ?

In the solitude in which no one saw her,
she forgot for a few moments the ink which
had soiled her fingers, the fair hair which
was unusually rough, and the rusty crape of
her somewhat neglected black dress, shining
in folds where it had been turned. She made
no effort to prepare herself, only endeavouring
to control herself when she received Henriette's
message, and advancing with the dignity which
he remembered in the days of old.

Godfrey,' she said, meeting him with her
hands outstretched, and standing at the door
in the fall light of the ruthless sun, which just

VOL. III. I

then had emerged with brightness from a cloud,
and was searching every line and every deficiency'
in her face.

Had not Sir Kalph foreseen years before that
the glory of Vere's colouring was likely to be
evanescent, and that the features where not
regular enough to satisfy a sculptor ? Well —
what of that ? In the heat and burden of the
day the flowers are not as bright as in the
early dew of the morning. There was nothing
in her countenance to make her shrink from
loving scrutiny. She was aware, though not
in any morbid way, of the changes in it. But
as she stood bare-headed, with premature lines
on the fair, broad brow, and the sun shining
down on her flaxen head, there was no sign that
her heart was throbbing violently, except an
added pallor, which was strangely unbecoming.

It was, somehow, not exactly the meeting
which the man had imaged to himself. Do
not such meetings almost always seem to disappoint
us after our imaginings? The glamour
seemed for the moment to have vanished,
as if a cold hand were clutching his heart, and

the cold were extending in some strange way
to his whole body.

Were little Henriette's insinuations real?
Could it be possible that the woman who
had once refused him — partly from pride and
the fear of humiliation — had become in the
course of years cautious and disdainful? Could
he offer himself again to one who was ready
to repel advances, and who, if he married
her, might prove an iceberg ? Vere, pale with
emotion, with her lips colourless and trembling,
dress neglected, and hair rough, scarcely realised
his anticipations ; whilst all the time there was
something unexpected in his gaze which arrested
her, and stifled the cry of her yearning heart.
Etiquette forbade her to question him about
his past, whilst it did not seem natural for him
to address her, as he had intended, with words
of tenderness, thanking her for the change
which she had effected in his father, and asking
her to be the mistress of his hearth and the
realisation of his ideal.

Priding herself on her presence of mind, and
with one of those quick deductions which

I 2

women are always ready to draw she recognised,
or thought she recognised, a change
of feeling in him , and talked if not as rapidly
as Henriette, with as much aplomb.

When the election is over, you must give
yourself a rest she said. ' Mr. Sellwood can't
do without you now.'

any poor man would be glad of the engagement.
I am promised a bonus, if he succeeds
or not.'

Why keep up that pretext V

What pretext V

That you are a poor man.'

I never wish to be rich.'

Is there not a little defiance in that V

'I do not know how the money was made.'

You should trust your father. It is scarcely
likely that he will wish to surrender the project
of his life. You are quite young stilL You
should accept thankfully the goods with which
the gods provide you.'

She was thinking, as usual, principally of
others, though she felt ruffled and uneasy.
This sudden arrival had shaken her, and deprived

her of her boasted strength. She could
not tell that he was chafing* at the veil of
-womanly reserve in which , as usual, she had
shrouded herself, and that — intimidated and
discouraged from the fear of placing her in a
fresh dilemma — he was losing a second opportunity
of speaking out. For the mere pleasure
of seeing him again and talking to him was
beginning to thaw the frigidity which had
been only apparent. A sort of happiness,
which seemed to bless rather than to expect
to be blessed, stole over her, and was a great
beautifier.

'you joke! 1 am on the shady side of
thirty,' he exclaimed.

A smile wreathed itself over her face.

No, I don't. Some of us grow old quickly.
Others are like Rip Van Winkle.'

1 am very much honoured, but I am quite
unable to accept the compliment.'

With a quick sense of delicacy he had detected
her consciousness of the change in herself,
and would have liked to have told her how lie
had suffered — how it was as though his soul

had been bruised, and he felt the bruises allover.


She is like a glacier,' he had said to himself
at first.

But now he saw the Raffaelesque resignation
in the face which he had too easily fancied to
be severe and denunciatory.

Was the child right V he had asked himself,
in terror a moment before, alarmed at the look
of blank stoniness in the dear face. But now
the old expression had returned with the self-forgetful
smile, and he hated himself for the
momentary suspicion. It did not make matters
better that she seemed already to take it for
granted that he had been fascinated by her little
cousin.

Is she not pretty?' she asked, when Dot left
them. 'I fear it seems rather a hard, colourless
life. for her here. Her father's death came
at last somewhat unexpectedly, but quite calmly.
He had been so used to lingering illness.
And, had it not been for the goodness of your
father, it would have been hard for us to live.'
Godfrey did not answer. He was thinking

of how terrible it would have been if either of
these women had been condemned to suffer
from actual privation, and he felt as if his
father could not have acted otherwise.

You know there is no male heir, and nothing
for anyone to inherit,' she continued with a
smile which showed that she could be still her
frank, bright-spirited self. ' Your father could
have turned us out''

'Impossible — he speaks of how much he owes
you.'

We were both much alone, and we helped
each other.'

He does nothing but sing your praises.'
There was a time when he seemed to hate
me.'

A recollection rose before her as she uttered
the words of the lonely, desolate man, eating
his own heart out with bitterness and regret,
who was said to be dangerously ill soon after
his son had left him. He had refused to allow
anyone but the housekeeper to nurse him, and
when Mrs. Rose was worn out with her task,
and with the surliness of her master, nere had

begged her to allow her to come and help her.
She had taken Reuben by surprise when he,
waking from a nap one day, had discovered her
sitting by his side, laden with flowers, which
she had brought to propitiate him, and looking
as if she had brought the sunshine with her.
She left him no time to swear at her, for she
began singing softly directly the sick man
woke, and at first he was inclined to wonder if
his disbelief in apparitions was incorrect after
all. But when she explained to him with tears
that she was sorry to have been the cause of
his misfortune, and asked if she might read to
him, as she Alas accustomed to read to her
uncle, he gave an unwilling consent. All this
returned to her memory, but she did not speak
of it.

She drew the conversation again to henrietta,
and seemed rather pleased than otherwise
that Godfrey had already made acquaintance
with her.

'It is a little hard that she should be condemned
to this hermit-like existence,' she
said. ' You must talk to her and help to develop

her. I know bow little she has to
amuse her here, and it has been duller that
usual since my uncle's death. But if one could
get fresh interests for her !'

I asked her if she recollected how I used to
carry her in my arms. But it would be absurd
to suppose that she could remember such a
thing through all these years.'

'1 have no doubt she remembers,' she answered,
with an effort at composure which accounted
for the coldness of her voice, and which succeeded
so well that she could meet the man's
earnest gaze without flinching.

To all appearance she was neither depressed
nor ill at ease, aud when he asked if she — as well
as Henriette — never chanced to find it dull, she
said, quickly, in the tone of a person who had
determined to be cheerful, and wished at th
same time to cut inquiries short,

I am sure it must be my own fault if I am
not contented.'

She had kept her arms close to her sides, as
if she would oblige herself to keep from gesture,
and her hands were trembling with the restraint

^vbich she had put on herself in such
a way that she became aware of it as soon ashe
had gone.

She had left the French gesticulation to
Henriette, but it was only afterwards that she
knew how at the first she had spoken calmly
and even coldly, and had stood before him like
a statue.

I must have seemed unsympathetic,' she
thought, plunging her face and neck into a
basin of cold water a few minutes afterwards,
that she might rally all her self-command. ' It
was a pity, but I would rather seem unsympathetic
than appear to be the victim of an
unrequited passion.'

She caught sight of her face in the glass,
and for once sat down before it counting the
wrinkles which where slowly coming, the lines,
and the marks of care.

I am not thirty yet ; but my uncle looked
older than he was before he died, I remember.
Some women grow older sooner than others, and
happiness might have made me younger,' she
thought, with something like a sigh, as, for the

first time, she noted v:it]i disapproval that,
even when she had brushed her hair smoothly,
there was a geometrical correctness about the
old-fashioned bands, and a precision in the
stern cut of her dress, including the neatness
of the collar, which was likely to be somewhat
irritating to the artist mind.

It dawned upon her, as she rested her chin
on her hand, and listened to the water flowing
in a brooklet near her window, hastening to
join the stream in the wilderness — where already
marsh-marigold and wild Lent-lilies were
blooming — that it would be possible for her to
wear her hair in a curly fringe like Henriette,
and to let her neck peep from soft ruffling
destitute of hard lines. Had she not passed
eight years in waiting, and nobody had heard
her murmur ? Then, with the child-like generosity
with which she had eyer been ready to
surrender the best which life could give her to
others, she thought how much more suitable it
would be that Godfrey should marry Sir Ralph's
daughter. Her conscience, that pitiless repeater
of hard truths, whispered.

Is she not younger and prettier than you,
and more at an age when luxuries are required?
Did you not give him great cause of offence?
Did you not speak to him in a way which
no man would be likely to forget, and will
you deck yourself out to allure him now ?
And would it be possible for you to supply
Henriette with sashes and lace, and yet
spend the money on yourself? Are you not
the weaker of the two to think of such a
thing? Let the girl have her chance.'

CHAPTER III.

Godfrey was so occupied with his father's
affairs that he was able to spare bnt a short
time on the following day to present himself
again at the Park. He was anxious for another
private interview with Henriette — not so much
because he had been disenchanted b}' her revelations,
as because a quiet dread had risen up
in his mind which seemed to him to account
for the coldness of his reception.

Her cousin will tell me ; she volunteers
everything, and it will be better for me to
know,' he said to himself.

It was earlier than before when he ventured
into the Park, rather before nine o'clock. He
had important work at ten.

Henriette was already in the garden, scissors
in hand, gathering some flowers.

How early you are !'

She made a little moue.

You have no curfew-bell — you others — ten
o'clock at night — we keep humdrum hours.'

I have been thinking of what you said
yesterday.'

She drew herself up.

^I don't know whether I ought to have said
all that — I have never known a mother — it is
true — but I talk too fast.'

The naivete of the confession was like the
rest of her character. For some cause or other,
she was on her guard.

It Alas you who talked of your cousin's
future. You made me think '

He stopped before he could finish the
sentence ; for men do not like to question
women. And, though it had struck him
that Vere had already given some sort of
pledge to his friend in the days when Charlie's
prospects had been little more promising
than his own — an explanation which

seemed to account for Lloyd's unwillingness
to talk on the subject — it was not possible to
approach the subject.

Coramon-seuse is uninteresting, and so is
the dull lichen which dull lives are supposed
to contract, the damp moss forcing itself over
the very roots of life, and threatening to
strangle them,' he thought, a little hopelessly,
as he looked at the moss grown trees around
him, and ventured to ask,

Does your cousin ever weary of this place
as you do V

Henriette laughed convulsively.

How can she weary, when it is " duty,"
"duty" with her all the time?' she queried
in her turn, with one of her Parisian shrugs.
Why, she has no time to sit still and weep.
What is it the poet said,

Men must work, and women must weep." '

'Kingsley only introduced that bit of false
sentiment into a ballad. He was the last man
to speak of it as true,' he said, quietly.

Well, it is " work," or whatever you call it,.

which seems to haiiut her all day, as if she
were haunted by a sin.'

I might have known that lie was likely to
prefer self-immolation to vulgar ambition,' he
said to himself. Then aloud, ' But she has
friends V

Ah yes ' — a little archly. ' Who told you ?
There is a story to that effect. They say
that her pride was wounded by some one when
she was older than I am now, and that that
prevents her from marrying — though they do
say she has a friend. I know, if I had one, I
would make him come here, and cheer us up
a bit. Women stagnate without men. I suppose
she writes to him sometimes ; at least, Mrs.
Austin writes.'

She had said little— nothing at all, as she
declared to herself, when she afterwards thought
of it, but there was a subtle divination in the
man's mind which made him guess more.

I hope I have not hurt you cried Henriette,
surprised into naturalness by the concentrated
look on the thin, pale face.

Oh no — there is nothing wrong. I am not

easily hurt,' aDSwerecl Godfrey, sharply awakened
from his reverie, and puzzling her more
than ever by his answer.

The sound of voices reached Vere, who was
busied in the kitchen, and she hastened out
in curiosity as to election news.

She had suffered during the night, and suffering
is no beautifier. More than ever Godfrey deplored
the fact that the radiant possibilities about
her seemed to have been checked. If she were
engaged to his prosperous patron, why should
the shadow of self-sacrifice seem to have fallen
on her? How could he guess that the look
which he thought strange on her face was the
look of a woman who had determined to face
the consequences of her own mistake and who
was not one to succumb hopelessly to circumstances.


She met him with a smile, which it cost her
much to wear, but which at the moment seemed
to prove her indifference to him. She wore a
large apron over her dress, a bunch of solemn-looking
keys by her side, and seemed to have
been giving out the grocery stores. As fate

VOL. III. K

would have it, a diversion was created just as
she stepped out from the flagged floor of the
kitchen to welcome the couple, whom she had
again seen in the distance, but whom she had
not liked to interrupt.

Some cocks and hens had found their way
into the scullery, and the maids were busily engaged
in driving them out. Henriette was again
convulsed with laughter, and Godfrey found it
hard not to follow her example. Vere smiled.

We are very primitive, because we are poor.
You laugh at me,' she said, in a low voice. ' I
think our ancestors would laugh. I make myself
ridiculous with this house-keeping.'

Oh, it is cruel to drive them about — I can't
bear to see creatures suffer,' cried Henriette,
recovering from her laughter.

"Vere looked at her in silence, knowing well
that this was a little piece of false sentimentality,
but not caring to expose her cousin's love
of acting. Unconsciously the slight hardness
crept again into her voice.

Dramatic heroines would not be able to
make simple pastry she said, with a little

laugh ; ' but — I must send you all away,' and
she displayed her flour-covered arms.

'Ah, 3'ou see it is her element, home and
domestic pursuits, and all that — they are not
my element at all''

A few minutes afterwards Yere joined the
two who were strolling round the house, and
they found themselves suddenly in front of the
older part of the castle, which had still a proud
air, as if vain of its antique beauty.

You have nothing like it in your grounds,'
said Henriette, a little defiantly.

Xo, it is so good of Mr. Sellwood to let us
stay here,' answered Vere, in the low tones
which seemed to have become habitual to her.

'I cannot thank you enough for the change
in him ; I find it out more day by day.'

I only drew out what was there already,
concealed from most people, but he has plenty
of good feeling and much ability.'

With yon must rest the merit of the discovery.'


I believe in all my fellow-creatures,' she
answered, as she opened the door of her own

x2

private sitting-room, and said, looking at Henriette
as well as at Godfrey, •' You can come inhere
as frequently as you please — you can amuse
yourselves as you like. No one will interrupt
you, and I am quiet myself. Those are my
uncle's as well as my father's books. Choose
when this election-time is over. It is not a
bad library,' she added, when Godfrey did not
answer.

It was the retreat of a woman of culture.
Fragments of old tapestry, pieces of old armour,
and furniture of old oak saved from the ruins of
the castle, flowers, birds,, shells, china, all were
here, besides a harp and a piano.

As she sat down on one of the low chairs
(for they had breakfasted already, and Godfrey
was hastening back to his father), he could not
help recalling Reuben's words of the preceding
night.

She is no longer quite as fresh as in-her
early girlhood, but she is one of the best and
most charming women I know.'

How much she and I would have had in
common — what a marriage it would have been

to have added to one's growth P Godfrey thought
to himself with a pang as he feared it was not
to be.

The fine simplicity which he had always
admired in her character had not been at all
impaired by time, and a nature which could
rise above the melancholy caused by endurance
and solitude, remaining always bright and helpful
when others might have failed, was as much
as ever to his taste. But, as far as he knew,
she was not free to accept him now. Every
moment when he was with her he blamed himself
for being intrusive, reminding himself that
he must not allow himself to think of her.

With Godfrey, when she next met him, she
was perfectly friendly and unembarrassed,
shaking off her awkwardness of the first
meeting, and allowing him to see — now that
she was no longer unnerved or distraught — the
true nobility and beauty of her character. It
did not seem to be possible to mix up thoughts
of jealousy with such a woman. Pettinesses,
meanness, and small irritations about trifles
seemed to have been cast out of her nature.

Once more he was incliuecl to say of her that
she could be as self-possessed as any man without
the weaknesses of an exacting nature.

Torringmoor was now distracted with all the
excitement of the election. And Vere — conservative
by family tradition and education, yet
feeling as if she knew little more about some of
the political questions at stake than if she were
a baby in arms — remained at home as much as
possible. It was Henriette who was constantly
out in the neighbourhood , shaking hands
genially with Godfrey's friends, and forgetful
of the interests of her father's old ally — whom
she readily enough classified as a ' horrid
fogey ' — wishing Reuben Sellwood a pleasant
and successful time of it. Henriette even
undertook to do a little private canvassing
amongst the cottagers in the neighbourhood,
and appealed to the working men, taking their
hands and looking at them with earnest eyes,
which made their hearts beat faster, for she at
least had no troublesome conscientious scruples
to worry her. At home she was dull and restless,
would not see guests, would not read her

usual novels, would not go out in the spring
sunshine, which was tempting and bright unless
it where to walk to Torringmoor, would not
sing her little songs, was somewhat cross, and
more than a little absent.

Yere seldom put any constraint on the movements
of her cousin, not supposing that there
were lions prowling about in that quiet neighbourhood
ready to devour young girls. Yet
she felt a little weighed down with responsibility
about Henriette just then, and knew that
when the roads were crowded with strange men
it was not right for the girl to go about alone
without an escort. She watched Henriette all
the more anxiously when her offer to accompany
her was somewhat irritably refused.

Meanwhile the election for Torringraoor
seemed as if it would pass off good-temperedly.
The local Liberal Association had invited
Reuben to come forward, as likely to be a
successful candidate. It was thought probable
that he would outbid the Tory where the Tory
looked upon himself as chiefly strong, namely,
in landed influence, and with this he had to be

taught to combine Liberal views. He would
thus have all the advantages of a Conservative
and none of the usual disadvantages of the
unknown Liberal nominees of the Reform Club,
who are most often sent to contest boroughs
like Torringmoor.

But Reuben's education in English politics
was as yet defective, and, counting on this
deficiency, another Liberal had come forward
likewise for the borough, and — till Godfrey's
introduction on the scene — had appeared likely
to divide the honours with Reuben Sellwood.
It was a little trying to the latter to find that
the introduction of .the Ballot Act had diminished
the exciting character of the proceedings.
Rotten eggs, flour, dead cats and dogs to be
showered on the hapless orator of the hustings
would have inspired Reuben with a Brutus-like
courage. While the suggestion that ' free and
independent electors ' could not be liberally
treated,' or that an unmanly ' polling-booth '
had to be devised for the secret recording of
the votes of weak-kneed voters — who had to
creep in like folks who were ' hard-up ' and

wanted to pawn their belongings — seemed to
him contemptible and disgusting.

One would think that a British citizen Avould
be proud to exercise his privileges as a freeman
said Reuben, drawing himself up, in something
like his old spirits, after his first meeting with
his son.

And as days passed on and the peace of the
Torringmoor people was interfered with by
nothing approaching a serious disturbance,, and
when the few acts of violence which are almost
inevitable in such contests were reprobated
by all parties, it is doubtful if Reuben did not
secretly sigh after the good old times when
differences of electoral opinion were apt to be
settled by hard knocks instead of immaterial
argument. In those 'good old times' whole
boroughs had been bought and sold, and one
or two had actually been disposed of by the
order of the Court of Chancery.'

Alas for the ' changes 'twixt then and now,'
as some one quoted from Coleridge to Reuben,
who thought the quotation a good one and
repeated it bravely.

In Torringmoor during these few days there
Alas little difference to be noted from the ordinary
stagnation,, except that a number of people,
Who generally cared little for politics, had
suddenly become mightily enthusiastic. A few
of the cynics who regarded an election of this
sort as the machinery for a vast chattering-machine,
skilfully wound up for special occasions,
coveted the deafness of Beethoven, and wished
that they also had a cellar into which they could
escape from the calling of melodious and
loquacious disputants.

In no more providential way could Godfrey
have been reconciled to his father. Reuben
was happier than he had ever been since his
son had left him ; smiling to himself and building
castles in the air. In fact, he was too happy
and too delighted with the clever plan by which
Charlie Lloyd had introduced him again to the
man of whom he was secretly still as proud as
ever — and whom he insisted on calling his 'boy'
to be willing to recall the old subjects of
dispute.

Not only were the subjects of dispute really

bygones,' but in many cases they had actually
disappeared — melted into thin air, by the skilful
interposition of the gracious woman whose
tact had already' been exercised upon the uncertain
temper of her own disappointed uncle.

Miss Rashleigh's grandfather paid me a cruel
trick, but times were different then. She is
extraordinarily capable — very deficient,' remarked
Reuben to his wondering sou, on the second
day after they met.

By this single remark Godfrey saw how he
was changed. For never did college coach,
high-school teacher, or school-board mistress
labour harder at the newest theories of education
than Vere had worked during these eight
years in developing all that was promising in
the character of this hitherto uncultivated man.

She had not only asked leave to read to him
as she read to her uncle, but by degrees had
introduced him to most of the good English
writers. She had so cleverly corrected his
errors of speech by repeating after him what he
said — as if she attached especial importance to
his opinions — and repeating it often in a different

way, that he had unconsciously adopted
the language of better educated people. There
was no longer anything to jeer at in Reuben,
either in his reticence or his roughness of
speech. And though he could not be called an
accomplished man of the world, of good birth
and recognized antecedents ; though he might
possibly have been blackball at some of the
more select of the clubs in London, on the
whole his promptness, his energy, and his air of
decision invested him with an importance which
could not be claimed by better born men.

Already he was thinking of his prospective
house in town, and stringing together a few
glib phrases, in which he no longer made
grammatical blunders, when Charlie sent to his
assistance the literary gentleman who had
promised to render him assistance.

To say that Reuben was astonished when
the dog-cart which had been sent to meet the
train returned, bringing with it the one being
whom he really loved on earth, would be to
over-state the fact.

For Charles had prepared him for the surprise.

The scheme had not only been devised
by his skilful brain, but Reuben had rehearsed
for it. In reality he could hardly speak when
he saw his 'boy' — his emotions were so overpowering
that he had some thoughts of opening
a vein, according to the old methods of medical
practice, that he might avoid the risk of epilepsy
or something worse.

But he had so learnt to control his features
that Madame Rachel's victim, when she stepped
into the witness box — with her face apparently
covered with plaster of Paris, painted pink and
white with every appearance of juvenility — did
not more skilfully disguise her original self
than this apparently matter-of-fact man who
attempted to receive his son without an appearance
of sentimentality.

Godfrey, who had likewise come prepared, was
the more surprised of the two.

Of literature, when they had parted last,
with the exception of Shakespeare, Reuben had
known nothing ; but of politics and public
affairs he still knew very little. The explanation
was that Miss Rashleigh knew little of
these matters herself.

You must write your address at once,' was
the first advice which the son ventured to give
hira^aud which he acted upon immediately.

The two men sat up during the small hours
of the night, before both of them were satisfied
with this composition.

Gentlemen,' dictated Reuben, 'the dissolution
of this Parliament gives to you and the
country at large the opportunity of deciding
whether the present government has not made
too raan}^ mistakes, and missed too many
opportunities of fulfilling its duties, to be again
entrusted with the reins of power.'

'Reads well for an opening sentence — don't
its observed Reuben, with a colloquialism of
which Vere had not been able to cure him.
Now we must have something about " peace "
and plenty," — "benefits to the working-classes'
— your old hobby — eh — and all the rest
of its

Well, I think it is hardly necessary to begin
with a hit at the other party — on the whole,
I should not do it was the answer of his
son.

Gentlemen,' redictatecl Reuben, tearing np
his other paper, ' Her Majesty's government
having advised the Queen to dissolve Parliament,
it becomes my duty to solicit eh,

what next? A hit at the income tax,
Afghan and Zulu wars, and all the rest of
it '

Godfrey's head was whirling. His father's
native shrewdness was as usual not at fault.
Yet with all his keenness he had not discovered
that this first meeting after an interval of
years was too trying to his son to enable him
to think with his usual clearness.

Godfrey tore up the second copy and commenced
a simpler form,

I beg to offer myself as a candidate for the
honour of election as one of your representatives
in Parliament. Convinced that the welfare of
the people will be best favoured by Liberal principles
of legislation and government '

Here he stayed his hand. Speaking figuratively
he could not get on his legs at all.
What in the name of truth and common-sense
lucre his father's opinions about the people ?

The drops of moisture stood oa his forehead
as he remembered the time when he had
told this very father that he refused to live on
money unjustly wrung from the poor, and when
he had said himself,

'If I ever enter Parliament, it will be to
devote myself to the cause of the people.'

It was possible that he had judged hardly.
If he had to address any man eight years
younger than himself under similar circumstances
now, he would say to him,

Wait and think. You are not expected to
settle everything in this world. There are
many problems which must remain for years
unsolved.'

He acknowledged to himself that, after living
for years among them, he knew little enough
how to remedy all the troubles and difficulties
of those who are called the ' lower classes.'
Reuben, who had had no peep into these innermost
arcana, what did he — what could he possibly
know of the manners and customs of people
whom till lately he had despised % Born and bred
among them, he knew as little about them now

as if they were the aborigines of distant lands —
say Fijian Islanders.

Reuben seemed to guess what was passing in
his son's mind, for, with a sudden want of self-control,
he cried, with a little return of the old
freedom of speech and want of culture,

Go at it — stick at nothing. Promise that
I'll amend the Land Laws and extend household
suffrage.'

There is no occasion to be in a hurry,'
said Godfrey a little huskily. ' Would it do to
have the people saying that this was a line
assumed for the hustings which you objected
to before V

I thought we'd decided on the Liberal
policy, and that anything would go down with
them,' answered Reuben. ' Let off plenty of
fireworks. It'll do them good.'

Hereditary instincts,' thought his son,
balancing the pen, and thinking how to answer,
^ have a trick of reasserting themselves
when one thinks they have been stifled. —
"What I mean is,' he said, speaking slowly and
trying to explain to his father, 'that a man

VOL. III. L

should get into the House of Commons simply
on his own merits. His opinions and his ways
of dealing with certain questions should have
been formed beforehand, or they are apt to be
useless.'

Reuben stared.

'I'm told that the Liberals as a rule are longest
in office of the two, and money is no object
with me. I made money for you and you look
down on it. Now, look you here, I am ready
to expend £5,000 in hard cash on the expenses of
this election, and to make promises which'll cost
me twice as much, when I've set my mind on a
thing.'

But it is equally certain that you must not
lay yourself open to proceedings by the expenditure
of that money,' thought Godfrey.

He kept the thought to himself, just as he
likewise kept to himself a growing desire to
draw a sharp distinction between the programme
of the Liberal party and the newfangled,
semi-continental political philosophy
which he had heard constantly discussed among
the class of people with whom he had associated

in London. The important social questions
of the day weighed more deeply with him
than ever, but he had never been accustomed
to treat them as mere watchwords of political
strife ; they had ever been questions with him
to be received with profound earnestness, and to
be approached on the side of self-sacrifice, yet
he was no longer sure that they necessitated
the redistribution of wealth.

How should he so word the printed address,
and afterwards suggest material for Reuben's
speech, as to preserve the just mean ?

To secure for those who cultivated land the
due results of their industry, to make rentals
more equal, and taxation fair were still highly-cherished
projects of his. But he had become
more careful lest he should paint abuses in an
odious light. He had lived to feel that it was
one thing to be a Radical orator rousing emotions
and covetous desires which might lead to
acts of lawlessness, and another to be a conscientious
philanthropist endeavouring to undo
the consequences of admitted wrongs. He
disliked argumentative tactics which might be

l2

unfair, and, though he rejoiced in the fact that
his father was now doing all that he could to
help the tenants on his estate, he thought it
unfortunate that Reuben should have chosen
this special time to remit twenty-five per cent,
off the rents of the tenants.

As day after day passed on — and the days
were but few which preceded the Torringmoor
election — he winced at the discovery of more
than one flaw in the armour of respect with
which he tried to invest his father.

Reuben's audacity and singularity surprised
and alarmed him. He was as a man smarting
under the sense of being foiled in the one project
of his life — that of having a stupendous fortune,
and founding a family in the person of
his son — and comparatively reckless as to what
he did with his money. The residue would be
left to Godfrey, whose indifference to the fact
was more than ever vexatious.

Godfrey had another vexation just then, but,
after all, it was the way of the world. When
he had been in London, the salesmen had
found out that they did not need his work.

Now, since it had become known who he
was, letters followed him in abundance, and it
soon appeared that he could have as much
swell-paid employment, artistic or literary, as he
pleased. Meanwhile it still occasionally happened
that his renewed intercourse with his
father was like walking over dangerous places.
He had to be very wary of his steps. And
Eeuben's way of looking at things was so
puzzling to him that to help his father at all
was much like attempting to clear a jungle to
which it seemed in vain to apply the axe.

Godfrey was as little desirous as ever of inheriting
enormous wealth which he feared
might have been acquired by tyranny and injustice,
and which he looked upon as a precipitate
from the labour of the many.

And Reuben was still reticent as to the manner
in-^^^hich he had acquired money. whether
or not he regretted the passionate explanation
of his early personal wrongs and the vehement
denunciation of the elder Rashleighs could not
be known. But he spoke with unusual tenderness
of Yere, and seemed to have put away

from him bis bitter cravings after vengeance.
In fact, the eight years bad done much to
transform the man. Though Godfrey was
sometimes bewildered with a sense of shame
when he saw Reuben for the jSrst time cracking
jokes with the mothers of dirty children,
stroking the hair of the little ones with his
own hands, which had somehow become in the
course of years well-formed and white — and
though he objected to so many burgesses being
asked to dine, it was impossible to speak
judicially to his father on the subject.

Anything seemed to him better than that
the old feeling of estrangement should crop up
between them.

Sellwood has made his book, and he will
win,' said some of the Torringmoor people.
He'll never open his lips when once he's in the
House, but that speech of his was not a bad
one.'

Reuben was fond of quoting the saying,
The French cooks would be the best in the
world, if they had got any butcher's meat.'
And with the assistance of Godfrey whom he

called his French cook, he had managed to put
together a good deal of knowledge which was
actually to the point.

The cheers and counter-cheers, the varied
sounds which were expressive of animation or
interest furnished the vis which was needed for
the man's oratorical powers, who, if he had
been reticent before, was rather proud than
she.

The cheers were to him as the breath of his
nostrils, and in the excitement of the moment
Reuben let out the fact that he had been a 
boy, setting out from his native town
at the age often to earn a sparse livelihood. The
imprudence of the admission did not occur to him
till afterwards, when he was comforted by recollecting
that the Torringmoor parish registers
might be searched in vain for the name of an
infant baptised by the cognomen which he had
adopted. But, after the statement of this fact,
Reuben's speech was a success. His anecdotes,
his illustrations — homely though they might be
and his invective — a weapon with which he
knew how to deal — touched in every case a

responsive chord. Not a word of his fell flat,
and, if his rhetoric was a little too vivacious, it
was admitted even by his opponents that he
had at least fire and vigour; while the cultivated
speech of his more powerful antagonist,
given in a more or less melancholy manner,
bore about as much resemblance to the speech
of the other candidate, as pale moonlight might
bear to midday heat.

Vere's words, ' You will have no cause to be
ashamed of him. You can't tell how he has
improved,' occurred to Godfrey's memory, as he
took his father's arm, and walked back with him
to encounter the little ovation which greeted
them in the town.

You did a lot for me, but Shakespeare did
the most,' said Reuben, not a little pleased with
himself, and quite forgetful that he had neglected
to keep to the line of partial neutrality
dictated to him by the younger man.

Godfrey's lofty scrupulosity would probably
never have carried his father through the election,
but now he began to think that, in spite
of the appearance of the younger and more

sprightly Liberal, Reuben might win the seat
from the Conservative, who considered himself
to be a fixture.

You were always fond of Shakespeare,' he
said, encouragingly ; ' you used to spend hours
reading him. Why, one ought, after a time, to
give out light almost in the dark, when one
has been steeped in such an atmosphere.'

CHAPTER IV.

Meanwhile Vere's growing anxiety respecting
her cousin, and her perplexity and alarm at not
being able to control the turn which matters
were taking, prevented her from hearing much
about the doings at Torringmoor. Knowing
and bitterly regretting as she did that her
judgments, her opinions, and tastes on many
subjects seemed to the younger girl to be a
little severe, she was the less inclined to exert
authority over her.

Do you understand one of the old ladies
in the neighbourhood had said to her, half
angrily, when she met her, ' that you ought
absolutely to forbid that child going about by
herself? If there is no one to control her, you
should have left her at school.'

She returned before my uncle's death.'

The fact is, you two girls should not reside
by yourselves.'

I feel quite old enough for anything,' answered
Vere, with her accustomed smile. ' We
have our very old housekeeper, besides.'

Past her work, as you know — it is yoUj to all
intents and purposes, who are the housekeeper.
And what with the dairy, and some farming —
Excuse me, my dear, you bury yourself too
much — you do not know what is going on
outside your own place.'

Henriette always walks with the maid — one
of the maids — I have always managed it since
I heard the place was so full. Would you have
her cling to me like a shadows

Humph !' said the old lady, with a grunt of
disapproval, ^ she might as well walk with her
puppy-dog.'

She was apparently in the right, and Vere in
the wrong. But unless the latter could have
summoned one of her distant female relatives —
who were all of them already distracted with
curiosity, and to whom she must have confided

her own impecunious state, and the fact that
she and her cousin owed much to Reuben Sell-wood
— there was really nothing to be done.

'It is a good thing,' she thought, 'that I
have no brother to inherit a title coupled with
starvation. With our lives the shame, as my
poor uncle felt it to be, will end

She remembered that it had been Sir Ralph's
dying wish that she and his little ' Dot ' should
continue to live in the old place as before,
and that the gossip should be hushed up as
Reuben's unexpected generosity had suggested.
It was natural that the neighbours should be a
good deal exercised on the subject, but there
was something in Yere's manner which kept
them from openly questioning her on her
affairs.

Could I turn a bright-eyed gazelle into a
quiet, domestic pussy-cat ? Could I force a
girl to study when study is hateful to her?
One wouldn't place roast beef before a toothless
infant,' thought Vere, a little out of patience at
the interference.

It was a worry to her to be forced to admit

that, though she had made up her mind to he
a sort of protector to the girl, and was ten
years her senior, she had not yet succeeded in
being able to understand her.

There were possible depths in her young
cousin's character which seemed at first sight
to be incongruous with her wilfulness and
frivolity. Unreserved and eager for sympathy,
troubled by the mysterious unknown and the
grey dulness of her present life, henrietta —
when she first returned to England — had shed
tears for imaginary woes for which perhaps a
mother might have petted her and pitied her.
But Vere, who , in spite of the secret troubles of
her own life, had taken up her own work again
with increased activity — and who was ready
to attribute this so-called ' hysteria ' to the
boarding-school education, which had been
unfortunate in its results — had shrugged her
shoulders a little, and deplored the affectation.
Latterly — perhaps too late — she had taken herself
to task for a mistake, and had attempted
to re-establish confidence between herself and
the easily complaining creature, whose frail

organisation possibly accounted for her discontent.
Yere fancied that she could read the
poor little heart like an open book, and was
only likely to err now in the opposite respect,
that of crediting an excitable school-girl with
undue feeling.

This afternoon she had returned from visiting
a few of the cottagers, having vainly attempted
to remonstrate with some of the men
who were hanging idly about their doors,
neglecting their work, with the stereotyped
excuse, that it was 'election-time.' It was a
beautiful April day, and as she passed through
the village she could not help admiring the
fields studded with buttercups, the daisies with
hearts of gold, and the fruit-trees in their
spring toilettes, whose serious and practical
dress would so quickly succeed their wedding
garments.

It was not strange that Godfrey should be
standing in their garden in talk with Henriette.
It was at an interval when he might easily
escape, and Yere had almost expected to see him.
In a place like the old park, which seemed to

have fallen asleep, with nobocl}^ coming and nobody
going, his visits were cheering. And the
park was beginning to look beautiful in its spring
attire, while she had a full recollection of Godfrey's
artistic enthusiasm — a recollection so
strong that she seemed again to hear the ripple
of the waters, and the swaying and sighing of
the branches of the fir-trees as the wind tossed
them about one gusty day, years ago, in the
wilderness. But something in Godfrey's attitude
was strange, though she told herself that she had
expected that as well. Not quite so soon, perhaps,
for she had her old liking and admiration
for the man, and though she accused herself of
having treated him badly; she did not like to
think he was ' light of love.' He was ben ding-over
Henriette, apparently giving her some
flower, or — could it be ? — a letter. And it
seemed as if their hands lingered together.
He, at least, to Vere's fancy, looked as if he
still felt the touch of the cool, smooth brown
fingers. So it had come — sooner than Vere
expected — and she at least had the courage
which had ever stood her in good stead even

when her physical strength began to sink to
its lowest.

The earth is waking from its wintry sleep,
but all things are dead asleep that cared forme.
God give me strength to care for themes
she said to herself, as she dragged her limbs
on mechanically, conscious of nothing just then
but the necessity for preserving her presence of
mind.

Godfrey had never seen her look so majestic.
The old black cashmere dress which she was
wearing fell round her like the folds of drapery
on a statue. A hot colour burnt on her cheeks,
whilst the transparent shadow of a black bonnet
which she was wearing, with lace strings contrasting
with the fairness of her hair, showed
off" to advantage the skin which had once been
so delicate, and which, in spite of its sunburn,
was still fair.

She has not altered nearly so much as I
thought at first, and what matters if she had
altered, if she is — as I now feel sure — still as
noble in character?' he was thinking as she
advanced, and, in a voice which was again a

trifle abrupt from the effort which she put on
herself, asked,

Shall I go away?' And then, with a laugh
which seemed to him a little ill-timed, ' Oh, I
thought perhaps that less publicity was desired.'

We were talking about what everyone talks
about — my father's affairs. The worst of a
man placing himself in this position is that
people rake up everything they can against
him,' Godfrey answered hoping to put her at
her ease, and wondering that she should again
have assumed the reserve and timidity of her
country ways ; for he was sure that this abruptness
was veiled embarrassment, the more so
when, turning to Henriette, she asked,

Have you changed your shoes ? The grass
is damp to-day.'

Oh, it is so like her to be always fidgeting
about my health. You have no idea what an
old nurse she has grown in her care of me,'
laughed the girl with colour which came to her
own cheek in a rosy wave.

Our neighbours say that I do not take
enough care of you.'

VOL. III. M

Our neighbours — I don't think any of them
are worth knowing — present company always
excepted,' answered Henrietta, with another
uneasy laugh, and then, With a shrug, concluding
her speech. ' How dull it is ! And yet she
has managed to live here all these years. What
shall I do when this election is over V She
nodded to Godfrey, and bounded across the
lawn to please her cousin by changing the thin
shoes, which were certainly wet.

Yere was following but Godfrey placed
himself before her.

'No,' he said, pleadingly, 'you must not pass
me. The strange way in which you have
evaded being with me alone '

I have evaded — nothing — I am not — aware
of it. And just now I am really anxious about
my cousin.'

There was a slight hesitation in her voice — so
trifling that no one would have detected it who
was not used to it.

But — your refusal to listen to me.'
'Have I refused to listen to anything — is it
about the election ? I — really forget.'

And she looked at him with a tranquillity so
admirably acted that he was stopped in his
speech.

You are still very proud,' he said, speaking
as if to himself. ' Why should you not be ? You
have ancestors dating from •'

She winced as if a stone had been thrown at
her. It was the first sign of excited feeling
she had shown.

Oh, leave alone my ancestors ! What good
have they ever done me? It was not of my
dead ancestors I was speaking, but of real flesh
and blood. Dot has always been delicate, and
I cannot get her to take care. Any illness, any
grief, however slight — I mean a real grief —
might kill that child.'

He bowed a little bewildered, and she hastened
into the house, leaning her head for one
moment against the mantelpiece in her own
little sanctum. The marble against which she
leant her forehead seemed burning, and she
could not see as plainly as usual. It seemed
useless to try to do her best, for she no longer
held the clue which might help her to disen-

M 2

tangle the maze. Her own case was clear
enough. Women, God help them, go on loving
men long after men have nothing to offer them
in place of the old flame but its ashes. She
believed that Godfrey might still offer that to
hers but it would be to his interest that she
should elude his offer. There was intellectual
sympathy between them — in some matters —
but she had Wearied of controversy, and did not
care for party politics any more than for controversial
debates about religion.

But intellect, as she knew, was worth nothing-^
compared v^ith the simple attractions of the
heart.

Does he imagine,' she thought to herself,
that the blood which flows in my veins is cold,
and that I have no longing for passionate love ?
I have always behaved in such a way that he
must think so. And would 1 care, if I were a
man, to fall back upon a reasonable life with a
woman who was merely dry and clever V

Her pitiless good sense seemed to make her
understand that she was not nearly so well
suited to be the companion of a man so near

her own age, as Henriette in her young freshness.
But here was the dilemma. Vere was
ready enough to suffer to promote the happiness
of those whom she loved — ready enough to let
Henriette be the joyous butterfly and she the
labouring bee. It would have been comparatively
easy for her to hide her own trouble, tolet
no one guess that she was suffering.

There would even have been a sort of
pleasure arising out of the pain. Vere would
have been as enduring as any fakir in India,
assisting at her own tortures when a woman of
another nature might have inflicted them on a
rival. But what if there was nothing good to
arise out of the martyrdom ? It would not be
possible to put any pressure on a man in the
supposed interests of her cousin nor could she
deceive herself into thinking that Godfrey had
listened with any show of interest to her
account of the alarms — which might be, after
all ungrounded — which she was continually
experiencing about her cousin's health.

She watched Henriette with increasing anxiety,
but determined, with her usual good

judgment to let matters take their course.
These were not long in reaching a climax, for
on the following morning, as she was seated at
her bureau, which was covered with small bills,
Henriette — whose craving for sympathy could
no longer be controlled — glided into the room,
and threw herself listlessly on the couch.

Never had the contrast between the two
girls been more marked than when the elder
one, turning from her papers, took her seat by
the younger one's side, and, looking her steadily
in the face, said,

If you have anything to tell me, I am ready
to hear it,' and was completely taken by
surprise.

Have you ever been in love V whispered
Henriette, more than ever like the ' Dot ' whose
childish absurdities had remained unbidden, as
she buried her little dark head in the pillow of
the sofa.

The elder flushed violently, the bright colour
flooding her face and neck. But dissimulation
was so impossible to her that she made no
reply.

And your love remains still f

That depends on what you mean. Love
does not die — it changes sometimes.'

And if it changed V

I should submit myself to the will of God,
and do my duty.'

With life of one uniform grey tint, like a
Quaker bonnet, i could not bear that long and
live.'

It is astonishing how easy one finds it to
live.'

No, no,' said Henriette, fairly breaking
down, ' it would not be easy — I could not live
on all those years.'

My poor child said Vere, pityingl}^, ' that
is only nonsense, though it will do for love-songs.
What would become of the world, do
you think, if that were the whole of life ?
There is plenty to do — work enough for women
as well as for men on this earth, so full of interest
and beauty. I mean what I say,' she
continued, playing with the girl's hair ; ' there's
much to satisfy in life beside the eternal theme
so continually harped upon by boys and girls —

it palls in time, and grows a little nauseous.
Every novel is full of it, every song; and when
you get to my age, it grows namby-pamby, to
say the least of it. Why, the little sun goes
down, but leaves plenty of brightness and light
in life — in nine times out often the sun was buta
farthing rush light after all.'

She spoke lightly, as if in fun, but Henriette
looked at her reproachfully.

And you — engaged yourself — to speak like
this V

Who said I was engaged '? I have plenty
to do, if that is what you mean. And even if
I were, why, dear, people would be cowards if
they could not bear to be sundered because they
loved. Loved — loved, do you call it? To go
about in a whining way, making the lives of
other people wretched ! Give it some lesser
name.' ' A childish selfishness, weak, if not
contemptible,' she would have added, but was
afraid of being bitter.

By this time she had her arm round her
cousin's neck.

If life is to be desolate,' she said, cheerfully,

it \vill be because we make it so. You aud I
for the present must be all-in-all to each other.
For instance, we may try to have larger aims.
Limbs grow numb for want of exercise.'

She did not know if she had succeeded in
comforting Henriette. Probably that young
lady had only intentionally extracted a secret
from her. But she did know that her own
great love, ^Yhich was not limited in kind, had
succeeded in conquering a storm which had
agitated her ; and that — in her readiness to try
temporary remedies and palliatives for her
cousin's sake — she was pleased to accept thankfully
an invitation for Henriette to spend a few
weeks with Mrs. Austin, which arrived that same
evening.

At Mrs. Austin's house her cousin would hear
more of the election, and would probably see
more of the Ellwood. Both reasons were
conclusive, especially as the girl herself seemed
to weary for change.

CHAPTER V.

As Reuben parted company with his son at the
gate of Broadmeacls Park — he himself having
proposed that Godfrey should go at once to tell
the Miss Rashleighs the events of the day — a
man, whom he recognised as a member of the
ToiTingmoor Town-council, and who had been
walking fast to overtake him, came smilingly
up to him, and, while he congratulated him on
the day's success, warned him that his future
prospects might be injm-ed, as some abominable
anonymous letters were being circulated at his
expense.

I thought it better to let you know. The
writer should be discovered at once and prosecuted
; though of course no one cares for such

cowardly hitting in the dark, yet at a time like
this ' continued his informant, a Httle embarrassed
as he noticed that Reuben became
strangely white, and that the veins on his forehead
were starting into unusual prominence.

He broke off, confused, in his glib speech, as
Reuben answered, in a rasping voice,

If you want to know my opinion of anonymous
letters, I look upon them as despicable
insults, for the purpose of conveying cowardly
and infamous calumny. Such mean attempts
to bespattered the successful or the rich should
be treated with indifference and contempt.'

Oh, very well,' said the disconcerted informer,
feeling as if he were falling he did not
know where, and Alas half annihilated by this
strange man's newly-found powers of speech.

I should also like to say,' continued Reuben,
in words which, in their good English, could
have been used by Godfrey, though the latter
would have shrunk from their tone of immoderate
pride, ' that, since I have not thought fit to
tell the story of my life, all reports circulated
about me must be lying inventions.'

There is something ridiculous in his assumption,
as if he were so certain of being the right
man to fit the right place — he, the poor boy
who, by his own admission, worked hard for
his bread in our caste-bedridden town of ,'
thought the offended town-councillor,
in derision.

Reuben had been wanting in his accustomed
tact. He had not only bared one of his most
important secrets to the gaping curiosity of
people who had their prejudices of rank and
station, but he had now made an enemy of a
would-be friend.

He was conscious of his two-fold error ashe
retired into his study. Not only should he
have done his utmost to propitiate the conservative
respectability of this old-fashioned
place, but he should not have defied the consequences
of snubbing a Radical, and one who
had been ready to help him. His self-justification
was that he had been taken by surprise,
and that the prudent steering between extremes
which Godfrey had recommended as
likely to lead to popularity, had ever been

hateful to him. He had been a hard-working:
and persevering man, with triumphs honestly
won ; a man, hitherto, of few words, and longing
for the time when this ' palavering ' would
be over. But he was a man also of strong,
instinctive good sense, and he had paled under
the information of these anonymous innuendoes,
as he immediately coupled them with some
annoying advertisements which had appeared
for some time in one of the provincial papers,
and of which he had determined to take no
notice.

Now that he was alone, he locked the door
of his study, and took out one of these newspapers,
also secured under lock and key in a
compartment of a handsome inlaid escritoire.
He read it with a curl of scorn upon the mobile
lips, which he had always been so careful to
hide by the now whitening moustache. It
ran,

If the man known at San Francisco in the

year 1849 by the nickname of Jem N ,

and now calling himself R. S , will communicate
with the advertiser, he may avert a

terrible danger to which he is at present
exposed.'

Jem N , Jem Nobody — Mr. Nobody, as

they called me when I told them, boy-like, that
I didn't know my right surname ; and I saw no
earthly reason why they should not. I had a
knack, in those days, of making queer friends,'
he said to himself, paling again, and devoutly
wishing that the advertisement Alas at Jericho.

He had laughed-off the thing in his own
mind, having determined to make a tabula rasa
of his past life. There was nothing behind
the scenes of which he considered he had to
be ashamed, but his new association with Vere
Rashleigh made him guess how refined gentlemen
and gentlewomen would receive with
horror some of the uncomfortable communications
which his old chums might have to
make.

I believe they are all dead, but perhaps I had
better write politely to this fellow,' he thought,
struggling against the over-powering desire to
get the lash on the shoulders of some ungrateful
person or other.

He sat down, and Avi'ote to one of the officials
of the paper.

If the man who calls himself " D. B.," but
of whom Mr. Sellwood has no knowledge, will
call at Broadmeads tomorrow evening at seven
o'clock, Mr. Sellwood will hear what he has to
say.'

No doubt the scoundrel who thinks he has
some gossip against me is skulking about in the
neighbourhood. I'll settle him to-moiTow^ night
scare him with the awful lightnings of the
law,' he thought, more satisfied with himself, ashe
enclosed the note in a second envelope, sealed
it — but not with the newly-adopted Sellwood
crest — and rang for his servant to give orders
that another man should ride over to Tongs
at once, and see that the letter was
deposited in the hands of the editor of the
paper.

Tell him to go in plain clothes, and not to
blab out where he comes from,' he said to the
astute butler, whose experience of the conversational
talent of his master would somewhat have
startled the aristocrats who had seen fit of late

to patronise Reuben, and induce him to enter
the presence of the goddess, styled ' Society.'

We must not take up too high a tone,' Mrs.
Austin had said. * Riches are the " open sesame "
to the highest sets in the country, so terribly
are things changing of late.'

The next day was the one preceding that
which had been arranged for the poll, and it
was necessary that Reuben should again address
a few words to his supporters amongst the
working-men at the Guildhall. Godfrey had
hoped for some further evidence of his father's
expansion into more manly modes of thought,
and wider fields of intellect. But he was
disappointed.

From the first the meeting was more earnest
than harmonious, and Reuben — who, surrounded
by his friends, ascended the platform amid
a waving of handkerchiefs, a holding up of hats,
and all the signs of the enthusiasm of the pres-ious
day — found that he had to struggle through his
sentences amidst the hisses, groans, and stamping
of his auditors. Directly the unfortunate

candidate opened his mouth, he was interrupted
by cries of derision such as ' Sain' under false
colours.' * What's yer real name, out chap T
and then another voice, ' It's a curious sort o'
name.' And there was a burst of laughter in
answer to the interrupter, who stood close to
the platform, and maintained his ground in spite
of the counter-cries, ' Order, shame — turn him
out,' with a quiet, half-amused twinkle in his
eyes.

Give the gentleman a leering' — it's a burning'
shame, when he's coin' his best to help us —
that's right, lads,' as a number of gloveless,
muscular hands were held up in Reuben's
honom\

But what had become of Mr. Sellwood's
oratory ? That very morning he had refreshed
his memory with the speech of Marc Antony
that he might be prepared in his original way.
But now he cudgelled his brains for a word
which he wanted in vain.

A murmur rose through the room. There was
a shuffling of feet instead of a waving of handkerchiefs.
Thoughts and words rushed quickly

VOL. III. N

pell-mell into the imliappy man's mind. But
none of them seemed to suit him. He did not
know how to begin. He remembered a certain
sentence. It ought to have come in the middle
of the harangue. But a lad near him, cried,
Go it, old Californy — we're all a-awaiting for
yer to begin,' and had his ears boxed by a
policeman, which created some confusion, and
was detrimental to thought.

Europe has been bristling with arms. The
soldiers are maintained at your expense. You
are taxed for warfare abroad, and deprived of
land at home when you ought to be labouring
for the blessings of peace,' cried Reuben, with a
hoarseness of voice and ungracefulness of manner
which were new and alarming to his
supporters.

That he, in his desperation, should sound in
his turn the note of agrarian agitation, and
talk of increasing the productiveness of the
land — that provision should be made for
peasant proprietors who had succeeded in all
other countries but England — seemed like
the quintessence of irony to those who knew

his history. A tittering could be heard iu
the room, and a few boys began to mew Hke
cats.

He took the land himself shouted one of his
opponents, in studiously offensive tones.

His name's not in the parish register,' cried
another.

Reuben ^\dped his forehead. His vision was
becoming blurred. Plis tongue clave to the roof
of his mouth. But he continued,

Where is the England which ought to be the
stronghold of the liberties of Europe? — her
people have become weak and helpless, her
nobles careful only for their own advancement.'


He stammered and stopped — unfortunately as
if he were inviting the comments which bis too
responsive audience had already proved itself
to be ready to give — but in reality to refresh
his memory, portions of this address having
been learnt by heart, after being composed in a
style which had not been criticised by his son,
and now appearing to be like parts of a child's
puzzle, very difficult to fit together, and to

adjust to the notes with which Godfrey had
provided him.

If England is to be a stronghold,' remarked
a quiet man, in a voice which was scarcely
audible, except to the quickened acuteness of
Reuben Sellwood's outraged sense of hearing,
we want people who will build up. There
are lots ready to pull down.'

A hubbub of interruption ensued. In vain
the chairman rapped violently on the table.
All his efforts to enforce order were useless.
He could with difficulty make his voice
heard.

Wish he'd teach us 'bout Ms own getting' on
in the world. I'm not the man to stay away
when there's a hint of that sort to be got,' cried
another stentorian voice.

The speaker was one of the working-men
who had been invited among the rest to come
forward, ask questions, or say what he knew on
the subjects discussed.

Keep to the point,' said the chairman, while
Reuben tried to encounter the somewhat impudent,
but straight and fearless glance of the

man, in which there was not the slightest sign
of embarrassment.

Californy ! CaHforny ! Go it, old gentleman.
We'd like to emigrate — the lot o' ns — if we
was sm-e of getting' the same chances as yon.'

Don't you think it 'nd be a jolly good plan
for all the swells to emigrate, and leave room
in the old country V asked another voice, which
was greeted with shouts of laughter.

*Damn it all!' cried Reuben, losing his
patience, and stamping on the paper which
his son had given him, and with which he
had meant to help himself in answering the
speakers. He was in a rage with Godfrey at
this moment for not drawing it out more effectively,
and meant to tell him he had ruined his
prospects because the handwriting was detestable.


Don't swear — it's Aveak and stupid ; it's
doing the devil's work, as old Bunyan said,
without his wages,' observed the same quiet
man who had spoken before.

• Method !' said another, increasing the
much.

Ranter, perhaps,' retorted a second.

Right — he be right, ranter or not,' commented
a thhxl. ' John Davis knows what he's
about — let Davis have his say.'

Davis had by this time gilded quietly forward,
and in a clear, penetrating voice, was
addressing the chairman.

'I make bold to come forward, sir, and just
say as I've come from the dein bed of a mate
as good and honest a man as ever I met since
I came to these parts. That man, sir, lived all
his days on nine shillings a week and a bit o'
a cottage, and had a missus and three children
to keep. And, as he lay a-dyin', he thought
how he couldn't die comfortable without making'
a ■\\'ill-like. So he says to the missus, " Get
down that 'ere jacket there." So the missus
gave him down his working-jacket, and with
his poor, weak hands he pulled out two old
knives — one as he had when a boy, when he
worked for Farmer Jones that had the farm up
in the valley, and died three years agone.
Give that to Jim," ses he (that war his
younger lad), " and t'other one " — what he'd use

himself till the day lie took to his bed — " to Jack "
(that were his elder boy). " Tell 'em that's all I
got to leave 'em," ses he. \Vell, su', I'd just
like for the candidate that's called " Liberal *' to
tell us "what's a poor man to do when one as
has worked all his days and been a God-fearing'
man has naught to leave the wife and chiltern
but two ole knives.'

Reuben stood meditating his answer, and
wishing he had given more attention to Godfrey
when the latter had been apt to bother
him over-much about the difficult question of
what the people were to do when the wages
were so unaccountably low, and the folks themselves
so terribly poor. He was ready to make
any amount of promises now, but the words
somehow stuck in his throat.

Meanwhile, the last speaker had glided away
amongst the crowd. Not so the determined
hinderers of the peace.

Go it, old Dives — tell the Lazarus what
to do,^ shouted one in his loudest voice, for the
amusement of his mates. ' AYe axed yer a
plain question — giv' us a plain answer. We

Tvants to know where we chaps is to go to
git our bags o' good.'

Git along, you chattering magpie — here's
the price,' cried another, while the orator
found himself pulled down by the legs from
the bench which he had tried to mount as
rostrum.

Hooray !' cheered the crowd, whilst a wild
shriek rang out from one of the women who
had been having too much drink, and determined
to make the most of the incident.

The workman, who was a heavy, grizzled,
bull-headed man, struck out fiercely, with muscular
arms, and for a moment there was imminent
risk of some of the weaker people near
him being trampled upon and rendered insensible,
with half their ribs broken.

Then Reuben was himself again. He
seemed to be suddenly galvanised into life.
His earlier instincts asserted themselves once
more, and with them his vernacular and his
courage.

Tek care of the women,' he cried, in a voice
which ensured obedience. ' Most o' you men

ha' got heads on your shoulders, and brains
in your heads. Don't fight like fools, but go
home to your T\dves and chiltern. Well — I'll
go too — and if — if — you've any respect forme
'

Something whizzed past his ear, and at the
same time one of the lights was extinguished.
The chairman, who knew that an excited
English mob could be brutal enough — before
manly feeling and a sense of shame could
resume their ordinary sway — rose to adjourn
the meeting. But he could not make his voice
heard. A policeman was already brandishing
his staff, and Godfrey — sick with fear for the
results — was proud of his father, as Reuben
stood, with his big shoulders heaving and his
voice commanding attention, careless of personal
danger.

*Be steady, my lads, be steady — be cheerful
o' the women. I say nothing 'bout violence
offered to me. But, if there's violence to the
weaker sort, the law shall assert itself. It's a
burning shame to cause danger for innocent
folk.'

*Pray come along,' whispered one of Lis
committee.

Tak' care o' herself,' retorted Reuben, proudly.
' 111 not go till the hall is cleared.'

I'll stop and help you,' said another.

No need for it,' answered Reuben, as — no
one knew exactly how — the crowd went out
peaceably, and what had seemed a few moments
before to be a horrible situation, turned out to
be nothing at all.

With the exception of the fact that as Reuben,
a few minutes afterwards, descended the
stairs in company with his son, he evaded a
heavy blow on his back — stooping down, and
picking the missile up. It was a large stone.
Godfrey finished after the assailant, who concealed
himself in one of the darker passages,
and, by turning and T^-inding, managed to elude
pursuit.

He rejoined his father, who was smiling.

'It will do for a relic,' remarked Reuben,
quietly, as he put the stone into his pocket, and
passed through the remaining stragglers and
the few policemen, who were never informed of

what had happened, on his way to his carnage.

Dismiss the coachman — or get in yom-self.
I prefer to walk,' he said, shortly, to his son.

Take care of yourself — there is danger —
there is indeed,' said Godfrey, wistfully.

Neither did he use the carriage, but, feeling
it unwise to argue with Reuben in his present
mood, made a detour, to see what it was possible
for him to effect in the town. He must
see the committee, to whom he knew that
his father had shown scant courtesy and unconventional
disrespect. It would be necessary
for Godfrey to apologise, and to fix an
interview. As he passed on to the committee-room,
an acquaintance came up to him, and
gave an account of the younger Radical candidate's
special oratory that day.

Mindful of his failure on the preceding
occasion, Mr. Edgar Worst had dressed himself
with minute care, and had been very
sedulous in manipulating certain written notes.
Once launched on the stream of florid oratory,
there had been no limits to the inducements
held forth to the credulous people wha

had been fooled by bis fervid imagination.
There is a turn in the tide, I fear ; it is
he now who has got the ear of the people.'

Godfrey felt something rise in his throat, making
him, as he said afterwards, like a big girl.
He could scarcely tell why, but he somehow felt
proud of his father, and more convinced than
he had ever been before of the good impulses
which were lurking in Reuben's nature, as he
answered, impetuously,

'I hate these sort of political rope-dancers,
giving promises where they have no right to
give them — more daring than the renowned athlete
who, instead of cooking omelettes on dangerous
heights, developed the brilliant idea of
drinking young girls over on wheelbarrows. I
had rather not see young fellows perform antics
on the tight-rope of politics with then heads in
sacks, risking falls which are likely to harm
others as well as themselves.'

You are a young man yourself,' laughed his
friend.

I don't feel like one,' he answered, with a
luckier laugh. ' Ashen I was young, I was for

settling every question in Heaven and earth; now
I have learnt how the " mills of God grind slowly
but surely." I can keep my mind more in the
attitude of suspense. You see I am patriarchal.'

And a sort of political agnostic, or at best a
wretched Whig. The Whigs did great things
in the past, but now that cautious picking of
their footsteps is fatal.'

Call me what you like,' he said, a little wearily,
' I confess that I have ceased to have
dreams of political millennium, and have little
sympathy with the petulant cries or the coarse
outbursts of some politicians. No doubt we are
groping from old order to new, and in the
twilight of a transitional period like this, one
does not always see one's own form plainly. I
used not to be afraid of the crude and novel,
neither do I distrust the future now. But the
older 1 grow the more I learn that sweeping
reforms of all sorts — too violently earned out —
may only put the clock back, tending to reaction
and to tyranny.'

And the working man V

My father was a working man. I am one

myself. But I will confess to you that I am much
disabused about many of the brilliant schemes
Which used to be my programme for the working
man. I have lived among them and have
been haunted by the problem of how to help
them for the best, and there have been times
when I have almost doubted the feasibility of
enlightening the lower stratum of all. I Alas
out of heart then. Educate them by all means,
and try to help them, but remember that there
is a dangerous time in store for them.'

How V laughed his companion.

Godfrey pondered.

It will not affect the thing one way or
the other if I tell you what I think. But
there is a crisis in the life of nearly every
man when he wakes to the sickening consciousness
of how little prospect of perfect
happiness there is for him on this side of
the grave ; when he is apt to break with past
traditions, striking out blindly like a drowning
wretch in his struggle to reach his unknown
God ; and Avhen there are plenty of busy folks
too ready to deprive him of the comfort of

looking on to a future life. Many of our destitute
and over-worked operatives are passing
through such a crisis, and will pass through it.
The miseries of modern life are the result of
causes which lie too deep for us to set them
right at once. But when men most need help
it is when they are lifting their heads from the
dense darkness of utter ignorance to the fog in
which they are beginning to see.'

Help— how V

'Don't let them strike their heads and go
down to the depths.'

'Against what ?'

Well, there are two especial rocks on which
men split — it is not I who said it first — God
and women.'

Other rocks besides V asked his companion,
lightly.

Godfrey looked grave, for a ch-sunken wi-etch at
that moment staggered past them on the pavement.
He had yellow ribbons on, and a yellow
placard in his battered hand.

I'm a martyr,' he grinned ' to the only cause
o' freedom.'

Young Sellwoocl sighed as he turned away-disgusted.
The disgust increased as he passed
a pubic-house in which there were maxims placarded
about, 'The horny hand,' — 'Labour is
everything,' and others of the same kind.

Come, come ; there is no need for differences
of opinion to lead to pugilism,' he
said, good-naturedly, to a couple of young
shorten, who were standing together on the
pavement, and who from hard words seemed
to be likely to proceed to blows.

I was trying to make him see that the English
constitution rests on its history and not on
theories,' explained one of them, a little bombastically
and sulkily.

A constitution which is full of syllogisms and
contradictions, but which is still the best in the
world,' said Godfrey, as he succeeded in separating
the combatants.

Meanwhile Reuben had chosen a short-cut
across the fields to Broadmeads. He unconsciously
struck at the flowers with his stick,
cutting off their heads. There were footsteps
behind him and a shadow fell across him on to

the grass causing him to start and turn round
irritably.

< I only wanted to warn yew,' said the man,
who owned the shadow, ' ud go through fire
and water to serve yew — but,' dropping his
A^oice, ' there's enemies on yer track.'

'Look here — you want money, no doubt —
but I've had enough for one day. I'm worn out
and worried.'

But I can give you information — don't yew
want to be put on your guard ?'

Goodness knows ! What is your information
worth? Some mare's-nest or other.'
It's more nor that.'

You've got hold of some cock-and-bull
piece of scandal,' said Reuben, angrily. ' My
man — why do the lot of you hate me so ? I'm
sorry to say you are fighting against people who
help you to get your bread.'

I saint fighting against no one,' said the
other, with a mocking laugh. * In time you'll
find as I was your friend.'

And the fellow cleared the stile with a bound
and disappeared on the other side.

VOL. III.

CHAPTER VI.

It was twilight when Reuben approached the
walls of his estate at Broadmeads.

Dark as it was, he could discern white chalk
pencilling in large letters near the gateway.
He crept closer to the walls, fearing to be noticed,
but taking a match-box from his pocket —
which he generally carried for his cigars — he
lit a wax match and held it to the chalk inscriptions.


The first was, ' Down with the impostor —
Reuben Sellwood.' The next was facetious,
No such person known here— name not in the
parish register.' The third was, ' Liar !'

It was characteristic of Reuben that he had a
secret pleasure in defying public comment, and

that his spirits rose as he began to think that
he might make a clean breast of the whole
thing in a letter to the morning paper, and that
when he had told the story of his birth the tide
of popular feeling would help to give him votes.
The punishment for the time had been severe,
but no don't the trimiiph would be greater.

But, when he took up one of the Torringmoor
papers for that evening, it was by no means reassuring.
He dashed it down with an oath.

Cowardly journalists ! They worship the
bugbear of humanity and yet are afraid of it.
They are so-called strong minds, but they are
in terror of the foolish spectre which Rousseau
conjured up.' (He would have InioAvn nothing
about Rousseau without Yere's reading.) ' They
dream of a Paradise of equality, and yet, Avhen
some one actually born of the dregs of the population
appeals to their theories — in real flesh
and blood — they kick him and will have nothing
of him — it's all pretence, this stuff about the
entry of my birth — and they know it themselves
; they hate the base-born.'

As he entered the house, he was told by the

quiet man-servant that a couple of gentlemen
were waiting for him in his study.

What sort of men V he inquired of the
butler, who did not immediately answer.

Begging-letter humbugs, no doubt ? — I have
told you to deny me to these impostors.'

Something peculiar in the servant's eye made
him feel uncomfortable. And then he remembered
the appointment of that evening, which
later and more vexatious circumstances had obliterated
from his mind.

He awoke to the imminent danger of all the
secrets of his past life being known by the
people whom he employed.

One of the visitors rose slowly to meet him ashe
entered the study, inclining himself but
slightly, the lower part of his face being partially
hidden by the turned-up collar of his greatcoat.
The other remained concealed in the
shadow of the curtains. In spite of the apparent
modesty of the intruders, both faces were
strangely familiar. The first man who had
been pushed forward as if to bear the brunt of
Eeuben's anger was a square-built man, rather

highly-coloured and weather-beaten. He had
long, red whiskers and restless eyes, seldom
looking at anyone when he spoke. And, when
he threw back his great-coat, he displayed
a satin-scarf, fastened with a mock-diamond
pin.

Dick Baker — I didn't guess you were in the
land of the living, so I didn't recognise your
initials,' exclaimed Reuben, T\dth a laugh, as he
glanced across him to the other fellow, with the
expression of one who felt himself to be fated
to evil.

Both of the faces revealed potentialities of
ferocity, but that of the taller and darker man
was especially cruel. An acute physiognomist
would have detected, in the handwriting on it,
the triumphant perversity of a life which had
submitted to no restraint, nor shrank from the
lowest forms of corruption. The brows revealed
intellect, and its fine sweep could not be entirely
destroyed. But in the purify cheeks, the
Bardolphian nose, the eyes, half enclosed infolds
of loose skin, and the lewd, smiling, self-contented
mouth there was a sort of resemblance

— of which this man, who called himself a
gentleman, was proncl — to the later portraits of
Francis I.

A sneer sat on the mocking lips, and his
laughter ^yas bitter as he rejoined,

And so you had killed me off, as well as
poor Dick. You might be a little more grateful.
You forget that this is a personal matter,
and it was your own fault if you did not give it
the immediate attention which for your own sake
we desired.'

He had the style of a reasonably well-educated
man, and his off-hand manner came
natural, as if he had practised it from his
boyhood.

Reuben's face was impassive, though his heart
beat tumultuously.

I fail to catch your meaning. I knew you
both at San Francisco, was associated with you
at the gold-diggings, was obliged to you for
assistance. But I knew too much of you to desire
your further acquaintance.'

That was the reason you did not answer
our advertisement ?' And there was a flash as

if of steel from the small eyes half-enclosed hi
the baggy folds beneath them.

Why should it mean me — that foolish advertisement
in the paper ? Loads of other people
have the same initials.'

If yoTi knew all that ice know, you would
jump at the offer we have to make yer,' said
the square-shouldered man, A\ith the air of one
who had laid a trap, and looked for another
to be caught in it.

If I knew r repeated Reuben, in a mystified
manner, but feeling as if something disgraceful
could be the only way out of these sudden complications.
' Do you mean to say that you have
acted the spy upon me all these years?'

Ah ! you hear un. He have waited till time
should bleach him white — ha I ha !' laughed the
red-headed scamp, nudging his more formidable
companion, who stood behind him.

I have not the faintest idea to what you
allude,' answered Reuben, in his most telling
English ; ' but I know there were many queer
passages in my life as there are in the lives of

most adventurers. And if yon have tramped
np something against me, and suppose yon can
excuse it to your consciences — your consciences
which are so ragged and battered after the way
in which yon used to treat 'em that 1 wonder
you can pnt 'em into working order at all — outwith
it at once — let ns hear the worst o' it. Bnt
understand, once and for all, you'll not have a
stiver ont of me.'

The annoyance had become horrible. Ren-ben's
cheeks were blanched. The perspiration
stood in beads on his forehead. He seemed to
anticipate something terrible, as he gazed,
with haggard face and' burning eyes, at the
intruders.

He had seen enough of these men at the
gold-diggings, and afterwards in the States, to
make him aware that they knew of his being-engaged
in all sorts of large speculations, and
of the prosperity which attended these speculations.


They want to get money out o' me,' he said,
between his teeth ; ' but they have not the
shadow of a claim to a farthing.'

The shorter man crept back, coT\'ed by the
rage in him, ^rhich ah-lady amounted to a
passion of fury.

*xA.re YOU not a little icarmT asked the other,
with a sarcastic smile. ' I envy you your Hereafter
the large scale on which you have worked,
it must be pleasant to kick up one's heels in
this old Eden here. For my part, 1 can't put
myself out to grass yet awhile — I'm too fond of
excitement and travel, and if you listen to me,
instead of being so peppery '

Listen to chat T asked Reuben, with the
veins on his forehead again starting into
prominence.

'■ I suppose you are aware that your name
has been coupled With a disgraceful story,
which has '

Eeuben waved his hand disdainfully. He
prided himself on ha^ang nothing to do with
those scavengers of society, the purveyors of
tittle-tattle, and would have swept the place
clean of such trash had he been able. He began,

I am not answerable for all the gossip of
this place.'

But the other burst into a laugh which jarred
on hmi, and then, creeping up nearer to Reuben
whispered a name into his ear.

The effect of the name was magical.

Poor lad !' the master of Broadmeads tried
to articulate. But a tremor had seized his lips.
It was a horrible story j,' he added. ' We meant
no harm ; but we were all to blame. What
more could we have done ? The unhappy
feiloAv couldn't swim.'

Poor devil ! he was not the first to get
drowned in that fashion. But it was you who
proposed it, and you who must pay the penalty ;
there's a tale of manslaughter against you — or
murder — or what you choose to call it. We
come to you as friends ; the evidence is all in
our hands. And, unless you pay us well, we
mean to make it public'

A fugitive colour appeared on Reuben's haggard
cheeks. He coughed, and passed his
hand between his collar and his neck, as if the
former was too tight to allow him to breathe.

Did they ?' His voice died ofi"; he could

not finish the sentence.

Hush ! speak low,' said the other, bending
forward. ' Did they dig up the body, did you
ask ? It was you who suggested it should be
buried close by in the saud. "We dug it up
long ago. Dick Baker knows where to find — '

It's a diabolical accusation invented by the
wickedest malice,' cried Reuben, leaping to his
feet.

Dunno,' said Baker, from a safe distance,
with the table between himself and his exasperated
listener; 'it do begin to look fishy.
Some one says as how you had a grudge against
the poor rascal, and he one of the Weakly sort,
and when we found the go old — you mind that
day — we was almost starving, the four of us,
and you and Pierce took the lead ? Well, we
found the good at last in a large queer sort of
a hole, nth a torrent o' water rushing down
from the heights upon it, and you said as how
the force o' the water for ages past was enough
to cause the depth o' the sole.'

Pierce nodded his head.

'It was about thirty feet,' he interposed,
'with perpendicular rocks on either side, and

the water cold as ice ; but the gold that glittered
at the bottom ! Enough to enrich the
population of a city !' and he rubbed his hands
at the recollection of it.

Well, it was your proposal — to tie a cord
round the wretch's body, and let him down to
get at the gold, and, when we drawer him hup,
he was dead.'

^ Liar — cowardly liar P cried Reuben. 'You
know well enough we proposed it between us ;
I was let down myself.'

'You — you can swim like a rat,' and Baker
burst into a mocking laugh.

If I could swim, my , teeth chattered — my
blood was frozen — and yet I did it.'

It was easy to you — it was death to him,'
said Pierce, with his tormenting eyes fixed on
his victim.

1 protested against his going — but you jeered
at him— and roused his pride — you insulted him ;
and he threw himself violently into the water,'
answered Reuben, in desperation.

Who is the ^^-itness of that ? We are two
against one.'

And others iu Californy,' added Baker. ' We
lias their signatures to shoal.'

For the first time in his life, Reuben flinched,
as though he had been struck, and stared at his
accusers, breathing hard. He hesitated a little
before speaking, but when he spoke it was in a
manner so decided that the first sensation of
those who had plotted against him was that
their project had miscarried.

Turning disdainfully from the fellow whom
he called Dick Baker, he addressed himself to
Pierce.

It is disgraceful. You have crossed my path
more than once before in my life, but you
shall not cross it again. If I ever did what
Alas bad, it was through your influence ; and,
if you think that you're to have the upper hand
of me agen, you're mightily mistaken. I won't
give way a bit. Did you ever know me give way T

You've been having a fine time of it,' said
Pierce, with facetiousness. ' Now, if you'd listen
to me, instead of being so impetuous '

I Sill not listen to you. Why, to listen to
you is to mix myself up in aU the vile schemes

of your plague-spotted life — crime piled upon
crime, and the whole loathsome heap whitewashed
like a sepulchre.'

You speak strongly,' answered his tormentor,
with a laugh.

Not too strongly for you.'

Well, we will leave till you are in a sweeter
temper— or make our story known to the municipal
corporation, or the Toningmoor newspapers
— while the trifle of a few thousands —
which would never be missed by you '

Reuben turned on him with an oath, which
he was never likely to forget. The unutterable
bitterness and disgust of life which he felt, after
the overpowering events of the day, had rendered
him indifferent to consequences. The
whole thing was like a lurid nightmare, that,
because in the madness of his ambition he had
mixed himself up with politics, this fellow, vntli
his trap so skilfully set to catch him, should
bring upon him an accusation more terrible
than death. He was sick at the thought of
the gossip and the cruelty of the criticism
which he saw to be hanging like an avalanche

over his head. And yet — since Vere's influence
had been brought to bear upon him, since Godfrey
had unconsciously accustomed him to think
of nobler things — the alternative proposed, to
buy these wretches off with money, was impossible.


I suppose it will be rather a wrench to part
with so large a sum, but it will lee a greater
wrench to be denounced to the Avorld hi general
as '

The shot struck hard, but it also sharpened
Reuben's rage. If passionate hate could lead
a man to commit a murderous assault, it is
astonishing that Pierce was not felled to the
ground at that moment. Accustomed as Reuben
had been to crush opposition, and, from a
long course of habit, dictatorial, if not violent,
the last threat seemed to exasperate him beyond
the bounds of endurance.

He leaped to his feet, and approached Pierce,
who cowered into his corner as if he feared
that the inch man whom he had come to intimidate
would be likely to lay violent hands
on his person. Dick Baker crouched down on

the opposite side of the table, with flagrant
abandonment at even a pretence of the virtue
of courage. Then Reuben as suddenly drew
back, as if from a reptile. To come in contact
with Pierce's person Avould have seemed to him
as repulsive as to touch a loathsome toad. The
face which had flushed, the eyes which had
gleamed, and the hands which had trembled
grew suddenly still.

Leave my house,' he said, ' scoundrel ! Oh,
you need not be afraid. I have a long score of
insults and cruelties to repay you, but this last
insult of all is beneath my notice. Come, you
have contrived it very cleverly—the devil himself
couldn't have managed it better. I almost
think the devil himself must have taken up his
residence in your body. But dare to ask me for
blood-money — for the innocent chap I loved —
killed by a cruel accident, through the rage for
gold you taught us — you, the so-called gentleman,
but the greatest cad of all amongst us,
hatching your serpent's brood of wickedness
from the greed for money which possessed you.
Not one farthing of mine shall you have, if you

begged on your knees for it. But to enter maj
house and dare to threaten me, as if you did
not know that I would sooner a thousand times
quit this miserable masquerade, and pitch the
whole lot o' the money into the sea than tighten
your diabolical toils around me — and — and '

He shrank from speaking more plainly. The
disgust with which the thing had inspired him
was mastering him again. But, "^^dth a sort of
gasp, he resumed his speech.

Ask yourself if I will ever alter what I have
said. Have you ever known me change my
purpose, or abandon a determination ? I was
an uneducated lout when you met me at San
Francisco, smarting from a sense of wrongs
which gave you a sort of hold on me. But
could you ever make me change my ground —
could your inducements appeal to me, could — '

You — you were very tenacious, certainly,*
muttered the other man, who saw that he could
expect no assistance from Baker, and who
staggered back pale from fear. It was not the
first time in his life that he had stood in dread
of Reuben's muscular arm, and he knew that a
VOL, III. P

blow from such au assailant might injure his
shattered frame.

Then begone — both of you — or I will summon
some of my men, and you shall be kicked
down every stair of this house till you reach
the door.'

You are mad — for tomorrow morning all
the town shall ring with this — we have already
got the paragraph printed — we '

Oh, 1 care nothing for tomorrow morning —
not a snap of the fingers for this election — or
your contemptible threats either. But I have it
from your own lips — you remember my tenacity
of purpose — that Reuben Sellwood '

Jem Nobody,' interrupted Pierce, with a
feeble attempt at a sardonic laugh.

The name signifies little. If you were a
gentleman — I rejoice that I was a working-man
and a democrat. But I wish to remind you
that the man who stands before you has passed
through other struggles, and that when he was
rough and beggarly in aspect — even then he
was accustomed to command respect. How
did he command it ? By never going back from

his word, by never faltering in a purpose on
which he had set his heart. You can practise
on my reputation as much as yon Hke — yon
have chosen your time well. But I have taken
my resolution. I care nothing for entering
Parliament, compared with my determination to
see you stand in your rightful place — the dock.
Now — begone.'

p2

CHAPTER VII.

Reuben had spoken truly. No audacity could
rival his own. No effeminate indecision, no
paralysis of will had ever made him swerve
from the path he marked out for himself. It
was, after all, a wonderful character — the passion
and energy in it could scarcely rival its force.

Its very eccentricity was the outcome of the
seeds sown in early youth. He saw this after the
men had quitted him. The very foulness of their
accusations had revealed to himself that atrophy
of the moral senses which had allowed him to
be maddened at this unfounded charge, whilst
all the time — as God only knew — another murderous
impulse had been at work in his heart.

God help me — if there is a God,' he thought,

as he sat with his head buried in his hands.
Who can say that I was not the indirect means
of hastening old Sir George's death ? I forgave
the old man at last, bnt I would have given a
deal — when it was too late — to know that no
letter o' mine had reached him before his fall.'

Sir Ralph had assured him on his deathbed
that he thought he had no cause to reproach
himself for the accident, and it was astonishing
how kindly disposed Reuben had felt since to
the whole Rashleigh family.

He even wished that Sir Ralph was alive that
he might go to him and pour out his woes.
He knew so little of law himself that he could not
anticipate his opponent's plan of arranging a
campaign against him. He was only determined
that this plot should be frustrated, and
his determination of bringing one of the greatest
rogues who had ever lived to justice gave
him for the moment an actual feeling of excitement
almost bordering on pleasure.

Yet, strong as his nervous system was, it had
been so shaken that, as the retreating footsteps
of the villains died away, he could almost

have been certain that the table on which he
was leaning his arms was reeling, the floor giving
way beneath him, and the walls advancing
as if to crush him.

It was a relief when the gong sounded for
dinner. Knowing how imprudent it would be
to disturb his father when the latter had retired
to his own apartment, Godfrey had not been
near him yet. The house was large, and it was
so difficult to know what was going on in one
part of it while he himself was occupied in another,
that he had contented himself With thinking,


It is a harassing day — and my father may
have important business of his own.'

But the family meal was somewhat more
formal than usual, the gaiety flat and forced.
And long afterwards Godfrey remembered how
he had been stick by an unusual expression
on his father's face — how the forehead seemed
to have become narrower — the lips closed in a
firm line which was apparent in spite of the
partial covering of the beard, and how the high
thin nostrils had sometimes quivered as if nth

repressed emotion. Yet Reuben tried to joke
in a tone of voice which was a little too highly
pitched in its attempt at being bright, and
which was quite out of keeping with his facial
despondency. He drank deeply of champagne,
and, if anything, seemed to be a trifle too jovial.
Some of the members of his committee, who had
been invited to dine with him, separated early,
as each had work in preparation for the morrow.
Godfrey went ont with one of them, and Reuben
strolled to the gate smoking a cigar.

When he was alone his look became serious,
and after hesitating for a moment he also went
outside the gates, and finding that the road was
clear sauntered up to the wall, and striking a
wax match examined it closely.

The chalk writing had been added to, and
beneath an inscription in large letters, ' Sailing
under false colours,' another and smaller one
had been added. Perhaps no one but himself
could have deciphered it — the hand-whiting was
so small, as if the coward who had written it
had shivered at the recollection of possible consequences.
But Reuben saw it clearly — it was

Murderer.' An artist of somewhat unpractised
talent had even depicted a miniature gallows,
and on it was a figure on which again was inscribed
' Slaughterer.'

The unknown seas of feeling and rage which
had been within him, rising in him, and threatening
to overwhelm him, made his pulse beat
again with unhealthy irregularity — his heart
giving rapid beats, and then seeming as if it
would stop.

'Am I mad?' he thought, as he passed his
hand rapidly over his eyes, disdaining to rub
away the atrocious lie which was recorded
on his own walls in the rough chalk.

It had been easy to doubt as to the coherence
of the 'mind-stuff' of such flabby personal
existences as those which Dick Baker and
Edgar Pierce had ruined by gambling and
drink ; easy enough for Reuben — had he not
been a professed materialist — to picture to
himself the possibility of such minds being
observed ' by evil denizens of the spiritual
world. Such men were either mad or possessed
by the devil, if there was a devil — an

alternative on which Reuben placed a mental
reserve. But he who had been ever temperate
till this night, and industrious according to
his lights, why should he be doomed to undergo
such tortures ?

It was as if an abyss had opened before
him and as if the kick which was suddenly
to overturn all his bricks had been brought
about by his own imprudence. Why had he
ever attracted attention to himself by entering
the political arena, for which, after all, he
was not fitted? He had a keen sense of
treachery to himself.

He did his best to restrain his ebullitions of
temper. But when the man-servant at ten
o'clock announced that Miss Rashleigh had
come, accompanied by her old housekeeper,
and had something important to tell him about
the morrow, he turned on him a face so
pale and agonised that the man asked, a little
curiously,

Are you ill, sir ? I can make an excuse for
the lady to come in the morning, if so be '

I'm not ill — any more than you are,' thundered

Reuben ; ' it's no business o' yours,' thus-making
a fresh enemy for himself.

In another minute Yere was in the room.
She visibly shrank from the meeting at so unaccustomed
an hour, and lost her compose, as
she exclaimed,

Mr. Sellwood — you will think it odd. But
they have been saying all sorts of cruel things
about you in the town. And — I— I — it would
be no business of mine — only you know how
you offered me a home — and how I cannot say
how much I thank you — 1 would trust you, if
no one else in the world were to trust you, I
know how good you can be — how you would
not allow an affront to be put on my uncle — -
and — when somebody came to me late to-night
and said that an old woman who is dying hasa
story to tell — and can clear up the mystery of
your birth — before — tomorrow — time is short,'
she added, energetically, but rather confusedly
With tears standing in her eyes. ' I — I came to
tell you — sit is important that you should go to
see this woman to-night.'

Impossible,' he answered. He spoke slowly,

almost sterile'. At that moment she seemed to
him not as a pleader, but as an inquisitor, who
had come with the curiosity of her sex to probe
the wound from which he was already suffering.

'Why impossible?' The tears in her eyes
were more impressive than her words, but her
voice was trembling. ' The woman may die —
every hour is of importance.'

Her weakness made him ashamed. He cared
much for this girl, whose sympathy had raised him
from previous despair. He still looked upon her
as his future daughter — the wife destined for his
son. By erasing himself, he hoped to make the
marriage more feasible.

I will tell you what I can tell no one else.
You have a right to my explanation. If I
seemed to speak abruptly — it is because I am
going away very soon. It does not matter tome
what people think about me — my birth or
anything else. I am sick of craving for notoriety,
for money, position, or anything else.'

Very soon T she asked, amazed. ' Isn't your
decision a strange one T

It is the result of a day's reflection.'

You do not mean '

I will tell yon frankly. I have got into so
queer a groove. I find so great a divergence between
the lives of ordinary people and my own
I crave so for rest — for escape into a different
air — that I have decided to leave this very night.'

No, no !' cried Vere, in alarm. ' Oh ! it is not
possible — it would be too dreadful — they will
put the very worst construction on your flight.'

He looked at her, and tried to smile. He did
not consider himself a coward. Indeed, it was
his intention to do his utmost to grapple with
what seemed to be a pitiless, inexorable fate.

I have ceased to care what people think.'

It made him more conscious of the jangled
dissonance in his own life, when he thought of
the sweet self-sacrifice and dutifulness of hers.
He had not done this thing, but as he looked
at her he became conscious of what it was to
bear about a silent court of justice ' in himself,'
to be an-signed as a prisoner at the bar, condemned
in other things by the judge and jury
of his own accusing conscience. He had
deliberately planned the misery of this girl's

family, and now on his own path to prosperity-was
the drawn sword and gleaming robe of the
avenger.

Sometimes,' he said, speaking half to her
and to himself, ' I have a feeling that it might
have been better for me never to have been
born.'

She came nearer to him and took his hand.

Mr. Sellwood, for the love of God, don't talk
like that I Go away — for ever, do you mean %
You are desperate and full of morbid fancies.
Shake them off — see this woman to-night — the
cloud which hangs over you now will be cleared
away.'

No, I was wrong to come back to the old
country — I was too rough for it. It would
have been wiser to buy another spade and a
rifle, and go back to some wilderness on the
other side o' the Atlantic'

She tried to answer him after his own fashion,
but he could not tell her that there was likely
to be a brand set on his name — a real dishonour
which he could never recover — and that he had
fancied once or twice, when he listened at the

back of the house, that he heard footsteps as
of men approaching to arrest hmi. A sort of
terror, which deprived him of his usual nerve
and good sense, had taken possession of him.

Again the scene came before his eyes, which
had always affected and haunted him, of a band
of rough men, principally young, but of different
nationalities — herded together for the discovery
of gold in a strange land, some of them ill from
the exhaustion of unusual exertions, and one—
a delicate Italian boy, unused to the vicissitudes
of climate, and but lately separated from his
mother. Reuben had protected and helped the
lad, but when Pierce, who was the leader of the
party, had suggested that each should take it
in turn to dive for the precious metal in an
abyss of water which seemed to some of them
like the gate of death, it had been easy to foresee
danger for the boy, who could neither swim
nor incur without foolhardiness the shock of the
icy chill. Reuben had tried in vain to dissuade
the lad, but when the poor fellow, goaded by
taunts, had allowed himself to be lowered by
cords into the stream, and was drawn up again

a, coi-ipse, he, as well as the others, had improvised
a hasty grave, and agreed to say nothing
about it. Such things were common enough at
a time and in a place where Lynch-law was
powerless to punish mistakes, and could only
inflict vengeance for deliberate crime.

But that the pitiful story should crop up
again, in a form which he in his wildest dreams
could never have anticipated, and be used as
means of extortion by men who would swear
away their own souls — if false-swearing could
bring them money — had nearly maddened him,
and deprived him of his usual power of thought.

Listen,' he said, ' Godfrey ^^dll be coming ;
it is too late for me to upset you by telling you
anything else now; but, if I leave to-night, I
should not like you to think badly of me. I
will write.'

I am not upset. Let your son go nth yon,
it will be better to tell him all about it, and to
take him to travel with you in the same train.'

She had risen to her feet as she said this, and
stood before him erect yet pleading.

You think I have taken leave of my senses —

that I want a keeper,' he said, with a shrug.
I daresay others will think so too. They will
shake their heads over me tomorrow, and
suppose that I have gone for a spree on the
Continent.'

Take some one,' she repeated.

Speak lower,' he said. ' We must not be
heard. My own son thinks badly enough of me
already. He is the last man in the world whom
I wish to know about this. I must trust you
not to tell him a word.'

She saw that there was nothing to be done
but to humour him. But not the less, when
she stood outside, did she rally herself by the
force of her character. Her hands were painfully
squeezing each other, but the forehead
was no longer drawn into distressful puckers.
She no longer felt as if she had lost herself, her
better self, and as if all this was a dream, in
which she was taking no active part. She had
made up her mind what to do.

CHAPTER Vii

Long after the household had retired to rest
that night, Reuben opened the drawers in his
study, and threw packets of letters into the fire.
His dog, as if it suspected something terrible,
was scratching at the door. He pushed it
gently into the room, shut the door on it, then
huddling his hat over his brows, and taking the
precaution to put on an old great-coat, pulling
the collar up to his ears, he crept out by the
back passage, which had been specially planned
by the architect of the house that the steward
might have interviews with the poorer people.

God help me, if there be a God,' he murmured
again, as he crept into the outer air.
The vague, unsatisfied craving after something

VOL. III. Q

beyond and without him, the gammer of instinct
which made him sometimes feel after the
work! in which he had said he had no belief, was
stronger than usual within him now. He looked
np at the starlit sky and wondered with a groan
how God could remember his soul amongst the
seething multitude of worlds. The verse in the
Psalms came back to his memory and he could
not even hope to be hidden in the darkness. It
was cowardly perhaps to hy, and more cowardly
to groan 'too late,' but his eyes seemed to
be opened to see the lost opportunities of a
wasted life.

He had determined to change clothes with a
working man to whom he had been kind, and
who would not betray his secret.

Meanwhile Yere, who suspected some strange
secret, and who had an earnest desire to sacrifice
herself in any way to help him, had been
also making her way through the slumberous
moors on this starlight night. It had been only
old Nancy's great fidelity which led her, as she
thought, at the risk of her life, to follow her
daring young mistress, as the latter plunged into

the night air, supposed by the old woman to
be charged with malarious mists fatal to the
young and the old. She had grumbled not a
little when, after along, Whispered conversation
'\^^th the village lad who had been engaged to
act as guide to them in their journey, Vere
had apparently [dismissed him, though at the
same time she took money from her pocket, and
seemed to be paying him extravagantly.

There was a touch of stubborn desperation
in the way in which her young lady said, in a
voice calm and clear,

This way, Nancy dear — he has told me whereto
go, through the wood and then over the stile
above, right on amongst the heather to Bill
Saxtens' — there is a poor old soul there who is
dying ; we must not wait till the morning, or she
may be dead.'

Dear heart alive,' protested Nancy, but just
then a dark cloud passed over the face of the
sky, and she shuddered, changing closer to the
soft hand which was caressing hers, as if to
give her the power to go on when her poor old
body was crushed and hip.

q2

Would you like it, Nancy clear, if you were
lying dying and I refused to come V

There was no answer to this appeal, and Vere
continued,

If you owed a person a great deal, would it
not be a cold and cruel injustice to repay his
generosity by deserting him just when the rest
of the world were beginning to give him up V

Meanwhile Yere was coaxing her companion
on, showing her how to place her feet so as to
avoid the difficult stones. But in spite of the
strength of her will her heart sometimes misgave
her, and it struck her with a sort of chill
to think of the horrible mistake she might have
made, and prejudiced Mr. Sellwood's interests
instead of helping them, by obeying the mysterious
summons which had been sent to her.
Vere was not a woman to reject a man utterly
on account of a criminal past, but for Godfrey's
sake she shuddered. Was it wise to challenge
an investigation of Reuben's past life from
Which he himself evidently shrank ?

The chilly feeling was growing stronger
every moment, and Yere's eyes Averse arrested the

moment she entered the cottage by the look of
ghastly horror in the face of the aged figm-e
which was lying on the bed. A figure Which
seemed to her at first to have little of the
semblance of life. The wrinkled, white-lipped
woman looked pale indeed, and the whiteness
of the hair added to the singular effect.

It was only when she came nearer to her
that Vere saw how the forehead was damp
with cold perspiration, and how the claw-like
hand was shaking more with strange excitement
than with fear. The sick woman even
made an effort as if to raise her head from the
pillow, and seemed to feel for something with
the other hand which she had concealed under
her pillow.

Yes, yes, Goody — it be right enough ; yew
shall give it to the teddy ; she du lev troubled
over it terrible,' said a woman who stood near
her. ' She be ninety year old, o' more,' she
whispered to Vere, ' an' some o' us think as she
be that queer in her head.'

It was evident enough, as these words were
uttered, that the figure could hear. For the

eyes, which had glittered as the only sign of
life, were distended again with the look of
horror which had struck Vere when at first she
had entered the room.

The few women who were gathered romid
the sick-bed, with the singular interest which
the poor invariably take in death, retreated as
if in fear, and Nancy clutched Vere's arm.

There be times when I thinks as she be a
witch. There she was a-mutterin' to herself
afore ye came, as she heard a voice, and snowed
as ye was cumin,' said the woman who spoke
before, apparently possessing more nerve than
the others, and bending over the dying woman
to shake up a pillow.

In the dark ages the poor creature Avould
have been bm-ned,' thought Vere, as a tender
feeling came into her face, and she set herself,
with her usual firmness, to the difficult task.

You have something to tell me V she asked,
bending over the unhappy creature, who was
making futile efforts to speak.

The encouraging, yet grave smile with which
Vere spoke seeded to abridge the struggle

somewhat. Yet it was some little while before
the silence was broken.

It is something on your conscience — yon feel
as if you cannot die without confessing it V
asked Yere, with a pathetic cadence in the true
ring of her voice which seemed to sth' some
hidden feeling in the dying woman, though as
yet there came no answer.

*Be it 'bout them babies, Elspeth, as you
were a-tellin' o' me? Now, didn't you dream
it all, Goody V asked the other woman, encouragingly.
' You said as how ye changed 'em,
didn't ye?'

Hold up your hand if you cannot answer,'
said Yere, trying to help, as another effort was
made for the failing breath, and a sort of wild
vindictiveness came into the white face.

Dhrame !' she said, in a harsh whisper. ' I
tell ye it were no thrace ! I changed the
blessed crater, and left him for a beggar's brat
as ^vwv my ain young teddy's. The cm-se o'
God ha' blasted me ever since, and yet I did it
for the right.'

Tell the teddy 'bout them names,' persevered

the other woman, while Vere listened with the
sick feeling caused by a new sort of dread,
and yet in ignorance as to whither these questions
tended.

My young teddy's — 'twas the heir. I heard
'em say — too late — as the title and all the property
wur his. He wur Sir George's eldest son.
His mother wur rightly wed ; here be the
Aveddin' lines.' And, with an effort of strength
such as the dying sometimes make, she tried
again to draw from beneath her pillow a leathern
parcel which she had worn attached by a
string to her neck.

Vere's mind had been instinctively casting
out feelers, as if for escape from a new perplexity,
during this conversation. So that at
times she scarcely heard the questions which
were asked by Bill Saxtens' wife, and her
thoughts were unconsciously veering to the
other question of whether the sharp lad whom
she had set to watch Reuben's movements
would be able to telegraph to her with the
assistance of the clerk at the office. But at the
sound of Sir George's name she began to give

her attention. Then this baby, whoever he
Alas, must have been a relation of hers. Ah I
that was it. Her uncle, her father's elder brother
by another marriage, said to have died

"when his mother died — and Her mind

could not follow. For a minute she was in a
state of expectant suspense, staring at Mrs.
Saxtens with a look of horrified inquiry.

The whole story, which began to dawn upon
her, seemed at first to be so ridiculously impossible
— so absurdly like that of the ' Claimant
' of newspaper renown, or of heroes of
penny dreadful — believed, by the people
who read such sensational romances, to have
been ' kep' out o' their OAvn ' by some wicked
scheming of usurping relations — that she had
much difficulty in believing it. Old-world and
childish m}i;hs of Perseus in his box on the
waters ; Romulus and Remus abandoned to
the tender mercies of a wolf, or of the she-bear
which was said to have looked after Paris,
floated before her memory. She remembered
that all the boys so got rid of turned out to be
rightful heirs when their presence was least expected,

and that the lesson— inculcated thousands
of years before— was that Fate was not
to be eluded nor prophecy unfulfilled.

To connect the matter-of-fact and nineteenth-century
Reuben with such a romance was somehow
so incongruous that, had it not been for
the solemn circumstances, she felt as if she must
have burst into hysterical laughter.

Poor young lady — it is too much for her,'
said Mrs. Saxtens, pityingly. ' It do hurt her to
hear o' this, and such a time o' meet I'

', The question is not whether it hurts me, but
whether it is true or not,' answered Vere, her
voice calm and clear as usual. * I see that this
bag contains a copy of the marriage certificate
of my uncle's first wife, and the birth certificate
of their child. The child was supposed to have
died — it was buried in due form.'

But the old 'oman changed the children herself
— she lev signed the writing afore you came,'
answered Saxtens, who seemed to be more reasonable
than the rest of the listeners, handing a
piece of paper, in which he himself had taken
down the confession, and to which the sick
woman had added her rough signature.

That 'beer parcel fell off the blessed child
when she changed its laughs,' added Saxtens'
wife — the dong woman being evidently
unable to say more, and suffering from that
physical exhaustion which often comes to make
the sting of death more bearable.

We must not distract her with questions
now,' was Yere's dominant thought. ' It is
not right that she should be worried any more
about this,' as Mrs. Saxtens rattled on.

She walked miles when she were not fit —
over ninety, as she be — leering' as how they
was insulting' Mr. Sellwood, by calling 'im base-born,
and his name not in the register. And,
ses I, " He'd best come, and leer it from her
own hips, and then— there's no saying — perhaps
hell behave it." '

Vere no longer heard her. She could not
spare time just then in considering a matter — of
which, after all, she knew little— of how far this
signed confession and the certificates in the
woman's possession would be important in a
court of law. She had fallen on her knees by
the bedside of the unhappy creative. The first
bewilderment which had confused her at the

unexpectedness of the revelation no longer
troubled lier for the next few minutes. Her
trust in God was too great to allow her to take
a despondent view of things, and the custom,
to which she had used herself from early years,
of looking out for her next duty and trying to
perform it, came to her assistance now, and
helped to clear her troubled thoughts.

Vere lingered in ]\lrs. Saxtens' cottage till all
was over, and the last sad offices had to be performed
for the quiet dead. As she left the
house, it was full daylight, and poor Nancy,
who had been napping at intervals during the
night, limped so slowly homewards as to cause
fm-ther delay, while her young mistress dared
not betray her impatience.

As they passed through the college, groups of
men were already tramping from various directions,
with scornful laughs on the lips of some
of them, and lowering; dismay on the faces of
others.

I axed thee a plain question, lad — giv' a
plain answer,' said a man, impatiently, to his

mate, as she passed. ' Be it true or not that
Mister Selhvood is not i' the place V

'Here's Joe here wants to know — wher the
swell is gone.'

Californy or Joosalum, for awt I cares,' answered
another, with a laugh.

'1 tell ye there is a plot against him —
anyhow, he's hoff — and there be chaps employed
a' ready to scour the country, right and
left to find 'im.'

Oh, it is too dreadful !' thought Yere, as she
hurried on. She was beginning to feel the
fatigue of the night's watch, and, with lips
parched and tongue dry, had a new horror of
impending disaster.

Mind how you tread — the path is slippery —
take care,' she said to old Nancy, to cover her
own confusion. ^ Pray come along,' she whispered,
as she took her arm.

And the two glided silently through the now
gathering crowd.

Henriette was waiting for them, though it was
but nine o'clock.

Where have you been f she asked, looking

at her cousin, who was paler than usual, with a
harassed expression of face, and covered with
dust. And then, not waiting to be answered,
she added, ' I suppose you have been helping in
the search for jMr. Sell wood ? His servants gave
the alarm, they say, as early as six o'clock. His
bed hasn't been slept in, and they think he has
made away with himself. And as to Godfrey,
he is enlisting the services of all sorts of people
who are scouring the country, and hunting
the copses and ditches V

How can I answer so many questions when
you pour them out upon me at once — even
supposing 1 knew,' said Yere, hopelessly.

There was something in Henriette's manner
which alarmed her — as if the girl were tired of
playing the child, and lead determined to take
a stand of her own which she had never taken
before.

Why didn't you tell me you were engaged
to Godfrey Sellwood?' she asked, suddenly.
Many things might have been different, if you
had told me that.'

I could not tell you what was not true.'

*Do Toil mean to say you were not engaged
to him ?'

I offered myself to him once. He refused
me. What more would you have me tell ?'

I suppose it is all a mistake — a queer mistake.
Mrs. austin told me that you two cared
for each other. 1 thought it was somebody
else, but certainly Godfrey Sell wood used
to linger about here in an unaccountable
manner.'

To flirt sith you,' said Vere, with a smile.

'No. YOU are wrong; there. I soon found out
he didn't care for me, and I like him much better
as a future husband for you.'

A new light began to dawn upon Yere.
Mrs. Austin had probably managed all this, and
had plotted to have Henriette at her house that
she might practise her usual skilful diplomacy.
It was kind of her, but Yere rather resented such
interference.

After all, he had a good reason for not asking
anybody to marry him. It would have
killed any woman to hear the things Ydiich they
say of his father.'

Henriette, I cannot stay and listen to such
talk. Who cares about the things? Saying
them will not prove them.'

Then it is worse than I thought,' said the
impressionable Henriette. 'Promise me you
will not marry him. I should like anything to
make a change in my life. But you — you are
old-fashioned enough sometimes, with odd ideas
about things , but good and noble for all that.

Why, I shouldn't ' And Henri ette^s varying

face was now laden with a look of resolution
and prophetic woe.

Nonsense, child — all this excitement is too
much for you. You are not going to drop
people who were so much to you yesterday,
just because there is a little gossiping about
them to-day. Let me give you some coffee,
and then I can hire a fly to take you back to
Mrs. Austin's. She Avill amuse you better than
I can. I am terribly tired.'

An hour afterwards Vere was alone, and the
telegram which she had expected was put into
her hand. The message was explicit enough,
and even in the midst of her sorrow she felt a

little triumphant to think that young Mitchell
had not been taught at the night-school, ^vhich
she herself had started, for nothing. The telegram
stated that he had followed Mr. S. to
Liverpool, and found that he had taken passage
in a ship which did not sail till that night for
America.

After this she dressed herself' neatly, taking
the precaution to carry warm wraps on her
arms and to hide her face in a thick gauze veil.

In a bed-room above, old Nancy was sleeping
quietly, and Yere trod so softly that she could
not be disturbed. In the kitchen below another
servant — a middle-aged Avoman who had
often been assisted by her young mistress in the
preparation of difficult dishes during Sir Ralph's
invahdism — was busy preparing the usual
middle-day meal. She was too well used to
Miss Rashleigh's superintendence of all that
concerned the Welfare of the household to be
startled when the latter opened the door. But
she stared a little when Yere said, with paled
face and decided manner,

Jane, a relation of mine is in distress — per-vol.

III. R

laps in danger of his life. I have made up my
mind to go at once to Liverpool to look after
him. It will not do for me to go alone, but I
have counted on your readiness to go with me.
We shall probably return again tomorrow.
Can you oblige me by getting ready at once V

Law, yes, miss,' said the somewhat disconcerted
Jane. ' I've never been so far, as I knows
of, in my life-time — but if so be as you must go
herself — why, it stands to razor as yer can't go
alone.'

Vere, who was accustomed to being obeyed,
had won the woman's heart by the constant
and benevolent interest which she took in the
happiness of her servants. And yet it was
evident that Jane got ready unwillingly. She
was one of the people who are suspicious of
everything new, and who believe that old
arrangements are in no need of reformation.

She was sufficiently slow in preparing for
the journey to leave time for her mistress to
write letters which she had determined to
write.

The first was to her cousin Henri este.

'Do not think it strange if I did not tell you
this morning. I shall probably be back again
before you have time to miss me. I ^as afraid
you Should be nervous about me, or that you
would argTie and try to deter me from my purpose.
I find that duty compels me to go at
once to Liverpool. Prepare yom-self for a
piece of very startling news. I have every
reason to believe that your father's and my
father's elder brother is still having, and that he
has been gi-nervously wronged all his lifetime.
If the information which I have is con-sect, he is
the man who has passed by the name of Reuben
Sellwood. It is wonderful to me to think how
he has conquered circumstances, considering
that he never benefited by the education which
all the rest of us received, and which, as a "rise
man used to say, begins from the day that '•' the
infant is something more than a mere animated
vegetable." There is a craze about heredity in
the present day, but I think we have no reason
to be ashamed of our uncle '

Here Yere waited, balancing her pen in her
hand.

K 2

She had been intending to add, ' remembering
that the characteristics of the vegetable are the
same, though its development may be altered.'
But there was no occasion to discuss this opinion
with Henriette, who could certainly not in
the least understand her. It was better to add,

His vulgarity has been on the surface ; I
have never considered him to be really vulgar
at heart, and, as to the things they say about
him, I am certain that they are not true. Yet
he is the victim of a vile conspiracy, and, if I do
not seek him out and try to help him, it may be
too late. I have a feeling that my grandfather
and your father would urge me to do so ; that
conviction is so strong that I dare not disobey
it. There is no occasion to confide in Mrs.
Austin — yet. She knows the world better than
I do, and it will be time enough for her to
advise me as to what is best to be done when I
can tell her the whole story more correctly.'

To Godfrey she wrote,

Your father is at Liverpool. He is hoping
to preserve a disguise which he has assumed
with the intention of protecting himself against

men who have plotted to ruin him. I know
now that he is my uncle, and that there should
be really no necessity for constraint between
us. As soon as I can I will put an end to the
mystery, which I hope to do with your help. I
seem to have known it more or less for years,
though I could never speak to anyone about it.
There was a sort of likeness to my father and
grandfather, more in complexion than in feature,
which at times seemed inexplicable to me,
especially of late years when he became by
degrees gentler in speech, more quiet in his
manner, and more tender in his treatment of
women.

He told me once that I had done him good,
and that he was proud of my devotion to
him. Need I say that I also am proud and
thankful to him for his goodness to me ? I can
tell you no more now than that he is labouring
under a cruelly unjust accusation, that he is
determined to disprove it, and that he is hoping
to meet men in the States who may being evidence
to do so. I should like to tell him the
truth before he starts.'

Her pen hesitated here. Was it necessary
for her to say more of her future intentions ?
If there was no need for constraint with Godfrey's
father, there was reason for keeping Godfrey
himself at a distance. Yet she wished to
bring father and son together, and added, after
short reflection,

I cannot let my poor uncle be tempted to
anything desperate. The ship will not wait
while we are deliberating, and it is my desire,
at least, to get a few words with him to soothe
and quiet him, should no one else come to his
assistance. But you surely will not let him sail
alone. It is my conviction that he needs someone
with him, to keep him from the determination
to elude us all, or even from suicidal tendencies.
I can tell you no more now than that
he has been cruelly treated.'

CHAPTER IX.

Although the two women started by an early
train, it was late in the afternoon before they
reached their destination, and the evening was
already drawing in before they took the final
step, after obtaining the necessary leave, of
going on board the Berkeley Castle. The lateness
of the hour was in itself unfortunate for
Vere's pui-pose, but it was still more unfortunate
that she was possessed of no clue which
would have helped her to identify her uncle.
She had been prepared for the fact that he had
assumed a disguise — the boy had told her so
much. But she had forgotten that he would
probably change his name, and had not guessed
that he would embark as a steerage passenger.

In the confusion and loiistle on board the
ship, with sorrowful leave-takings in the deepening
twilight, it was not likely that Vere's
perplexity would attract much attention.
Rough sailors pushed past her, canning bales
and boxes, and those whom she questioned
turned away their eyes impatiently, after the
truth had once been ascertained that there was
no Mr. Sell wood among the passengers.

Jenny was worse than useless. The journey
had already unhinged her, and now the sight
of the dark masses of seething water, which
intervened between herself and the glimmering
lamps that had just been lit on shore — with the
ghostly look of the tall masts of the shadowy
vessel, and the dread of becoming entangled in
the ropes which seemed to be like live things to
catch people's feet — increased her bewilderment
and dismay.

On the deck people and things had become
difficult to distinguish. The tragedies which
were being enacted were veiled by the merciful
dusk. Yet the hand-clasps, the tearful farewells,
and the look of desolation on some of the faces as

they tore themselves a^\'ay from the ' okl familiar
scenes' and endeavoured to say a cain
good-bye to friends whom they might never
meet again on earth, were all en crossing to
those who took part in them. None of the
crew had a thought to give to the affairs of
disconsolate strangers. Yere and her companion
remained unnoticed, with no one to
warn them that they incited a risk of being-forgotten,
as Miss Rashleigh suggested at last to
her maid that it would be better to make some
inquiry as to the names of those in the cabins to
which a few of the passengers had already
retired for rest.

A bell rang as they were creeping back
again, disappointed, up the companion ladder.
But though Yere quickened her footsteps, saying,
' I suppose we must give it up — it is useless
to search for him any more,' she had never
thought it possible that the boatmen — to whom
she had given explicit directions, and who were
now hurrying the strangers with scant courtesy
into the boats — would think of pushing off without
her. And Jenny, whose nervousness had

increased, and whose fears of being separated
from her young mistress were now added to her
renewed horror of being entangled in the ropes
or struck by the boxes, proved to be a greater
hindrance than ever to all rapid movement.

If Mr. Godfrey had bin 'beer — it might ha' bin
different,' muttered the woman, discontentedly,
as she found herself wedged for a moment in
the crowd, close to another woman, with a baby,
which she was afraid of hurting.

Yes, if we had had a gentleman it would
have been better,' admitted Yere, who was
unable to confide to a servant that she herself
was sore at heart on account of young Mr.
Sellwood's unaccountable tardiness in obeying
the summons of her telegram, and feeling
at the same time how very much she preferred
not ha^ang been obliged to travel by
the same train with him. She had been aware
of this duality in her mind concerning him in
past days, and reproached herself for her old inconsistency
of feeling.

If he had come by the next train, as I
thought he would, I should have been able to

tell him at once that we have lost the clue.
But, if he had meant to come, he ought to have
been here by this time — as it is, he Avill just
miss ; and who can tell whether my worst fears
may not be realised?' she thought to herself,
sadly.

Just at that moment a lantern, which was
held by one of the ship's crew, flashed upon the
faces of the people who were near her, and she
no longer heard the voices calling or attended
to the movements of the crowd. Jane — who
was watching her mistress closely, with the
increasing and not unfounded fear of being
separated from her — could not tell why Miss
Rashleigh held unaccountably back, while others
pushed forward. There was nothing starting
to the maid in the appearance of an old, close-shaven
man, wearing a coarse serge suit, and
with a sealskin cap pushed so closely over his
brows as almost to hide his eyes. But Vere was
saying to herself,

If I had not heard the story of his birth
before, I must have known him by the likeness
now. Surely he must see it himself when he

looks in the glass — the likeness of the lines of
the mouth and chin to my uncle Ralph — only
Diis mouth was weaker, and — to the pictures of
my father.'

She tried to reach the man who seemed to
wish to elude her, uttering a sudden exclamation
as she tore the veil from her face. But as
she did so he disappeared. Could it be possible
that Reuben Sellwood had hidden himself from
her intentionally ; that he did not A^^sh to be
followed even by his son ; that he intended to
preserve his disguise and perhaps to deny his
identity? Had she allowed her impulses to
mislead her in trying to help him in his difficulty,
and in supposing that circumstances were
altered because he was so closely related to her?

Before Vere had time to answer these questions
which crowded into her mind, a new sort of
fright assailed her. The decks were suddenly
clearer. There was no longer the sound of the
bell. Could it be possible that the boats which
had been a few minutes before alongside were
already full, and had started without her? She
strained her eyes to see over the intervening

space of water, which had rapidly risen during
the last quarter of an horn, and which had been
for some time thronged with small boats. At
the same moment a new horror that the ship
was mooring came upon her confusedly, and
made her cry to one of the men who seemed
most likely to gwe assistance,

Stop the boat — stop it — we shall be left
behind.'

Lor miss was the answer, ' there's no more
boats going now. They've already weighed
anchor.'

'What could I have been thinking of?' cried
Yere, in self-reproach. ' Surely it is not too late
they ^vill send another boat.'

The men only shook their heads, while Jane,
in whom the seeds of rebellion had been developing
for some time, and who would have
needed some much slighter provocation to make
her lose the little self-control which remained to
her, rushed wildly to the ship's side, flourishing
first of all her pocket-handkerchief, and then her
shawl. Finally — discovering that all her efforts
and screams for assistance were of no avail —

she collapsed in a hysterical fit, to the amusement
of some of the sailors, and the pitying
perplexity of a few of the passengers.

Meanwhile the captain, whom Vere had
sought, remained inflexible to all entreaty. The
wind was high, and as the ship sailed majestically
out of the harbors the white surf could be
seen in the ' glimpses of the moon,' and Vere
could understand the difficulty there would
have been in putting back. There were some
humiliations for her to bear — one of the worst
being the way in which Jane took the misadventure.
But even the fussy lamentations of
the latter were not without their advantages, as
these were the means of attracting the attention
of sympathetic people. One of the kindest
among the women proffered assistance. She
was a Avidow with several children journeying
to the States, and she pressed on Miss Rashleigh's
acceptance a berth in her cabin. Others
made no difficulty in providing for the still
sobbing Jane, or in offering changes of clothing
till the vessel should stop at some port.

'Ain't as large as most o' the regular passes

explained voce of the more confidential
of the crew ; ' there ain't much accommodation,
and cape, he's already been put about by that
beer boat which put off from the 'arbour when
the ship was already starting.'

Ay, a foolhardy gentleman — must have paid
heavy fees to the boatmen ; they rowed with a
will to catch the steamer, and he up the side o'
the ship, and in in a jifTey, while the bell was
a-ringing, t'other folks going off, and the captain
swearing that he'd take no one else in.'

Time and tide wait for no one,' commented
the first speaker, with a shake of the head, ashe
looked at Miss Kashleigh ; and, from the
further remarks which were made, Yere had no
difficulty in gathering that Godfrey Sellwood
must have arrived, after all, just at the time
when she herself had been absent from the
deck, and that he was probably now doing his
utmost to search for his father.

Her unwillingness to inflict her own trouble
upon him made her more ready to accept the
offer of the lady, who seemed really to require
assistance with her children. But on the following

morning, as she stood looking a little
hopelessly at the expanse of rushing and receding
waves, she was startled by the sound of
Godfrey's voice. There seemed to be a sort of
gladness in it which he was unable to conceal,
as — having heard some of the other passengers
making themselves merry at the accident which
had befallen two unprotected females — he had
hastened to try to make her see the bright side
of the apparent disaster.

You know you used to say you would like a
sea-voyage, and that you wished to see America.
I am sure you will go with us all the way,' he
said, as they talked together of their plans, and
of what was best to be done in the case of Reuben
continuing to avoid his son.

I stayed at Torringmoor till the middle of
the day to save appearances. By that time we
could tell pretty well which way the poll was
going, matters, of course, being entirely altered
when my father's name was withdrawn from
the contest.'

That in itself was a bitter disappointment to
him.'

Godfrey answered by explaining his own
theory that the rapid succession of untoward
events had been too much for his father's brain,
and that if Reuben was suffering, as he feared
he might be, from some transient affection of
the nervous system, it would be best to humour
him in maintaining his disguise, winning his
confidence by degrees, and then telling him
Vere's story.

In accordance with this plan, the two tried to
avoid the appearance of seeming to watch the
fugitive, and indeed kept aloof to a certain
extent from each other.

The fact that Reuben was said to be suffering
from headache, and seldom showed himself
tiU the darkness came on, even on the steerage
part of the deck, seemed to favour Godfrey's
hypothesis that his father was ill, or, at least,
that he had good reasons for wishing to preserve
his privacy. So that, with the exception
of a sympathetic glance at the beardless face —
which was at first a little difficult to recognise,
with the hair shaven off so that it was easy to
see in the fines of the chin and mouth, as well

VOL. III. S

as in those of the somewhat high-bridged nose,
the likeness which Vere's quick eye had detected
— the son passed him in respectful silence.
He had sent letters to his father assuring him
of his deference to his wishes, and of his readiness
to observe the line of conduct indicated by
him ; but as yet he had received no answer.

So days passed, and the Berkeley Castle
ploughed its way over the waves on its voyage
to America. The passage had been so far a
rough one, and several of the ladies had been
confined to their cabins since the shores of
England had receded from view. But a few,
who seemed to rejoice in the freshness of the
wind and a sight of the big waves, remained
continually on deck. Among them was Vere,
who laughed at herself in the character of an
interloper, and who had written to Mrs. Austin
an amusing account of her somewhat awkward
adventure. She had managed to make friends
with most of the mothers who had children onboard,
and occupied herself with taking care of
the little ones when most of the mothers were
incapacitated.

After a time the wind seemed somewhat to
abate. The sea was dark and oily, with glimmers
here and there of phosphorescent light.
The ship still pitched a little, but the waves
were shorter, and no longer broke in coils of
spray which were shattered by the wind, whilst
as the evenings drew on the sky was thick
with stars.

It is a good thing to be able to talk a little
without roaring as if through a speaking-trumpet,'
said Godfrey's voice one evening.

I have been blaming myself for sending you
that telegram. Why did you attempt to reach
the ship, after the signal had been given her to
start, and when the night was so dark? I
have heard the people here say it was at the
risk of your life, ' answered Vere, remorsefully.



I assure you there was no danger in it. And
if there had been could I have done less?
You cannot conceive the agony I suffered when
I knew that you were exposing yourself for my
father's sake, and that I had been left at homes

2

like a milksop doing nothing. The thing was
impossible

She was silent. There had been moments
when she was vexed with herself for having
come on this errand of mercy at all. Would she
not have done the same for any of her follower
features who were in trouble or in danger, but
did not Godfrey hint plainly that he had
thought a good deal not only of his father
but of her being in the ship ? He was evidently
pleased that she had not returned
and was it not possible that he attributed the
motive to her which would probably be attributed
by the world in general, and against which she
had already been attempting to guard herself
by writing a letter to Henriette as well as that
to Mrs. Austin which she intended to post on
the first occasion, and in which she entreated
her cousin to tell the whole truth at Torring-
moor, as nothing was so conducive to ill-natured
gossip as telling half-truths which could
be misconstrued. Everything about the supposed
Reuben Sellwood's real parentage, and
Godfrey's claim without any purchase to the

property, must come to the sm-face now — the
sooner the better. Yet Vere reproached herself
for tbinkmg so continually of what was best for
Godfrey, when she could not be sure that he
thought about her. The juxtaposition into
which they were now sometimes thrown made
it difficult for her to exclude him from her
mind.

You try to keep me at arm's length, as my
poor father keeps us both. I know that I
have no longer light to come near you, now
that his honour and mine may be inseparably
stained.'

'Don't say that,' she cried a little impetuously.
Whatever your father may have done, it cannot
affect you.'

The world thinks differently.'

'Never mind the world. Besides, it is my
opinion you may be proud of your father. He
is scared at present, as if some terrific calamity
were really overhanging him, and he is determined
to avert it. If his education had always
been like yours, and he understood more about
these things, he would treat these villains

with the disdain nth which they ought to be
treated.'

You may read something which I cannot
unravel,' he said, a Httle sadly, ' shallow people
may misjudge him, but you were never
shallow.'

Had he yielded to his feelings he would
have liked to have taken her hand in his
tender clasp, and blessed her for her goodness
to his unhappy father. He could only thank
her through the unsympathetic vehicle of the
eyes.

There is nothing so wrong as you think,'
she said, presently. ' I wish 1 could help you.
You have already heard the woman Elspeth's
story and I have given you the proofs. The
neighbours are ready to bear witness to the
fact that she was your father's nurse.'

The story doesn't so very much matter, but
it wants the connecting links, and outsiders, you
know, may discredit it on account of the advanced
age of the witness. When women are over
ninety and the memory is weak '

He did not finish the sentence, and she made
no direct reply. Something held her back and
made it impossible.

To tell the truth, I should not care at all
about proving it. I have so used myself to the
idea of belonging to the people — and — there is
something about which I care so very much
more that all other things dwindle into insignificance
beside it.'

He stopped, but she did not help him. If she
cared for him at all, if her indifferent manner
concealed a secret feeling, he could have no
suspicion of it. Yet it is strange what fancies
get into one's head when one is heart-sick.
And as his watchful, anxious eyes were fixed on
her, keen with the instinct of love, he saw, faint
as the light was, her face pale and her eyes
wet with some new emotion.

Did you not guess that one of the reasons
why I came home again was because of you?'
he cried, With sudden passion in his voice.
Why should we prevaricate ^\ith each other ?
You may not want any new interests — you may

take life as it is — and be content with all the
kind acts which you perform for others. But I ?
My heart has cried out to you in the exile of all
these years.'

Don't speak of that,' she said, piteously. ' 1
don't know quite what you mean. If you were
in exile, it was I who was to blame for it. 1 ask
your pardon. I did what I thought was my
duty then. I suppose we have most of us done
what is wrong in our lifetime, and I ought
not to have arrogated to myself the right
of '

She was going to add, ' Of interfering — even
though I felt that I should lower myself by
consenting to have anything to do with such a
compact.'

But it did not seem possible to refer to the
past mistake, especially T\dth the remembrance
that the man who had planned it was at this
time broken down himself, and that he had
taken refuge in flight rather than face a
scandal.

It was not your fault — it was only you' misfortune
— don't trouble over it any more,' Godfrey

entreated. For at that moment the fear of
his father's guilt seemed to be lowering on him
from the sky, and the stains on his horizon made
him afraid to look at the pine, clear stars which
gazed down on him like severe eyes, and made
the remembrance of that time of penance in
London seem comparatively light.

I do not know why you talk of such things
now,' she said, with her old sadness stealing
over her. ' You had a great deal to go through
then — and now you have this mystery to solve
about your father's birth — and the trouble about
his losing that election — you seem to forget
about all these minor things, though you attach
too much importance to the scandal they raised
about him. I don't know, after all, what you
really care for.'

I care for nothing but you,' he said, in a voice
she never forgot, and which left her no more room
for doubt. She started at the sound of it. Her
first impulse was to quicken her pace to the
-other side of the ship where some of the passengers
were walking. Her next to stand still and
rally her dignity. The announcement was surprising

for a variety of reasons, and she could
not keep the sarcasm out of her voice, as she
said, with an attempt at speaking lightly,

How long have you found that out V

Ever since you sent me from you. It was
my fault to go on hoping, though you gave meno
hope.'

You have been very silent.'

'My silence was deliberate. I wished to
know if you had remained unchanged. I had
based such hopes upon '

Don't hope at all,' she answered, thinking of
Henriette, so that the answer was given proudly,
with her eyebrows drawn together.

He bowed and made way for her as she walked
quickly away from him towards the cabin.

Mute and appealing he sat, half stunned
and blinded, his reason refusing to take-in the
reality of her decision.

I never dreamt of love, but for one woman,
and she has cast me off,' he said to himself, in a
slow, uncertain way, which made him notice, as
in a dream, the change in the weather.

The sea, which had been heavy for days, was

becoming more and more still. The stars were
now completely veiled in a canopy of cloiidj and
a dense, impenetrable fog, making it difficult to
see eight or ten yards ahead, was enveloping
even the ship's company in a darkness which
might be felt.

'I don't like the look of the weather,' the
captain observed to some one, unconscious of a
listener. It was impossible for Godfrey to see that
the other man was his father, but he recognised
the voice in a conversation which followed, and
in which Reuben, as usual, showed his practical
foresight.

If he is in trouble, I have a right to share it
with him,' he thought, with a hah'-foiTaed intention
of getting up from the seat on which he
had hidden himself, and endeavouring, under
cover of this darkness, to force some explanation
from the father who eluded him.

Meanwhile, in the cabin — which she shared
with the lady dio was going out to the States
to rejoin her husband — Vere was endeavouring,
as usual, to assist with the children.

There are plenty of other things for a woman

to do besides marrying. I have a perfect
right to decide on never marrying, if it suits me.
Of course I can never many any other man
but Godfrey. But Henriette fancies him, though
she pretends that she does not,' she was thinking
to herself, as she attempted to calm
the peevish infant, whose mother — but just recovered
from the agonies of sea-sickness, and
delighting in the change of weather — was
sitting up for the first time, looking rather
helpless.

Surely it was a lapse from her usual consistency
for her to think for a moment of veering
from the plan which, in her strict sense
of duty, she had marked out for herself. And
yet, to see a strong man in such evident pain
had been agonizing to her. It was all most
perplexing, the more so that a voice within
seemed to say to her,

Beware, if you deaden human love ; the
divine may no longer be able to exist.'

It was perhaps a morbid fancy, but she began
to feel as if she had treated Godfrey badly.
She had reasoned perhaps from false premises.

Henriette might have flirted with him. It was
characteristic of that little school-girl to be very
Cavilling, like another Miranda, to open her heart,
in simplicity, to the first Ferdinand that came.
But if the flirting had been on one side, after
all, could Yere do better than commit herself
to the loyalty of the man who had loved her
so long and faithfully ?

When the baby slept at last, she lay down
in her berth, but not to sleep. Her thoughts
were occupied With anxiety as to what was
best to be done about Eeuben. For, though
she possessed much of that spiritual alchemy
by which a heart that is accustomed to rest
on God can transmute even its own troubles
into joy, the troubles of others pressed hardly
on her.

'I cannot force him to speak to me against
his will. That would be unwomanly,' she
thought, a little sadly. ' His is a mind to
hold on tightly to anything which he has
undertaken.'

She had not the faintest conception of what
Godfrey could mean by hinting that his father

would not be proud to have it proved that his
had ever been the title by right, and that he
had been the elder and legitimate son of her
grandfather — and another George Rashleigh.
That some other sad story was weighing on his
mind, not associated with this mystery of Een-
ben's birth— a story which he would willingly
let sleep, and the recollection of which sometimes
would cleave its way like a lightning
flash to his poor heart — was suddenly remembered
by her, and for the first time she saw
that she had possibly been guilty of imprudence,
if not of self-will, in undertaking to
help the man whom she supposed to be her
uncle.

She who thought of personal human life as
of the development of the soul, and who believed
in dormant forces for purification, leading
to strenuous efforts after good — such as she
hoped had been lately roused in Reuben's
nature — thought very tenderly of him, making
excuses for his new and shamefaced desire to
keep out of notice, as she lay musing in her
wakefulness. That a character should be

stinted to its depths, the real ore sifted and
discovered in the hope of final deliverance
from evil, vas, according to her way of thinking,
one of the best things which could happen,
by whatever means, in the moral evolution
of a human being.

After all, he cannot hold out long,' she
reflected. ' He will be sure, sooner or later,
to speak to Godfrey.'

She had always felt that the love which this
rough man had for his son, however it might
have been warped for the gi-ratification of his
own selfish desires, was still love, and as such
ennobling.

He loves Godfrey still — he will not avoid
him long — it is only a shame-faced pride, and a
sort of stunned feeling which makes him keep out
of his way now,' she reflected further. ' I do not
believe in that theory about the weakening of
the brain. At any rate, Godfrey's father seems
to have made friends with the capta — perhaps
because it was not possible for him to avoid hin
without exciting notice.'

Although she did not know it, the mutual

reserve which had so often been unfortunately
kept np between the father and the son was
being conquered that very night, when in close
converse together Reuben and Godfrey were
helping the captain to keep a careful look-out
on deck. There seemed to be no need to
apprehend danger, for Captain Herrick, who appeared
to be fully equal to the emergency, had
decided that under the present circumstances it
would be better not to attempt to make headway,
but to reduce speed from eleven knots
to a pace which was slow. There seemed to belittle
for any who were milling to help to do.
For Mr. Herrick and his second officer were
themselves on the bridge, and the pilot in
charge was also looking out. Vere, who was
lying sleepless below, wondered at the sound of
bells which from time to time resounded in the
darkness, blended with other sounds which she
did not know to be fog-horns. Then suddenly
a low rumbling, as of a vessel approaching, was
heard. And peeping through the port-hole,
which was close to her sleeping-berth, she saw
something dark looming out of the fog, moving

quickly through the water. She lay dovrn
a gam in an instant, and then a tremendous
shock, upsetting everything in the cabin, and
followed by a splashing of water, was followed
by a cry from the ten-ivied mother — something
like she had fancied a woman's cry might be if
she were shot through the heart. It was reechoed
as soon as uttered by wails of distress,
and other cries as piteous, from the other and
larger cabin, and again that temple rushing of
water.

Vere was up in a moment, seizing two of the
children. Fortunately the desire to minister to
these little ones, whose mother was often so
unable to help them, had caused her to
foiTQ the habit of being provided with her
dressing-gown. She wrapped herself in it
now.

The lower part of the cabin was already wet
with the water.

Corn-age ! we are in God's hands. Take the
baby and follow me,' she said, almost sternly, to
the mother, whose sense of the present danger
seemed to be numbing her faculties.

VOL. III. T

At the same time she heard Godfrey's voice.
He cried,

Is it all right below ? Have yon spnmg a
leak V helping her and her terror-stricken fellow-passenger
with a coolness of decision which left
no time for further questioning.

The scene on deck was one of terrible confusion.
Some of the lady passengers who had
been aroused from sleep, with no time to put on
warmer clothing, were rushing backwards
and forwards wildly imploring help, whilst
others retained more of their presence of mind,
and some of the more active of the men — Reuben's
figure conspicuous in the emergency —
were endeavouring to marshal them into appointed
places. Vere did not require to be told
that there had been a tremendous collision, and
that the bow of a formidable steamer, which
was still looming through the darkness, had
pierced the side of the ' Berkeley Castle,' which
had already heeled half over, laying her bulwark
and port close down to the water. Nor
did it seem as if the commander of the other
steamer would be able to render much assistance,

for the ship had rebounded from the violence of
the shock, and could be but faintly seen through
the fog. Lifebelts and other appliances were
being served out — the boats swung on the
davies, and every preparation made for getting
them lowered with safety.

Meanwhile the emergency was more critical
than had at first been expected, The vessel
sank lower in the water, and Godfrey — who by
Vere's request had put the frightened mother and
her little ones, with Jane and others of the passengers
and crew, into the first boat which was
pushed off — turned in anxiety to her.

The fog was by this time beginning to lift,
and the east was touched with the splendor* of
the rising sun, revealing the full horror of the
situation. Some of the crew had abbacy climbed
the rigging and, "smith faces ghastly in their pallor,
were calmly awaiting the result, while two
of the officers with others of the crew were
putting on their life-belts, and preparing to take
to the water.

Meanwhile the purser and the steward, nth
some of the passengers to help him, among

t2

whom the Ellwood were conspicuous, had
been assisting most of the women into other
boats, one of which was whirled away in the
darkness, and one was in considerable danger of
being capsized as it Alas crowded by men who-jumped
into it without orders.

The last boat was now ready to be lowered.
Godfrey looked at Vere who had held back till
now, whilst others were pushing forward, but
who was now deadly pale with her lips blue
and trembling, though she tried to take the most
cheerful view of the situation.

There is not a minute to lose,' he said, in a
choking voice ; ' they helped your maid down the
ladder, but now you must jump to save your
life.'

Where is your father V she asked, looking
round.

I will see to my father afterwards. Thank
Heaven he is a good swimmer. I saw him a
few minutes ago, more active than anyone in
assisting the helpless. There is no one who
knows better how to meet these emergencies,
for no one has weathered more dangers than he

has in his past life. You mil do him no good
if YOU stay to search for him, and 'it may be too
late to save yom-self,' he answered, with the
huskiness of voice which grated on her ear.

I came to take care of him,' she repeated, a
Httle obstinately, straining her brave eyes for
Reuben. ' God who has helped me hitherto Avill
spare us. I am not afraid.'

Quickly now — there is no time to be lost —
you must do as I tell you,' he cried, almost passionately,
as, grasping her, he lifted her off her
feet. ' Steady there, lads, the lady first,' he
called, as he lifted her, and the men standing at
the bow of the boat caught her as, yielding to
his instructions, she let herself fall from his
arms into those outstretched to receive her.

He had intended to wait, and make another
effort to save his father. But at that moment a
whiff of wind caught the sinking ship, and
hastened its fate. And a little exclamation of
pain from Yere, who had grazed her side in her
descent against one of the timbers of the sinking
vessel, made further calculation impossible.
He flung himself to her assistance and helped

to push off the boat, which was not more than
two lengths from the steamer when the ship
sank suddenly by the stern and disappeared.

A voice sang ont ' Good-bye ' as the vessel
went down. It was the voice of Eeuben, who
was clinging to some of the lower part of the
rigging. A terrible dread shot through Godfrey's
heart. But a few minutes before, when
he had seen his father coolly giving orders to
some of the more bewildered of the passengers,
he had counted on his presence of mind todo
the best for himself. Now, as he waved his
hand, and said ' good-bye,' a sick fear occurred
to him that Reuben — in his weariness of life,
his unwillingness to face the future, and his aching
feeling of the irksomeness of it all — might
be glad to escape not only to America, but out
of the difficulties of life altogether.

The other occupants of the boat thought that
Godfrey was beside himself as— shouting in
answer, *It is not good-bye. Hold on till I
come to help you,' — he flung himself into the
water just after the ship had gone doT\m.

Amongst all the thrilling incidents of that
dreadful morning there was none more pathetic
than the story of the son who had risked his
life to save his father. When the passengers in
the boats had been received into the other
steamer, and when successful efforts had been
made to pick up others of the crew — who had
been found floating about, having seized hold
of any wi-eckage or spar which was at hand —
the two men were descried clinging to the boat
which was bottom upwards, and which had been
overturned in the hasty efforts made to load itt
then appeared that the older man's power of
swimming had deserted him. He had been
struck by some portion of the rigging, and, had
not Godfrey managed to support him in the
water till the boat was reached, he must inevitably
have gone down with the few who had
been lost.

Thank God,' said Godfrey, on the following
day, when he broke the news to Yere, who —
in common with the other women who had
been rescued from the wreck — had experienced
the greatest kindness from the captain and

screw of the vessel which had been the cause
of the disaster. ' Thank God that Ave shall be
able to brighten the remaining years of his life.
He was not selfish or ignoble, and his has been
a troubled life — how troubled we can scarcely
know,' he added, unconscious of his somewhat
cm-ious use of the * we,' and speaking with deep
emotion, as he looked involuntarily up to the
sky, blue and clear after the fog of the preceding
day.

Vere was reclining upon a basket-chair on
deck, Avrapt in the warm coverings which had
been lent to her. Her mind was a little confused
from all that she had gone through, but,
as her eyes followed the direction of his, she
drew a long, sobbing breath.

Neither spoke of the thoughts present to the
minds of both — thoughts of the unclothed spirits
which had been in their company but a few
hours before, and were now — where ? Far
above and beyond them, millions of miles away,
beyond the sun and beyond the stars ? A thrill,
very strange and solemn, seemed to pass over
the woman's nerves as she remembered the one

little child among those dead, who had kissed
her the day before, and who had solved the
great riddle, and knew infinitely more now than
the wisest men on earth could know of that
change.

'Aire yon thinking about that, too?' she
asked, drawing another deep breath, but conscious
at the same moment, from the expression
of Godfrey's face, of some newly-discovered
point of sympathy which made speech unnecessary.


About what V he faltered, knowing that he
answered stupidly.

'About something which one can feel, but
cannot articulate. Perhaps it belongs to the
other language which we have not yet learnt.
But how it comforts one to believe in a merciful
Father, and to feel sure that Love overrules
all !'

He nodded — and though neither of them said
that, in the clear light of Eternity, they might
one day find that what men call death may be
only that fuller life Which He 'who loved us
into life ' came to give his people ' more abundantly,'

— neither thought it necessary to express
the sentiment. There are moments too solemn
for human talk.

The captain — he was kind to me T asked
the gil, very softly.

His last thought was for others. He died
doing his duty.'

A little sooner than ourselves. I often wonder
what it must be to be beginning to learn
that new tongue and really to see,' she said,
after a pause — the eyes which had been banded
by a gush of tears shining now with a soft
light.

'I think I ought to tell you,' she added,
turning again, after a few minutes, to Godfrey,
that some one said you were a splendid fellow,
and ought to have a public testimonial.'

My father did more than I did,' he answered,
gravely, but his voice was not quite steady.

And it was then that she noticed an indefinable
something in his manner, which made her
understand that he had more to break to her ;
and the happy, trustful Hight — which, as she sat
With folded hands during: that interval of silence.

had seemed to grow brighter and brighter, as
if it would irradiate her face — suddenly went
out.

'Your father?' she exclaimed, interrogatively,
with still that determination to master her over-sting
nerves which made her press her hands
tightly together.

Did they not tell you 1 His spine has been
seriously injured. He will never go to America.
I shall have to go for him.'

Is there — anything — I can — do V she asked,
after another pause, with the old impulse strong
upon her which had ever made her so ready to
cope with emergencies, so full of immediate
courage and enterprise. * Did he send me — any
message V

All that Godfrey had studied to say in preparation
for such a question, which she would
probably put, went clean out of his mind at the
critical moment. He had been driven into a
comer, and could only answer simply,

He said that the dearest wish of his heart
was to see us — as soon as possible — man and
wife. Need I repeat what I told you the other

hight — that I always have loved you, and
-always shall, and that I never shall cease caring
for yon, and never cared in that way for anyone
else ? And then, till I can prove his right to
the title, and communicate with friends in the
States — who, it seems, can do much to clear up
this scandal, knowing what liars and blackguards
these ruffians are — you — you would be
be able to take care of my father — like a
daughter.'

She was silent, and he continued :
Ah I could send to Mrs. Morton to help you,
but I see it is asking too much. I did not
speak out at the right time, because I was led
to imagine that you had promised to marry my
friend. And, now that the delusion has been
dispelled, most women would consider that I
had offered them an affront in asking them to
marry a man who is somehow under a cloud.
Only that I thought you were different from
most women, and that the anguish of uncertainty
compelled me to speak out '

Don't you judge a little hastily about most
women V she interrupted, in that direct way in

which her simple nature let all her true impulses
sway her. ' And I — I who owe you some reparation
— do you think anything could give me
greater pleasure than to nurse your father?'

THE END.
