L I E> Ray

OF THL

UNIVERSITY

Of ILLINOIS

St 462m
vel

sm

S9*B&mi

W§ml

FIRE. By Mus. Dibhl. 2 vols.

NIGEL FORTESCUE. By W. Westall. 5s.

PERIWINKLE : An Autobiography. 3 vols.

THE MAN WITH A SHADOW. By G. M. Penn. 3 vols.

A LEAL LASS. By R. Ashe King. 2 vols.

THE PIT TOWN CORONET. By Charles J. Wills. 3 vols.

A RECOILING VENGEANCE. By Frank Basket. 2 vols.

Ward and Downey, Publishers, London.

& flood

A. DE GRASSE STEVENS,

Athos OF
OLD BOSTON," "THE LOST DAUPHIN," "WEIGHED IN THE BALANCE,
ETC.

Ti Wxttt Illume.

VOL. I.

LONDON :

Ward AND DOWNEY,

12, York STREET, Covent GARDEN, W.C.

1888.
\ All rights reserved']

•s,

w

TO MY ONLY SISTER,
MES. FRANK H. EVANS,

1 3zbuzU this took.

Dreams, books are each a world ; and books we know
Are a substantial world, both, pure and good ;
Round these, with tendrils strong as flesh and blood,
Our pastime and our happiness will grow.

Wordsworth.

^



in 2010 with funding from

University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign

http://www.archive.org/details/misshildrethnove01stev

CHAPTER I.

PAGI

A LETTER 1

CHAPTER II.

THE FOLLY 22

CHAPTER III.

'•'the sins of the fathers" . . . .41

CHAPTER IV.

A FAIR PARLIAMENT 51

CHAPTER V.

SENTIMENT AND " BACCY " 66

CHAPTER VI.

Stage-struck 82

CHAPTER VII.

DANGER AHEAD

PAGE



CHAPTER VIII.

AN ARRIVAL AND A MEETING. . soo

CHAPTER IX.

THE IMPERIAL CHANCELLERIE . . 259

CHAPTER X.

A COURT FAVOURITE . -, „ D

1/0

CHAPTER XI.

A WOMAN SCORNED . . # 9n

CHAPTER XII.

A PINK Billet-doux . 99 „

CHAPTER XIII.

IN THE HAZEL COPSE . .

CHAPTER I.

A LETTER.

The Need House,
Benton's Station, New Hampshire,
"April, 188—.

"My Friend,

"A clever Frenchman once said, ' On
review toujours a ses premiers amours.'
Let us suppose this to have been said of a
woman who, in her first youth, had. loved, a
man and jilted him, and then, after many
years and much sorrow, her heart returned
again to him with a love and constancy unknown
before. Cannot the past teach you to
read between the lines ? I did not write to
you of my engagement ; but now that it is

VOL. I. B

over, and I am free, I find myself instinctively
seeking the old shelter of your friendship,
which at one time was never denied me ; appealing
to the old sympathy to which I then
never appealed in vain. Are you astonished —
surprised? I am not. In those old days —
whose glory is not yet faded, over whose
memory ' Acquiescent in pace ' has not yet been
written — I came to you at all times, and you
refused me nothing save one tiling — once. So
now I creep back to the old refuge, and bid
you fold down the cere-cloth from our dead
past, and see if still, after all these years, it
does not look somewhat fair ; if still there does
not cling to it the memory of those old days ;
of blue skies, bluer waters, sweet roses, sweeter
vows, bright sunshine, brighter promises ! My
marriage engagement is broken, Philip. Why ?
I can give no reason. He was all that the
world calls worthy, and I believe he loved me ;
yet I found him wanting. Memory is a rare
and delusive beautifier, and my memory is
sadly tenacious of the past ; therefore I am

free. I could not be dishonest to him, even
though I would. Yes, I am free, and I am
writing } 7 ou after years of silence. I wonder
will you smile over this half-confession, and
say, ' Impetuous as ever ! ' or will you understand,
and, so understanding, send me the
answer I desire ? But should you choose to
misconstrue my words, I can but say that I
have wished to be honest, however late in the
day. Write to me, Philip, or better, come tome.
After all, I am but a woman, and a very

weak one.

Patricia."

This was the letter that awaited Philip
Tremain on his breakfast-table, one bright
spring morning of that most fickle, yet most
beautiful month, April. Even as he entered
the room he became aware of its subtle
presence made known to him by its faint,
dead odour of violets ; consequently it caused
him no great shock of surprise to find the
large, square envelope, sealed with the device

b 2

of a lighted candle and a silly moth, and the
motto "Delusion" below a monogram; with
the firm handwriting forming his name and
address looking up at him from its dainty
surroundings of silver and damask. As the
face of a once dearly loved friend, neglected
yet not forgotten, comes back to one from
out the mists of memory, recalled unexpectedly
by some trivial circumstance — a
strain of music, a line of poetry, a faded
flower.

Time was when each succeeding morning
of Mr. Tremain's life, the early post brought
a similar letter, but in those days his manner
of receiving it differed exceedingly from this
greeting. Then, he would take it up tenderly,
holding it for a few moments before his
longing eyes, and perhaps — for he was young
and very adoring — raise it to his lips before
he broke the seal — which in those days was
not a cynical candle and blind moth, but a
true lover's knot, with a French sentiment
intertwined.

Now be eyed it askance for a second or
more before be lifted it, and then after
balancing it lightly on his open palm, put it
down unopened, made his tea, buttered his
toast, and opened his newspaper ; nor did he
glance towards it again until, his breakfast
finished, his cigar alight, sitting in the
sunshine that flooded his apartment, he took
it up and broke the seal.

Various emotions passed over his face ashe
read. Surprise, half anger, half scorn, and
lastly, as he came to the final lines, a quiver
of pity or tenderness softened the stern outlines
of forehead and lips. He laid the open
letter on his knee, and as he sat motionless,
the increasing noise of the shrill street cries,
-and the echo of commencing traffic bespoke
the reawakening of the great city to one
more day of toil and strife and unrest, passed
by him unheeded.

A breath of the past was mingled with
the present, and bore along with it the scent
of fresh grass, a mingled perfume of fruit and

flowers, a vision of flowing muslin draperies,
a lithe, graceful figure, dark, lustreless hair
crowning a proud little head, eyes of deepest
violet shaded by black, pencilled brows and
lashes, a face whose almost dusky colouring
flushed in an instant into richest carmine
when deeply moved.

Ten years had gone by since Philip
Tremain, a young barrister struggling for
briefs, idle, clever, lazy, and cursed with
expectations of money, first met Patricia
Hildreth. He was living then in a small city,
in the interior of New York State, situated
near one of those great lakes so renowned for
their beauty and their treachery. On account
of his talents and position he was rather the
enfant gate of society in that aristocratic
little town ; which, by the w r ay, held itself
very exclusive, and counted among its residents
many blue-blooded descendants of old
colonial families ; its customs were colonial
as well as its traditions, and it looked down
with contempt upon its sister city, on the

borders of a sister lake, because it had
admitted within the doors of hospitality
scions of fathers who were known to have
made their money in trade.

To this hot-bed of traditional conservatism
came Patricia as a guest — handsome, disdainful,
capricious, city-bred Patricia — armed withall
her little wiles and graces, a creature of
wonderful resource, to be looked upon from
afar, and to be judged and condemned by
the narrow code and petty by-laws of the
unwritten Blackstone of Hurontown. To the
married women she was a dangerous siren ; to
the girls a triumphant, unapproachable Thetis ;
to the men a delusion and a snare, so soon as
ever she burned them with the blue fire of her
eves, or flashed her smile upon them from the
freshest of red lips, revealing the whitest of
pearly teeth.

In virtue of Philip Tremain's long-acknowledged
precedence where anything
feminine was concerned, all the other young
eligible of Hurontown stood aloof and

watched the coming flirtation, half in envy,
half in pride ; for was not the conquering
hero one of their own belongings, and one
also who had never known the arts and
cajoleries of women, save as portrayed by
the demure maidens of their own little town ;
whose manners and conversation betook
largely of the Puritan training bestowed
upon them by their mothers ? And was not
this mocking, fearless young amazon a maiden
fresh from that modern Babylon, New York,
where, if all the girls were fair, all, too, were
more or less false, and like the Corelli, only
ensnared to destroy ? Would it not be a
proud boast for all future Maronites if this
beautiful young witch should be captured by
their village Perseus, and so changing the
classic role be made subservient to his will
and pleasure all the clays of her life ?

But Patricia was petulant and capricious,
and Patricia was not to be easily won ; both
of which reasons made Philip pursue her the
more eagerly ; to him, as to all men, that

which is easy of attainment is not to be
desired. Whether he was successful or not
remained for a long time unknown to the
outside world, but before many weeks had
gone by Patricia had given over her superior
little airs, ceased pursing up her pretty
mouth, and become indeed wondrously meek
and gentle, as she cast down her proud eyes
and hung out the red flag of danger, followed
bv the white flag of truce : all of which signals
signified a total surrender to the enemy.

Thus one evening as they drifted idly
about in a cockle-shell of a boat on the blue
waters of the great lake, she holding the oars,
he sitting at her feet, the softly 7 fading pink
and amber light in the west casting a rosy
hue over her sweet face and fleecy white
draperies, he put his hand on hers, and drawing
down her not unwilling head, told his
love — the old, old story — and gained the
assurance of hers.

Then followed days of beatific bliss and
rapture, though both were poor, and a more

undesirable and foolish marriage for either
in the world's eyes — even the little world
of Hurontown, which aped the morals and
cynicism of modern Babylon — could not be
imagined. As a punishment for their precipitate
happiness came an indignant letter
from Patricia's mamma summoning her home,
and peremptorily bidding her give up such
foolish playing at love. What did she
think would be her chances for the future
if she marred all possibilities by such reckless
flirtations ? Was she really devoid of
all sense and judgment ?

The lovers parted with vows of undying
constancy, and the flame of their love was
kept alight by the interchange of daily letters,
which, on Patricia's part at least, were the
cause of considerable deception and hoodwinking.
Thus the months wore on ; winter
came, and with it a kind friend, lately visiting
in modern Babylon, brought news of Patricia's
gay life in that city, and rumours of her not
too innocent flirtations, of her daring public

opinion by various foolhardy escapades ; of
her beauty, her wit, her heedlessness of public
censure ; to all of which Philip listened,
smiling, believing in her fully, trusting that
his love for her, and hers for him, was
sufficient safeguard against all attacks made
upon her loyalty by those in her own home.

But when there came a letter from Patricia,
short, and not very gracious, flippant and
worldly in tone, announcing her approaching
visit to Europe under the chaperonage of a
lady rather too well known for her leaning
towards a brilliant life, and altogether unfitted
to be the guide, philosopher, and friend
of so impetuous a nature as his lady love's,
Philip aroused himself from his indolence,
and awakened to dangers ahead for him and
her, betook himself to modern Babylon, and
presented himself before her without word
of warning. Came, indeed, most unexpectedly
upon her, as she was holding her little court,
composed of one or two clever men, several
handsome ones, a sprinkling of fair girls and

equally fair matrons ; in the midst of whom
Patricia shone forth resplendent, as the planet
Venus among her satellites.

Upon this fashionable throng burst poor
Philip, disturbed, travel-stained, and weary.
From the fulness of a young, loving, jealous
heart, overcharged and ready to explode at
the first touch of powder, he demanded,
not too courteously perhaps, that she should
instantly then and there, explain the presence
of those obnoxious men, renounce her contemplated
journey, throw aside the useless,
frivolous life she was leading ; marry him
at once, and come to him in his poverty
and toil with him ; he did not add for him,
or she might have yielded. He was not
even gracious in his manner of asking, and
his hand clasped hers roughly, sending the
brilliant rings into the soft fingers mercilessly.

Patricia drew back her injured hand,
noting with self pity the red marks his
violence had left upon it, glanced down at
her dainty costume of delicate laces and

softest silk, looked at the evidence of wealth
in her soft surroundings, turned a little
towards the inner room, brilliantly lighted,
w T here she had left her subtle flatterers and
adorers, their words still echoing in her
ears, then brought her unwilling eyes back
to Philip's tired, angry, harassed face, noted,
although half ashamed, his rumpled hair and
ill-fitting coat, his general lack of finish and
repose, and drawing one hand slowly over the
other, slightly shook her head.

"You will not?" he cried out hoarsely.
Then without waiting for her reply, he burst
into a torrent of disappointment and recrimination,
urged thereto by his hurt self-love ;
as he, quick as Patricia to make comparisons,
noted in proud disdain his provincial
appearance beside the perfectly-mannered,
faultlessly-dressed, languidly-interested young
moths, who fluttered about the flame of
Patricia's beauty, stupidly singing their sensibilities
in the fire of her brilliancy. Yet
none the less, though he knew and felt his

own worth and truth to be boundless, compared
to theirs, he also felt that in the
eyes of the woman he loved, he looked —
oh, unpardonable sin — honest, jealous, and
countrified.

You are not worthy of my love, or of
me," he cried. "Go your own way, Patricia,
lead your own life ; I release you, but don't
for one moment think you have injured or
blighted mine. If all these luxurious dainties,
and all those brainless fools," with a contemptuous
wave of his hand towards the
innocent revellers and their surroundings,
"are more to you than my love, then is
your love too dainty a luxury for me. I
loved you, Patty, God knows how I loved
you ; but that goes for nothing in your eyes.
Good-bye, Patricia, good-bye."

She stood very still and silent while he
spoke, the colour burned red in her cheeks,
the fire gleamed in her eyes, her bosom rose
and fell rapidly with the quick beating of
her heart. She had not intended that half

unwilling shake of her bead to be taken so
literally, and used against her. Was he not
over anxious to grasp at this chance of freedom
? Were there not others, only waiting
for her to declare herself unfettered, to offer
her so much more than this one poor man
could give ? Above all, did he not snatch
at this suddenly-made breach between them
with almost indecent haste ? Her head rose
proudly. She met his look gallantly.

As you say ; no, I cannot live without
what to me makes up the sum of life; luxuries,
dainties, call them what you will ; they have
not entered over much into your life, I know ;
but they have become a part of mine, and
of me. I should be miserable without them."

Even as my wife ? " he asked royally.

"Even as your wife," she answered proudly.

He said no more, but as he turned to
go from her, she came close up to him, touching
him lightly on his arm. His love had
been very dear to her ; might she not keep
a slight chain upon him still, so that in the

future she might have some little hold upon
him ; and, indeed, did she not love him all
the more because of his hot anger, and bitter
truth, and loyal love ?

She put out both her hands to him — her
voice was very gentle and pleading :

"Since we are to part, Philip, and you
will have it so, will you not kiss me once,
only once more, for good-bye ? "

He turned from her, unheeding her pleading;
voice or hands.

Do not say it is my will that we part,
Patricia; be just at least, if you cannot be
generous. No, I will not kiss you now, I
am not quite a hypocrite ; perhaps one day
when I can believe and trust in you again,
Patty, or when all my love for you is
dead, or when I can think of you, look
at you, judge you, as other men do, then
I will kiss you, but not until then. Ask
me then, Patricia."

"I will never ask you again," she answered
passionately; "but you, Philip, shall be the

first to beg a kiss from me, and I shall bethe*
one to make your pride suffer, as you
now make mine."

Then she left him, sweeping by him,
proud, tremulous, excited, stung to the heart,
but making no sign. He heard her laugh
ring out joyously, a moment later, as she
applauded some witticism of one of her
admirers, and with a muttered exclamation
she made his way out into the night.

So they had parted, and never since that
unhappy evening had they met.

Time went on ; there came trouble to
Patricia in the death of her mother ; he wrote
her a cold note of condolence, to which he
received no reply ; then rumour brought him
the knowledge of her inherited wealth, and,
shortly after, of her engagement to a man
many years her senior. Of her wealth he
thought little, of her engagement he spoke
calmly, and with the air of a cynic, who
beholds all things pass by, good and bad,
and says, in the bitterness of his soul, cui

vol. i. c

bono? But, inwardly his love and pride
were roused from their sleep of years, and
lie owned to himself, with a hard honesty,
that to think of her as belonging to another
man than he was intolerable. He had not been
able to keep her love when he won it, but
it was none the less a pain to find that
another had succeeded where he had failed.
Time, however, that wonderful physician, ina
measure numbed his distress, and to his
world he posed as a charming man, though
cold and heartless ; not one to be sentimental
over a dead past, but rather one to make
his power felt, and to lead and bend other
wills by the stern inflexibility of his own.

And then had come Patricia's letter,
telling of her broken toys ; asking to betaken
back into his affections ; seeking to
creep back into the old shelter of his heart,
where once she had ruled so proudly.

Ten years had passed since he, in that
sweet month of roses, had first met and loved
her. Ten years ; and in the mean time

Philip Tremain had risen high in the world,
and in men's opinions ; his money had come
to him, partly by inheritance, partly through
his own hard work ; he had made his name
well known, his fame was still a rising one.
Xo need to feel ashamed for him now; indeed,
no greater sybarite lived than he, no truer
dilettante, and no one whose surroundings
were more daintily luxurious.

But notwithstanding the changes that
had developed this, to her, unknown side
of his nature, as he sat in the sunshine this
fair spring morning, holding Patricia's letter
in his hand, he judged her no less harshly,
blamed her no whit the less, than he had
when last he saw her, and refused to kiss
her for good-bye. With her own hands she
had torn the veil from his idol ten years
ago, and he would not now voluntarily raise
a finger to restore its shattered beauty.

An hour glided by, his cigar was finished,
the freshness of the morning had departed,
before he aroused himself from his retrospect ;

C 2

he turned to his writing-table with a smile,
and a half-uttered : " No, not even for you,
my once beloved Patty ; you have made
your own life, and you must live it out
to the bitter end — alone."

His answer therefore to Patricia was a
polite stiff note of condolence or congratulation,
which she chose, on the failure of
her matrimonial plans. A regret he was unable
to accept her invitation, a hope for her
happiness, an assurance that she might always
consider him her friend, but nothing more; not
one word in answer to the love she proffered,
not one of remembrance of, or regret for the
past.

Patricia Hildreth's face was not good to
look upon, as she read his response ; if ever
mortified vanity and determined revenge was
readable on a woman's countenance, it w T as to
be seen on hers then.

"So I have humbled myself in vain," she
said. " Well, it shall be your turn next, my
Philip, or my woman's wit is of no account ;

you shall feel the same sting as you have
given me, incased in your armour of pride and
well-being though you may be. Take care,
Philip, my hand is small but it is firm to
strike, and he is most lost who thinks himself
invulnerable to a woman's charms."

THE FOLLY.

About a week later Mr. Tremain found at his
breakfast plate another letter, and though
bearing no crest or motto, and not suggestive
of violets, was nevertheless a dainty enough
feminine epistle.

"The Folly,

Staten Island,

"April, 188—.

"Dear Me. Tremain,

"Will you come down to us for as
long as you can stay without becoming bored
to extinction ! Your favourite rooms are
waiting you, your favourite horse stands idle
in his stall, the yacht is in perfect condition,

and this delicious foretaste of summer makes
sailing in her delightful We are bored to
death, however, for want of some one out of
the common. Come and be that some one.
I can offer you a pretty girl, a clever girl,
and a girl of the period to flirt with successively
; then there is myself, and your
little god-daughter, Marianne, for commonsense
and dulness ; while George, poor fellow,
is pining for another battle at tennis and
billiards with you. The ponies, my new ones,
and their mistress, will be at the five-thirty
boat tomorrow afternoon, to meet you, so
pray don't disappoint,

"Yours most cordially,
Esther Xewbold."

Nothing loth, Mr. Tremain put himself
on board the Castleton the next day, and
enjoyed the half-hour's crossing to the island,
whose wooded, picturesque shores, clad in
fairest green, w r ere a refreshment to his senses,
accustomed for so many months to the hard

lines and sharp angles of New York. As lie
stepped off the boat at New Brighton, he was
at once attracted by a very small boy, in a
very tall hat, top-boots, and silver buttons ;
then the most perfect of pony-carriages and
ponies met his view ; and last, but not least,
a pretty little woman in a Gainsborough hat,,
and a light ulster, who put out a welcoming
hand, in a heavy driving-glove, as he appeared,
and said gaily :

Oh, Mr. Tremain, this is very good
of you. You know I said I should come
for you myself. Now, then, are you quite
settled to your liking ? Let go their heads,
Tony ; go on, my beauties."

The ponies answered spiritedly to the
flick of her whip ; and, indeed, pranced wolf
so suddenly that the small atom of humanity,
perched up behind, quite lost his dignity,
and only retained his equilibrium by superhuman
efforts.

Once on the Terrace they bowled along
at a good pace, and after the usual questions

had been asked and answered, Mr. Tremain
inquired whom he was to meet at the Folly.

Mrs. NewboW answered with a little
laugh : "I think I told you in my letter
of the three varieties of graces — a specimen
of each — I have prepared for you ? Here
they are by name, and ticketed with the
attributes they pose for, and fondly imagine
they possess. A clever girl from Boston
of course, Rosalie James — small and dark,
and critical — reads all the newest books
with the most jaw-breaking names, goes in
for all the * colonies ' and 'isms,' the later the
better ; likes to think herself a disciple of
the most advanced agnostic cult, is nothing
if not cultured, and pins her artistic canons
to those of Btirne Jones and Walter Crane ;
is a working member of the Sorosis Club,
the Nineteenth Century, and every other
woman's club in the Union ; writes for the
magazines, and always has an aesthetic novel
on the stocks, which never is launched.
How do you like this style, Philip ? "

Honestly, not at all," answered Tremain,
echoing: her thrill of laughter: "from the
woman of brains defend me ! What have
yon next to show me ? "

"Ah well, she's not so had as she sounds'
said Mrs. Newbold, "I've known her do a
great many kind things ; and after all it's
not her fault, you know, if like the little
boy in Punch she fails to take interest in
any event subsequent to the Conqueror.
And now to number two, my pretty girl,
Baby Leonard, and a very pretty girl she
is, in a slow, superb Juno-like fashion. I
don't now of my own knowledge that she
ever shows greater animation than a languid
yes, or no, implies ; but if you feel a very-keen
desire to read beneath the tranquillity
of her manner, go to Jack Howard for information,
she is his latest victim, and he
may have touched the depths of even her
shallow soul."

"Thank you," returned Tremain, "I do
not feel my soul intensely drawn by occult

forces — isn't that the correct jargon ? — towards
that of Miss Leonard ; let us allow Jack
fall innings there."

Ah, you are very hard to please," cried
Mrs. Newbold in pretended petulance. "Now
this is really my last and only remaining
girl ; in my heart of hearts I think she is
worth the other two, in spite of her always
handicapping herself ; enter then Dick
Darling, and shouldn't you know by the
sound of her name that she is a girl of the
period ? Pretty ? Oh. yes, but more fascinating
than pretty ; has a brown face, and
laughing eyes, and turned-up nose, uses all
the latest slang, wears a hard hat, a cut-away
jacket, a Stanley necktie, and eye-glass and
chain, and carries the slenderest of walking-sticks,
smokes her own cigarettes, drinks
Bass's ale, and plays a rattling good game
at poker ; and despite all her mannish affectations,
has the best heart in the world. She
rides like a bird, pulls an oar with the best,
and can give as ugly a twister at tennis as

you could wish to see. Now is she more
to your liking ? "

Mr. Tremain shrugged his shoulders.

My dear Mrs. Newbold, what can I say ?
Miss Darling is doubtless a thoroughly good
young lady, but more after the hearts and
tastes of younger men than such a graybeard
as I. Do not, I beg of you, make any efforts
in the young-lady line on my behalf, I ask
nothing better than a good share of your
company, and an hour or two of romps
with my little god-daughter. I shall be more
than blessed if you will put up with my
dulness."

What a very pretty speech, Philip, it
is quite refreshing to my old married ears ;
very well, you may sacrifice yourself on the
altar of decorum and innocence if you like,
I will not say you nay. The men of our
party I think you know ; besides Jack
Howard we have handsome Freddy Slade
the beauty of the day — and one or two
inoffensive lads to fetch and carry. And so

you don't think either of my graces worthy
your consideration, Philip ? Yet I do believe
teach one of them owns a good and true
heart, in spite of their individual fads."

I do not doubt it," answered Mr.
Tremain ; " but seriously, my dear Esther,
you must surely know that having suffered
once in that way, I am not likely to be easily
attracted again. I fancy the woman who
could win my cynical and fastidious heart,
has not yet come from the other world ; she
must needs combine all the beauties of the
graces, the attributes of the muses, and
be withal, like Caesar's wife, above suspicion.
Find me such a divinity, Esther, or else I
shall wait for your own little Marianne."

A silence followed Philip's half-jesting,
half-bitter reply, broken at last by Mrs.
Newbold's lightest laugh, as she asked :

Do you like my ponies ? George gave
them to me on my last birthday ; Dick Darling
christened them, Rock and Taffy ; hard and
soft, you know, or dependable and doubtful,

or any opposing virtues you choose to select.
Now then, here we are," as she turned her
ponies cleverly over an awkward incline, and
dashed through the gates.

Shall we join the world at lawn-tennis,
or will you come in with me and have a cup
of tea ? "

With yon, if you please," answered
Philip, mock-pleadingly. " My dear Mrs.
Newbold, don't deliver me into the hands of
the Philistines prematurely."

Esther's blithe laugh rang out merrily as
they sped up the long avenue, shaded by the
rows of graceful elm trees on either side ; she
brought the ponies to the door with a workmanlike
flourish, and scarcely touching Philip's
assisting hand, sprang out and was up the low
broad steps before him.

Let us have tea at once, Long. This
way, Mr. Tremain."

They entered the library together ; it was
a large room and the favourite one, par
excellence, of all the apartments in that most

charming and hospitable of homes, the Folly.
On one side ran a broad, covered, outside
verandah, on to which opened two large
windows of stained glass, through whose
mellow tints the light shone in tenderest
colours ; heavy draperies, of some wondrous
Eastern fabric, fell on either side of the
broad low door; a neutral-tinted wall supported
rare plaques of Moorish faience, and
choice selections of bric-d-brae, with here
and there the glimmer of brass sconces and
silver repousse ovals, relieving the somewhat
sombre tone ; while everywhere, in each possible
or impossible spot, on every table, in every
vase or bowl, a wealth of Marechal Niel roses
filled the air with their subtle pungent perfume,
and caught and held the sunshine as
in a trance. The one picture of the room
stood upon an easel, hung with plush of
ruddy hue ; it was an artist proof engraving
of Correggio's " Io and Jupiter." A fire of
pine-logs smouldered on the andirons, and
through the curtained doorway a vanishing

perspective revealed a vista of drawing-room,
music-parlour, and billiard-hall, all in the
half tints of twilight.

Mrs. Newbold threw off her hat and
ulster, and pushing back the light fluffy curls
from her forehead, called out laughingly :

"Mimi, Mimi!"

A little fairy, all yellow curls and white
frock, darted through the open door, and
dancing up to the pretty lady threw her arms
rapturously around her; her mamma bent
dow T n her own head above the little one, and
kissed the eager little lips.

"See, Philip," she said, "here is your
god daughter. Has she not blossomed into
a little hoyden ? "

A Hebe, rather," answered Philip, " and
as like her mother as a bud is like the
rose."

Esther laughed. " You certainly do pay
one the very prettiest compliments, Mr.
Tremain ; I make you my humble acknowledgments,"
and she dropped him a mock

curtsey. " If this is the result of stern law,
why, commend me to its votaries."

And thus laughing, chatting and sipping
their tea, they beguiled the time
away, until the first dressing-irons broke
upon them with surprise, and Philip escaped
to his room before the tennis party appeared,
flushed with victory, or despondent with
defeat.

As Mr. Tremain moved leisurely about
his apartment, his ear caught the sound
of his own name ; he stopped, with a half
smile on his lips, and listened. The
speakers, two girls, were evidently oblivious
to the fact, that given open windows and
unmodulated voices, what is sent out of
one window, may enter at the other.

"Who is this Philip Tremain?" asked
voice No. 1. "I am bored to death by
Esther Newbold's praises of him. I don't
know him."

He can't be great things then, can
he?" said mockingly voice No. 2. "Only

VOL. I. d

you see, Rosie, this time you're out of it
altogether; Philip Tremain is just too
awfully utter, just the sweetest thing out
in men, my clear, though you dont know
him Boston way. Handsome mug, heaps of
shiners, Mayflower family, and good form
from way back."

Here a little whiff from a Russian
cigarette fluttered in. "Ha, ha," laughed
Philip, as he sniffed at it, " the girl of
the period, and her least hated friend ;
matters grow T interesting."

How disgustingly slangy you are,
Dick," broke in voice No. 1; "really your
language is most offensive."

Poor cultured child ! " cried out the
other, with a merry laugh, that had
something honest in its tone. " How I
afflict her ! Oh, ye gods and little fishes,
how shall I appease her ? But seriously,
Rosie, don't you remember some one telling
us all about him, and the dreadful cropper
handsome Patty Hildreth came over him ?

Long ago, my dear, when she was young,
and we had not even seen our c green and
salad days.' He was tremendously in love
with her, they say, and was blind to
Patty's little peculiarities where men and
flirting were concerned, until at last something
worse than usual came to his ears,
some scrape more daring and hare-brained,
in which Patty's name figured largely,
and he cut up rough about it ; Patty was
wilful and obstinate, and Mr. Tremain
injured and harsh, and so the engagement
came to everlasting smash, and Patty
engaged herself, before the week was out,
to old Tom Taylor, who left her a cool
million, and died within the year of her
dismissing him. What luck some girls

o o

have ! By the way, Esther has asked
her here, she says ; what a lark it will be
to see the meeting of the old-time pals.
Good gracious ! are you all dressed, Rosa ? I
shall be late again, as sure as eggs is eggs,
and George is such a Turk about meals."

d 2

Then the speaker evidently moved away
from the window, and Philip heard no more ;
but what he had listened to set him thinking,
and brought a smile of bitterness to his
lips.

So Patty is coming, Patty is to be
here," he mused, " and I must meet her
after all these long years. Poor, wilful,
pretty Patricia ! "

A few moments later he entered the
library, and found the room still in half-lights
and apparently tenantless ; but as he
moved towards the fireplace he became aware
of a tall, slight figure, severely clad in a dark,
trailing gown of some heavy silken materiaL
A fall of black lace surrounded the drooping
head and fell low about the face, throwing
such deep shadows upon it that Philip looked
in vain for any definite characteristics. The
long and slender hands lay crossed lightly
upon her knees, and were guiltless of rings.
Something in their attitude, however, recalled
Patty to him, and, with a half-credulous

smile, lie quickened his steps towards the
quiet, almost motionless figure ; but as he
reached her side, a ripple of laughter and
light voices broke the spell, as the door was
thrown open, and Mrs. Newbold entered,
followed by her bevy of fair maidens.

"Ah, Mr. Tremain," cried Esther, "are
you here before us ? How shall I apologise ?
Now, will you take your introductions homceo-
pathetically, or in one dose ? Girls, fall into
line ! "

Laughingly she presented him to each in
turn, and with a careless, "The men you
know," slipped her hand within his arm,
saying : " Shall we go in to dinner ? "

But Philip stayed her.

You have forgotten one" he said, in a
low voice, glancing towards the figure by the
fire, that had remained motionless during all
the gay argot and repartee.

Oh," replied Mrs. Newbold, with a shrug
of her pretty shoulders, "you mean Mille.
Lamien. She is Mimi's governess. I will

present you, however. Mademoiselle, permit
me ; Mr. Tremain — Mdlle. Lamien."

The lady thus addressed turned and
bowed slightly — the barest recognition of
Mr. Tremain's presence. She raised her face
a little, and the light from the wax candles
in the sconce above her head fell full upon
it. It was a face pale in the extreme, with
the dull waxen colour of death — a pallor increased
and intensified by the masses of snow-white
hair piled high above it, and the heavy
black lace folds about it. The dark eyes set
in deep shadows burned with a strange inward
fire, that not even the heavy lashes
could veil. Across one cheek a long cruel
mark of greyish blue seemed to throb, as if
in angry remembrance of the cruel blow that
had caused it; the fair skin would bear its
traces for life. The mouth was firm and hard,
save for a nervous twitching that sometimes
marred its outline. It was a countenance
neither handsome nor attractive, and Mr.
Tremain turned away, after the barest interchange

of civilities, with a feeling of irritable
disappointment. What right had such a
figure, youthful and full of grace, to be surmounted
by a face almost grotesque in its
plainness ? He had thought of Patty, when
first he saw the quiet, dark figure and clasped
hands ; but as he turned now with Esther's
hand still on his arm, the fleeting evanescent
vision passed from him.

Mimi will come to us at dessert, mademoiselle,"
said Esther, not unkindly. " Will
you not also join us?"

Madame is very kind, but I beg she
will excuse me," was the reply, in a voice
that sounded young for so old a face, and
yet that held an echo of such hopelessness
in its cadences, it haunted Philip's ears
unceasingly, and so dulled his senses that
Miss James's most brilliant high aesthetic
conversation fell unheeded, while Dick
Darling's most daring slang evoked only a
passing shudder of disapproval.

Miss James shrugged her thin shoulders

and voted him a good-looking bore, then
turned her dark head and left shoulder
upon him, and carried the battle into the
enemy's camp, by appropriating Jack Howard,
who, by all rights, social and flirtations,
belonged to pretty Baby Leonard.

Philip thus left unmolested save by his own
reflections, and quite innocent of his own
shortcomings, was only aroused from a long
brown study by hearing Freddy Slade appeal
in his most drawling tones to his host, ashe
lifted his glass of Burgundy, and eyed
it lovingly.

I say, Newbold, what an extraordinary
woman you have managed to annex as a
governess — capital w r fine this, what's its
vintage ? — I met her to-day, walking all alone
in that beastly sycamore plantation of yours,
and thinking' she might be lonely offered
myself as a companion. By George ! you

should have seen the look on her face as she
declined ; you wouldn't have thought me good
enough to be her lap-dog — give you my word,
never saw such scorn on any woman's face
before. Who is she ? A princess in disguise,
an exiled Kussian of high degree, or a disappointed
tragedy actress ? "

Oh, you must ask Esther," replied lazy
George Newbold. " She's her latest importation."


This was Mr. Newbold's usual way of
getting rid of all troublesome or inconvenient
questions. " It saved him trouble," he used
to say, "and gave the wife the gratification
of doing all the talking."

Esther will tell you, without being
asked, beau sire" broke in that little matron ;
"I am very much in love with her, you
must know ; she is delightful, and she is
mysterious, what more can you ask ? She
is the daughter of a Kussian noble and a
French girl of the bourgeoisie. You can
imagine the story, it's for ever repeating itself.

The marriage was a secret one, the young
man's family refused to recognise it ; he was
recalled to Petersburg, and the girl offered
money in lieu of her young husband, which
she passionately rejected. Then followed the
old story of hopeless waiting; her baby was
born, and for a time she struggled bravely
on, fighting shame and poverty hand to hand.
But at last she succumbed, and death freed
her from her share in life's battle.

"The misfortunes of the mother seemed to
follow and dog the daughter, whose great personal
beauty served only as her worst enemy.
She was brought up respectably enough, and
but for what Lord Byron calls the ' fatal
dower,' would doubtless have lived and died
in the monotony of a commonplace existence.
Little as you may think it, however, Adele
Lamien was possessed of such unusual beauty
of face and form, it was impossible for her to
pass unnoticed in the rank and file of humanity.

In ignorance of her mother's fate, the poor
girl, with a blindness born of innocence, was

soon treading step by step that dolorous path
which had ended for her young mother in
despair and death. There's an irony in such
repetitions that might well repay the study of
one interested in the factors of the ' great
chance' called life.

Well. Aclele was wooed and won by a
very lofty personage, who, if not of the parent
imperial rose-tree, could claim close connection
with it. Like her mother again, the marriage
was a secret one, though in accordance with
the ritual of the Catholic Church, to which
faith the girl belonged. I believe the months
that followed were the happiest the girl had
ever known in her not too happy life. It-made
the awakening all the more terrible ; for
of course there was an awakening. Men have
a habit of tiring of their most beautiful human
toys, especially if these playthings develop
intellect and passion.

"Let me draw a veil over this part of
Mdlle. Lamien's history. It is enough to say
that a terrible crime was committed — a crime

so violent and so fatal that all Petersburg
were roused to action, and the imperial bloodhounds
let loose to track the perpetrator. It
was at this time that Adele fled from Russia,
and reached England almost by miracle. From
there she hastened to America, haven of all
persecuted unfortunates ; and in New York
she came under my notice. I listened to her
story, and, after she had finished its narration,
and knowing all against her, and nothing in
her favour, I took her as governess for my
little daughter. Quixotic ! Yes, I know it
was, and a dangerous experiment ; but I
couldn't help it — there were reasons. — her eyes
haunted me. And truth compels me to state
that so far she has proved herself fully worthy
of my trust. Marianne is devoted to her —
she is little short of angelic in the child's eyes ;
and I openly confess to a tender regard for
her. She is unexplainable, enigmatic, fascinating.
But, hush, here comes the child ; and
her ears are something abnormal."

Esther finished with a dramatic little gesture

that set them all laughing, and in the
general merriment Philip's gravity passed unchallenged.


CD

The story, as told by Mrs. Newbold, withall
her little artistic touches of gesture and
inflection, haunted him strangely. He found
himself constantly reverting to it, and always
with an incongruous and almost jarring thought
of Patty, running side by side with his unwilling
sympathy for Mdlle. Lamien.

Miss James found him a very inattentive
listener as, later in the evening, they sat together
on the wide verandah, and looked
across the broad stretch of lawn to where the
faintest streak of shining grey marked the
waters of the bay. The moonlight was flooding
all things with reckless prodigality, until
even the barest and tiniest twig grew luminous,
and the budding roses became ethereal in the
generosity of its rays.

Miss James would have dearly loved to
sentimentalise a little ; she was not at all
adverse to a mild flirtation with this handsome

grave man, whose very presence made
her feel her own littleness of mental stature.
Unconsciously she dropped her usual heroics,
and was prepared to be as meek and coy as
any new-fledged debutante. Unfortunately
however, Philip's mind was not in tune, or she
struck the wrong chords, for he failed miserably
to be responsive. At length, after a
rather awkward little silence, she requested
him, a trifle sharply, to fetch her a shawl ; she
felt the evening growing chilly.

Almost too eagerly Philip sprang up and
hastened to obey her, leaving her with tears of
mortification in her eyes, and hot anger in her
heart. Meantime, Mr. Tremain, quite oblivious
to his shortcomings, made his way to the inner
hall, where he had an indistinct remembrance
of having seen something white and fluffy, and
which bore about it a faint odour of white rose,
Miss James's most affected scent. Surely,
unless he was too awfully masculine, that
soft white odorous mass was of the nature of
a wrap.

As lie crossed the entrance-hall on his-quest,
he caught sight of Mdlle. Lamien's tall
figure in the little drawing-room which was
especially consecrated to Marianne. She was
standing by the window, her face pressed
against the frame, her whole form shaken with
suppressed emotion. Tremain, like most men,
was acutely susceptible to tears. He stopped
involuntarily, hesitated, and in another moment
was at her side.

Mdlle. Lamien," he said, gently, " are
you in trouble ? Can I help you ? "

She made him no answer, save by a quick,
impatient movement of her head.

But Mr. Tremain was not to be baffled,
though he rather wished himself out of the
scene, and felt unwarrantably angry at Miss
James for being the innocent cause of his
present position.

Have you had bad news ? " he persisted.
Are you suffering ? Let me beg of you to
tell me what troubles you ? "

As suddenly as she had drawn from him

before she turned towards him now, and lifted
her face, pale and haggard in the moonlight,
full upon him. Her eves shone hotly.

I have been looking my dead past — my
old love — in the face," she cried, passionately,
and I am miserable ! "

She turned, and before Philip could put
out a detaining hand, was gone. He stood as
she left him, almost as pale as the wild, whiteface
she had flashed upon him.

"Good God!" he muttered. "What a
look of Patty there was in her eyes ! "

Miss James waited long, and impatiently,
and in vain for Mr. Tremain and her wrap.
He did not come back ; indeed, as a matter of
fact, he forgot all about her commission until
later in the evening, when she swept by him on
Jack Howard's arm. At sight of her, Philip
was struck by his sins of omission, and with
rather less self-possession than usual, made a
poor apology for his rudeness.

Were you rude, Mr. Tremain ? " Miss
James replied, icily. "Pray don't apologise;

VOL. I. E

I had not accused you." And with a mocking
smile, she passed on, laughing ostentatiously
at Jack's latest witticism.

Mr. Tr remain looked after them with a
faint surprise in his glance ; then he, too,
laughed, but quietly, as he said, half-aloud :

Oh, woman, woman ! thy name is
caprice ! "

A FAIR PARLIAMENT.

The next morning, when Mr. Tremain sauntered
down the broad stairs, that gave upon
the inner hall, he found that favourite place
of resort already occupied, and about twenty
tongues were going at full gallop, every one
talking, no one listening, while far above
the well-bred clamour, rose Dick Darling's
high-pitched treble.

I say w T e must ; oh, what a most too
unutterably utter lark ! Esther, you are a
trump, you are a saint, you are a double-distilled
daisy, and you deserve to Lave a free-actionem,
high-stepping trotter, and a skeleton
selfish waggon, for your very, very own ! "

e 2

LIBRARY

University of illinois?

"You are very kind, Dick," and this time
it was Mrs. Newborn's voice, "but indeed,
I don't want a reward of merit of that description,
I fail to appreciate it, my dear.
A nasty little abominable trotting waggon,
all bones and ribs, and no flesh, and a
monstrosity of a horse that would drag my
arms from their sockets and me over its head
before I could say "

Jack Robinson," broke in the irrepressible
Dick, " though why one is always supposed
to invoke that mythical personage, in times
of surprise, it is beyond me to explain.
However, you are about right, Esther, for
now I come to think of it, what would you
do with your legs ? "

Oh, Dick, you are really too hopelessly
vulgar," cried out a chorus of voices, to which
Miss Darling not a whit abashed, replied ;

Well, and what would you have me
call them?"

"You might say pedal extremities," remarked
Miss James, to which brilliant suggestion

Dick vouchsafed no further reply thana
pronounced sniff and shrug of her shoulders.

Then Esther caught sight of Philip, and
rose in pretty confusion to greet him.

"Ah, Mr. Tremain, you have stolen a
march upon us, and invaded a woman's congress,
and now, since you have been so very
rash and bold "

' Oh, rash and bold ! ' " sang Dick, under
her breath, with a comical Mikado gesture.

"You shall stay and be umpire. Perhaps,
as you are a man," continued Esther, severely,
"I may be able to drag a little bit of sense
out of you."

I doubt it," said Dick again, sotto voce.

And so do I," echoed Philip aloud, at
which there was a general laugh, and then
a general and eagerly expressed desire that
Mr. Tremain might be made as comfortable
as possible, and at once admitted to the inner
sanatorium of their circle.

Esther pulled forward the most seductive
causeuse, Baby Leonard actually resigned a

cushion for his head, and Dick Darling
evolved the tiniest of cigarette cases and
vesuvius from her knowing little coat
pocket, and striking a light offered him a
real Turkish brew," assuring him that they
were " quite the knob," and that she imported
them herself, straight from the shores of the
Bosphorus, a fact, which none of them being
strong in geography, dared to contradict.
Only Miss James refused to join in the
general adulation ; she sat quite still in her
low wicker - chair, leaning her dark head
against the gold-coloured cushions, and watching
Philip, furtively, through her half-closed
eyelids.

When the hubbub of welcome had somewhat
subsided, and only a rippling laugh,
or the frou-frou of the women's gowns, as
their owners moved about listlessly, or settled
themselves more comfortably in their
luxurious chairs, gave evidence of the
concourse of tongues " that had been, Mr.
Tremain ventured to ask, holding: his unmoved

cigarette between his fingers, what
had been the topic under discussion, when
his untoward entrance silenced the music of
their voices ?

Music of our voices, indeed ! n mocked
Dick, bringing her shoulders up to her little
ears. " You flatter us, Mr. Tremain — at least
you flatter me — the harmonies must have
been strangely mixed in that galere ; I never
heard my shrill pipe called anything so
fetching before. Speak for yourselves, girls,
I am nothing if not honest."

"Don't be absurd, Dick," answered Miss
James, pettishly ; " what a miser you are
to take everything to yourself in that
fashion ! "

Speak for oneself, or no one will
speak for you," said Dick, calmly. " I always
find the best policy is that which brings
oneself most into notice, and if you don't
flaunt your own colours boldly, no one will
haul 'em up for you."

All this isn't very enlightening to Mr.

Tremain," broke in Mrs. Newbolcl, in her
pleasant fashion ; "of course it's wildly exciting
and interesting to ns, but we can
scarcely expect him to enter heart and soul,
into the rights and wrongs of our feminine
policy. Now the case in point, Philip, is
this : next Thursday — ten clays off, you see —
will be my husband's birthday, and we
thought it would be very nice to celebrate
it for him in some jovial way."

I suggested a dance," interrupted Baby
Leonard, " because a dance is so easily
done ; one has only to put the whole affair
in Delmonico's hands, and order one's dress,
and let one's young men know the colours
for one's bouquets, and fill up one's dance-card
twice over, and then you see — why
then it is accomplished."

Highly amusing for you, Baby, who
never look to such advantage as valuing with
Jack," said Esther, half indignantly, " but
rather hard on poor old George, I think,
seeing that the poor dear fellow can't dance

a step, and after all, it's his birthday, you
know."

"I don't suppose he would think of
that," replied Miss Leonard, "I never did,"
at which self-evident ingenuousness Dick went
off into a frenzy of laughter, which proved
so infectious that they all joined in, until
their united strength of lung attracted Jack
Howard and Freddy Slade, who emerged
from the billiard-hall, cues in hand, to know
what the dickens was the joke ? " And
then, when order was restored, and only
Dick going off spasmodically in little spurts
of merriment, the two men were invited to
remain and become members of the council
of war.

Now, Esther, I have an idea," suddenly
cried out Dick. " I don't get one
very often, so attach it when you can.
Let's have some downright first-class athletic
sports. There's the gymnasium, just
the ticket, with all the newest fads in bars,
and poles, and trapezes. We girls might

go in for the lighter exercises against the

<r> o o

men, and then make way for their competitions
in the higher science ; and we
could end up with a rousing good battle
at ten-pins ! Now that is a good suggestion.
Don't you like it ? " in a tone of
intense astonishment, turning from one to
another with a comical look of surprise on
her fresh round face.

"I think it is perfectly disgusting," said
Miss James, with scorn ; " and quite worthy
of you, Dick. The idea of making mountebanks
of ourselves in those odious gymnasium
costumes, to romp and riot about
like a parcel of schoolboys ! Besides, I
don't see where George would come in, in
your refined little programme, any better
than in Baby's scheme ! "

Oh, he should give the prizes," answered
Dick, not a whit abashed.

"Yes, and pay for them, too," muttered
Jack Howard, a little maliciously.

Well, I resign," said Dick, with the

air of a martyr. " But really I don't see
what we can do. We can't have races,
because the ground's as hard as nails, and
the poor dear beasties would lame themselves,
and we can't have a yachting contest,
because all the Squadron, and the
crack boats, have gone off to Newport ; and
tennis is a bore, and dancing is a nuisance,
and you look down on my healthy little
device, so cudgel your own brains, my
dears, mine refuse to evolve another iota
of an idea ! " And Miss Darling pulled
out her cigarette-case and devoted herself
to a minute inspection of its contents.

Well, I am sure, the only things left
to us are theatricals, or tableaux," said
Esther, piteously ; " the latter are simply
odious, so it must be the former. After all,
it's strange how one always does come
back to theatricals ; they always seem most
satisfactory in the end."

Because we all believe ourselves to bethe
one great actor of the future," said Mr.

Tremain, with a smile; "it's only opportunity
that we lack, not genius ; and it's
only other people's stupidity that fails to
recognise our talents."

"You needn't count me in, Esther dear,"
cried Dick ; " I never could act worth a cent,
and what's more I hate it, pretending to be
ever so many qualities that one is not, and
never succeeding a third part as well as
the most twopenny-halfpenny actress at the
Bowery ! "

Dick's severe," laughed Baby Leonard,
because the first and only time she was to
Lave appeared in public the committee were
obliged to ask her to resign, she made love in
such a vigorous fashion, and charged the
jeune premier as though he were a five-barred
gate, and over him she would go, willy-nilly.
She frightened him terribly, and he refused to
go on with his role if Miss Darling continued
in hers."

Baby dearly loves a sell," remarked
Dick, good-naturedly, when the laugh at her

expense had subsided ; " but she's quite right,
I'm quite too awfully horrid when it conies
to making believe." With which little home
thrust Miss Darling settled back in her chair
seemingly.

Then, since acting it is to be, let's settle
the play," said Jack Howard. " It's always a
long business, and we haven't any too much
time at our disposal."

"There's School" suggested Miss James,
"or Ours, or The Romance of a Poor Young
Man; and oh, doesn't that make one weep
for poor Montague ? "

Oh, how sentimental ! " cried Dick.
"Why don't you have something jolly, like
The Mikado, or Ruddigore, or even Patience /
There's something more in any one of them,
than in all your love and moonshine plays put
together."

But since you refuse to join our company,
Dick, isn't it a little grasping on
your part to wish to coerce our choice?"
said Esther, mischievously.

"I am dumb," answered Dick, shutting
her mouth firmly, and only letting her
laughing eyes glance merrily from one to
another, as the discussion waxed fast and
furious, and threatened to end in tears and
temper.

It settled itself down at last, however,
into a comedy, or melodrama, and a farce ;
and when, to end all farther embarrassment,
Mr. Tremain suggested a ballot to decide,
it was accepted unanimously. The result
gave the first preference to The Ladies
Battle, the second to the ever fresh Box
and Cox.

Of course you all know I don't act,"
said Mrs. Newbold, prettily, and withdrawing
gracefully from all contest over the roles.
"1 never like anything so much as being-wardrobe
mistress and prompter, so I shall
elect myself into those positions at once,
and that clears off one superfluous woman."

Nor would she listen to any of the protestations
and entreaties of her companions ;

she put her hands over her ears, and shook
her head, until every little golden curl danced
again, as she cried, laughingly: "It's no
use, I don't hear you, and I'm not to be
moved. I have chosen my favourite characters,
and I won't give them up. Now then,"
bringing down her hands, " let us dispose of
the roles. Baby, you must be Leonie de
\ illegontier, you will look the character to
perfection ; Rosalie, whose forte though you
may not think it, is comedy, shall be Mrs.
Bouncer, in the farce ; Jack, will you take
De Grignon's role ? And you, Philip, I know
Henri is an old friend in your hands, will
you represent him once more ? "

And who is to be the Countess, Esther'"
asked Miss James, with a little smile. " Are
you keeping her part for some special favourite
who has not yet arrived ? It's the most important
role of all, and should be well taken,
or the play will prove terribly flat."

Have no fear, Bose," cried out Dick, forgetful
of her vow of silence, " I know, my

genius is once more to the front ; for whom,
of course, should Esther be keeping that part,
except for the cleverest actress of you all —
Patricia Hildreth — don't you know, pretty

Patty " She stopped as suddenly as she

began, and, flushing crimson, stole a deprecatory
look at Mr. Tremain's cold quiet face,
which at that moment caught a reflection of
her own painful blush.

I beg your pardon," she murmured under
her breath ; and there followed a moment's
constraint, broken immediately, however, by
Philip asking quite naturally and easily :

Then you are expecting Miss Hildreth,
Mrs. Newbold ? It is many years since I last
saw her — act."

And then, just in time to save Esther's
confusion, the luncheon-gong sounded, and
the council broke up, straying off in twos and
threes towards the dining-room.

"It's all very well," said Dick Darling,
scoffingly, to Freddy Slade, as they sauntered
along together, " having these miserable

theatricals — they might as well have 
at once, and be done with it — and,
for my part, I can't see that poor George
comes into it any better than he did with
Baby and me, though Esther was so sharp
about its being his birthday."

Oh, George can pay the shot," answered
Freddy, carelessly.

I'm sure it's what he's always at, poor
dear," retorted Dick, sharply ; and as by this
time they had reached the lunch-room, their
aimunent came to an end.

vol. i.

SENTIMENT AND "BACCY."

Esther," said Mr. Tremain a few hours
later, as they sat together in the library., just
before the time for the tea-tray and the return
of the other visitors, who, at Dick Darling's
suggestion and under her guidance, had gone
en masse to deal out tobacco and small sums
of money to the old salts at Snug Harbour,
Esther, did you know Patricia was to be
here, when you asked me to come ? "

His voice was more stern than reproachful,
and Mrs. Newbold, glancing up at him furtively,
thought how cold and impassive was
his face. She paused a moment before answering

him, and the flames from the pine-logs on
the wide hearth, leaping high, revealed a half-anxious,
half-hesitating expression in her blue
eyes and about her delicately - cut mouth.
She held a screen of scarlet Ibis feathers, as
she sat in a low chair, to shield her from the
heat, and her hand trembled just enough to
set the scarlet feathers moving, like so many
vivid fire-tongues. She answered somewhat
evasively :

And if I did, Philip, what then ? Is the
old wound so deep it cannot be healed, ami
do you, a Hercules among men, shrink from
\h^ light touch of a woman's fingers ? "

We are but courageous," he made answer,
according to time and opportunity, and the
weakness or strength of the temptation. A
woman's hand has been the cause of a man's
undoing ever since the world began, Esther.
I have no desire to become another sacrifice
on the altar of a woman's vanity."

u What do you fear, Philip ? " she asked,
presently, turning the feather fan round and

f 2

round in her finders, and watching him
intently as she spoke.

What do I fear ? Everything and
nothing. Yon, who know the whole miserable
old story, must also know the bitterness of
its ending. What do I fear ? I fear Patricia ;
I fear the light coming and going in her eyes ;
I fear the grace and beauty of her motions ; I
fear the subtle witchery of her voice ; I fear
the sweetness of her smile, the studied trick
of her down-drooped mouth, the soft lingering
pressure of her hand ; I fear — but there, why
fight against shadows ? I have the remedy in
my own hands — I can leave you, Esther.
Even you cannot compel me to see her."

He had risen as he spoke, and moved
about restlessly, stopping half-unconsciously
at a table that stood in his path, and fingered
absently the several articles of bric-d-brac
upon it.

Esther followed his movements with her
eyes, a look of pity and yet triumph on her
face. As his voice grew passionate, she

dropped the feather-screen, and clasping her
hands across her knee, drew a quick long-breath
; but when he came towards her again,
she sank back into her former listless attitude.
He stood up tall and straight before her, resting
one arm upon the chimney-shelf, and
looked down at her with dark excited eyes,
which the slight smile upon his lips failed to
counterbalance.

Did you ask her here with some deep-laid
plan of reconciliation ? Esther, was that
your motive ? Did you think, knowing me
since your girlhood — not so many years ago,
Esther — and finding me fairly good-natured
and forgiving, as men go, that you would take
the spindle of fate into your own hands, and
like Atropos of old, cut the tangled skein of
my life, in the vain hope of reuniting it with
hers ? It was kindly meant, Esther, but —
it cannot be."

Mrs. Newbold stopped him with an upward
gesture of her hand.

Philip," she said, slowly, and looking at

him steadily, " does it not strike you — do you
not think — you are taking her acquiescence
rather too much as a matter of course ? Has
Patricia no right to repudiate you, before even
you endeavour to reclaim her ? "

He paused before he answered, and the
lines about his mouth and eyes grew sterner
and more defined. When he spoke he took
his arm from the chimney-shelf, on which he
had been resting, as though disdaining that
slight support, and his voice sounded harsh
and uncompromising.

Has she that right, Esther ? Has she
not rather by her own actions cut herself
adrift from the usual consideration granted to
women ? Did she consider me, when she cast
me off so lightly ? And for w T hat, forsooth ?
Because I w T as a too eager and too rustic a
lover; because my outward appearance offended
her hypercritical eyes ; because she was buta
butterfly of the hour, as vain and frivolous
as the frailest cigale of a summer's hour ; and
because her world, before which she shone asa

bright particular star — and oh, what a little,
trifling world it was ! — and over which she
reigned as a queen, repudiated me. I was not
of their mode ; I was not a super-chic ; I
could not speak their argot, or join in their
light impertinent persiflage. I was too honest,
Esther, for her world — too honest and too
brutally straightforward, and so — she threw
me over."

She was young, Philip," pleaded Mrs.
Newbold, " young and flattered and spoilt.
Cannot you now make allowance for her
surroundings then, and understand how
terrible and impossible poverty, imperious
poverty, seemed to her ? You, who so well
appreciate the luxuries of life now, cannot
you put yourself in Patricia's place, and judge
from her standpoint, and see with her eyes,
what it meant, when you asked her to fling
her old life behind her, and start on a new
and untried one, with you alone, and you
only as recompense and compensation ? "

"If she had loved me," broke in Mr.

Tremain, " she would not have considered,
she would not have hesitated ; my love and
my devotion would have weighed heavier
with her than all the baubles and gewgaws
of her fashionable life."

For all answer to this Mrs. Newbold
laughed, throwing back her pretty head,
and throwing out her pretty hands dramatically.


"Ah," she cried, "for wholesale, downright
vanity commend me to a man ! It's
no use looking savage, Philip ; I cannot help
it, I must have my laugh out ; your cool
assumption of the be-all and end-all of
Patricia's existence is too irresistibly funny.
It's very man-like, and very characteristic.
You never take into consideration, you lords
of creation, the up-bringing, education and
surroundings of a girl of the world. You
forget that the very trifles you stigmatise as
frivolities are the daily small necessities of
her life : she knows nothing different. It is
as natural to her to have pretty clothes,

artistic surroundings, and dainty employments,
as it is for you to go to a crack tailor
and smoke an irreproachable cigar. She
cannot understand another sort of world
where these elements are not : she accepts
them as a matter of course, and could not
fashion her day without them. Then comes
some untoward fate, in the shape of a lover
from that unfamiliar world, whose habits,
maimer of life, occupations, are all opposed to
hers — as opposite as the luxurious civilisation
of Europe is to that of the heart of Africa.
What she deems necessities, he calls luxuries ;
her natural pastimes become frivolities ; her
occupations, idleness ; her unconscious acceptation
of all that money brings, worldliness ; and
her hesitation, when her lover and her love
demand the sacrifice of all this, pusillanimity
and calculativeness. And what does the
man offer in exchange? — for luxurious comfort,
straitened means ; for dainty clothes,
the resuscitated dresses of last year; for
society — a tired harassed husband ; and fo

recreation — perhaps a cheap place at some
theatre, two or three times a year."

"You are painfully frank, Esther," said
Mr. Tremain, stiffly.

"Yes, and I mean to be," continued
Mrs. New bold, " because it is a subject
I have very much at heart, and because
it is the fashion of the day to cry down
the worldly maiden, and cry up the
poor, but self-sacrificing lover. Had you
anything better to offer Patricia, than what
my words picture ? Was there any brighter
prospect for her ? Did you not make the
sacrifice as great a one as possible, and
could you honourably and reasonably have
expected the change in your fortunes, when
you urged Patricia's choice, and left her
no alternative between poverty with you,
and her accustomed luxury without you ?
Do you not understand her position somewhat
better, Philip, since you have become
a man of luxury and wealth ? "

You should qualify as a special pleader,

Esther," was Mr. Tremain's reply ; " but
you are in a manner right, a woman's
motives are always beyond a man's fathoming
; " and then with half a sigh she heard
him add, under his breath, " poor Patty,
poor pretty wilful Patty ! " and she smiled
at the inconsequent words, and nodded
her pretty head at the dancing flames,
while the lurking look of triumph in her
eyes shone out defiantly, and drove away
the droop of apprehension from her lips,

Then came Long, and the tea-tray, and
little Marianne, and Mrs. Esther was very
gracious and sweet, and full of petits soins
for Mr. Tremain's comfort, and withal so
winsome and so subdued elated, that
Dick Darling — who returned presently withall
her volunteers in outrageous spirits —
declared she was " the daisy est thing out,
and quite too superlatively lovely ! "

"And how did you find the old salts,
Dick ? " asked Esther, when every one had
been served with tea, and little Marianne

was particularly happy, forcing some scalding
milk down the luckless throat of "Trim,"
her ficus Achates in terrier-dog form.

Oh, as fresh as paint, and as delightfully
greedy and selfish as it behoves all
old men to be. They minutely inspected the
baccy,' and one of them told me, ' 't weren't
his sort, but shiver his timbers if he could
expect a young teddy ter know the difference
atween "old virgin," and "honey dew;'
and another one spat rather unpleasantly
upon the new silver dollar I gave him,
and expressed his rather blasphemous opinion,
as to its being a ' Blaine dollar,' and only
worth ninety cents ! Oh, my dear, they
are a most edifying old crew, and their
simplicity and naturalness is only worthy of
that respectable old party, and his residence,
known familiarly as 'Davy Jones's locker."

Dick, you are incorrigible ! " laughed
Mrs. Newbold, and that young lady, on whom
the afternoon's expedition seemed to have
acted as champagne, began again.

There was one most particularly refreshing
old hero ; he said he had been all
through the civil war, and got his promotion,
and his leg bowled off, at Gettysburg "

Oh, but I say, Miss Dick," here broke in
Freddy Slade, " he couldn't do it, you know,
not there, because Gettysburghh was a land
battle, and how could your old man-o'-war's
man be there ? "

He said Gettysburghh, I am perfectly
sure he did," answered Dick, " because I
quite well remember how he winked at me
when he said it, and — yes, I did, I couldn't
help it, it must have been capillary attraction,
Esther — I winked back at him, and then he
spun a tremendous yarn, all about his gory
wounds, and bloody hurts ; mixed up, you
know, with reefing topsails, and belaying
mizzen-masts, and setting fore and aft sheets,
and rolling in the scuppers, and weltering in
his own gore, and piping up the dog-watch,
and losing; his les:, and fighting for his
country, and scoffing at its rewards ; and I

am sure, yes, very sure, he said it was at
Gettysburghh it all happened. But really now,
when you come to think of it, things were a
little mixed, and I am not responsible for the
geooraohv of this country."

At this there was another laugh, in which
Dick joined, and then in the silence that
followed, Marianne's shrill treble made itself
heard :

I do quite think with Perkins, mumsey,
Miss Dick's the gal for my money ! "

At which astounding revelation Esther
gasped, and the rest of the company fell into
renewed shouts of laughter.

Come here, Mimi," said Mr. Slade at
last, putting out his hand, and catching hold
of the child and the dog, and drawing them
towards him, he lifted Marianne on to his
knee, causing Trim to stand in perilous fashion
on his back legs, since his little mistress refused
to release him.

Now, Mimi," Mr. Slade continued in the
hush of a breathless silence, " you are a most

interesting little girl, and what you have
just told us has made Miss Dick very happy,
only we should like to know a little more.
Can you remember anything else said by the
ingenuous Mr. Perkins ? "

"He isn't Mister Perkins, 'kept to Sarah,"
said Marianne, very proud of her position,
and rather consequential in consequence ;
he's her young man, and he comes under
her window sometimes, and sings ' Sally in
our Alley,' real beautiful, and that's her, and
I heard her tell Jane, and she's my very own
nursery-maid, that he said ' that there wasn't
no one could hold a candle to Miss Dick, and
she was the gal for his money ; he wouldn't
mind putting a fiver on her, 'cause she'd run
straight ; but he wouldn't go much on that
there pal of hers, Miss James, 'cause she was a
shifty one.' "

"Oh, Marianne, Marianne!" cried out
Esther, trying vainly to cover the confusion
caused by Miss Newbold's parrot-like revelations,
" come here to me." Then as Mimi

struggled down from Mr. Slade's detaining-arms,
and danced over to her mother, she
said, reprovingly :

What were you doing, to hear all that
senseless gossip ? Where was Mdlle. Lamien ?"

Poor Lammy had a ' creation ' headache,"
lisped the little girl, standing first on
one foot and then on the other; "so I was
just put off on to Jane, 'cause nurse was out,
and so she and Sarah did their work together
and I helped 'em, and they were having
a crack ' over the company. Is you sorry,
mumsey ? " the little thing asked suddenly,
noticing the look of annoyance on her mother's
face. " Was I naughty ? "

Yes, I am very sorry," answered Mrs.
Newbold, emphatically ; " my little daughter,
you must not listen to such nonsense. You
must get your dolly next time, or come to me,
when Mdlle. Lamien has a headache."

Poor Lammy ! " echoed the child, " she
was cross, too, and said Sarah was very wrong,
every one wasn't made with Miss Dick's bright

face and sweet temper ; but I could make
myself like her if I tried to always say a kind
thing and not a horrid one, though the horrid
one might be cleverer."

There was a moment's unbearable awkwardness
as Mimi's sage remarks fell upon the
burning ears of her audience ; then Esther
made a move, quickly followed by the other
ladies, and the party broke up, each glad to
escape the embarrassment of the moment.
Esther alone noticed Miss James's face, flushed
with passion and mortification, and sighed involuntarily.


She had reason afterwards to remember
that look, and her sigh.

VOL. I.

Stage-struck.

For the next week but little was talked of at
the Folly, save the forthcoming theatricals.

The morning hours grew strangely silent.
Gone was the light laughter, banished the
echo of gay voices, the quick coming and
going of youthful feet ; indeed, to any one
entering suddenly and unknowing, the air of
the house was so changed and transformed they
might well exclaim, " The place is haunted ! "

And haunted it certainly was, but with
fair ghosts in modern raiment, who, if they
moved about at all, did so with tragic step and
abstracted gaze, or with comic gesture and
exaggerated action, accompanied by eagerly-moving

lips, from which, however, no sound
proceeded, while each and all held, tightly
clasped and closely scanned, one of those thin
yellow paper books which Mr. French has made
so happily familiar to all of us.

Indeed, as Dick Darling remarked, with a
piteous shake of her head, and a twisting up
of her round mouth, " There wasn't such a
thing as a ' rise ' to be got out of any one of
them, since the craze for acting had descended
upon them."

Now and then George Newbold, in honour
of whose birthday all this commotion was
undertaken, would come upon a solitary group
of two — always a girl and a man — who evidently
considered learning in couples the
quickest way, and who would scowl upon
him distractedly when he approached them,
or seem wrapped in contemplation of the
other's genius as, with halting speech and
flushed face, he or she repeated their respective
lines.

Mr. Newbold had been heard to declare

more than once within the safe precincts of
the smoking-room, in language more forcible
than polite, that for his part, he should be
glad when the " shindy " was all over ; and as
to its having anything to do with him, or his
birthday, it was a — lie. He didn't see where
his fun came in, since he took no part in it.

Paying the bills, old man," replied Jack
Howard, lazily, to this outburst ; " what more
can you ask ? Isn't that the proud position
and boast of the typical American husband ? "

To which grim comfort George only replied
by lighting a very large and disreputable-looking
pipe, and smoking furiously.

Miss James was among those who elected
to study d deux, and had undertaken, in this
way, Jack Howard's education, who, much to
Baby Leonard's chagrin, had become in some
manner, the clever Rosalie's slave. Baby, with
tears in her eyes, marked his defalcation from
her ranks, and with a feeling of self-pity
and wounded vanity, sought compensation in
Freddy Shale, and absorption in her role.

Between Miss James and Dick Darling
coolness reigned. These once fast friends
were now almost declared enemies, for even
Dick's proverbial good-nature was not proof
against the continued and unbending anger of
her whilom friend. Miss James had neither
forgotten nor forgiven little Marianne's unfortunate
revelations, and she visited her annoyance
and jealousy upon Dick, who at least
was guiltless of all wish to offend ; and from
brooding over Mr. Perkins' plain and unvarnished
words, Rosalie grew to forget they
were the utterance of a servant, and magnified
their consequence until she fairly hated Dick,
and longed to see some evil befall her.

Perhaps the keenest sting of all lay in the
fact of her humiliation before Mr. Tremain,
for, with an unreasoning confidence, she had
made out to herself that Philip was attracted
to her, that he found in her a mind superior
to the general run of young ladies, and that
consequently he might, in time, come to fully
realise and appreciate her abilities, and so,

perhaps, would be solved the enigma of her
future ; for Miss James was no longer a jeune
ingenue, and the thought of continued single-blessedness
troubled her not a little.

It was therefore very bitter to be humiliated
in his presence, and to see the lurking-smile
gather about his lips at Marianne's reckless
disclosures. Mr. Tremain, be it remarked,
was innocent of any co - operation in Miss
James's schemes ; he did not even give hera
second thought beyond the necessities of
every-day life ; and the fact that they were
often thrown together created no suspicion in
his mind, as to any ulterior hopes being built
upon his words and manner. Though, indeed,
Philip had that courteous and deferential bearing
g towards women which made his smallest
service an appeal, and his lightest word a
caress — as Dick Darling said, "When he asked
one to have sugar in one's tea, it was with
such an assumption of intimacy and entreaty,
one might well imagine he was suing for one's
heart and hand.' ,

Perhaps Miss James built upon this
manner, and though so clever in ologies and
ethics, failed to read aright the signs of this
man's heart, and raised foundations on sand inconsequence.


And still Patricia did not come. Each day
Mr. Tremain looked for the old familiar witching
face in the circle of "fair women" who
gathered at tea-time in the pleasant library ;
where the wide fireplace, never empty of
smouldering pine-logs, was very attractive
in the chilly spring mornings and evenings.
But he looked in vain. The faces were constantly
changing — for Mrs. Newbold w T as a
great favourite, and had many guests — and
they were fair enough, too, but none so fair as
Patty's, as he remembered it, ten years ago,
and not so winsome or so full of grace.

He was too proud to ask news of her ;
ever since his conversation with Esther, his
heart had gone forth more and more to
his little wayward love of a decade ago,
and though he turned his thoughts resolutely

from all remembrance of her, and sternly
told himself that he had been right in his judgment
of her, she was but a frivolous butterfly ?
and as such more unsuited than ever to
him in his graver years, still there would
come unbidden a lurking memory of her
sweet mutinous face, the wilful lips, the
flashing eyes, the silks and laces that
surrounded her lithe form, the faint sweet
odour of violets that always accompanied
her, and he would pull himself up with a
start to find his heart and mind gone captive
to the ghost of his old love.

"Ten years ago!" he said, half unconsciously
to himself, " ten years ago ! It is
ten years since we parted ; why, Patty must
be past her jeunesse now ; she was nineteen
then, she is nine-and-twenty now, and what
woman keeps youth's fairness or freshness
when so close on thirty ? Patty thirty !
Patty grown out of wilful, petulant girlhood ;
Patty with suffering and change written
on her face ; nay, with perhaps a wrinkle

or two, or even a gray thread in the soft
brown darkness of her hair ! "

Impossible ! He could never think of
her save as when they parted, when she
was in the full flush and arrogance of her
young beauty, surrounded by every luxury,
and flattered by the gay homage of her
little court, triumphant, sparkling, inaccessible.
To picture her in any different guise,
was to wilfully take down his idol from
its pedestal.

He sauntered into the library one afternoon,
at the accustomed hour of tea, and
found the room full of people. Mrs. Newbold
was pouring Indian Hyson into faultless cups
of royal Worcester, which Jack Howard
passed about, followed by Dick Darling
with what she called " the trimmings," i.e.
sugar and cream.

An animated discussion was o-oino- on,
so Philip's entrance was unnoticed save by
Miss James, who beckoned to him to take
the empty chair beside her. Nothing loth

to escape introductions, he fell into her
scheme and made her supremely happy ;
for they sat a little withdrawn from the
general group, and this made Mr. Tremain's
position all the more marked. Miss James
was never quite content unless what she
called Philip's "attentions" were fully en
evidence.

Dick Darling's bright eyes spied him
out presently, and she brought him a cup
of tea, handing it to him with a shrug
of her shoulders and an absolute wink of
her eye, at which Miss James coloured
and cast an angry look after the retreating
culprit.

And when is Miss Hildreth coming ? "
were the first words that caught Mr. Tremain's
ear, and riveted his attention at once.

Not until the very day of the play,"
replied Mrs. Newbold. " It's rather provoking
of her, isn't it ? But really, you know, Patricia's
so spoiled, and it doesn't very much matter.
She's quite perfect in her part, and we can

have a dress rehearsal before evening on the
day, if necessary."

And who acts Henri de Flavigneul's
part ? " asked another voice.

"Oh, Mr. Tremain," replied Mrs. Newbold
again. "You need have no fear, Mrs. Beverley.
Mr. Tremain is sans reproche in his character."

Do you mean Philip Tremain," the lady
persisted, " the clever Mr. Tremain, who has
such bijou chambers and who is so unapproachable
? But surely, won't that be a
little awkward ? Wasn't he once engaged to
Miss Phil ? "

But here Dick Darling managed to upset
the brass water-kettle, and in the confusion
which ensued the question was never completed.


Soon after the guests took their departure,
and as the house party stood about the fire
waiting for the dressing gong, Esther said :

"I am sure it is high time we had a
rehearsal ; we shall never be ready if we goon
in this lazy fashion. I have sent for Mr.

Kobinson, of Wallace's Theatre, to coach you
all, and he will be here tomorrow ; so I calla
rehearsal for that afternoon, and I advise
you to study up well, for he's a perfect
martinet regarding correct lines, and thinks
nothing of reducing one to abject misery
by his sarcasm."

But who will take Miss Hildreth's part ? "
asked Baby Leonard. " It's no use our rehearsing
if the Countess isn't here — it will be
Hamlet with Hamlet left out, and no mistake."

Baby is thinking of her grand scene,' 7
murmured Miss James aside to Philip. " Her
part is nothing without the Countess as a
foil."

Some one might read the lines of her
role," suggested Freddy Slade, who, as De
Grignon, thought very little of any other
character. " It won't matter very much if
one only gets one's proper cues."

Oh, but it matters a great deal, thank
you," cried Baby, quite roused from her usual
lethargy. " Who wants to act to bare cues,

I should like to know ? And how is one to
work up into anything, if one hasn't the proper
assistance ? "

You are quite right, Baby," said Esther,
when she could make herself heard, " and you
shan't be put in any such dampening position.
Mdlle. Lamien has offered to be Patricia's
substitute, and she knows the lines by heart.
I think it's very good-natured of her."

To which there was a general assent, only
Miss James whispered again to Mr. Tremain :

You will have no temptation to draw
you from your allegiance to your Baby-wish
sweetheart, Mr. Tremain. Mdlle. Lamien can
scarcely offer any counter attractions, as the
Countess, to Baby, as Leonie."

Then with a quick upward look and the
least perceptible halt: "How would it be, I
wonder, if our capricious leading lady were
here in person ? "

The glance she gave him was brief; butin
the second that her eyes scanned his face,
she noted the blood steal slowly into his

cheeks, and the lines deepen about his mouth,
and with an angry impotent throb at her
heart she realised his secret, and the hopelessness
of her plans and desires. She turned
away however, as the gong sounded, with
a light laugh, despite the dull heavy sense
of her own impuissance.

Mr. Tremain was not long in completing
his toilette that evening, and when he came
downstairs and made his way to the library
in search of a book, it was with the purpose
of half an hour's quiet reading before dinner.
He crossed the room to the low bookcases
that lined one side, and selecting his volume
turned back to the fireplace, where a low
reading-lamp on the sofa - table made an
inviting resting-place.

He had thought himself quite alone, and
was consequently not a little surprised to
see within the shadow of the chimney recess,
opposite to him, the dark quiet figure of
Mdlle. Lamien. He put down his book with

a half-sigh, and approached her ; not even
at the sacrifice of his dearest self-indulgence
could Mr. Tremain be discourteous to a lady,
still less to a stranger and a dependent.
Moreover, he acknowledged to himself that
Mdlle. Ancien exercised a distinct and strange
kind of spell over him, reminding him in
some occult ni 7 serious way of Patricia,
though why and wherefore he was at a loss
to explain.

It was not that these two women — who
had so little in common, whose lives were
as wide apart as the poles, and whose interests
were as diversely opposite as well could be —
had ever met ; and yet — such is the strong-personal
magnetism of certain natures — Philip,
though he had spoken but twice to Mimi's
governess, felt the sense of her power over
him ; a power so subtle, and yet so strong
as to amount almost to physical force ; while
always with the sense of this domination
came the thought of Patricia.

Mdlle. Lamien was sitting where first
he remembered seeing her, well within the
shadowed recess ; her face, even in the subdued
light of the single lamp, looked paler
than ever, perhaps because its waxen pallor
was touched by a shade of red in the cheeks ;
the kindly shadows hid the painful mark
that disfigured one of them, but the light,
catching the silver of the wavy hair beneath
the falling lace folds, played about it, and
across the dark sombre eyes, and thin hands
that lay clasped with a sorrowful droop on
her knees.

As Philip drew near to her, some polite
words of salutation on his lips, she suddenly
raised her head, and turning it more fully
towards the light, smiled at him. It was
wonderful, the effect of her smile; in a
moment, as it flashed across her face, it
transfigured it wholly, and restored, once
more, somewhat of the youth and beauty
of bygone days.

Mr. Tremain stood spell-bound; once again
there swept across him that strange intangible
something, that reflex of Patricia, that evanescent
likeness, gone as soon as caught, yet
so tantalising in its reality. As he stood
silent, amazed, and yet in a manner fascinated,
by the singular metamorphose wrought
by a smile, two lines of an unpublished poem
written by a dear dead friend, rose unbidden
to his lips. He repeated them, half unconsciously,
below his breath :

Light my path thro' Stygian darkness,
By the splendour of thy smile."

Such indeed must have been the light
that glowed upon the face of Cleopatra, when
Anthony called her his

Glorious sorceress of the Nile."

As Philip gazed upon the face before him,
and no word was spoken, he felt a sudden
thrill of life and fire pass through him ; the

VOL. I. h

blood leapt in his veins and flew to his
face, he put out his hands entreatingly, drawing
nearer to her ; he felt the subtle essence
of her being wrapping him around, enervating
his mind, his will ; and yet he had no power,
no desire to combat it. For it was not
Mdlle. Lamien he saw, it was not her white,
wan face, with its disfiguring scar, that
enchanted him, it was not her burning eyes
that held his, it was not even the present
he was conscious of. No, he was back again
in the past, ten years ago, and he was
looking his last upon his sweet girl-love,
seeing the mocking smile upon her lips, the
trembling hands, the piteous, defiant eyes.

"Patricia," he cried, "Patricia!" And
as he called her name, the spell was broken,
the glory faded, the past fell from him, and
he found himself alone ; and only the light
rustle of a silken gown, the faint dick of
a closing door, gave evidence of a departing
presence.

Good heavens ! " he said at last, drawing
a deep breath, and looking about him uncertainly,
" who and what is this Mdlle.
Lamien, that she is so like, and yet so unlike
Patricia ? And what spell does she own to
trick me into such hysteric emotion ? "

Then the door opened, and Long came in,
followed by Perkins, and the wax candles
were lit in the brackets and sconces, and the
room from semi - darkness and mysterious
shadows, leapt into vivid, brilliant life. Then
came Mrs. Newbold, bringing a touch of this
world's goods in her latest importation of a
Worth gown, full of joyful content and wellbeing,
fastening her gloves and jingling her
jewelled bangles, and looking very much surprised
to find Mr. Tremain in advance of her.

And so the hour passed and the spell
faded, and Philip gave no further thought
to Mdlle. Lamien or, strange to say, to
Patricia.

Miss James scored several points that

h 2

evening in her own estimation, and felt
almost feverishly anxious to have the preliminaries
over with, and her engagement to
Philip recognised as un fait accom^i.

DANGER AHEAD.

Meantime the preparations for the theatricals
went on rapidly. Mr. Robinson came down
the next day, and found his amateur troupe
duly drawn up for inspection. Not one of
them, however, was word-perfect, in spite of
their diligent study, singly or in couples,
except Mdlie. Lamien and Mr. Tremain, to
neither of whom did the text present any
difficulties.

Much to Philip's surprise, Mdlle. Lamien
proved but an indifferent actress ; she recited
her lines without a mistake, but that was all
that could be said in praise of her. She was
dull, apathetic, heavy, made no effort to throw

life or emotion into her part, and was, indeed,
so studiously indifferent, that Mr. Robinson
took no trouble to either remonstrate with or
contradict her, knowing her to be but a substitute,
and feeling perfectly sure of the real
impersonator, who had been trained untiringly
by him, and had made her debut as
his favourite pupil.

Mdlle. Lamien made it so very apparent
that she only appeared in obedience to Mrs.
Newbold's request, that Philip found acting
up to her not only laborious, but ridiculous,
and consequently shirked his scenes with her
as much as possible, though not without
wondering at the strange contradictions of
which her character seemed formed.

The days were drawing on now, and only
three remained before that one which, as Dick
Darling remarked, " they were to so appropriately
celebrate — George's birthday, with
George left very much out of it." Now that
Philip knew Patricia was not expected until
the very morning of the all-important day, he

put away from him all thought of meeting
her, and, with a suddenly developed gaiety,
joined heart and soul in the frivolities of the
hour.

The day before the great event, however,
something happened which threatened to deprive
the company of Henri's personation,
and which for the moment, threw even the
theatricals in the shade. A letter written by
]mr. Tremain to his one intimate man friend
best explains the situation :

"The Folly,

"April, 188—.
"Dear Mainspring,

Here I am with a strained wrist and

a halo of heroism. The first is uncomfortable,

the second undeserved. No doubt you will

receive a garbled account of what has occurred,

and a highly-coloured report of my c heroic

action and wonderful presence of mind ' —

the words are Miss James's, not mine. Well,

then, to save your brain a shock, and your

friendship a blow, I send off these somewhat

unintelligible lines. I don't want you repeating
the tale, with mock heroics, at the
club and about town, and I know your
fondness for a good story.

Let me say then, as a premise, that
whatever of bravery or heroism was displayed,
at a somewhat critical moment in a commonplace
incident, belongs solely to Mdlle. Lamien,
Mimi's governess; and, by-the-bye, I don't
know but that it is just at these commonplace
times that one's nerve and resolution
are most often put to the test.

Here are the facts : Mrs, Xewbold hasa
pair of new ponies, George's latest gift,
and her last fad ; she drove me up with
them the day I arrived, and I didn't care
for their style particularly, they pulled too
hard, and had an obstinate trick of catching
at the bit that might prove nasty. Esther's
groom on these occasions is Tony, elected,
presumably, because of the smallness of his
stature. You have seen Tony, and therefore
know that he is mostly hat.

Very well, this morning being bright and
tool, Mrs. Newbold decided to take little
Marianne and Cissy Beverley for a drive ;
it was in vain both George and I pointed
out to her that the ponies had not been
exercised for the last two days, and would
therefore be very fresh and too great a
handful for her, she would not listen — her
sex never will, you know, when advice runs
against inclination — and woman-like, she must
play with her latest toy.

"So off they started, the children tucked

in beside Mrs. Newbold, and Tony perched

up behind. The little brutes were fresh

enough, but Esther had them well in hand,

and drove off in true workmanlike style.

They had their drive, along the upper road,

i
and round by the Bay, and so through

the town to Beverley's house. Here Mrs.

Newbold got out, letting Marianne hold the

reins, with Tony at the ponies' heads. She

lifted Cissy down, and was just turning to

give a word of caution, when a cat, followed

by Beverley's setter pup, ran out from the
kitchen garden and flew directly under the
ponies' heads.

Then came a sudden shying movement,
the light carriage swayed dangerously, and
then, with tossing heads, the little brutes
broke loose from Tony's hold, took the bits
between their teeth, and in a second were
off on a dead run.

You will admit it was not a pleasant
situation for Esther. She has since told me
that her first intimation of danger was the
sight of her darling's bright sunny hair
and frightened blue eyes being borne away
in the rocking, swaying carriage, as it sped
down the drive, drawn by horses wild and
young.

"They passed the gate safely, and started
off down the Terrace at a full gallop. And
now my part comes in. I was walking leisurely
up from the post-office when, as I neared
Snug Harbour, I saw . the ponies dashing
towards me ; in a second I recognised them ;

in that second they were past me. I started
after them, but with a feeling of hopelessness,
for who could hope to come up with their
flying feet ? And though the road was broad
and open for several miles, little Marianne —
whose piteous white face caught my eye as
she was borne by me — might at any moment
loose her hold and be dashed out, or dragged
in the trailing reins.

I put on what speed I could, and as
I reached a slight curve in the road, beyond
which the ponies would be lost to sight, a
woman flew through an open gate and threw
herself directly in front of the frightened
animals.

Thus checked for a second, I saw her
measure the distance with a glance, then
jump and catch the bridle with one hand,
flinging all her weight upon it and never
letting go, though the little brutes dragged
her several rods. To reach her side and
add my strength to hers was but the work
of a moment ; the ponies, easily tired, submitted

to my soothing voice and hand, while
little Marianne, who throughout had behaved
like a heroine, now covered herself with
glory, by stepping deliberately out of the
carriage and throwing her arms about the
tall, dark figure beside her.

I turned then to face my brave companion
; it was, as I suspected, Mdlle. Lamien,
who stood there, calm and unmoved, the
heavy lace of her veil concealing whatever
emotion her face might have revealed. It
was she, and no other, who had risked her
own life to save the child ; and yet, Main-waring,
I declare to you solemnly and in all
calmness, it was not of her I thought as we
stood together side by side ; it was not her
personality that seemed so near me, nor her
spirit that had carried out so brave a rescue.
Laugh at me if you will, suggest hysteria and
nerves ; so be it, I accept the taunt, and repeat
again, it was not Mdlle. Lamien who made
captive my admiration and esteem — it was
Patricia Hildreth. Explain it as best you can.

I do but repeat, it was Patricia who dominated
me then ; Patricia who seemingly stood so
close, I had but to put out my hand to touch
her, — and yet — it was Mdlle. Lamien who
replied coldly to my inquiries, and who
walked swiftly aw T ay, leaving me with Marianne,
and the now quiet horses.

Strange to say, neither she nor the child
have received any injuries, and I have
escaped with a strained wrist — my left one —
which will not incapacitate me for tomorrow ;
indeed, a Henri de Flavigneul with a sling will
be a new departure, and ought to prove what
Miss Darling would call ' very fetching.'

"By the way, you come down, I believe,
for the play ; did I tell you Patricia will also
be here ? I think in many ways this place
grows dangerous, and I shall return to my
own den, as soon as the theatricals are over.

As ever, old friend, yours faithfully,
Philip Tjremadt."

But if Mr. Tremain was inclined to treat

thus lightly his share in Marianne's rescue,
the others refused to look at it in so trivial
a light. Esther, with tears in her eyes,
took both his hands and thanked him with
a tremulous smile.

I shall never forget it, Philip, never,"
she said, and turned away to hide the falling
drops.

George Newbold, proverbially a man of
few words, wrung his friend's hand in the
grip of a giant, and muttered an incoherent
Old fellow, can't thank you; it was splendidly
done."

And then came Dick Darling, her laughing
face sobered for a moment, and a look
of true admiration in her eyes, as she said :

Mr. Tremain, you are a brick ; it was
awfully tip-top of you ! I tell you what ; for
downright bravery you ' take the cake ! ' J

But from no one did Philip receive such
delicate and subtle flattery as from Miss
James. That young lady fairly glowed with
the magnitude of her admiration. She went

about with raised eyelids and drooped lips,
as though always contemplating, mentally,
his past danger, and returning thanks for
his deliverance. She was also always meeting
him at odd times, and in out-of-the-way
corners, and asking with solicitude after his
poor injured wrist," offering to bind it up
for him, or write his letters, or read to him ;
which last, as Dick said, e< was palpably
absurd, since Mr. Tremain's eyes and brains
were not injured, or out of working gear."

Philip, hating all fuss, and especially fuss
in which he deserved so small a share, made
the most of his strained wrist and kept in
the smoking-room, or his own chamber, the
rest of the day, and there nursed his rancour
against Miss James for being a fool herself,
and making him appear an equal one ; and
his resentment towards Mdlle. Lamien, who
had passed him by almost without recognition,
drawing the falling laces closer about her face,
and not heeding the eager hand he put out
to detain her, or the alert tone in which he

asked after her health. She had paused just
one brief instant, as though about to speak,
and then, evidently changing her intention,
drew herself up and passed down the stairs,
not once looking back, or replying by a word
to his courtesy.

There was a full-dress rehearsal called for
that evening, and Philip, as he sat moodily in
his own room, smoking his cigar, felt a half
savage delight in the knowledge that Mdlle.
Lamien must appear for it, and respond in a
somewhat less chilling and uncomfortable
manner to the requirements demanded by
his role.

A little before tea-time he heard voices in
the corridor outside, which he recognised as
Dick Darling's and Baby Leonard's.

"Only think; she has actually come," Miss
Leonard was saying, "and a day before she
promised ! "

To which Dick briefly replied, " Who ? "

Why, Miss Hildreth, of course ; who

else are we all waiting for ? Really, Dick,
you grow very dense ! "

"Oh, do I?" returned Miss Darling,
unmoved. " And so Patricia has come at
last ? Patricia the beautiful, Patricia the
inconstant, Patricia the slayer, Patricia the
conqueror ! Well, I agree with you, Baby,
'tis something: to be sure of her, for Miss
Patty is but kittle cattle at best ! "

Here the two girls walked down the passage,
their voices growing fainter and then
sinking into silence. So Patricia was come.
For a long time Mr. Tremain sat very still,
not heeding his outward surroundings, immersed
in retrospect ; his cigar went out,
the fire died on the hearth and fell into little
heaps of white ashes, the day darkened, the
hours drew on to evening, and the shadows
came out of their hiding-places in the large
room, creeping up from indistinct corners,
and from behind the heavy furniture, shaking
themselves free from the window draperies,

VOL. I. I

and drawing nearer, nearer, until they
wrapped him all about in their impalpable
obscurity, and he became a part of them,
as unreal and intangible as they.

Patty was come ! Patty ! And he must
see her again, must look into her eyes, and
touch her hand, and watch the smile come
and go upon her lips, just as he had known
it all, and loved it, ten years ago.

And now a strange thing occurred ; at least
it seemed strange at the time, and Philip could
never quite shake off the indefinable feeling of
the supernatural that then enveloped him, whenever
in after years he recalled that evening.

His rooms were situated in what was
known as the " bachelor wing " of the Folly,
though not separated from the main corridor,
as were the other apartments of that class.
He knew that next to his chamber w T as
what was called the Green Room, occupied
by Miss James and Dick Darling, while on
the other side was the dressing-room belonging
to his suite, and used by his man-servant ;

the remaining rooms beyond were bachelor
apartments, separated from the main part
of the house by a heavy baize door, that
cut off all sound. He also knew that the
fair occupants of the Green Boom were at
that hour sipping tea and scandal in the
library, and his man flirting with the maids
in the hall. To all intents and purposes
he was absolutely alone, as no sound of
arriving guests could reach him, the greater
spare rooms being situated in the west wing.
Marianne and Mdlle. Lamien's apartments
were in the main corridor, but a storey above.
All this flashed across Mr. Tremain's mind
in a second, though it has taken somewhat
long to explain.

As he sat brooding in the chill dim
shadows, conjuring up the ghosts of by-gone
years, and speculating moodily upon the
fate that had marred his life, and the strange,
inconsistent, unwilling homage he even yet
bore for the woman who had played the
part of a gay mocking Cassandra to him, and

I 2

with a dreary pessimist philosophy accepted
his destiny as inevitable, he became suddenly
aware of a faint subtle perfume, that stole
over his senses imperceptibly, which he recognised
physically to be the odour of violets.
And as this sweet scent swept over him, there
came before him vividly, a sudden sharp remembrance
of the past, while the words of the
poet rose unconsciously to his lips :

— I think of the passion that shook my youth,
Of its aimless love and its idle pains,
And am thankful now for the certain truth
That only the sweet remains. 1 '

He was no longer Philip the successful,
resting in his easy-chair, the idol of the hour
at the Folly ; but he was Philip the ardent,
and the impecunious ; Philip in a badly made
coat, heated and travel-stained, hurt and
angry ; standing in a room that was dainty in
its luxury of flowers and half lights, with a
vision of a drawing-room beyond, brilliantly
lighted, softly coloured, and from whence came
the echo of gay laughter, and bright voices.

And now from out that room came slowly,

ah, how slowly, to his wildly beating heart, a
tall slight figure, clad in softest silks and laces'
with a breast-knot of violets ; and as the
vision advanced nearer and stood half within
the shadow of the outer room, he could see the
soft fair face, crowned with its dead-brown
hair, and wearing a look half frightened, half
pleading in the sweet eyes, and on the arched
and trembling lips.

Slowly, slowly the figure drew nearer to
him ; now it was but a few paces off, he could
almost touch it w 7 with his hand, he could seethe
violets rise and fall with the lace upon her
bosom ; their scent came to him strong, and
sweet, and pungent. He sprang from his
chair, and held out his hands.

Patty!" he cried, "Patty, have you
come to find me, my little Patty ? "

But even as he spoke the vision faded ;
there came one clear loud whisper, calling his
name, " Philip ! Philip ! " and then, even ashe
looked, the shining lights were gone, the
gaily echoed voices silent, the figure grew
indistinct and unreal, and then vanished, and

Philip found himself standing in the middle
of the room, gazing on vacancy, with only
the sad perfume of violets left on the air.

He sank back into his chair, bewildered,
exhausted, and as he did so, a strain of saddest
music reached his ears, and a voice that was
almost a monotone, and yet that struck an
answering chord of misery in his heart, said,
rather than sang, some words that ran in this
wise :

I am a woman,

Therefore I may not
Call to him, cry to him,

Bid him delay not ;
Showing no sign to him,
By look of mine to him,
What he has been to me.
Pity me, lean to me,

Philip, my king ! "

The voice ceased, and Mr. Tremain, his
composure gone, his heart beating wildly,
cried out again, this time with a ring of
deepest passion :

Patricia ! Patty, have you come back tome?"


But it was not Patty's sweet voice he
knew so well, that made answer, it was a
far higher, lighter treble that cried out,
as the door was flung open impetuously :

"Oh, Mr. Tremain, how very dull and
mopy of you ! All alone, in the dark, and
no fire ! " And Mrs. Esther swept in, trailing
her plush tea-gown after her, followed by
Perkins with a lamp, and Long with a silver
tray set with a tea equipage.

"Dear me!" continued Mrs. Newbold,
coming nearer, and blinking her eyes in
affected short-sightedness, " how very dismal
you look, and how very cold you feel !
Here, Perkins, make up the fire directly.
I have come to give you your tea, Philip,
I am sure you need it, for you look as white
as a ghost, and as dazed as a clairvoyant !
Put the tray here, Long," drawing up a
small table, " there, that will do ; now
tell your master to come to Mr. Tremain's
sitting-room, immediately." Then as the two
servants withdrew, she added with a comical

little grimace, " now for ten minutes, until
George can join us, my reputation is at
stake ! Isn't it awful ? and I who have
known you since my days of short frocks
and pig-tails ! " Then with a light laugh,
I knew you would be dull, Philip, I always
think it's very trying work posing for a hero,
and you know we all insist upon your personating
that most uncomfortable character,
whether you like it or not, so if I were you
I'd get all the glory out of it that's possible !
Now then, here's a cup of tea for you," and
she jumped up, carrying it over to him, where
he sat, half hidden in his arm-chair.

The newly kindled fire flashed up as
she came to him, and shining full upon
him, revealed the whiteness of his face, and
the look of introspection in his eyes.

"Are you not well, Philip?" she asked ;
and then before he could reply, " Why,
what a delicious odour of violets ! You
dear thing, have you got some for me ? "

But Mr. Tremain made no answer ; he

put out his hand and took the cup from her,
saying as lie did so: "Then you, too, perceive
it, Esther ; it is the odour of violets, is
it not, and yet I have none for you."

Of course it's violets," replied Mrs.
Newbold, positively, " and of course you are
hiding them from me. Ah, well, I don't mind,
I dare say you are keeping them for some one,"
and she smiled a little fine smile of superiority
and knowledge.

After a moment's pause Mr. Tremain asked
another question, and in spite of his attempted
carelessness, his voice had a ring of anxiety.

Esther, who — who was singing, just now,
when you came in, or a moment before ? "

<c Singing ? " queried Mrs. Newbold. " Oh,
no one ; they are all far too busy discussing
this evening's rehearsal ; though, stay a
moment — yes, I remember now, I did hear
some one grinding out a melancholy ditty,
as I came down the corridor. Of course, it-was
Mdlle. Lamien."

Mdlle. Lamien ? " echoed Philip.

"Yes," replied Esther, "she has a little,
tiny room in this very wing, where she keeps
a piano and some books ; you might hear her
here, it's just possible."

But Mr. Tremain was not heeding her.
Once aoriin he was overwhelmed and confused
as the strange spell of this woman's
personality crept over him. He could have
sworn the voice was Patricia's, just as the
face of his vision had been Patricia's ! Was
he always to be haunted by this strange dual
resemblance — which was no resemblance —
between the Patricia of his youth, and this
incomprehensible, mysterious stranger ?

If the voice was the voice of Mdlle.
Lamien, why should it affect him so strongly,
or why should it seem but the fitting adjunct
to the face of his vision, since that
vision wore the semblance of Patricia ?

But whether she came as a faint perfume,
Or whether a spirit in stole of white,
I feel, as I pass from the darkened room,
She has been with my soul to-night ! "

AN ARRIVAL AND A MEETING.

When Mr. Tremain entered the drawing-room
later in the evening he was at once conscious
of Patricia's presence. It did not require
the practical use of his eyes to assure himself
of the fact, for to him the room and the
company were permeated with her personality.


It had always been so with Patricia.
When she entered an assembly she drew to
herself all the light and vivacity and beauty
of the scene ; and the homage which was
always immediately accorded her, seemed buta
fitting tribute to her fascinations.

Other women, by far more beautiful, paled

before the witchery of her face ; other wits,
whose slightest expression was a bon-mots
faded into insignificance when she entered
the lists.

And yet she was neither very beautiful,
nor very spirituelle ; but she possessed ina
rare degree that nameless something, that
charm of presence, of voice, of manner, which
is unconquerable because intangible, and
against which it is worse than useless to resist.
It is a dangerous attribute, and heavy
is the responsibility of those who possess
it ; it may lead them and others to the
highest feats of heroic sacrifice, and it may
doom them to the lowest depths of the woe
that is eternal.

Philip, as he crossed the room, looked
not so much for Patricia herself, but rather
to where the black coats gathered thickest
and the tinkling sound of gay laughter and
careless persiflage waxed loudest ; there he
knew he should find Miss Hildreth, for was.
she not the candle about which the silly

moths gathered eagerly, glad to singe their
humble wings, or even spend their lives, if
only once the flame of her brilliancy might
rest upon them, and lift them for a moment
from the dull round of commonplace ?

The seal she affected was indeed a typical
one, he thought, as he moved towards her
with a slight smile upon his lips, his face
still pale from his recent emotion ; and was
he any better than his fellows ? Were not
his unwilling feet moving towards her, drawn
as the needle to the magnet ? Was not his
heart beating tumultuously at the thought
of holding her hand in his once .more ? Was
he not, in fact, the silliest of all human
moths, since he, who knew by experience
the cruelty of that flame, yet sought it
wantonly, glad to bask again for a brief
half-hour in its baleful light ? As he came
close to where sat Miss Hildreth, a queen of
a mimic court, the knot of adorers and
worshippers fell back, and accorded him,
us of a right, a free passage to the lady of

their allegiance. In a moment the hum of
general conversation ceased ; even Mrs.
Newbold, who had watched his entrance
with only half suppressed excitement, felt
the words die upon her lips, while Miss
James made no pretence of even listening
to her cavalier as she noted with flashing
eyes and sullen heart the meeting of these
whilom lovers, and Dick Darling, with
sympathy written on every line of her fresh
young face, laid an impetuous hand on Jack
Howard's arm, drawing him a step or two
nearer the charmed circle. Thus watched
by every eye, and almost in total silence,
Mr. Tremain bowed low before Patricia,
holding out his hand, as he said in his most
deferential tones :

"May I hope that Miss Hildreth still
keeps a place for me in her remembrance,
although it is so long since we last met ? "

And now surely, if ever, Patricia earned
for herself the character so freely bestowed
upon her, of petulance and inconstancy. She

raised her head a trifle haughtily as she
replied, and so managed as not to see Mr.
Tremain's outstretched hand, while her words
fell cold and cutting :

Can Mr. Tremain expect any woman
to remember ten years back and own toit
? "

Then she laughed, a cool, well-trained
little defiant laugh, and turned nonchalantly
to a tall, dark, foreign-looking man, who
alone of all her court had refused to fall
back as Philip approached her. The slight
was a direct one, but if it told, the hurt was
invisible to the world, for Mr. Tremain,
smiling a little more indulgently, answered
her no less coolly :

That Miss Hildreth should remember
the number of years since we met is answer
sufficient, and too great an honour."

Then he bowed again, and turned away,
and the crowd of eager satellites moved up
closer and filled the gap ; only Miss James
remarked the wave of angry colour that

swept across Patricia's face, and for an
instant dyed it crimson.

Meantime, Mr. Tremain moved quietly
back, and stationed himself where, half-hidden
by the heavy falling porters, he
could study unseen the face and form of
the woman on whom for ten long years he
had bestowed the greatest love of his life.

It was with keenest eyes of disapproval
that he noted each change in her, changes
that to him seemed indicative only of the
interior alteration that had come over her,
and that while it gave her the polished
brilliancy of a costly gem, he felt was gained
only by some corresponding loss of heart.

Miss Hildreth was dressed in white, without
a spot of colour save for the large bouquet
of Parma violets that lay unheeded on her
lap. Her costume, though simple in the
extreme, yet bore evidence, even to Philip,
of its costliness, and reminded him sadly,
with its soft silken folds and filmy laces,
of the dress in which he had last seen her.

Evidently these baubles of fashion had not
lost their charm to Patricia. Mr. Tremain
in his character of critic saw only artificiality
in each little curl that formed the coronal
of soft, dusky hair, crowning the small
delicate head ; he read worldliness in each
guarded laugh, each well-modulated tone ; he
descried vanity and pride in the very gestures
of her hands — those little hands that had
once rested so trustingly in his, and on
which he had showered so many hot, youthful
kisses. He noted every turn of her head,
every line of her sweet face, every movement
of the slim upright form, and to
him it seemed as though a cold hard imperceptible
coating of worldly artifice and
selfishness wrapped her around and about,
as hard and keen and impregnable as any
corslet of triply-tried steel, from which all
shafts of remembrance, affection, compassion,
or naturalness, glanced off harmless, not
leaving even a dent behind upon the polished
surface.

VOL. I. K

This, then, was Patricia after ten long-years
? This was the woman of his love.
This was the wilful Patty for whom Esther
Newbold had pleaded so generously, and
towards whom his heart had become as wax
in the fire of tender remembrance. This was
the reality of his vision ; he had come from
the presence of that spiritual Patty face to
face with the real Patricia, and so coming-ins
heart and soul had been moved with
love and compassion towards her ; he had
yearned to make all right between them,
to forget the past, to knit together the
broken skein of their two lives, to be, in
fact, magnanimous and generous, to hold
out the hand of forgiveness and reconciliation,
and to welcome in return a heart-broken,
remorseful, penitent Patricia, who should
fall upon his heart with glad gratitude,
while she owned herself vanquished and
grateful for the immensity of his goodness
and patronage.

And he had found instead of this imaginary

Patty a woman of the world, unmoved
by his presence, irresponsive to his generosity,
unconscious of her own shortcomings, unremorseful
for the past, in fact, forgetful
of it and of him ; who, with cool insolence,
overlooked his outstretched haud, and, with
the well-bred impertinence of her class, made
plain her indifference to him. Well, and
was he not right when he told Esther
Newbold that he would not consent again
to play the fool to a woman's vanity ? Had
he not read aright Miss Hildreth's character
when she scorned him ten years ago,
and withdrew her love, because of his
poverty and his bucolic indifference to the
petits soins of her every-day life? Had he
judged her too harshly ? No ; a thousand
times no ! Her character was but in bud
then, and he had only too well foreseen how
bitter would be the blossom, though so fair
in outward seeming.

Ah, well ! Let the dream vanish, the
vision fade ! He had been but allured by the

k 2

Corelli of desire, and, however near lie had
approached to the scorching flame of her
seductions, he had come forth unscathed.

His meditations were here interrupted by
a touch on his shoulder, and George Newbold's
pleasant voice in his ear.

I say, Tremain, I want to introduce

some one to you . Oh, no, my good

fellow, not a woman ; I am too much your
friend to betray you in such a fashion. It's a
man for whom I bespeak your politeness — a
man, and not a brother, since he is a
foreigner."

Mr. Newbold, after this, for him, very
long speech, stopped to take breath, and, ashe
did so, patted Philip affectionately on the
shoulder.

There he is," he continued, presently,
moving Mr. Tremain about, and motioning
towards the crowd that still surrounded the
spot where sat Patricia. " Don't you see
him ? Tall, dark man, pasty face and black
eyes, wears a red ribbon in his button-hole

that fetches all the women — there, bending
over Miss Hildreth ! By Jove ! he's scarcely
left her side since I presented him. Shea
witch, is Miss Patty — a witch with a long
head, and minus a broomstick."

Who is he ? " asked Philip, not particularly
impressed by the stranger's appearance.
"Where on earth did you pick him up, and
what the devil made you bring him down
here ? "

He picked me up, don't you see ?" replied
George Newbold, not in the least put out by
Philip's evident bad temper. " Found him at
the Club — the Union, you know. Townshend
had introduced him, and made him a stranger
member. He brought a line of introduction
to Townshend from Jim Goblet, who knew him
in Paris. Townshend said he had been asking
for me — knew my name, he said, from hearing
the Goblets speak of me so often — awfully
kind of Jim and Ada, I'm sure — so he wanted
to know me, and I couldn't do less than be
civil, so I asked him down for the theatricals

my birthday, you know — and he leaped at
my fly at once, so here he is."

"I don't like him," said Mr. Tremain,
didactically. " What's his name, Newbold,
and where does he hail from ? "

Here's his card," replied George, pulling
it out of his waistcoat-pocket. " I thought I
had better be sure about it because of introducing
him, you know. The women do get
so savage when you leave a fellow's patronymic
vague. Bless them, the dears ! They've
got their 'Almanach de Gotha ' at their
fingers' ends, and know to a fraction's nicety
just how cordial they should be to each individual
mother's son of them. So many smiles
and graciousness to the elder son of a peer, so
many less to an Honourable, and so many less
again to a younger detrimental. The women
of this country, my dear Tremain, are mad,
simply mad over titles. It's the irony of
history. What our forefathers fought and
died for — equality, and the abolishment of
mere hereditary rights — their grandchildren

fall down and worship. For tiny part, I
wonder the stern old Puritans don't turn in
their graves with horror ! "

The card which Mr. Tremain held bore the
name of Count Vladimir Mellikoff, and had
no address save a pencilled one — " Brevoort
House " — in one corner. The bit of pasteboard
was as non-committal as the stranger's
face.

Is he a Russian ? " asked Philip.
It looks so, doesn't it ? " was the careless
reply. " ' A Ossian or a Prussian,' but
certainly not 'an Englishman.' Perhaps he's
a Nihilist in disguise, perhaps he's a dynamite,
or a Land-leaguer, or a red-handed Communist,
who knows ? At any rate, he's got his match
in Miss Patty ; never saw such a case of
1 bowl over ' at first sight in my life, never,
I give you my w T ord."

But Philip failed to rejoice in Mr. New
old's hilarity ; and that gentleman strolled
off presently, in his peculiarly aimless fashion,
and securing Count Vladimir Mellikoff by

the simple device of slipping his hand within
his arm, led him up to Philip, presenting
him with all due ceremony.

Mr. Tremain, contrary to the traditions of
his country, and taking a leaf from Patricia's
own book, passed by the foreigner's outstretched
hand, and with a some r hat forbidding manner
and bow, entered into conversation.

Count Vladimir, however, was not to be
easily distanced or put down ; he could with
rare tact suit his manner and his words to
the individual of the moment who formed
his audience ; so now, with his usual keen
insight, while discovering Mr. Tremain's half-formed
distrust and dislike, he also recognised
his superior intellect and position,
and set himself to work at once to dispel
the unfavourable impression he had made.
He had not learned his earliest lessons in
diplomacy at Europe's politest Court, Petersburg,
for nothing, therefore it was not long
before Philip found his suspicions and scepticism
melting beneath the charm of his manner,

sand his cultivated, modest conversation. He
learned without trouble, that Count Mellikoff
was travelling in the States for pleasure principally,
though with a suspicion of political
business to give interest to his visit ; that
he was a diplomat by birth and training,
and a loyal servant to the present Tsar of
all the Russia, whom he served with the
like love and fidelity he had formerly bestowed
upon Alexander II.

He was a distinguished-looking man, rather
than handsome, with an air of breeding and
distinction in the thin face, keen small black
eyes, aquiline nose and broad, rather pointed
forehead. His manners were self-possessed
and quiet, he spoke English fluently, and ina
pleasantly modulated voice, while the few
gestures he used w T ere indicative of absolute
self-control. Mr. Tremain soon discovered
that nothing escaped his observation, he was
aware of every movement of the various
groups scattered about the drawing-rooms,
and while apparently absorbed in the topic of

the moment, had the attribute of prescience
so widely developed as to be conscious of
the general tone of conversation throughout
the room.

Philip acknowledged himself fascinated,
and ere long dropping his habitual reserve,
he entered cordially into Count Vladimir's
graphic descriptions of life in Petersburg. By
degrees the conversation glided on to more
intimate grounds, and Philip found himself
asking somewhat bold questions as to a certain
Russian practice in which he had long been
much interested. Count Mellikoff replied
frankly and with great openness, and only
laughed a little indulgently when Mr. Tremain
advanced gingerly upon the spy system of the
Tsar's Government. His remarks were firm
and to the point, and the Count became more
and more earnest as he refuted them, giving
his interlocutor, every now and then, a keen
and searching look.

You cannot deny, Count Mellikoff," said
Mr. Tremain at last, speaking with more tha n

his usual animation, " that the spy system, as
practised by your Government, makes of
every true Kussian a special constable, whose
work is well understood, and whose life is
devoted to the espionage, not only of suspects,
but of every Russian citizen. You become,
in fact, individual policemen, and you each
watch the other with keenest scrutiny, ready
at any moment to denounce and arrest each
other."

Why should I deny it, my dear sir ? "
answered the Count, very quietly. " It would
be but useless waste of breath on my part,
since all the world looks with awe and wonder
on the workings of the Imperial Chancellerie
of Petersburg. Nay, so far from denying it,
let me give you some faint idea of its
workings, and of the far-reaching, all-powerful
engines it employs. Our system is divided
into two sections, one of which is devoted to
all international or foreign questions ; the
other deals only with the surveillance of the
Tsar's subjects, who, for the time being, are

non-resident or abroad. Our agents of the
first section are generally well known ; as a
rule they make no secret of their connection
with the Imperial Chancellerie, and they
consist of both sexes and of all classes.
Indeed, we find our cleverest work often
accomplished by ladies. I need but mention
Madame Novikoff, whose influence and power
over a certain Premier of England is but a
matter of common on dits, and who, at one
time, seriously affected the foreign policy of
Great Britain. That work accomplished, she
has wrought further mischief to Her Majesty's
Government by encompassing the defection of
Dhuleep Sing and enrolling him under Russia's
flag. It is not beside the question, sir, if, in
the future, he does not become a source of
trouble to the British authorities at Calcutta.
That, sir, is one woman's work. On the
Continent, again, I could point out to you,
in almost every city of importance, a like
emissary. In Paris there was the charming

Princess Lise Troubetskoi, followed now by

that Marquis de and his fascinating wife,

whose hotel is the gathering-place of all the
elite, and whose identity is as strictly unknown
now as when first they startled all
Paris by the magnificence of their entertainments.
At Brussels you will find Madame

de M ; at Dresden, the Countess de

B ; in Switzerland, the Prince A. P ;

and at Koine, the Marquise di P . Even

Egypt is not forgotten, and in the Countess

J Russia finds an able coadjutor, whose

position as lady-in-waiting to the vice Queen
gains for us many secrets communicated by
the British Government to the Khedive. And
even you, sir, must remember the great noise
regarding Madame Blavatsky, who, as the
priestess of theosophy, for many years carried
on a secret correspondence with Monsieur
ZinoviefT, then Chief of the Asiatic Department
of the Foreign Office, and with Prince
DoudarofT Korsakoff, Governor-general of the

Caucasus ? But for Lord Dufferin's clear-lightness,
Madame might still be carrying
on her patriotic work."

You astonish me, Count Mellikoff," said
Mr. Tremain, as his informant stopped to draw
breath; "I knew that 'the little father' held
undoubted sway over all his own vast territory,
but not that he bisected other nations with
such regular and effective engines."

Count Mellikoff smiled, and the fire in his
deep-set eyes leapt up, as he answered :

Sir, this is but a small portion of the
all - powerful protection bestowed on his
children by our father, the Tsar. Even herein
your own land of equality and freedom, his
emissaries are ever at work, and from every
capital of Europe, indeed from many insignificant
towns and villages, there go forth
daily weekly or monthly reports to the
Imperial Chancellerie at Petersburg. Is it
not useless, then, for any one individual to
fight against so omnipotent and universal a
power f

Worse than useless, I should say," replied
Philip, wondering within himself as he
spoke, what part was played in the great
political drama by this same quiet, well-bred
gentleman who stood before him.

But this," continued Count Mellikoff,
smiling again, and turning his intensely black
eyes, in which no pupil was visible, but all
seemed iris, full upon Mr. Tremain, " this is
but one section of the great organisation, and
in some ways the most insignificant. The
second section, which has to do directly with
the Tsar's subjects abroad, is of much vaster
proportions, and wields a far greater power.
If you will permit me, sir, to introduce dry
statistics ? " And the Count drew from his
pocket a small but substantial note-book,
which he held unopened, waiting for Mr.
Tremain's reply.

Philip bowed a trifle impatiently, as he
said : " I beg you will continue, Count Ellis
; statistics are the back-bone of political

economics in all countries ; to me they bear
a special charm."

I thank you, sir," replied the Count, who
evidently was a literal translator of the polite
Gaelic, Monsieur. He opened the note-book,
and turned over the pages carefully and with
a practised hand.

"Ah!" he said at last, "I have it.
Listen, sir, to a quotation from the reports
of the Chancellerie : 'In the year 1884, no
less than 890,318 Russian subjects of the
Tsar crossed the Western frontier, for the
purpose of paying more or less prolonged
visits to foreign countries. The next year the
numbers had increased to 920,563 ; ' and you
must bear in mind that I do not exaggerate
when I assert that every one of these travellers
is subjected to the same amount of espionage
abroad as at home. Their every movement is
noted, every remark reported, every change of
residence recorded. There lives no true-born
and loyal Russian who is not bound by conscience,
if not by oath, to report to Petersburg.

anything that may seem to him suspicious, or
amiss, in any of his fellow-countrymen. It
may be only a word, a look, a letter, a handshake,
nothing is too trivial, because out of
trivialities have grown the great revolutions of
the world. You may be living in India,
China, England, or America ; you may be rich
and noble, or poor and dependent ; if you are
one of the Tsar's children, you may be very
sure that every day and hour of your life is
known, nay, is commented upon and discussed
within the Imperial Chancellerie, no matter
how many thousands of miles of sea and land
separate you from Russia. At any moment
the Tsar can call you to account ; he is no
respecter of persons ; it may be the highest
noble at the Court, the poorest serf on the
steppes, the fashionable beauty of the hour,
the hired governess of your children, the maid
of your toilette, the valet de place ; the very
highest and the very lowest, one and all must
obey when the voice of the Tsar of all the
Russia speaks the word of command. Xo

VOL. I. l

crime can be so hidden bat it will be unearthed,
no reparation accepted unless appointed
by Imperial edict, no forgiveness
sanctioned unless granted by word of the Tsar.
Said I not right, sir, is it not a grand and
wonderful system, this that puts to shame
Nature's barriers, and acknowledges no limits
to its power, save its own Imperial will ? "

Count MellikofT ceased speaking, and
Philip, looking at him, saw his face for one
moment lit with the mocking fires of conscious
malignity and indomitable, cruel perseverance.
For one moment only ; but in
that moment the fierce light of his eyes
seemed to scorch all who came within its
radiance — nay, seemed even to traverse the
long room and touch Patricia with its malevolence.
Then the passion faded, and the
Count stood quietly before him, a smile on
his lips, the black note-book clasped firmly
between the long, thin fingers of both hands.

Mr. Tremain felt all his original dislike
and mistrust rush full upon him once more.

He for one moment felt actual hatred for this
calm., composed foreigner, and his quiet, well-tutored
face, his low voice and persuasive
manner, and, above all, for the horrible system
of torture and surveillance he upheld as his
tenets and dogma. He gave a short, hard
laugh as he replied :

I cannot compliment you, Count Ellis
on either section of your system. Tome,
as I said before, you all appear to act
only as special police spies, each one ready
and eager to betray the other should occasion
arise, and each knowing the other to hold this
power over him. You have interested me
deeply; but, pardon me, I cannot jump with
you the entire length of the Tsar's fatherly
protection, as exemplified by the Imperial
Chancellerie. I have an old-fashioned prejudice
in favour of individual free will and
independence."

Count Mellikoff made a slight bow, and
the smile on his lips deepened as he answered :

At least, sir, you will pay us this justice,

l 2

T ou never hear one Russian speak evil of
another (I speak, of course, only of those
of a certain social standing), nor will our
ambassadors give any direct information to
foreigners concerning any fugitive from justice,
no matter how doubtful and suspicious
their actions may appear. With us, sir,
loyalty to our great Tsar and to his Government
go hand-in-hand with our lives."

Mr. Tremain replied only by a gesture of
assent, for, as he began to speak, George
Newbold came up to him once more, and
carried him off, with a hurried apology to the
Count.

We want him, you see. Many pardons,
but he is needed for rehearsal. I'll be back
directly," and Philip, thus hustled away, had
no time to explain.

Count Vladimir Mellikoff stood very still
for some moments after Philip left him ; the
lines of care and thought that were graven
innumerably about his eyes and the corners

of his mouth, came forth with startling prominence,
and gave a crafty, sceptical look to his
countenance ; his eyes gleamed in their hollow
sockets, his lips moved quickly, and then,
with a sudden upward gesture of his right
hand, he put back the note-book in his pocket
and, turning, walked slowly back to where
he had left Patricia surrounded by her gay
adorers.

The room, however, was empty now, and
had Miss Hildreth been in very deed but a
vision of his own creating she could not have

o

vanished more completely — not a trace of her
remained. The great carved chair in which
she had sat was pushed hastily back, and
about it, grouped in confusion, stood the ottomans,
stools, causeuses and low fauteuils, in
which her train of devotees had reposed themselves,
all equally unoccupied now. Not a
trace of the queen of the revels, or her lighthearted
companions, remained — not one. Yet
stay ; what is this lying on the floor, half-hidden

by the fallen satin cushion of her
chair ? This bit of finest muslin and filmy
lace, dropped or forgotten by Patricia as she
moved away indifferent, yet alive, to every
note of praise or flattery that rang about
her.

Count Mellikoff crossed the room with
noiseless footsteps, bent down and picked up
the dainty morsel ; it proved to be a lady's
handkerchief, and in the corner were an
embroidered crest, and the initials A. de L.
The Count gave one long-drawn sigh, almost
a gasp, and then with dexterous fingers folded
the delicate article neatly and placed it in an
inner pocket of his waistcoat. He smiled ashe
did so, and said, half aloud :

"There's treason in every inch of that
cambric and lace ! Ah, madame, how we
overreach ourselves sometimes, and how the
odour of violets clings to every thread of this
little traitor ! "

Then he turned and walked down the

empty room, and as he reached the heavily-draped
doors dividing the drawing-rooms from
the music-hall, one of the curtains was pulled
further aside, and he came face to face with
Miss Rosalie James.

THE IMPERIAL CHANCELLERIE.

Three months before that meeting between
Patricia Hilclreth and Mr. Tremain — out of
which had grown such cynical disillusion on
his part, and which had called forth such
cogent reasons for his disenchantment — winter

o

still held captive the great metropolis of
Petersburg. But a winter of such dazzling
brilliancy, such blue skies, such clear and
glittering frost and snow, such floods of
sunshine, such ringing out of joyful sleigh-bells,
such flashing past of fair women robed
cap-d-pie in costly furs, and such a constant
round of gaiety and frivolity, as to rob 
of his usual hardships and terrors.

Looking on as an unblessed spectator at
the life and vivacity of the scene, the riches
and luxury displayed day by day on the
Nevski Prospect, at the line of handsome
equipages, the brilliant uniforms of the Tsar's
Guard Imperial, at the laughing eyes and fair
faces of the fairest women of the world, at the
hourly ebb and flow T of the splendid pageant,
who could believe, or, believing, realise that
not a stone's-throw away, beneath the horrible
gloomy walls of Peter's fortress, there languished
men and women, equal in birth and
position to those gay flanders of the present
hour, and who once had flaunted their colours
as bravely as the best, but who now, owing to
the inexorable will of an acknowledged tyrant,
wore their hearts away in imprisonment for
some political lapse, some inadvertent dereliction,
no matter how slight ; perhaps but a
word whispered in a lover's ear, a note given
or taken, an uncontrolled exclamation, a
gesture of emotion ; and who, victims of that
despotic secret police, betrayed, maybe, by

their nearest and clearest, were hurled in one
moment from comparative security and protection
into the terrible, silent, unapproachable
dungeons of Petropavlovsk, from which no
word or sigh, no cry for help, no appeal for
justice ever resounds, and into which no
whisper of comfort or encouragement, no
sign of love, friendship, or remembrance, ever
penetrates, whose only outlook is the still
more horrible sentence of exile to Siberia, or
perhaps a merciful deliverance through death
on the weary march thither ?

The very air of the gay city breathes
disaffection and suspicion, while upon the
brightest countenance, beneath the merriest
jest and laugh, one reads the fleeting look
of terror, or hears the echo of strained
anxiety.

It was of Venice that Lord Byron wrote
his famous line :

"A palace and a prison on each hand."
And yet, surely, it may well be typical of

great Petersburg, where fair, and grand, and

imperial rises the Winter Palace, guarded

night and day by ranks of soldiers and

police, within which reign luxury, power, and

wealth, though stalked by the grim shadows

of treachery, deception, Nihilism ; while hard

by, the frowning bastions of Peter and Paul

tell of the first Peter's cruel tyranny, as

of the latter-day hand of iron despotism and

oppression ; within whose death - encircling

walls languish many of Russia's proudest

sons and daughters, who, grown hopeless from

long and fruitless waiting for deliverance,

have become

. Bowed and bent,

Tax gray, and ghostly, withering ere their time."

Thus does history but repeat itself, and the
story of Ivan Ivanoivich is rehearsed again
and again, only the actors changing, not the
drama, or the raise en scene.

On one bright and beautiful morning in
January, when all the fashionable world of
the famous capital were out and abroad, and

to all outward seeming "youth was at the
prow, pleasure at the helm " of the day's
amusements, a group of some half-dozen men
were gathered together in a small inner apartment
of the building known as the Imperial
Chancellerie. Of these, some were in the
police uniform of the Tsar, the others in plain
morning dress, in one case enhanced by a
great-coat lined with almost priceless sables.
Conversation, which had been carried on in
low tones, languished somewhat, and the
only sounds that broke the increasing silence,
were the scratching of a quill-pen over rough
paper, or the fall of a coal from time to
time from the open fireplace. It was the
owner of the fur-lined great coat who was
writing, and as he sat busy and preoccupied,
the clear, searching sunlight fell full upon
him, and revealed a face of more than usual
distinction. The brow was broad at the
temples, growing narrow as it reached the
hair that fell heavily across it, and which
was well streaked with grey ; the eyes were

intensely black, deep set in cavernous sockets,
out of which they flashed and glowed like
smouldering fires ; the cheeks were thin, the
complexion olive ; a slight, short beard and
moustache accentuated the pointed chin and
firm, thin lips ; the hand that guided the
pen was slender, nervous, long-fingered, and
capable.

In a word, the man writing in the inner
sanctum of the Petersburg Chancellerie, and
the man paying his devoirs to Patricia
Hildreth, and conversing amicably with Mr.
Tremain, are one and the same, Count
Vladimir Mellikoff. It was easy to see that
he was the ruling spirit of the group assembled,
each one of whom treated him with
deference and respect.

The quill-pen continued its noisy progress
over the official paper for some moments,
and the silence grew so intense that the
tinkling of the sleigh-bells and the echoed
laughter of the occupants of the droschkies
as they flew past could be distinctly heard,

despite the heavy double casements. At
length the door opened and another person
entered, at sight of whom the assembled men
fell into attitudes of anxious respect, even
Count Mellikoff rising from the table and
bowing deferentially to him.

The new-comer was a tall and handsome
man, with a stern, uncompromising face, and
of alert and dictatorial manner. He was
dressed in morning attire, and wore on his
coat more than one ribbon of merit or distinction.
He advanced rapidly, bowing comprehensively,
and took the chair offered him
by Count Mellikoff, from which the latter
had just arisen, with a courteous word and
gesture.

This personage, for he well deserves the
grander designation, was Paul Patouchki, a
naturalised Russian, who owned Poland as
his mother, yet yielded his allegiance to
the Tsar ; he was the head and chief in
Petersburg of that secret section of the

Chancellerie whose work it was to keep strict
watch and ward over the Imperial subjects,
who, from business or pleasure, elected to
live without the Tzar's boundaries. Patouchki
was trusted implicitly by his superiors, whom,
indeed, he had often served at the risk of
his life, and by them, the Emperor of all
the Russia not excepted, he was entrusted
with the organisation and develop ment of
the most delicate missions ; for by no harsher
word were the despotic actions and orders
of the Chancellerie ever designated.

Patouchki seated himself and drew towards
him a heavily brass-bound despatch-box,
and unlocking it with a key suspended
from his watch-chain, took from it his
morning's correspondence ; this he scrutinised
rapidly, sorting out the more important
papers, and pushing the largest number towards
a fair, boyish-looking young man, who
had entered with him, with a muttered, " For
you, Ivor," and then opening and reading

with quick and comprehensive eyes the few
special communications he had reserved for
his own perusal.

Indeed, every movement and action of
this remarkable man bespoke a character of
keen perceptions, unbending will, inflexible
opinions, and quick deductions. As he
finished his letters he folded them neatly
and laid them down with nice precision,
in due regularity of sequence of importance ;
this clone, he leant back and looked up at
the men who stood some 7 hat back from him
in the same respectful attitudes. This slight
movement was evidently a signal w T ell known,
for each one of the group now advanced in
turn and laid before Patouchki their reports,
which were in the form of sealed documents ;
then falling back again, waited for the chief
to speak.

When he did so, his voice was harsh and
crisp, the words fell from his lips with the
precision of bullets from a repeating revolver,
and it was noticeable that, whatever the

bearing or meaning of his instructions, his
countenance and expression never changed
or softened ; that hard, imperious, unsympathetic
human mask was never known to
show emotion of any kind.

Count VJadimir," he said, addressing the
most distinguished of the group, after himself,
" I have read and considered your report
of the work done by you in western France,
which, I am requested by his Excellency to
say, does you infinite credit ; it has been
decided by the secret committee of the
Chancellerie to give into your hands a somewhat
delicate mission. What say you, sir,
to an expedition into the heart of Africa ? "

His Excellency knows he has but to
command me at all times, and in any mission,"
replied Count Mellikoff, his musical voice
sounding in marked contrast to the other's
harsh tones; "my life is at the service of
our father the Tsar."

"Well said' replied Patouchki, shortly;
then, turning towards the others, he consol.

i. m

tinned : " Gentlemen, we will dispense with
your presence ; Ave wish you good morning,
sirs."

The salutation was a command, and so
understood by those to whom it was addressed
; they responded to it by bowing
and withdrawing in silence ; all but Ivor,
who, as the chief's private secretary, was a
privileged person.

As the door closed on the last departing
agent, Patouchki turned somewhat hastily
towards Count Mellikoff, and bade him be
seated. Ivor Tolskoi's fair head was bent
in studious attention over his official papers,
and the chief had learned by experience that
Ivor, despite his boyish face and girlish complexion,
was both deaf, dumb, and blind
when it behoved him to be so in the service
of his master, even as his soft dimpled hand
could, when occasion required, sheath itself
in a gauntlet of iron, and deal a giant's
blow.

"Vladimir Mellikoff," said the chief,

dropping the more ceremonious title, " we
have tried your metal often, and know of
what true steel it is fashioned ; but the
mission I am now desired to commit to your
skill and judgment is one requiring even
more finesse, delicacy, and determination
than any that have gone before. Let me
put well before you its hazards and unpleasant
features, that you may withdraw your acquiescence,
if you so desire."

Count Mellikoff, whose mobile face had responded
by varying expressions to Patouchki's
warning, now flushed suddenly, and as suddenly
paled again ; he leant forward impetuously,
and spoke rapidly, the nervous fingers of his
right hand moving restlessly as he did so.

In what have I failed, chief, that you
should think such words necessary ? "

In nothing, Vladimir Mellikoff," replied
the other, coldly and without change of expression
or voice; "we have ever found you
ready and willing and zealous in our service ;
indeed, but one reproach can be attributed

m 2

to you, and that is more an attribute of
temperament than a fault ; trop de zee,.
Vladimir, trop de zee, has ruined more than
one diplomat, and frustrated more than one
mission."

Count Vladimir drew back as if struck
an unexpected blow ; his eyes flashed for a
moment intemperately, the lines about his
mouth tightened ; then the habitual and
tutored reserve and control of long apprenticeship
reasserted itself, and when he bowed in
answer to the implied reproof, his face was
as expressionless and cold as that of his
monitor. Patouchki continued :

It goes without the saying that your
mission will not take you into Africa, that
was but a pour-parler ; indeed, you must
leave the East behind you and travel westward
to the great continent of America ;
your work lies there, and if I mistake not,,
within the somewhat narrow limits of New
York. You have read the minutes of the
murder of Count St e van Lallovich, and you

know that our suspicions regarding the
murderer all point to a woman, either as
instigator or accomplice. You must find that
woman, Vladimir. Stop," raising his hand
imperatively, "we ask no impossible devoir;
you shall have every facility afforded you,
and as the case now stands, you will want
no deadlier weapons than tact, finesse, and
delicacy, the surest tools with which to
meet a woman, since they are essentially
her own''

"It is but a poor warfare, chief," replied
the Count, a smile curving his lips in disdain.

Patouchki frowned.

No warfare is poor or trivial, Count
Vladimir, that sustains the safety of our
father the Tsar, or that strengthens the
hands of his Government. Women have
proved ere now our most dangerous foes ;
they strike in the dark, and pay no regard
to honourable codes. Since, then, we may
not fight them openly, let us turn their
own forces of cunning, artifice, and falsehood

against them. He who would serve
the interests of the Tsar must put aside
all considerations of sex."

Again Count Mellikoff bowed ; and after
a moment's silence the chief continued :

"You know the incidents of the murder,
Vladimir, no need to recapitulate them ; you
know Count Stevan's near kinship to the
Tsar, and the consequent lesson that must
be read to all miscreants who think to spill
the Imperial blood of Russia and escape
unpunished. You know also of the oath
sworn by that wretched woman, when, by
Imperial ukase, her marriage to Stevan
Lallovich was pronounced void ; you know
her subsequent career, and the chain of
circumstantial evidence that points to her
as at least an accessory to the crime. We
have reason to believe that she has escaped
to America, and is living there in disguise ;
the chain has narrowed its links until
we can confine ourselves to one state
and one city of that great country —

New York, or a narrow radius therefrom.
But so far the Chancellerie has been unable
to lav the finger of certainty upon her, sofar
she has eluded our absolute knowledge ;
and therefore it is to you we would depute
the task of tracking her, dogging her, and
bringing her personally within the power
and jurisdiction of the Imperial Chancellerie.
Are you willing to accept this work, Vladimir ?
Remember, we ask it in the service of the
Tsar, to whose protection you have hitherto,
with undeviating fidelity, sworn to be true,
even at the cost of your life."

Count Mellikoff, as Patouckki concluded,
rose from his chair and walked quickly across
the room to the window. As he did so,
Ivor Tolskoi raised his fair head and youthful
face, and looked after him. " Does he
hesitate 1 " he said within himself. " By our
Lady of Kazan, I wish the chance were but
offered me. The chief should find me ready,
and as adamant against the softest lures of
the fairest woman of all her sex." Then

he dropped his innocent blue eyes, and
continued the monotonous pen-work on which
I13 was engaged.

Vladimir Mellikoff remained for several
long moments beside the window, looking
out with unseeing eyes upon the well-known
scene before him ; upon the gaily
decorated sleighs and droschkies flying
by ; upon the frozen Neva, over whose glittering
ice the skaters were deftly circling ;
upon the Austrian band playing before the
Admiralty, their light-blue uniforms seeming
like a bit of the sky above, fallen to earth ;
upon the huge Imperial Winter Palace,
whose innumerable windows glanced like
jewels in the crisp cold sunlight ; upon the
officers and sentinels relieving guard at its
gates ; upon the throng of brightly attired
pedestrians coming and going, up and down
the broad streets, in quick succession ; he
knew it all so well, had been part of it for
so many years. Was not this very scene
photographed upon his brain's camera, withall

the high lights accentuated, and all the
shadows deepened ? Who shall say what
wave of memory swept over him, as he
stood there gazing down, seeing, yet not
seeing the ever-changing panorama that since
his boyhood had been dear to him ; from
the unique charm with which only youth
and youth's memories can embellish the most
ordinary scene ?

Did he hesitate, or draw back from
this mission laid upon him ; did his heart
and soul shrink from hounding out a w r oman,
whose wrongs and griefs had hurried heron
to the perpetration of a crime, which
even he felt to be but an outburst of that
savage justice that reigns deep down in
every human heart ? Did he confess to
himself that it was but coward's work to
bring to bear upon this w T retched fugitive
all the political force of the Imperial Chancellerie,
with himself at its head as its
willing and revengeful agent ?

He knew well that if he undertook this

mission he would can it through to the
very end, that was his nature ; combining
something of the sleuth-hound and the
bulldog, he could track his prey indefatigably,
and could fasten his cruel fangs upon
it relentlessly when found. But was it worth
his while, was the game noble enough ; was
not fighting a woman, with her own weapons,
but poor sport for one who had won his
spurs in signal service under far braver
and more dangerous circumstances ?

As he stood thus, wavering within himself,
a hoarse and mighty shout went echoing
up to the blue vaulted sky ; then came the
clank of arms, the rattle of metal trappings,
and a mounted guard swept into sight, their
scarlet kaftans brilliant against the snow,
the precursors of the Imperial equipage, in
which, as it dashed past, Vladimir recognised
the Tsar and Tsarina, enveloped though they
were in robes and mantles of rarest furs.
Behind them came another sleigh in which
sat two ladies and an equerry ; as they

passed the Chancellerie, the lady nearest
Vladimir's window lifted her face and turned
it towards the grim walls ; it was a pale
and beautiful face, enhanced by the rich cap
of sables that seemed to embrace lovingly
the waves and masses of golden brown hair
beneath it. As Count Vladimir caught sight
of that proud, fair countenance, a sudden
smile broke over it, called forth by some
remark of her companion's, and melted all
the pure still lines into the tenderest curves
of youth.

It was but an instant. Then the sleigh
had passed by, and was already far down the
Nevski Prospect, while the shouts and cries
of " Long live the Tsar ! Long live the Little
Father ! " grew fainter and fainter as the crowd
followed in the wake of the Imperial cortege.

Count Vladimir started as from a reverie,
and unconsciously drew up his tall figure
proudly, while his face became haughty and
resolved. Well he knew that fair, proud
woman, and long had he served her as the

most ardent and loving of her slaves. She
had been a Lard task-mistress, but he loved
her, and to win her would gladly have sold
his soul to the Prince of Darkness. She had
given him some half-encouragement when last
he urged his suit, and laughing half tenderly
as she dismissed him, bade him bring her yet
one more proof of his undeviating fidelity to
the Tsar, augment by one more public expression
his unqualified loyalty, add one more
ribbon to those he already wore on State
occasions, and then — why, then, she, Olga the
beautiful, the Tsarina's favourite, most beloved
sand loving maid of honour, Olga the cold, the
proud, the unbending, would consider his passionate
pleadings, his long service, and perhaps
reward it in the way he implored.

You must hesitate at nothing, Count
Vladimir," she had ended, "if it is to serve
our father the Tsar. Remember, it is in small
actions, rather than in great ones, that we
prove our loyalty. Nothing can be too trivial
or too heroic if it be undertaken for him."

And Vladimir had gone from her presence
resolved to win her at any cost. Here then,
lay his opportunity close to his hand. He
turned abruptly from the window, and met
Ivor Tolskoi's eager blue eyes with such an
expression of determination and pride that
that youth dropped his abashed, and felt
his chances of superseding Count Mellikoff to
be but vain and delusive hopes.

Your pardon, chief' said Vladimir, in a
quiet voice, once more taking the chair facing
Patouchki ; " I have taken, perhaps, too much
time to consider the flattering mission his
Excellency would honour me with. My
answer is, as it ever has been, and ever will
be, that I am at the disposal of my gracious
father the Tsar. My life is his, consequently
what his Government elect for me to do, I
can but consider as an Imperial command, and
consecrate myself to its fulfilment. I am ready
to leave Petersburg at a moment's notice."

It is well said, Vladimir," replied
Patouchki, over whose composed features

passed the faintest suspicion of relief. " My
instructions are that you leave within the
week ; tomorrow your papers of detail will
be given you. I need not remind so faithful
a servant of the Tsar that secrecy, despatch,
and caution should be your watchwords. Be
discreet, Vladimir, and watchful. Remember
how much depends upon our having this
woman within our power ; and remember,
also, that in choosing you as their emissary,
the secret committee have had particular
regard to the exigencies of the case, and to the
fact that you will have to deal with people of
the upper classes, and through them work
your way to the completion of the chain of
evidence. Distrust every one, Vladimir ; but,
above all, distrust the ladies of the great
world, they are our cleverest enemies, even
as they are our best friends. Your letters of
introduction and credit will be sent you indue
course. And now, good-bye, Vladimir,
for the present. You have carried good luck
with you so far, may it not fail you now."

A week later saw Count Vladimir Ellis
on his way to Paris, en route for the
United States, and as he settled himself
comfortably in the salon coupe reserved for
him in the train de luxe going southward,
it was with the memory of Olga's blue eyes
looking kindly on him, and Olga's hand resting
just a moment longer in his than was
necessary for good-bye, and his heart was
warm within him, and he smiled as he
watched the outlines of magnificent Petersburg
fading in the distance.

His glance lingered longest on the glittering
spire of Petropavlovsk, as it rose above
the Neva, and when at last this was lost in
the distance, he murmured, with a sigh upon
his lips :

Fate is stronger than conscience. I £o
to make war upon a woman, with a woman's
smile as my reward ! "

A COURT FAVOURITE.

It was evening in the Winter Palace — evening
of the day on which Vladimir Meilikoff had
entered on the first stage of his new mission :
to make war upon a woman.

Within the Palace all was hushed and
still; the servants passed to and fro with
noiseless footsteps and that well-trained air
of repose only attainable by long and constant
effort. For once no official or social entertainment
was on hand, and the Imperial
Family were enjoying the novelty of a comparatively
quiet evening — a novelty, whose
rarity precluded any possibility of its charm
waxing dim.

The great State apartments, the Onyx
Hall, and the Salle des Panniers were empty,
dark, and silent, hiding their wonderful
treasures in the gloom and shadows : their
priceless tables of malachite and lapis-lazuli ;
their jewel-encrusted frames to pictures rarer
and more valuable than the gems that surrounded
them. From out the dark corners
started a thousand and one memories of bygone
kings and dynasties — of that great and
licentious Catherine II. , to whose energy
Petersburg owes so much, and the Winter
Palace its existence ; of Peter, also called the
Great, who first raised his nation from out of
its barbarism ; of Napoleon, and his restless
ambition ; of Nicholas, who died brokenhearted
when Sevastopol fell ; of Alexander,
the wise and beneficent, father of the Tsar
who now occupies the Imperial throne, and
who strove in vain to stem the current of
mad republicanism that spread disaffection
broadcast from the Baltic to the Caspian, and
which gathering strength year by year and

VOL. I. N

month by month, rolled on like some gigantic
wave far out at sea, tossing high above the
surrounding breakers, riding fearlessly to its
doom, and breaking with devastating effect
against the ill - protected breakwaters of
monarchical institutions and traditions.

When the Court was alone, so to speak,
and free from the onerous duties of perfunctory
ceremonial, the Tsarina — whose
nature was as gentle and loving and peaceful
as that of her sister, the beloved Princess of
England's hopes — shunned the vast State
chambers, and held her petit es reunions in a
smaller suite of apartments, within which
were gathered every luxury of modern civilisation,
and where, when the heavy plush
jiortieres were drawn, the great stoves emitting
the heat of a furnace, and the logs piled
high on the low fire-dogs, it was possible
to forget the ice and snow without, even
as in looking upon the various spoils and
souvenirs of every clime and country, from
the rich silks and perfumed woods of the

Orient, to the more homely comforts of Great
Britain, it was possible to forget that this
was Petersburg, and become oblivions to those
frowning walls and cruel dungeons, mocked
by the names of the two Apostles, St. Peter
and St. Paul.

Nevertheless, there they stood, grim, real,
dauntless, and within them languished the
poor " prisoners of hope," wrapped, at least
let us pray, in that merciful and dreamless
sleep, which the dark hours bring even to
the most miserable.

This favourite set of rooms of the Salinas
opened one from another, each growing smaller
until the last was reached, which was indeed
a veritable nest of down for the fair Danish
dove who had mated with the bold Russian
eagle. Here the Empress received her most
privileged guests, and permitted audiences
that were of a peculiarly private or domestic
order. Here, too, would come the Tsar, and
throwing himself down into one of the low

velvet ottomans, put from him his habitual

B 2

air of reserve and anxiety, and enter with
affectionate raillery into the spirit of the
hour ; or should such be his mood, at a sign
all would withdraw, leaving him alone with
the Empress, who at such times threw aside
the conventionalities of a life hedged in by
etiquette, and became only the loving, faithful
wife, the intelligent companion, the cheerful
counsellor and consoler.

Much indeed might the walls of that
blue chamber have revealed could they have
spoken : secrets on which hung the fate of
nations ; decisions that were to make history ;
and confidences that wrung tears of blood
from the stern Tsar, whose heart, like that
of his father, loved his mighty empire, but
who, unlike him, failed to inspire complete
trust in his nation's heart.

On these occasions, the larger room of all
was given up to the use of the Court ; and
here gathered the different ladies and gentlemen
attached to the personnel of their Imperial
Majesties ; and here, too, were often admitted

particular friends of the bedchamber ladies,
the maids of honour, the equerries, and other
official personages of the Court. The orders,
however, for such entrance were somewhat
difficult to obtain, and each person who
entered was keenly watched by a member
of the secret committee of the Chancellerie,
whose function, unknown to any but himself,
obtained for him the fullest opportunities
of scrutiny.

And in this incognito lay the power of
the Chancellerie ; for it might be the very
individual to whom you spoke so confidingly ;
the friend, man or woman, on. whose fidelity
you relied implicitly, the young girl with the
innocent face, the youth with the bold free
carriage, the elderly courtier with venerable
grey locks, or the dame honneur of highest
repute, who was the secret agent and in
the secret pay of the Chancellerie, and who,
at a given signal, would deliver you up to
its iron laws, its fearless judgments, and cruel
sentence.

On this particular evening the outer salon
was well filled with guests, whose gay voices
and subdued rippling laughter mingled with
the strains of the Household band, and bespoke
some hearts at least among the number as
free from carling care. French was the
language spoken, for Petersburg duties even
gay Lutetia itself in its undeviating worship
of all things Parisian.

Within an embrasure of one of the heavily -
draped windows, the curtains of which had
been pulled somewhat hastily apart, sat a
youthful couple, who would in any assembly
have stood boldly forth as being more beautiful
and distinguished than is the usual type of
humanity. Of these, one was a young man,
the other a woman scarcely entering her
second decade, but with so much of imperious
grandeur and haughty pride of race about her
that to call her by the less dignified title of
girl or maiden would seem an impertinence.

The young man was of more than ordinary
proportions, tall and broad-shouldered, with a

look of the innocence of childhood still clinging
to the soft curves of his fair Northern
face, that was revealed in his joyous azure-blue
eyes, and reflected in the crisp golden curls
which, despite the rigid cropping according to
the last Paris mode, lay in tiny rings all over
his round and well-shaped head. A close
observer would perhaps have noted that his
throat, though full and well developed, owned
a straight and clean back line, denoting a lack
of amative passion, and that the head and
forehead were most developed where the
phrenologists tell us to look for cruelty and
perseverance. His hands were remarkably
white, and kept in scrupulous order, even to
the finely-rounded filbert nails that shone with
the reflected sheen of a polissoire and pondre
des ongles. This was his only bit of coxcombry,
however, and for the rest, it may be
said, he had a hearty laugh, a merry jest, and
a cheerful word for every one, and, while
boasting more friends than any young patrician
in Petersburg, yet admitted no one to a

closer intimacy than that accorded by outward
cordiality of manner.

This was Ivor Tolskoi. We have seen
him before, in the inner sanctum of the Chancellerie,
when Vladimir Mellikoff accepted his-mission
; and Ivor cursed the fate that trembling
in the balance, fell in the favour of the-older
and more experienced man, and thus
shut him out from winning his first spurs in
the service of his master.

Ivor Tolskoi was, in many ways, an enfant
gate of his world. He was an orphan, and
very rich ; a ward of the Tsar's, owning large
estates in the wild Ural province, which he
seldom visited, and serfs whose numbers he
had never counted, who were free in name
only, and whose sole use in the world was so
to labour for him that his revenues year by
year never failed, and never grew less.
He owned no title, and he would, have scorned
the acceptance of any mere bauble of to-day's
creation ; he would have told you, with a toss

of his golden head and a ringing laugh, that
the Tolskois were lords of the soil and of
human souls long centuries before Peter came
to the Imperial throne, and raised his nation
from out their barbaric indolence ; and that
while the imperious Tsar was learning shipbuilding
at Hertford, his ancestor of that
period was riding at large over his vast properties,
hunting the wild boar and the wolf,
the ermine and marten, across his own territory,
whose boundaries not even he could
define. It would ill become him, then, the
last scion of his grand old race, to accept a
tawdry title in place of his own simple name,
Ivor Tolskoi, which each eldest son had born
in succession for generation after generation,
and before which the peasants upon his wide
western property turned pale and trembled.

His companion was his equal in feminine
beauty, and there were many circumstances
in the life of each strangely similar, which
served to draw them closer together, and

more intimately than is usually the case in a
country and a Court where etiquette governs
rather than affinity.

The face of the young woman who leant
back negligently against the pile of velvet
cushions Ivor had placed for her, was
strangely beautiful, with the weird, almost
unholy beauty of an enchantress of old ;
such beauty as Fasting wore, or Cleopatra,
or Messalina, which enslaves the senses
at once, without leaving any loophole for
calm reason. She too was tall and grand
of build, though slight, as became her three-and
-twenty years ; her shoulders bore the
curves of the Milo Venus ; her neck and
bosom fell in the round charming: lines of
maidenhood ; her head rose proudly from
the short classic pillar of her throat, and was
carried with an almost royal grace ; the sweep
from chin to ear was perfect in its fine symmetry
; the low arched forehead bespoke
more than ordinary intelligence ; beneath it
her eyes, set wide apart and wearing a look

of innocent fearlessness, were of the deepest
shade of violet, to which the black lashes
and pencilled brows gave the piquancy of
unexpectedness, for her hair, which was rolled
high in heavy masses and fastened with a
jewelled arrow, was brown in colour, shot
through with a thousand lights of golden
auburn ; her complexion was pale but warm,
and the small perfectly modelled bow of her
mouth was tinged with vivid crimson, adding
the perfecting note to her ideal countenance.

In manner she was cold, proud, repellent,
though beneath the outward ice ran a fire of
passion that once let loose would sweep away
all barriers of conventionality, and stop at
nothing to accomplish its desires.

Like Ivor, she was an orphan, and like
him untitled, but there ran within her veins a
strain of the great Catherine's blood, transmuted
to her from an ancestor who could
boast of Imperial favours, and of this bar
sinister in the past Olga — for she it was
was prouder than of any patent of a lesser

nobility. It may be that, generations intervening
notwithstanding, this last fair representative
of her race possessed some traits
and characteristics of her Imperial ancestress,
for like her, she was both strong and weak,
impetuous and calculating, passionate and
mercenary, forgiving and tyrannical ; and was
indeed a pure specimen of the Russian type,
in which are so strongly and so dispassionately
blended the master passions of cruelty and
remorse.

01 ga NaundorfT had known no home save
that of the Court, for though she inherited a
fair property from her father, it was situated
many long miles from Petersburg, on the
southern frontier amidst the trackless wastes
of the steppes, where for nine months continual
snow reigned, and where the long
dreariness of winter w 7 as fraught with the
terror of isolation and dull monotony.

Olga remembered but little of this faraway
home, and shunned such memories-whenever
they came to her, with an instinctive

shrinking from the unknown and undesirable.


Her father, who had been a brave and
gallant officer, who had served his country
on many a battle-field, and loved his Tsar,
the Alexander of o'ood deeds, with a strong
and fervent love, which nothing, not even
the claims of his little daughter, could outweigh,
and w T ho was trusted and loved in
return by his Emperor, brought the little
motherless Olga, when but a child of ten, to
Gatschina, presented her to the Tsar, demanding
an asylum for the pretty child, whose
mother w T as dead, and whose fearlessness and
beauty made her the more open to an untoward
fate.

The great Alexander w T as pleased to gratify
his faithful friend and servant, and was also
captivated by the tiny maid's rare loveliness ;
and so it came about that General NaundorfFs
desire was granted, and his little Olga became
the pet and plaything of the Imperial Court.
There she grew from girlhood to maidenhood,

and, as her beauty developed more and more,
and her intelligence expanded, she became
a special favourite with the Tsar, to whose
private apartments she had free access, and
from whom she gained by her pretty imperious
pleading, many a coveted favour for
some loyal subject of his Majesty.

The news came of her father's death, but
it made little difference to Olga ; she had
scarcely known him, she could not be expected
to weep for one she did not love.
Her first real sorrow fell upon her when
by the hand of an assassin, the kind and
gracious Alexander II. passed from life to
death. Her grief was inconsolable then ; shew
r kept for days and nights, and mourned him
with a deep abiding sorrow, that fostered
and strengthened her hate and abhorrence
of those who, while calling themselves Russians
and patriots, planned secretly, and in the dark,
for the overthrow of the Imperial throne.

She was grown a woman then, and a
rarely beautiful one, with her fair proud

face with its touch of royal scorn, and her
free, upright, graceful form. It was at this
time that Vladimir Mellikoff first saw her.
and claiming distant cousinship, proceeded
straightway to fall in love with her and
worship her ; a worship she accepted as a
right, but a love which she only tolerated
with indifference.

When the new Tsarina formed her personal
Court, she named Olga as maid of
honour, and when first the young girl entered
on her duties, received her with such winning
sweetness and graciousness, as to subdue
utterly the proud heart, and cause it to
transfer to the young and still lovely woman
all its treasure of intense veneration,
affection, and allegiance which it had held
for the beloved Alexander.

Count Mellikoff, meantime, succeeded but
poorly in his suit ; Olga was neither touched
nor won by his persistency ; she accepted
his homage and his passionate devotion
with her superb Imperial grace, but granted

him nothing in return, save perhaps when
she saw him wavering and uncertain, torn
between his love and his self-respect, then
she would bestow on him a smile of dazzling
softness, or let her slim firm fingers resta
moment within his, or murmur some half
inaudible word of praise or protest, when he
would be again at her feet, her slave, her
adorer, her passionate lover.

He had spoken out his love at last, and
urged his claims upon her so vehemently
and with such emotional force, as to rouse
her even from her habitual indifference, and
to call forth that half promise, on account
of which Vladimir had started on his new
mission with such an exulting heart and such
visions of glorified future bliss.

There was one habitue of the Court,
however, whom Olga often favoured with
her rare smiles, and in whose cornpauy she
always appeared frankly content ; this was
Ivor Tolskoi, in whose fair good looks
she took honest pride, and for whom she

laid aside something of her haughty,
imperious manner. Indeed, Ivor was so
bright and joyous, such an incarnation of
the brilliant sparkling cold sun of Petersburg,
which exhilarates but does not warm,
it was impossible not to like him, and not
to melt under the cool fire of his blue
eyes, and the fine if cruel smile of his lips ;
only Olga failed to see the coldness or
the cruelty.

She fancied she knew Ivor Tolskoi's
life from Alpha to Omega, that there was
not a page of his daily existence that was
not open to her inspection, and yet she
in reality knew nothing ; not even his daily
avocations, beyond the light ones imposed
upon him by Court regulations, and never
dreamed that he was one of the most
vigilant and most active members in the
secret service of the Chancellerie. Indeed,
Ivor Tolskoi's boyish face and youthful
laugh seemed incompatible with intrigue
and surveillance ; and Ivor knew this, and

VOL. I.

took good care to play both his roles with
diplomatic finesse and success.

And so, Ivor," Olga was saying in
her clear, cold voice, " you really believe
that that wretched woman of the bourgeoisie
had a hand in the murder of poor Stevan
Lallovich ? Upon my word, to what heights
will the canaille next aspire, if even a
Prince of Russia is not safe from the stab
of a knife in the hand of a red republican ?
Do you think she murdered him, Ivor ? "

"Ah," replied Tolskoi, "you put a blunt
question, Mdlle. Naundorff," for though Olga
addressed him with the familiarity of a
sister, Ivor never so far forgot himself as
to reply in like manner. " How dare one
express any opinion on any subject in these
days of treachery, since the very walls have
ears and the very doors speak ? And even
should you press me, mademoiselle, I could
not answer ; I never have any opinion on
any subject more important than a ball
cotillon ; best trop de peine" And Ivor

threw back his head and laughed, his full
and hearty peal, at sound of which several
of the other guests of the salon stopped
their idle occupations and laughed in
sympathy. But Olga frowned and beat her
pointed - slipper impatiently against the
foot-stool on which it rested.

"Don't be silly, Ivor," she said; "and
don't laugh so loud, you will have old
Madame Bettcheriski down upon us for
breach of etiquette. "When will you cease
to be such a boy ? "

When I cease to sun myself in your
smiles, mademoiselle," replied' the young-man,
gallantly, and with a half-mocking bow.
W x hen that unhappy day dawns for me I shall
take leave of my youth for ever, and seeing
it fall from me, grow as ' grave and reverend
a signior' as Count Vladimir himself."

To this allusion to her absent lover,
Olga made no rejoinder save by a scarcely
perceptible upward movement of her head.
She waited a moment before she spoke

again, and in the silence that fell between
them, there floated across the room the conclusion
of a sentence, spoken in a musical
though rather high-pitched voice :

It is true, nevertheless. She may not
care for him, but when he returns to Court
our proud and haughty favourite will be
prepared to bestow her hand upon him."

Then the speaker's voice faded away into
space, and Olga looking up found Ivor's
eyes fixed upon her with a strange and unwonted
fierceness in their blue depths. Her
own fell beneath his glance, and she felt with
annoyance the blood rise in her face, and
spread its crimson over her pale cheeks.

She was angry at this school-girl exhibition,
and drew herself upright into a
more dignified attitude, folding her hands
on her knees, and looking up boldly into
Ivor's face ; as she did so the colour faded
as quickly as it had come, leaving her paler
than before. Tolskoi continued to gaze at
her intently ; he bent forward a little, bringing

his golden head nearer her dark one, and
said, in a voice quite different from his usual
gay insouciant tones :

"It is my turn to ask a question. Is
this true, mademoiselle ? "

Is what true?" replied Olga, under
her breath, half fascinated by the face and
eyes looking down so close upon her ; a
face that bore the familiar lineaments of Ivor,
but with an expression she had never seen
there before, and which made this very
familiarity seem strange and repellent.

Is it true," repeated Ivor, in the same
low voice, " that when Count Vladimir
Mellikoff returns — if he returns — Mademoiselle
Naundorff will bestow upon him the honour of
her hand ? Is it true ? For that is the reading
between the lines, is it not ? Our Court recognises
but one proud favourite, mademoiselle,
and who should know her name so well as you?
At present she lacks but one courtier in her
train, Count Vladimir. You see the riddle is
not difficult of solution ; but is it true — Olga ¥'

It was the first time lie had ever called
her by her name, and Mademoiselle Naundorff
winced perceptibly as she heard it fall from
his lips, in the low suppressed tones of his
voice. She started, and threw back her
head with her favourite gesture, as if she
would throw off the burden of the hour,
and free herself from its restrictions.

Have you a right to ask, Ivor ? " she
answered, coldly. " How can you be so
foolish as to heed a bit of incomplete gossip,
blown to us from the lips of Countess Vera,
light as feather-down, and without beginning
or end, as are most of the Countess's scandals V

"You may laugh at me if it pleases you,"
replied the young man, brusquely ; " but I
will have my answer. Is it true ? "

Will have — and to me!" cried out
Mademoiselle Naundorff, hasty anger in her
voice, then laughing a little. "You deserve
to be punished for your temerity. What —
since you will have it so, Ivor — what if to
oblige you I admit that perhaps when Count

Mellikoff returns, if I see my way to it, and
am not too borne or fatigued, I may — what
is the happy phrase ? — bestow my hand upon
him. There, you have your answer, sir."

She leant back again against the cushions,
and scrutinised him through her half-closed
eyelids. Ivor's face was white with passion ;
his blue eyes seemed made of steel, so hard
and brilliant was their lustre. He did not
move from his position, or take his gaze from
her face, and when he spoke it was with no
outburst of anger or eloquence, but in the
same repressed low voice.

Then I warn you, Olga, . let him take
heed, for you shall never give to him what
I know you would refuse to me. Should
lie dare to boast of you as won by him, I
will make him eat his own words, even
though it be with a knife of steel."

Olga shuddered involuntarily, but controlling
herself quickly, said quietly, with
a little laugh : " You speak at random, my
poor Ivor ; what wish of yours have I disregarded,

or what request left unfulfilled ?
Is there anything more I can do for you ? "

But Tolskoi was not to be put off with
light words or meaningless phrases ; bis face
did not relax, nor a softer expression come
to his eyes, at her bantering words, though
he spoke somewhat less harshly.

Yes, you can give me one thing more ;
you can give me your promise never to marry
Vladimir Mellikoff without my consent. Will
you promise me this, Olga ? "

Mdlle. Naundorff w T as now, however,
thoroughly roused ; she sprang to her feet and
drew up her tall figure to its full height, while
the proud lines of her face became prouder
and more imperious, and her voice vibrated
with suppressed anger, though her tones fell
calm and cold.

Certainly not, Monsieur Tolskoi ; you
presume too far on good fellowship. I make
no promise to you, or any one, that shall
control my free actions ; what you ask is
preposterous, Ivor, preposterous."

"Then I will kill him," said Tolskoi, quite
calmly, and without any extraordinary vehemence
in his voice or manner ; "I will kill
him."

And as Olga drew back, startled at his
unexpected reply, he bent forward and caught
her hand in his.

Remember what I say, Olga ; if he
presumes to think that he has won you,
or dares to say so, or if I learn in any way
that you are his promised wife, I will kill
him. He shall not possess what I would
give my life to gain, and what you know
would be refused me."

Then he dropped her hand, and before
Olga could recover from her surprise, had
passed down the long salon, and through
the open porters into the great corridor
that led to the palace court-yard.

Olga remained for some moments dazed
and astonished, trying in vain to reconcile
the Ivor of the past with the Ivor of the
moment, wondering vaguely at his strange

words and altered aspect. She had known
for some months that he made no secret of
his devotion to her, but he had always urged
his admiration upon her in such a happy
half-bantering fashion, she only regarded it
as a boy's ardour, nor took him more seriously
than his youthful face and careless manner
demanded.

He had, indeed, once hinted at a deeper
feeling, but she had laughed and told him
not to burn his fingers with fire, and he,
after a moment's annoyance, had laughed
with her, and returned to his old openly
expressed adoration.

But now, within this last half hour,
she had seen below the surface of that
gay exterior, and she drew back half
alarmed, half fascinated at what she beheld
there. And although she had had her eyes
opened to the other side of Ivor's nature,
she had ruled and controlled men too long,
seen them become her willing and abject
slaves at a mere smile or word too often,

to give much weight to Tolskoi's threat ;
it amused her rather than terrified her.

Poor Ivor," she mused ; " how very
melodramatic, and how youthful ! I must
get you into better training, Ivor, or we
shall have you really committing some foolish
escapade, and mixing my name up in it.
in a way I should not care for."

Then she turned from the window, and
as she did so came her summons to the
Empress, and hastening to obey the command
she forgot Ivor entirely, or remembered
him only to say half vexedly : " After all
he told me nothing about Count Stevan's
murder. Oh, tiresome Ivor ! " And thus
she dismissed him, and all other annoying
subjects, with but scant courtesy.

A WOMAN SCORNED.

When Count Vladimir Mellikoff drew back
the porters that shrouded the doors of the
large drawing-room at the Folly, he came
face to face with Miss Rosalie James, and
for a full moment these two gazed at each
other in a silence that might have been born
either of unexpectedness, or preconceived
arrangement.

Count Mellikoff never allowed ordinary
emotions to be visible in his face ; he had
that absolute control of feature and muscle
which only long training and an inflexible
will can effect. It is seldom one comes across
such a countenance, over which no appreciable

change ever passes, and upon which
the passions leave no reflex, not even the
slightest shadow, such as troubles a pool
when a cloud passes overhead, that is gone
even as one watches its approach. Such a
countenance betokens one of two temperaments
: a nature too weak and vacuous to
feel or comprehend any master passion, and
which from very inanition becomes irresponsive,
or one so strong and so intense
as to fear its own capabilities, and therefore
strives to conceal all outward expression, lest
its lightest emotion might exhibit something
more than the usual conventionalities.

Of the latter type was Vladimir Mellikoff.
From his boyhood he had taught himself
the value of repression, and in it had found
his greatest power. He had learned to so
utterly subdue all outward expression of the
passion that at the moment might be consuming
him, as to remain absolutely passive
under the most trying circumstances, and
so to control his every feature, that not one

muscle, not so much as the trembling of
his lips or the lifting of his eyebrows, ever
betrayed him, when it was his will that they
should not.

And yet, perhaps, the greatest charm that
he possessed was the sudden and unexpected
brilliancy or softness which he at times allowed
his countenance to assume ; then all the
harsh, decisive lines faded from about his
mouth and eyes, the stern rigidity of chin
and brow relaxed, the gravity of the dark
eyes, in their deep settings, grew tender,
and the expression of melancholy harshness
melted beneath the sweetness of his smile.

Olga Naundorff, who knew him so well,
had seen this change in him more often than
any one, yet even to her it was always new
and startling, and filled her with a certain
feeling of amazement, not unmixed with
pity. For to Olga, the beautiful, as to her
Imperial ancestress, men and men's passions
were but playthings of the hour, and should,
like all mechanical toys, be perfectly regulated

by ingenious clockwork, warranted never to
get out of order, and never to carry their
cleverness beyond certain boundaries. If
any one of lier puppets over-stepped these,
and showed signs of unconventional or barbaric
passion, she lifted her dark brows in
astonishment, raised her proud head a trifle
more haughtily, and with superb disdain
reduced the poor bungler to his proper state
of imbecility, and then passed him by ever
after with an intensity of quiet scorn, that
killed by slow but sure degrees.

To her mind all passion was vulgar, and
to be vulgar was to write one's self down
a fool ; fools had no place in her world. They
might be of use in some other part of the
globe, that was not her affair; to her they
were bores, and bores, as we all know, are
obnoxious pests; away with them, let them
be anathema. Life is too short to expend
any portion of it on emotions that ruin the
digestion and spoil the most perfect complexion.


For one entire moment Miss James and
Count Vladimir looked full in one another's
faces, and in that moment each pair of
dark eyes read something in the other that
caused them both to sink simultaneously,
while over the girl's cheeks a faint dull red
rose and faded.

The half smile, mocking yet satisfied, that
had come to Count MellikofFs lips as he-picked
up the bit of lace and muslin from
beside Patricia's chair, still lingered, and
now it deepened somewhat, as with a bow
he stepped back, holding aside the heavy
draperies, and by an almost imperceptible
gesture commanded Miss James to enter. She
obeyed him, and as the thick plush curtains
fell behind her with a dull rustle, they
seemed to her excited fancy to shut her
out for ever from the gaiety and freedom
of the life she had quitted only a moment
ago, even as they shut her within the deserted
drawing room, with Vladimir Mellikoff as her
only companion.

She laughed nervously and put her hand
up to her throat as she did so, trying in

J. » J o

vain to shake off the absurd superstitious
feeling that was creeping over her, and that
seemed to enfold all her senses and render
her acquiescent and obedient to the will of
this tall dark man, who stood before her,
and whose distinguished face, with its burning
eyes and compressed lips, fascinated her, as
the serpent fascinates the dove. She could
even think of this simile, and in her heart
laugh at it, but she could not shake off,
or overcome the fact of his mesmeric influence
upon her.

Count Mellikoff drew a low causeuse
towards her, and with grave politeness
begged her to be seated. She sank down
upon it with passive obedience, and folding
her hands on her knees looked up at him ;
she held a marquise fan of ostrich plumes,
these trembled somewhat ; it was the only
sign of emotion that escaped her.

Vladimir turned from her and walked the
VOL. i. p

length of the drawing-room, standing for a
moment at the entrance to the conservatory,
where lived the golden-hued Marechal Niel
roses ; their pungent yet faint perfume permeating
the atmosphere, while their heavy
heads drooped with the burden of their own
loveliness, half hidden in the tender green of
their leaves.

As he walked away from her, Rosalie
roused herself from the strange lethargy
that had subdued her ; she threw back her
head, her breath came quickly, a flush crept
up and stained the olive pallor of her cheeks ;
she opened her hands, throwing them outwith
an impatient gesture, and the marquise
fan fell noiselessly at her feet, the waving
feathers making a light breeze as they
fluttered down that touched her face and
lifted the laces of her low corsage.

The over-strained tension of her nerves
gave way ; she could have cried for very relief
and joy as she felt the spell of his presence
failing at the return of her powerful will.

She watched him eagerly and saw him enter
the rose house ; as his dark figure vanished
in the interior gloom she jumped up quickly,
threw up her arms, and drew a long deep
breath ; took a step or two forward, and
noticing the fallen fan stooped to pick it up,
then turned to leave the room by a side
entrance. As she did so Vladimir Mellikoff
stood before her, holding a golden-hued rose
between his fingers.

She started back, she was almost terrified
by his sudden reappearance ; she had not
heard his approach, his footsteps were noiseless
on the heavy carpet ; she imagined him
safe in the alleys of the conservatory, and her
escape from him but the effort of a moment.
She had but stooped to recover her fan, and
lo, there he stood, tall and commanding and
smiling, before her. She gazed at him questioningly,
and again, as her glance met his
inscrutable dark eyes, she recalled the old
fable of the serpent and the dove. She sank

down upon the causeuse trembling.

p 2

Mademoiselle," Count Vladimir's courteous,
cool tones were saying, ct will you
honour me by the acceptance of this rose ?
The royal flower, par excellence, over all other
flowers, as one of your own English writers,
John Ruskin, says. If I may be permitted to
suggest so bold an idea, it will enhance,
and be enhanced, by a place in your corsage."

He held out the flower, smiling as he did
so, and she took it mechanically, and fastened
it amidst the black laces that draped her
shoulders and bosom ; it dropped its golden
head lovingly upon them, while its perfume
rose and fell with the pulsations of her
heart.

Vladimir drew a chair opposite to her and
sat down, leaning forward with his elbows
on his knees, and his keen eyes noting
each fluctuating expression of her face, each
flutter of the laces above her unquiet breast,
each nervous movement of her hands in their
long, loose Suede coverings. He had a dangerous
game to play, and upon his successor

defeat depended his winning or losing
Olga. As her name crossed his mind, though
not spoken by his lips, he was shaken by
a sudden passion of love and desire ; he recalled
her proud, pale beauty, the blue of
her eyes, " blue as the violets of his own
Novgorod," the golden sheen of her hair, her
lissom figure, and her cold haughty smile.

He would win her, or he would die; and
what mattered any other woman's life if he
could but appear worthy in her eyes ? What
had the chief said ? " You must use a
woman's weapons-finesse, deceit, distrust —
when you make war upon a woman." Welland
so he would ; it should go hard with
him if he could not fit himself out in a woman's
armour, and not reveal where the breastplate
failed to meet, or the helmet bound his
forehead too tightly. One must put up with
such little inconveniences when one adapts
oneself to the warfare of the weaker sex.

Above all, distrust the women of the great
world, they are our cleverest enemies ; " that

had been another of Patouchki's axioms; and
he did distrust this pale, dark-eyed, slight
American girl with every fibre of his mind,
and read her through and through ; her
shallow cleverness, her dwarfed ambitions,
her stunted love, that was not so much love
as a mixture of baffled pride and jealousy,
and desire of conquest. She could be useful
to him ; he had decided that within the
dinner-hour, when he caught her suspicious
glances, cast first at Philip Tremain, as he sat
on Mrs. Newbold's left, and then at Miss
Hildreth, who, radiant and handsome, was
eating olives, and testifying George Newbold,
on whose right hand she was placed.
He had read Miss James's secret then and
there, and resolved that it should be useful
to him, and that she should be the tool in his
master-hand wherewith to work.

Rosalie in due course had been presented
to him, and she had not failed to notice
and feel flattered by his attentions to her.
She was smarting under Mr. Tremain's too

apparent indifference, and Patricia's too evident
power. She longed to strike both the
one and the other, to tear off the masks
from their serenely smiling faces, and hold
them up to the scorn and derision of their
world.

I hate them both," she murmured
between her teeth. "I hate him because he
loves her still, and I hate her because she is
so beautiful and so victorious. I know there
is some secret well hidden behind that lovely
face, and oh, what would I not give to find it
out and reveal it ! "

It was at this moment that George Newbold's
lazy voice interrupted her thoughts,
and looking up she saw him leaning towards
her with the distinguished appearing foreigner
beside him. Mr. Newbold mumbled out
two names and left them, and Rosalie
glancing up again met the Count's steady
dark eyes fi^ecl upon her, and knew with
sudden certainty that he had read her face
only too well ; how much more that lay beneath

the surface of her outward seeming not even
she could tell !

They stood quite silent for several
moments, and during that time she felt
imperceptibly at first, and then more and
more certainly, his influence and power
growing upon her ; she acknowledged the
intensity of his glance without daring to
meet it, and could have cried for rage at her
own inability to throw off the fascination he
exercised over her. When he spoke it was
upon a commonplace topic, and she drew a
sigh of relief when, after a brief conversation,
he bowed and left her, even though
conscious of a vague regret that he should go
from her.

During the evening she had many times
felt his eyes seek her out and rest for a
moment on her face, and at each such occurrence
the blood had rushed to her cheeks, and
she had trembled, though not with cold.
He had stood a long time talking with
Mr. Tremain, and she had watched them

with a half formed anticipation of some
coming and unexpected catastrophe, and
then, when she turned and sought to leave
the room, she heard a quiet voice say, " Permit
me," the floor was opened for her, and as
she expressed her thanks Count Vladimir
bowed, and returned to his place beside
Philip. And now they were once more
together and alone, and she was again
conscious of an ever-increasing apprehension ;
the prescience of some coming evil in which
they were both to bear a part, and yet which
she was powerless to avert.

"Mademoiselle," said Count Vladimir,
bending a little more forward and looking up
at her from under his dark brows, " I am
about to do something which under ordinary
circumstances and with an ordinary audience
would be considered not only indiscreet but
unconventional. If I misjudge my opportunity
and my audience and offend you by
putting you outside the pale of w T weak worshippers
of conventional cult, pray say so at

once, and I will humbly beg your pardon
and withdraw."

For answer she drew her finders once or
twice across the feathers of her fan, and let
her eyes travel slowly up from that pretty
toy to his face, taking in as they did so the
smallest detail of his appearance, from the
thin long-fingered hands, that hung down so
quietly between his knees, the dead gold of
the one ring he wore with its blazing ruby,
to the tiny red rosette of an officer of the
Legion of Honour that decorated his correct
evening costume. As she raised her eyes still
higher they met his, and for an infinitesimal
space of time held hers captive ; then she
dropped them again, and sinking back against
the cushions of her chair, raised the feather
fan until it rested against her lips. Her
voice was quiet when she replied, though a
fine ear might have caught a suspicion of
fear in it :

"You flatter me, Count Mellikoff; to be
considered above one's world in virtue orin

vice is always a distinction, if not always
an honour. Pray in what indiscretion can
I be of help to your'

I will tell you frankly, mademoiselle,
that I am visiting this country for two
purposes and in two characters. It has
struck me that as one part of my work is
that of reparation, a woman of my own world,
of quick perceptions, nice judgment, and
unerring instinct might, and could, materially
assist me in my self-imposed task. I know
the generosity of women, and I know how
quick they are to respond to any tale of
wrong or outrage ; perhaps it . is the very
conventionalities of their lives which hedge
them in, from birth to marriage, that increases
their spontaneous desire to see wrongs righted,
and the criminal brought to justice. I do
not know, that is a question of analysis into
which I cannot enter ; I may have my theories,
but need not bore you with them. The
result of the present system is made plain
to me by the women of my own country,

where no rule or restriction is ever relaxed
on any pretence, and where the world
and the world's dogmas are worshipped with
a blind and absolute faith. And yet, mademoiselle,
even there I have known the
fairest and highest born women, when occasion
required, shake off the chains of custom
and stand forth boldly in defence of right
and justice."

That, Count Mellikoff, it seems to meany
woman would do, no matter what her
nationality, if the object of her enthusiasm
was worthy in her eyes. It is not to an
American girl that you should plead for
liberty of thought and action, since we have
grown up upon the very soil that once was
baptized in blood, shed by our forefathers
to gain this very freedom of opinion."

It is a grand country," replied Vladimir,
slowly, and without banter or sarcasm in
his tone, " I admire it already, though as
yet but a stranger, and it is for that very
reason that I shrink from one part of my

task. Mademoiselle, when one has been
courteously received, and hospitably entertained,
one hesitates to strike a blow at
those who have so trusted one. The Arabs
read us a lesson in moral ethics, which we
children of a latter-day civilisation would
do well to follow. He who breaks bread
with the child of the desert is ever after
protected by him and his tribe. Not so with
us, treachery is our watchword, ingratitude
our pass key."

He spoke somewhat bitterly, though without
changing his position or expression, and
Miss James, as she looked searchingly at him,
could discover no corresponding reflexion of
words in face or eyes.

Has your experience been of such a
character ? " she asked, a little abruptly.

Both my experience and actions will
bear me out in my asseverations," he replied ;
and then in rather a lighter tone he continued
: "It is rather the fault of our nineteenth
century progress, mademoiselle, that we

have neither time nor inclination for the old-fashioned
courtesies and amenities of our
grandsires' days ; we make boast of our
honesty and truth, it is true, and we are
brutal often in enforcing these virtues ;
we cry out against and disclaim the gentler
methods, and say with satisfied arrogance
that fine phrases have no truth, polite
aphorisms no depth ; well, perhaps we are
right, but for my part I prefer a well-turned
and politely worded lie, knowing it to be
such, than the brute force of to-day's truthfulness.
Honesty and honour have such elastic
definitions, it is difficult to know where the
one degenerates into mendacity, or the other
becomes contention.

Let us, however, leave useless analysis,
mademoiselle, and with your permission, I
will become personal. I am selfish in doing
so, because I desire to interest you in myself
and my work."

He drew back a little as he spoke, and
lifted his arms from his knees, bringing

this face more on a level with hers. Rosalie
watched him with the same indefinable
interest and fascination that had first subdued
her. She did not speak, but her eyes sought
his and rested there, and the heavy golden
flower upon her bosom rose and sank
hurriedly.

Have I your permission, mademoiselle ? "
he asked.

She bowed her head, making an affirmative
gesture with her hand ; the feather fan
lay still upon her lap.

"You have heard," he began, "that I
am here in two characters. I come in the
ordinary way to visit a great country, for
which my own land has always entertained
a friendly feeling ; I come to inspect her
institutions, her educational universities, her
great cities, her fine rivers ; I come to admire
and to learn, and to carry back with me
pleasant recollections of a too-hospitable
and charming people. That is I, in my
proper aspect, without disguise or concealment

; but that is not my first object, or
my real errand. Mademoiselle, I come to
seek, to trace, to find — a woman. One who
has flown to your country for protection, to
escape the penalty of crime ; who is a fugitive
from justice, and who thinks, poor fool ! thus
to avoid the power and the vengeance of
Russia. Mademoiselle, it is in this work
I ask your assistance."

As he spoke, Miss James had risen to
her feet, and now stood before him, her face
blanched and haggard, her eyes glowing
dark and angry, her breath coming quick
and short ; her arms hung straight down
by her sides, the loose gloves falling about
the thin wrists and leaving bare the slender
arms ; the feather fan lay unheeded at her
feet.

Why do you ask me, Count Mellikoff?"
she cried, in a strained, harsh voice, her eyes
never leaving his face. " Why do you ask me
to help you to track a woman, to hunt a
fugitive, a poor, wretched, heart-broken fugitive,

no doubt flying for her life from your
cruel country and its cruel laws ? What do you
see in me that makes you think I will lend
myself to your mad schemes ? What am
I that you should so count upon my cooperation
? "

She stopped, and Vladimir, who had
also risen and stood facing her, cool and unmoved,
bent down and, lifting up the marquise
fan, handed it to her with a bow before
he replied. When he spoke his voice was
keen and sharp, his words cutting and cruel.

What do I see in you, mademoiselle ?
Nay, let me rather answer your question by
a line from an English poet ;

1 1 see — a woman scorned '

How does the couplet end ? "

But Miss James made him no reply, her
hands closed vehemently on the fan she held;
under their pressure the frail pearl sticks
snapped in two and fell apart. She looked
at him fixedly ; the crimson blood had rushed

VOL. I. Q

in a, torrent to her face, and the red stain
lingered there. Suddenly she faltered, trembled,
swayed a little, and sinking down upon
the low causeuse, covered her face with her
hands and burst into long-drawn sobs and
tears.

It was late that night before Miss James
sought her own room ; as she passed out of
the drawing-room Count Vladimir held back
the heavy porters with respectful attention,
bending his head in salutation as she went
by him.

Behind her, on the velvet carpet, lay the
strewn petals of a golden-hued rose, about
whose torn beauty a subtle fragrance still
lingered, and the broken pearl sticks of a
marquise feather fan.

A PINK Billet-doux.

Me. Remain had allowed George Newbold
to take him away from Count Mellikoff
without any great regret on his part. He
acknowledged himself interested in the man
and in his conversation, and at first as he
listened had almost persuaded himself that
his instinctive prejudice against him was ill-founded
and narrow.

But as the Count continued in a perfectly
passionless voice and with what seemed to
Philip a grim satisfaction, his circumstantial
revelations regarding Russia's power, and
Russia's definition as to what constituted
fatherly protection, he felt all his original

q 2

doubts reawaken ; and then he had caught
that momentary, searching, comprehensive
malevolent expression which crept over
Vladimir's face, though but for a brief
second, and this had strengthened him in
his dislike and suspicion.

Therefore he was glad of any excuse to
leave him and return to the more commonplace,
if frivolous, topics of the ladies.

In the silence and security of his own
room he had promised himself a somewhat
more satisfactory interview with Mdlle. Lamien
than had been his portion since the accident,
and with this object in view had shaken
himself out of his half-mesmeric condition,
and deserted the hermitage of his cynical
reflections.

But this was destined to be an evening
of disappointments, beginning with Patricia's
frigid reception of him, and culminating in
the non-appearance of Mdlle. Lamien, either
at dinner or afterwards in the drawing-room „
He had watched in vain for the tall dark

figure, with the falling laces half concealing
the pale face and white hair, to come gliding
in unnoticed, and take the accustomed place
within the arched chimney-recess, the slender
hands, clasped loosely together, resting on the
black dress, the passionless repose of attitude
marking a mind far away from the gay
surroundings of the Folly.

He grew impatient at her absence, for
Philip was of that temperament which, finding
most things — men, women, and opportunity
— come at his bidding, resented the
smallest deviation from this rule, and chafed
inwardly at so flagrant a dereliction to his
will. He desired to see Mdlle. Lamien in
Patricia's presence, and with the cool analysis
of criticism, contrast her feature by feature,
attribute by attribute, with that brilliant
woman of the world. It had never entered
into his reasoning that Mdlle. Lamien might
frustrate his plans by the simple device of
remaining invisible. He had perhaps imagined
her presence compulsory, and since he had

decided that she was to be the object of his
evening's pleasure or amusement, he felt
doubly defrauded by her absence.

Had Mdlle. Lamien desired to feed the
flame of the something more than interest
already lighted in Mr. Tremain's mind concerning
her, she could not have chosen a surer
method. He was piqued and chagrined at
her evident indifference. It was many years
since any advances on his part had been
met by steady rebuff. He had sustained his
character of conquering hero by the very
rarity of his attentions, and it gave his sensibilities
something of a moral shock to find
himself distanced by this cold indifferent
woman, whose very position made his interest
in her the more anomalous.

It was ten years ago that Patricia had
flouted and dismissed him. Was he to experience
like treatment at Mdlle. Lamien's
hands ? For though Mr. Tremain had sofar
scarcely admitted the nature of the
interest that Mimi's governess inspired in

him, he was yet candid enough to give ita
somewhat warmer title than mere curiosity
in the study of a new character.

Patricia had distinctly repulsed him,
though he had met her with the old love
ready to reawaken at the first sign of desire
on her part. Very well then, let Patricia
see that he too was heart-whole and as
indifferent to her as she to him. And then
Mdlle. Lamien had failed to work up to
his cue, and Philip felt his sharpest weapon
was thus taken from him, while Patricia
triumphed in her insolence and beauty.

The theatricals were to take place in
the bijou gem of a theatre which George
Newbold had had put up to please Esther,
in the first year of their marriage. It was
a perfect model in miniature of La Scala,
at Milan, hung throughout with the softest
shade of rose silk, a daring innovation of
Esther's, which rather outlined the classic
columns and severe arches, but which added
a charming air of comfort and luxury, and

was as Dick Darling said, " quite far and
away the most fetching thing for the
complexion."

The stage was fitted completely with all
possible and impossible 'properties," and
opened at the back into the other end of
the rose-house, the opposite door of which,
led into the drawing-room. It was indeed
a royal playhouse, and acting upon its boards
became a luxurious fine art.

When Mr. Tremain entered the auditorium,
he found the first two rows of stalls half
filled by the house guests ; Patricia had
betaken herself and her train of admirers
to one of the boxes, where she sat radiant
and lovely, the soft rose colouring of the
hangings casting a delicious tint upon her
fair face and upon the shimmering surface
of her dress. Philip was at once conscious
of her presence, but passed her by apparently
unnoticed, and made his way to the front
row, where sat Esther Newbold and Dick

Darling, with an empty hauteur beside the
former.

Into this Mr. Tremain slipped carelessly,
and with the familiarity of good-fellowship,
lifted the great bouquet of roses and hyacinths
that lay unheeded on Esther's lap. Dick
Darling leant over and nodded her brown
head at him, while Mrs. Newbold gave him
one of her sw T feet smiles, but laid her fingers
on her lips in token of silence, for Box and
Cox held the stage, and Miss James was
entering into the spirit of Mrs. Bouncer
with a verve and sprightliness, seemingly
incompatible with her usual irresponsive
superciliousness.

The absurd farce played itself out amidst
the chilling reproofs of Mr. Kobinson, and
the plaudits of the spectators, until at last
the curtain dropped upon the final scene.
Philip turned then to Mrs. Newbold, and
restoring her flowers to her, said :

A propos of nothing, Esther, whose

exquisite taste is one supposed to praise in
the arrangement of your posy ? "

"Ah," said Mrs. Newbold, smiling again,
and touching the great jacqueminots caressingly
with her ringers, "I am very proud
of my bouquet, and I will give you three
guesses, Philip, at the donor's name."

"Yes," broke in Dick Darling, quickly,
and I'll bet you three to five you don't
guess it ! "

"Those are very certain odds, Miss Dick,"
replied Mr. Tremain, laughing, " considering
that never in the course of my long and
varied experience have I been known to
elucidate the simplest rebus. Even ' when
is a door not a door ? ' is beyond my mental
powers ; how then can I be expected to
divine who is the latest slave to Mrs. Newbold's
charms ? I must say however, I
consider George a very amiable young man."

So do I," laughed Esther. " Now could
a wife say more ? But your three guesses,
Mr. Tremain."

"Miss Darling must put up the stakes
first," answered Philip, "I am not going to
bring my powerful legal mind to bear on
this problem without first seeing the stakes.
Now then, Miss Dick, out with them."

Oh, but I have positively nothing,"
cried Dick Darling, her face flushed and
eager. "What could I possibly have worth
Mr. Tremain's ' cheese ' ? "

My dear Dick ! " exclaimed Esther, "you
really must get out a dictionary of your
own terms ; your expressions, I am sure, are
nowhere to be found in Lindsey Murray."

Poor old duffer ! " replied the incorrigible
Dick, " I hope not indeed. I guess some
of them would make his hair curl, even in
the cold cold grave."

Philip laughed, and Esther tried to look
scandalised, but failed utterly; and then
Mr. Tremain said, bending slightly forward :
You might put up that tantalising little
note, Miss Dick, that is half stowed away
in your laces. I am perfectly sure it contains

some scandal of Queen Elizabeth which
would amply repay me for my unwonted
efforts, if I win it. Its very colour betrays
it ; whoever heard of a pink billet-doux that
was not redolent of intrigue ? The more
bashful the colour, the more gigantic the
scandal''

"What, this?" replied Dick, taking out
a small square envelope, rose - tinted and
crested. "Ok, no, this would not be worth
your powder; it's only a note from Mdlle.
Lamien, and doesn't contain a cent's worth
of intrigue, Mr. Tremain."

Then its looks belie it," said Philip,
"for it fills me with apprehension. Let me
look at it, Miss Dick, perhaps its tangible
presence may allay my terrors."

But Dick only shook her head, and held
the little note still further away.

"No, no," she cried, "it's not for you,
Mr. Tremain, and I'm not going to give you
even so much as a ' glim ' at it." Saying this,

she put it back in her dress, and smiled at
Philip provokingly. •

"I will put up this' she exclaimed,
holding out her arm, on which a ruby and
diamond butterfly sparkled in a bangle
setting ; "and I am sure it's simply angelic
of me, for this is my one and only piece
of bang-up jewellery ; all real and no imitation,
worth double the money. Now,
Mr. Tremain, three guesses out of five ; and
oh, ye gods, protect my cherished bauble ! "

She swung the pretty ornament between
her finger and thumb, and the light from
the wax-candles in the girandoles caught at
it eagerly, as it shot forth rays tipped with
rainbow gleams.

Mr. Tremain sat back with a mock air
and sigh of fatigue, and the two women
watched him interestedly ; Esther with a
little smile of amusement on her softly-tinted
face, and Dick with a frown of
anxiety knitting her forehead.

Let me consider," said Philip, reflectively,
putting the tips of his fingers together somewhat
awkwardly on account of his sling,
and contemplating them attentively, "only
three random shots at three-score recognised
admirers ! Long odds in your favour, Miss
Dick. Now had I but the language of
flowers at my tongue's end, I might be
able to make such conjunctions with the
unwritten but supposable affinities, as to
read at once the hidden meaning in the
subtle juxtaposition of jacque roses and
hyacinths. Question : Did the donor know
any more about their meanings than I
do?"

I can supply you with posy lore, Mr.
Tremain," broke in Mrs. Newbolcl, "if that
will be of any assistance. Know then that
the red red rose expresses love, the hyacinth
sport or play."

"Ah, the one is contradictory of the
other," replied Philip, "Your nameless
admirer, Esther, could scarcely be guilty of

so bold a play upon definitions as to make
game of his love by his flowers. Bather
let ns suppose him ignorant of any deeper
knowledge than their price."

I think that an equally impertinent
suggestion," answered Mrs. Newbold. " A
man should never count the cost where a
woman is concerned."

Granted, my dear Esther ; in theory
you are absolutely right, in practice you
are lamentably wrong. But I see wrath
mantling on Miss Dick's brow, and scorn
flashing from her eyes at our persiflage ;
let me appease her and make a desperate
plunge into the depths of incertitude.
And first of all, to be courteous and French,
I throw T away deliberately one chance in
suggesting that it may have been M. le
mari who sent the flowers ? Ah, no, believe
me, I did not need your silent denial, Esther,
to be assured of my mistake ; that would
be far too commonplace and bourgeois a
reading for our ethics of this nineteenth

century. The lover sinks such attentions
in the husband, and is better employed in
sending flowers to some other man's wife,
rather than to his ow 7 n."

How very cynical you can be, Philip,"
exclaimed. Mrs. Newbold, turning her blue-eyes
full upon him. "I am sure George
often gives me flowers ; why, these very buds
I am wearing are his gift," and she touched
some half-open blossoms that formed her
bouquet de corsage.

That was very gallant of George,"
replied Mr. Tremain, gravely, "especially
as he had the arduous task of gathering
them from his own rosery, and the virtuous
satisfaction of knowing that they cost
him far more than the roses of your posy
cost the other fellow. Well, let me try
again. Was it Freddy Slade ? I have
noticed that innocent youth casting furtive
glances in your direction, Mrs. Esther, too
often of late. It is possible that his ardour
may have overstepped his prudence and

his income, and your Jacques been the
results"'

"Wrong again, Mr. Tremain," cried Dick
Darling; "oh, I do hope, with all my soul,
you may miss each time."

Considering; that I have but one chance
more, that is rather ungenerous, Miss Dick.
I should not have believed so rancorous a
spirit dwelt within your breast. To wish
to further humiliate a two-thirds vanquished
foe ! "

But I don't want to lose my bangle,
you see," said Dick, naively, at which remark
both Mr. Tremain and Esther laughed, and
the former continued :

Well, here goes my last and only
try for your pretty bauble, Miss Dick.
Was it Sir Piers Traceyy ? To be sure it
is not quite in his line, and I never saw
an Englishman yet dio appreciated an
American woman's love of flowers, still it
might have been Sir Piers, and in that case
George could not even try to appear jealous."

VOL. I. R

Poor dear Sir Piers ! " laughed Esther,
the idea of his sending any one flowers !
He's old enough to be one's grandfather ! "

I don't know that that makes him
ineligible," answered Mr. Tremain, " I daresay
' old Q.' and Beau Brummell showered
roses upon the youthful Esther of their
decrepitude ; it isn't age, my dear Mrs.
Esther, that counts in such things, it's
temperament."

Well, in any case I am glad you have
not won my bangle," cried Dick Darling,
as she slipped it over her dimpled wrist.
I always make it a point to pay up my
debts of honour on the spot, I can't bear
a ' Welcher,' so you would have been obliged
to take my ruby fly, had you been successful,
Mr. Tremain, and that would have
been death to me, simply death."

"With such an alternative, Miss Dick,"
replied Philip, with increased gravity, and
bowing across Esther, " I am devoutly thankful
to have lost, for to have been the indirect

cause of your untimely decease, would have
branded me for ever in my own eyes ! "

Then Mrs. Newbold said time was up,
and she must go ; the Ladies Battle would
be called in five minutes, and she was wanted
behind the scenes ; was Mr. Tremain going
through with his role ?

But Philip begged off on account of his
still lame wrist which he wore bandaged and
in a sling ; it would be quite effort enough
to act when the real representation took place,
Mr. Robinson could read his lines and he
would imbibe valuable hints from his superior
method. Was Mdlle. Lamien to take the
Countess d'Autreval's part ?

"No," replied Esther, fingering her roses
a trifle nervously, and looking at him from
under her eyelids, "Miss Hildreth has elected
to act her own role at the rehearsal, consequently
Mdlle. Lamien's services will not be
required. Ah, Patricia has already left her
box, I must go," she added, hastily ; and with
a hurried gesture she walked towards a side

r 2

exit, her pale pink draperies sweeping after
her, and making a little frou-frou with their
silks and laces.

Mr. Tremain reseated himself, changing
his fauteuil for the one Esther had vacated
next to Miss Darling. He leant back negligently
and turning his face towards that
young lady said carelessly :

Since we neither of us appear on the
boards, Miss Dick, let us console one another
off them. By the way, where is Miss James ?
I did not see her come into the theatre after
her very capital bit of acting."

Oh, I don't know," answered Miss Darling,
with a shrug of her shoulders. " I
suppose she is improving her mind somewhere,
at the expense of some one. To speak
frankly, Mr. Tremain, Kosalie and I are bad
friends just now, and I give her as wide a
berth as possible."

Oh, indeed," answered Philip, rather
bored, and not at all understanding that he
was the cause of this bad friendship, since

Dick, reading Rosalie's schemes and wishes,
had denounced them hotly ; and Miss James,
with the remembrance of Perkins's slighting
remarks still fresh, had replied with equal
vigour ; and so the breach widened between
them day by day.

Dick sat silent for several moments, the
colour coining and going in her cheeks : she
was a very chivalrous little girl, and her
whole heart had gone out in unreasoning
admiration to Patricia, when first she saw
her ; her beauty, her brilliancy, her sparkling
vivacity making an absolute captive of the
maiden, who, as she looked at her, felt all
her own shortcomings rise up and confront
her in formidable array.

She had heard the story of Philip's and
Patricia's engagement, and its unhappy termination,
and she had secretly admired him,
in her own mind, for a long time, and had
felt Patricia's reception of him as a personal
injury, which she longed to put right by
a few judicious words. She felt sure they

would be judicious because they would be
honest. Now if he would only name Patricia,
only ask some question, no matter how trivial,
that she might introduce this one absorbing
subject.

But Mr. Tremain, with that perverted
obstinacy so often displayed, which consists
in saying the wrong thing at the right
moment, when he did speak, propounded a
question so diametrically opposite to Dick
Darling's thoughts that that young lady was
actually taken aback, and stared at him
blankly for a full second without answering.
And yet Philip had only inquired if Miss
Dick could say why Mdlle. Lamien had not
appeared that evening ? It was a simple
enough question, but Miss Darling seemed
incapable of replying to it, so he spoke again.

My dear Miss Dick, what have I said ?
You look as though you had either not heard,
or not understood me. Pray let me repeat
myself. Can you tell me why Mdlle. Lamien
has absented herself all this evening ? "

Miss Darling by this time had come back
from her vain imaginings, and answered him
readily enough.

Oh, I beg your pardon ; I guess I must
have been ' in Japan ' when you first spoke.
"Why hasn't Mdlle. Lamien come down this
evening ? For a very simple reason : she has
gone away."

"Gone away!" echoed Philip. "But I
saw her late this afternoon in the corridor."
He did not add, and heard her ; since, if
Esther Newbold spoke truly, it was she who
had startled him by her sad, monotonous
song, and her voice that had an echo of
Patty's in its notes.

"Oh, no doubt," replied Miss Darling,
she only went away while we were at
dinner ; I heard the wheels of the dog-cart
just as we had eaten our way up to the
supreme de volatile."

Is she to be gone long ? " asked Philip,
conscious and yet astonished at the feelings
loss this news created in him.

"I really don't know," replied Dick.,
looking a little surprised. " She left this
note for me," taking out the pink envelope
from its hiding-place and showing it to him.
He bent forward eagerly to scan it as it
lay on her outstretched palm, the superscription
hidden, the reverse side lying uppermost.
On this he saw impressed a tiny
coronet and a twisted cypher, " A. de L"

It only tells me about some fancy work
she undertook for me," continued Dick, drawing
back her hand with the note, "and thanks
me rather over much for my ' unvarying
kindness.' She might stow that," she concluded,
with a grimace.

But Mr. Tremain had eyes and thoughts
only for the little note, and its dainty,
aristocratic heraldry.

"Is she a titled pedigree in disguise?"
he asked, pointing to the monogram and
coronet ; then, with an effort, as he became
aware of Miss Darling's surprised looks, and
speaking more lightly : " This grows exciting,

Miss Dick ; who knows ? — we may have
the elements of a three volume novel ready
to our hands, yet lose them all by blundering.
What do you know about Mdlle. Lamien ? "

Only what Esther has told us all,
which you heard, I think. As to her being
titled, if you think this indicates it," pointing
to the embellishments on the pink note,
why you know, they go for nothing. It
may be only a blind, or it may be that
Mdlle. Lamien prefers to write on other
people's note-paper. I don't think it's very
conclusive evidence one way or the other."

And Miss Darling got up with almost
an impatient air.

I am going to change my seat," she
said, " I want to go further back, where I
can better see and admire Miss Hildreth.
But before I go, Mr. Tremain, I will tell you
who sent Esther the roses, it was Mdlle.
Lamien ; a sentimental and too extravagant
outburst of gush on her part, w r isn't it ? "

Too surprised to reply, Mr. Tremain

made way for Miss Darling, escorting her
to a back row, where George Newbold received
her with empressement, and Jack
Howard with unqualified relief.

Give you my word," he whispered in
her ear, " I have been bored to death, Miss
Dick ; so glad to have you back again ! "

But Miss Darling proved very poor
company, and Jack Howard for once voted
her tiresome.

Stupid blind mole ! " declared Dick
to herself, as Philip made his bow and left
her. " Can't he see how lovely Patricia has
grown, that he must run after that pale
Russian woman ? Oh, what idiots men
are ! " and Miss Darling consoled herself by
reducing poor Jack to the verge of despair
by her sharp retorts and acrid replies.

Quite late in the evening, after the
rehearsal was over, and the little theatre
empty, Count Vladimir opened the double
doors and stepped within Melpomene's
deserted temple. The lights had not yet

been put out, and the stage scenery stood
unchanged from the last act ; an air of late
occupancy, and a memory of brilliant accessories,
of fair women in their sheen of
jewels and gleam of satins still lingered, to
which the empty seats and deserted stage
pointed the moral of all transitory glory.

Vladimir stood for a moment contemplating
the scene, a fine smile curving his
lips, the light of recent conquest lingering
in his eyes.

"I am too late' he murmured; "the
drama is played out seemingly, the actors
fled. Ah, well, I can afford to wait."

Then he went forward a few steps, and ashe
did so his quick eye evidently detected
something unexpected, for he made his way
definitely towards the back row of stalls,
stooping when he came to the last but one,
and lifted from the carpet a folded square of
paper. He held it up to the light ; it was an
envelope, pink in hue, and embellished on the
smooth satin surface by a tiny coronet and a

twisted cypher. It was Dick Darling's rose-coloured
billet-doux.

Vladimir Mellikoff made no movement of
surprise or triumph, but as he took out his
black note-book and laid the envelope safely
within its pages, the smile deepened on his
lips and in his eyes. He turned and walked
swiftly away, letting the double doors close
noiselessly behind him.

The little theatre was once more deserted ;
the wax-lights flickered in the still air ; the
rose silk draperies stirred slightly as a passing
breath of soft spring wind floated in from the
rose house, bringing a wave of perfume from
the g-olclen blossoms over which it had lingered
in its passage. The mimic comedy was played
out. the actors had abandoned their roles ;
only real life and its human tragedy remained
uncompleted, across which none but the
Divine hand dare write the word finis.

IX THE HAZEL COPSE.

sir. Tremain, after leaving Miss Darling in
the safe custody of George Newbold, walked
hastily out of the theatre by a side entrance,
and making his way along a narrow and
dimly lighted corridor, came to a small door
opening on to an outside terrace which ran
beneath the library windows, and from which
a flight of steps led to the large flower garden
Esther Xewbold's particular hobby.

He stepped out on to the terrace, shutting
the door behind him, and drawing a deep
breath of relief at being once more alone. It
was a charming night ; the cool fresh west
wind swept by him in fitful gusts, touched

with a warmer breath of the south, and laden
with all the mystery of the thousands of miles
it had travelled ere it reached this fair spot
of God's creation. It could not linger to unfold
its burden of knowledge ; it could but
flutter its dark soft wings and pass on in the
orbit of its destiny, leaving its mystery unsolved,
its secrets unrevealed, and murmuring
ever as it went, sweeping up amidst the tall,
waving trees, or bending low to caress the
sleeping flowers, telling its message always
and ever — its message of the passing of Time,
of the coming of Eternity.

The stars heard it, and the sea,
And the answering aisles of the dim woods."

Only man, whose ears are not as yet
finely enough attuned to the music of the
spheres, heard no hidden meaning in its
gentle voice, no celestial trumpet-call in its
rude blasts.

Why should Nature reveal her most
priceless secrets to man, since as yet, his

highest attainment is a disbelief in all things
beyond his finite wisdom, and a cavilling
at what he calls the useless machinery of
organic life ? Nature is as shy as she is beautiful
; generous when trusted, but niggardly
when discredited. How shall the wilfully
blind expect to see into her mysteries, or the
wilfully deaf hear the lilt of her charming ?

Below the terrace lay the garden beds,
wrapt about in a dreamy haze, out of which
the crescent moon, set high in the intense
blue of the heavens, evoked spectral gleams of
gold and silver as it fell athwart the yellow
daffodils, hanging their heavy heads down
to their shrouding green sheath-like leaves ;
or where the sweet narcissus raised its white
disk, distilling its rich perfume far into the
night, and recalling the beautiful Boeotian
youth, whose tragic fate seemed written on
each silver petal.

11 Xarcissi, fairest of them all,
"Who gaze on their eyes in the stream's recess,
Till they die of their own dear loveliness."

Here, too, blossomed the luscious double
violet, hidden beneath its close growing leaves,
mingling its dainty perfume with the more
pungent exhalations of the tiny musk plant
and lily of the valley, while the pale blue-eyed
forget-me-not was lost in the shadows,
as were the star of Bethlehem, and the
delicate classic cups of the crocus, only their
bolder yellow rims catching, now and then,
a fleeting moonbeam.

A grove of sycamore trees threw up their

graceful branches against the luminous 
o

ness, while the chestnuts swayed their half-opened
downy pink and white buds, and the
maples fluttered their long, tendril-like pods,
cased in verdant green, and as rhythmical as
lightly strung Eastern prayer-beads. The faint
early verdure of the lilac was just discernible,
and in one of the dark oak-trees a little
mother bird, wakened by the brilliant moonlight,
crooned out a plaintive note to her
mate, who answered her by the soft fluttering
of his brown wings.

And then all was still, but not silent ;
for the great wonderful nisrtit is filled with
the sweet harmonies of the invisible world,
whose cadences are too faint and tender to
be heard among the clarion chords of the
da) r , but which possess an infinitude of
euphony that seems borrowed from the
heavenly choirs of the New Jerusalem.

Mr. Tremain coming suddenly — from the

artificiality of the miniature La Scala, with

its rose-coloured hangings, its wax tapers,

its atmosphere laden with the manufactured

perfumes of chypre, jockey-club, duchesse ;

and its stage, on which the mimic actors

travestied the passions of real life ; its

audience, made up of fair women, whose

costly robes were more priceless in their

eyes than the ruder virtues of truth and

honour ; of men, whose natural abilities

were buried beneath a fashionable languor,

and whose moral nature was stunted and

undeveloped by the blighting curse of their

century, love of gold and desire of its

vol. i. S

possession — into the immensity and candour
of the night — felt as if dealt a blow, and
stopped involuntarily, swayed by some unknown
emotion that strove against the one
influence and yearned towards the other.

He stepped down from the terrace, and
wandered aimlessly along the broad garden
paths, his hands clasped loosely behind him,
his bare head bent forward, the April wind
stirring the short brown locks that fell over
his forehead. Now and then he stooped down
and looked carefully at some half-hidden
blossom, drawing back the leaves with heedful
fingers, and smiling at his own childishness
as he passed on, not rifling even one
bud from the parent stem.

The garden paths were all broad and
straight, and Philip walked on, unheeding
his steps and unmindful of his course. He
was very deep in thought, so deep that
presently he forgot to notice the flowers
on either side, passing on without halting
at any favoured one. Dick Darling's bald

news— that Mdlle. Lamien had left the Folly
and her apparent ignorance as to her return,
had opened Philip's eyes with a start, and
revealed to him the distance he had already
travelled in the primrose path of dalliance
and uncertainty.

He acknowledged to himself, with a twinge
of mortification, that her leaving the house in
such a manner, and without any word to him
as to her intention, was a wound to his self-love
and self-esteem. Though, indeed, why
Mdlle. Lamien should have confided her plans
to him was an open question. He had met
her but once face to face since the accident,
and that opportunity had resolved itself into
the unsatisfactory interview in the corridor,
when she had scorned his hand, and swept
by him clown the stairs without a word.

Poor Philip ! it was rather rough treatment,
as he said to himself, to have his hand
refused twice in the same evening by two
different women ! A smile of self-scorn and

amusement came to his lips as he recalled

s 2

the incident ; fate was not usually so unkind,
lie was not accustomed to such churlish treatment
at her hands, and the very novelty set
him speculating as to the motives that incited
two such opposite natures to a similarity of
action.

Self analysis is a very deceitful occupation,
and Mr. Tremain, who had set about an interior
examination as to his own feelings and
intentions regarding Mdlle. Lamien, was soon
wandering far afield in the realms of speculation
regarding the ulterior motives of these
two women, comparing their various attributes,
contrasting their characteristics, finding subtle
likenesses between them, and antagonistic
points of approaching. Then he recalled
the little pink note, and the bouquet of jacque
roses, and Dick Darling's sarcastic criticism
upon them. Why should Mdlle. Lamien use
coroneted note-paper if it was not her own ?
And why should Mimi's governess waste her
scanty substance upon hot-house flowers for
Esther Newbold, who certainly could better

afford the luxury than her paid dependent ?
And did not Mdlle. Lamien know the meaning
hidden in the blossoms ? Had she some
reason for selecting red roses and white
hyacinths, or was it only a coincidence, an
accident ?

Were I a little more of a fatalist,"
thought Philip, " I should answer my own
question by reminding myself that nothing
is accident in life. In their cult, kismet
overrules and becomes destiny."

Meantime, taking no heed to his steps,
Mr. Tremain was surprised into consciousness
by a sharp blow in the face, which
recalled him to a survey of his surroundings.
He found he had wandered far beyond
the garden precincts, down a gentle declivity
ending in a lightly-wooded copse, to which
a low-hanging hazel-tree branch barred his
entrance. Putting this aside, he entered
the small enclosure ; it was not more than an
acre in extent, the trees with which it was
planted being still young, and standing

rather wide apart. The ground beneath
was of yielding though uneven turf, and
quite at the far end of the tiny wood a
rustic bench was placed near a small fountain
with a marble basin, into which the water,
trickling from a vase held in the marble boy
Narcissus's uplifted hands, made a pleasant
murmur in the stillness of the night.

A gleam of white drapery falling across
the bench warned Philip that he was trespassing
upon a rendezvous, that had all the
recognised characteristics of an assignation.
He had gone too far, however, to retreat,
since his presence must have been already
announced by the harsh crackling of the
offending hazel - bough, some of the twigs
having broken in his hand as he pushed it
back.

The white figure neither moved nor showed
any knowledge of his approach, but remained
absolutely motionless, the head and shoulders
in deep shadow, only the gloved hands and
the sweeping draperies catching reflection s

from the fitful moonlight. If it was an
assignation, the lady apparently was the
only one faithful to the tryst, for there
was no manly form beside her, nor manly
accents raised in pleading or caress ; indeed,
voices of any timbre there were not.
A silence, deep and profound, held the little
wood as in a spell, and the white - robed
figure with the folded hands might have
been the enchanted Princess, and Philip the
Prince who was to wake her with a kiss,
whose very sweetness would open the door
once again to the outside world of romance,
and passion, and disappointment.

Poor Princess ! let her dream on a little
longer, wrapped in her unconscious, vision-less
slumber ; the malignant fairy's curse of a
hundred years ago is fast wearing itself away,
and with love's awakening who can banish
the twin sisters of jealousy and suspicion ?
Does not the fairest rose of all the garden
fair bear within its flushing bosom the cankerworm
of deceit and decay ?

Preaching noiselessly upon the short turf r
Mr. Tremain came close upon the fair intriguer
before she heard his footsteps, or was aware
of his presence. The moon, which had been
slightly obscured by the passing of some hazy
clouds, now broke forth and shone down full
upon the slight upright figure that had arisen
hastily, and taken a forward step or two, as
Philip's approach became known. The silver
rays touched with seeming tenderness the dark
hair rolled high upon the little head, and
fell across the white neck, half concealed by
a fleecy drapery, gathered together carelessly,
and held by one slender hand in a long loose
glove ; they struck cool and sharp on the
sweeping lines of the dress, accentuating each
fold of the silken texture, and threw into
bold relief the soft pallor of the delicately-rounded
face, lingering longest where the
dark brows made a mystery of the eyes,
and kissing the curved lips that now were
set and defiant ; illuminating and defining
each gracious curve and outline of the graceful

form, with the same ethereal brilliancy
that transformed the trickling fountain into
an elixir of life, and awakened the boy-god
Narcissus into perennial youthfulness.

Mr. Tremain stopped spellbound ; and fora
moment's space, in the hush that fell between
them, each could hear the quick-drawn breath
of the other, while the tinkling drops from
Narcissus's vase became a Niagara in sound
and volume. Then the spell was broken,
as both, with involuntary impulse, spoke the
other's name.

Patricia ! "

Philip ! "

The woman was the first to recover her
composure ; with a nervous laugh, that rang
a little untrue, and in a slightly strained
voice, she broke the embarrassment of the
moment.

So you, too, have caught the fever
of unrest, Mr. Tremain, and become moonstruck
under the influence of Luna's fool's
month. For myself, I have always asserted

that the blood of the wandering tribes flows
in my veins, the night-time and the dark
hours have always been my favourite times
for "

"A rendezvous," struck in Philip, sharply.
"I have not forgotten any of your pet
peculiarities, you see. Perhaps I intrude,
however ; the hour and scene demand a
Romeo for your Juliet, and I can scarcely
hope to fill the part to your liking."

She started as though he had struck her,
but made answer calmly enough :

You are too modest, Mr. Tremain, by
far ; it is a new development in your character,
pardon me if it strikes me as somewhat
ludicrous." And she laughed lightly and
coldly, though with a ring of bitterness
below the mocking notes.

But Philip was not angered by her words
or her laughter ; he scarcely heard the latter,
so eagerly were his eyes devouring each
feature and line of the once dearly worshipped
face and form.

Surely the cheeks were a trifle more wan
and hollow than in the old days, despite
the delicate rouge tinting that lay upon them ;
and the eyes were deeper set, the shadows
beneath them darker, their expression more
weary and unsatisfied than when last he had
looked into their violet depths ; and had not
the perfect modelling of her figure grown
somewhat thinner and more shrunken ?

He, who remembered her in the full glory
and pride of her youthful beauty, and who
had loved her in it, noted now with keenest
vision each change that time had wrought
upon it. And as he gazed the old old passion
leapt into life again ; his heart grew tender
and longing, his love of ten years ago awoke
from its long slumber, and clamoured for its
resurrection. And yet, mingling with this
tumult of emotion, over weighing it, and
pressing it back, was a strange, intangible,
inexplicable power that evolved itself out of
a future of unknown presentiment, even as
it seemed but the forecast of a dread calamity.

But Philip was not one to be swayed
by unseen influences ; he shook off the impression
of supernatural agencies and resolved
to snatch at this one hour, which chance had
thrown in his way, and wring from it whatever
of joy or sweetness could be gathered
from the withered blossoms and crushed buds
of the past.

He stood face to face with Patricia once
more ; might not he, remembering Esther
Newbold's pleadings, even now after ten long
years of separation, gather sufficient fruit
from off the golden trees of past youth and
love, to make happy and contented the downward
years of life ? Could a man stand thus,
looking into the eyes of the woman of his
lifelong devotion, and remain indifferent?
Would not any sop from out that gilded past,
if thrown to him by her hand, prove of sufficient
value to be worth his glad acceptance ?

All this time his eyes had never left her
face, and she grew restive under the intensity
of his scrutiny, flushing and paling, while

the hand that held the fleecy drapery about
her throat and neck trembled.

Patty," he said at last, in a voice set
in a lower key than usual. " Patty, it is ten
long years since we stood thus, alone together.
Do you remember the last time we met and —
parted ? "

She did not answer him at first, but
moved away from him some paces, and halted
beside the fountain ; the marble rim that
surrounded the basin was broad and high,
she seated herself upon it, and turning her
face looked upward at Philip, who had
followed her.

Not more cold, or hard, or irresponsive
was the face of the boy Narcissus behind
her, than was the fair impassive beauty of her
face. The springing jet of water had ceased
to flow, and only a few drops fell now and
then from the upheld vase ; they seemed
pike echoes from the past years falling slowly,
slowly, one by one.

When she spoke her voice was calm and

composed, though Philip, accustomed to its
fuller cadences, caught here and there a flat
note in its ebb and flow.

I find you are as inconsequent and as
tactless as ever, Philip," she said ; and though
she dropped her previous formality of address,
his name gained nothing in her using of
it. " You were always a sad bungler ; fancy
reminding a woman of her existence ten years
ago ! And then expecting her to remember
her words and actions at that time ! My dear
Philip you are speaking of ancient history ;
why not tell me at once that Queen Anne is
dead, and expect me to be astonished ? A
woman remembers nothing of her past, save
her conquests and her gowns. The one tells
upon her vanity, the other tells upon her
purse."

She laughed again, lightly ; and drawing off
her glove dipped one hand in the dark water,
stirring its surface into a hundred rippling
smiles, and scattering the drcrns in a shower
of prismatic spherules.

"I know it is the fashion of your world,
Patricia," Philip replied, quietly, " to scoff
at all things ; so narrow are the limits of this
nineteenth-century philosophy that what we
cannot understand we disbelieve, what we
do not wish to recall we deny, and what weare
forced to accept we despise. It is a cruel
creed even for men, on the lips of a woman
it becomes detestable. You may scoff as you
please, Patricia, you cannot change or alter
the old laws of God ; as long as man is man
and woman, woman, memory and remorse
must have a place within their consciousness ;
and no matter how hard or callous you may
have grown, or how learned in the world's theology,
you cannot entirely quench the attributes
bestowed upon you, when you became not
only a beautiful creation, but a woman of soul
and reason. The last ten years cannot be a
blank to you, any more than our last meeting
and parting can be."

Miss Hildreth laughed again, and wiping
her slender finger-tips upon a tiny square of

lace and muslin, from whose folds an odour
of violets stole forth, she answered in an even
lighter tone :

"My dear Philip, let me recommend to
you a certain essay on the 'Art of Forgetting,'
if you have not already read it. It is written
by a modern philosopher, it is true, but
nevertheless, he sounds the heights and depths
of our social system, and evolves a theory
therefrom for which he should receive an
universal peerage, bestowed upon him by
his indebted fellow-sufferers. In the art of
forgetting lies one's only chance of freedom
from remorse for the past, and the inconveniences
of the future. Believe me, if we
can only master thoroughly this hitherto
neglected art, we need have no further fears
either for our digestions or complexions. It
was, I think, old Sir Piers who said that
all one's nightmares, physical or moral, arose
from one of two causes, an unruly liver, ora
too vivid memory ; let us give the old

man the credit of the aphorism, in any
case."

Since you are so willingly blind,
Patricia, " cried Philip, roused from his apparent
calm by the cool impertinence of her
replies, " it seems a pity to force you to recall
a past that dates back ten years. And yet
I fear I must do so, for there are certain
things that had better be explained between
us now. Who knows but twice ten years
may come and go before we meet again ? "

He paused for a moment, but she made
him no reply ; her face and slim graceful
figure were thrown into high relief against
the dark hazel-trees, her silks and laces lay
about her feet in careless profusion across
the short green turf, her hands were folded
in the lace scarf that wrapped her neck in
its fleecy folds. Afar off in the darkness
of the drooping branches, an owl hooted,
and a bird or two answered in sleepy half-notes.


vol. i. t

It is not so very long ago," Philip
continued, " since a letter came to me from
you."

She shivered a little and drew her laces
about her more closely.

In that letter, Patricia, you had forgotten
nothing ; not one detail of the dream we
dreamed together ten years ago. You wrote
from your heart then ; your heart that will
sometimes make its cry heard, despite the
crust of worldly artifice and selfishness you
have built up upon it, and you appealed
to me to recall the old days, c to fold back
the cere-cloth from the face of our dead past,'
and see if something of beauty and sentiment
did not still cling to its memory."

She put up one hand to her face and
passed it hurriedly across her trembling lips ;
she did not speak, but her eyes grew large
and dark in their entreaty. Mr. Tremain
continued, unheeding either her eyes or
gesture.

"I am not going to quote further from

that letter, Patricia, and I will only tax your
patience a very little longer, while I describe
to you two visions conjured up by your
appeal. I saw once more you, in your first
fresh loveliness and beauty, radiant with youth,
transformed by love ; and I saw myself, as yet
a raw, unfinished, unformed specimen of manhood
; the Creighton of a suburban society,
it is true, but nevertheless the veriest tyro
in the affectations and niceties of town etiquette.
You came within my circle, and you
charmed me by the sweet graciousness of
your beauty, the blue fire of your eyes,
the frank candour of your witcheries. And
you — you were content to let me play
Stephen to your Chloe. And so that
vision faded ; and when next I saw you infancy,
you came towards me, from out a
world of light beyond, from whence came
also the echo of gay laughter and light
jest ; the silks and laces of your dress fell
about you jealously, I remember their colour
and their sheen, as you crept up to me,

trembling. There was no glad exclamation
on your lips, no joy in your eyes, no hand
held out in welcome ; hesitating and uncertain
you stood before me, looking at me from
under your down-cast lids, and drawing
one hand slowly over the other. And I,
loving and eager, I, a very fool in love, never
dreamed the reason of your changed demeanour
; no, not until hours afterwards, when
the night and the falling rain had cooled my
passion. You were ashamed of me, Patty,
ashamed of your rustic lover, who came into
your presence with a heart on fire, but wearing
an ill-fitting coat, and with manners more
pronounced and enthusiastic than those of
your little court in the room beyond."

He stopped and walked away from hera
few paces. The woman thus left alone
seated on the marble fountain rim, never
moved or spoke ; only a low cry burst from
her lips, smothered as soon as born, otherwise
she remained as still and silent as the
Boeotian marble god behind her, whose prototype

had lived out all the passion and the
pain of loving so many centuries ago.

The moon above drifted from cloud to
cloud, flinging its silver fire down recklessly
upon the sheltered nook, and upon the fair
woman miserable in the midst of her loveliness.
Mr. Tremain turned and came back, he drew
close to her and stood silent for some
moments ; the pity that filled his soul, revealed
in his eyes down bent upon her. After
a time he spoke, and his voice had regained
its usual level tones.

That was all, Patty, a very commonplace
ending. You were ashamed of me ;
ashamed of my outward appearance, which
lacked the correct finish of a Bond Street tailor ;
ashamed of my eagerness and my passion,
and my open adoration ; ashamed of my
poverty, and afraid of it. Poor pretty Patty !
poor little butterfly of fashion ! What should
it know of the coarser insects of creation,
whose existence was as necessary perhaps,
but less ornamental, than its own ? Why

should it break its pretty painted wings in
trying to soar above the sunshine of the
hour ? You rejected me, Patricia, that was
the end of our last interview ; you rejected
me and scorned me, and cast me from you
when tired of your toy, and when you had
wounded me beyond healing, and flouted
my love and constancy. You asked me to
kiss you for good-bye ; I think that was the
bitterest moment of all my life, Patty, it was
such wanton cruelty, such selfish triumphing.
And I went from you with all the love and
hope and trust and belief of youth crushed
out of my heart by your two soft little hands.
"Who could have thought they had the strength
to deal one such a coward's blow ? "

Again he stopped, but still she remained
still and silent, the whiteness of her face
growing strange and unfamiliar in the fitful
moonbeams.

That was our last meeting and parting,
Patricia, and it happened ten years ago.
And you would have me believe that you have

so mastered the art of forgetting as to make
of it all only a blank chaos ! "

He came nearer to her, and moving
with careful hand the folds of her dress sat
down beside her on the broad marble brim.
Seated thus, side by side, his eyes were on
a level with hers, and he read within their
depths so great a misery as to call forth a
fuller pity in his own.

Patty," he said, very quietly, " Patty,
my answer to your letter was cold and
hard, unworthy of me. Will you forget it,
my dear, and let me give you my true
answer now, with your head upon my heart,
and my lips on yours, as in the old clays,
Patty? The old beautiful days when the
world and our love was young. Patty,
my little wayward Patty, come back to my
love and to me."

He held out his arms and would have
drawn her to him, so sure was he of her
answer. But she, springing up, stood tall
and dignified before him, her bosom, from

which the lace wrap had fallen, heaving
with her hurriedly drawn breath, the whiteness
of her uncovered neck and arms gleaming
like alabaster, as she stood silhouetted
against the sombre boughs of the hazel-trees
behind her. Her eyes flashed with their
old fire, she raised one hand in her old
favourite imperious gesture, and when she
spoke the tones of her voice had grown round
and full and musical.

No, Philip," she cried, " you come too
late. What ! you think you have but to
throw the handkerchief and I will run gladly
to pick it up ? You are willing to accept
me now, because for some concealed reason of
your own, I appear more desirable in your
eyes, better worth the having, and so you
read me a long monologue on your constancy
and love, and my faithlessness and cruelty.
But you forget to put in the finer shading
to the picture, Philip ; you forget the
part you played in our drama d deux; you
forget how eagerly you snatched at the

freedom I offered ; you forget your harsh
words, your rough manners, your imperious
demands, your impatient flying to conclusions.
You wilfully misunderstood me then, Philip,
you wilfully misread a girl's most natural
shrinking from the unknown and the
untried, and put it down to heartless
coquetry and deceit. Was it for me to set
you right ? Was I to plead my own
cause ? No, Philip, you have scorned me
twice ; once when you refused my kiss, ten
years ago, and again when you refused my
offer in my letter. I will not accept now
a love born out of pity, an interest created
by desire. I will have all or nothing ;
pity shall have nothing to say or plead on
my behalf."

She threw out her hands passionately.

Take back your offer, Philip ; make
it to some less jealous, less wise woman.
I will have none of it. I have seen
many strange things in my wanderings often
years, gained many bitter experiences,

vol. i. u

mingled with many strange people, touched
close on terrible tragedies ; but one thing
I have never lost throughout all — my pride
and my freedom. Go, Philip, you have
your answer in my farewell words of ten
years ago. I have no room to remember.
I have mastered the art of forgetfulness and
oblivion."

With one quick movement she stooped,
drew the long folds of her shining draperies
about her, gathering her laces in one hand,
and swept by him swiftly ; the moonlight
clinging to her as she moved, surrounded
her as with a halo, and lighted up the
fine scorn that curved her lips and glowed
in her deep eyes.

In another moment the elastic swaying
hazel-boughs parted to receive her, and then
springing back, hid the slight graceful figure
froui Philip's sight.

And still the drops falling from the
vase, held high in the hands of the boy-god
Narcissus, counted out the moments,

and the moonbeams fell straight and long,
in narrow shafts, across the spot where
Patricia had leant her fair form, stirring
to sudden life with her jewelled fingers the
waters placid dark surface.

Now she was gone, and the radiance
departed with her.

END OF VOL. I.

Charles Dickens AND EVANS, Crystal Palace Press.

%

OF THE

U N IVLR5ITY

Of ILLINOIS

8:2.3

te.

Wt

in 2010 with funding from

University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign

http://www.archive.org/details/misshildrethnove02stev

FIRE. By Mes. Diehl. 2 vols.

NIGEL FORTESCUE. By W. Westall. js.

PERIWINKLE : An Autobiography. 3 vols.

THE MAN WITH A SHADOW. By G. M. Penn. 3 vols.

A LEAL LASS. By R. Ashe King. 2 vols.

THE PIT TOWN CORONET. By Charles J. Wills. 3 vols.

A RECOILING VENGEANCE. By Frank Barrett. 2 vols.

Ward and Downey, Publishers, London.

;a liobci.

A. DE GRASSE STEVENS,

Author OP
OLD Boston," "the LOST Dauphin," "WEIGHED IX THE BALANCE,
ETC.

VOL. II.

LONDON :

WARD AND DOWNEY,

12, YORK STREET, Covent GARDEN, W.C.

1888.
\^All rights reserved']

CONTENTS.

CHAPTER I.

PAGE

A FACE FROM OUT A CRIME 1

Chapter II.
"it was no delusion" 21

CHAPTER III.

ST. PETER AND ST. PAUL , . . , . 34

Chapter IV.
SUSPICIONS 52

CHAPTER V.

MIMI'S BIRTHDAY POSY 79

CHAPTER VI.

"tis A Siren " . . . 95

Chapter Il

PAGE

THE CANKER WORM OF DOUBT . , . ,116

CHAPTER Viii.

A SOCIETY DRAMA 139

CHAPTER IX.
"it is hopeless" 154

CHAPTER X.

THE SONG OF THE CIGALE . . . , .169

CHAPTER XL

INTROSPECTION 189

CHAPTER XII.

PLOTTING 203

CHAPTER XIII.

THE ANGLAIS . . . . , . , 227

CHAPTER Xii.

PAGE

FIND ME THE W03IAN " 23^

CHAPTER XV.
"this little hand" 253

CHAPTER Xii.

ARRESTED ! 262

MISS HILDRETH.

CHAPTER I.

A FACE From OUT A CRIME.

The same dazzling and brilliant sunshine, that
for so many weeks had held sway in Petersburg,
was still beautifying the Tsar's great
capital, and gilding all things with an illusory
sheen, which had all the appearance of true
gold, but which fled away at the approach
of darkness, leaving bare the cankerous fever
spots, the dry bones and wasting disease of
the most tyrannous, but most doomed phenomenon
of autocratic power.

During all the early hours of morning
the sleeping city lay bathed in this Wonderful
alchemy ; the Neva resting tranquil beneath

VOL. II. B

the spell, even its cold grey waters catching
reflections from the sun-god's rays. From
above its low bank rose a long grey stonewall,
broken here and there into sharp angles
and protected by recurrent cannon, set at
regular intervals ; beyond this a tall and
slender spire shot up high into the air,
graceful and quivering with a thousand golden
lights, that seemed to break against it, and
then fling the fragments broadcast with
careless prodigality ; these in falling touched
again the fluttering flag on the white belfry,
glanced athwart the Imperial mint, and awoke
myriad reflections in the facade of the Winter
Palace.

This tall spire, shooting upwards like a
lance, is the crowning glory of Russia's great
State prison, and Russia's Imperial tomb of
kings, the grim fortress of Petropavlovsk. It
is a familiar sight to Petersburg's populace,
as they pass to and fro across the Troitski
Bridge, or linger in the spacious Boulevard-park,
which is never empty, and through

which the dwellers on the Petersburg side
go in and out to their homes.

Beneath its solid foundations lie the bones
of Russia's greatest sovereigns ; within its
granite walls languish many of Kussia's truest
patriots ; while without its precincts, separated
only by a few rods, lying almost within its
shadowy rises the stately palace, within which
lives Russia's Tsar, conscious always of the
everlasting surveillance of Peter's prison, yet
unable to cast it from him, or flee before it.

It was very early in the day, about a
month after Olga NaundorflP's interview with
Ivor Tolskoi, and as yet but few people were
astir in the city's streets, save those whose
avocations called them forth in the pursuance
of itinerant trade. Now and then a mounted
orderly would ride past, leading an un-caparisoned
horse by a long rein, the iron
hoofs clattering over the bridge, breaking-clear
and distinct across the sharp morning
air ; presently they would disappear under
the arched entrance to the barracks, and

B 2

then, perhaps, a dark, sombre figure would
come next, passing swiftly along, with secrecy
written on every line of the face and habiliments,
to be swallowed up in the frowning
doorway of the Imperial Chancellerie ; while
those he passed on his way drew back instinctively,
the women crossing themselves
furtively, the men cursing below their breath.
For was not this an emissary of that terrible
secret police, from whom no one was safe,
whose inexorable will was as iron and blood ?
And who could say who would be the next
in turn to feel that cruel hand upon his
throat, and know, with helpless certainty, that
Petropavlovsk was his eternal destination ?

Just as the clocks on tower and steeple
struck seven, following the single notes
by the ecclesiastical melody of triumph
How glorious is our Lord in Sion," a
young man appeared, walking quickly, and
with long, swinging steps, across the
Troitski Bridge. He was tall and straight
and though muffled in a long coat and profuse

furs, the yellow tint of his close-cut
curls beneath his sable cap, his fresh complexion
and boyish gaiety of appearance, at
once betrayed him to be Ivor Tolskoi.

He was humming lightly as he walked
some half remembered refrain from last
night's ball or opera, but as he reached the
middle of the bridge he halted, and folding
his arms upon the parapet looked out across
the marshy delta of the river, to where the
Finnish Gulf made an indistinct grey line.

The gloomy fortress frowned heavily upon
him, bat the sun's shafts were making merry
with the Palace windows, and Ivor's thoughts
had more just then to do with hope and love,
than with treachery and despair. The opera
melody died on his lips unfinished and he
heeded it not ; his fancy had leapt the bounds
of prosaic realism and was wandering as it
listed in the realms of conjecture.

It was of Olga he thought as he wondered
with idle curiosity which might be her casement
amoncr those that glittered and deemed

o O O

like jewels in a crystal setting, across the
great marble front of the Winter Palace.
If he waited long enough would he see the
blind raised, the silken hangings withdrawn,
and the face of his lady-love look forth to
greet the day ? Then would he, standing
below her, bare his fair head and veil his
bold blue eyes, and pray the passing wind
to carry to her his message of fealty and truelove.


But the windows remained hermetically
sealed, the curtains undrawn, and presently
Ivor with a shrug of his shoulders, a laugh
at his sentimentality, and the fragment of
song once more on his lips, passed on his way,
looking neither to the rio^ht nor the left,
and vanished within the heavy portals of
the Imperial Chancellerie.

Mounting one flight of stairs with quick
step, and passing along a short corridor, Ivor
knocked at a closed door, and hearing the
sharp French " entre' opened it and stepped
within that inner chamber where so few wrecks

ao-o Vladimir Mellikoff had wished his
chances, and made his choice.

Patouchki sat, as then, at the table writing ;
and without raising his eyes from his occupation,
bade the young secretary good-morning,
signing him to his place by a gesture
of his left hand.

Ivor obeyed at once, and for some time
only the rapid passing to and fro of the
quill pens upon the paper were the only
sounds.

Ivor Tolskoi had removed his heavy
outside wraps and thus revealed the fact
that he still wore evening-dress, and that
a white rose-bud lingered in his button-hole,
its freshness somewhat tarnished, but its
perfume as sweet as ever.

After about half an hour's silence,
Patouchki pushed back his chair and laid
down his pen, passing his hand rapidly across
his forehead once or twice, and looking keenly
at his young companion as he did so. In
the cruelly frank and searching morning light

the face seemed to lose something of its
pristine youth ; the faint lines about the
eyes and mouth became accentuated, the
pallor of the temples more noticeable, the
cruelty of lips and chin more pronounced.
He did not look up however, though aware
of the chiefs scrutiny, until Patouchki's harsh
voice and bullet-like sentences broke the
silence.

** Burning the candle at both ends are
you, Ivor ? Pardon me if I remind you that
wilful waste will scarcely benefit yourself, or
us. Let me also remind you that that moderation
in all things of which the apostle speaks,
has always produced far more lasting results
than reckless enthusiasm and imprudent zeal''

The young man flushed slightly as he
replied : "If you would imply, chief, that
my present dress is scarcely suited to my
present occupation, I acknowledge the reproof
with all promptitude. I was late at the Court
Ball last night, and had not time to return
to my apartments before making my journey

across the bridge. I could not fail in that,
since it was undertaken by your orders,
consequently I must beg your pardon for
appearing in such attire."

The words where apologetic enough, but
the tone was slightly antagonistic. Patouchki
looked more closely at him ; it was not
usual for his subordinates to use any but
obsequious words and tones when addressing
him, and his quick ear caught the foreign ring
in Iv^or's voice. He passed it by, however,
without open comment, though inscribing it on
the tablets of his memory, and replied, calmly :

"And have you brought me confirmation
of the business on which I sent you ? "

"Yes, chief," answered the young man,
shortly. " I saw the man Mattalini, who is a
veritable specimen of Southern Italy intrigue
and falsehood. He would rather lie than tell
the truth, I take it ; but he will be faithful
enough to the Chancellerie if paid sufficiently.
He had arrived only last night from Paris,
and brought news of Count Vladimir Ellis

occupations and associates in gay
Lutetia."

A slight sneer curled Ivor's lips as he
spoke the Count's name, which was no more
lost upon the chief than the unusual ring in
his voice a moment before.

Tolskoi grows restive," he mused, letting
his keen black eyes rest piercingly on the
young man's face for several moments ; *' nor
is he quite frank with me. He keeps something
back concerning Vladimir, whom I have
noticed he never mentions without a covert
sneer. There is without doubt a woman
in the case. It is always so ; Eve's daughters
ruin our most promising patriots, sapping their
energy, their spirit, their wit, and talent,
by slow but sure degrees. And for what ?
A gleam of white teeth in a dangerous smile,
the pressure of a traitorous hand, the hypocrite
tears in melting eyes ! Ah, bah ! It's the
old old story of the garden, for ever repeating
itself — ' the woman tempted me and I did
eat ; ' and latins of the forbidden fruit, have

become dead to all things save the unsatisfied
desire it creates but never satisfies."

Aloud he said : " Did Mattalini give viii
no packet or papers for me ? "

Yes, chief," replied Tolskoi, " here they
are," taking from his inner pocket a small
sealed envelope, and holding it out to
Patouchki. As the latter's Ions; fingers
closed over it, Ivor continued, in a half-nervous,
half-jocular tone, and touching his
fair moustache with his white fingers :
Might one interested in the cause inquire,
chief, what news you have of Count Mellikoflf
and his mission ? It is something of an open
secret icliy he has gone in certain circles, and
I, for one, should be glad to know how far he
has succeeded."

To pass on the information to those of
your friends who are so keenly interested in
and solicitous for the welfare of our father,
the Tsar ? " answered the chief, sharply.
Why, Ivor, I did not know you were so
much of a gossip."

The young man bit his lip and frowned.

You mistake me, chief," he said, and
once again his voice had a ring of antagonism
in its tone, " and you misjudge me. My
question was in some sort a warning, and put
forth that you might dictate such an answer
as best suits the interests of the Tsar and
Chancellerie. There are those, chief, who do
not hesitate to assert that Stevan Lallovich's
murder was but an act of justice on the part
of his repudiated wife ; those, too, who have
the ear of our Empress, and who are never
weary of instilling dislike and distrust of the
Chancellerie in her mind, and who insinuate
that Count Mellikoff's mission has more to do
with secret and treacherous intrigues against
the Tsar, than with the finding of a fugitive
woman. And when the Chancellerie is struck
at, you best know for whom the blow is
intended. This was my motive for my
friendly inquiries regarding Count Mellikoflf."

He finished with a slight bow, and stood
looking; fall into Patouchki's face. For a

moment the immobility of that sphinx-like
countenance was broken up, a wave of dull-red
blood rose slowly in the sallow cheeks,
the black eyes flashed ominously, a sneer
rested on the thin lips and repeated itself in
the frown that gathered on his forehead.
When he spoke his voice vibrated with
greater distinctness and staccato emphasis
than ever.

There will always be fools, Ivor, as long
as time endures; even in eternity we shall
doubtless find similar spirits to vex our hard
earned rest. If I have misjudged you, it is
enough, I beg your pardon. That there are
traitors on every side who can know so well
as I, who hold my life not worth the price of
a rush-light ! To be accused wrongly forms
the greater part of man's experience, but to
know one's own rectitude is sufficient compensation.
The Chancellerie is for the
moment secure in the integrity of its
members, I believe; though in this Petersburg
of ours, who can say how long even our

institution will stand, or who shall prove the
first traitor to its system ? Let it be known
then, Ivor, that Count MellikofF has at present
reached America, and that he is working
under our protection and our surveillance.
Even he needs to tread wearily, for not even
he is free from our suspicion, or our watchful
care. No one, Ivor, no one, in all our great
machinery, but has his double, whose duty it
is to report to us every action, word, or occupation.
A traitor would find short mercy,
he mio^ht think himself fortunate had he time
for a pater or an ave, or a cry to our Lady of
Kazan. I need say no more, your warning
will be remembered and acted upon."

Ivor bowed again in silence and turned
back to his desk, but before he reached it
Patouchki stopped him.

'' I shall not require you longer, Tolskoi,"
he said, in his usual quiet voice, 'you had
better get an hour or two of rest now; at
twelve I shall desire your attendance with me
upon the Emperor and Empress, who will

make at that time a private visit of inspection
to Petropavlovsk. Meet me at the private
entrance of the Palace, and now S' Bogorn."

I will be there, chief," replied Ivor,
promptly, a little smile creeping into his eyes
and about the corners of his mouth. He drew
on his heavy furred coat and stood for a
moment, holding his cap under his arm, as he
pulled on his long gloves, glancing now and
then at Patouchki, who had returned to his
writing, and was apparently so engrossed
with it as to be oblivious of Ivor's presence,
and forgetful of Ivor's warnings.

Good morning, chief," said Tolskoi, again
ignoring his elder's more solemn salutation,
^' and thank you."

But Patouchki replied only by a gesture
of his hand, and the next moment the heavy
door closed noiselessly on Ivor's retreating
figure. As he ran lightly down the short
flight of stone stairs, and stepped out into
the brilliant sunshine, the smile deepened in
his eyes and about his mouth, and became

a short gay laugh, that rang out clear and
joyfully, cutting the cold keen air like a
bell, and causing an old woman creeping
slowly on her weary way, to turn and bless
his youth and good looks in Our Lady's
name.

He ! but 'tis good to be young, monsieur,
and beautiful. Saint Peter send you a fair
lady-love, and a short shrift ! "

Ivor laughed again, and tossed the old
dame a shall coin ; but the mirth died on
his lips as he passed beneath the shadow
of the o'reat fortress, and recalled the o^rue-
some context of the blessing bestowed upon
him. " A fair lady-love, and a short shrift ! "
AVhat a ghastly conclusion ! What had he or
Oloa to do with death and death's ceremonies
? He made very sure of winning hi
fair lady, but to take account with death,
now in the full vigour and strength of his
youth, had not entered into his calculations.
A plague on all old women — evil prophets ! —
let them look after their own souls ; as for

him, a long life and a merry one stretched
before him.

Then he beo^an to hum again the broken
strain from the opera ; and as he did so,
his thoughts travelled far ahead, and were
on the whole satisfactory. Vladimir Mellikoff
well out of the way, suspicion raised against
him, no matter how faint, and the Italian,
Mattalini, to dog his footsteps — for Ivor knew
the Italian was the one picked out to serve as
the Count's double — what might not he, Ivor
Tolskoi, accomplish ? Was not the way opening
clear and straight before him, with Olga —
beautiful, proud Olga — as his prize ? AYhat
could be more opportune than the chiefs
selection of him to act as aide during the
Royal inspection of the fortress ; for well Ivor
knew that Olga Naundorff would accompany
the Tsarina, and that of necessity she would
fall to his escort, as they passed from casemate
to corridor of the giant prison.

Ivor was a firm believer in propinquity,
and here would be a rare occasion for him in

VOL. II. c

the relaxation of the strict Court etiquette
that usually hedged Mdlle. Naundorff about
with a thousand barriers, for on such ex-officio
occasions it was well known that the Tsar
and Tsariua appeared with only a strong
guard, and one lady and gentleman of their
suite.

The great chimes of the fortress cathedral
were ringing out the mournful cadences of
the liturgy — " Have mercy, Lord" — which in
Petersburg mark each quarter of the hour,
as Ivor passed out of the Chancellerie. It
was close on eight o'clock, and already the
streets and promenades were showing signs
of renewed life. The great doors of St. Isaac's
stood open, and into the vast misty building
the devout of both sexes were passing rapidly.

Ivor paused, went up the steps, and
looked within. The lights on the altar at the
far end gleamed like so many tiny stars,
through the diaphanous incense clouds, that
clung always about the holy of holies. The
dull gold on the massive ornaments and in

the frescoes shone out here and there, thrown
into relief by the more sombre purples and
blues of their surroundings.

Before a statue of the Virgin and Child
a woman had thrown herself in the abandonment
of grief and petition ; two or three
scarlet kaftans of the Imperial Guard gave
a touch of vivid colour, and contrasted
chromatically with the white alb and golden
vestments of the officiating priest. The low
monotonous voices of the congregation rose
and sank, like the murmur of the ocean
breaking on the sands, as they, wrapt in
private devotions, made known their petitions
in low undertones, and quite irresponsive
of the priest's function ; while he, standing at
the high altar, offered up the sacrifice of the
mass.

As Ivor gazed half spell-bound, and half
disbelieving, the woman who knelt before
the Virgin's statue got up and moved slowly
towards the door. She had thrown back her

long veil, and her face against its blackness

c 2

stood out in cameo relief. As Tolskoi's
glance fell upon it, he started violently, and
put out one hand involuntarily, as though
to bar her way. But the woman dropped
her veil instantly, and pushing rudely by him,
walked rapidly down the steps and across
the promenade ; disappearing from view even
as Ivor, recovering from his amazement,
turned to follow her.

'^ Good God ! " he exclaimed, standing fora
moment uncertain what to do, the look of
horror still stamped upon his features, " as I
am a living man, that was the face of Adele
Lamien, the murderer of Stevan Lallovich,
and his repudiated wife ! "

*' IT WAS NO DELUSION."

At twelve o'clock that clay, just as the great
fortress cathedral chimes rang out the hour,
repeating again the melody taken from the
Eastern liturgy, " How glorious is our Lord in
Sion," Ivor Tolskoi reached the side-entrance
of the Palace court-yard, and, passing between
the saluting sentinels, made his way towards
a small door in one side of the building,
before which marched constantly two of the
Imperial Guard, whose business it was to
watch jealously all in-going or out-coming
traffic, and who, fully armed as they were,
presented a sufficiently terrifying appearance,
even to the most peaceful-minded.

Before this door two open sleighs were
standing, their magnificent black horses handsomely
decked out in gold-plated harness, and
each wearing a triangle of gold bells spanning
its back, from which the slightest movement
evoked a shower of tinkling notes that
fell melodiously, one after the other, on the
frost-bitten air, and were echoed back again
by the high walls of the court - yard.
Sumptuous rugs and wraps of the costliest
furs were thrown across the velvet cushions,
while the coachmen and footmen were
wrapped in mink-skin capes and tall, conical-shaped
hats.

A short distance ahead of the equipages
a selected division of the Imperial body-guard
sat immovable upon their splendid chargers,
the scarlet of their kaftans contrasting finely
with the glossy coats of their steeds and the
dazzling snow that lay as a pall of innocence
upon the great metropolis.

Ivor stopped only long enough to return
the salute of the captain of the guard, and to

exchange a good-morning with one or two
of the others, who where all well known to
him, and then, pressing quickly forward,
entered the Palace by the small door, and
made his way to an ante-chamber, where, as he
expected, he found Patouchki already arrived.

The chiefs face wore a somewhat troubled
expression, which did not lessen as the young
man, shutting the door securely behind him,
came up hurriedly towards him, an answering
look of anxiety upon his usually fresh, insouciant
countenance. Patouchki also noticed
that his face was very pale, and his eyes wore
a restless, inquiring expression, which was
enhanced by the stern set of his lips. He
made no comment until standing close by
Patouchki's side, when he said, abruptly, and
almost commandingly :

Did you not say that Vladimir Mellikoff
had gone upon this mission to America to
track and to arrest the cast-off wife of Stevan
Lallovich, for whose murder the Chancellerie
holds her responsible ? "

Patouchki, for once taken off his guards
started at this unexpected address, and turning
sharply round so that he faced Tolskoi,
looked at him keenly before he answered.
But Ivor never flinched nor faltered ; his cold,
light-blue eyes met the chiefs black ones full
as boldly as they had ever rested on Olga
Naundorff's fair proud face, and something
in their hard cruel light warned Patouchki
that the question was no idle one, but that
behind it lay some disturbance unknown at
their morning meeting. He replied in his
most repellent manner :

You have forgotten, Ivor, it seems, that
the Chancellerie never makes decisive affirmations
in words. Among us it is unnecessary
to name names or publish identities. Your
own rather too vivid imagination has outrun
itself, Ivor, and accredited to Count Mellikoff's
absence in the United States a more sinister
motive than could be found in the records
of the Chancellerie. Murder and arrest are
two ugly words and have an ugly sound

to ears unaccustomed to them, especially
when applied to a woman."

Nevertheless, chief," answered Ivor, impatiently,
the frown deepening on his brow,
*' though you may choose to call Count
Mellikoff's mission by every name under
heaven save the right one, you cannot disguise
its true motive. The Chancellerie may wrap
itself about with all possible or impossible
possibilities of expression, there are those
who can read between the lines, and who
follow its machinations. Let me beg of you,
chief, by all the months of faithful service
I have given you — and they are many now
to be frank with me in this. Much —
you cannot know how much — depends upon
your answer to my question. Can you not
yet believe in my fidelity and trust to my
loyalty ? Have I proved myself so poor a
Russian ? Answer me this, I beg ; is it to
track and to find Stevan Lallovich's forsaken
wife that Vladimir Mellikofi" has gone to
America ? I will not press you further as

to her share in the murder, or why you
suppose her to have sought refuge there,
if you will give me a frank yes or no
to my question ; only be quick, I entreat
you, our very moments are numbered ! "

Patouchki, who, during Tolskoi's impassioned
address, had remained immovable,
his eyes downcast, the lights and shadows
on his strongly-marked face alone revealing
his interest and irresolution, looked up as
Ivor's voice dropped into silence, and again
fixing his piercing black eyes on the young
man's face, he replied slowly, and with a
hesitancy that sat strangely on his usually
assured manner :

*' Your words are imperious, Ivor ; but it
is the imperiousness of youth, not arrogance,
therefore I pass them by unrebuked. As
to answering your question with a short
yes or no, that is impossible. There are too
many motives and too many interests mixed
up in Count Vladimir's mission for me to
give to you, or any one, so unequivocal

a rejoinder. However, since I do believe
in your honesty of purpose, Ivor, and trust
your integrity of action, I will say this
much, that one of Count Mellikoff's objects
the most important if you will have it
so — was to seek and to find the woman
who calls herself Count Stevan Lallovich's
wife. What then ? "

Then he will never find her, chief,"
broke in Tolskoi, " and you and the Chancellerie
are being tricked by him for your
pains. Vladimir Mellikofi" may have his own
game to play, and his own ends to serve,
but finding and securing Stevan Lallovich's
pseudo wife will not be one of them."

He laughed slightly as he finished, and
his voice grew scornful again at the mention
of Mellikoff's name.

"What do you mean, Ivor?" exclaimed
Patouchki, now thoroughly roused.

'* What I say," returned Tolskoi, doggedly,
Vladimir Mellikoff is deceiving all of you
when he pretends to be on the track of that

wretched woman, and you, chief, are blinded
by his specious words."

Have a care, Ivor," cried Patouchki,
sternly, " the Chancellerie can hold you
accountable for those words. What proof
have you of what you affirm ? "

The proof of my own eyes," replied
Ivor, hotly, '' I tell you, chief, Mellikoff is
deceiving you for reasons of his own, for
I, this very morning, since I parted with
you, have stood face to face with Adele
Lamien, who calls herself Adele Lallovich ! "

'' You, Ivor, impossible ! " cried Patouchki,
you have seen her, and here in Petersburg,
in broad daylight ! And where ? "

As I stood within the door of St.
Isaac's this morning," answered Tolskoi,
the mass was just begun, and she had
been kneeling — prostrated I should say —
before the statue of our Lady of Kazan.
Something familiar in the lines of her figure
struck me even then, and presently as the
miserere bells rang the quarter, she arose

and came towards me, her veil thrown
back, the whiteness of her face and the
distinctness of her features thrown out
vividly against her black apparel. She
passed me rapidly, pulling down her veil
impetuously, as she lied out and down the
steps before I coukl put out my hand to
stop her, and when I reached the pavement
she had disappeared. But I tell
you, chief, as I hope to be saved at the
hour of my death, it was the face of Adele
Lallovich into which I looked for that
brief interval."

Impossible ! " again ejaculated Patouchki.
'' Impossible that she should be here, in
Petersburg, and the Chancellerie remain
ignorant of her arrival. She is a marked
woman to all our emissaries, how could she
come and go, without disguise even, and
we remain in ignorance ? No, no, my good
Ivor, your eyes mislead you this time ;
with all her arrogant bravery Adele Lamien
knows better than to put her head in the

lion's jaws, or herself iu the power of the
Chancellerie."

I tell you I saw her," repeated Tolskoi,
obstinately, *' believe me or not, chief, I
saw her, and no other."

"But my dear Ivor," began Patouchki,
persuasively, when a groom of the chambers
entered hurriedly, and bidding them make
haste, as their Majesties were even then
descending the staircase, cut short the chiefs
oratory, and caused both him and Tolskoi
to hasten their footsteps towards the side
door, which now stood open with footmen
and lacqueys on either side, holding the
fur robes, foot - muffs and wraps of the
Imperial party.

As Ivor and Tolskoi emerged from the side
corridor, the Tsarina reached the entrance and
paused a moment for her attendants to clasp
the magnificent cloak of sables about her
slight figure. Very sweet and delicate, and
somewhat sad was the face that looked out
from the clinging furs, with a touch of the

same melancholy that at times rests on her
English sister's brow, and ^Yith more than a
similitude of her gentleness and sympathy.
As she crossed the threshold the slightest
possible shrinking or timidity caused her to
hesitate for one brief moment, then she took
her place in the Eoyal equipage, and her face
as she turned it towards her husband, wore a
brave courageous smile.

Poor Tsarina ! though wrapped about on
every side with all luxury, yet never to realise
the happiness of confidence ; never to feel
secure, even in your strictest seclusion ; never
to know when the cruel bullet, sent with
a fatally true aim, may end your tenure
of greatness, and send you back to your
magnificent palace, a heart-broken, lonely
widow !

Behind the Empress came the Tsar, dressed,
as was often his pleasure, in the scarlet kaftan
of his own guard, and by which he signified
his desire to remain incognito. Following;
him were Olga Naundorfi" and the Emperors

equerry, who, with Patouchki and Ivor, formed
the Eoyal suite.

The Tsarina in passing had acknowledged
Tolskoi's presence by a gracious recognition,
which sent the young man's blood running
hotly through his veins, flushing his face and
brightening his eyes. Ivor was every inch
an Imperialist, and he loved his gentle Tsarina
Dagmar with a real and chivalrous devotion ;
the latent sadness in her eyes and the pathos
of her smile touched the most responsive
chords of his cold and selfish natures and
awoke in him the purest sentiment of his
heart.

Olga had caught the Empress's friendly
bow to Ivor, and she too relaxed somewhat
the frigid demeanour she had evinced towards
him, since their conversation regarding Count
Mellikoff, and flashed upon him one of her
most lovely smiles, as he put out his arm
and almost lifted her to her place in the
second sleigh. The Tsar and Tsarina drove
alone in the foremost equipage, preceded and

protected on either side by the guard, while
in the second were seated Olga, the equerry,
Patouchki, and Ivor.

The gates were flung wide apart, and thus,
with the horses prancing, the bells ringing,
to which the clanking swords made a monotonous
echo, and the sun shining, the Eoyal
party crossed the gay boulevard now thronged
with people, and drew uj) at the grim and
frowning archway of Peter's gloomy fortress.

VOL. II.

ST. PETER AND ST. PAUL.

Petropavlovsk is in itself a giant fastness,
covering, as it does, tliree-quar tears of a square
mile, and divided into so many rambling
corridors, barracks, ravelins, bastions, curtains,
and store-houses, as to be for the most part
unknown even to the officials who form
its on^fnage, and who, having certain portions
of the immense structure set apart for their
duties, live out their lives without exploring,
or being permitted to explore beyond their
individual domains.

The boulevard and the canal intersect the
building, and separate the citadel proper from

what is known as the *' crown work," which
lies to the rear.

Dreary indeed is the outlook for the unfortunate
political suspect who is hurried by
night, blindfolded and closely guarded, into
this living tomb. To him, hastened along-through
unfamiliar passages and by echoing
walls, conveyed hither and thither through
succeeding gates and vaulted corridors, no
possible effort of memory, or mathematical
calculation, can ever aid him to determine
which one of the many courts, bastions, or
redoubts is that selected for his incarceration.

Nor, indeed, will he ever know, for when
at last the gendarmes halt, and he is allowed
the use of his eyes, he finds himself in a
small court-yard completely enclosed by high
walls, above which only a limited sky line
is visible. And where this court-yard is
situated, to what bastion it appertains,
whether it faces the river or lies back from
it, what is its relation to the door of
express, or its connection with the other

D 2

casemates of the prison, not the wildest
conjecture can establish, or the keenest
intuition demonstrate.

The part of the fortress, however, which
the Tsar had selected for his inspection, was
that known as the Trubetskoi bastion, one
of the largest and most impregnable, projecting
as it does well on to the river side
in the direction of the Bourse. The shape
of this bastion resembles as much as possible
a bishop's mitre, as worn by the Western
Church ; it is built, in two storeys of stone
and brick, around a court-yard of its own
which extends beyond the building proper
and terminates in high thick walls, that
completely shut it out and in from all
communication save that afforded by a
narrow vaulted passage, always strongly
guarded. The interior consists of two tiers
of casemates, opening on to narrow corridors,
two dark punishment cells, overseers' rooms,,
kitchen and soldiers' quarters. In the courtyard

are a bath house and one or two stunted
shrubs.

Nothing more gloomy and horrible can
be imagined than imprisonment within one
of these casemates, of which the Trubetskoi
bastion boasts seventy-two, thirty-six on
each tier. As they were originally designed
for cannon they are considerably larger than
an ordinary prison cell, but size is no mitigation
of their horrors. Each casemate has a
window, but it opens upon the baffling stonewalls
of the narrow outer court-yard, and
is moreover set nine feet above the floor,
in a deep arched recess, and guarded by
heavy iron bars. The massive wooden door
is equally disappointing, giving as it does
on to the stone corridor that lies between
the cells and inner court - yard ; in the
centre of each is a square aperture, which
can be opened or closed at the will of the
jailer, by a swinging panel, acting like a
miniature portcullis, and which, when horizontal,

serves as a shelf for the prisoner's
food.

Directly above this panel is that horrible
contrivance — more loathed and detested by
the incarcerated wretch than any other of the
diabolical arrangements — the 'judas" horoscope
or Squint, and which resembles a slit
for letters more than anything else, with a
nicely adjusted strip of wood that can be
noiselessly raised or lowered from the outside,
and through which the eyes of the guard
can spy at any moment upon the occupant
of the cell.

Only those who have tasted of this unending
inevitable surveillance can appreciate
its horrors. To be never free, never for one
moment, whether in grief, or pain, or despair,
from the espionage of unsympathetic eyes.
To throw oneself upon one's knees before
the image of Our Lady, with which each
cell is supplied, to pour out all the woe and
misery of one's breaking heart in the abandonment
of desolation, and then, to hear

the faint click of the revolving slide, and
starting back, find the argus eyes of one's
jailer peering through the detestable "Judas;"
and to know the very words of supplication
and invocation Avill be used against one to
condemnation.

What wonder then that many who have
entered Petropavlovsk bravely and with a
good courage, believing their imprisonment
to be but an affair of days, are never seen
again, never emerge alive from its terrible
dungeons ; or lose mind and reason waiting
for the day of deliverance that never
comes ?

No words can paint the growing horror
and despair of a prisoner thus incarcerated.
Day by day his terror expands and magnifies
as hope dies in his heart, and the inexorable
hand of Kussia crushes out his very life.

Within the casemates there are, for
furniture, an iron bedstead and table bolted
into the wall, an iron oven of the commonest
description, a stationary iron wash-hand basin

and a statue of the Virgin, beneath which
hangs a tin cup for catching the dripping
moisture that exudes constantly from the
stone walls.

On entering his cell for the first time,
the poor victim is stripped of his clothes
and given in exchange a loose blue linen
dressing-gown, grey linen trousers and shirt,
and a pair of soft noiseless list slippers.
The guard, after making a minute personal
examination, in search of some possible
criminal matter, withdraws ; the heavy door
swings to with a dull echo, the bolts slip
into the padlock, and the prisoner is left
alone, in the midst of a stillness and silence
like that of death.

Gloomy, forbidding, sombre, the walls
and vaulted ceiling rise about and above
him, the air is heavy and lifeless, the silence
is profound ; not even an echoing footstep
in the corridor makes a welcome noise, for
the guards creep about iu felt slippers as
noiseless and as muffled as his own. And

thus the purgatory of bis sentence begins ;
and wbo, save Almighty God, can say when
it shall end ! While hour by hour the
chimes of the fortress - cathedral ring out
their triumphant notes — a mockery of the
poor soul in torment — or toll the miserere
that sounds a knell to all his hopes.

It was at the entrance to the Trubetskoi
bastion that the Imperial party alighted.
Extraordinary reports as to the violence and
cruelty practised within the walls of 
had lately become so widely disseminated
throughout Petersburg, mingled
with such threats of summary justice to be
shortly meted out to the officials by the hands
of the enraged populace, and such sinister
warnings of personal vengeance, that the
press of all parties called upon the Tsar to
prove himself Emperor in his own domains,
by investigating and abolishing the scandals.

It was a time of grave anxiety ; but he,
listening to the counsels of those who had in
past difficulties proved their loyalty and disinterestedness,

yielded at last to their persuasions,
and resolved to adopt the extreme
measure of a personal inspection of the
maligned fortress. The Empress, on hearing
this decision, and who, despite her gentle
looks and quiet manner, owned the courage
and high spirit of her Danish ancestors, at
once determined to accompany her husband.

The populace should see that their Tsar
and Tsarina neither feared to trust themselves
to the people, nor shrank from redressing wrong
when brought before their notice, though
indeed none knew better than she how purely
perfunctory and ceremonious would be the
inspection and its results.

The governor of Petropavlovsk and the
lieutenant of the Trubetskoi bastion received
the distinguished guests, and welcomed them
with apparent relief and pleasure, throwing
open the doors of the casemates one by one,
and standing back deferentially, with more of
sorrow than of anger on their official countenances
; for was not theirs a sad example of

unrequited and misjudged zeal, since even
they could be regarded with suspicion and
doubted in their humanity ?

Most of the casemates were found to be
unoccupied, and Patouchki, who walked beside
the Emperor, never failed on each such occasion
to draw his Imperial Highness's attention
to the fact.

I believe, sir," he said, as they entered
the last of the lower range of cells, and found
it like its predecessors, empty, swept, and
garnished, " that one of the most formidable
counts in the public indictment against ,
is the over-crowding of its cells,
and their uncleanly condition. Your Majesty
has now visited thirty-five of these casemates,
the greater number of which have been found
unoccupied, and all of them in perfect sanitary
order. I think, sir, this answers that complaint."


The Tsar sighed, but made no reply.
Perhaps he, like Patouchki, wished to make
the best of everything and see only the

brightest side ; but even he could not still
the premonitions of evil that arose thick and
fast in his mind, as he comprehended the
immensity and power of this Imperial prison
house of Russia.

Of the few victims found in the cells
none recognised the Royal party. They were
for the most part political offenders from the
interior provinces, who had never before been
in Petersburg, and to whom the face of their
new Tsar was not as yet sufficiently familiar
to make recognition possible, especially as
his dress differed in no respect from that
of the officers accompanying him. Little did
the poor victims imagine, as they were
hurriedly changed, early that morning, from
one part of the fortress to another, that it
was to avoid any accidental recognition on
the part of those, who, being the last to
enter the prison, still retained memories of the
outer world, and sentiments of Imperial justice
— believing that their Tsar, once convinced
of their innocent incarceration, would order

their instant release — that this transfer was
made. Any possible outbreak was to be
avoided at all hazards, since any such dilute
could not but end awkwardly for the Imperial
inspectors, and disastrously for the officials.

Had these poor wretches but suspected
that the tall, soldierly man, wearing a scarlet
kaftan, without ribbon or order, and who
looked gloomy and thoughtful beneath the
military helmet, was their Tsar — their little
father, the great Emperor of all the Russia
how they would have fallen at his feet,
praying his interference ; protesting their
loyalty, and maintaining their innocence !
Or had the faintest doubt crossed their minds,
that the slight upright woman, clad in those
closely-clinging, sombre robes, whose eyes
looked so pitifully forth, and whose face was
so wan and pale, might perchance be their
Tsarina, what tears and sobs, what pleadings
and supplications would have rent the air,
as they kissed her hands, or grasped wildly
at her garments !

But fate was against them ; their opportunity
came to them unsought, and they
passed it by unknowing. How should they
know, poor souls, to whom even a word of
ordinary greeting from their jailers was
denied, and to whom no echo of news ever
penetrated, how should they know, that at
the very moment, as they were praying passionately
for some means of communication
with their Emperor, he himself stood before
them, and that had they but put out their
hands they could have touched him ?

It was the cruel irony of fate ; the bitter
obligation of destiny.

As the guards threw open the massive
casemate doors in silence, most of the inmates
did not so much as raise their heads or change
their attitudes. Why should they ? It was
only another of those many interruptions in
their day's vacuity, in which the jailer played
the part of inspector with maddening sameness.
What call had they to look more often
on his hated face than was needful ?

Scarce a word passed between the Tsar
and Tsarina, or their suite ; the pall of absolute
silence which enfolds great Petropavlovsk
in the dark mantle of submission, had descended
also upon them, and so held them
captive as to kill any outward expression of
inward emotion. Sometimes it was the
** Judas" only that was lifted, and then the
Tsarina would turn away her eyes and refuse
to look, standing apart with anxiety and
sadness written on her pale face ; and when
this happened, Olga would separate herself
from Ivor, and waiting silently by her Eoyal
mistress, watch her every motion with the
sympathy of comprehension.

And so the weary task dragged on its
heavy chain ; there remained but one more
cell, and then this horrible nightmare of duty,
this travesty of inspection, would be over,
and they might hurry away from out this
gloom and depression, and seek once more the
brilliant sunshine, the gaily-thronged streets,
where at least the grim spectres of despair

and desperation, if they stalked among the
careless mummers, were out-balanced by the
laughter and jesting of the merry-makers.

At length they reached the last casemate
of all, and as the door was unbolted and
thrown open, the Emperor and Patouchki
stepped across the threshold. Seated on the
iron pallet, his arms thrown out across the
table, was an old man, whose head was white
with the snows of many winters. He neither
moved nor spoke as those without came towards
him ; his hands were waxen in colour,
nerveless, and attenuated ; the blue dressing-gown
hung loosely upon his emaciated form ;
his face was hidden on his arm. Something
in the intense stillness and rigidity of the
attitude, in the absolute rest that had fallen
upon him, startled the beholders with a vague
sense of fear.

At a word from the Tsar, Patouchki crossed
the cell and laid his hand upon the bowed
shoulders. A shudder passed over the form,
followed by a long and weary sigh, and then

the head was lifted, and two feverish, bright
eyes gazed out of the hollow sockets. For a
moment he looked at them bewildered, and
then, with a sudden, thrilling crj, he flung
himself forward and fell at the feet of the
Tsar, exclaiming in broken, feeble tones :

'•' Blessed be God in Sion ; He has heard
my prayer ! Blessed be our Lady of Kazan !
It is the f^ice of my Tsarawich I see once
more ; it is the face of my little father — my
Tsar ! Oh, my Emperor, I am Alexis —
Alexis of Battenkofl". I am an old man of
over four-score, who, for fifty long years,
served your father — my Tsar Alexander — and
who, after all that time of faithful love and
devotion, have been left to rot in this terrible
pest-house for two long weary years. Pardon
me, little father, pardon me ! I have done no
wrong, believe me. I. have never plotted
against my sovereigns; I have loved them
always, and served them to the extent of my
poor abilities. I had no hand in that bloody
murder ; I was innocent of all participation in

VOL. n. E

it. I would have given my life's blood to
save my Emperor. Why should I seek his
death ! Pardon me, my little father, as your
sire, whose soul sees me now, would have
pardoned me ! "

As the last words passed from his lips the
old man sank back, his hands twitched
convulsively, and he fell on the floor in a
swoon. So sudden had been his movement
forward and so rapid his utterance, neither
the officials nor Patouchki had time to interpose,
but the latter now stepped quickly
forward, as the Tsar, with a gesture, motioned
to him to approach, and after giving him
some directions, speaking earnestly and decisively,
turned abruptly and left the cell.
Neither the Tsarina nor Olga Naundorff had
entered this casemate, the Empress's tender
heart had therefore been spared the harrowing
scene.

As the Imperial party drove away from
the terrible fortress, and the brilliant sunshine
caught at the glittering harness and bright

trappings of the guard, a cry arose on the
boulevard : " It is the Tsar, and our Tsarina !
Loud' live the little father ! Lons^ live the
Tsar ! " But neither God's sunshine, nor the
loyal shouts of his people could bring back the
colour to the Emperor's face, or banish the
look of care and anxiety that rested so heavily
upon it.

The next morning an Imperial pardon
was sent to Petropavlovsk for Alexis Batten-off,
but it came too late. The weary spirit
and sorely wounded heart were at rest in
eternity ; the old man's soul had passed
beyond all earthly pardon, into the Almighty
hands of justice and recompense.

E 2

LIBRARY

UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS

SUSPICIONS.

For many days the Petersburg Imperial
press rang the changes unceasingly on this
last benignant and forgiving act of the
Tsar's.

It called upon all malcontents and revolutionists
to say, if in this pardon were not
displayed the utmost leniency and mercy.
For was it not well known that Alexis 
was taken almost red-handed at the
assassination of the late Tsar ? And, indeed,
who but one familiar, through long habit
and confidence, with the movements of the
Emperor, could have supplied the knowledge
which assured the grim success of the

dastardly attack ? Was not Alexis always to
be found, under suspicious circumstances,
consorting with the most pronounced of the
Nihilist faction ; and could he be there save
for one j)i-^iT^s^ ^^-^7 ^ Could one touch
pitch and not be defiled ?

Where then, in modern history, could
another such act of condonation be pointed
out, as this by which the Tsar had pardoned
a participator in his father's murder ? Was not
that answer sufficient to all the treacherous
suggestions, the menacing innuendoes, that
had been ripe and bursting for so long in
Petersburg ? Perhaps now the organs of
the opposition would cease their importunate
beating, since the Tsar's inspection of 
had resulted in such a redress of
imaginary wrongs, as not even their wildest
dreams could have supposed possible. And
was not the hand of Almighty justice made
plainly visible, in that Alexis of Battenkoff
was not permitted to taste again of liberty,
but was stricken by death before the news of

the Tsar's generosity could reach him ? Let
those who would, read well the lesson thus
openly delivered to them.

Paul Patouchki read the enthusiastic
laudations and pious thanksgivings in the
silence of his apartments in the Chancellerie,
and, as he did so, a slow, inscrutable smile
crept over his face and lingered there.

It was not often that the chief recognised
any direct interposition of Divine Providence
in the political turmoils of Russia ; indeed,
in his own heart, he scoffed at all such
superstitions, and acknowledged frankly that
the Imperial Government neither desired, nor
would appreciate, any such interference with
its autocratic despotism.

But certainly, for once, he saw in the
Battenkoff incident and death a most opportune
intervention, whether Divine or otherwise,
since by it the hands of the Imperial party
could be strengthened, and for a time, at
least, their policy be freed from too suspicious
and too true aspersions. To his mind, like

the last of the Stuart Pretenders, nothing in
life so well became poor Alexis of Battenkoff
as his leaving: it, how and when he did.
It was the one touch needful to stamp the
Imperial inspection of Petropavlovsk with
triumphant success, and to prove a satisfying
sop even to so hydra-mouthed a Cerberus
as the disaffected party; and therefore he
was thankful, though none knew better than
he that no actual improvement had been
effected, no evils redressed, no reforms instituted
in the governmental department of
Petropavlovsk. The giant fortress closed its
jaws just as tyrannically upon its victims,
and abated not one jot or tittle of its iron-handed
authority.

Patouchki, however, had too many anxieties
pressing upon him to spend over much
time in complaisant reading of political
trumpet notes ; he laid aside the Petersburg
Messenger and turned toward his desk, on
which lay a heavy correspondence not yet
disposed of. As he sat down in his familiar

place, the grim smile faded from bis lips,
to be replaced by a dark frown that knit
together the black eyebrows, and accentuated
the strong lines about the eyes and mouth.
In truth, the chief was more concerned than
he liked to admit, even to himself, at Ivor
Tolskoi's news ; and though at the time he
endeavoured to treat it with cavalier disbelief,
he nevertheless had an inner consciousness,
of its truth, and a presentiment of complications
to follow in consequence.

That Adele Lamien should be in Petersburg,
and the Chancellerie have neither
warning of her intentions, nor knowledge of
her presence, seemed, as he had said to Tolskoi,
impossible ; and yet, even as the word fell
from his lips, he knew himself to be wrong,
and Ivor to be right. The great spy system
had failed for once, imperceptibly almost,
and so far without damaging results, but it
had, nevertheless, proved itself vulnerable,
and had found its match in the quick wits
and ready ingenuity of a woman. Even

all the elaborate machinery of the Chancellerie
had not been sufficient, when pitted
against the devices of one weak, fugitive
woman.

Yes, that was where the shoe pinched ;
to be duped by the very criminal they were
pursuing, and to hear her laugh in their ears,
as she slipped out of their fingers ! ind then,
what a bad precedent was even this slight
dereliction on the part of the Chancellerie ;
and how could the discipline of fear be kept
up in the minds of the younger members
of the great body, if such a defection became
known ? And the woman, Adele Lamien,
was brazen enough and clever enough,
smarting as she was under her own wrongs,
to circulate their blindness and failure,
just where it would most redound to their
discredit.

"It is impossible ! " again muttered
Patouchki, as his fingers rested idly on
his desk, and his eyes wandered over the
familiar trifles of his daily avocations. 'sit

is impossible ; and yet I know it is true.
Some one of our emissaries has been asleep
at his post, some one has connived at this
woman's plotting, or been blind to her schemes,
and deaf to her plans ; some one, as at
Balaklava, has blundered, and it remains forme
to find the culprit, and to administer
chastisement. A winter in Siberia, or in
the Nartchinsk mines, will teach that someone
the price of treachery, and the weight
of the Chancellerie's wrath. Meantime the
woman must be found and watched ; the
time is not ripe yet for her arrest, I must
wait Vladimir Mellikoffs next report first ;
and by heaven, should he prove false, as
Tolskoi would insinuate, he shall work out
his retribution, side by side with the wretched
victim of Count Stevan's licentiousness. But
first of all, the woman must be found."

He drew a deep sigh, and with almost
an expression of weariness took up one of
the many despatches before him, and broke
the seal.

Meantime, Ivor Tolskoi had prospered but
slowly in this suit. Despite all his anticipations
of numerous opportunities occurring
during the inspection of the fortress, in which
he should be able to command Olga's attention,
and by deftly-turned compliment, or ingenious
flattery, urge his pretensions, even as with
subtle innuendo and covert sneer he touched
upon Count Mellikoff's absence, and the
character of his mission.

But Olo-a was more than indifferent, she
was impatient with him ; the influence of
the time and place oppressed her peculiarly
impressionable nature, as the sight of the
pale sorrow on her Tsarina's face set vibrating
the chords of her quick and passionate
sympathy. She accorded Ivor but a
half-hearted attention, scarcely hearing his
soft pleadings, and while retaining unconsciously
a memory of his insinuations against
Vladimir, it was not until the Eoyal
cortege turned down the gay boulevard that
a full realisation of his meanings came to her.

She turned then sharply to him, as he sat
beside her, and, with her favourite imperious
upward movement of her head, said abruptly
though in a low voice, inaudible to the
other occupants of the sleigh :

^' What is it, Ivor, you have been hinting
to me all this morning, concerning my cousin
Mellikoff ? If you have news of him, why
not give it me without so much useless circum
ambulation ? I do not like mysteries."

Mdlle. Naundorff has surely mistaken
my meaning," answered Tolskoi, coolly, looking
straight at her, and smiling a little. '' I had
no intention of insinuating anything detrimental
of Count Vladimir ; my remarks were
but general, though to be sure any one is
welcome to wear the cap, if it fits him."

'•' Les absents ont toujours s tort'' replied
Olga, still impatient; *'my cousin Mellikoff
but shares the fate of all who have achieved
even a limited greatness ; jealousy and envy
go hand in hand with those who, not so
fortunate, only stand and look on."

Her words were sharp, and her manner
pointed. Ivor knew both were intended to
stinor, and though he could not control the
sudden wave of hot blood that dyed his face
crimson, he could control his temper and
his voice ; he answered her, therefore, with
another cold little laugh, as he said :

Surely it is grace enough to be so
defended by Mdlle. Naundorff ? Even Count
Vladimir could scarcely ask a greater favour,
accustomed as he is to all devotion — where
women are concerned."

What do you mean '( " exclaimed Olga,
imperiously. " I insist, Ivor, on your explaining
your very equivocal suggestions."

Tolskoi shrugged his shoulders, and replied
under apparent protest :

It is, I think, well known how successful
Count Mellikoff has always been in
any affaire dio coeur, though such details
are better suited for men's ears than for
yours, mademoiselle. It can, however, be
no detriment to him, even in your estimation,

to acknowledge that his past is not written

upon an absolutely white page, since you are

the only one who has definitely subdued

him, and bid fair to turn the brave Lothario

into a Benedict. I have yet to meet the

woman to whom the reputation of a certain

kind of success in a man proves anything

but a recommendation."

As Ivor finished, a silence of several

moments fell between them. Olga turned

< >

her fair face from him and looked out, with
unseeing eyes, upon the gay, moving pageant
about her. Tolskoi watched her intently but
furtively, and saw with inward satisfaction
that his barb had gone home and was
rankling, and would rankle for days to come,
in her heart.

Well he knew Olga Naundorff's character,
with its complex mingling of cruelty and
softness ; its nicely balanced elements of revenge
and generosity ; its preponderance of
pride, its insatiable demand of absolute submission
to her will, and its imperious abrogation

of supremacy, not only over the present
and future of her suitors, but over their past
as well. Like her great ancestress, the Empress
Catherine, her favours were tyrannies ;
and woe unto the luckless recipient of them
should she find him faithless in the smallest
degree ! Even his past must be forgotten
and forsworn ; his existence could only begin
with the bestowal of her first smile.

Without knowing it, a true and absolute
belief in her cousin Vladimir Mellikofi''s integrity
had gradually grown up within her ; she
had come to regard him as the one faithfully
sincere lover out of all her admirers, whose
very sternness and power of repression spoke
more eloquently to her than all the more
emotional pleadings of her other suitors. She
had believed herself to be the first and only
woman on whom he had expended even the
smallest measure of love ; and to be the object
of so unique and chivalrous a devotion, had
not been the least among her reasons for
yielding to his solicitations.

Ivor's insinuations, therefore, coming as
they did, disturbed her more than she cared
to realise, and awoke at once that latent
suspicion and distrust that forms so pronounced
a factor in the Russian character,
and caused her to accept his words as positive
and final evidence of Vladimir's perfidy and
deceit. She never stopped to weigh his
actions against Ivor's words ; hers was nota
nature of sufficiently generous tendencies to
tarn instinctively from ignominious slander ;
rather it leapt to conclusions, and from its
own attributes pronounced its condemnatory
sentence.

In her eyes Vladimir Mellikoff had been
tried and sentenced, with Ivor Tolskoi as
judge and jury. She could never trust him
again, and she would endeavour by every
means in her power to unravel his past ;
holding the threads of it in her slender
hand until the hour should come when she
could wound deepest, and play with most
sinister effect the part of Atropos. What

tbouo'li she stabbed ber own heart as well
with the sharp scissors of fate ? She must
bear that, and hers would be the satisfaction
of beholding her victim's misery first.

Meantime the Imperial procession flew
swiftly along the boulevard, saluted on every
side by the shouts of the populace, and the
cries of the people : '' Long live the Tsar !
Lonof live our little father ! Long live the
Tsarina ! " And the bells rang, and the sun
shone, and all was gaiety, and mirth, and
mocking optimism.

The crimson blush that had dyed Olga's
cheeks so deeply, as the meaning of Ivor's
last words became clear to her, had faded
and left them colourless when she again
turned to him, and her voice had an additional
ring of hardness when she next
spoke.

My dear Ivor, we have, I think, always
been sufficiently good friends for us not to
doubt each other's sincerity of motive, even
when we feel forced to speak upon subjects

VOL. II. F

whose very nature precludes any possibility
of agreeableness. I do not forget my
very singular position in the world ; alone
as I am, though apparently protected by
Imperial power, I owe obedience to no one
in matters that concern myself alone. And
it is because of this peculiar position that
I am about to appeal to your friendship,
or whatever sentiment does duty for that
obsolete emotion, and beg you to be quite
frank with me, and tell me all you can of
Count Vladimir Mellikoff's past. Since, as
rumour asserts, I am to become his wife, it
certainly befits me to inform myself of
his antecedents, in order that I may be a
true and sustaining helpmate to him. Tell
me, then, my dear Ivor, all you know, or
all you will reveal concerning my cousin."

There was something so finely bitter and
yet so commanding in her voice, and she
had subdued her countenance to such an
expression of simple friendliness, Tolskoi
looked at her with genuine admiration during

the half-moment that elapsed before he
answered her. When he did reply, it was
scarcely in the way she anticipated.

Mdlle. Naundorff," he said, his cold,
hard blue eyes studying her face intently,
*' you may remember that some weeks ago,
when we spoke on this subject one evening
at the Palace, you asked me a question, to
which I gave you no answer. You asked
me then what was my opinion as to the
share of a certain woman — known as Count
Stevan Lallovich's cast-off wife — in the
murder of that same Count Stevan ? I told
you then I had no opinion upon the matter,
and from that the conversation wandered to
more personal matters. Mademoiselle, what
I said then was not true. I had, and have,
a very strong opinion as to the culprit, or
culprits ; but we will let that rest for the
time being. Shall I continue ? Are you
interested sufficiently in this wretched
woman's story to wish to hear more ? "

She replied by a quick and decisive

p 2

gesture of her hand, and an almost inaudible,
'' Yes."

Ivor smiled again, and drew the fur
robe more closely about her, glancing keenly
across towards Patouchki, who, however, was
absorbed ia conversation with the equerry
and paid no attention to his companions ;
seeing which, Tolskoi continued :

*' Mademoiselle, that woman is now in
Petersburg, and I have seen her. This is
probably not such a matter of surprise to
you as it is to — some other people ; but when
I tell you that Count Mellikoff's hurried
journey to America was undertaken ostensibly
to track, to find, and to arrest that woman,
and that his continuing there is for the
same reason, you will understand why my
meeting with her here is pregnant with such
grave complications."

Olga was gazing at him earnestly,
following his every word and gesture with
her eyes ; the violet iris had grown black
and enlarged from suppressed excitement.

I will not go into the details, mademoiselle*'
Ivor went on, " of that unfortunate
woman's wrongs, or the succession of cruel
circumstances that led up to the murder of
Count Stevan, Doubtless, she had a share
and part in that murder ; but hers was not
the only brain that conceived the crime, or
the only hand that struck the blow. There
was a stronger and more important power
behind ; one who knew the terrible risk that
was run in slaying a member of the Imperial
blood, no matter how slight the consanguinity,
and who had private ends to serve in seeing
Count Stevan removed for ever from Imperial
favour ; one who, though hesitating to become
a murderer in deed, did not hesitate to use
this half frenzied woman as his accomplice
and took Hers, indeed, should be the hand
to hold the knife and strike the blow, but
guided by a far more powerful coadjutor."

Ivor stopped again, and again Olga
motioned to him to continue, by the same
quick movement of her hand.

There was but one man in Petersburg,
mademoiselle, who could boast of any apparent
intimacy with Count Stevan Lallovich,
and who, if any one at any time, might
have been his confidant. That man was
Vladimir Mellikoflf."

Again he stopped, and Olga, without
taking her eyes from his face, felt, as she
gazed on its youthful freshness, a great and
terrible wave of doubt and uncertainty rush
up and over her, Wrapping her round and
round, and sweeping away all lesser sensations
in this awful one of impending
calamity ; but such calamity as should break
not only upon her, but on one whom she
dared not name, and out of which she could
see no lift of light or hope. Tolskoi's words
had been too well chosen not to carry with
them the significance he intended, and she
felt their full force even as she realised their
full meaning. She drew her tongue across
her lips, and tried to smile in answer to

the cold light in Ivor's blue eyes, but the
effort was feeble and abortive.

Have you any more to tell me ? " she
asked at last, in a voice that was almost
a whisper ; ''if so, continue, I beg. I find
the story very interesting, and — instructive."

Ivor replied by one of his coldest little
laughs, and then resumed his narrative.

"You, mademoiselle, were not in Petersburg
when the murder was committed, the
Court being then at Gatschina, consequently
you could not know how great was the
excitement here, or how freely Count Ellis
mingled his regrets and desires for
summary justice to be meted out to the
criminal, with the public expressions heard
on every side. No one had known Count
Stevan better than he ; and no one had a
better right to mourn his untimely fate.
Unfortunately, Count Vladimir had not been
in Petersburg during the night of the
murder, nor indeed for a day or two before ;

consequently, he could throw no light upon
Steven Lallovich's movements at that time,
and his regrets could only take the more
passive form of words. You will see therefore,
mademoiselle, why, when the Government
discovered that Count Stevan's repudiated wife
had fled the country — aided and abetted by
some powerful political friends — and was heard
of in America, it took prompt and decisive
measures for her capture. And who could
have been better chosen for this work than
Count MellikofF, since he had been Stevan
Lallovich's best friend ? I must remind you
here, mademoiselle, that my confidences must
be held secret between you and me ; I amas
it is, overstepping my boundaries in speaking
thus frankly of the Government's share
in this business ; but I do so deliberately,
and am willing to bear the consequences."

"I shall be silent," replied Olga, simply,
and Tolskoi continued :

You know, mademoiselle, how and
when Count Mellikoff started on this mission.

though at the time of his departure you
little suspected it was in the interests of
a woman that he undertook so long a
journey. You knew only that there was
work to be done on behalf of the Government,
and that he had been selected for
that work. It is now two months since
he left Russia ; granting him all necessary
time for easy travelling and stoppages, he
must have reached the United States close
on to a month ago, which would leave him
this last month to lay his train, if not to
find the woman. I have said, mademoiselle,
that this woman calling herself Adele
Lallovich, was assisted through Russia, andover
the frontier, by the influence of some
strong political agent, one whose word and
whose name carried the weight of coercion.
Very well, this happened early in December ;
in January Count Vladimir leaves Petersburg,
and reaches America early in February.
A month goes by, and within the first week of
March I meet Adele Lallovich face to face

here. Ah, I see you have followed my
reasoning. The same powerful influence that
got her out of Kussia, when danger menaced
her here, has now sent her back to Petersburg,
where she is for the time being more secure
from arrest than in the States. And the
brain and the hand that have twice protected
and saved her — a fugitive from justice —
are the same brain and hand that planned
and executed Count Stevan's murder, and
that used her as their instrument. I think,
mademoiselle, that Count Mellikoff will somewhat
disappoint the expectations and shake
the confidence of his Government, when he
returns without any definite intelligence
or any important information regarding
the movements and condition of Adele
Lallovich."

Olga heard him throughout without word
or sign, though not one detail of the terrible
suspicion he so boldly advanced was lost
upon her. Slowly but surely she followed
his every gesture, his every sentence, never

taking her eyes that had grown so strangely
dark from his face. Every vestige of colour
ebbed from her cheeks and lips, leaving
her face white as alabaster beneath the
dark furs of her close cap ; a waving ripple
of golden-lighted hair seemed the only
sentient thing about her. She spoke at
last, and her voice had a faint far-away echo
in its whisper.

What you would suggest, Ivor, is
horrible, unnatural. What could be the
motive for such a crime, and such a shielding
of the criminal ? If, as you say, it
were possible for one brain to plot and
plan it all, and another to fulfil it, still
where would be the object, what would bethe
motive ? I know whom it is you suspect,
but his motive, Ivor, his motive ? "

She bent forward eagerly, clasping her
hands and looking into the very depths
of his eyes. Ivor Tolskoi saw his advantage,
and pressed it home. His opportunity had
come, he was not one to lose it for lack

of course to deal one more swift sure blow.
Meeting Olga's strained violet eyes with his,
in which the steel-blue light flamed out, he
said slowly and with distinct emphasis :

'raddle Lamien, or Lallovich, is a rarely
beautiful woman, Olga, and beauty such as
hers is a dan onerous attribute. Count Ellis
is a worshipper of woman's loveliness,
and the story goes that when Adele Lamien
became the wife of Stevan Lallovich, she castoff
a former lover whose chains had begun to
gall. Who that lover was, Olga, I leave to
sour imagination. But when Stevan Lallo-
rich repudiated and threw aside the woman,
and an Imperial ukase released him from his
obligations, is it unlikely that she sought her
former friend and protector, or that he, maddened
by her beauty and her wrongs, determined
to avenge them ?

"That is the story, mademoiselle, and you
now know why I swore to you that sooner
than see you Vladimir Mellikoff's wife I would
kill him with my own hand."

But Olga made no reply. Silent, impassive,
stricken through and through, she sat with
blanched face and tightly clasped hands ; and
the sun shone, and the bells rang, and the
populace shouted : " Long live the Tsar ! Long
live our little father ! " but she neither saw
nor heard any of it. All her heart and soul
were in revolt and turmoil ; all she had trusted
to had gone down before her eyes, she was
shipwrecked upon an ocean of deception and
despair.

Presently the shouts and cries grew fainter,
and the horses slackened speed as they turned
into the Palace gates and were drawn up
sharply at the side entrance, out of which
she had passed so long ago — was it months or
years, or alas I only hours ? Should she ever
again knows what it was to feel light-hearted
and joyous? Would this terrible burden of
knowledge ever be lifted from her heart ?

Ivor Tolskoi sprang down even as the
threshold was reached and put out his arm to
help her ; she barely touched it with her gloved

hand, and passed by him with but one burning
look from her haunted eyes. For days after, the
light pressure of her fingers rested there like
iron, and the misery of her glance accompanied
him as that of a lost spirit.

Mill's Birthday POSY.

George Newbold's birthday fell within the
first week of May, and certainly no more
ideal spring morning could have dawned than
that which Esther had set apart to be especially
celebrated in honour of her spouse.
Mr. Newbold should, indeed, for the
fitness of things, have been a young and
blooming maiden — rather than a man verging
towards middle age, and more or less 
— to correspond with the rare
loveliness and freshness of creation, that
sprang afresh to life as Aurora, with blushing
finger-tips, drew back the curtains of the
night, and ushered in the roseate dawn. Even

as the surroundings belonged more to that
'garden of fair delights," consecrated by the
Egyptians to Daphne, into which naught
but harmony and sensuous peace and pleasure
was allowed to enter, rather than to

This live, throbbing age,
That brawls, cheats, maddens, calculates, aspires,
And spends more passion, more heroic heat,
Between the mirrors of its drawing-rooms
Than Poland with his knights at Roncevalles."

But Nature is ever prodigal and unreasoning
; she stops not to consider on whom
to spend her largesse, she has no calculation
in her giving, and she seeks no return, since,
with her keen perceptiveness, she knows we
mortals possess nothing of our owt, no gift
of jewel or of price, of intellect or of beauty,
that can compare with the least of those
benefits she pours with such lavish hand
upon us.

Does not all creation join with the angelic
choirs to hymn her praises ? What song of
mortal measure, sung by mortal tongue, can

equal in strength and melody that heavenly
canticle ? Nay, let us stand rather with
bowed head and reverent mien, lifting our
hearts in silent ecstasy, thankful if we may
so much as catch a distant echo of those
'' divine praises," borne to us maybe on the
wings of the far west wind ; or a reflection
of the golden glory of that paradise, ensnared
in the luminous fragility of a sunset cloud.

It is all we can hope for on this lower
earth, and who of us dare count on ever
realising the terrible sublimity, the awful
purity, of "the beatific vision " ?

It was very early in the morning when
little Marianne came running down the broad
terrace steps, and stood alone amidst the
varied riches of Esther's flower garden. Her
sunny hair was all unbound, and lay upon
her shoulders and about her forehead, still
damp from the morning's bath, glistening
like threads of gold washed in a wavelet
of sunshine. Her white frock glanced in
and out against the tender backs round of

VOL. n. G

early green foliage, as she ran from flower
to flower, plucking here a blossom, and there
a bud, studying each attentively before adding
them to the bouquet in her hand, with the
gravity of childhood, which invests every
action with a separate importance.

And as she flew about rejoicing, as only
children and animals can rejoice, in the mere
pleasure of being, she sang from time to
time the rhyming measure of a nursery song,
which fell unheeded from her lips, and that
had no sense or meaning, but sprang as
spontaneously from her heart as did the
song of the little brown thrush, who was
pouring out his weight of thanksgiving,
with such overwhelming rapture as to shake
his very soul, and cause the quivering catkin
on which he perched to bend and sway
beneath its vibrations.

The windows of the Folly were still
closed and curtained. Its inmates were as
yet scarce turning on their couches of down,
or realising that another day had begun for

tlienij another day opened out full of sublime
opportunities for good or evil. AVith the
passing of another hour they would perforce
he roused from their dreams by the inevitable
early cup of tea, without which species of
dram-drinking no woman of fashion can
support the fatigues of her toilette, or the
embarrassments of the morning post. But
that is sixty minutes off yet — sixty long
minutes — three thousand, six hundred seconds
and in the meantime, before the inevitable
overtakes us, let us follow the preacher's
advice and make the most of it. 'yet a
little more sleep, and a little more slumber,
a little more folding of the hands to sleep."

Time enough to take up the burden of
living when that burden is ruthlessly thrust
upon us, and we bow our shoulders with
accustomed habit to receive its weight.

But little Marianne entertained no such
pessimistic views ; to her the joy of life was
simply in the act of living, and its triumph
in escaping from the tyranny of Sarah, and

G 2

being absolutely free to tear lier frock or
rumple her golden hair without the visible
personality of that Nemesis. Presently Trim,
her beloved Skye terrier, came leaping out to
her as fast as his very short legs and corpulent
body would allow him to travel ; and
then began a series of romps in which it was
difficult to say which took the most satisfaction
— the dog or the child. Trim, however,
was the first to give up and retire on
his laurels, selecting a particularly green spot
of turf beneath a lilac-tree in full bloom, and
after solemnly turning round and round in
an unsuccessful race with his own tail, settled
himself comfortably thereon, and with the
tip of his red tongue showing between his
teeth, watched the child with a benign and
patronising expression. Marianne, thus deserted,
returned to her flower-gathering,
apostrophising Trim as she did so.

You are a lazy dog. Trim. I'm 'shamed
of you ! It's perfectly ridiculous your pretending
to be tired ; you can't be ; it's only

putting on shapes, just as Miss Dick says,
and shapes isn't very nice manners in such
a wee little doggie as you ! "

Trim snapped at an intruding fly, and
yawned for answer, then settled his nose on
his paws and went to sleep, and Marianne,
thus left companionless, grew a little weary
of solitude.

I guess I've got enough flowers now
for Popsey's bufi'day," she said, regarding
critically the glowing mass of blossoms held
very tightly in her hot little hand. *' I guess
I'll go in and put 'em on his dressing-table,
and cry ' boo' very loud in his ear. Then
he'll have to get up ! "

And fired with this most laudable device,
Mimi trotted away very fast, without so much
as a backward look at the recreant Trim.
Little recked George Newbold of the awful
fate in store for him at the hands, or rather
in the shrill voice of his small daughter ! But
surely, could he have foreseen her advent
in the character of a red Indian, he would

have devoutly thanked chance for his timely
delivery.

As Marianne tripped along, a dark shadow
fell suddenly across her path and stopped
her further advance. Pushing back the fringe
of golden hair, that fell almost into her
sapphire blue eyes, the child halted and
looked up a little bewildered.

It was Vladimir MellikofF who stood before
her, looking very tall and dark against the
brilliant green of the sun-swept lawn behind
him. The child gazed up at him gravely
and without speaking. This was not a
familiar figure in her little world ; she would
have greeted Jack Howard, or Freddy Wilde,
or even old Sir Piers Traceyy with her
accustomed quaint mingling of condescension
and intimacy ; but this tall, dark stranger,
with his sombre face and deep black eyes,
was unknown to her, and because unknown
was not to be put on the same footing with
her old companions.

However, Esther Newbold's small daughter

was sufficiently a little worldling in training
to recognise in this stranger one of *' papa's
men," as she called them, classifying all
unknown masculine visitors under one head ;
she did not, therefore, run away, but stood
quietly silent, her eyes raised frankly to his,
and the sunlight turning to living gold each
tendril of her fair hair.

Vladimir Mellikoflf could be very gentle
and winning to children ; they touched that
inner chord of tenderness that vibrated so
passionately to Olga Naundorff's lightest word,
and something in the fair child's face, with
its deep blue eyes, recalled to him that other
proud Russian face, with the violet eyes and
scornful, curved lips. He bent down and
spoke to Mimi in his softest voice.

"You are little Marianne, are you not?"
he said.

*' I am Marianne Newbold," replied the
child, with grave directness.

I wonder if you could say my name,"
continued Mellikoff, persuasively. "It is not

so pretty as yours, but then I am a mau, yoi^
see."

"Men's is never so pitty," remarked the-child,
didactically. *' What is your name ? "

Vladimir' replied Count Mellikoff,
gravely, and repeating each syllable distinctly :
*' Via — di — mir. Do you think you can say
it? Try."

But Marianne shook her golden mane in
positive negation.

"I couldn't," she said, "not possibly.
But I'll call you Mr. Val, if you like; it's
pitcher than your real name."

"Very well, then, Mr. Val it shall be,"
answered the Count, smiling broadly at the
very English sobriquet bestowed upon him.
Who have you been gathering all those
flowers for ? "

'they's for my Popsey ; it's his buffday.
Do you know how old he is, Mr. Val ? I
guess he must be most a hundred."

To which Mr. Anal replied with a laugh ;
but Marianne was no whit abashed.

I think so," she went on, seating herself
on a low garden bench that stood under a
spreading ash-tree, and beginning to sort
out the flowers as they lay upon her lap.
"I think so, 'cause he's got so many grey
hairs, more than I can count. When I was
a little girl" — with great disdain — "I used
to pull 'em out, till Sarah said ten new
ones came to each old one's funeral. Then
I asked Lammy the other day if she thought
Popsey was nearly a hundred; but she only
laughed. Does you know Lammy, Mr. Yal V
she queried, abruptly.

Oh, but that isn't a real name, you
know," protested Vladimir, diplomatically ;
*' that might be any creature's name — a dog's,
or a cat's."

** Oh, no, it couldn't," cried the child,
eagerly, "cause it's a person's — a grownup's,
you see. It isn't her very own, own
name ; but that's too long, so I just calls
her Lammy."

And what is her very own own name? "

asked Mellikoflf, idly, taking up a large white
marguerite from Mimi's store, and carelessly
stripping off its petals, his mind unconsciously
repeating the old formula, '' she loves me —
she loves me not." The child's voice fell
with startling distinctness across the morning
stillness, and shattered Vladimir's sentiment
with a straight, keen blow.

'' Her very own name," said Marianne,
slowly, and taking great pains with her
syllables, " is Mademoiselle Lamien — Mademoiselle
Adele Lamien."

The stripped daisy-head fell from Count
Mellikoff's fingers, and lay at his feet amidst
its snow-flake petals unheeded. He started
violently at this positive answer to his
negligent question, and the blood rushed for
one moment to his face. He, who was never
known to show emotion even when confronting
death, trembled now before the unconscious
words of a little child. His dark eyes seemed
to grow larger in their hollow settings, the
fine veins about his temples throbbed visibly.

Mimi, however, was ignorant of the agitation
she had awakened ; her golden head
was bent over her flowers, while with one
little foot she kept off the repentant Trim,
who, having awakened from his slumbers,
was endeavouring with slavish abjection to
reinstate himself in his little mistress's favour.

When Count Mellikoff next spoke, anyone
save a child would have noticed the
forced lightness of his voice ; as it was,
even Mimi looked up surprised by the
change in it.

^' And is it, then, Mademoiselle Lamien
Adele Lamien — that you call by the j^^i^t-
nom of Lammy ? " he asked.

Yes," replied the child, a little startled
and impressed by his manner. "Mumsey
calls her Mam'zelle Lamien ; but I don't —
not always — I call her Lammy. Is you
sorry ? Why does your eyes look so black ? "

Do they look black, Marianne ? " Ellis
asked, stupidly ; then recovering himself
with a laugh, and returning his old manner :

'•' No, I am not sorry. Why should I be ?
I've never seen your Mademoiselle Lamien.'^

"She's gone away," answered the child,
quickly. " She had to ; she said she must,
cause she and Miss Hildreth couldn't possibly
be here together.' But when I asked Mumsey
about it, she only said : ' Nonsense, and don't
bother.' "

*rand has she been a long time with
you ? " asked Vladimir, putting the question
indifferently*

Mimi shook all her golden curls. "Not
very long; she came on Sarah's bufFday, and
that isn't very long ago."

But homo long ? " queried Mellikoff. '' A
month, a year, a week ? Try and think,
Mimi ; was it one Sunday ago, or two, or
three ? You know when Sunday comes, don't
you ? "

"Yes," replied the child, "it's the day
after Saturday, and I always have my best
pudding for dinner. What's your best pudding,
Mr. Yal?"

Bat Mr. Val was spared answering this
embarrassing question by the advent of Sarah,
who bore down upon them, her cap-strings
flying, and whisked Marianne off, in a whirlwind
of yellow hair and white petticoats,
before he could even protest. She waved
one little hand to him as she tripped away,
holding on to her flowers with the other,
and Trim barking at her heels ; then the
terrace door closed upon them, and Vladimir
was left alone.

Mechanically he stooped and picked up
one of the stray blossoms that had fallen
from Mimi's lap ; he turned it idly in his
fingers, looking at it with unseeino^ eves, while
his busy brain went on thinking, planning,
scheming.

Was he wrong after all ? Had she escaped
him ; nay, had she ever been hereat
all ? Why had she gone away ? When
would she come back ? How could he piece
out his welcome a little longer at the Folly ?
Was he altogether wrong in his suspicions ?

Had the woman tricked him again ; fighting
him with his own weapons, had she outmatched
him and escaped ?

And thus, as he stood lost in his self-questionings
— a sombre, dark figure in the
glowing beauty and sunlight of the fair May
morning, twisting the drooping flower round
and round in his fingers, and the song of
the birds echoing ceaselessly in his ears —
a sudden light broke over the gloom of his
countenance, a half-formed exclamation rose to
his lips ; he dropped the flower suddenly, and
took a step forward.

''No, I am not wrong," he said, in answer
to himself. " Let Adele Lamien beware, or
I may turn her own arms against her." Then
he turned abruptly and walked towards the
house ; and only the sunshine, and the birds,
and Mimi's faded blossoms remained.

'''tis a siren."

AxD so the long golden morning hours
rolled on, and the garden remained untenanted.
The sweet spring flowers — than
which none are more beautiful and frap-rant,
because so redolent of promise — wasted their
perfume on the gentle breezes that swayed
their yielding blossoms ; the birds' song
grew hushed and lapsed into silence as the
repose of noontide settled down upon them.
The sun fell in straight, level rays that
were warm with a foretaste of tropical heat ;
far away in the distance a faint silver line
marked the sea's limits, across which now
and then a white sail flashed and was gone.

All nature lay hushed and stilled in that
strange peace that comes at the day's meridian,
when the only sounds are those of
the under-world, the drowsy humming of an
early humble-bee, the impatient buzzing of
a giant-fly, the bu-bu of multitudinous
insects, the chip-chip of the grasshopper,
broken sharply across by the monotonous
hammer of the woodpecker.

Within the Folly all the lower rooms
were alike deserted, not a ripple of laughter
or an echo of voices was to be heard ; even
the billiard hall was void, the men, in the
absence of the feminine element, having taken
themselves off to the stables, or down to
the club-house, where lay the yachts moored
in harbour, curtsying gracefully to each
succeeding wavelet as it broke against the
sharp outline of stem or stern.

But up in Mrs. Newbold's boudoir
however, there were life and action enough
and to spare, for here were gathered Esther
and her women guests, while each pair of

feminine lips were eager to contribute their
share to the general conversation.

Patricia Hilclreth lay full length upon a
couch pulled close to the hearth, on which
a fire of fragrant hemlock burned, in mockery
of the open window and in defiance of the
dancing sunbeams. Miss Hildreth was in all
things luxurious, and revelled with almost
barbaric delight in warmth of atmosphere
and colour.

Her slight but perfect figure was wrapped
in a long loose cashmere robe of softest
azure, about which the dark bands of Russian
sables swept in classic lines, nestling closely
about the firm white throat with caressing
touch, and falling back from the white arms
and rounded Wrists. In her hand she held
a dainty vellum-bound book, a collection of
sonnets much in vogue, and from which
she read aloud at intervals some special
jeu d! esprit.

At her feet, on a low, luxurious pile of
cushions, sat Dick Darling, doing nothing,

VOL. II. H

her hands clasped around her knees, her
eyes feasting, in true hero-worship, on the
face of her divinity.

Before a large Psyche-glass stood Baby
Leonard, absorbed in a row of suggestive
little porcelain pots, and breathlessly engaged
in the exciting process of "making up" in
daylight, d ^I'opos of the evening's requirements.


Esther was resting in a lounging-chair
with Mimi on her lap, the golden curls
falling about the pretty face bent down
over a new picture-book ; and at the open
window, on a low ottoman, sat Miss James,
her hands clasped idly upon her lap, her
thin face pale and tired, her dark, restless
eyes fixed intently upon Miss Hildreth.
Something in the attitude bespoke mental
depression and dread, that even the alert
watching of eyes and mouth could not
disguise.

Dick's glib tongue had been running on
aimlessly from topic to topic, taking in a

wide range of subjects, from the races at
Jerome Park, to the coming international
yacht contest for the America Cup ; and
though the remarks of her auditors were
few and far between, Dick was perfectly
contented and asked nothing better than to
listen to the sound of her own voice.

She was interrupted before long, however,
by Miss James's sharp and rather high voice
addressing no one in particular :

^'Dick is certainly a living personation
of Tennyson's ' Brook,' isn't she ? ' for men
may come, and men may go, but she goes
on for ever ! ' "

To which Dick, arrested in mid-career,
retorted sharply : " I can't say that I see any
men about anywhere, either coming or going.
The wish must be first cousin to Rosalie's
thought. Good gracious. Baby ! how much
more rouge do you mean to annex ? You're
blushing like a peony now, and one eyebrow
is half a mile longer than the other. You
make me think of Jack Howard's story of

H 2

Miss Graham, the American beauty of
London, you know."

"No, we dont know," broke in Esther,
languidly; "perhaps you'll be so good as to
enlighten us."

Toivn Optics cribbed it from him," continued
Dick, once more in her element, "and
positively quoted it as true. It appears some
magnificent master asked Cecilia Graham
if she didn't find her abnormally long eyelashes
rather inconvenient at times ? To
which Cis replied, smiling sweetly, 'Why,
certainly ; I am always obliged to have them
borne in front of me when I go upstairs,
for fear I shall trip upon them!' And will
you believe me," went on Miss Darling, when
the laugh evoked had died out, "that brainless
master has gone about ever since getting
it off as a double extra specimen of American
repartee, and all the time it never took place
at all except in Jack Howard's budding
intellect. I think Town Optics owes him
one for that."

"I can cap your story by a better, Dick,"
retorted Esther, rousing herself and sitting
up very straight, 'rand mine is absolutely
true, for it happened to George's sister, ^Yhen
she was in London, oh, ever so long ago,
before the war."

'' Ancient history ! " groaned Miss Darling,
resignedly. '' Drive ahead, Esther, only you
are awfully behind the age."

*' A story's a story, no matter when it
happened," replied Mrs. Newbold, a little
confused in her grammar, " and you are not
obliged to listen, Dick."

'' Oh, yes, but I shall," remarked that
young person — 'listen and remember, and
get it off with effect as first-hand, at my
next big spread. Go on, Esther, do, like
a daisy."

Well, you must know, my dears, that
George's sister was a very pretty girl "

Oh ! " interpolated Miss Darling, making
tragic efforts to control her astonishment.

Yes, very pretty," went on Esther,

severely, *' and when she was in London she
was presented at Court, and went out a
great deal, and that's when old Sir Piers
first saw her and wanted to make her Lady
Traceyy."

"For her sins! I am sure there could
be no other reason for such a punishment,"
again interjected Miss Darling, piously.

Ah, but Sir Piers was a gay young
baronet in those days," said Esther, with
decision. "Any girl might have hesitated
before she gave him his congo. However,
that's neither here nor there. Margaret Newbold
was a very great favourite ; and one
evening, at a big dinner party at a tremendously
swell house, she was given a proportionately
great grandee as a cavalier. This
very high-bred personage began by staring at
her, up and down and round and about,
through his eye-glasses and over them ; and
when he found this was not in the least discomposing
to the young woman, but that she

talked on glibly to her left-hand neighbour,
he gave a loud * ahem ! ' and said, so that all
the company might hear : ' Ah — miss — ah — I
perceive, though you are an American, you
speak English quite fluently — ah ' Margaret
eyed him for a moment over the rim of
her wine-glass, and then replied, with calm
distinctness and an air of inward satisfaction :
Well — yes — ah — Mr. — I do. You see, the
missionary who converted our tribe was an
Englishman, and he taught us the lans^uaoje.'
Then she went on eating her fish, quite undisturbed
by the shouts of laughter that
went up at the expense of her unfortunate
questioner."

"Served him right, too," cried Miss Darling,
indignantly. " I never heard of anything su
caddish. We might just as well ask, in an
off-hand, jovial kind of a way, if it's because
they have so many H's lying round loose, that
they forget to pick 'em up and use 'em in
the right places ! And one might suppose so,

you know, with reason, judging from some
of the specimens we get over here."

*' It's very trying," broke in Baby Leonard,
plaintively ; '* I can't get both sides of my
face to look alike, and this creme imperative
is so sticky ! What shall I do ? "

Leave it all alone," cried Miss Darling,
brusquely. '' You can't improve on nature.
Baby — it's no use ! ' Bad's the best,' as my
old mammy-nurse used to say. You won't
make your eyes any the larger or prettier by
painting them a distinct violet, and your
mouth's a far better shape left to its own
lines ; you can't make a Cupid's bow out of
it, try as you may."

Only listen to Dick the virtuous ! "
laughed Esther. " She positively waxes eloquent
on the shams of the hour, and is
developing a soul above frivolities ! We shall
have her quoting Carlyle next ; or, stay, I
know what it will be. What's that sentimental
couplet, Dick, tucked carefully away
beneath your pot of * cherry-lip,' in your new

silver-mounted toilette des ongles? Is tins
the way it runs :

^"hy send me to this little girl ?

Sure such a gift were silly !
Can I add lustre to the pearl,

Or paint the gilded lily ? ' "

Oh, Esther, you're a brute ! " cried poor
Dick, the tears actually in her eyes, her cheeks
very red. " How could you ? It's only —
only some stupid little lines about a still more
stupid joke. They don't mean me at all."

*' And then, fancy Dick being compared
to a pearl, and a lily — a painted lily ! " exclaimed
Miss James, in her most disagreeable
voice, and with a slow smile creeping over her
face.

*' Oh, Esther, how could you ! " cried poor
Dick again ; but Mrs. Newbold only laughed.

Don't be cynical and fault-finding, then,
my dear Dick," she said, quietly, drawing one
of Mimi's golden curls through her fingers ;
'rit doesn't suit you, my dear, nor your little
round, brown, winsome face."

Since poetry seems to be the order of
the clay, listen to this," broke in Miss Hildreth,
in her clear musical voice, and lifting her eyes
from the tiny vellum book she held :

' J^ear my bed, there, hangs the picture jewels would not
buy from me.
'Tis a siren, a brown siren,
Playing on a lute of amber by the margin of a sea.

•' In the hushes of the midnight, when the heliotropes
grow strong
"With the dampness, I hear music — hear a quiet,

plaintive song —
A most sad, melodious utterance, as of some immortal
wrong.

'•' Like the pleading, oft repeated, of a soul that pleads in

vain,
Of a damned soul repentant, that would fain be pure

again !
And I lie awake and listen to the music of her pain.

"And whence comes this mournful music? Whence,
unless it chance to be
From the siren, the brown siren,
Playing on her lute of amber by the margin of a sea ? ' "

Silence fell upon the little group as
Patricia's voice died away. For a moment

all were held by the spell of the poet's words,
with their deep nndernote of passionate protest.
The present faded out of the line of
mental vision, replaced by the past, within
whose mystery of silence, somewhere a great
wrong lay hidden, and unappeased.

Had the poet known of it, in all its details,
and kept inviolate this secret of another's
existence, or had he only guessed at its outlines,
fearing to fill in the lights and shadows,
lest imagination should fall short of reality ?

So vivid, indeed, was the impression produced,
it seemed only a continuation of the
tragedy when Miss Hildreth spoke again,
slowly and without any apparent reason, save
inward impulse.

*' I have known one such woman once, to
whom all life and all time was but the cry of
a damned soul,' crying out ceaselessly against
'an immortal wrong.' Did our poet know
her story, I wonder, when he wrote of his
brown siren ' ? But no ; this poor soul has
had no one to sing out her wrongs, or open up

the story of the treachery that blasted her life.
Alone she has had to bear her burden, and
alone she must bear it to the very end."

As Miss Hildreth spoke, Dick Darling
crept close to her side, and knelt there,
listening eagerly, with quick corning breath,
to the disjointed sentences. In the deep
interest of the moment no one looked towards
the window where sat Kosalie James, or
noticed the intense nervous restraint she was
exercising. Her face was absolutely colourless
; her hands pressed so hard one upon, the
other that they left blue marks upon the soft
flesh ; her eyes where strained and feverish ;
she bent forward in an alert, expectant
attitude, as of one awaiting, yet not certain of,
some preconceived revelation. At the Psyche-mirror
sat Baby Leonard, still placidly trying
one artistic preparation after another, and
totally oblivious to the tense atmosphere of
suppressed excitement about her.

'rand who was she? Is she alive?"
asked Dick, her whisper catching up Miss

Hildretli's falling inflection, and sustaining
the interest of the moment. *' Who was she ?
Is she alive ? Where did you know her ? "

*eyes, she is alive; oh, yes, indeed, she
is alive," answered Patricia, still in a retrospective
tone ; " and I knew her in Petersburg
when I was last there — such a little time ago,
as it seems now."

Was she beautiful ? " Again it was
Dick's voice that asked, and Patricia's that
replied.

"She was very beautiful — so beautiful
that no one could withstand her loveliness.
And her beauty became her curse ; ah, what
a curse, since it attracted the attention of one
so high above her that his lightest regard was
an insult ! What but bitter wrong and crime
could be the outcome of a love proffered by a
scion of the Imperial house to a woman of the
people ? Beauty is a grand leveller, it is true,
but it cannot level the iron hand and cruel
laws of Kussia. It was the old story — the
old, old, pitiful story — that comes to every

woman once in her lifetime, and that each
woman translates as best suits her desires —
the story that makes a heaven upon earth,
a paradise within our hearts."

Again the musical tones died away in a
sigh of regret, and again Dick cried out in
her quick, absorbed whisper :

Is there any more to tell ? What
happened ? AVhat was the end ? "

What any woman might have looked
for, save a woman blinded by love, and a
man absorbed by passion. They lived in a
fool's paradise for an all too brief space, and
then, before the golden sheen had fallen from
their vision, while the woman still played
with fate and the man toyed with destiny,
the blow fell — sudden, sharp, omnipotent,
as is the nature of Russia's potency. Taken
away from his very arms, her marriage
annulled by Imperial ukase, her life ruined,
her soul lost in a whirlwind of injustice
and despair, what wonder that her woman's
nature revolted, and that throwing aside the

narrower swathing bands of law and conventionality,
she stood forth, bold and free
and savage, and struck down her craven
lover in the very zenith of his manhood,
with a hand that never faltered, as it drove
home the steel to his very heart ? "

Miss Hildreth had grown strangely excited
as she told the tragic story ; she rose up
now and stood at her full height, the clinging
cashmeres marking every line and curve of
her beautiful form ; her face was pale as
death, and beneath her dark brows her eyes
gleamed with their old dangerous fire ; she
lifted her hands and brought them together
before her, throwing them out palm upwards
in passionate protest ; her voice was low
and concentrated, vibrating with intolerance.

*' And I who tell you this," she continued,
^'I speak as only one can who has looked
upon such suffering as hers ; who has beheld
the soul drink to the very dregs of the cup
of renunciation, despair, desertion ; seen it
touch the very heights and depths of mental

ancniish. and wandered with it so far in
the paths of darkness that even crime seemed
but justice, if it woukl in any way balance
the debt of honour."

She faltered suddenly, and turning with
quick impetuosity, sank back upon the couch,
her light mocking laugh ringing out discordantly
as she concluded.

*' Was I not right, Dick ? The poet must
have known this story to write so tellingly
of an ' immortal wrong, and of a soul repentant
longing to be pure again.' "

Miss Darling had started back when
Patricia had arisen, and though she remained
kneeling, her eyes never left the other's face.
Across the room, in the full warm glow of
the noontide sun. Miss James sat shivering,
but watching ever and always with the same
look of expectancy, and yet of certainty, on
her face.

As Miss Hildreth's little laugh struck so
harshly across the compressed emotion of
the moment, and made, as it were, a half-bar

of discord ia the tragic score, Dick
Darling shuddered, and put out her hand,
as though to ward off some impending
danger.

"Don't," she cried, her brown face paling
and flushing alternatively, *' don't laugh in
that dreadful way; oh. Miss Hildreth, it
hurts me ! " She crept a little nearer to
her and laid one hand on the pale blue
draperies. "That is not all, not all of the
story, it cannot be all. Tell me the rest of
it. Tell me her name ! "

Dick's whisper was imperative, imperious,
and Miss Hildreth, fino^erino- nervously the
vellum-covered volume, felt the force of
the girl's candid eyes, and honest, earnest
gaze.

'her name" — she said, slowly and hesitatingly
— *' her name "

But before she could complete her sentence

Esther started up, putting Marianne hastily

down, and came towards her.

You have said quite enough," she
VOL. ir. I

exclaimed, excitedly. *' Patty, Patty, let me
beg you to be careful."

As she spoke, the door behind the swinging
porters opened slightly, unperceived
by any one except Miss James, over whose
face the same sneering smile crept out
again. Miss Hildreth looked up at Mrs.
Newbold with defiance in her eyes and on
her lips.

My dear Esther, surely you are a
little too dramatic. Why should not I
gratify Miss Dick's romantic inquisitiveness ?
Her name — the name of this woman — was —
is — well, let us call it Adele Lallovich."

As she uttered the words clearly and
distinctly, the porticoes were pushed hastily
aside, and George Newbold's voice preceded
himself in person, exclaiming :

** May we come in, my dear ? We are
bored to the verge of insanity."

And crossing the threshold he, held back
the curtains, and Vladimir Mellikoff stepped
into their midst. As he did so a sudden

quick sigh broke from Miss James, she got
lip hastily and passing down the room met
his cool impenetrable glance with the slightest
possible recognition, and upward gesture
of her hand. He stepped forward to open
the door for her, and when it closed upon
her and he returned to the little group, a
keen observer mig-ht have noticed a slight
increase in the brilliancy of his eyes, a touch
of triumph in the smile with which he
bent over Miss Hildreth's hand, held out
in OTeetinoj to him.

Patricia's face, however, looked cold and
hard ; and the line of dark fur lay about
her white throat like the shadow of a coming
calamity.

THE CANKER WORM OF DOUBT.

Mr. Tremain did not ao-ain see Miss Hildreth
after she left him standing by the fountain
in the little wood, until they met in the
green-room an hour before the play.

She had gone from him then with scorn
and anger in her words, and with scorn
and defiance in her heart ; she met him now
with cold and indifferent hauteur, amounting
almost to insolence.

Philip had stood for a long time alone
beside the marble boy Narcissus, revolving
moodily the sharp home truths she had thrust
upon him. He did not forget one curl of
her lip, one Hash of her eyes, one inflection

of her clear voice, as she flung back the
love he offered ; flung it back with bitter
disdain and contempt. And yet, curiously
enough, he was not angry with her ; there
was no such positive element in his feelings
as that ; he seemed to himself to hold, as it
were, an outsider s position, and to look on and
judge her from an outsider's point of view.

Was it her own complete indifi'erentism,
her absolute disbelief in the ordinary delusions
of life, her cynical acceptance of the contradictions
of destiny, together with her sudden
outburst of passionate derision, that had produced
in him this state of cool analysis and
judicial judgment?

He had pleaded his love fervently enough
under the glamour of the moonlight and her
loveliness, and he had meant what he said
then ; he would gladly have taken her in
his arms, and given his answer to her letter
in a fond and foolish lover's way ; but — and
here lay the difficulty — she must return to
him as she had gone from him, the same

yielding, loving, believing, if wilful Patty ;
he could accept no other ; no new Patricia,
no woman whose eyes spoke of the fires of
conflict, whose face had that written upon
it which tells of the lower depths of mental
pain and struggle.

For Philip, as we know, was above all
things, masterful, and his idea of dual happiness
was autocratic rather than constitutional;
he would share no divided throne and sceptre,
even with the woman of his heart ; he must
reign, and he alone, and she must be the
empire over which he ruled unquestioningly.

All this had been in his heart, though
unspoken, when he pleaded with her to return
to their old relations, and, unconsciously,
perhaps, there was an echo of his despotism
even in his tenderest words. However that
may have been, Patricia would have none of
it. She was not to be won by pity when
passion had failed.

And so it was that as she stood tall
and beautiful before him, with her rich white

draperies clinging about her in sensuous lines
and curves, her face pale with suppressed
emotion, her eyes dark with endurance, she
tossed back his proffered gift, his reawakened
love — a love that would share no rights and
no prerogatives — and, with the fine irony of
a woman who sees her advantage and presses
it, thrust back and away from her all appeal
from out the past, touched though it was
with the pure gold of that time when love
and youth, belief and trust, went hand in
hand together.

Even yet, then, after ten long years of
experience and knowledge, Philip could not
read her heart aright. And she, should she
forgive him ? Give up the unequal game,
lay down her arms, acknowledge herself
vanquished, and creep timidly back into his
embrace, repentant and abject, meek and
thankful ?

Then she looked at Philip's face, calm and
quiet and victorious, with just a touch of
wearied assurance in its smile, and her heart

leapt up again in sudden protest and passion.
No, she would not yield, she would never yield
until she saw him suffering, through a woman,
some portion of the pain and humiliation he
had inflicted upon her. Then, when expiation
brought forth the fruit of atonement, why then
ah, then Miss Hildreth would reconsider.

It was Miss Rosalie James who first
introduced the canker of doubt in Philips
mind concerning Patricia, of suspicion regarding
her past.

It had never occurred to him to speculate
upon the possible experiences and circumstances
which must have made up the ten
years of their separation.

Miss Hildreth had passed the greater part
of that time abroad, and his news of her
had not only been meagre but nil, for after
the first few weeks of her absence, during
which her name had been on every one's lips,
coupled with her broken engagement, and
her inherited fortune, it was rarely mentioned,
and never in Philip's presence.

The most perfectly controlled human heart
cannot so entirely root up envy and malice
as not to cavil somewhat at the perversity of
Providence, in showering benefits with both
hands upon a fellow mortal, who certainly
cannot so thoroughly deserve them as oneself.
However, if destiny will be so blindly prejudiced,
why let us become as indifferent toit
as possible, and in perfecting ourselves
in this fine-art forget both the name and
existence of our once bosom friend.

This was society's philosophy regarding
Patricia Hildreth, and thus for ten long
years her place had been vacant in the circles
of the great world, and she herself forgotten
as completely as the snows of last year. " Mais
oil sont les neiges danton ? " may be asked
of more things than Musset dreamed of, when
he wrote his sad and bitter reproach.

Miss James had met Philip late in the
afternoon of George ISTewbold's /^5^c(, as he
was strolling idly about the garden-paths, the
inevitable cigarette between his lips, and his

hands, as was his fashion, clasped loosely
behind him. He caught sight of the small
dark figure coming towards him down the
terrace steps, and though at first impatient of
the interruption, something in the thin outline
of face and form, the lassitude of step and
bearing, touched a chord of compassion in his
kind heart.

He had not indeed been altogether insensible
to the nature of Miss James's feeling
towards him ; no man is quite so dull and hard
as not to be touched by the unasked devotion
of a woman ; it is wonderful when that devotion
is directed to one's self how unselfish
and pure, though hopeless, it appears ! Philip's
heart might be in the position of being
captured in the rebound, but Miss James
was not the one to do it ; nevertheless her
attraction to him, to call it by no warmer
name, was harmless, if ineffectual, and not
unpleasant.

Thus argued Mr. Tremain, though injustice
to him let it be said the argument

was not carried on in words, scarcely in sensations
; it was negative rather than positive.
He met her therefore with that deference
and attention which made his slightest service
a distinction, lifting his hat and throwing
aside his half-smoked cigarette as he did so.
Miss James looked at him steadily for a
moment, watching him as he tossed away
the end of burning paper.

Oh, I am sorry you should do that," she
said, in her rather hard voice. ^' I don't in
the least object to cigarettes ; in fact, I
like them."

But Philip only smiled and shook his
head.

''Oh, I've had quite enough of it, Miss
James, I assure you. I was only smoking
as a distraction and to make the time oo."

o

Has it been such a long day ? " she asked,
a trifle sharply. She knew Mr. Tremain
and Patricia had not met that day, and
shrewdly suspected the reason of his restlessness,
and though she acknowledged to herself

the hopelessness of her own hopes, she could
not endure to have it brought home to herby
him,

*' Very long," replied Philip, candidly ;
it's a way time has of never weighing hi
goods. The hours that he go by on lagging
steps, the hours to come rush and tumble
one on top of the other, and are never in the
future but always in the past."

I should think that rather depended
upon one's occupation," responded Miss James,
tritely. " If one's copybook was to be trusted,
time never halted or stood still. ' Time Flies
with a very large T and F is among my
earliest recollections."

Mr. Tremain laughed a little as he replied :

You shame me, Miss James, into an open
confession of laziness. To be lazy is to find
time out of joint, and in consequence out
of touch with one. One can only be legitimately
lazy on board a yacht, or fishing ;
under such circumstances action becomes
criminal. By the way, let me congratulate

you on your distinct success as Mrs. Bouncer,
last evening. I asked for you after rehearsal,
but did not see you."

"No," replied Miss James, slowly, ''I did
not come back to the theatre."

As she spoke a dull flush rose to her
cheeks, for she remembered how and where
she passed those two hours, when all the world
were absorbed in the miniature playhouse.
With one of those strange sudden weaves of
perception she saw again a broken feathers
and golden-hued rose lying together on
the velvet carpet, and Vladimir MellikofF,
tall and dark and smiling, holding back the
heavy courtiers, through which she escaped
trembling and doomed.

She caught her breath and went on a little
nervously :

"I am very flattered to be praised by
you, Mr. Tremain. I can't bear Mrs. Bouncer
myself; she is quite antipathetic to me."

Then surely you deserve all the more
praise," said Mr. Tremain, courteously. " If

to be out of accord with one's role results
so favourably I shall devoutly pray that
Henri de Flavigneul and I may be at daggers
drawn this evenins:.'''

'but what would Miss Hildreth say to
that ? " asked the girl, sharply, and looking
up so quickly as to catch the sudden frown
of annoyance that spread over Mr. Trenaain's
face at the mention of Patricia's name.

''Ah, Miss Hildreth," he replied, with
assumed carelessness. " I had not taken
her into consideration."

"And yet Miss Hildreth is not one to be
left unconsidered ? " said Miss James, questioningly.
" She is not one to be easily
passed over." Then, with a sudden change
of manner, she added : " You have known Miss
Hildreth a long time, have you not, Mr.
Tremain ? "

Philip looked down at her a little startled
and surprised. Was she laughing at him —
this pale, quiet, almost insignificant girl —
or mocking him? Surely the subject of his

and Patricia's broken engagement had been
public property too long to have escaped her
knowledge. Was it impertinence or ignorance
that dictated the question ? But Miss
James's face was placid and mildly interested
as she looked up at him with a little smile,
and waited for him to speak.

Oh, yes, I have known Miss Hildreth
for some years," he replied, shortly ; and then
with an abrupt laugh : " but I have not seen
her for almost as long as I have known her."

"Ah," said ]\[iss James, meditatively,
'she has been abroad for ten years, and ten
years makes such a difference in one's knowledge
of another. Only think what might
not happen in ten years ! "

Apparently Miss Hildreth's experiences
have been more or less narrow," answered
Philip, annoyed that the conversation should
have turned upon Patricia, and yet unable to
keep from discussing her.

"Oh, do you think so?" asked Miss
James, with quite a look of surprised inquiry

in her eyes. '' To be sure you ought to know ;
but do you think she— any woman — could
come back quite unchanged after ten years
abroad ? "

There was so much of veiled controversy
in her tones that Philip at once found himself
looking at the matter from her point of
view, and debating his own question with
a decided neo-native bias.

*' \Yhat do you mean ? " he said at last,
after a moment's delay. "What do you think
are some of the experiences that may have
come in Miss Hildreth's way — or any woman's
during ten years' absence abroad ? "

That would depend so much as to where
one went, what countries, or towns, or cities ;
whom one associated with ; and how one lived.
Each country has its own peculiar influences,
dangers, casualties, but some countries have
the two former more developed. Kussia, for
example ; in Russia one instinctively looks for
dangers, intrigues, conspiracies. Has Miss
Hildreth ever been to Russia, Mr. Tremain ? "

Miss James was treating the subject with
so much gravity and impressiveness that
Philip felt himself carried along with her,
and inclined to look at Patricia's past career
and its attendant trivialities in a serious and
grave light.

*' I really cannot answer you in detail,
Miss James," he said, "but collectively I
should say that nothing was more probable
than Miss Hildreth's being perfectly familiar
with Prussia, and Prussian society, in all its
phases."

"Yes, I should say so too," answered Miss
James, nodding her head in confirmation of
her words. "In fact I am sure of it. Mr.
Tremain, do you think Miss Hiklreth has ever
before met and known Count Mellikoff?"

They had been walking up and down a
garden-path, but she stopped when she put
this question and faced him. Philip of course,
also stopped, and for a moment there was
silence between them.

That is an extraordinary question'' he

VOL. II. K

said at last ; " have you any reason for asking
it, Miss James ? "

"Bat you have not answered me yet," she
protested ; " when you do so I will reply to
you. Do you think Miss Hildreth has ever
before seen and known Count Mellikoff ; say
in Paris, or St. Petersburg ? ''

'' To the best of my belief Count Mellikoff
is a stranger to America, Miss James."

But is Count Mellikoff a stranger to Miss
Hildreth, Mr. Tremain?"

That is beyond me to answer," replied
Philip, with an unconscious inflection of
curiosity in his tone.

'then I will answ^erfor you," said Rosalie,
her thin sharp voice growing rounder and
fuller, *' but you must bear in mind I have no
reality to go upon, only surmise and observation.
Very well, then, I say Miss Hildreth
has not only met and known Count Mellikoff
before, but she has known him well, and she
is afraid of him. That surprises you, Mr.
Tremain, and yet I don't know why it should.

You must remember you have seen nothing
of Miss Hilclreth for ten years, and you know
nothing — positively nothing — of her life
during that time. Why shouldn't she have
known Count Mellikoff, and why shouldn't
she have reason to fear him ? Ten years is
a very long time ; long enough to drink deep
of experience ; long enough to plant, and sow,
and reap. Long enough to lose more than
one friend, make more than one enemy; long
enough to sink oneself to the neck in intrigue,
and to bury oneself in crime. May not Miss
Hildreth have eaten of the tree of knowledge,
and found the evil overweigh the good ? May
not Count Mellikoff have been her friend,
and become her enemy ? Is it not possible
that each is striving to outwit the other, aud
each is afraid of the other ? I see you think
me rather mad, Mr. Tremain, and credit me
With a morbid love of melodrama, or a
desire to make mountains out of mole-hills.
Ah, very well, let us say no more about it :
only when next you see Miss Hildreth and

K 2

Count Mellikoff together, watch his manner
towards her, and see for yourself if he carries
himself as a stranger to her. Ten years is a
honos time for a woman to wander about the
world alone."

She finished abruptly, and turned away
from him, leaving him without another word.

Philip's meditations, if unpleasant before,
were now distinctly disagreeable. He disliked
mystery, and above all things and most of
all he disliked it in connection with a
woman. In his eyes all women should belike
Caesar's wife, above suspicion, and it
hurt and galled him that even a shadow
of aspersion should rest on Patricia's fair
fame.

And yet, as Miss James had said, ten
years was a long time, and Miss Hildreth
gave no explanation, beyond a vague and
general one, as to how she had spent that
time. Might there not be some secret
bound up in those years ; some secret
between herself and Vladimir Mellikoff, which

it was wisest to leave so buried ? Was it
possible of belief that in all that time
Patricia had never consoled herself for the
lost love of her youth ?

Hers was an impetuous nature, open to
sudden convictions, quick to act, ardent,
impressionable ; with such a temperament
in the hands of Vladimir Mellikoff, what
imprudence might not have taken place ?
Even a secret marriage, and a subsequent
purgatory of disenchantment, were not
impossible consequences. Indeed, the range
of possibilities was so varied and so unsatisfactory,
Mr. Tremain felt himself unable
either to seize or exorcise them.

At the tea hour that same day. Miss
James asked suddenly, in a lull of conversation,
bending' forward and addressing Patricia
in her highest voice :

"Oh, Miss Hildreth, by the way, Mr.
Tremain and I have been discussing your
long absence from your native land, and
your possible and probable experiences.

Will you tell me, for it was rather a question
of difference between us, have you ever
been to Russia; do you know St. Petersburg?"

Something in Rosalie's sharp, hard tones
commanded attention, and when she finished
all eyes were turned upon Patricia, as she
sat in a high-backed chair ; her tea-gown of
marvellous old lace and fluttering ribbons
seeming but a fitting setting to her delicate
beauty. Vladimir Mellikoff put down his
cup of untasted tea, and drew near the
central group.

Miss Hildreth looked up a little surprised
at Rosalie's earnestness. She raised the tiny
apostle spoon in her fingers, and studied
it attentively as she answered :

Oh, yes, indeed. Miss James, I have
done the whole grand tour. I know my
London, my Paris, and my Petersburg
thoroughly, and like a loyal American place
the Peerage and the Almanach de Gotha
next to my Bible." Her voice was clear
and mocking, and a trifle artificial.

*' And may I also be permitted to ask
a question, mademoiselle ? " said Count
Mellikoif, advancing towards her and bowing
slightly.

Patricia raised her delicate eyebrows
in cool superciliousness. " Oh, certainly.
Count Mellikoff ; in what way can I add
to your knowledge ? "

She put out her hand with the empty
tea - cup, and Dick Darling flew to take
it from her ; the outstretched hand trembled
ever so little, and the spoon fell to the
floor.

Since you know my home, mademoiselle,
Petersburg, I do not make a blunder when
I suppose you to have known it socially as
well as "

"According to Baedeker," broke in Miss
Hildreth, with a little laugh. " Make your
mind easy, Count Mellikofi"; your Court and
your grand monde showed me nothing but
civilities."

That goes without the saying, mademoiselle,"

replied Vladimir, still more gravely.
"And, pardon me, it is pleasant to speak
on home subjects to one who understands
them so well ; did you, then, when at Court,
or in society, did you ever meet the most
brilliant man of his time, the most fascinating,
handsome, rich young noble of all Kussia ?
You will recall him at once when I name
him. Mademoiselle, did you ever know
Count Stevan Lallovich ? "

There was silence for a moment as Vladimir
Mellikoff asked his question, and for a moment
after, during which all eyes were again turned
towards Patricia. She had started forward
a little, and half rose up from her chair;
her face had grown suddenly pale, and
her eyes, beneath their dark pencilled brows,
flashed strangely.

It was but a moment, a second of time,
a heart-throb, then she controlled herself, and,
with one of her lightest, most mocking laughs,
sank back upon her chair, sweeping her ]aces
about her royally.

Count Stevan Lallovicb," she said, very
distinctly ; " you ask me if I knew Stevan
Lallovich? My dear Count MellikofF, your
very question is superfluous. Could any
woman who knew Petersburg, fail to know
Stevan Lallovich? The handsomest man of
his day, as you have said, and the most
unscrupulous." Then she turned to Miss
Darling : *' My dear Dick, will you beg
Esther for another cup of tea, and boiling,
my dear, positively boiling. You see, Count,
among other Russian peculiarities, I clinton
my Russian tea."

I see, mademoiselle," replied MellikofF,
gravely. " May you always prove as loyal
to all think's Russian."

o

Mr. Tremain had not been present during
this little passage at arms, but Miss James,
as she sat before her mirror that evening
'making-up" her small sallow face into a
hard-visaged, calculating sirs. Bouncer, congratulated
herself upon her strategy.

*' My shot told," she was thinking, as she

painted in another wrinkle, "it almost took
Miss Hildreth off lier guard. She is not
likely to forget herself again ; but I have
seen her once without her mask, and that
is enough. Oh yes, ' it moves, it moves.' "

Then, with Galileo's immortal words on
her lips, she added a final touch to her eyebrows,
and glided quickly away, appearing
a few moments later in the flies, and calling
forth Mr. Kobinson's encomiums upon her as a
model of punctuality.

A SOCIETY DRAMA.

In another half - hour the little playhouse
was full to overflowing. Not a seat was
vacant, and scarcely an inch of space was
left for the men of the party to plant their
feet upon. Gay and musical were the tones
of women's voices and laughter that rose and
fell upon the scented air, sustained and
strengthened by the more manly basses.

The theatre itself glowed in the soft
effulgence of electric light, each filament
incased in a hanging crystal vase, subdued
to a warm palpitating softness by silk shades
of roseate hue. Flowers bloomed everywhere,
piled in glowing masses along the walls

and across the miniature orchestra screen.
The rose-houses had been stripped of their
loveliest exotics, and these rifled blossoms
hung their gorgeous heads amidst a quivering
background of clinging green smilax.

On each rose-silk fauteuil lay a bouquet
of the golden-hued Marechal Niels, tied with
long ribbons of palest amber, and a tiny
satin programme on which, amidst quaint
device of scroll work, were inscribed the
characters and scenes of the coming drama.

The lever de rideau was a masterpiece
from the hand of an English Academician,
whose foreign name was better known in
the two great English - speaking countries
than others boasting a more national ring.
The heavy folds of richest white silk bore
testimony to the versatility of his brain and
brush, since here swept garlands of trailing
roses across a wonderful marble terrace, upon
which were grouped in classic attitudes the
sisters of histrionic art, Melpomene, Thalia,
and Terpsichore.

The scene was one of luxury that had
become a fine art, every detail being in itself
so faultless, it required but the completing
touch of contiguity to render it a rounded
whole of perfection. The onlooker might
well pause and ask himself if the developments
of wealth, refinement, and culture,
could reach a fisher degree than was displayed
that evening within the walls of this
miniature La Scala.

The curtain rose on the perennially new
and refreshing Box and Cox, in which bliss
James aojain distinguished herself and scored
her final points to rounds of ringing laughter
and spontaneous applause, which savoured more
of the "Surrey side," than of a languid nil admit
audience of this critical century. Between
the farce and the serious work of the even-nor
music held sw^av, and La Diva's glorious
voice captivated all hearts and brains in Owen
Meredith's "Aux Italiens," its final appealing
line rounding each verse with the pathetic cry,
Non ti corda di me, non ti corda di me ! "

It was during this interval that Mr.
Tremain, making his appearance in the Greenroom,
found Miss Hildreth already there
awaiting her first call. She was alone for
the moment, and was standing with bent
head and clasped hands, leaning against the
tall carved chimney screen that shielded the
low burning logs on the hearth.

The long folds of her first costume, a
iidglig^e of Worth's conception, fell about
her in a clinging amber sheen, across which
the fits and draperies of duchesse lace
fell in filmy cascades. Philip stopped involuntarily
for a moment, and looked at
her. Her marvellous loveliness struck him
afresh, as, indeed, it had a habit of doing
whenever he came upon her unawares. This
attribute was indeed one of Miss Hildreth's
chief charms ; you forgot her actual loveliness
when away from her, and were apt to
criticise not only it, but her. It was a
criticism, however, that fell to pieces at the
first contact with her, and which left you

only conscious of her beauty and her fascination.
You could not analyse her when she
smiled, or when her deep, tender, dark blue
eyes looked full into your own.

Miss Hildreth had not heard Philip's
entrance ; and he thus had an opportunity
of watching her undisturbed and unconscious.
Despite the make-up of rouge and bismuth,
put on so delicately as to be almost imperceptible,
the face was at that momenta
sad one. All the fire, and life, and spirit,
had gone out of it, and in their places an
expression of weariness and despondency had
crept about the mouth and eyes, which was
strangely pathetic because so at variance
with Miss Hildreth's usual bearing. Even
the attitude, half-listless, half weary, bespoke
a state of mental depression and dejection.

Philip, as he watched her, recalled Miss
James's unequivocal suggestions, and almost
against his weill found himself speculating
as to which episode out of those ten unknown
years of her life she was lamenting at that

raiment. He had not been present at the
tea hour, and therefore had missed Rosalie's
well-turned opportunity ; but even without
that, Miss James had contrived to sow the
seeds of distrust and suspicion in his mind.

He could not look upon Patricia now
without the record of those long ten years
arising between him and her; across whose
closed pages what experiences might not be
written ! Even her beauty became a source
of like animadversion ; could any woman
possessing such a face and form count thirty
years off life's score and not have drunk deep,
even to satiety, of the wine of passion, that
turns even as one's lips touch the cup's brim
into the waters of Lethe ? Miss James was
right ; those ten years wherein Patricia had
grown from girlhood to womanhood must
hold some hidden memories, into which for
his peace of mind it were best he did not
look, and from whose influence, as from her
personality, it were wisest for him to detach
himself at once.

He would end his visit at the Folly in a
day or so, and when he left it so would he
leave behind all recollection and all know-led
se of Patricia. He desired to know nothing;
of her immediate past, he would refuse to
be interested in her present or her future.
Only, before he bid a long good-bye to the
Folly and its inmates, he must once more see
A dele Lamien ; there was something to be
said to her, and he must say it.

He moved slightly forward, and as he
did so Patricia turned and looked up. In
an instant the softer and sadder shadows
passed from her face, her eyes regained their
fire and light, the smile came back to her
lips and chased away the dimples in cheek
and chin, the soft evanescent bloom stole
upward and renewed her youth and freshness
as colour and contrast can alone do.

Mr. Tremain came towards her grave
and unsmiling, and with something of the
old dark anger on his face, that ten years
ego had frightened her and deterred her from

VOL. II. L

uttering the few words of reconciliation hovering
on her lips ; this anger was all the more
pronounced because of his character costume
of light livery. One does not naturally associate
buckskin tops and a striped waistcoat
with a countenance of gloomy disapproval

Miss Hildreth took in the situation at a
glance, and laughed out at him, one of her
cold light mocking laughs, that angered
Philip with its ring of insincerity.

Well, my Knight of the Rueful
Countenance," she exclaimed, "you look not
only bored, but in a rage 1 Ah, my dear
Philip, when will you learn how foolish and
handle a thing it is to expend your reserve
emotions on trifles ? We Americans are
accused of being a race incapable of experiencing
any grand passion, either in
conception or realisation. Perhaps it is
because after cultivating our sensibilities to
the highest pitch we are content to expend
them on trivialities. I remember a clever
Englishman once telling me that we as a

nation have no measurable idea of passion
save in the abstract ; we appreciate wit
and humour, subtle argument, keen incisive
reasoning, but as to the heights and depths
of one terrible all-mastering, all-absorbing
emotion, it is as a dead letter to us. Our
highest expression of nervous force results in
an exaggerated friendship, or a marriage of
convenience ; we are simply incapable of what
the French call une grande passion "

She stopped with another little laugh,
but Mr. Tremain made no reply, so with
the slightest possible shrug of her shoulders
she continued :

"For example — and pardon my using you
as a peg upon which to hang my argument
to look at you at this moment one would
declare that nothing less than a complete collapse
of the entire social system could account
for such an expression of abject wretchedness.
How can one be supposed to know that it is
the result of nothing more tragic than an
ill-starched necktie, or a poor-fitting coat ? "

L 2

Again she laughed, and Philip felt the
blood surge up to his face at her taunting
raillery.

I should feel honoured at being considered
worthy your mockery," he said,
quickly, '' only that this time I cannot plead
guilty to the impeachment ; my costume,
even to its insignificant details, is, I beg to
state, beyond reproach. I cannot complain
even of a rumpled tie, or an uncomfortable
coat."

She shrugged her shoulders indifferently.
You are fortunate and to be congratulated.
Does not Madame, de Eemusat tell us of the
annoyance caused the great Napoleon by too
tight arm-holes, and of Josephine's tears over
the loss of one Cashmere, out of her two or
three score ? You see, my dear Philip, even
the heroes of our immediate past were not
above acknowledging their little weaknesses.
Such items are the crumpled rose-leaves and
parched peas of greatness. Dare we of a
lesser mould scoff at them ? "

She turned away from him as she spoke,
leaving him with a decided feeling of having
been taken at a disadvantage. His call followed
almost immediately, so he had no time
to reply ; but the remembrance of her mockery
remained with him, and added a touch of
bitterness and reality to the situations of the
play, in which he and she bore reversed
relations to those of real life.

The drama selected by Esther Newbold,
The Ladies' Battle, is too well-known and
too great a favourite to require description.
Perhaps of all drawing-room comedies it is
the most pleasing and the most comprehensive.
Those who have seen the foremost
actresses of our clay personate the young and
beautiful Countess d'Autreval — who is not
ashamed, though fully conscious, of her love
for Henri de Flavigneul, and who bravely
relinquishes it in favour of her girlish niece,
Leonie de Yillegontier — will remember what
scope can be shown in the development of that
character, whose fundamental attributes seem

at first sight to be those of impulse and self-gratification.


The scenes moved on with magic smoothness
and completeness, and gradually, as the
interest grew and deepened, the audience
began to realise that it was upon Miss Hildreth
as the Countess, and Mr. Tremain as Henri,
that the chief influence and importance of the
play culminated. The undercurrent of suppressed
antagonism that existed between them
communicated itself to the onlookers with a
subtle, yet potent power; while to those who
could read the writing; between the lines, the
situations assumed a potential gravity and
significance.

From the moment of the Countess's soliloquy,
"Now to be more than woman," when,
recognising her growing love for the young
soldier, she consults her looking-glass as the
oracle which is to encourage or dissuade her
from entering the lists against Leonie, and
then lays it down with the significant line,
"Ah, it has deceived so many ! " to her final

act of renunciation, Patricia carried the house
with her, and left no loophole for any anti-interest
or climax.

Baby Leonard made a charming Leonie.
Her innocent face and unsophisticated manner
were a capital study and a clever following
of nature ; but it was on Patricia Hildreth
that the sympathy and sentiment centred,
and there arose almost a cry of disappointment
when the curtain dropped finally upon
Leonie's happiness, at the price of the nobler
nature's self-sacrifice. Even her fellow actors
felt her potency, and Philip most of all.

He caught her hand in his as she left the
flies, and detained her one moment.

"Patty," he cried, "Patty, once more let
me plead with you. Is it true, dear — are
your words something more than allegory :

Beneath the wreath and robe, the heart unseen
Oft throbs-smith anguish.'

Are they true of your heart, Patty, Patty ? "
But she checked him with her old impatient

gesture, drawing away her hand
from his close clasp, and laughing lightly,
ironically.

*' My dear Philip, too much simulating
of passion has overturned your habitual
self-control. Fancy quoting a couplet out
of a modern drama by way of asking a
question ! But let me follow your lead and
answer you from the epilogue :

Men conquer all, but women conquer men.' "

Then she passed by him still laughing,
and the echo of her laughter came back to
him long after the last gleam of her silks
and laces had disappeared from sight.

A grand ball completed the celebration
of George Newbold's birthday, and those
who where perforce the wall-flowers of the
occasion noticed, not without comment,
that Mr. Tremain kept sedulously away from
Miss Hildreth, and that Patricia danced more
often with the dark Russian stranger than
with any other of Mrs. Newbold's black-coated

contingent. Or, as the men put it
afterwards in the smoking-room, that conceited,
distinguished, red-ribbon foreigner
devoted himself exclusively to the most
beautiful woman of the evening with occasional
relapses to the plainest girl.

It was thus that Miss Hildreth and
Rosalie James divided the honours, if such
they could be called, of Count Vladimir
Mellikoff's attentions.

"it is hopeless."

True to his resolution, made more absolute
than ever by Miss Hildreth's last openly
displayed indifference, Mr. Tremain determined
to leave the Folly on the first possible
excuse. His visit had already prolonged
itself far beyond its original limits, and in
the departure of his friend Mainwaring, he
saw a happy opportunity of effacing himself
naturally and without too violent a wrench.
John Mainwaring had come down only
for the theatricals, and nothing could be
more d ]propos than for Philip to make his
adieux with him. As for Patricia, he entertained
no softer sentiment towards her than

that of distinct disapprobation. He felt it
would be a relief to get himself away from her
influence and from the spell of her beauty.
Twice now she had repudiated him and the
love he pleaded ; what better proof of her
thorough deterioration could any man ask
for than this ? Could any words have been
more sharp than hers, or speak more openly
of defiance and glad rejection ? Apparently
she retained not one tender recollection of
the past, or the smallest desire to recur toit.
She met him always with cool raillery,
mocking aphorisms, or taunting satire ; she
was hard, brilliant, unresponsive as the
diamonds she wore so regally, and to throw
oneself upon her sympathies was to wilfully
grasp at the glittering sheen of unreality,
and be wounded because the substance
slipped from one's hold.

Away from her and once more absorbed
in the work of his profession, Mr. Tremaiii
felt he could forget her and the past few-days
of unrest and disquietude. The calm

moiiotoDy of his personal self-centred routine
became a haven of rest in his eyes, to which
he looked forward with impatience ; forgetting
that it is one's inner state of being that
makes or mars the tranquillity of one's,
existence.

Accordingly Mr. Tremain ordered the
packing of his portmanteaux, and made
known his coming departure the next
morning at the very late breakfast hour,
at which feast Esther and a few of her
guests appeared languid and fatigued, and
instant in their demands for the strongest
black coffee.

Philip observed with relief that Miss
Hildreth was not among the number. Little
Marianne was there, sitting by her mother's
side, her fair child face looking all the
sweeter and fresher by contrast with the
jaded home appearance of her elders.
Vladimir Mellikoff was also among the
missing ; but Miss James was at her place,
seemingly none the worse for her exertions

of the eveniiio- before, her sallow countenance
and (lark eyes being untouched either by
fatigue or inertia.

Mrs. Newbold received Philip's announcement
with voluble expressions of protest.

"Oh, but indeed you must not go," she
said, 'ewe really cannot spare you; do reconsider."
And she looked at him with
an almost exaggerated expression of entreaty
in her blue eyes.

You are very flattering and very kind,"
replied Philip, avoiding her glance, and
answering in conventional tones and words,
but really 1 must go, it is impossible I
should stay longer. Mainwaring has brought
me news of an important case, which has
been advanced on the calendar, in which
I am involved, and even if this were not
the case, I could not, my dear Esther, desire
to wear out so warm a welcome as yours."

But Mrs. Newbold did not rally to the
implied compliment. She shook her head
dubiously as she said :

*' That is only a faqon de j^cirler. I did
not suppose, Philip, that you would ever
descend to subterfuge."

At which Mr. Tremain laughed, and Miss
James lifted her eyebrows in scarcely concealed
superciliousness.

One could almost be discourteous to
Mr. Mainspring, in thought, at least," continued
Esther, regarding that dark-visaged
young man with an expression that belied
her smile.

To which he replied, with a half-shrug
of his shoulders, that he considered himself
fortunate in attracting any portion of Mrs.
Newbold's attention. It was a satisfaction to
be regarded actively by her, even though that
activity took the form of animosity.

Esther bit her lip and was silenced ; but
George Newbold laughed, and remarked aside
to Dick Darling that that was a hit straight
out from the shoulder.

Presently Marianne, who had been feeding
the lono^-sufferino' Trim on deviled kidney

scraps, and enjoying, with all the cruelty of
childhood, his tears and squeers, lifted her
golden head and innocent eyes, and startled
the entire company by exclaiming, in her
clear shrill treble :

Mumsey, why does Mr. Yal ask so many
questions about my Lammy, and when is my
Lammy coming back again ? "

Esther, decidedly taken by surprise,
turned quickly, and spoke with unaccustomed
sharpness.

Who are you talking about, Mimi ?
Who is Mr. Yal ? It really is extraordinary
the amount of gossip you manage to imbibe
from unknown sources."

Mr. Yal," replied little ]\Iimi, with unabashed
frankness, ''Mr. Anal is Mr. Yal. I
can't say all his name 'cause it's too long, so
he said I was to call him Mr. Yal. He came
out in the garden when I was getting Popsey's
bufifday flowers, and he talked to me all about
Lammy ; and when I told him Lammy's very
own name, his eyes got so black, and he said,

When is she coming back ? ' and, of course,
I didn't know. Miss James, she knows Mr.
Val ; she's always talking' to him."

At which lucid and candid explanation
Miss James felt the blood rush hotly to her
cheeks, and Mr. Tremain, with kindly thought,
turned attention from her by saying, quickly :

It must be the Count, Mimi designates
by that innocent abbreviation. With the
frank socialism of childhood, she is no respecter
of persons. ' Mr. Val ' sounds just as
important in her ears as Count Vladimir does
in ours."

'•' She's a ridiculous little monkey," replied
Esther, impatiently ; and then the subject
dropped, much to Philip's chagrin, as he
desired to glean some further particulars
concerning Mdlle. Lamien's probable return.
Conversation languished after this, however,
and one by one the women stole away to
their bedrooms, there to sleep off the excitement
and fatigue of the previous night.

It w.^s arranged that Mr. Tremain and his

friend should take the six o'clock evening;
boat, which would, as Freddy Slade remarked,
land them in New York in ample time for a
'refreshed" prior to dinner at the club, at
that magic hour when each small round table
is daintily set out in fine linen and glittering
silver, and surrounded by the best-known
convives of clubroom.

The pleasantness hour, by Jove, of the
whole twenty-four," said Freddy, enthusiastically.
" Upon my word, I quite envy you
fellows the sensation you'll produce when you
walk into the ' Union.' You will actually
smell of the country, ' pastures green,' you
know and all that sort of thing."

For the better part of the day the house
remained silent and deserted as far as the
lower rooms were concerned, and luncheon,
which was at all times a movable feast,
became on this occasion a translated one, to
be partaken of by the fairer sex within the
privacy of their own apartments, and in the
luxury of dishabille.

VOL. II. M

Late in the afternoon Mr. Tremain made
his way to Esther Newbold's boudoir, and
knocking with assured familiarity, opened
the door almost before the customary words
of invitation. He found Mrs. Newbold alone,
lounging far back in a '' sleepy hollow "
of a chair, with a tiny tea-service on a
low, Japanese stool beside her. She welcomed
him cordially and with a charming smile.

"Ah," she exclaimed, " is it yon, Philip ?
I hope you have repented of your morning
decision and have come to tell me so, and
beg my forgiveness."

For what ? " asked he, wilfully dense.

For saying you were going away, of
course. Haven't you come to tell me you
will not go after all ? "

No," said Philip, without any answering
smile. "I have come, on the contrary, to bid
you good-bye."

You are unkind," exclaimed Mrs. News
impetuously, "and — you are unwise.
What, Philip, are you going to lay down

your arms so tamely, and acknowledge yourself
beaten by a woman ? "

*sit would seem so, my dear Esther, if
flight means that I am vanquished. Will you
give me some of your tea as a stirrup-cup ? "

She answered him by pouring out the
fragrant Pekoe and handing; it to him in
silence ; the tears stood in her eyes and her
mouth quivered a little. She sat still as
Philip drank the tea, and then, when he
had put down the empty cup and come back
to his place beside her, she turned and
spoke quickly, and with almost nervous impetuosity.


Oh, Philip, I am sorry, grieved, inexpressibly
grieved that you should go in this
way. I had hoped so much for you — for
her — yes, more for her — from the propinquity
of these few days. And it has all come to
nothing, and you are going away, and how
can it be possible for you ever to come
together, if you persistently let slip each
opportunity of an understanding ? "

M 2

She spoke with so much real earnestness
that Philip was greatly touched. It needed not
the mention of Patricia's name to make plain
to him who was the object of Esther's solicitude,
and he could not but smile sadly ashe
thought how little worthy was she of
Esther's tears and regrets. He bent towards
her and took her hand in his,

"My dear little friend," he said, '' tha
truest friend ever granted to an undeserving
man, I beg you not to trouble yourself about
me or my unfortunate affairs. Let me assure
you that I am truly grateful to you for
the opportunity you provided me with in
which once more to seek and learn my fate.
If the result, and my answer, has been buta
double repetition of that of ten years ago,
is that your fault ? My dear Esther, I have
looked upon my old love without prejudice
or bias, and I have seen her stripped of all
the thousand and one artifices that go to makeup
the woman of the world ; we have stood
face to face with nothing: between us save

the memory of the jDast, and I can say to
you with all truth and earnestness, that I
am not only glad, but thankful, that her
answer to my appeal was what it was.
Believe me, there could never be any solid
happiness for us so long as the ten years of
our separation lies between us like a gulf,
dividing our past from our present. It is
better as it is, dear Esther, it is better as
it is."

He unloosed her hand, and, rising, walked
hastily up and down the room. Mrs. Newbold
was crying openly, scarcely wiping away the
tears as they fell.

Oh, Philip ! " she pleaded, her voice
pitiful and broken, ** indeed, indeed, you
judge her too harshly. Oh, can you not
read her heart ; are you so blind, so very
blind, as not to see it is for you she cares,
and you only ? It is because she loves you
that she strives to hide it all ; that she laughs
and jests, and is bitter, and mocking, and
gay, and frivolous by turns, and never, never

once reveals the real, passionate, throbbing-woman's
heart beneath these artifices. Oh,
what can I say to open your eyes ? "

*' Say nothing," he replied, sternly, '^ it
is best as it is. I am not one, Esther, as
you know, to come lightly to a decision,
especially one of such grave importance tome
; but in this you cannot change me ;
nothing can alter my decision. You are
blinded by your loyalty, you see her as
you fain would see her, with the glamour
of her beauty and her fascination surrounding
her so closely you cannot perceive the real
woman beneath. But I have beheld her
as she is, cold, hard, brilliant, illusive, heartless
; she is but the mocking personation of
her old self ; the outside tenement, beautiful,
bewitching, but soulless and insincere. I
told you when we spoke of this before that
I would not willingly again become the plaything
of a woman's vanity, and yet, so frail
are man's resolves, I did again put my fate
to the touch, and have again failed and

lost. T am not likely to repeat my folly,
Esther, when I can still hear the words of
scorn with which she repudiated me, and
flung back my love as not worthy her consideration."


"It is hopeless, then," cried Esther, imploringly.


"Yes," he replied, shortly, "it is hopeless,
and I am glad that it is so."

When next he spoke, it was upon indifferent
topics, and there was that in his
face and voice which warned Esther against
reopening the former subject. Before he left
her he stood a moment, holding her hand,
and looking down into her flushed and earnest
face.

Do not think me ungrateful," he said,
with one of his rare, sweet smiles ; " I have
had my opportunity, it is my fault that I
failed to utilise it to my advantage. After
all, these things are arranged for us by a
higher power than our own wills. To you,
Esther, I can never feel aught but grateful.

and you know whenever you need my poor
services, they are yours without the asking."

*' And hers, Philip, hers also," she pleaded,
'you would not refuse your help to her, should
she ever require it ? "

*that is such an unlikely contingency,
your question needs no reply," he answered,
gravely ; and bending his head until his
lips touched the hand he held, he said, with
simple gravity : ** Good-bye, Esther, and God
bless you."

And so he went away from her, and
Mrs. Newbold, with the unreasoning instinct
of her sex, felt she had never esteemed him
so highly as now, when he refused the request
she urged so ardently upon him.

THE SONG OF THE CIGALE.

Me. Remain, on leaving Mrs. Newbold's
boudoir, made his way, without encountering
any one, to the lower hall, turning
instinctively from the billiard - room, from
whence the sound of the cues against the
balls, and an occasional exclamation proclaimed
the occupation of the men.

In his present state of mind he felt
no inclination to join them, or take part
in the employment of the hour. His conversation
with Esther had reawakened all
the unrest and bitterness of his heart
against Patricia. Looked at in any light,
her conduct could not but appear heartless
and unwomanly, and the remembrance of

it — of lier scornful eyes and smiling, mocking
lips — rankled in his mind and added
the one touch of vindictiveness that is so
closely allied to revenge, as to be a difference
in name only.

Mr. Tremain would have scouted any
such paltry feeling as a desire for retaliation,
and yet deep down in his heart there
lay the half-developed germ. Could any
vendetta strike her heart more surely
than such an action on his part, as should
prove to her how brittle were the bands
she had woven, how impotent her power
to hold captive the man she had scorned?

There remained yet an hour before the
time of his departure, and Philip, more by
instinct than design, turned towards the
library, and, pushing back the noiseless
'poTtieves, entered. The room was empty,
and lay in the half shadow of the quick
coming evening. A touch of gold from
the setting sun still lingered on the painted
vvdndows, touching to a deeper tone the

blues and purples in the classic folds of
Clio's drapery. One casement stood open,
and the evening air floated in, fragrant
with a thousand odours from Nature's
laboratory ; strong and subtle and all-powerful
arose the keen scent of the musk
plant, overcoming all lesser perfumes, and
assertion with overwhelming; insistence its
supremacy. One long low ray of sunlight
fell across the picture on the easel, lighting
up with magic radiance the passionate
languor of lo's face, and markings with
stronger emphasis Jupiter's stern acceptation
of her allurements.

Still follow incr his instincts Mr. Tremain

o

crossed the long room, and drawing back
the curtains that separated the music-parlour
from the library, stood for a moment uncertain
as to his further action. The room
was unlighted save for the same level rays
of dying sunlight, and the piano that stood
at the far end was thus lost in the quivering
darkness.

Philip, even as he stood upon the
threshold, and before his eyes became accustomed
to the dim light, was conscious
of the presence of some one within the
room beside himself, and gradually as the
obscurity became penetrable he made out
a dark figure sitting before the silent
instrument, with bowed head, about whose
throat and face hung heavy, clinging folds
of black lace. Simultaneously with his discernment
of this presence, he recognised
its personality, and as he did so felt alarmed
and electrified by the sudden rush and
tumult which took possession of his being.
The blood leapt to his face, he felt it throb
in his temples and pulse in his veins, ashe
realised without farther assurance, and
before the bowed head was lifted and the
pale, cold face gleamed out of the sombre
surroundings, that it was Adele Lamien
who sat there, and that he was unreasonably
glad and sorry, repentant and rejoicing,
that he should thus have one more interview

with lier before lie should vanish out
of her life, as Patricia had already passed
from out of his.

He advanced slowly and stood before her.
As he approached, she dropped her protecting
hands and sat silent, immovable, her
pale face — pale with the pallor of mental conflict
— looking strange and unearthly amidst
its setting of falling black draperies, the dark
bruise upon her cheek growing livid in the
half lights. Suddenly, she threw back her
head and smiled upon him.

It was but the second time he had ever
seen her smile, and as the radiance and
glory broke over her face and flooded it
for one brief moment, with a brightness and
transient loveliness, he started, for something
in that smile and face, some strange, subtle,
illusive likeness to some one whom he knew,
and yet whom he could not name, grew into
existence with the fleeting radiance, and
faded with it before he could grasp at the
reality. It was but a mere shadow of a

resemblance, gone as soon as discovered,
without substance, without reason, and yet
perceptible, even when most baffling.

So sudden had been her transformation,
and so rapid the return to the old habitual
quietude and repression of her countenance,
Philip found himself wondering if, after all,
he was not under a delusion, or that his
eyes, dulled by the dim obscurity of the room,
had not mistaken the temporary flashing
and paling of a sunbeam for that evanescent
light on cheek and brow.

He had remained standing and silent,
during the brief moment that elapsed between
this entrance and her recognition ; he bent
over her now, and speaking quietly, said :

I am fortunate, Mdlle. Lamien, in finding
you — and alone."

"You are very kind," she answered, in a
low, repressed voice, a voice that had through
all its repression a throb of passion. '* Surely
Mr. Tremain can find pleasant and more
amusing companions than I."

'none who can interest me so deeply,
believe me'' replied Philip, gravely. *' You
have returned, mademoiselle, the better, I
trust, for your absence ? "

My absence ? " she queried, a little surprised
; then more quickly, " Ah, yes, my
absence ; it was but an affair of hours, a
necessity, not a pleasure. All the same, I
thank you. I am better for the change."

Philip had waited for some sign of invitation
to remain, but as none came, he grew
bolder, interpreting her silence as best pleased
him, and drawing up a low arm-chair, took
his place beside her, at such an angle as
enabled him to watch her face without effort.

You have been missed, mademoiselle, by
more than one," he said, slowly; "your name
has been often mentioned, even by those
unknown to you."

Indeed," she replied, more quickly than
usual ; *•' who has done me that honour ? "

I shall answer your question by another,"
said Philip; "Mdlle. Lamien, where and when

have you known Count Vladimir Mellikoff?
Who and what is he, that he should express his
surprise and displeasure at your movements ? "
She drew a honos sio^h, and turned her
head away from him, as she answered slowly
and in a low voice :

'where and when have I known Count
Vladimir Mellikoff? Who and what is he?
My reply can be brief enough, Mr. Tremain,
to both questions : I have never known
Count Vladimir at any time, I have no idea
who or what he is."

Her words were concise and to the point,
but they failed to convince Philip of their
absolute sincerity. He said nothing for a
few moments, but the silence that fell
between them was alive with suggestion ;
and Philip, as he watched her, felt the old
inconsequent irrational influence of her
personality creep over him, wrapping him
about in a half-magnetic, half willing subjection
; and which, while recognising its
power, he was unable to throw off.

It was she who broke the silence with
an upward gesture of disdain, as she said :

Why should we speak upon so worn
out a theme as my existence, Mr. Tremain ?
There are none concerned in my past who
would care to recognise me now." Then
suddenly, and with a quick movement
towards the piano : " Shall I play for you,
Mr. Tremain?"

She did not wait for his reply, but struck
at once a few low notes, a minor chord or
two that swept across the dim half-lights,
and seemed but an outcome of the twilight,
and of the last faint golden rays fading
moment by moment in the far western
sky. Then a headlong rush and tumult of
melody caught up the passion, and despair,
and lono^ino^ of a soul in bondage struoo-linor
to be free, beating against the bars, crying
out in anguish, then sinking; back into
despondency, and with a final moan striking-down
wards to despair.

Mr. Tremain, as he listened, felt himself

VOL. II. X

caught up in the rush and movement, and
borne along with it, following her will and
pleasure even as her white fingers flew over
the ivory keys, striking them now with fiery
impetuosity, now with caressing softness,
and again with lingering tenderness. Her
slight fissure in its black dress was alive
and sinuous, responding to each emotion ;
her pale face grew illumined beneath its
weight of white hair and drooping laces that
fell about it. She was the living incarnation
of the music; and Philip, half spell-bound,
half realising the potency of the spell, found
himself repeating mentally, 'the charm of
woven paces and of waving hands." Was
she a Vivian as well ?

She ceased playing as he came and stood
beside her, and in the hush that fell between
them, the echo of light laughter floated to
them from the rooms above. It was a
discord, a false note in the intensity of
the theme.

Philip bent towards her, almost touching

the white hair with his lips ; it was a
moment of exquisite uncertainty. Then she
struck the notes again, and a plaintive prelude
stole out, while in a low voice, monotonous
yet musical, that seemed but the continuation
of the melody, she said rather than sang :

'' I am a woman,

Therefore I may not
Fly to him, cry to him.

Bid him delay not.
What though he part from me,
Tearing my heart from me,

Hurt without cure ! "

Her voice faltered, sank into silence,
her hands fell from the keys and lay
motionless upon her lap. Philip, to whom
the first line of her song had come not asa
surprise, but as an expected climax, bent
forward eagerly. Once again he heard the
mocking voice of his vision, once again the
faint sweet perfume of violets stole upward,
robbing him of the reality of the present,
restoring to him the past with all its unfulfilled
promise and its hoj^e.

N 2

It was the passion of surprise, not of
arrangement or premeditation, that held
him, and that swaying him against his better
self, made him speak from the emotion of
the moment.

Adele," he said, his voice low and
restrained. *' Adele, you have doubtless
heard my story ; you knows that I have
been the sport, the plaything of one woman's
vanity for all the better years of my life ;
and yet I dare to offer you the heart she
has scorned. Adele, will you accept it ?
Will you restore my faith and belief in
womanhood ; that faith and trust which
another woman has so nearly destroyed ?
Hush, wait one moment before you speak.
Yes, I know I am almost a stranger to you,
I have seen you but half-a-dozen times ;
you know but little of me, and that little
is not of the best. And, I too, what do
T know of you ? Nothing, save what Esther
was pleased to tell us all concerning you.
I realise that your past is seared and crossed

by sorrow and grief, but always, Adele,
always since first I saw yon, you have
haunted me, you have possessed me, you
have laid me under a spell. Break that
spell now by saying you will listen to me ;
by telling me that at last, however late in
life, my faith, my belief, my trust shall not
be given in vain."

He stopped, and she looking up quickly
saw the flush of earnestness upon his face,
the light of eagerness in his eyes. She let
fall her glance, and a little smile — was it of
triumph or of pity ? — crept out about the
mouth, that died ere he could catch its
curves. She had listened to him apparently
without surprise, and without betraying
emotion of any kind ; her voice fell dull
and cold when she spoke.

You proffer a strange request, Mr.
Tremain, and one not easy of reply. Is it
possible you can be in earnest ? Have you
not heard my story ? Has not the whole
of Madame Newbold's world become cognisant

of its details ? Do you not know that Adele
Lamien is a woman on whom rests the blight
of suspicion, if not of guilt ? A woman
whose life has been one of no common
misery. Do you realise what it means to
be suspected of crime, branded as a fugitive,
an outcast ? Can you gauge the depths of
misery contained in the words ruined and
repudiated ? Do you not know that one
spot upon a woman's reputation, though
incurred through no fault of her own,
stamps her for ever in the eyes of your
world. Can you, knowing all this, realising
it, yet ask me to listen to your words of
vehemence ? You, Philip Tremain ! Ah, do
you not know I would give my very heart's
happiness if I might so listen ? No, no ;
that is not what I mean. You are mad,
Mr. Tremain, mad with the desire born of
a moment's passion."

I am not mad, Adele," he urged. " I
ask you again to listen to me, and I tell
you again that I neither care nor wish to

know more of your past than you desire
to tell me. Cannot we forget that, cannot
I make for you a future that shall outlive
your past ? Nay, wait one moment, there
is something more I must say. You know
I have no fresh first devotion to offer you,
I have not even a heart swept and garnished
for your acceptance. I did not wish to love
you, I am not sure I love you even now ;
all I know is that you draw me to you with
invisible chains ; that you take from me all
resistance, all desire to resist."

"Ah," she exclaimed, with infinite bitterness,
'you speak as a man. We women
do not so easily break the bonds that have
held us for so long. Suppose I were to take
you at your word, suppose I were to listen
to you, to your own undoing ? What would
be the outcome of it? I, a woman, Adele
Lamien, who perchance has looked shame in
the face, who may have swept the by-ways
of wickedness with her skirts, I to demand
of you this sacrifice, and for \vhat ? That

you may hear my name spoken in whispers
and with bated breath ; that you may seeme
pointed at in scorn and derision ; that
never may you look at me, never see my
face, without the bitter memory of my buried
past rising up between us. No, this may
not be ; you have loved before, it is not
love you feel now, it is resentment, disappointment,
anger. Put by your fancy of the
hour, Mr. Tremain, and let Adele Lamien
fade out of your life even as she has come
into it, an accident only. Do you not
remember the fable and fate of the poor
Cigale ?

The grasshopper so blithe and gay,
Sang the summer time away ;
Pinched and poor the spendthrift grew,
When the keen north-easter blew.'

1 am that poor Cigale. I have had my
summer time, and now it is winter ; and
}'ou would fain make me believe that one
can conjure up a second summer from out
l^he ruins of autumn's blasts ; nay, that is

impossible alike for you as for me. Believe
me, no good has ever come from a passion
£0 suddenly developed, as this you plead
now. You will live to thank me for my
words, even if now, at this very moment, you
are not confessing their justice."

She rose as she finished, and moved somewhat
away from him. The darkness of the
early May evening had crept up and about
them unnoticed; she had become indistinct
and unreal, a part of the shadows that surrounded
her ; and Mr. Tremain, as he listened
to the low, even notes of her voice, felt the
unreality of his position grow more and more
defined.

He had been mad — mad with a moment's
passion ; and yet — and yet, what was this
impalpable, intangible influence that drew him
to her with invisible cords, even while he
realised the wisdom of her words, and rejoiced
in the freedom she forced back upon
him ?

The silence and the darkness increased ;

lie became but a dim outline against the
deeper tones of shadow, her pale face alone
showing; in the ffloom.

"You scarcely give me a choice, Adele,"
he said ; " and yet how is it possible for me to
accept your decision ? "

His words were followed by a light laugh ;
a chord struck sharply, and then from out
the obscurity came her voice again. But
what was this change in it ? What was
this undertone of mocking raillery that
sounded so familiar and yet so incongruous ?

Said I not truly, Mr. Tremain, you are
mad to ask me to listen to you ; and yet —
ah, Philip — perhaps it would be wiser for
us both could I but yield."

"Then listen, I entreat, Adele," he cried,
impetuously, " do not make your decision
a final one ; leave it open as a possibility
for future consideration. Do not let me ask
in vain ; only say that you will think twice
before you refuse me definitely. Do I ask
too much ? "

Too much ! " lie echoed, and her voice
sank to a whisper. "Is it too much to put
the cup of water to the parched lips of a dying
man, and bid him drink ? AYill he refuse,
think you ? Do you know how greatly you
tempt me ? Shall not you and I come to
repent with bitterness this parleying with the
inevitable ? Well, then, since you will have
it so, and since my will is weak — ah, so
very weak — and fate is strong, it shall be
as you wish. I will make no final decision.
I will wait. Surely this should be triumph
enough, even for me, to know that I have
won you from the remembrance — nay, from
the very presence of — Patricia Hildreth ! "

At Patty's name thrust thus sharply and.
unexpectedly upon him, Philip started forward,
impelled by the same unknown, unreasoning
force that had held and controlled him
throughout their interview, but he was too
late. He was conscious of a light silken
rustle, a low laugh, a hand laid for a moment
on his, and then he was alone.

As Mcllle. Lamien drew the poitiers behind
her, two figures crept back into the
obscurity of the room beyond, and as she
passed swiftly on and out into the hall, a
whisper in a woman's voice echoed across
the shadows :

"Are you satisfied — convinced ? There is
no mistake ?"

*' I am absolutely convinced, mademoiselle,
there can be no mistake," answered a second,
carefully modulated voice.

A moment later Miss James stole quietly
out of the now dark library, followed by
the sombre, gliding figure of Vladimir Ellis


INTROSPECTION.

The party at the Folly had broken up at last,
and, going the way of all things terrestrial,
was already numbered among the pleasures
of the have been.

Mrs. Newbold had flitted seaward with
little Marianne, her husband, her maid, and
a small army of dress-baskets and boxes. The
golden glory of July held the gardens and
woods, the terraces and parterres, in the spell
of midsummer colouring ; flinging abroad with
generous hand its meed of sunshine, its wealth
of fruit, its richness of blossom, its long hours
of fullest beauty, when the intense blue
heavens above, the smiling earth below, and

the very atmosphere of soft delicious haze
seemed to palpitate with their own tropical
luxuriance.

Mrs. Newbold's island home never looked
more enchanting or enchanted than in this
'' royal month' and yet it was just at this
perfected time that stern fashion decreed
she should leave it, and seek for pleasure
and relaxation within the narrow limits and
confined area of George Newbold's yacht.
And Esther, with a courage worthy of a
better cause, never dreamed of disputing
fashion's mandate, but bore with heroic
fortitude the thousand and one restrictions
entailed upon her by existence in the Deerhound;
for even in that most luxurious
schooner her convenience had to suit itself
to space.

And so, while the Deerhound lay moored
at Newport, and Mrs. Esther entertained
and was entertained with almost royal
splendour, and the long summer days were
given up to feasting and amusement, and

the long summer nights to dancing and intrigue,
the Folly was deserted, its blinds
close drawn, its hospitable doors locked and
barred ; and the roses came to perfection,
and ran riot in their wantonness, showering
their petals in such lavish prodigality that
the garden paths lay strewn and heaped
with the crimson and white of their livery.

Even as in ancient Some a certain youthful
emperor, satiated with every guise of
amusement, worn out with pleasure and
fulfilled desire, buried the companions of
his licentiousness beneath an avalanche of
rose-leaves, which, as they fell, became their
grave-clothes and their pall.

And have we of to-day no likeness to
this pagan Heliogabalus ? Do not we bury
the best-beloved of our past beneath a cerecloth,
formed of the sweet sentiments of
forgetfulness ; and, turning from their appealing
eyes and sadly accusing faces, enter
with fresh zest and renewed enthusiasm upon
the untried excitements of the hour ? Are

we, after two thousand years of Christ's
humanity, and the awful lessons of Gethsemane
and Golgotha, so much less pagan ?

Mrs. Newbold had taken Dick Darling
with her in her flitting ; she had come to
have a very true affection for that somewhat
crude young lady, for Esther possessed so
much of the alchemist's power as to recognise
pure gold when she found it ; and also Miss
Darling's outspoken admiration for Patricia
Hildreth acted as a salve to her disappointed
and fruitless projects.

To Dick herself the prospect of three
weeks or a month at Newport on board the
most perfectly appointed yacht of the squadron,
with unlimited license to enjoy the passing
hour to the full, was, in her own phraseology,
"just too most awfully nailing ! " She danced
and she flirted, the latter in her own half-boyish
fashion. She smoked everybody's
cigarettes save her own. She won the ladies'
single-handed lawn tennis tournament, and
sported the prize — a jewelled racket and ball

brooch — with frank clelio'ht in her own
prowess. She drove Freddy Shade's tandem np
and down Bellevue Avenue all one morning,
and sailed Jack Howard's microscopic cutter
out to the Narrows and back in the afternoon.

She was, indeed, as happy as the day
was long ; like Browning's ' Duchess,' " she
loved whate'er she looked on, and her
looks went everywhere." And then, oh,
happy, thought, were there not more worlds
to conquer in the immediate future ? Did
not visions of New London, Shelter Island,
Mount Desert, and the Isle of Shoals stretch
out in endless perspective before her ? What
girl could dare to be otherwise than sublimely
happy so long as the sea laughed, and the
sun shone, and there were such beneficent
factors in the scheme of life and Providence
as horses, and dogs, and boats, to say nothing
of men and boys, who were but the playthings
of existence ?

And through all those long, luxurious
summer days, Mr. Tremain remained in

VOL. II.

town, returning a curt negative to all alluring
invitations.

He had not seen Mrs. Newbold assail after
his momentous interview with Mademoiselle
Lamien ; indeed, he had left the Folly immediately
after it, walking into New Brighton,
and proving but a sorry companion to John
Mainwaring, during their journey to New York.

To tell the truth, he felt himself to be
somewhat of a traitor to Esther, in that he
had permitted himself to become a traitor
to the memory of Patricia. He could not
quite forget or put from him Esther's earnest
words, Esther's eyes filled with tears, and
Esther's undeviating fidelity to the love of
his youth ; that love from which he had
now deliberately and by his own act cut
himself off for ever. He knew that to
Esther he could only appear as the most
weak and vacillating of men ; his own words
rang too clearly in his ears to allow him
for one moment to doubt what her judgment
upon his action would be.

There are two things no woman can
excuse or palliate in a man : disaffection
from herself where she has once been the
first object of his devotion, or disaffection
to an ideal which she has set up as a fetich,
and to which unswerving fidelity is expected
as a matter of right. Esther had set up
in this position the old love of ten years
ago that had existed between himself and
Patricia ; she had, so to S23eak, dug its dead
body from out its unquiet grave, and
breathing into it her own vitality and desire,
had set herself to work to re-create answering
in his heart. With the impetuosity
of woman's nature, which considers no
office so legitimately its own as that of
binding up broken hearts, and reuniting
broken truths, she endeavoured now to reconstruct
and rehabilitate this passion of his
youth, never pausing to reflect upon his
attitude in the case, or the probabilities of
failure which amounted to certainties.

She had failed, it was true; but that



is only half a failure that leaves matters
at the point from which they started. There
is always room for hope so long as certain
premises remain unchanged. Philip was still
unbound and unfettered, and Patricia was
still Patricia Hildreth. Were not these
sufficient foundations on which to build as
fancy dictated ?

Reflecting on this, and on his own position
from Esther's point of view, Mr. Tremain
could not but acknowledge that his proposal
to Mdlle. Lamien, and their partial engagement,
could only be regarded by Esther in
the light of direst treachery. Any reasons
he miofht brincr to bear in defence of his
present situation and the circumstances that
had led up to it, would, he knew, be scoffed
at and scouted by his staunch little friend.
Of what use would it be for him to enter
into the physiological side of the question ?
He could not hope to explain to her the
vague, impersonal power that drove him onto
this finale. Should he plead that he was

not altogether a free agent, and advance in
confirmation of this the subtle illusive resemblance
of Mdlle. Lamien to another someone,
equally shadowy and unreal, he would
be met with an incredulous smile, and a
suggestion that since he could urge no
stronger reason than that of a chance likeness,
why need he hesitate to exploits his
delusion ? Or why choose Adele Lamien's
negative unreality, in place of Patricia Hill
positive personality ?

It would be vain also to remind Esther
that not only had Patricia twice deliberately
refused him in words, but by open raillery
and covert mockery had emphasized those
refusals, more times than his pride cared to
count. No, Esther would be convinced by
none of these thugs ; it was worse than hopeless
to expect it of her, and therefore worse
than useless to appeal to her. In selecting
Adele Lamien for his future wife, he had cut
himself adrift from his own life, and from
the close sympathy and intimacy of those

few friends whose affection had made existence
worth living'.

o

He realised perfectly that in thus choosing
a woman upon whose past lay not only the
blight of secrecy but the curse of suspicion,
he made that past his own with all its weight
of shame and sin, nay, perhaps, even of crime,
at which she had so vaguely hinted. He
knew now that in that moment of surprise
and overmastering passion, when the spell
of her music and her presence held him
against his will, he had not reasoned, he
had not considered. He had let the potency
of the moment bear him away; he had, indeed,
seen dimly what the outcome must
inevitably be, and yet he had allowed himself
to drift on with the current, and made no
resistance.

His love, his pride, smarting and burning
beneath the cool insolence of Patricia's scorn,
hurried him on to such a declaration as
should be final, and break for ever the bonds
of those ten years that had held him so

long, and galled him so intolerably. He
would be free, and Patricia should see and
recognise his freedom and own its justice,
even though she laughed gaily and jested
mockingly upon it.

It was indeed in this half defined and
scarcely acknowledged retaliation, that he
now found his chief solace, for the matter of
his new engagement cannot be said to have
contributed to his happiness. Still, if fate was
so untoward as to eliminate all the higher
degrees of perfection from his destiny, it was
at least something gained to know that he
retained the power of wounding one woman
through another. It was not the greatest
or grandest revenge, nay, it had something
pitifully mean and ignoble about it ; but
it was revenge, and Philip was still human
enough not to have mastered that divine
perfection, which kisses the hand bearing the
rod, and blesses the scourge even while the
blows fall.

In the meantime he hugged his secret, and

kept his unhappiness to himself; refused to
mingle with his own kind, and rarely stirred
from out his chambers, except for the daily
walk to and from his office, and grew silent,
morose, unapproachable.

The July days came and went with lingering,
regretful steps ; but they brought him no
comfort. He grew to hate the long, bright,
cruel hours, during which the sun shone so
fiercely in the intense blue sky whose wide
expanse was softened by cloud or mist ; even
as he came to loathe the short midsummer
nights, with the flooding moonlight and the
radiant stars set in the vaulted firmament
of God's glory.

No news and no word came to him from
Mdlle. Lamien ; he had neither seen nor heard
from her since their unsatisfactory parting.
He had waited expecting each day some expression
from her, some recognition or repudiation
of the promise that bound him ; but each
day brought him only disappointment, until at
last, as the days grew into weeks, he ceased

expecting and accepted his position almost
with relief. He was ready and waiting whenever
Mdlle. Lamien should signify her need
of him ; he would not lift a finger to break
the slight chain that bound him, but neither
would he by act or word rivet that chain
closer.

Of Patricia he knew absolutely nothing;
not even the echo of her name reached him.
That most energetic of society chronicles,
Town Optics, was never counted in his literature,
though, had he known it, even that
authority was silent concerning her movements.
She had apparently dropped out of his
life as completely as even he could desire ;
and, as he acknowledged with a bitter smile,
she was not likely to vex or trouble him
more, in the changed conditions of his
future.

Ah, well, let her rest in peace ! Patty,
his wilful, loving, perverse little Patty, had
been dead to him for ten long years.

But with the last week of July, Mr. Tremain

aroused himself, and, throwing off his lethargy,
hastily packed a light portmanteau and betook
himself to a certain landing-stage down in
the city's depths ; and as the sun set in a
harmony of gorgeous splendour over Bowling
Green and Castle Garden, making a golden
symbol of Trinity's tall spire, and flooding
the city with transient beauty, he stood upon
the deck of a small steamer, bound for the
rocky shores of Maine, and, two days later,
had vanished amidst the deep far stretching
pi lie forests of that eastern state, pitching
his tent beside an outlet of wild Hemlock
Lake, and lost completely to civilisation in
the form of post, or telegraph, or daily paper.

PLOTTING.

Court Mellikoff had also on leaving the
Folly betaken himself to New York, and
re-established his locale in that quiet but
eminently aristocratic hotel, which has for
years been a sort of Mecca to European
wanderers, who finding life on the plan of
the ordinary huge American caravansary, too
public and en evidence, have sought with
thankfulness the more retired existence of
this favoured resort.

Most people object to that process of
public cleansing usually regarded as the
attribute of vulgarity ; but one need not be
vulgar to object to consuming one's roast beef

and port wine under the public eye. It is
not a pleasant sensation to come to look
upon one's self as only an atom in the great
scheme of a table d'hote; one loses one's
identity at such times, and with the loss
of identity goes also one's self-respect. If
you wish to retain your dignity in your own
eyes and in the eyes of your world, keep
yourself to yourself ; and, above all, do your
eating and drinking in private. Nothing is so
much desired as that which is difficult of attainment
; and no man has so many dinner invitations
as he who is known to be fastidious, as to
whose table he will honour with his presence.

On the evening of the same day as that
on which Mr. Tremain started off on his
lonely wanderings, Count Mellikoff sat in a
private apartment of his hotel busy over a
variety of despatches and papers, heaped
together on a writing-table.

The day had been very warm, and even
with the approach of night the atmosphere
became but little less intolerable. The windows

were open, but the latticed blinds were let
down, and through the crevices the moonlight
fell in broken lines across the walls,
the rays of the small lamp on the writing-table
being too faint to outshine the moonbeams
; the room, in consequence, had a
half unreal appearance, through the mingled
reflections of oil and moonlight.

A few blocks up Fifth Avenue, a barrel-organ
was groaning out a popular melody,
interrupted at intervals by a Strauss valse
from the German band performing in Washington
Square.

On the centre table stood a tray with
a bottle of claret and Apollinaris water, and
a days bowl filled with cracked ice.

Despite the intensity of the temperature,
Count Mellikofi" was scrupulously dressed in
evening costume, the gardenia in his buttonhole
showing white against his coat ; beneath
the flower the tiny red button of honour,
that had so fascinated Miss James, stood out
like a drop of blood.

With rapid, accustomed fingers, Count
VJadimir opened one by one the letters and
papers, scanning their contents with quick
comprehension, and laying each document
aside with accurate decision. As he came
to the last, he put it down before him,
and bending forward, touched a little gong
that stood near his despatch-box ; then he
leant back in his chair and waited. A door
leading to an inner room was partially open.

In the few seconds that intervened before
his summons was answered, his face, seen
now in the full light of the lamp, seemed
to grow more pallid and anxious, the mouth
beneath the straight moustache and beard
grew hard, the eyes from out their shadowy
caverns burned with a restless light, the
cheeks appeared thinner, the forehead more
pronounced, the hand as it rested on the
table more nervous and attenuated, while
the ruby in his ring glowed with an evil fire.

The sharp metallic echo had scarcely died
away before the door leading to the other

room was pulled noiselessly open, and a
short dark figure emerged from the interior
shadows, and came forward with a crinoline,

CD ~'

uncertain gait.

Did the Excellence runs: ? " the man
asked in Italian, standing before the Count,
and speaking in a voice that was both
unctuous and false.

Mellikoff looked at him for an instant
before replying, while a smile of infinite scorn
and disgust curled his lips.

'eyes," he answered shortly, and in the
same language, "I did ring; I require your
most valuable services, Mattalini."

The Italian bowed, and rubbed his hands
together.

''Si, si, Signor," he mumbled, ''I am but
your servant ; you command, I obey."

Vladimir paid no attention to this protestation
save for another of those slow, scornful
smiles, neither of which escaped the Italian's
notice.

"You will take this letter, Mattalini,"

Count MellikofF continued, lifting a sealed
packet and passing it across the table, •' ta
M. Stubeloflf, who is at present in this city.
You will deliver it into his hands and bring
me back a written reply — you understand,
Mattalini — a written reply."

There was that in the Count's tone that
caused the blood to leap hotly within the
Italian's veins ; but he only bowed the more
obsequiously as he replied :

Si, Signor, I comprehend. The M.
Stubeloff is he who represents our father
the Tsar in this inferno of a country ; he
makes a sojourn here. Bene, he shall receive
your packet, Excellence, from my own hand,
and you shall have his Excellency's written
response."

The man's voice was quiet and respectful
enough ; but Vladimir caught the sudden
look of hatred that flashed up for one moment
in his eyes, and knew that Mattalini was
his secret enemy. As he turned away. Count
MellikofF spoke again :

'you will olive directions below at the
office, that should a lady ask for me she is
to be shown up at once — at once ; do you
understand ? "

Si, Signor," replied the man, quietly ;
and then, with creeping step and drooping
shoulders, he crossed the room, appearing
for one moment in the moonbeams like the
shadow of an evil spectre, and then vanishing
as noiselessly as he had entered.

Once outside the room he stopped and
drew a deep breath, lifting his bowed form,
and, raising his right hand, shook the open
palm and long fingers at the closed door.

Curse him," he muttered, ^' curse him
root and branch. May the evil eye never
leave him now or hereafter, in life or death ! '
Then he turned and walked swiftly down
the passage towards the stairs.

Count Mellikoff, left alone, leant back in
his chair with a heavy sigh, passing his
hand wearily across his eyes. The rival
musicians had settled their difficulties by

VOL. II. P

the withdrawal of the barrel - organ, and
only the strains from the German band
floated in, mellowed by distance. It was
the 'blue Danube" they were playing, and
unconsciously, Vladimir Mellikoff kept time
to the pathos of the under theme with his
thoughts. The look of anxiety deepened on
his face, emphasized by the additional expression
of sadness that crept into his eyes.

And, indeed, he had reason to be both
sad and anxious ; of late he had detected in
Patouchki's letters and despatches a latent
tone of distrust and suspicion, which he
was quick to feel and to resent.

There were no more veiled allusions to
his past ability and faithful services ; no
assurances of his proved fidelity to the Tsar ;
no commendation of the work already accomplished,
such as had come rarely, to be
sure, but yet with sufficient regularity in
the earlier stages of his mission. Father
were there peremptory commands, undisguised
admonitions, and barely concealed innuendoes

of dissatisfaction and distrust on the part of
the Chaucellerie.

Rest assured I shall be the last to misjudge
or condemn you, Vladimir," had run
the chief's last letter ; " but it becomes me
to warn you that there are others who take
a less lenient view of your position than I
do, and who will not scruple to use every
indiscretion against you. He who serves
Russia must be prepared to find her not
only suspicious, but ungrateful ; it is your
high privilege, Vladimir, to be counted
among the most loyal of her servitors ; but
even to you may come the bitter lesson,
that trifling with her decrees is followed by
swift and sure punishment. The sworn
presence of the woman, Adele Lamien, in
Petersburg, to which Tolskoi has given his
oath, but which, as yet, we have been unable
to verify, greatly complicates your poseidon,
since the Chancellerie knows that it was to
find her you undertook your present mission.
If, in the month that elapsed between your

p 2 .

arrival in the States and her alleged appearance
here, you have allowed her to slip
through your fingers, you know full well
the judgment that will be passed upon you.
Your telegrams of late have been vague and
uncertain, your letters no more assuring. In
the meantime, and up to this present moment,
we have been unable to put our hands upon
this woman ; she has disappeared as mysteriously
as she came. And since there is
room for doubt in the matter, we prefer to
give you the benefit of that doubt, at least
for the present."

This had been the substance of Patouchki's
communication, and Vladimir could not mistake
its tone, even if its meaning had not
been further enhanced by the arrival of
the Italian, Mattalini, who came ostensibly
as a bearer of despatches, and with a request,
which was more of a command, that Count
Mellikoff would kindly retain him in his
service.

A bitter smile had come to Vladimir's

lips as he read the letter of recommendation
and looked at the candidate for his
favour standing: before him. "Well might
Ivor Tolskoi have said, that lying craft
and duplicity were stamped on his every
feature. Vladimir Mellikoff but confirmed
these words when he said, half sadly to
himself, as the man turned away :

And has it come to this, my chief ?
Am I to be dogged and watched by such
a paid miscreant as this Italian 1 Is he
to be my ' double,' and am I to stand or fall
according to his testimony ? Oh, Russia,
hard indeed are you as a task - mistress,
heavy your yoke of iron, and bitter your
recompense ! "

It did not require any great perspicuity
to read through the Chancellerie's design
in sending Mattalini to be servant to Count
Mellikoff; and, from the moment the sullen
Italian entered his service, Vladimir felt
his evil star had arisen, and his evil hour
arrived.

That Tolskoi should have been the one
to swear to the actual presence of A dele
Lamien, or Lallovich, in Petersburg, when he —
Mellikoff — was hunting her down in America,
troubled him but little. Firm in his own belief,
and secure of his ultimate success, he paid
small heed to a chance likeness that might
easily have deceived so gay and volatile
a young man as Ivor. Was it likely that
he, Valdivia Mellikoff, an old and tried
servant of the Tsar — old at least in experience
if not in years — should be distanced and outdone
by a yellow haired youth still almost
in his adolescence? Count Mellikoff smiled,
and put the thought aside as valueless.

Much more disturbing and distressing was
the scant news he received of his betrothed.
Olga had written once or twice during the
first two months of his self-imposed exile,
and then suddenly her letters had ceased,
and he could obtain no further news of
her than what he could glean between the
lines of the official telegrams in the daily

newspapers. These were meagre in the
extreme, only a bare mention now and then
of the more important items of Russian
politics, or her attitude on the Bulgarian
question ; but they at least told him that
the Court was still at Petersburg, and therefore
he knew Olga to be there also. With
the beo'inninor of the Russian summer she
would accompany her Imperial mistress to
Gatschina, or the baths, and then he felt
he should indeed be separated from her.

Oh, for this weary time of probation to
pass I This winning of one more honour,
one more decoration, to lay at her feet ; and
then to claim his recompense, his prize,
and with his first rapturous kiss upon her
proud lips seal his fealty, and bid a final
good-bye to worldly ambition and reward !

Immersed in such meditations, Count
Mellikoff started nervously as a sharp rap
on the door awoke him from his reverie ;
with the immediate self-command of long
habit, he instantly controlled both face and

voice, and calling out a " Come in," rose
from his chair and walked to the middle
of the room.

The door was thrown open with the
words, '* A lady to see you, sir," and then
quickly closed. A slight figure dressed in
black, and with a heavy veil drawn over
the face, advanced towards him, and, as
Vladimir came forward, a voice, high pitched
despite its whispered words, said quickly :

"I have come, but I must beg you will
not keep me long."

For answer Count Mellikoff bowed
respectfully and pulled forward an easy
chair.

Let me ask you to be seated," he
said in his slaves tones, '' and pray remove
your veil. I entreat, I insist ; the evening
is stifling."

Without a word his visitor sank down
upon the chair, and mechanically unpinned
and removed her thick veil ; the face beneath
the hard outline of the black hat looked

hollow and aged, the dark eyes burned
feverishly, the thin lips were colourless.

Even to the most superficial observer
great and marked were the changes that
a few weeks had wrought there ; it bore buta
faint and blurred resemblance to the face
that Mr. Tremain had looked on, not unkindly,
two short months ago at the Folly.

Count Mellikofi" turned to the table, and
pouring out a glass of claret, added the ice
and Apollinaris with careful exactness, and
brought it to his guest.

You must drink this, mademoiselle,"
he said. "You are looking very exhausted.
Ma foi, I cannot compliment you on the
temperature of an American summer ! "

She took the tumbler from him and
drank the contents thirstily ; as she put down
the empty glass her unloved hand came
within the radius of the lamp-light. It
looked shrunken and attenuated, the rings
upon the thin fingers hung loosely and
jangled one against the other. She sat

back wearily, looking up at him with an
eager, anxious expression.

I must ask you not to keep me long'
she said again, " I may be missed at any
moment. It is important I should return
as soon as possible'

Count Mellikoft* drew a chair in front
of her, and sitting down leant slightly
forward, joining his hands together by the
finger-tips. His position and gesture recalled
another like occasion in which she and he
were the chief actors ; she shuddered violently
and drew back from him involuntarily.

Miss James," began Count Vladimir, in
his cold, even tones, *'I beg you will believe
that I am fully alive to your disinterestedness
in thus coming to me, and also to the risks
you run in so doing. But, as I told you
during our first conversation, in seeking your
co-operation in my work I was well aware
you would have to encounter much that must
of necessity be disagreeable to you, since
defying or breaking the canons of conventionality

is always an unpleasant experience.
You, however, elected to become my partner
in this work — an honour of which I am
deeply appreciative — and you were content
to chance the consequences if you could but
work out your own ends in furthering mine.
Am I not correct in my statements ? "

Yes, yes, oh yes," she replied, hurriedly.
"You are quite right, perfectly correct."

I can assure you, mademoiselle," went
on Count Vladimir, with a little smile, leaning
somewhat more forward until the heavy, languorous
scent of the gardenia seemed almost
to stifle her, " that I have no desire to detain
you longer than is absolutely necessary,
though, were I to consult my pleasure, I
would willingly lengthen the visit of one
for whom I entertain such sentiments of respectful
admiration. However, since wee cannot
consult inclination, let us proceed to duty.
What news have you to give me of our
dramatis personae ? Let us commence with
Philip Tremain."

At the mention of this name the girl's
white face paled perceptibly, and her lips
quivered. She loved Philip as well and as
generously as it lay in her nature to love
any one ; and though he had passed her by,
even when conscious of her love for him,
it was none the less bitter to find herself in
the position of a spy and informer against
him.

Vladimir Mellikofi" saw her hesitancy and
read its meanings.

'' It's not pleasant, I admit, mademoiselle''
he said, *' to be obliged to speak uncompromisingly
of any one ; especially must thisbe
the case now and with you, when you recall
Mr. Tremain's pronounced — friendship."

His jibe told. It was this very friendliness
of Philip's attitude towards her against
which she most revolted and beat her passion
to tatters ; she could better have borne his
anger or hate, than his calm indifference of
friendly interest.

"Mr. Tremain is no friend of mine," she

said, sharply, and with a short, hard laugh ;
'' his goings and comings are nothing to me,
except in so far as they influence her. I
have fully admitted to you, Count Mellikoff,
the reason v/hy I shall be glad to see her
humbled and exposed. I do not know why
she should flourish, and flaunt her beauty
in my face, when it lies in my power to
tear the mask from her and reveal her real
self to the world that flatters and adores her
every whim and caprice."

"You have both reason and cause on your
side, Miss James," replied Vladimir, quietly.
'' A woman scorned makes a dangerous enemy.
But pardon me, if I remind you who it is
that has placed the power of enmity within
your reach."

I have not forgotten," she answered, with
almost sullen bitterness ; " it is to you, Count
Mellikofl", I owe my weapon of vengeance. I
am not ungrateful."

Count Mellikofl" made a slight bow, and
said : '' And now as to this Mr. Tremain,

where is lie at present ; and have you any
further news of her ? "

Up to this morning, Mr. Tremain was
not two miles distant from here," replied Miss
James. '' He had not left town since his last
interview with — her, until this evening."

And has he gone now ? " inquired Vladimir,
quickly, sitting upright in his chair.
*' This is news, indeed. Where has he gone ? "

'' That I cannot tell you, but certainly not
to her. I called at his chambers ostensibly on
an errand of charity, and the janitor told me
he had left town suddenly. A little judicious
questioning elicited the further details that he
had taken but one small portmanteau, given
his man a holiday, and ordered himself to be
driven to a landing stage, too far down town
for any boat to start from but an ocean
or Sound steamer. He left no directions for
the forwarding of his letters, and made no plan
for returning. He has vanished from out our
circle for the present, and I can give you no
clue to his possible destination."

It matters but very little," replied
Yladimir. "When his presence is required,
the orbit of his destiny will swing round tous
again. We can dismiss him for the
present, and be thankful he has so opportunely
vanished into space. And of her,
mademoiselle, of Adele Lamien, as it is wisest
still to call her, since even walls have ears ? "

You are over-prudent, Count Mellikoff,
surely. Still, perhaps it is as well to keep up
the farce to the end. Of Adele Lamien's
escape there is no fear. She is absolutely in
our power ; I know her every movement, her
daily avocations ; I can put my hand upon
her at any moment. She is as unsuspicious
and ignorant of the net closing so securely
about her, as she is that in me she sees her
deadliest foe. No, there can be no failure
there ; whatever else fails, I am sure of that
revenge; that is," she added, suddenly, "if
yoic are certain — if you are not deceived."

"No, I am not deceived," replied Count
Mellikoff, slowly. " We shall not have muck

longer to remain inactive, mademoiselle ; I do
but attend a final telegram, and then the
blow will fall''

I hope so," answered the girl, bitterly ;
and may it crush both him and her when it
comes."

There was a moment's silence before Count
Mellikoff spoke again ; when he did, his voice
had regained its lighter tones.

And Madame Newbold and the charming
Miss Dick," he asked ; " what of them ? "

Still at Newport, on board the Deerhound
; but they are to weigh anchor to-night
for a longer cruise than any they have yet
taken. After this evening it will be impossible
to say when or where telegrams or
letters could reach them." She stopped for a
moment, and then said, abruptly : " And the
warrant — you will have no difficulty about
that ? "

I anticipate none. The first steps can,
of course, be but preliminaries. There is no
doubt of our securing an arrest, and that is

our first move. With Mr. Tremain lost, so
to speak, the Deerhound and her passengers
started on an uncertain cruise ; and, New
York an empty wilderness, there is nothing
to interrupt the march of events, mademoiselle.
We may look any day now, any hour, for the
consummation of fate."

'"I am glad," again replied the girl ; "yes,
I am old. And now I must po ; it otows
late. Have you any further instructions to
give me ? "

She took out her veil as she spoke, and
tied it closely over her face, listening earnestly
meantime to Count Mellikoff's low and rapid
utterances. He spoke quickly, but with
decision, and she acquiesced by her absolute
silence.

As he finished she rose, and drawing her
thin black mantle closely about her, walked
rapidly towards the door. Vladimir Mellikoff
held it open for her, but she passed him
without word or salutation.

Half-way down the narrow passage a man

VOL. II. Q

overtook lier, and turned to glance at her ashe
passed. It was the Italian, Mattalini.

Later on that same evening, while Philip
Tremain paced the deck of the out-going
steamer with restless footsteps, and did battle
with the conflicting emotions that raged
within him, Patricia Hildreth, leaning on the
arm of the most distinguished partner of the
hour, floated languidly around to the strains
of " Dreamland " waltzes, the most admired
woman of all the bevy of fair women who
filled the spacious drawing-rooms of the
Eversleigh " at Long Branch. Her draperies
of lustrous silk were not more white than
her fair face, nor were the jewels on her
bosom more bright and cold, than was the
blue fire of her eyes. Only her smile retained
its old charm and sweetness, and belied the
weariness that rested upon her brow.

She conferred distinction by her presence,
and dispensed her favours with so royal a grace,
the recipients of her bounty never stopped to
weigh their value, or count their cost.

THE Anglais.

Ivor Tolskoi did not see Mdlle. Naundorfi'
ao^ain for several weeks.

On leaving her at the private entrance
of the Palace, he had walked away with
Patouchki, towards the Chancellerie, where he
was kept busily at work until late m the
afternoon. He purposely avoided the Court
circle in the evening, his presence not being
officially demanded, for he felt he could not
so soon again meet Olga's reproachful eyes,
and pale suffering face ; a longer interval
must elapse before he could greet her in his
accustomed manner.

The next day he heard of her sudden 

2

disposition through that same Countess Vera,
whose trivial words had first set alight the
fire of vindictiveness in his heart. Ivor was
a great favourite in all the Petersburg salons,
and his appearance in Countess Yea's
drawing-rooms at the mastic tea-hour was
hailed with delight.

A considerable number of the best known
heaii-mondaines were already gathered thereto
whom the Countess — who was a pronounced
follower of all customs English — was
dispensing tea from out a most 
samovar. She welcomed Ivor with
effusion, and bade him take the vacant chair
beside her low gipsy-table, which with its
dainty tea-cloth and royal Worcester tea-service,
looked distinctly out of place in the
large, formal, mirror-hung apartment.

It is delightful to see you, mon clier^'
lisped the Countess in her high voice, looking
at him languishingly ; '' it is ages, eternities,
centuries, since you last honoured one of my
this anglais with your presence. Positively

I believe you have not before seen my newest
importation from that land of fogs and
delights. Behold, this is my very last ! "
and she pointed gaily to the little table. " I
assure you it is quite correct, quite comme il
faut, cloth and all. I have it direct from my
dear friend, the Duchess of Never ; it is an
exact copy of the one used by the Princess at
Sandringham. The dear English ! one quite
grows to love them."

And the Countess clasped her hands
together dramatically, letting them fall with
effect upon her plush tea-gown ; against the
ruby folds the diamonds and rubies of herrings
flashed triumphantly.

Tolskoi laughed, his full-hearted boyish
laugh, as he took the English tea-cup she
held out to him.

You have the courage of your opinions,
Countess," he said ; '* it is well you are protected
by Imperial favour. I know some
houses in Petersburg, where were such frank
expressions of Anglo-mania indulged in, they

would be followed by a swift and emphatic
caution from the Chancellerie."

The Countess shrugged her shoulders.

'^ Ma foi, I am no politician, no intriguer.
I am but a silly moth of fashion, I do not
even pose as a butterfly ; but it appeals to
my sense of hen-etre to be on good terms
with England ; and certainly it is more politic,
since through our Grand Duchess, and our
Tsarina, our dynasty is doubly allied with
that country. But there, I see your eye
are wandering after your thoughts ; I regret
your disappointment, mori crier, for you will
not see her here to-day."

Tolskoi acknowledged the raillery with
another laugh. "Ah, Countess, you are the
fairy of the story books ! And why does not
Mdlle. Naundorff honour your salon to-day ? "

'' Because she is indisposed," answered
Countess Vera, looking up at him sharply ;
'' she is obliged to keep her own apartments.
I fear you took but poor care of the future
Countess Mellikoff, monsieur, for she returned

from the Petropavlovsk inspection looking
like a ghost, and scarcely able to render her
light .services to the Tsarina, during the
cveniDo-. Were the horrors of the Fortress
so very pronounced, mon cher ? You will
have to answer to Count Vladimir, you know,
if on his return he finds his fiancee changed.
Already Petersburg rings with your openly
displayed admiration for her cold beauty."

She laughed as she concluded, and got
up slowly from her low chair. Ivor rose also.

I shall be only too happy to answer
any charge of Count Mellikoff's," he said,
deliberately, " when he returns."

Then the Countess Vera glided away from
him, and with a word here, a whisper there,
a smile, a nod, a gesture, set afloat the rumour
that society might look for another highly-spiced
scandal, as soon as Count Mellikoff
returned, for Ivor Tolskoi, not content with
stealing away his fiancee s allegiance, intended
to challenge him as well.

Wasn't it quite dreadful ? Ah, yes, but

very romantic ! added the little Countess, to
whom intrigue and scandal were as the breath
of her nostrils.

The conversation now became general,
and of course the favourite topic under discussion
was the Imperial visit of yesterday
to Petropavlovsk. Ivor found himself inconstant
requisition, and his ingenuity not a
little put to the test in replying vaguely yet
satisfactorily to the eager questions poured
upon him.

All interest in the reunion had, however,
flown for him directly he heard the cause
of Olga Naundorff s non-appearance, and he
managed as soon as possible to make his
adieux to the Countess.

Ah," said that little lady, lifting her
eyebrows in mock despair. "So we are to
lose you ah-lady ! We cannot offer you a
sufficient attraction, moi cher, to keep you
^n the absence of the Court favourite. Let
me warn you again, Count MellikofT is nota
man to be trifled with."

"Nor am I," answered Ivor, incautiously;
whereat the Countess Vera laughed.

*'Ma foi'' she said, '' if you carry matters
^Yith so high a hand we shall have even a
more dramatic esclandre than the Stevan
Lallovich affair. By the way, Ivor, what
news is afloat concerning Count Vladimir, and
his search for the missing woman ? Oh, yes,
you see it is no secret to me, the reason of his
departure la-has'

With which vague and descriptive term and
a gesture equally disdainful, the Countess indicated
the broad continent of America. To her
intelligence and imagination, it was but a land
of scQii-bai-barians and savages, where existence
was not worth the price of her smallest luxury.

Tolskoi replied with a little bow.

Ah, Countess," he said, *' who can hope
to keep any secret from you, and indeed who
would . wish to do so ? I believe Count
Mellikoff is fully satisfied with his advance sofar
; it remains only for the Chancellerie to
express an equal approbation."

Then lie bent over the Countess's hand, and
with a passing compliment, made his devoirs
and left her. She stood for a moment looking
after him thoughtfully.

I would rather not be in Count Mellikoff's
shoes," she said to herself, '' should he not
succeed. Ivor Tolskoi is not likely to prove a
light enemy, and Ivor Tolskoi means to steal
from him not only his sweetheart, but his
reputation."

Then she laughed a little as she turned
gaily back to her gipsy-table, and her thea
Anglaise,

Meantime Tolskoi on leaving the Palace
Vera, turned his steps towards the Boulevard
de Cavalerio, in the direction of his own
apartments. His brow was clouded and his
lips stern as he walked along the gaily-lighted
streets. Evening had already closed in, the
long evening of a day late in March, and the
boulevard was full of life and movement.

Ivor, however, took but little heed of his
surroundings, the news he had just heard

concerning Olga, disquieted him not a little,
the more so as his love for her was very great,
and he felt that he alone was answerable for
her mental and physical illness. He would
have spared her had it been possible for him
to do so, and had he seen any other way out
of his difficulties. His first great object was
to win her away from MellikofF, whom he knew
to be his only serious rival, and to do this
he was willing to descend to any subterfuge.

He knew her nature sufficiently well to be
aware that nothing short of falsity to her, on
Vladimir's part, would serve to break even
the lio'ht bonds that held her to him. Ellis
greatest power lay in the protested
claims of this his first and only love ; and
she, in listening to his protestations, had
been more swayed by the sense of her undivided
sovereignty over him, than by any
feeling of affection.

His years and his honours gave him the
right to pose as a man of fashion, whose
experiences of a certain kind were but foregone

conclusions ; instead, however, of pleading
this as a reason for his wish to ranger
himself, he actually offered her a virgin
heart, that had known no warmer mistress
than ambition, until he met ber, and fell
captive beneath her smile and proud, cold
loveliness.

The paradox of his life was unique, especially
in Petersburg ; and Olga had felt a
thrill of pride when she looked upon Vladimir's
stern face, and noted the many distinctions
of honour that marked his Court dress, and
realised that she, and she only, had won
his love and his devotion. She was the first
woman before whom he had bowed his head
in haughty pleading. It was no mean
triumph, even for Olga Naundorff, to win
and rule him as an accepted suitor.

All this Tolskoi realised to the full, and
as his passion grew and strengthened, he
determined to hesitate at nothing — no duplicity,
no falsehood — if by it he could awaken
suspicion in her mind, and so gain time for

the perfecting of his own ends. Meliikoff's
prolonged absence, and the unexpected meeting
with Adele Lamien in St. Isaac's, gave
him ample basis upon which to work, and
furnished him with a plan of attack, with
so much of possible truth in it as to carry
instant conviction to Olo^a's mind.

Her heart had always remained untouched,
even by Vladimir's devotion ; she had not
therefore, the divine instinct of love, by which
to sift out the false from the true.

And of Ivor it may be said, he believed
enough in his allegations to make their fulfilment
an easy possibility ; it was, however,
quite outside his calculations that Olga, by
a real or feigned illness, should effectually
shut herself off from his personal influence ;
the more so, as in a few days he was obliged
to leave Petersburg, for his own estates in
the Ural provinces, and his absence would
extend over several weeks. What security
had he against adverse circumstances and influences,
while separated from her ? Was it

not even possible that Mellikoff might return
triumphant ? In which case, of what avail
would be his schemes and intrigues ?

Fate, however, was against him, for he
did not see Mdlle. Naundorff before his departure.
He was often at the Palace, frequenting
the Court salon with sedulous
regularity ; but Olga never appeared, and he
learned from the Countess Vera that she was
still indisposed, " though not in danger of
death," that little lady added, sharply, and
with a meaning look at Ivor's downcast face.

It was early April, when Tolskoi reluctantly
quitted Petersburg, and it was June before
he returned.

The Court was still at the Winter Palace,
for the winter season had been a long; and
cruel one, and even with the first days of
June, summer advanced with but lagfo^ingr
footsteps, seemingly unwilling to awake the
gay capital from its long frost-bitten sleep.

Political affairs also held the Emperor,
whose presence in the metropolis was considered
by his ministers to be a necessity ;
therefore, when Ivor shook off the dust of
many days, travel and alighted from his
coupe at the railway terminus, it was to seethe

familiar standard floating from the
Winter Palace, and the tall lance-like spire
of PetropavloYsk rising above the creeping
waters of the Neva, and piercing the vivid
blue of the sky beyond. The Troitski bridge
and Boulevard-park were gay with passing
traffic, and noisy with the cries of the flower
vendors, whose trays and baskets overflowed
with the blue violets of the Novgorod.

Tolskoi made his way at once to the Imperial
Chancellerie, where he found Patouchki,.
as he had left him, seated at his desk and
busy over what seemed to Ivor the identical
despatches that had surrounded him two
months ago. The only observable change in
the chief's entourage lay in the open windows,
and the softness of the west wind, as it stirred
the papers with a gentle touch, and yet that
had a bitter chill even in its caresses.

Patouchki, he thought, looked worn and
harassed ; the sallowness of the flesh tints,
the deeper lines about his forehead and mouth,
spoke of days and nights of ceaseless occupation

and anxiety ; and to Ivor, fresh from
the almost limitless freedom of his wide
frontiers, spoke also of the despotic rule and
iron obedience with which those who serve
Russia, must accept Russia's dictates.

The chief looked up, and greeted him as
though but a day's separation lay between
them.

"Ah, Ivor," he said, "so you are come
back. You are welcome."

Ivor thanked him and turned towards
bis own desk, where lay neatly piled together
various documents and papers, anticipatory
of his expected return. Several newly cut
quills were in the pen-tray, and a fresh
unstained pad was opened invitingly. An
amused smile came to the young man's face ;
it was all so absurdly natural and familiar ;
his absence of wrecks faded away and became
visionary and unreal, in this crude matter-of-fact
light of official routine.

What did it matter to Patouchki that

he, Ivor, had but just come from those
VOL. II. a

distant, far-reaching steppes, where the shy
game and wild animals flew before his
footsteps, and the miles of low stunted
forest ended only with the horizon line,
to meet which the cold grey sky appeared
to curve in an almost perceptible arch.

Standing alone, amidst his vast possessions,
surrounded by a limitless silence,
Tolskoi had better understood than ever
before the meaning of the word freedom,
and the unfathomableness of that undefined
yet distinct craving for something higher
and greater, than this world gives, which
is implanted in every human heart. That
vain, vague stretching after the unattainable,
the blue flower of the mountains, the edel-
weiss of the Alps, which grows only on the
heights of sacrifice and abnegation, and
which, like the precious stone set with the
jewels of suffering, is only attainable '' to him
that overcome." Great indeed is his reward,
*' and his joy no man taketh from him."

Ivor had carried with him during all

Lis long return journey by road and rail, a
recollection of this wider outlook, and it
gave him therefore somewhat of a moral
shock to find the world of Petersburg — his
world — busily engaged just as he had left
it, not only not recognising any spiritual
change in him, but not even aware of any
better or higher aims than those attainable
by intrigue, and shameless pandering to the
powers of the moment.

Although he had stood face to face with
God and Nature, for one brief moment, what
was that to them ? Here, in Petersburg,
neither the Almighty nor Nature, had part or
lot in the fierce, unending struggle called life.

With a shrug of his shoulders Ivor took
his accustomed place, and as he broke the
first seal felt the better influences fall from
him, and the old power reassert itself.

If, as we are told, each soul has its fatal
moment of choice, on which depends its
final development, this was that moment
for Ivor Tolskoi, and in accepting the old

R 2

life with that careless gesture and cynical
smile, he put from him for ever the higher
calling that might have been his, and set his
feet in the downward path of deterioration.

After a short interval of silence, Patouchki
turned towards him with his old imperiousness
of manner, and said, abruptly :

*' About this woman, Tolskoi, this Adele
Lamien, whom you avow you saw. So far
we have been unable to obtain any trace of
her here, or learn anything concerning her
movements ; while on the other hand Count
Mellikoff sends reseated messages of confidence
as to his assured success, and the
infallibility of his approaching coup de main.
So after all, my dear Ivor, you must have
been the victim of a delusion. It is
impossible for Adele Lamien to be in Petersburg
without the Chancellerie's knowledge."

"I was not mistaken, chief," replied Ivor,
quietly. " I saw Adele Lallovich with my
own eyes. Hers is not a face to be easily
mistaken, and I would rather trust to my

own instincts, than to Count Mellikoflf's
written assertions. Answer me one question,
chief: has Vladimir Mellikoff ever, to your
knowledge, seen Adele Lallovich ? "

Really, Tolskoi, that is a strange question,"
answered Patouchki ; "frankly, I have
never had occasion to ask him. The woman's
face was common property to all Petersburg,
at one time, through the photographers, and
considering; how well Count Vladimir knew
Stevan Lallovich, it is but natural to suppose
Its opportunities for seeing his mistress were
numerous."

Pardon me, chief, if I differ from you
on one or two points," replied Ivor, with
unwonted gravity. " In the first place, you
must admit that Stevan Lallovich did not
for some time regard Adele Lamien in the
light of a mistress. He married her, remember,
according to the ceremonies of the
Church of Rome, and it was not until his
passion for her grew cold, that he sought
Imperial interference. He kept her exclusively

at his villa across the Neva, and so
long as he upheld her position as his wife was
over-scrupulous in his care of her. I have
reason to believe that not one of Count Stevenson
companions, even Vladimir Mellikoff,
was ever admitted to her presence. The
marriage was secret and kept so, and as long
as the infatuation lasted Lallovich showed
nothing but respect to her. We know how
sudden was the Imperial ukase, and how little
prepared she must have been for it, was shown
by the tragic vengeance that overtook him.
You understand then, chief, why I prefer to
trust to my own instincts rather than to
Count Mellikoff's assertions. I did once see
Adele Lallovich in her happier days, and I
am not likely to mistake her face now, even
though disfigured by shame and crime."

Patouchki had listened attentively to
Tolskoi's remarks ; he replied to them by a
slight creature and the words :

Granted all that you say is true, Ivor,
I fail to see how not knowing personally

this unfortunate woman is any real disadvantage
to Count MellikoflP. He has every facility
for tracing her, and we know by experience
that the last evidence to build upon in such
a quest is personal appearance. It needs but
the adjuncts of paint, powder, and a wig, to
deceive even Lucifer himself. No, no, that
troubles me but little ; what is more of an
anxiety is my inability to trace in any way the
accomplice who first assisted Adele Lamien
out of Russia, and who now — placing credence
upon your words — has accomplished her return.
Would I but put my hand on that accomplice,
I would soon unearth the criminal."

Ivor made no reply save by a significant
smile, and the slightest possible shrug.
Patouchki noticed both, and felt irritated
at the implied dissension expressed by them.

You have doubtless some theory to
advance upon this also," he said, sharply ;
"perhaps you will have the goodness to
impart it to me."

"I do not know if my deductions maybe

dignified by so specific a title as theory
chief," Ivor replied, imperturbably ; "I was
but working out a small sum of calculation,
which is at your service. In December last,
Stevan Lallovich was murdered, and the
woman calling herself his wife — though a
suspect, and closely watched as such — disappeared,
vanished absolutely. In the following
January, Count Mellikoff, at the request
of the Chancellerie, undertook a mission of
discovery in the United States, whither the
woman, according to trustworthy evidence,
was supposed to have flown. Two months
elapse, and nothing is discovered or revealed
; meantime, you receive satisfactory,
if vague, reports from Count Mellikofi", and
the Chancellerie is lulled to inaction for the
time being. At the end of March, I meet
Adele Lallovich face to face in the heart
of Petersburg, where she has arrived without
the knowledge of the Chancellerie, or its
agents. That is my problem, chief; now to
its solution. The same powerful influence —
whose word was law, whose will was coercion

that crop this woman out of Kussia at a
critical momcDt, has again been successful
in sending her back to Petersburg, at a time
when suspicion was thrown oft" its guard,
and when Petersburg was a safer hiding-place
than New York. That is my theory,
chief, so far as I have worked it out."

Patouchki did not speak for several
moments. He sat looking straight before
him, the furrows wrought by anxiety and care
plainly visible on his sallow, stern, set face.

The shadow of Ivor's veiled meaning was
not lost to his quick perceptions ; but he
put it from him as unworthy of debate, and
turning again to the young man said, even
more sternly than before :

I would advise you to be careful, Ivor,
in your own interests; it is best to say less
than you know, still less than you suspect.
To me you may speak freely, indeed, I desire
you to do so ; but beyond these walls, have
a care. What further conclusions do you
draw from your elaborate premises ? "

Ivor, with a quick flush at the suggestion

of sarcasm in Patouchki's voice, replied
quietly :

"Bat one, and to you, chief, my deductions
may seem both absurd and impossible.
You will remember the circumstances of the
murder, and you will, I am sure, concur
with me, dien I assert that to plan and
accomplish such a crime could not have been
the sole unaided work of a woman. There
must have been a bolder and surer brain
behind, one who had sufficient reason to
make the perpetration of the murder serve
as a double revenge. Very well then, granting
such was the case, who would be better
fitted or more competent to assist the
accomplice in crime in her flight, than he
who had helped her to her revenge ? Self-preservation
would render this shielding
power compulsory, where she was concerned ;
for, once she fell into the hands of the
Chancellerie, not her life only, but his,
would be the forfeit. I have no doubt,
chief, that he dio helped Adele Lallovich

across our frontier, has conveyed her back
again, and — for a reason."

Tolskoi, as he finished, walked slowly
across the room and back ao^alD, halting
beside Patouchki. The latter looked up at
him with a strange drawn expression upon his
face. There was complete silence for a few
moments ; when the chief spoke it was in a
very different voice to his usual harsh tones.

'rand you would suspect "

"I suspect no one, chief," answered the
young man, his blue eyes flashing coldly.
I would only suggest that it is a strange
coincidence at least, that shortly after Count
Mellikoff's arrival in America, Adele Lallovich
should reappear in Petersburg."

He said no more, but turning abruptly,
walked back to his desk.

Patouchki sat immovable for a honos time.
Ivor's suggestion had fallen upon him with
almost crushing certainty, while mingled with
the sense of humiliation and irritation at
being outwitted, was also the feeling of pain

and sorrow that lie, who had thus outwitted
him, should be the one in whom he had most
implicitly trusted.

Like Olga NaundorfF, there appeared to
him no room for doubt. Ivor's very appearance,
his boyish insouciance and frank bearing,
were but additional witnesses to that
other's treachery. And yet, and yet, could it
be true ? Should he not do well to wait justa
little looser before condemning; the absent ?
Could he but find the woman, could he but
put his hand upon her ! Were she really in
Petersburg now, what greater evidence of perfidy
could he desire, with those damning proofs
in the shape of recent despatches and cables
lying now on his desk ? He turned at last,
and spoke with apparent effort.

Tolskoi, your warning is understood.
Find me the woman, here in Petersburg,
and I shall then know how to act."

I will find her," replied Ivor, with stern
brevity ; and, accepting Patouchki's words asa
dismissal, he bowed and left the room.

THIS LITTLE Hand.

Late that same evening Tolskoi made Lis
appearance at the Palace, in the outer salon,
where he found the usual gathering of officials
and dames honneur with their invited guests.
His reception was a flattering one, and his
return to the heau-mondaine circles hailed
with acclamation.

The heavy curtains to the inner salon were
closely drawn, indicative of the Tsar and
Tsarina's desire to remain unmolested for the
present. The evening was very warm, and
most of the long windows stood open, the
wind gently swaying the light draperies.

Beneath the casements the Neva crept by

in slow rippling motion ; the moonlight falling
athwart its grey opaqueness, woke here and
there sudden gleams of radiance. It struck
also across the blank stone wall of the
Triibetskoi bastion, accentuating its grim
outlines, and, shooting far upwards, tipped
the Lance-like spire of Peter's Fortress
with golden fire.

The Countess Vera was the first to
welcome Tolskoi, smiling up at him, as she
did so, and waving her great fan of scented
lace to and fro languidly.

Oh, are you returned, mon cher ? What
a pleasure ! And what a surprise to sonne one !
Oh, yes, she is here, and quite ravishingly
beautiful. For the moment she is with her
Imperial Majesty. How hot it is, non cher,
and what a cruelty that the Court regards no
"one's convenience, save its own ! One so longs
to be flying westward."

'ris it so unsupportable ? " replied Ivor in
his clear youthful voice, looking very handsome
and young as he bent down towards the

miniature lady. " Upon my word, when I am
near the Countess Vera, I lose all sensation
but one of supreme well-being."

"Ah, flatterer ! " cried the little Countess,
tapping him lightly on the arm with her fan.
"See, here she comes."

At that moment the velvet curtains at the
far end of the grand saIo)i parted for a
moment, to allow the eo-less of a tall slight
figure, that moved down the room with an
almost regal grace, and Whose white draperies
of soft lustreless silk swept after her in
rhythmic curves.

It was Olga, and Ivor, as he beheld her
after two months of separation, felt his heart
leap up in glad response to her beauty.

Indeed, never had she looked more beautiful.
The grand curves of her perfect figure,
well defined by the low-cut bodice and falling
laces of her dress, her head, carried with aU
its imperial haughty grace, crowned by the
masses of her golden hair, her eyes so deep
and wonderful beneath the dark level brows,

the "pomegranate flower" of her mouth
showing vividly against the colourless fairness
of her complexion. She wore a sapphire
and diamond ornament upon her neck, and
the rare stones flashed and scintillated beneath
her quick-coming breath.

Ivor stepped forward eagerly, his face
flushed with the renewed ecstasy of her
presence, and bending low before her, murmured
some inaudible (greeting;. The Countess
Vera watched them, a smile on her brilliant
little face.

Olga drew back, with an almost imperceptible
movement, and with a sudden dramatic
gesture repelled, rather than welcomed, the
young man. She had not seen him since
that day when at his thinly veiled allusions,
and suggestive words, all trust and belief
in the truth and honesty of human nature
died within her. In that brief hour's drive
it seemed to her she had grown years older,
and beyond that day she never looked.

With the melting of the snows of winter

she had put from her whatever of softness
or leniency belonged to her girlhood ; with
her womanhood she adopted the creed of her
world, " an eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth."

"Ah, Ivor," she exclaimed, controlling
instantly both voice and manner, and holding
out her hand in greeting, 'so you have
come back. What an eternity you have been
away ! Petersburg has been only half itself
without you."

She smiled as she spoke, and the charm
of her smile counterbalanced the indifference
of her tones.

Petersburg cannot have been so desolate
without me, as I have been without Petersburg,"
answered Tolskoi, gaily. " Is one
permitted, mademoiselle, to express one's admiration
and pleasure in beholding you so
radiant and so — happy ? "

One is permitted always to speak one's
mind in this age of enlightenment," she replied,
carelessly, though the meaning of Ivor's
question had not escaped her.

VOL. n. s

"And what news do 3^011 bring with you?"
she continued, a little hurriedly. " One is bored
to extinction here, kept so late in town, and
with such a dearth of novelty that counting flies
upon the wall becomes an exciting pastime."

She had walked on as she spoke, separating
herself from the Countess Vera by a slight
farewell gesture ; Ivor ke23t pace at her side.
When they drew near one of the deep embrasured
windows she stopped, and motioned
Ivor to the low cushioned seat beneath. But
he refused to avail himself of her invitation,
preferring to stand at her side and look down
upon her. She sank languidly back upon
the velvet cushions.

In the music gallery, at one end of the
great salon, the Household band were playing
an arrangement of some of the wild, sad,
national airs. The strains floated to them
across the rippling current of light laughter
and gay voices, like the under-chord of
melancholy that runs always side by side
with the happier melodies of life's theme.

Ivor was the first to speak, and, as lie did so,
Olga turned her head somewhat away from him.

You ask me for news, mademoiselle ;
that is, indeed, somewhat singular. How
can I bring you news from my wild province
which should prove of interest to you ? Let
me rather ask that question. What do you
hear from Count Mellikofi", mademoiselle, and
how prospers his mission ? "

She did not reply at once, and Tolskoi,
watching her averted face, saw the jewels
on her bosom rise with a sudden, quick,
indrawn breath.

When she spoke it was with an almost
exaggerated assumption of carelessness.

I hear nothing of, or from Count
Mellikofi"." Then, after a moment's pause,
'* Are you more fortunate?"

If you like to call it so. My latest

intelligence is to the effect, that having been

successful beyond his expectations, he looks

forward to an immediate return, and to

the reward he feels he has fairly earned."

s 2

'*Ah!" she exclaimed, quickly, "you surprise
me. And the woman — is she found ? "

"According to Count Mellikoff's despatches
he does not doubt his soon having
her in his power," answered Ivor, slowly.
But as we know, mademoiselle, there is
considerable truth in the old saying about
the cup and the lip. Even Count MellikofF
may find himself mistaken."

And you ? " she asked, still with
averted head, and in her assumed careless
voice. " May not you be mistaken ? It
would seem that this — this woman — whom
you say you saw, must after all, have been buta
delusion of your too ready imagination, since
Count Mellikofi" is so certain of his success."

"No, I am not mistaken, mademoiselle,"
answered Ivor, gravely. " When Count
Mellikoff returns victorious, it will be my
turn to win distinction ; and he who wins
last wins best, you know. When that time
comes, Olga, / shall claim my reward, and you
will give it to me."

'your reward?" she questioned, turning
lier face towards him at last, and looking up
straight into his eyes.

Yes, my reward," he replied, " my
reward, which will indeed have been hardly
won."

He stooped and lifted her hand. "This
hand, Olga, this little slender hand ; that
is what I shall claim, and that is what you
will give to me."

She made him no answer, save to let
her fingers lie passively in his. Presently
he bent and kissed them, then quietly putting
her hand down, he turned and walked from
her.

When near the great doors he looked
back. She was sitting as he had left her,
passive and unmoved, with the shadows
cast by the lightly swaying curtains half
shielding her face, and the grey darkness
of the starless sky for a background.

Her hand lay as he had put it down,
motionless upon her lap.

It was September before Philip Tremaiii
turned his face homeward again, leaving
behind him the deep, silent forests, already
donning their wonderful autumn tints, and
the silent waveless lake on whose bosom
his boat had so often lain motionless for
hours, drifting slowly with the almost
imperceptible movement of the tide ; while
he, stretched full length along its narrow
planking, his arms folded beneath his head,
watched with speculative eyes the clear
blue of the heavens, the passing of the
fleecy clouds, the sweeping up of the rain
mists, the birth of the stars, the rising
loveliness of the crescent moon.

He had sought these solitudes to find
some specific against the unrest and discontent
of his heart. He had flown from
the haunts of men, craving the healing
power of nature, trusting to find forgetfulness
in her potent charm. He had come
to the very fountain head of nature, hoping
to forget Patricia, and behold, nowhere was
she more present to him. Nowhere did the
spell of her beauty, her contradictions, work
such havoc to his peace of mind.

The very motion of the boat, the blue
waters of the lake, the " breath of the pine
woods' the low rapid flight of a bird across
the skv, all reminded him of her, and brought
her so vividly before him as to cause him
defined physical pain.

It was not, however, as the Miss Hildreth
of the present, that she appeared to him —
the successful beauty, the indifferent woman
of the world, the jesting advocate of to-day's
hateful creeds — but rather as the Patty often
years ago ; the Patty of his first passion,

the love of his adolescence, the clear-eyed,
honest-hearted, bewitching, wilful Patty of
his first devotion.

He had sought for forgetful n less, but he
had not found it ; and so, after a month spent
in unsatisfying and unsatisfactory inter-communion,
he repacked his portmanteau one
glorious autumn morning, bid good-bye to
his little skiff, and to the silent sympathy
of the pine woods, cast a long regretful look
over the deep blue lake, and turning his steps
towards the inartistic railway station, five
miles distant, by afternoon of the same
day was crossing the tortuous streets of
Boston, preparatory to ensconcing himself
comfortably in a "Pullman Express" for
New York.

He reached that city in due time, and was
at once immersed in the rush and go of its
restless life. The streets were all alight,
the open windows of hotels and restaurants
displaying brightly dressed groups within,
to whom the chief aim of existence for

the hour was apparently, the excellence of
a favourite ice, or the proper quality of
the champagne fraj)pe. Along the side-walks
a varied crowd was constantly passing ; shop-girls
mostly, in large hats and pretty frocks,
whose tired faces were flushed and eager, or
pale and weary, according as they walked
alone, or kept company with some smart
young male assistant. Philip noticed with
a half wonder, that each of these work wis
wore long gloves half-way up their arms,
and that their low shoes were *' dressy" to
a degree, with patent tips and abnormally
high heels, on which they limped along with
heroic courage. The theatres were not out
as yet ; but Delmonico's and the Brunswick,
where in the full swing of early evening traffic,
and many were the envious glances cast by
the weary pedestrians upon the more favoured
few of fortune within those hospitable walls.

As ]mr. Tremain let himself into his
rooms with a pass key, he could not but
feel how dreary and un-homelike was such

a return. He bad not telegraphed word
of his arrival, and so found himself the sole
occupant of the dark building ; his servant
and the care-taker were evidently enjoying
life abroad this fine evening, and apparently
the other habitues of the place were
similarly employed.

He threw open the door of his sitting-room
and entered ; the room was in semi-darkness,
the only light being a reflected
one from the street lamps, and the moon
which shone through the unsheltered windows.
The furniture looked ghostly in the chintz,
over-coverings, and the faint gleam of gilded
picture-frames and mirrors only added a further
touch of unreality. On the writing-table
he could just distinguish a pile of letters
and newspapers — the accumulation of four
weeks' absence ; they seemed to him as the
hand of civilisation, stretched out across
the month of isolation and solitude, which
separated him from the world of yesterday
and to-day.

Striking match lie lit two of the wax
candles in a small girandole ; but they served
only to make the darkness more apparent, and
he was turning impatiently towards his bedroom,
still holding the lighted taper, when the
sound of quick hurrying feet, coming rapidly
up the stone staircase, arrested his attention.

Why these particular sounds should at
once arouse surprise and apprehension in his
mind, he could not tell ; many footsteps passed
up and down the staircase in the course of the
twenty-four hours, and as a rule he neither
heard nor heeded them. But something in
these quick agitated steps, with the tap of a
lio^ht heel on each stair, disturbed him
strangely.

The wax vesta burned down to his fingers
and went out ; and as the red spark vanished
the footsteps halted, and Philip could distinctly
hear the hurried respiration and quick-caught
breath of some one just without his door. No
sensation of fear or supernatural alarm overcame
him, he stood quite still and waited ;

and as lie thus stood counting these brief
moments of suspense, he felt himself to be
saying inwardly, that he was not at all
surprised, it was only what he had expected —
this night visitant — it was what he had come
home for, the reason why he dared not linger
longer beside the blue lake, in the depths of
the keen-scented hemlock forest.

The hurried breathing grew more distinct ;
an uncertain hand was laid upon the handle of
the scarcely closed outer door ; there was the
click of the catch being pushed hastily back ;
the rustle of a garment, the quick steps along
the short passage, and then a figure detached
itself from the enshrouding shadows and stood
irresolute upon the threshold of the room.

A figure closely muffled in a long dark
cloak, and a shadowy hat, beneath whose wide
brim a white face flashed, and two eager eyes
looked out, peering into the half lighted
obscurity beyond.

It was but half a second the figure stood
there, irresolute ; then with a swift impulsive

gesture it moved forward towards
Philip, and as the light from the candles
fell full upon the face, Mr. Tremain started,
and then advanced quickly.

'miss Dick!" he exclaimed. "You,
and here ! "

*' Oh, yes," cried that young lady, still
breathing very fast and speaking incoherently,
her words rushing one on top of the other.
Oh, yes, it is I, and I am so glad to find
you ! I've been here twice already, each
evening since we came back, and the door
was always locked. To-night I saw the
lights and thought at least I should hear
something about you. Oh, Mr. Tremain,
I am so glad you have come back at
last ! "

She stopped and looked at him appealingly,
clasping and unclasping her fingers,
with nervous impatience.

Philip was the least vain of men, but
for one moment certainly a terrible thought
did half form itself in his mind, as to the

motive which had induced this most compromising
visit. Was his little friend Miss
Dick quite off her head, and was he in anyway
answerable for her aberration ? The
idea was not agreeable.

*' My dear Miss Dick," he began, gravely,
but she interrupted him.

''Oh, I thought you were never, never
coins back again ! That idiot of a care-taker
and your fool of a servant, couldn't, or
wouldn't, tell me anything about you. They
only grinned discreetly behind their hands.
Oh, what have you been doing to stay away
like this, and never leave a scrap of an
address behind you ? "

Good heavens ! " thought Philip,
'* decidedly the poor girl is out of her
mind, and if Tompkins, or Mrs. Barker have
seen her like this, it will be all over town
in a week, and her reputation nowhere."

My dear Miss Dick," he said again,
but Miss Darling evidently had no ears save
for her own voice.

*' It's perfectly dreadful — awful," she
continued. " It has nearly broken my heart,
and to think you should be away just when
you were most needed, and I coiildnt find
you. And it is so hot, too, and such a
season to be shut up in New York. Oh,
why didn't you come before ? What made
you go away at all ? I told Esther I Avould
never rest until I found you, because I knew
you could do something. You have always
been a good friend to me, Mr. Tremain, you
won't refuse me, will you ? "

The tears were in her bright brown
eyes as she spoke, and Philip, roused out
of his self-consciousness by the sight of her
earnestness, found himself saying, impetuously
:

What is it I can do for you, Miss
Dick ? You know I won't refuse, whatever
you may ask."

'' Oh, then go, go at once ! Why do
you stand looking at me so stupidly ? "
she cried, impatiently. '' Every moment is

precious, and here you are wasting them by
the dozen ! " She stamped her foot. " Why
don't you go ? " she repeated.

Philip, made more and more bewildered,
could only look at her in vacant surprise,
a fact that had the effect of reducing Miss
Darling to silence, out of sheer rage.

Go ? " he said, slowly, repeating her
words mechanically. " Go ? — but where am
I to go?"

Ah," she gasped, beating her hands
together, " how stupid you are, how cold,
how cruel ! Where are you to go ? Why
but no, stay, it will be better if you come
with me. Will you come — at once, directly ?
Here is your hat," and she caught up that
article of apparel from off the table, and
held it out to him. *' Oh, do make haste,"
she cried, " do come with me at once."

But Mr. Tremain was not to be carried
off in so unceremonious a manner. He took
the hat out of her hand and laid it back
on the table, before he said very quietly :

"My dear Miss Dick, I will go with
you to any place you may name ; but
first, I do beg of you, compose yourself
a little, and tell me what it is you want
me to do ; who it is you want me to see ? "

Miss Darling pulled herself together with
-an evident effort.

I want you to go with me to Ludlow
Street Jail," she said, speaking very slowly,
'* to see Patricia Hildreth."

Had a cannon ball dropped at his feet,
or the foundations of the house given way
beneath him, Mr. Tremain could not have
experienced a more sudden or appalling
shock. The words reached him, but it
seemed as if they came from miles away.
He saw the dark, alert figure standing
before him, whose bright, dark eyes never
left his face, whose nervously working hands
were so suggestive ; but it lost all identity
to him. It was not Dick Darling who
stood there, entreating him to make haste,
not to delay ; it was some phantom, some

VOL. n. T

Nemesis from out the past, whose words and
entreaties were as unreal as the shadows that
came creeping out of the corners, revealing
bit by bit the cunningly-concealed spectres.

'come with you to Ludlow Street!" he
gasped at last, *' to see Patricia Hildreth.
What do you mean ? "

** Oh, I mean what I say," cried Dick,
her voice high and strained ; *' it is quite
true. She is there. She has been arrested."

Arrested ! " gasped Philip. '' Arrested
—Patricia ! "

Oh ! yes, yes," sobbed Miss Darling,
the tears running down her face. '' She
has been arrested, she is in prison — she
will die. She is innocent. I know she is
innocent, I know it."

Arrested ! " cried Philip again, unable to
grasp more than this one direct fact, and
quite unmindful of Dick's tears and protestations.
'' Arrested ! And for what ? "

Oh, that is the most terrible thug of
all," wept Dick. 'rit's so horrible I don't

know how to tell you ; she is arrested on a
suspicion of murder."

'* My God ! " cried Philip. '' What horrible
mockery is this ? "

''Oh, will you come, will you come?"
implored Dick, wringing her hands. " Oh,
only think, she is shut up there all alone.
She has been in that hateful place for hours,
for days, while we have all been away dancing,
and flirting, and being happy and amused ;
and she has been alone — all alone — shut up in
prison with no one to go to her, no one to
help her. Oh, I could beat myself for never
knowing, never dreaming of her trouble ! "

'rit is horrible," said Philip again, in the
same low, inward voice in which he had
spoken since Dick's first outburst. " It is
infamous. Who has done this thing ? Who
has brought this charge ? "

He spoke sternly, and looked at Dick with
eyes that burned her very soul.

The Russian Count," she answered slowly.
"Vladimir Mellikoff."

Mr. Tremain made no reply. He turned
abruptly away from her and walked over to
the window, and stood there looking out into
the night.

The street was a quiet one at all times,
and now even a solitary passing footstep
echoed far ahead in the absolute silence. But
had it been mid-day, with its roar and rumble
of traffic, Philip would have heeded it as little
as he now heeded the stillness and desertion.

His mind was far away, busy with a
thousand wild conjectures, a thousand improbable
suggestions. The whole of the past
ten years appeared to roll themselves out
before him, full to overflowing with dark
suspicions, unassailable doubts, maddening
possibilities. The poison distilled by Miss
James's smooth tongue had done its work ;
how could he tell what those past years might
cover, what deed or crime be hidden in their
protecting folds ?

Ten years lay between him and the Patricia
of his youth ; was his faith in her so unshaken

as to admit of no room for doubt ? Ah, there
lay the sting ! He did doubt, and in that lay
the keenest torture of this terrible moment.
Indeed, as he thought of her mocking raillery,
of her pronounced indifference, her assumed
cynicism and misanthropy, he felt there wa
room for doubt, there was room for suspicion,
there was room for condemnation. Would
to God, that he could proclaim aloud a like
faith in her innocence, a like belief in her
unsullied past, a like valour in her defence,
as did Miss Darling 1 Would to God he had
but the memory of her — pure and untainted —
as she was ten years ago in which to trust,
and by which to fight for her !

For indeed, he knew it would come to that ;.
he should fight for her, yes, inch by inch,
even though the game was a losing one. He
would give her of his best, he would bring to
bear all his possessions of legal acumen, brilliant
pleading, forensic argument ; she should
not fail or be beaten down, if his strength
and his reputation counted for anything.

He had loved her — yes — and he loved her
now ; he knew it ; better perhaps in her hour of
humiliation than in that of her triumph ; and
for that love's sake he would spend and be
spent in her behalf. And yet, ah yet, there
must be ever and always resting between him
and her that

Little rift within the lute,
That ever widening, makes the music mute."

Meantime Miss Darling, standing where
he had left her, watched him keenly. The
eyes beneath the broad brim of her hat were
soft and gentle, the tears still lay upon her
cheeks. Instinctively she recognised the
anguish of the man before her, and she respected
it, looking on with reverent but
unspoken sympathy. Presently she moved
quietly across the room and approached him ;
he paid no attention to her ; apparently he
had forgotten her very existence. She put
one hand timidly on his arm.

Will you come ? " she said. " Oh, will

you come with me — to Patricia ? Only think
how long she has waited ! Only think of
Patricia — our Patricia — in prison on so vile
a suspicion ! "

He looked down upon her, and at the hand
resting on his arm ; his face was drawn and
aged, his eyes dark with suffering.

Yes, I will come," he said ; " I will
go with you. My God, only to think of it !
Patricia — Patty — in prison, and for murder!"
He took up his hat mechanically, and
followed her as she led the way down the
dimly lighted stairs, their footsteps echoing
drearily behind them. And so together they
passed on and out of the dark building, and
were swallowed up in the greater darkness of
the night.

The wax candles in the wall-sconces burnt
on all through the long night hours, and
died out only as the early sunlight struck
athwart their feeble rays. On the table lay
the accumulated letters and papers, one
marked across the face " immediate," in a

strong, bold hand. On the floor a glove had
dropped, and close beside the door lay a
withered rose-bud, as it had fallen from
Dick's breast-knot.

And the morning hours grew into noontide,
and gave place to afternoon, followed
in turn by the shadows of evening ; but
neither the master of the deserted room, nor
the girl with the bright eyes beneath the
wide hat, came back to it. And so another
day was born, and died, and slipped away
into eternity within the narrow confines of
that solitary chamber.

END OF VOL II.

Charles DICKENS AND Ji\A .S . STAL PALACE Press.

W

M

M

i^m^

^-■^^^k.

;^

-^.

L I E) Mary

OF THL

University

or ILLINOIS

82.3

5t46Zm

V.3

kir-,;.

in 2010 with funding from

University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign

http://www.archive.org/details/misshildrethnove03stev

FIRE. By Mks. Diehl. 2 vols.

NIGEL FORTESCUE. By W. Westall. js,

PERIWINKLE : Ax Actoeiogeaphx. 3 vols.

THE MAN WITH A SHADOW. By G. M. FfKJS'. 3 vols.

A LEAL LASS. By R. Ashe King. 2 vols.

THE PIT TOWN CORONET. By Charles J. Wills. 3 vols.

A RECOILING VENGEANCE. By Fbajjk Barrett. 2 vols.

Ward and Downey, Publishers, London.

31 flobcl.

A. DE GRASSE STEVENS,

AUTHOR OF
OLD Boston," "the LOST DAUPHIN," "Weighed IN THE BALANCE,

in \Lhree '^ohtmc0.
VOL. Ir.

LONDON :

WARD AND DOWNEY,

12, YORK STREET, COVENT GARDEN, W.C.

1888.

hall rifjhtfi reserved']

CONTEXTS.

CHAPTER I.

A VIGIL

CHAPTER II.

LUDLOW STREET JAIL

PAGE


CHAPTER III.

"fathom her motives, PHILIP" 33

CHAPTER lY.

Mixed MOTIVES . 54

CHAPTER V.
A Woman's logic . 74

CHAPTER VI.

A QUESTION OF COMITY 8G

NON-COMMITTAL



CHAPTER VIII.

A DAMAGING PROMISE IT

CHAPTER IX.

CONFLICTING IDENTITIES

CHAPTER X.

A GLEAM OF LIGHT

CHAPTER XI.

CHECKMATE

CHAPTER XIII.

NO EXPLANATION

13^





CHAPTER XII.

OUR LADY OF KAZAN . . . . . .183



CHAPTER XIV.

Fags

FORGIVE her" 218

CHAPTER XV.
Vladimir's welcome 233

CHAPTER XVI.

AN ETERNAL FAREWELL 251

CHAPTER XVII.

AFTER TEN YEARS 268

CHAPTER I.

A VIGIL.

The news of Patricia Hildretli's arrest on
a criminal warrant lead flown like will-fire
throughout society. Mr. Tremain found himself
almost the only one of his ^vorld not
cognisant of the facts from the beofinnino- •
and as he listened to one garbled statement
after another, coloured according to the
narrator's fancy, he cursed the evil fortune
and his own selfishness, that had kept him
so effectually out of the way, and made him
play so blindly into the enemies' hands.

He knew very well that had he been
at home, or allowed his letters and papers

VOL. ni. B

to lie fonvarclecl to him, matters would never
have reached so serious a pass ; but shutting
himself away as he had done from all outside
communication, there had been no one at
hand to avert the blow as it fell, or to force
a more definite showing from the attacking
parties, before the extreme measure of arrest
was put into execution.

Esther Newbold's absence, and the uncertain
movements of the Deerhoimd, had
proved an additional disaster for Patricia.
It was only on the yacht putting in at IS^ew
London, that Esther heard of her friend's
trouble. A flaming poster outside the hotel
had caught Mrs. Newbold's attention as she
sauntered along the planked side walk with
Miss Darling, and the next moment they were
both reading with horrified comprehension the
bold sensational headings :

"Arrest of Miss Hildreth. Further developments
expected shortly. Miss Hildreth's
appearance in Ludlow Street, etc., etc."

These were the lines, in staring red letters,

that first greeted Esther on her lauding, after
a three weeks' cruise ; and their effect upon
her can better be imagined than described.
She was, however, essentially a person of
action, and not an hour had passed before
she, her husband, and Dick Darling, were
on their way to New York, leaving the yacht
and its guests to dispose of themselves.

That Patricia should be in such dire
trouble, and alone, struck Esther as something
so preposterous as to be almost incredible.
Patricia, who counted her lovers and admirers
by the score ; who was always triumphant
and victorious and worshipped wherever she
appeared ; whose smile was a reward highly
coveted ; whose favour was a prize eagerly
courted — to be in prison, arrested on some
crime too horrible even to be named. Alone ;
subjected to indignities and privations whose
very meaning had been hitherto unknown to
her easy, luxurious existence.

Ah, do let us get to her at once," Esther

had cried, imploringly, after she had poured

B 2

out all the horrible story in George NewbokVs
astonished ears. " Only to think of her in
that dreadful place ; how she must suffer 1 And
in this weather too, so hot and breathless as
it is : and we never knowing all the time, but
enjoying ourselves like brutes and heathens !
Oh, Patricia, Patricia, is this what your wilfulness
has brought you to ? Oh, George,
do make haste ; and to think what a viper
we entertained in that dreadful Count Ellis


Well, he certainly hasn't turned out an
angel," answered George, in his slow fashion.
For once, my dear Esther, the scripture
has gone back on itself, for he was a stranger,
and we made him very welcome ; in return
for which he took us in most neatly."

'don't be profane," retorted his wife, "Pm
sure this is no time for such joking. Isn't
poor Patty a lesson to us all, and the evil
that has overtaken her a judgment on our
folly ? But will you make haste ? We shall
lose the train if you are so deliberate.

There's the gig along-side at last ; good-Lye,
my Mimi, be very good and you shall come
to Mumsey in a day or two."

She put her little daughter out of her
arms, drew down her veil, and hurried off
her husband and Miss Darling, without
further leave-takings. Little Marianne stood
on the deck straining her blue eyes for a last
glimpse of the dancing boat, her white frock
and golden hair fluttering the lio^ht breeze.

Mr. Tremain found himself embarked on
a fruitless expedition when he yielded to
Dick Darling's entreaties and started off impetuously
to visit Miss Hildreth in prison,
and, as Dick evidently expected, wrest her
there and then from its odious cbn fines.

Indeed, had he been less overwhelmed by
the calamity that had fallen upon Patricia,
he would have saved himself the needless
journey ; for, although the evening was still
young when they reached the gloomy buckling,
no amount of bribery or corruption could
effect an entrance at that hour. In vain

Philip pleaded the exigencies of the case
and his own legal position ; the not too polite
official was adamant to all entreaties! His
instructions were decisive ; any one washing
to see the prisoner must come at the proper
hours, and with a proper pernnt.

But I am her counsel," urged Philip,
with a reckless disregard of truth.

The man looked at him disdainfully. " I
guess that won't Avast, Judge," he said, and
turned away determinately.

Mr. Tremain looked down at Dick, who
stood crying openly beside him, not even
taking the trouble to wipe away the tears
as they fell.

It's no use, Miss Dick," he said, " we
can do nothing until morning:. You must
let me take you home."

''Oh, it's too horrible," cried Dick, sobbing.
'' It's brutal, it's wicked ! Only to think that
poor Patricia is somewhere in this awful
place and we can't get to her. Oh, Mr.
Tremain, which one of those dreadful windows

with the iron bars belongs to her ? " she

coukl not bring herself to say " Cell," so choked
down the final \Yord in a fresh burst of tears.
Ah, which indeed ! " answered Philip,
sadly. The same thought had come to him,
as his eyes traversed quickly the long blank
stone front of the building, its monotony
of outline only broken by the narrow barred
casements.

Behind which of those apertures lay
Patricia, abandoned in her extremity ? Her
beauty tarnished, her fair name tossed from
lip to lip, her character at the mercy of an
unsympathetic human world.

'soh, Patty, Patty," he cried to his own
heart ; '' has it come to this, my love ? Have
all your pride and loveliness brought you
only to this ? "

He turned away slowly, and, drawing Dick's

hand within his arm, led her to the carriage

that stood some little distance down the street.

*' Will you go back to Esther? " he asked

as he helped her in.

"Yes," she answered; 'rand oh, Mr.
Tremain, come with me ; oh do, please do."

He hesitated for a moment : then divino;
the address, stepped in and seated himself
beside her.

Neither Philip nor Miss Darling ever forgot
that long night drive, or the moving
panorama made up of lights and shops and
people, that seemed for ever passing and repassing
before them. It was as if they stood
still, while all this restless pageant went
by them in brilliant sequence.

As they turned into Broadway, and drove
somewhat slowly up that narrow thoroughfare,
they met the stream of pleasure-seekers at
its height ; the theatres were just over, and
a crowd of brightly-dressed, gay voiced people
were passing from the entrances into the
streets. Now and then a light laugh, or
some careless jest, would reach the silent
occupants of the carriage, and wound them ;
as a blow wounds falling upon a hurt still
rest and bleeding.

Ob," cried Dick at one such moment,
*' how cruel the world is, how unfeeling !
Ah, Mr. Tremain, how can any one laugh
and jest when she lies in that awful place,
while Patricia is in prison ? "

But Philip said nothing ; the anguish of
his own heart was too absorbing to leave
room for superfluous words of comfort. For
no anguish is so great and so overwhelming,
as the knowledge of one's powerlessness to
help when one's best beloved is in dire
need of aid.

Fifth Avenue was reached at last,
heralded a long way off by the huge
electric transparency, which flaunts its advertisement
high above the heads of the
pedestrians, and causes the very stars of
heaven to pale before its garish light.

Turning down a side street, well up among
the " thirties," and then into Madison Avenue,
the coachman drew up before a large brown,
stone house, across whose many-windowed
front not a light was to be seen, save the

faint gas-jet of the ornamental brass sconce
in the vestibule.

Miss Darling sprang out unassisted, and
running quickly up the steps, pulled out a
latch-key and swung open the door as Philip
came up behind her.

You will find Esther in her morning-room,"
she said briefly, and leaving him
to find his own way, turned towards the
stairs. Philip watched her as she mounted
them wearily, step by step. There was
dejection and despondency in her movements,
and in the tired droop of the young
shoulders beneath the long dark cloak.

A deeper feeling than he had ever
believed it possible for him to entertain
for gay, volatile Miss Dick, had been born
within his heart that evening ; and, as he
stood now" and watched the girlish figure
fade into the shadows of the upper corridor,
it was with a sense of sudden loneliness
that he turned and walked slowly across
the wide entrance hall.

Mrs. Newbold's town house wore that
look of desolation and inhospitality that is
born of holland covers over the furniture,
carpets rolled up into corners, statues,
ornaments, and chandeliers wrapped in protecting;
winding-sheets. The advent of the
mistress of the house had been sudden and
unexpected, and the mansion had not as yet
thrown off the depressing atmosphere of
care-takers and board-wages.

In Esther's boudoir, however, matters
were a little more homelike ; the cases
had been taken off the chairs and couches,
and various feminine belongings, flowers
and books, redeemed somewhat the forlornness
of shrouded pictures, and a fireless
hearth.

Mr. Tremain knocked in a perfunctory
way on the door, and immediately Mrs.
Xewbold's voice bade him enter. He found
her lying on a couch drawn up to an open
window, over which the Venetian blind had
been lowered.

She had been crying bitterly, and the
face she raised from the pillows bore buta
faint resemblance to its usual insouciant
blonde prettiness, in the blurred lines,
heavy eyes, pallid cheeks, and tumbled
golden hair.

She sprang up impetuously on seeing
Mr. Tremain, and ran towards him holding
out her hands in welcome.

"Oh, Philip," she cried, "have you come
at last ? Oh, is it not all too dreadful ?
Have you seen her, Philip ? How is she ?
Is she brave and full of courage ? Oh,
Patricia ! poor, poor Patricia ! "

Mr. Tremain took her hands in his ashe
answered :

No, I have not seen her, Esther. We
were too late."

She turned away from him and sank
down again on the couch, looking up at
him with the tears gathering in her tired
blue eyes.

"I made sure you would see her," she

said, simply. ''I never doubted sour power,
I never thought you could fail."

"Alas, I am not omnipotent," he
answered, somewhat bitterly. 'even a little
brief authority, officially bestowed, can render
me powerless. It will not be for very long,
however. I shall go back again at the earliest
possible hour in the morning."

'' And you will help her, Philip, you
will not let any foolish feeling of pique come
between you and her now ? You will not
remember her cruelties, you will only think
of her sufferings ? Oh, Philip, you must
take up this matter for her, and you must
plead for her, when the time comes, as
you have never done before. You will,
Philip, promise me you will ? "

'there is little need for that," he
answered, sadly ; "all my services are at her
disposal if she will accept them."

Yes, I am sure of it," replied Esther.
Ah, Philip, I did not think this would bethe
service she was to require from you.

when I begged you, that hist day at the
Folly, to help her if occasion came."

No, nor did I," answered Philip, quietly ;
then after a moment's pause he continued :
*' Do you think, Esther, you can bear to tell
me a little more about this matter ? Sofar
I know nothing beyond the bald fact of
the arrest, and the nature of the charge
lodged. Miss Darling was too much overcome
to enter into particulars. If I put a
few plain questions, will you answer them ? "

'* Oh, yes, I will try," replied Mrs.
Newbold, clasping her hands closely together,
and looking earnestly up at him.

Philip drew forward a low chair, and
placing it in front of her, sat down wearily,
and with a half sigh.

"Do you know when — she — she was
arrested ? " He avoided Patricia's name
with something; of the same dread which
makes us hesitate over that of one but lately
dead.

"I think it was only a few days ago,

but I don't know exactly ; I cannot give
you the precise date," answered Esther.

"Ah, that accounts for the delay that
has occurred in their pushing on the matter,"
said Philip, more to himself than to her.
*' August is the legal holiday month, and
Anstice, the District Judge, before whom
the examination, if there be one, would be
made, is not due here for another week.
We have therefore seven clear days before
us, in any event, without counting on the
chapter of accidents for further delays. Now
tell me, who was it brought the application
for arrest ? "

Count Vladimir MellikojBf,*' replied Mrs.
Newbold. '"' Oh, Philip," she added, her eyes
flashing, '•' is he not a coward, and does not his
seem coward's work, when one remembers how
he was received and trusted?"

Mr. Tremain answered by a gesture of
his hand.

One would rather not think of that," he
said ; " let us try and put aside personalities,

and look at the case only from an outside
point of view. You may be very sure Count
Mellikoff wasted neither time, nor the opportunities
afforded him by your hospitality, to
work out his nefarious scheme. But what
I wish to ask you, Esther, will, I know,
grieve you to answer ; still I must clear up
one or two points in my own mind, before
I see her. Who was the person murdered ;
and why is she suspected of complicity in
the crime ? "

He spoke sternly, and the hard lines
of his face appeared in greater prominence.
Esther looked at him half frightened.

"He believes her guilty," she thought,
with quick and decisive perception. " How
terrible ! But it is so, I see it in his face."
Then she said aloud, and with a slowness
that was almost hesitancy : " The name of the
murdered man was Count Stevan Lallovich ;
but I can't tell you — that is — at least I don't
know, how it is that they prove Patricia to
be mixed up in the horrible aSiiir."

Mr. Tremain noted her hesitancy and
the sudden reserve that had come over her ;
he put it down to the knowledge of some
facts she was wilfully withholding from him,
and this suspicion added weight in the scale,
that balanced so evenly between Patricia's
innocence and o-uilt.

o

When he next spoke his voice was even
colder and harder than before.

There is something very mysterious in
the whole affair," he said, looking Esther
straight in the eyes; 'sit seems inconceivable
that an American citizen should be arrested
in her own country, on the charge of a
foreign absent, for a murder committed ina
foreign land, on a foreign subject. Of
course Count Mellikoff has no power to
arrest of himself; he must therefore, have
laid sufficiently compromising evidence before
our authorities to obtain a warrant, and an
officer to execute it. As it appears now the
whole affair reads more like a midsummer
madness than anything else ; but a madness

VOL. III. c

pregnant with serious complications and
results. Who was this Stevan Lallovich,
Esther, and did — she — know him ? "

*' He was a cousin, or a relation, or a near
connection of the Russian Tsar's," answered
Mrs. Newbold, still avoiding Philip's eyes.
I heard Patricia — I mean I believe she did
once admit knowing him when she was in
St. Petersburg. He was a great swell there,
I am told, and the favourite of the Court
society. I don't know anything more about
it, Philip, indeed I don't. And oh, it is all
so horrible, and so dreadful, how can you
go on asking questions in that cold way ?
It's just as if you admitted to yourself that
there was a possibility of her — her knowing
something about the death of this miserable
man. Oh, Philip, how can you doubt her?
How can you, when you think of her in prison,
and remember it is Patricia, our own Patricia,
they accuse of this terrible crime ? "

And Esther buried her face in her hands
weeping passionately.

But Mr. Tremain was scarcely moved ;
he remained sittings resting; his head on
his hand, and apparently lost in close study
of the carpet under his feet. Esther's words
rang in his ears.

Oh, Philip, how can you doubt her ? "

And yet he knew he did doubt her. He
knew that when Mrs. Newbold admitted
Patricia's acquaintance with the murdered
Stevan Lallovich, and placed that acquaintance
within the ten years of Miss Hildreth's absence
those ten unexplained years — he felt all the
old distrust and suspicion leap into life
again, and range themselves before him in
mute confirmation of Miss James's calculated
insinuations.

Ten years is a long time — long enough
to plant and sow and reap — long enough to
sink one's self to the neck in intrigue, to bury
one's self in crime."

How could he declare her innocent when
this terrible, impassable gulf lay between

them ? Since she had known this Stevens

2

Lallovich, might not another of Miss James's
suppositions prove true? Might she not
also have known Vladimir Mellikoff in that
past, and have reason to fear him now ? How
much could he believe even of what she,
Patricia, might tell him ?

Several long moments passed by in silence,
during which Esther sobbed hysterically,
before he roused himself, and, getting up,
said, very quietly : " I will not trouble you
further to-night, Esther ; you had better get
to bed, little woman. You do not quite trust
me, I know, but you may, my dear ; never
fear, she shall not suffer or be overcome if
I can prevent it. I will come back tomorrow
after — I have seen her — and tell you of
her."

Oh, Philip, be gentle to her," pleaded
Esther, " be very gentle ; remember you did
love her — once."

I am not likely to forget it," he replied,
and then he turned away abruptly and left
her.

All night long he walked to and fro,
up and down, across an open common of
waste land that skirted the railway at ,
and all night long, as the hours
crept by, and the stars faded, and the dawai
drew on, he fought the battle over and over
against himself — the battle of his love for
her, against his doubt of her. And when the
day broke in a sunrise of golden splendour,
it found him still uncertain, neither victor
nor vanquished ; still loving her, and still
doubting' her.

LUDLOW STREET JAIL.

Mr. Tremain did not return to his rooms
with the dawning of the day ; he indeed
shunned them with an almost superstitious
dread of what he should find there. It seemed
to his overwrought nerves that they must
for ever be haunted by the horrible spectres
evolved by Miss Dick, and by the memory of
her terror-stricken eyes and tear-stained face.

AVitli the lengthening of the morning
hours civilisation awoke again to its monotonous
round of employment. A grey-coated
policeman, making his way to the park, yawning
as he walked, and but half awake, passed
Mr. Tremain, and turning round stared at
him inquiringly.

And, indeed, Philip, as lie stood outlined
against the clear blue sky, his hands thrust
into his pockets, his hat drawn down over
his eyes, his face stern and pale, his dress
disordered from his long night vigil, appeared
a strangely incongruous figure, out of keeping
with the fresh dewy daintiness of the summer
morning, and might well arouse suspicions
in the commonplace mind of a respectable
Central Park policeman.

The pertinacity of the man's curiosity
awoke in Philip at last a sense of his position,
and brought back to him, with a sudden rush,
the reason of his presence there — the reason
of the dull anguish that grew into keener
sufferings with each heart-beat. In the bright
sunshine everything appeared more hard and.
real : the night vio-il had soothed him somewhat,
and the slow on-coming of the dawn
had held something of illusive hope in its
vague tertiary half-tones ; but with the breaking
forth of the sun, in the vast triumphant
heaven of illimitable blue, came the sternness

of reality, the hardness of fact, banishing the
gentler mood, and renewing the struggle and
vacillation of his mind against his heart.

As the bell of the Sacred Heart Convent
rang out for early mass, Mr. Tremain turned
his steps city wards, and, walking with long
swinging strides, was soon skirting the river
Boulevard, and, entering the Park on the west
side, made his way to the Fifth Avenue gates,
and so down that deserted promenade until
he came to an hotel ; here he went in, ordered
a room, and flinging himself on the bed fell
into a deep and dreamless sleep which lasted
for hours. It was nature's demand to recuperate
her exhausted faculties, and would
not be denied.

When Philip awoke it was close upon noon,
and greatly annoyed at the flight of time,
he swallowed a cup of tea and hurried away.
On reaching the gloomy building in Ludlow
Street, he demanded an interview with the
superintendent, and after considerable delay,
was admitted to that functionary's presence.

The office of prison superintendent is one
not altogether to be desired ; the men
who fill the post are usually drawn from
the rank and file of disappointed office seekers
on a larger scale, who for political reasons
consent to be mollified by the less honourable
appointment. As a rule they are neither
refined in mind nor manner, and, with an eye
to the main chance, look upon the inmates
committed to their charge as so many victims
to be fleeced according to their means.

As we know, there is a golden key that
fits all locks, before which even bolts and
bars have been known to fly apart, and nowhere
is its power so potent and so comprehensive
as in the cases of a certain class of
prisoners awaiting trial, who if they can control
the '^ coin '' can be supplied with every
luxury, save those of freedom and fresh air.

The man who received Philip, with a short
nod, was neither better nor worse than others
of his tribe. He was apparently very busy
or wished to seem so — over a large assortment

of letters and bulky documents, which,
he rustled ostentatiously, and a trifle offensively,
as he looked at Philip over his large
round spectacles, and bade him, "Morning."

Good morning," replied Mr. Tremain,
with considerable hauteur.

Now then, what can I do for you, sir ? "
asked the superintendent, fussily, and with
another documentary rustle.

'' I have called," said Philip, quietly, *' to
obtain full permission to visit and to wait
upon a lady now confined here, at all times,
and on all days, that I may deem it necessary
to do so. The lady's name is — Miss Patricia
Hildreth."

He hesitated as the last words passed
his lips ; how strange it seemed to use her
name to this coarse unsympathetic official,
how incompatible with all the traditions of
his and her past !

'ras for my own name," he continued,
"it may be better known to you than my
personal appearance,"

He drew out his note-book and put one
of his cards on the table. The superintendent
took it up and scrutinised it narrowly.

'' Oh, so you're Mr. Tremain, are you ? "
he said at last, rolling the card between
his fingers as he spoke. " Oh, yes, I've
heard of you, sir, often enough. I guess we
oughtn't to be strangers, Mr. Tremain, since
we're both in the same profession."

Oh, indeed," replied Philip, seeing an
answer was expected. "You are a lawyer,
then ? ''

"You can bet on that, sir; I've served
my day at the bar, out in the west therewith
a comprehensive jerk of his thumb,
*' and I can tell you we get through some
pretty tall work out there. Plenty of cases
like the one you're interested in, you know ;
plenty of blood-letting, and many a pretty
young woman mixed up in it all."

Philip winced ; this classing of Patricia
with the lawless crimes of a wild civilisation
seemed little short of brutality, and brought

home to hin with terrible exactitude the
attitude she had assumed, in the eyes of the
public, by her association with crime.

The keen eyes of the official noted Philip's
susceptibility, and he drew his own conclusions.

"Beg pardon if the subject's distressing,"
he said, not unkindly ; " it's a pretty bad
look-out as it stands, Mr. Tremain, and if
I was a friend of the lady's, I should own
to feeling uncommon squeamish. It takes
a deal of evidence to get a warrant issued
at any time, and specially against such a
top-sawyer as Miss Hildreth. But there, that
foreign Count, he's left no stone unturned ; he's
like one of those old blood-hounds dowai south,
that used to track the nio^o-ers before the war.
Hes tracked to some purpose."

All this was horrible to Philip. It seemed
to him he could not stand there and endure
this man's crude criticisms and cruel deductions,
passed so unconcernedly upon Patricia.
To him each look was an open insult, each
word a lash wherewith to strike at her ; they

brought the reality of her position before
him with unvarnished accuracy.

She was no longer Miss Hildreth surrounded
by her own little court, the cynosure
of every eye, the honoured guest of every
drawing-room, the reigning favourite of all
society ; she was only Patricia Hildreth,
stripped of all accessories, a woman under
arrest, a woman charged with murder, a
prisoner awaiting the law ; just as any other
of the poor wretches within those hateful precincts
awaited it, and with no more merciful
outlook than had they. It was indeed, as he
had said, horrible, incredible, maddening.

His silence had at length impressed itself
upon his loquacious companion, who now sat
looking up at him keenly, turning the visiting-card
round in his fingers. It was Philip who
was the first to speak, coming back to his
immediate surroundings with a start, and turning
so sad a face, and such sorrow-haunted
eyes, upon the little official, as to rouse to life
all the dormant sympathy of his shallow soul.

"AdcI the permit?" asked Philip, quietly.
'' T should like to use it now, if you please."

His very gentleness disarmed his opponent,
who without further comment drew towards
him a arose volume, and filling in a blank
order, tore it out noisily and handed it across
the table. Mr. Tremain took it and folded
it quickly without glancing at it. Each
separate item in this horrible drama was
agony to him ; he had never fully recognised
the gravity of Patricia's position until brought
face to face with the official details of it.

'^ I've made it out as you wanted," said
the superintendent a little protestingly, as
Philip took up the scrap of paper, *'ifc's
available for any day and any hour, up to
the official inquiry. You'd like to go to her
now, perhaps." He touched an electric bell,
and in the moment that passed before the
summons was answered, said somewhat awkwardly
: " I'm real sorry for the lady, Mr.
Tremain, we all are. I've done what I canto
make her comfortable, and let us hope her

stay with us won't be a even' long one. Woods"'
he continued, addressing the tall warder, who
had entered as he was speaking, " take this
gentleman to Miss Hildreth, and, look here,
he's to come and go as he pleases, do you
understand ? Good morning, Mr. Tremain."

Philip bowed and walked out of the
official presence as one in a dream. He lost
even his own identity as he followed the
guide down endless passages and corridors,
and heard the jingle of the keys he carried
suspended by a ring from his finger.

It seemed to him he was back again at
the Folly ; he was walking along the paths
of Esther's flower-garden, with the stillness
and hush of the night above and around
him. And now he had reached the little
hazel-copse and was pushing back the bough
that barred his entrance ; there was the marble
fountain in the distance, he could hear the
drip of the water as it fell from the upraised
vase in the boy Narcissus' hands ; and there
was the rustic bench, and the fixture in the

flowing, sliming, white drapery, that rose up
hurriedly and came forward a little, holding
the soft laces closely about the white throat
and heaving bosom.

Yes, it was Patricia — Patricia in all her
regal loveliness, in all her wealth of beauty ;
with her eyes glowing beneath the dark brows,
her mouth tremulous and wistful.

He started forward quickly — the vision
faded, the night fled away, the tinkling water-drops
resolved themselves into the surly clink
of key against key on the warder's ring. All
the poetry, and grace, and glory fell away
from him, as he found himself brought to
a standstill before a heavy door, into the
lock of which Woods fitted a key from those
on the ring, unlocked it, and with a slight
push threw it open.

Philip was conscious of a muttered " I'll
be back in an hour, sir," and the noise of
a closing door behind him ; and then he
realised that he was alone — face to face with
Patricia.

CHAPTER III.

FATHOM HEE MOTIVES, PHILIP.

'•' Philip ! " she cried, eagerly, and came forward,
her hands held out in greeting, and
thcD, as if struck by some sudden remembrance,
and with a return to her old imperious
manner, she dropped her hands, and turning,
walked away from him towards a small table
that stood at the further end of the room.

Mr. Tremain remained motionless just
within the door, his senses taking in by
degrees the surroundings, and growing accustomed
to the half gloom that served as an-apology
for daylight, and that made its way
through the narrow barred casement set high
up in the whitewashed wall.

The room was too large to be called a cell,

VOL. III. L)

and if sparsely furnished, was not uncomfortable.
Philip noted an easy-chair and a rug
spread beneath the table, while on the table
were writing materials and books, and a vase
of delicate-lied roses; the counterpart of
those he had seen in Esther's boudoir the
night before. It touched him strangely to see
this proof of Esther's love and Esther's faith ;
the golden blossoms came, he knew, from the
rose-houses at the Folly, and spoke eloquently
of Mrs. Newbold's belief in Patricia's innocence,
since their presence in that prison-room
fraught as they were with so many memories
must, if she were guilty, prove a scourge
rather than a comfort.

It took Philip some moments to realise his
position and to adjust his faculties ; when at
last he roused himself and looked across the
dimly-lighted room, it was to meet Patricia's
eyes fixed upon him with an expression of
proud endurance, that was more pathetic than
tears.

She had seated herself at the table and

was leaning' forward, her hands folded across
the portfolio that lay open before her. She
was dressed ia black, and the severe Times and
folds of the yielding cashmere seemed to
mark with painful accuracy the increased
slenderness of her form — a slenderness, it
struck Philip, that had almost reached attenuation.
Her face was very pale ; only the vivid
burning scarlet of her lips, and the blue fire
of her eyes beneath the straight dark brows,
redeemed it from absolute pallor.

The confinement, added to the tropical
heat without, and the close atmosphere
within, had told visibly upon her freshness
and vigour ; there was a lassitude about her
attitude and a weariness in the lines of her
face that bespoke mental as well as physical
exhaustion, and now that the sudden flush,
called up at sight of him, had died out of
her cheeks, Philip perceived how hollow they
had grown, and how the circles under her
eyes had darkened. Her hands as they rested
on the open portfolio were stripped of all their

D 2

wonted brave array of rings, and looked a&
white as the paper beneath them, the blue
veins painfully apparent.

It was thus that he saw her again ; it was
thus that they met after that parting on the
night of the theatricals when she, radiant,
beautiful, sparkling with jewels, triumphant
and successful, had laughed aside his love, and
swept by him with a light jest and indifferent
word, that wounded deeper than she might
ever know. He had gone from her then,
smarting under his humiliation, and in the
hour of his pain proffered the love she had
rejected to another woman, who could scarcely
be called her rival, and yet who influenced
him as potentially as she.

And what the result had been of that
second wooing he dared not now remember,
for even as he recalled his bondage to Adele
Lamien, and as he looked upon the wrecked
beauty, the stained loveliness of the woman
before him, so, too, he realised that he loved
her and her only, loved her better in this

her hour of disgrace and misery than ever
before ; and that never in reality had his
true allegiance swerved from this one woman
of his heart — Patricia Hildreth.

The silence between them grew oppressive,
embarrassing' ; it was she who first broke
through it, saying, in a voice that trembled
somewhat, and with a little laugh that
was but a pitiful mockery of its old gaiety,
and that ended in a half sob :

** So you have come at last to see me,
Philip. Well, and is it not absurd that you
should seek and find me — here ? " She
emphasized her words by a swift glance up
at the grated window and around the bare
un-homelike room.

At her voice Philip awoke as it were
to life, his eyes followed hers in that
momentary, but comprehensive glance, and
he understood only too well the meaning of
the quickly-repressed sigh, that half escaped
her, as she caught the gleam of yellow light
upon the roses in the tall vase.

He crossed the room quickly, and standing
beside her, rested his hand near hers, bending
over her and speaking rapidly, in a voice
whose deep emotion was only kept in check
by his strong will.

"Patty," he said, " believe me, I came
as soon as I could. I knew nothing of your
trouble until last evening, when Miss Dick
came to me about it. I lost no time then. I,
we, came to — to this place late as it was, but we
were not permitted to see you, we were obliged
to go away and wait until the morning."

At the sound of her homely, familiar
diminutive her lips trembled, though she
answered with a little smile :

Yes, the rules of this — this institution
are rigorously observed ; " then with a sudden
transition to the old mocking raillery : " Ah,
Philip, in all your gloomy prognostications
for my future you never once thought of
me as coming to — this — did you ? "

The flippant words and manner jarred on
him, he drew back from her mentally, and

found himself wondering; if there couhl be
any situation in life, however tragic, that
she would take seriously ; and as he thought
this, Patricia was noting; the difference
between his hand and hers, as they rested
on the table side by side. Hers so white
and dainty, luxurious, useless, with rounded
nails and rosy finger-tips ; his strong and
nervous, with fine lines in the long firm
fin hers and well - modelled wrist. Were
they not fitting types of their two characters ?
Patricia," he said again, and even more
gently because of his half criticism of her,
"it is a very terrible grief to me to find
you here, and to know the — the reason of
it all. I have come now because I want
you to hear one thing from my own lips,
and that is, Patty, that all I have, or can
give you at this time, is yours without the
asking, if you care to make use of it. I
know I may be too late in offering you my
services — indeed, I may be too late to be of
any practical advantage to you — but in any

case, as a lawyer, or a friend, I beg you
^Yill command me. You can surely trust
my friendship."

At the last word she smiled, and raising
her eyes met his, with a sudden leaping to
life of the old blue fire in her own.

Yes," she said slowly. " Yes, oh ^^es,
I am quite sure I can rely upon the disinterestedness
of your — friendship." Then,
after a moment's silence : " Have you seen
Esther ? How is she ? These are her roses.
Are they not exquisite, and redolent of the
Folly ? "

They are redolent of ony folly," he answered
sharply, and then continued, hurriedly
withdrawing his hand from its close proximity
to hers, ''I saw Mrs. Newbold last evening;
she has made herself quite ill by grieving
over you and your present position. She is
a most loyal friend, Patricia."

And loyalty is so priceless an ingredient
in — friendship," replied Miss Hildreth, *sone
should put a fictitious value upon it when

one finds it. Will you find a chair, Philip,
and sit down ? I believe I shall make
use of your protestations now."

He crossed the room in answer to her
invitation, brino^infj back with him the one
other chair afforded by official regulations.
Her eyes followed his movements, and a
smile, half tender, half wistful, trembled
about her lips, fleeting in its gentleness as
was her mood ; for, when Philip returned
and seated himself at some little distance
from her, the fine well-cut lips were closed
firmly and with something of sternness in
their expression.

"Philip," she began, in a low distinct
voice, and looking at him with resolute
decision, "let us have done with this beating
round the bush ; let us be quite frank
with one another for this one half-hour at
least. You knows why I am here ; you know
I have been arrested on a warrant for complicity
in a murder."

He made a hurried gesture of appeal.

and would have spoken, but lie appeared not
to heed him.

They are ugly words ; it is an ugly
charge to bring against me, but since it has
been brought I should like you to tell me,
Philip, just what will be the course pursued.
What will be the next move in the game ? I
have been here now — in prison — three days ;
ah, it does not do to mince one's words, my
friend ! And so far I am absolutely in the
dark regarding my possible fate. What will
happen to me next, Philip ? What is the next
step usual in such cases ? "

For a moment Mr. Tremain looked at her
in unfeigned amazement. Her coolness, her
almost indifference staggered him. He had
expected to find her overcome with apprehension
and dismay, full of fears for the future ;
dependent, humble, imploring. Instead of
which she met him with her accustomed
ease and grace, and with even a touch of
that old badinage which had always jarred
somewhat upon him.

He could not but contrast Dick Darling's
passionate pleading, and Esther's tears, with
the calmness and self-possession of the friend
for whom they wept and pleaded. Was she
worthy of the intense devotion it seemed
her prerogative to call forth ? With this
question his old doubt of her reawakened,
and when he answered her it was with a
possession no less assured than her own.

To reply with anything like accuracy
I must be professional," he said. " That you
will understand ? "

She made a little gesture of assent.

It is useless for me to cite any
usual course of procedure," he continued,
because all the details and circumstances
surrounding this case are of so peculiar a
character as to admit of no ordinary precedent.
You have been arrested, not under
the law strictly speaking, but under what
is defined as the comity of nations ; that is,
that sufficient evidence of an incriminating
character has been loosed against you to

induce the authorities to accede to the
pressing request of a foreign Power and to
issue a warrant for your arrest. This arrest
will be followed by an official inquiry, which
consists chiefly in an examination of the
warrant, to determine its regularity, and the
identity of the person therein named with
the person arrested."

'' And this examination," she interrupted,
'' where does it take place ? "

Before the District Judge. Undoubtedly
it will come under his jurisdiction."

^' And this particular inquiry — my inquiry?
How soon shall / be inquired into ? " she
asked again, with a scornful inflection of voice,
and a little smile.

Judge Anstice is the District Judge for
New York," he replied, in his coldest and
most professional manner ; *' this particular
examination will come on next week at the
latest, it has only been delayed on account
of Anstice's unavoidable absence."

"I see," she answered. 'rand what

happens next, Philip ? You must forgive
my utter ignorance, the situation is a novel
one for me."

Again there was a sufficiency of mockery
in her voice to strike Mr. Tremain afresh
with the complete incongruity of the entire
situation. It was evident she either did not,
or would not, comprehend the gravity of her
position ; she was still looking at it as an
outsider and not as the principal actor, the
pivot upon which all turned ; just as she forgot
or put aside the terrible nature of the charge,
and the fearful compensation demanded should
that charge be substantiated.

*' Good heavens," thought Philip ; *' she
cannot realise it is for complicity in a murder
that she stands accused ! She cannot realise
the nature of the obstacles that lie between
her and acquittal, or how awful will be the
consequences should our efforts in her behalf
fail."

Well," she said again, " what happens
next, Philip ? What is the next proceeding

of the law ? You have brought me as far
as the Judge and the inquiry, what follows
after ? '•'

'■' Should there be any fault in the warrant
papers," answered Mr. Tremain, speaking
against his will, and in short detached
sentences, " or should the evidence brought
forward by those who obtained the arrest fail
to be of such a character as to justify the
person under arrest being put on trial, that
person would be discharged, and therefore
freed from any further action. The arrest
in fact falls to the ground, unsubstantiated,
there being no prima facie case.'

'' And if otherwise, Philip ? If the evidence
is of such a nature as to prove a lorimer facie
case, what then ? "

She asked this question very slowly,
looking at him steadily with unflinching eyes.
Then," he answered as slowly, and with
every line of his stern face tense and drawn.
'* then I fear — I believe, that the person under
arrest would be dealt with in the same manner

as though legally proved guilty ; the accused
would doubtless be sent back to the country
from which the request for arrest emanated,
and where the crime was committed, for trial
according to that country's laws."

'' I understand," she said, after a moment's
absolute silence ; '' and in this particular
case — in my case — that would mean —
Petersburg ? "

He made no other reply save an assenting
gesture of his hand.

For a long' interval there was silence between
them ; a silence in which each was lost
to the other's presence, and which was so full
of dark meaning, so pregnant with dread
possibilities, as to leave upon each like traces
to those once impressed indelibly upon the
countenance of a saint of old, who for one
brief second was permitted to gaze into the
bottomless pit of anguish.

Again it was the woman who first broke
the silence, and though it was but the shortest
whisper it pierced Philip's soul with dismay.

'petersburg," she murmured, 'rand that
means the mercies of the Imperial Cimn-
cellerie ! "

Patty," cried Philip with sudden passion,
this terrible alternative must never come
to pass — it must be averted at all costs ; do
you hear me ? — onus be. You must be frank
with me now, as frank as though your last
hour had come. Answer me with absolute
truth the questions I shall ask. I can only
save you if you will save yourself."

She was not slow to read his meanioor
beneath his words, and the smile that curved
her lips was bitter enough as she exclaimed :

'' So you doubt me, Philip — you ! " Then
with a c[uick indrawn breath : " Ask any
questions you like, I will answer them."

You know by whom your arrest has
been accomplished ? " he said quickly, avoiding
any definite answer to her reproach.

Yes, by Count Vladimir Mellikoff."

And the charge ? "

"For being an accomplice in the murder

of Count Stevan Lallovich," she answered
quietly.

"Did you ever know this Count Stevan
Lallovieh ? "

Yes."

Did you know of his murder ? "

Yes."

Do you know the circumstances connected
with it ? "

"Yes."

'' Will you tell them to me ? "

I had rather not do so — now."

Very well, let that pass. Did you ever
know Count Mellikoff previous to meeting
him at the Folly ? "

No, I think not. One meets so many
people in the course of one's life ; but I am
quite sure I had never met Count Mellikoff
before."

Do you know of any reason he might
have for enmity against you ? "

No, indeed ; none whatever."

'' It is very extraordinary," Mr. Tremain

VOL. III. E

continued after this brief colloquy. " I cannot
but think there is some other person mixed
up in this affair besides Count MellikofiT,
some one who has perhaps personal motives
to serve in bringing this charge against you.
Can you think of any one who has sufficient
cause against you to make such a course
possible ? Any woman, let us say, to whom
the blackening of your character would ive a
vindictive satisfaction ? "

Ah," she replied, with a scornful gesture,
and the superiority of a beautiful woman over
her plainer sisters, *' I cannot follow you there.
We all have our feminine enemies without
doubt ; but who of us can put our finger on
the most venomous of them ? "

'all the same we must find this one,
Patricia ; when we find her we shall perhaps
unearth the secret of her spleen. I am convinced
Count Mellikofi" has a woman for his
ally."

Miss Hildreth shrugged her shoulders, but
made no further reply. Presently, however,

she turned a little more towards him, leaning
still farther across the table, and looking full
into his eyes, said, with sudden directness :

"Why do you ask nothing concerning
your friend, Adele Lamien, Philip ? Do you
not know that she, too, is implicated in this
affair?"

Adele Lamien ! " he exclaimed, taken
off his guard by the unexpectedness of the
assault. '•' Good Heavens ! what has she todo
with all this ? "

' Ah, what indeed ? " answered Miss Hill
slowly. "Fathom her motives, Philip,
and you will lay bare the secret of my arrest."

Patricia," he cried again, strangely moved
and excited by her words and manner, and
by the sudden return of that vague, intangible
influence, evoked by the mere mention of
Mdlle. Lamien's name, that had from the first
played so distinct a part in his intimacy with
her, " Patricia, what do you mean ? Explain
yourself What can Adele Lamien have to do
with you ? "

E 2

LIBRARY

UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS

*tali, what indeed?" she answered, in
the same measured tones, still looking at him
earnestly. " What indeed ? All — or nothing,
—Philip. Simply that."

I must know more," he exclaimed, almost
roughly. " You must tell me what you mean.
I must find her''

'that may prove more difficult than you
imagine," answered Miss Hildreth, quietly,
and as she said the words. Woods the warder
entered, and Philip understood the end of his
interview had come.

He got up mechanically and held out
his hand. '' It is best I should go for a little
while," he said. " I will come back again.
After all, we have settled very little."

*' I should say we had settled a great
deal," she answered, with another of those
quick, mocking smiles.

Then she bade him good-bye ; and it was
not until he had walked up the longer half
of Broadway, that Mr. Tremain remembered
two things. Patricia had calmly ignored his

outstretched hand, and he had forgotten to
inquire of the superintendent the nature of
Mdlle. Lamien's complicity in the charge
brought against Miss Hildreth.

MIXED MOTIVES.

Mr. TPtEMAiN had not been far wrongs when
he told Esther Newbold that the arrest of
so prominent and well-known a person as
Miss Hildreth bid fair to develop into an
international question.

The charge entered against her was of
too grave a nature not to excite and sustain
public attention. It certainly appeared to
the community at large a very arbitrary
and high-handed proceeding that an American
citizen could be thus imprisoned at the request
of a foreign Government.

Her offence being in no respect a political
one, this loophole of escape could not be

urged in her favour, for in that case the
foreign Government interested in her committal
would never have demanded her
arrest or expected her surrender into their
hands. Doubtless had Miss Hildreth been
but a poor workwoman, on whom depended
the support of her family, no such strenuous
efforts would have been put forth to accomplish
her arrest, or a precedence have
been created to deal with her position.

But being what she was, and controlling
almost unlimited wealth and influence,
the case assumed potential proportions, and
therefore it was deemed expedient to allow
an official inquiry to take place, and to
permit the greatest latitude in its operations,
even to the calling of witnesses.

To meet this position of affairs great exertions
were made on the part of Miss Hildreth's
friends, foremost among whom stood Philip
Tremain. He had quitted Patricia's presence,
at the conclusion of that first interview, as
decided in his own mind as to her gu'AX)

or innocence as he had been when he heard
of her arrest. Her words, her insinuations
her reticence, had all been so many damning
factors against her, while her manner, so
light-hearted, so inconsequent, so trivial,,
were the only elements in her favour.

To Philip, indeed, that very light-heartiness
— which he called flippancy — appeared
the most suspicious feature of her behaviour.
It seemed to him that any woman, no matter
how frivolous or hardened, must have given
vent to tears and protestations when brought
so close to the awful consequences of even
supposed guilt ; whereas, he found Miss
Hildreth even more composed — if that were
possible — and more trivial than at their parting
in the flies on George Newbold's birthday

night.

Good heavens, how long ago that seemed !
And what a page of tragedy — or was it
melodrama ? he had construed since then !

As he walked back to his rooms from
Ludlow Street Jail that hot August evening,

his mind was very full of Patricia's farewell
words :

Fathom Adele Lamien's motives, Philip,
and sou will lay bare the secret of my
arrest."

He had, indeed, in the sudden tumult
and agitation of Dick Darling's appearance
and communication, lost sight of Mdlle.
Lamien's claims upon him ; nor was it until
Patricia spoke with that enigmatical smile that
he remembered them, or paused to consider
what was likely to be her attitude in the
present complication of affairs.

He had neither heard from or of Mdlle.
Lamien since their parting, and while he held
himself bound to her by honour, he could not
help reflecting upon the fact that no actual
eno^ao-ement existed between them, and that
she might so regard their equivocal position,
and desire him to understand her silence
as an expression of her final refusal of his
suit. However that might be, he felt matters
had reached such a crisis as to make his

seeing her an imperative duty, since,
by so doing, he might elucidate the true
motive for Patricia's arrest. Recalling Adele
Lamien's last words, and the note of victory
in her voice — " surely this should be triumph
enough, even for me, to know that I have
won you from the remembrance, nay, from
the very presence of Patricia Hildreth " — he
felt more than ever convinced that Vladimir
Mellikoff had not only been helped by a
woman, but by this very woman.

Had not her own words betrayed her
jealousy and dislike of her former rival ?
What more natural than that she should
join issue with Count Mellikoff, and play
into his hands, not realising perhaps the
nature of the train she set alight, or the
gravity of the consequences ?

Was she not a Russian, and had not
Mellikoff himself enlightened him regarding
the system of that secret police, whose ranks
were reinforced by members of one's own
household ! According to the Count's black

note-book, the very people who ate your
bread, who clasped your hand in friendship,
who instructed your children, were, one and
all — if Kussian — banded against you, and
ready to strike at you in the dark at the
word of command.

Separated from Mdlle. Lamien, and freed
from the dominating influence of her personality,
Mr. Tremain realised how little
his own volition had had to do with his
offer of marriage to her.

In looking back at their interview, it
seemed to him he had been possessed by
some demon of evil who urged him on to
his doom ; and under whose specious
reasoning and cunning insinuations, his owen
stronger sense and will had become but
passive agents.

How gladly would he not now welcome
any honourable means of escape from the
light fetters that bound him ! He knew this,
and acknowledged it frankly ; even while he
also realised that, were he ao-ain to stand

before Adele Lamien, and listen to her low
suggestive voice, and look upon her strangely
familiar face, he would again yield to her
influence as he had yielded before, and be '
subjugated by that same nameless something,
to which he had succumbed before. It was
not a pleasant position for any man to accept,
and yet he was obliged to accept it from
its very uncontrovertibleness.

He walked all the way from Ludlow
Street to his up-town chambers with such
reflections for his only companions ; it was
not to be wondered at, therefore, that he
felt himself out of tune with his surroundings,
or that the light-hearted gaiety apparent
in those he met, whose labours over for the
day, were evidently on pleasure bent, jarred
upon him as exuberant examples of positive
callousness. Just so would they laugh and
smile and jest, even though the worst predictions
came true ; and she, counted guilty,
had already set sail across the ocean of
destiny to meet her fate — alone, in a land

where neither his skill nor his love could
avail her anything. He reached his rooms
at last, exhausted in body and mind ; he
found them in the most scrupulous order,
Harris, the invaluable, having reduced everything
to the level of every-day commonplace.
Not a trace of last night's emotional interview
remained, even Miss Dick's little glove
had been neatly folded and lay upon the
table, with the faded rose-bud from her
corsage placed on top of it. With a sigh,
Mr. Tremain threw himself down upon a
couch drawn up against an open window,
and passed his hand wearily over his forehead.
The silence and coolness and half
darkness were absolute rest and refreshment
to him after the heat and glaring sunshine,
and conflicting experiences of the day ; it
was a physical relief to sink into a state
of semi-apathy and to pass from the tense
excitation of feeling into a corresponding
insensibility.

Philip could not have told how long

he remained in this state of suspended
activity ; he was aroused at length by the
slamming to of the heavy outer door, and
with this ordinary sound he reawakened to
the exigencies of the immediate situation.
He got up wearily and struck a match,
not with any definite object in view, but
because he felt he must be doing something,
and that something could be better accomplished
in the light.

The slowly igniting candles on his writing-table
threw but a faint aureola into the darkness,
sufficient, however, to reveal to Philip's
eyes the pile of unopened letters, across the
topmost one of which was written that
under-scored immediate.

He took it up indifferently. " It is Main-waring's
writing," he thought listlessly, and
had almost a mind to put it by until a
more propitious moment — until he had
written that letter to Adele Lamien demanding
an interview, upon the wording
of which it had taken him so long to decide.

Holm Mainwaring's communication could not
possibly be of such importance as to demand
instant attention ; it had waited several
days as it was, it might wait a few hours
longer without disaster.

And so it is with the wisest and most
sagacious of us. We pray on bended knees,
and with streaming eyes, for one, only one
chance, one opportunity more wherein to work
out our salvation ; and then when the OTace is
given we reject it because, forsooth, it comes
to us in so accustomed and natural a guise we
cannot believe in its efficacy.

How should Philip, hesitating and uncertain,
holding Mainwaring's letter in his
hand, guess that within the long business
envelope lay the solution of all that was most
enigmatic to him — the key to what was now
a locked book to his perceptions ?

Do any of us ever know the exact moment
when we stand upon a mental precipice, or
realise how far our next step may carry us onto
our doom ?

He broke the seal at last, more from habit
than impatience, and glanced carelessly down
at the page as he unfolded it. It was not a
long letter, only a few lines written hastily
across one side ; but had it been a printed
folio of engrossing depth it could not have
riveted Philip's attention more closely. The
candles, flaming up with a sudden assured
brilliancy, shone full upon his face, and
upon the startled, excited, incredulous expression
which spread over it as he read.

It was a long time, many moments, that
he stood thus, reading and re-reading John
Mainwaring's hurried lines, and when at last
he raised his head and threw back his
shoulders, he took a long deep breath as of
one who, but lately spent and exhausted, sees
opening before him a fair plain, smiling and
verdant, wherein his tired nature may refresh
its weary faculties.

"If this is true," he said, half aloud,

why then " and finished his soliloquy

with a smile.

Half an hour later Mr. Remain was rino:-

o

ing the bell at Mrs. Newbold's door, and somewhat
astonished the servant by the vehemence
of his demand for her mistress.

Tell her I must see her," he said, '• it is
of the utmost importance ; " then he pushed by
the maid and made his way to Esther's boudoir.

He found the room empty, though traces
of late occupancy were apparent in a book
tossed carelessly down on the tumbled
cushions of the couch, and a long strip of
artistic needlework, in which the needle was
standing upright, and a tiny gold thimble,
that had fallen down and lay beside a " Kate
Greenaway " picture book.

He had scarcely time to note these particulars
before the door was opened, and Esther
came towards him quickly, looking a little
pale and excited, her fair hair tumbled about
her face, and the long train of her neglige
making a slight rustle as she moved. She
came close up to him and raised her eyes to
his ; they caught the reflection of the hopeful

VOL. in. F

gladness therein, and her cheeks flushed
suddenly, as she cried, putting out her hand
and touching his arm :

Philip, oh, Philip, you have news — good
news i

Her voice had a ring of expectancy in it
that did not escape Philip.

*' Esther," he replied, looking down at her
steadily, and speaking gravely, " I have come
to you at this late hour for one reason only — ■
to ask you one question. Will you be frank
and honest in your answer ? "

*'Ah," she exclaimed, "there are both
reproach and reflection in your words. Ask
me the question first, Philip, and judge of my
veracity by my reply."

She turned and walked to the couch,
seated herself, and, taking up the strip of
embroidery, examined it attentively.

Mr. Tremain followed her.

"It is all very well, your trying to parry
my thrust, Esther ; but it is useless. I shall
oblige you to give me a direct answer."

He drew up a chair as be spoke, and, as lie
sat down, took from his pocket a note-case.

'will you oblige me by reading this
letter ? " he said, handing her Mainwaring's
communication.

She took it with a deprecatory shrug of
her shoulders, and read the few lines it contained
with an absolutely expressionless face.

*well?" asked Philip, after several
moments had passed.

''Wein" she echoed, folding the letter
with exactness and handing it back to him,
but avoiding his eyes.

Esther," he said, bending forward and
forcing her to look at him, "Esther, the news
contained in that letter is no news to you."

Still she did not reply ; she had again
taken up the strip of embroidery, and her
fingers trembled a little as she drew out the
needle. Mr. Tremain put out his hand aud
took it from her.

My dear Esther," he said once more, in
the same measured tones he had used from

r 2

his first greeting of her, *' you can at least
answer a direct question. Did you know of
this before ? "

Since you put it in that way — yes," she
replied.

For how long — all the time ? "

*eyes, all the time."

"And you have kept it to yourself —
why ? "

But to this she made no answer.

Why did you keep it from me ? " he
asked, more sternly. *'Do you think you had
any right to do so ? "

*eyes, I do," she answered, quickly, stung
by the reproach in his voice. *' I think so
still. A promise should always be sacred."

*^ A promise — and to whom ? "

If you consider that a necessary question,
I do not," she answered, with a touch of
asperity in her voice. " You surely have lost
somewhat of your customary acumen, Philip,,
to ask it."

Then let me put it in another form," he

replied, not in the least disturbed by her show
of temper. " Did you promise — hei ? "

She looked at him for a moment, before
she spoke, and the rebellious blood dyed her
cheeks scarlet, her blue eyes flashed.

I am not compelled to answer you," she
said mutinously, '' but I will do so. Yes, I
promised herr

But why, Esther, why ? What induced
you to make so absurd a promise ? And,
having made it, why, when such extraordinary
circumstances arose, did you still keep your
lips closed ? Why did you not tell me that
evening, when I came to you, and when you
were in such grief and anxiety ? Surely you
must have known it would have greatly
simplified matters."

But Mrs. Newbold was obstinately silent.
She shut her lips firmly together and looked
at Philip beneath a decided frown.

Do you mean to tell me," he continued, a
trifle impatiently, "that you could believe
such a matter was not of vital importance ?

Do answer me, Esther, I beg ; what motive
can I have save to help "

'' Oh, if you will look at it in that light,"
interrupted Mrs. Newbold, quickly, " why then
I must say, I don't see what great difference
your having known this would have made.
It couldn't stop the arrest, you know."

'' I know nothing of the kind," he replied
shortly ; " 1 am not at all sure that it might
not have done so. It is always far more
difficult to rectify a blunder than to prevent
one. I cannot but feel that you have treated
me badly in this matter, Esther ; at such a
time and under such circumstances the
utmost candour should have been shown."

He did not speak angrily, but with so
much of sadness in his voice, Esther felt compunction
stealing over her and absorbing her
late vehemence and impatience.

'^ I should much prefer your being angry
with me, Philip," she said, wistfully, " or that
you shook me ; it's much more awful to see
you look so hurt and pained. But can't you

believe me, can't you understand ? It washer
wish — her demand — from the very beginning.
She made me solemnly swear that no
one should know — least of all — you."

Ah, yes — I least of all," he replied, half
sadly. "Very well, my dear Esther, Weill ask
you no more questions. You shall not be
tempted further to break your promise. Let
us only hope that this unfortunate secrecy may
not in the end prove our greatest stumbling-block.
I do not see the way any clearer
before me because of this unexpected document,
but I shall do my best to use it to our
advantage. After all, what a truly womanly
bit oi finesse it was — and is ! "

As Philip spoke the door was again thrown
open, and Dick Darling came in, followed by
little Marianne carrying a basket filled with
roses. She ran up to her mother, holding out
the basket to her, and crying :

'they've only just come, Mumsey.
Perkins brought them up himself. Oh, they
do smell pufieckly 'vicious ! "

Esther took the flowers from her little
daughter's hand.

You can guess whom they are for," she
said to Philip, smiling a little. " Dick and I
intend taking them early tomorrow morning."

Mr. Tremain took up one of the fragrant
blossoms, and, bending down towards Esther,
said, in a half undertone :

And is Miss Dick also a sharer in this
secret ? "

Esther shook her head.

"Not through me," she answered.

And Mainwaring, how did he become a
conspirator ? "

I do not know," she replied, looking down
again. " I do not know — how should I ? "

He made no answer for a moment, during
which his eyes never left the downcast face
before him.

Good-bye," he said simply, at last, and
including Miss Darling in his leave-taking
by a half bow, passed out of the room,
carrying the red rose-bud with him.

It was a distinct source of pleasure to him,
as he contemplated the little flower, to remember
for whom its sister roses were destined.
The tiny blood-red blossom seemed
to put him in touch once more with his old
life — that life which antedated his visit to the
Folly — when Adele Lamien was still unknown
to him.

A woman's logic.

The first check experienced by Count Mellikoflf
in the fulfilment of his well-laid plans, was
one of which he took but slight account.

In calling into action the machinery of the
law, and thereby obtaining the warrant for
Miss Hildreth's arrest, he overlooked one
point. He had designedly delayed this summary
action until such a moment, when
knowing the Newbolds and Mr. Tremain to
be well out of his way, he could proceed
without apprehension of interference on their
part.

He was quite well aware that to act
against their combined forces would be a far

more serious Undertaking than to attack Miss
Hildreth alone and unbefriended . But could
he once accomplish her arrest, he believed that
here in America, as in Russia, he had only to
demand an official inquiry, as a matter of
form, and it would at once be granted ; at
which inquiry, trusting to the strength of his
evidence, he foresaw her immediate committal
for trial, and expected by the time the heart
monde were returning to New York, and
before a cabal could be raised in Miss
Hildreth's behalf, to be already on his way to
Petersburg with his prisoner, about whose
subsequent fate, when once she was handed
over to the Imperial Chancellerie, he had no
need to concern himself.

Then he would be free to seek Olga, and,
laying his love and his life at her feet,
demand that reward for the sake of which
she had persuaded him to undertake this
mission. Patouchki also would be convinced
of his loyalty by this last signal service in the
Emperor's behalf ; and even the Tsar himself

might bestow a further distinction upon him ;
one ribbon more, perhaps, to swell the number
of those upon which his beautiful Olga set
such store.

And, indeed, so far fortune had favoured
him and his plans ; up to a certain time
events marched according as he directed. The
warrant was obtained ; Miss Hildreth was
arrested ; and, save John Mainwaring, none
of her special friends were in town to stand
by her or act in her defence. On Mainwaring,
Count MellikofF bestowed not a thought ; he
had not even seen him in the crowd of
transient guests at the Folly, and his name
was suggestive of nothing.

The matter of an immediate official inquiry,
however, was not so easily managed. Count
Mellikoff found countless obstacles to overcome,
raised by that very organ, the law,
which so far he had played upon to his own
purpose. Innumerable technicalities and
difficulties were for ever cropping up, resulting
in unheard-of delays. Even Mellikoff's

patience gave way at last, and he anathematised
the entire Western continent, its
institutions and customs, in language more
forcible than polite. Despite of his choler,
however, Vladimir Mellikoflf was obliged to
swallow his wrath, and bear with what patience
he could muster, that most difficult of all trials
enforced inaction.

Meantime he heard again from Patouchki,
and the tone of his letter was such as to create
a fever of anxiety and unrest, that threatened
to prostrate him mentally and physically.
From Olga Naundorff he received neither word
nor sign.

And so the long, hot days came and went,
and by none of the waiting actors in that
life-drama were they ever forgotten in the
years that followed.

To Patricia, Philip, Esther, Dick Darling,
Vladimir MellikofiP, and Kosalie James, each
sunrise brought but an increasing weight of
torturing anxiety ; each nightfall was fraught
with an additional burden of suspense.

Within the week after his return, Mr.
Tremain had another interview with Miss
Hildreth. He found her in the same half
flippant, half rebellious mood that had so
angered him at their last meeting. He stayed
with her for more than an hour, during which
she remained as adamant to all his arguments,
entreaties, prayers. He left her at last in
anger, and with hot words of passion as his
farewell.

You force me to draw my own conclusions,"
he said. ^'It would be more reasonable
if you would give me ever so foolish a motive
as your reason for denying the truth of the
assertion contained in this letter." He struck
John Mainwaring's offending epistle as he
spoke. " Once more, Patricia, will you, or
will you not, acknowledge this affirmation
as true ? "

She had grown very pale under the lash
of his ill-concealed anger; but she gave no
other sign either of embarrassment or yielding,
and when she answered she looked

him straight in the eyes, and spoke without
a falter in her clear musical voice :

I have nothing to say, Philip. Mr. Main-waring
is the best person for you to apply to for
confirmation, since he has made the statement.'

"And that is all you have to tell me —
all you will tell me ? " he asked, his voice
reflecting the doubt and pain of his mind.
"At least, Patricia, since I know on what
grounds Count Mellikoff will seek to justify
your arrest, you might confide the truth tome.
Are you, or are you not "

''My dear Philip," she broke in hastily,
the colour rushing; to her face in a sudden
overwhelming torrent, " cannot you see what
I am ? — is not that enough ? Why should
you try to solve Vladimir Mellikoff's motives ?
It is he who has brought this charge against
me, let him prove its validity."

"And Mainwaring ? " he asked, slowly,
looking at her keenly.

"Mr. Mainwaring shall answer to me
for his officiousness," she replied, quietly.

And this is all you have to say, Patricia ?
This is all you will tell me ? "

"Yes, that is all I have to say," she
answered.

And at her reply he turned from her
abruptly and left her ; nor did he again seek
an interview with her during the few days
that remained before her quasi-trial.

Philip could not but contrast the emotions
with which he had sought this meeting, with
those which overwhelmed him at its close.
John Mainwaring's letter had apparently
opened the way to a satisfactory unravelling
of the tangled skein, and it was with a full
belief in the solution thus presented, that he
had gone to Patricia, and begged for a more
explicit explanation than that suggested in
Mainwaring's statement. He believed also,,
that at last he had fathomed Mdlle. Lamien's
part in the transaction, and the secret of her
power over him ; he had already accused her
of being Count Mellikoff's accomplice, and
now he thought he saw how it was that all

unconsciously she played advantageously into
his hands.

It needed but a \Yord from Patricia to
reduce his theory to reality ; but this word
Miss Hildreth declined to pronounce, nor could
he force from her any admission upon which
he could establish his hypothesis. The only
outcome of his interview with her was a return
to the old uncertainty and doubt that had
made his life a torture for so many days.

To the great surprise of every one, Mr.
Tremain did not appear as Miss Hildreth's
solicitor, nor, indeed, take any active part
in her behalf. It was John Mainwarino^ who
was selected by Patricia as her adviser, and
to John Mainwaring she opened her whole
heart ; holding nothing back, and in no way
excusing or exonerating herself for the part
she had played in the plot, that bid fair to
develop all the characteristics of tragedy
before its termination. She bound the young
lawyer by the most solemn of promises not
to reveal certain portions of her confession,

VOL. m. G

although the consequences of his secrecy
might be the worst possible for her. And
Mainwaring, being a man of quick sympathies
and ardent chivalry had, under the spell of
her beauty and her emotion, passed his word
of honour to use only such particulars of
her statement, in her support, as she should
designate.

"I think you are mistaken," he had said,
after urging a greater latitude upon her, '' I
cannot say how far your reticence may not
tell against you. I wish you Avould be quite
frank with me. Miss Hildreth, or rather let
me be on your behalf. I don't believe you
half realise the gravity of your position, or
how terrible the result may be for you should
I fail to overthrow the validity of the warrant.
You see a certain amount of complicity we
must acknowledge, since we cannot set up
an alibi, and that will go just so much
against you if I may not show the context.
Won't you reconsider, Miss Hildreth, or let
me take another opinion upon the matter ? "

No," she answered with decision, " I
cannot reconsider. It is impossible. Only
think in what a position it would place him
were I to allow you to proclaim my miserable
attitude. No, be the consequences what they
may, I have brought sorrow and shame
enough upon Philip Tremain through my
influence, I will not disgrace him publicly
by having my weakness dragged out to the
light of day. You have given me your word,
Mr. Mainwaring. I have no fear of your
breaking it, and I do not care for any second
opinion. I must stand or fall by the line of
argument we have marked out between us."

And from this decision he could not move
her.

After he left her, Miss Hildreth sat for a
long time quite still and motionless. The
sk)w heavy tears gathered in her eyes and
fell down her cheeks unnoticed and unchecked ;
the sobs, deep weary sobs, burst now and
then from her brave heart ; and at last, as
the evening shadows lengthened into nie^ht,

G 2

and all about her became wrapt in soft impalpable
darkness, she fell upon her knees,
bowing her proud head to the ground, and
praying as she had never prayed before ;
entreating forgiveness for her wilful pride,
her cruel selfishness, her obdurate egotism,
through which, not she only had been
brought to so terrible an alternative, but he
whom she loved bid fair to be dragged down
with her in her fall.

'* No, no, no," she cried aloud, clasping her
hands too-ether and throwing; them outward
in a passionate gesture of entreaty, '^ I will
never give in. I will never confess the
shameful part I have taken in this deception.
I will never, my poor Philip, by word or
sign permit one slight or sneer to fall on
you through me. If I have failed in everything
else, I will not fail in this. At least,
I have courage and endurance left, I am
not afraid but that they will stand me in good
stead ; and should the very worst consequences
fall upon me, I deserve them all. Yes, every

individual item, in that horrible possibility
of which he spoke, is not too much for me
to bear in punishment. Oh, Philip, Philip,
to think I should be the one to bring the
disgrace upon you of biting scorn, and evil
laughter, and venomous tongues ! I, who love
you, and yet whose love can point to no
higher achievement than this ! "

A QUESTION OF COMITY.

The morning of the fateful 15th of September
dawned at last ; and long before the hour
fixed for the official inquiry, the court-room
was filled to overflowing by a crowd gathered
from every grade of Society, to each member
of which the arrest and possible fate of so
prominent a person as Patricia Hildreth
assumed a special and individual importance.
The very secrecy and mystery that had
surrounded the case from the outset, and the
reticence of the Press regarding it — usually
so garrulous and self-opinionated — served only
to whet the sensation-loving appetite of the

community. The examination being held in
open court, any one was free to enter, and to
exercise that naive candour of criticism and
good-natured interference in other people's
affairs peculiarly American. Not a member of
the assemblage but was cognisant of the casein
all its details, or who could not, at a
moment's notice, reel off a synopsis of its
peculiar features, embracing the names, social
standing, personal incomes, and general habits
of the persons most implicated in it.

The Folly, the Deerhound, and Esther
Newbold, as the mistress of both, were fully
canvassed, together with Miss Darling's openly
expressed anger at being detained by the
accusing party to give special evidence, and
Mr. Tremain's extraordinary conduct in refusing
to act as Miss Hildreth's solicitor ;
while Patricia's private life, her jewels, wealth,
and beauty, were scarcely more absorbing
topics than were the treachery, hardheartedness
and ingratitude of Vladimir Mellikoff;
who, having been received with such cordial

hospitality, returned it in so evil and backhanded
a fashion.

A strong party of Patricia's friends occupied
prominent places, among whom were
George Newbold, Sir Piers Traceyy, Freddy
Slade, and Jack Howard, further enforced by
a feminine contingent of the super-chics, to
whom a morning spent in a court of inquiry,
of which they formed, as it were, an independent
jury, to decide upon the guilt or
innocence of one of their own sex and order,
offered too new a sensation to be despised in
this age of satiated experience. They came,
therefore, arrayed in the most exquisite of
costumes, and bringing with them their
individual fads and fancies in the way of salts
eau de-cologne, and fans. They rustled into
their places with the same arrogance and
assurance with which they distinguished a
'first night" at Wallace's or the opera, and,
raising their long tortoiseshell handled 
with elaborate superciliousness, gazed at
the gathering crowd with the same indifference
as they inspected the unfamiliar

face of an aspirant to histrionic fame whose
success was still in embryo.

Patricia Hildreth had indeed no severer
tribunal to stand before than these butterflies
of the hour, who were equally ready to bestow
upon her smiles, congratulations, and
assurances of their undeviating fidelity, or
scoffs and jeers of objurgation — none the less
defamatory because spoken in soft tones and
with downcast eyes — according as the decision
was driven for or against her.

As the great clock in the tower of the City
Hall struck ten, echoed by all the lesser clocks
of the neighbourhood, the little crowd of
black-coated lawyers and attorneys, that filled
the space between the bench and a certain
railed oS" space, within which a chair had
been placed, separated, the different members
taking their places to right and left of the
official bench set apart for the District Judge,
before whom Patricia Hildreth was to stand
arraigned, by virtue of arrest, on a charge of
murder. It was understood, of course, that

the proceedings were in a manner informal ;
the inquiry purported to deal solely with the
validity of the warrant issued against Miss
Hildreth, and did not in any sense partake
of the nature of a trial ; that, should Count
Mellikoff substantiate the arrest, would take
place in St. Petersburg, before a Russian tribunal.
Nevertheless, to all those concerned in the
case, and to the onlookers, this official inquiry
was regarded in the light of a tria], especially
since, owing to the gravity of the circumstances,
witnesses were to be allowed on both
sides.

John Mainwaring's dark, clean-shaven face
wore a somewhat anxious expression as he
bent down towards George Newbold and spoke
earnestly to him. Mr. Tremain, Esther, and
Miss Darling were not present in the court-room
; later they were to be called to
give evidence. Count Mellikoff was there,
however, looking very pale but perfectly self-possessed,
his deep-set burning eyes flashing-looks
of disdain upon the unfriendly crowd,

whose hostile expressions did not fail to reach
his ears.

As his solicitor Vladimir had ensfagfed Peter
Munger, one of the most famous members of
the Bar, whose name alone was supposed to
ensure success. He was a large man, with a
forbidding forehead and an offensive smile; and
his very aggressiveness was popularly supposed
to weigh heavily with the Bench.

He spoke very little to any one, but
scowled darkly upon Mainwaring, and muttered
a rather unprofessional expletive beneath
his breath, against his opponent's youth and
inexperience.

I had rather it had been Tremain," he
had growled out to Count Mellikoff, when first
apprised of the name of Patricia's solicitor,
it's worth my while to beat him ; but that
youngsters-bah ! " And out flew a shower of
little chewed-up quids of paper, which it was
the great man's habit to indulge in as a breakwater
to the more pernicious tobacco.

Count Mellikoff had shruoraed his

shoulders and held out his hands in deprecation,
but made no other reply, upon
which the orient snorted out something: not
over polite regarding foreigners, which
Vladimir felt it was wiser not to notice.

As the last stroke of the hour died
upon the air a moment's silence fell upon
the assembly, and in that silence the peal
of old Trinity's bells rang out, calling the
worshippers to morning service. Vladimir,
as he listened to the deep peal, thought of
Petersburg, and found himself waiting involuntarily
for the victorious paean, "How
glorious is our God in Zion," which in his
country followed the striking of the hour,
drowning the sadder notes of the Miserere.

But the bells ceased, and with their final
chord of aerial music the small door behind
the official bench was thrown open, and the
legal cortege entered and took their seats ina
silence that was absolute, save for the
throbbing of the air stirred by the expectant
breathing of the waiting crowd.

Judge Justice, the District Judge for New
York, was eminently imposing both in person
and manner. He was unusually tall, with an
intellectual head, a face of much power and
kindliness, and a reputation for leniency whenever
compatible with a strict observance of
justice. It was to him that both John Main-waring
and Mr. Tremain looked instinctively
for sympathy, though knowing him to be
before all things a strict disciplinarian in all
points pertaining to his profession. He was,
moreover, a popular favourite with the public
who hailed his appearance with subdued
satisfaction.

The half murmur of applause which greeted
Judge Anstice developed into decided expressions
of excitement as a tall, slight
figure advanced, piloted up the narrow
aisle by a policeman, and shown into the
railed off space before the Bench. The
new-comer was Patricia Hildreth, and the
hush of expectation, that followed close
upon the audible comments called forth by

lier appearance, became breathless, as, with a
firm step and upright bearing, she took the
place indicated and stood for a moment confronting
her accusers.

Her beautiful face was colourless, her
blue eyes looked black and luminous beneath
the dark brows, her lips were resolutely
closed, with just a touch of defiance in the
firm set curves. She was dressed plainly
in black, and she wore no veil.

It had never been Miss Hildreth's custom
to hide her beauty when most triumphant ;
why should she do so now in the hour of
her extremity ?

It was intimated to her that she was at
liberty to sit down, and with a slight bend of
her proud head she availed herself of the
permission.

Mr. Munger opened the proceedings with
a short and technical explanation as to the
nature and purport of the warrant of arrest,
the issuing of which had been formally requested
by the Russian Government, and acceded

to by that of the United States, not asa
matter of absolute right, but tlirouo;h that
comity of nations by which the relationships
existing between two great powers were kept
intact and justly balanced. The warrant thus
issued had been executed upon the person of
Patricia Hildreth, alias Adele Lamien, alias
Adele Lallovich, on the charge of her having
been an accomplice in the murder of Stevan
Lallovich, which occurred at St. Petersburg
in the month of December last. The investigation
of this warrant was what they
had before them now, and in so doings he
would first call attention to the point of nationality,
since upon this point very much
depended. Should Miss Hildreth, or rather
should Adele Lamien, prove to be a Muscovite
subject, the American authorities could have but
one course open to them, namely, to surrender
her to the Russian officials, and let her be
put upon trial in the country, and according
to the laws, where the crime was committed.
A like course had been adopted by

another foreign Power, when the United
States was the petitioner, and the offender
a political criminal. Spain had at once
delivered up this fugitive from justice'"
though not legally compelled to do so, and
the offender was brought to trial solely
through the courtesy of a foreign Government.
Having then this case as a precedent, it
would, according to national honour, be
impossible to refuse a like amenity in the
present instance. As the Bench was aware,
the circumstances in the case now before them
were of so extraordinary a nature, it had
been deemed wise to allow of evidence being
given, a course entirely at variance with
the usual procedure in such cases. Special
emergencies, however, required special treatment.
But before he availed himself of the
privilege thus accorded, he would call the
attention of the Bench to a few of the
peculiarities of this case, by which it would
be seen how weighty and grave were the
The late Mr. AV. ^I. TM-eed.

reasons which led to the demand and the
issuing of the warrant.

In his opinion there had never been a
more deliberately planned and executed
murder than that of Count Stevan Lallovich,
nor one in which greater skill and finesse
had been displayed, both before and after
the perpetration of it. It was needless for
him to tell the Bench who the lady purported
to be that stood accused before them ; her
name and her position were far too well
known and defined to require any blazoning
forth by him. His task was the more unpleasant
one of proving that this Patricia
Hildreth had no right to her recognised patronymic,
since she, under the name of Adelc
Lamien, had contracted a marriage with
Count Stevan Lallovich, and had subsequently
consented to, and participated in, the murder
of the same Stevan Lallovich. It was owing
to these exceptional features that the warrant
had been issued against her, and he submitted

VOL. III. H

to his honour that the papers of arrest would'
be found regular on all these points.

Having gone thus far, Mr. Munger paused
and threw an imperative glance at the Judge
and auditors collectively ; it was plainly
evident that his statement had made a
decided impression.

The public interest in the case had been
pronounced enough even when but little
of its real nature had been revealed, and
now, when the true aspect of the charge was
exposed, and Patricia Hildreth stood stripped
of all protection, even that afforded her by
her name and position, and was openly
branded not only as a murderer, but as a
wilful impostor and adventuress, the excitement
reached fever beat, and not one pair
of all those hundreds of watching eyes but
were turned upon the proud beautiful face of
the accused woman ; that face never faltered
nor winced beneath their gaze, eager though
they were to note the first sign or expression
of fear upon it.

After this scarcely perceptible pause, Mr.
Munger took up his theme again, and in
incisive phrases, with rough eloquence, told
the story of the brilliant, dissolute, captivating
Russian noble, Stevan Lallovich ; painting
his character in forcible lights and deep
shadows ; dwelling strongly on his blood
connection with the Muscovite Emperor, his
life at Court, the unstinted adulation poured
upon him, the continuous round of success that
attended his every caprice ; until it became
an article of belief in his circle that he had
but to express a wish, or whis^Dcr a desire,
and the fulfilment of it was accomplished
without the asking. Like Jove of old, did
he but nod his head his whole world trembled,
or smile and they rejoiced. With great skill
the able pleader brought down his narrative
to ten years ago, when, as he said, with a
disagreeable smile. Miss Hildreth, then in the
full glory of her exceptional beauty, had left
her native country — he would not suggest
under what circumstances — and for the greater

part of those succeeding ten years had been
an independent wanderer over the European
continent, answerable to no one ; concerning
her experiences during those ten years Miss
Hildreth was known to be obstinately reticent.
They had her admission, however, as he
would show later, of her having been in
St. Petersburg a part of that time, and
also of her having known Count Stevan
Lallovich. The date of her acknowledged
visit to Petersburg comprised the month
before and the very day of Count Stevan's
murder. She returned to America early in
February, the crime having been committed
in the December previous.

It was a well-known fact among Count
Lallovich's friends, that about a year before
his ill-fated death he had become so infatuated
by the extreme beauty of a foreign lady —
foreign in the sense of her not beinor a
Muscovite subject — as to marry her according
to the ceremonies of the Roman Catholic
Church, which Church, not holding communion

with the Greek religion, is looked upon
in Kussia as schismatic. After a few months
of retired felicity the affair became known
to the Tsar, who revoked the marriage by
Imperial ukase, and recalled Count Stevan
to Petersburg ; the unfortunate lady was
thus turned adrift, with her character ruined,
and her personality numbered among the
many suspects, over whom the Chancellerie
keeps so close a watch.

On the morning of the 28th of December,
Count Stevan Lallovich was found murdered
in his own palace, stabbed through the heart.
The assassin had left behind no more tangible
proof of identity than was contained in a
small handkerchief, evidently dropped in the
haste of flight, marked across one corner in
embroidered letters A. de L. ; above these
letters the initials F. H. had been carelessly
written in ink. The handkerchief was
that of a woman, and was traced as belonging
to Adele Lamien, or de Lallovich, Count
Stevan's repudiated wife. Suspicion fell

naturally upon this woman, a suspicion which
soon became assurance ; but she, with consummate
cunning, eluded every effort put
forth for her apprehension, and finally escaped
to America, landing in New York some time
within the month of February last.

It would be understood that in so grave
and terrible a crime, where the victim was
a member of the Imperial Russian family,
no efforts would be spared to track and find
the perpetrator of the deed. From positive
and unimpeachable evidence the Chaocellerie
had reason to believe the assassin to be in
the United States, and they accordingly
authorised Count Vladimir Mellikoff, a member
of the Tsar's household, to act as their
agent in the matter ; and he it was who in
the furtherance of this work had traced the
criminal link by link, and bit by bit, until
he was able to lodge such information before
the proper authorities in this country as
resulted in the arrest of Patricia Hildreth ;

who now, as Adele Lamien, or Lallovicb,
stands accused of her husband's murder.

"That, your honour," summed up Mr.
MuDger, " is my statement. To prove the
regularity of the warrant, and the validity
of the evidence upon which it was issued,
I propose first to show that the kdy calling
herself Patricia Hildreth is, in propria persona,
Adele Lallovich, and that by her marriage
with Stevan Lallovich, she became de
facto a Russian subject, and is therefore
answerable to Russian authority. To do this,
I will avail myself of the precedent established
for this case, by taking informal evidence
upon it. I will therefore ask Count Mellikotf
to come forward."

NON-COMMITTAL.

As Vladimir Mellikoff stepped out from the
group of men surrounding him and took the
place indicated by Mr. Munger, a low murmur
of disapproval surged up from the highly
wrought crowd of listeners and onlookers,
at the sound of which his colourless face
flushed, for one brief second, while the dark
eyes in the cavernous sockets gleamed intemperately,
and the mouth beneath the dark
beard and moustache tightened visibly.

He gave his evidence quietly and dispassionately,
but with great deliberation, his
restless eyes glancing now at Miss Hildreth's
calm, unmoved face, now at John Main-waring's
dark, shapely, outlined countenance.

and back again to Mr. MuDger's beetling brow
and heavy frown.

Each word he uttered told with distinct
force against Patricia, and gathering confidence
as he went on, Count Vladimir carried
the wavering opinions of the public with him.

Ably interrogated, he proved the presence
of Miss Hildreth in St. Petersburg at the
time of Count Stevan's murder, her acquaintance
with him, and her precipitate and mysterious
flight from the Russian capital the
morning after the perpetration of the crime.
He next proved that a lady, calling herself
Adele Lamien, had taken passage and sailed
in a steamship of the International Line from
London for New York ; that, on the ship's
arrival at the latter port, Miss Hildreth was
found to be among the passengers, while Adele
Lamien was missing. Miss Hildreth's friends
were kept in ignorance of her arrival for
several days, and when questioned regarding
her sudden and unexpected return, she displayed
the greatest reticence.

He, yjadimir MellikofF, had arrived in New
York somewhat later in the same month of
February, but, wince to various causes of
delay, he made no progress in his mission
for several weeks ; and, while waiting the
further development of events, he had accepted
an invitation extended to him by
Mr. George Newbold, to pay him a visit
at his country-house, the Folly, on Staten
Island. The first evening of his arrival he
met Miss Hildreth, and from something; in
her manner, he was led to observe her closely ;
these observations resulted in the conviction
that she was playing a part, which it was
vitally important she should succeed in. An
unexpected clue to her secret had fallen into
his hands that very evening ; he had found
beneath Miss Hildreth's chair, when she and
the house party had withdrawn for the rehearsal,
a fine cambric handkerchief, edged
with lace and embroidered in a monogram,
A, de L. ; the very counterpart, in fact,
of the one left by the criminal in her precipitate

flight from the rooms of the murdered
Stevau Lallovich, the only point of difference
being that the one now in his possession
did not have the written initials P. H.
upon it.

He next drew attention to the presence
at the Folly of a person calling herself Adelc
Lamien, who filled the position of governess
to Air. XewbokVs little daughter. He, personally,
had not met Mdlle. Lamien during
this visit ; but others had done so who would
prove her identity with the lady before them.
He had, however, been witness to an interview
between Mdlle. Lamien and Mr. Philip Remain,
during which Mr. Tremain made no
secret of his knowledge concerning that lady's
past life. He had also in his possession a
note addressed to Miss Darling, one of the
young lady guests at the Folly, signed Adele
Lamien, written on paper bearing the Lallo-
rich crest, and dated the 3rd of May ; the
very evening on which Miss Hildreth was
said to have arrived at the Folly.

During all of Count Mellikoff's narration,
Patricia never once took her eyes from ibis
dark, inscrutable face ; she watched him with
the same expressionless countenance which
she had worn from the opening of the inquiry.
But at the mention of the interview between
Adele Lamien and Philip Tremain her face
changed perceptibly, a wave of emotion
passed over it as she turned her troubled
eyes appealingly towards John Mainwaring.
Then the mask of impenetrability settled over
it again, and she sat immovable, her hands
clasped together on her lap, her head thrown
back in proud defiance.

Count Mellikoff's further statements were
purely technical, and related chiefly to his
position in Russia, his credibility, authority,
etc., all of which were vouched for by the
Russian Ambassador.

As Vladimir resumed his seat, a low murmur
of disapproval escaped from the crowd,
a murmur promptly subdued, but that told
of the o^rowino^ excitement. Mr. Munster, on

hearing its threatening: notes, tossed back Lis
head with a snort of defiance, and called up
his next witness with prompt alacrity.

As the slight, thin figure of Rosalie
James appeared in answer to Mr. Munger's
call, another change passed rapidly across
Patricia's face, her lips curled slightly, while
into her eyes there flashed a look of comprehension.
Had not Philip hinted at some
hidden woman enemy ; some one to whom
she, Patricia, had given cause for anger,
for retaliation, for revenge ? And had not
this girl, with the sharply outlined face,
always held aloof from her ? Had she not
often found those keen, observant eyes fixed
upon her with the same scrutiny with which
they now regarded her ? She had put Mr.
Tremain's supposition by as not worth consideration
; she saw now how important had
been its bearing, for in Rosalie James she
recognised, with a woman's quick perception,
her most pronounced and calculating enemy.
And with this certainty came another.

This girl loved Philip, and knowing her
passion to be hopeless, she had sought outwith
the unfailing prescience of slighted love,
the woman who was her rival, hoping that
in striking at her she would also wound the
man who had rejected lier. Love is proverbially
cruel, none knew this truth better
than Miss Hildreth ; it was, therefore, with
a strange illogical sympathy that she listened
to Miss James's defamation of her.

Rosalie spoke in her usual high pitched
voice, every note of which carried her words
into the furthest corners of the crowded
room. Under Mr. Munger's manipulation she
gave a condensed and telling account of her
instrumentality in the arrest of Miss Hildreth.
In substance it was as follows.

She had been a guest at the Folly at the
same time as Patricia, and had taken part in
the same theatricals, though not in the same
play. She had often heard Miss Hildreth discussed
before she met her, and from what had
been said had formed no very high opinion

of that lady's character. Miss Hildreth was
always singularly reticent concerning her experiences
during her residence abroad. She
had only once heard her make any voluntary
allusion to her visit to St. Petersburg, and
that was on the morning of the 4tli of May,
when some of the house party were gathered
together in Mrs. Xewbold's boudoir. Miss
Hildreth had then related a curious tale ;
she had not actually detailed the murder of
Count Stevan Lallovich, but she had alluded
to it very pertinently and with great excitement
of manner. She had also distinctly
named Adele Lallovich as the victim of a
moral crime, and had intimated the form
of her revenge.

To her, Miss Hildreth had from the first
appeared as a woman with a secret, and she
had determined to fathom that secret. She
had her reasons for doing so, they were purely
personal reasons. She had, from the first day
of her arrival at the Folly, heard a great deal
about Adele Lamien. She had seen her once

or twice, but had paid little attention to hers
noticing only that she shunned observation
and kept as much in the background as
possible. On the arrival of Mr. Remains
however, Mdlle. Lamien apparently lost her
shyness for she, Miss James, had several times
seen them together, and had once discovered
the governess in a state of great agitation.

She had not liked Mdlle. Lamien at anytime,
and believed her quite capable of the
most flagrant deception. Mrs. Newbold had
been remonstrated with for her credulity, and
on one such occasion she had related to her
guests an extraordinary story, which purported
to be that of her governess, and which vas
substantially that of Adele Lallovich, as told
by Count Mellikofif ; the details and make-up
differed somewhat, and the murder of Count
Stevan was not touched upon, but the main
features were the same. Mr. Tremain was
present on the occasion, and it had occurred to
her at the time that Mrs. Newbold had some
covert meaning: in her recitation ; at all events

Mr. Tremain seemed much moved by it.
Mdlle. Lamien was not at the dinner-table
when her story was discussed.

She had first suspected Miss Hildreth and
Mdlle. Lamien of being: one and the same
person, from a hint thrown out by Count
Mellikoff. She had previously remarked that
Mdlle. Lamien and Miss Hildreth were never
present at the same time, and on the evening
of Miss Hildreth's arrival, it was given out
that Mdlle. Lamien had suddenly been called
away. It was not long before these suspicions
-became assurances ; she could not form an
opinion as to the motives for the deception
being practised upon them all ; she had no
previous acquaintance with Miss Hildreth,
consequently she could not vouch absolutely
for her identity ; but in any case it was plain
that the lady passing under that name had
some desperate motive for doing so.

It was not until the last day of Mr.

Tremain's visit at the Folly that the nature of

this intrigue was made plain. The theatricals
VOL. ni. I

took place ou the evening of the 4th of May
Mr. Newbold's birthday ; on the following
morning Mr. Tremain announced his departure
for that afternoon. About half-past
four she and Count Mellikoflf were seated
on the stone terrace beneath the library
^YiQdows ; they did not observe any one enter
the room until close on to five o'clock, when
Mr. Tremain came in, walked first up to
the book cases and then passed on into the
music-room, which was separated by porters
only from the library. She and the Count
remained a few moments longer on the
terrace, and then entered the library by one
of the open French windows ; as they did so a
sudden exclamation from the inner room
arrested them, and they thus became the
listeners to a very remarkable interview
between Mr. Tremain and Adele Lamien,
during which Mdlle. Lamien played and
sang in a manner which seemed to greatly
affect Mr. Tremain. At the close of the song
he had offered himself to Mdlle. Lamien, and

this had called forth from her a confused and
rarabliDO' statement, in which she hinted at
crime and shame beings not unknown to lier.
Mr. Tremain's ardour, however, had not been
daunted by these equivocal innuendoes ; he
pressed her for an answer, and Mdlle. Lamien
had at last accepted him conditionally. The
interview terminated by Mdlle. Lamien exclaiming,
excitedly : " Surely this should be
triumph enough, even for me, to know that I
have won you from the remembrance, nay,
from the very presence, of Patricia Hildreth ! "
She had thought them remarkable words
at the time ; but they assumed a still greater
significance when Mdlle. Lamien pushed back
the 2^ortieres and, walking rapidly across the
library, turned as she reached the open door
and looked back. Believing herself to be
alone, she let the mask of deception fall
from her, and, despite all disguise of paint
and powder, they recognised in the countenance
thus turned towards them, smiling

and triumphant, the face of Patricia Hildreth !

I 2

Miss James gave lier evidence throughout
in so calm and assured a manner, and in
such cold and concise sentences, as to admit
of no interruption and impress the seal of
unimpeachable truth on all she said. Both
her face and voice were hard and impassive ;
but, notwithstanding her pronounced, unsympathetic
attitude, she carried weight with
her, and reduced the majority of wavering
opinions into affirmative antagonism against
Patricia.

Looked at through the medium of Count
Mellikoff's and Miss James's statements, that
lady's conduct did indeed appear not only
perplexing but condemning.

A DAMAGING PROMISE.

With the close of Miss James's testimony,
the noon recess was called, and to the relief of
every one the mental strain and tension was
laid aside for an hour.

Miss Hildreth walked out of the court-room
with the same firm tread and upright
bearing with which she had entered it ; Judge
Anstice disappeared through a private door,
and his withdrawal was followed by the
instantaneous appearance, on every side, of
sandwich-boxes and lunch-baskets. The
ladies under George Newbold's escort regaled

o o

themselves on chickens' wings and " cup ; "
the humbler crowd making audible comments
thereon over their humbler fare.

The silence was broken by a Babel of voices
all raised to concert pitch, all going together,
and all discussing volubly the events of the
mornings.

The public pulse stood at fever height, and
public opinion, with its usual consistency, was
veering round in favour of Vladimir Mellikoflf.
Miss Hildreth had been chief favourite when
the inquiry opened, but Miss Hilclreth's
chances for keeping that position looked
scarcely favourable now, judging from public
expressions.

The refreshment hour passed all too quickly,
and with the prompt return of Judge Anstice,
the crowd settled itself down, re-nerved and
fortified, for the honos afternoon's work that
evidently lay before it.

Once more Miss Hildreth took her place
within the railed-off space, and those nearest
to her were quick to perceive the additional
pallor of her face, and the troubled look in her
dark blue eyes.

Almost imperceptibly the modus operandi

of tins informal inquiry bad assumed the proportions
aud importance of a legal trial; and so
exceptional and perplexing were the circumstances
surrounding the case, the usual manner
of procedure was tacitly waived, and the investigation
carried on on broader lines. The
dramatic element so predominated, it insensibly
bore both the Bench and the crowd along with
it, breaking down all ordinary barriers of legal
treatment.

The stipulated point at issue was of course
the examination of the warrant papers, and if
Judge Anstice stretched the cordon in this
respect it was scarcely to be wondered at.
The case virtually had no precedent ; it was
only in deference to that un written code of
the courtesy of common law between nations
that any such inquiry took place at all, and
had the chase been a less grave one than that
of murder, no proceedings would have been
entered upon. But, as has been said, exceptional
cases demand exceptional remedies, and
since an arrest and inquiry had been granted.

the lines for the carrying out of the latter
could not be too broad and comprehensive.

Mr. Munger reappeared like a giant refreshed,
and immediately called up Mrs.
Newbold as his next ally. Esther's fair,
pretty face, flushed and anxious, looked as
much out of keeping with its surroundings
as did her costume of lace and muslin. She
glanced appealingly at Miss Hildreth before
speaking, and that silent appeal called up
a ghost of a smile to Patricia's lips.

Despite the soft prettiness of her blonde
colouring, however, Mrs. Newbold could lay
claim to plenty of self-possession, and Mr.
Munger found her not quite so malleable a&
he had imagined. She answered any question
put directly to her as briefly as possible, but
she would not advance any detail or explanation.
Notwithstanding the neutrality of her
replies, however, her evidence was gravely
important, for it established beyond question
the fact that Miss Hildreth and Marianne's

governess, known at the Folly as Adele
Lamien, were one and the same person.
Esther did not attempt to deny this, nor
did she vouchsafe any explanation concerning
it. When asked if she had always been
cognisant of this fact, she answered, simply :

"Yes."

'' Had she then assisted Miss Hildreth
in the deception ? "

Yes."

"Had she told the story purporting to
be that of Adele Lamien, as recounted by
bliss James ? "

Yes." .

"Was she present when Miss Hildreth
indicated that of Adele Lallovich ? "

"Yes."

"Did she endeavour to stop her?"

"Yes."

Why ? "

Because she thought Miss Hildreth was
indiscreet."

Was she acquainted with Miss Hildreth's
reasons for wishing to keep her identity with
Adele Lamien secret ? "

Mrs. Newbold's face flushed, and she
turned another appealing look upon Patricia
before she replied, slowly :

'' Yes."

'' Would she state those reasons ? "

No, she could not."

Why ? "

*' She was under a promise."

'' To whom ? "

'•' She would rather not say."

To Miss Hildreth ? "

'^ Yes."

'' Had she agreed with Miss Hildreth's
reasons ? "

'not altogether."

Yet she assisted her to carry them out.
Why ? "

She would rather not say."

Had those reasons anything to do with
Mr. Tremain?"

Mrs. Newbold was silent, and, with a
snort and a smile, Mr. Munger continued :

"Did Mrs. Newbold know Adele Lamien,
or Lallovicb, to have committed a crime at
some period of her life ? "

*' Yes, she had been told so."

And Mrs. Newbold was perfectly sure
that the lady calling herself Miss Hildreth was
the same person who, at the Folly, was known
as Adele Lamien ? "

"Yes."

Then Mrs. Newbold believed her friend —
]\Iiss Hildreth— to be guilty of murder?"

Clear and sharp came the answer :

"No, I do not."

What then did Mrs. Newbold believe ? "

And Esther, her face flushing and paling
alternately, her blue eyes fixed dauntlessly
upon her tormenter, replied, that while forced
to admit that Patricia Hildreth and the
person purporting to be Adele Lamien were to
her certain knowledge one and the same, to
the best of her belief this was not the whole

truth. Miss Hildreth had reasons, grave
reasons, for what she had done, and she, Mrs.
Newbold, had consented to help her, never
foreseeing the grave and terrible consequences
that might ensue. She was not at liberty to
state those reasons ; but she was as certain as
she stood before them then, that Miss Hildreth
was absolutely guiltless of the crime of which
she was accused.

How did Mrs. Newbold account for the
two handkerchiefs marked A. che L. ? "

'* She could not account for them."

Had Miss Hildreth ever spoken to her
concerning her life abroad — especially her life
at St. Petersburg ? "

No ; Miss Hildreth had always been
uncommunicative on all such topics."

This closed Mrs. Newbold's statement ;
and Esther could not but feel, as her husband
handed her to a seat not far from Patricia, that
she had done more to injure her friend's cause
than to help it.

'* Oh, if she would but have let me

speak ! " she said to her husband, the tears
dimmiDg the brightness of her blue eyes.

Patricia caught the half whispered exclamation,
and saw the glistening tear-drops ; but
she only folded her hands more closely
together, and waited with a look of quiet
endurance on her pale face.

Dick Darling was next interrogated, and
her violent partisanship was decidedly refreshing
to the excited listeners. She indignantly
denied any possible connection between
Miss Hildreth and Adele Lallovich ; but when
pinned down to say why, she could only shake
her brown head and declare she was sure of it
from a moral point of view.

Yes, she had received the pink note from
Mdlle. Lamien, on the evening of the 3rd of
May. She could not say if the handwriting
was that of Miss Hildreth, or if it was the
same as that on the handkerchief. She was
not familiar with Miss Hildreth's calligraphy.
She had never had the smallest suspicion of
Miss Hildreth's identity with Mdlle. Lamien ;

she didn't believe it. She was not given to
looking for suspicious motives in every-day
life ; thank goodness she was not a sneak, and
hoped she never might be ; this last with a
malevolent glance at Miss James. Miss
Hildreth had told the story of Adele Lallovich
at her special request. Yes, she had used both
names in telling it, Lamien and Lallovich.

Miss Darling finished with an open scowl
at Mr. Munger, and a smile at Patricia, and
fluttered off to Esther's side, where she kept
up a running commentary on all subsequent
events.

Once more there was a few moments'
interval or breathing space, and then Mr.
Munger played his trump card by requesting
Philip Tremain to step forward. It had been,
undoubtedly, a disagreeable surprise publicly
when it transpired that Mr. Tremain was not
to appear as Miss Hildreth's solicitor ; but it
created a still greater sensation that he should
be called in evidence against her; and, for a
few moments, as he stood there, composed,

dignified, and impassive, such a silence fell upon
the assemblage that even the dropping of the
proverbial pin would have resounded loudly.

And in that brief interval Philip lost all
sio;ht or knowledge of those around him : he
saw only the pale, proud face of the woman
he loved, the close-shut curve of her lips, the
anxious expectancy of her eyes. Was she
fearful of him then, and of what he might
say ? he asked himself a little bitterly. She
had never rightly estimated his love, why
should he expect her to do so now ?

Perhaps, since she had deceived him, she
judged him by her standpoint of deception.

Then he lost touch with the more personal
elements of the scene, and remembered only
where he was, and why he stood there. That
woman yonder, that dark, silent, motionless
figure, with the clasped hands and the pallid
beautiful face, was Patricia Hildreth — the
woman of his life-long devotion, the love
of his youth and his manhood — and she was
charged with what ? Murder !

And he ? He could do nothing to exonerate
her, nothing ; he was helpless, powerless. She
had refused even to give him an explanation
of her position, and should Vladimir MellikofF
come off triumphant and she be taken from
him, taken away to that Russia whose hand
is as iron, whose vengeance is of blood, whose
retribution stern as death, he should never
know — never, never — how much of truth,
how much of falsehood, she had kept back
from him ; or what was the secret that not
all his passionate pleadings could wrest from
her.

Patricia had not lifted her eyes from her
folded hands, or apparently taken any notice
of Philip's appearance ; only for one brief
moment a faint wave of colour tinged her
cheeks and faded slowly away.

Mr. Hunger's harsh voice broke the silence,
and with an audible sigh of relief the audience
fixed its attention upon Mr. Tremain. In replying
to the lawyer's questions, Philip made
his statement as brief as possible.

He had gone to the Folly by invitation,
and had had no expectation of meeting Miss
Hildreth there ; he had not seen Miss
Hildreth for ten years previous to his meeting
her at the Folly. He had not found her
particularly changed ; and had not had much
intercourse with her. Yes, he acted in the
same play with her — The Ladies Battle —
on the evening; of Mr. Xewbold's birthday,
but as bliss Hildreth did not arrive until the
afternoon of the day before, they had not:
rehearsed together. He had first met Mdlle.
Lamien the evening of his arrival at the Folly ;
she had interested him at once, and increased
that interest by her courage on the occasion of
the carriage accident. He had never for a
moment suspected Mdlle. Lamien and Miss
Hildreth of being the same person ; he could
see no resemblance between them beyond
height and certain tones of voice. No, he had
never seen Mdlle. Lamien in full daylight ; at
the time of the accident she wore a thick
black veil drawn closely over her face.

VOL. ni. K

Miss Hildreth lead never spoken to him of
her absence abroad, or volunteered any information
concerning it. He had known
Miss Hildreth for ten years ; yes, at one time
they had been engaged to be married. The
interview described by Miss James had certainly
taken place between him and Mdlle.
Lamien ; he had no wish to repudiate his
position ; at the end of the interview he
considered himself engaged to Mdlle. Lamien ;
nottingham since occurred to alter his
relations towards her. He had been out of
town from August to September ; his orders
were that no letters or papers should be
forwarded to him. He returned to New
York on the evening of the 8 th of September ;
he had only just reached his rooms when Miss
Hildreth's arrest was made known to him ; it
was Miss Darling who told him. He had
gone at once to Ludlow Street but was denied
admittance ; he then went to Mrs. Newbold's
house in Madison Avenue. It was only two days
ao-o that he had learned that Miss Hildreth and

Mcllle. Lamien were supposed to be one and
the same person. Yes, he had asked Miss Hill
either to confirm or negative the charge,
but she had declined to do so. He had no
reason to believe that Miss Hildreth had contracted
an unhappy alliance while abroad,
nor had he any for denying the possibility of
her leaving: done so. Miss Hildreth was his
friend, he would not therefore insult her by
protesting his belief in her innocence. He
had never seen Count Vladimir Mellikofi'
before meeting him at the Folly, on the
evening of the 2nd of May.

With the termination of Mr. Tremain's
statement further inquiry was adjourned until
the following morning. The long, hot day
had run its course at last, aud as the pent-up
crowd surged out into the mellow, lambent
atmosphere of the summer evening, and
melted away in all directions, twilight aud
desertion settled down upon the empty court-room.


Patricii, turning for one last look, as she

K 2

passed out of the private door, smiled sadly at
the change wrought ia so short a time.
Would it be so when she too had passed out
of the lives of those who surrounded her now ?
Would her name — her place — become but an
empty memory — a recollection to be put
aside with all haste ? Would he forget her,
too — he, Philip, for whose love she had
played so hazardous a game ? Would he forget
her, as these people forgot her, glad to rush
away from the excitement of looking at her
to the greater excitement of condemning* her ?
Must she, too, like Adele Lallovich, drink to
the very dregs the bitter cup of humiliation
and desertion ?

When all this grim comedy — this farce that
touched so close on tragedy — was over, when
Kussia's hand had closed upon her, would he
think of her then ? Would he come to know
her better when she had passed from out his
life for ever, and, perchance, give now and
then one backward look, one sigh, to the days
l;hat were no more ?

"Ah, Philip," she murmured, ''I would
rather far you should never know, lest in
knowing you should come to despise me for
my weakness and my love ! "

CONFLICTING IDENTITIES.

On the second day of the inquiry public
excitement and interest reached a higher pitch
than ever, when it became known that Mr.
Mainwaring would occupy the greater part of
the morning in refuting the evidence given,
and in protesting against the legality of the
warrant.

Considering how positive had been the evidence,
even of Miss Hildreth's own friends, it
was difficult to see what possible line of argument
the young lawyer could take, with any
surety of success. Mrs. Newbold's testimony
had disposed effectually of any doubts as to
the identity of Miss Hildreth with that of the

governess at the Folly — Adele Lamien — once
with this fact established irregularly, was not
Miss Hildreth's complicity in the murder of
Stevan Lallovich a foregone conclusion ?

o

The suborning of Miss Hildreth's particular
friends against her had certainly been a masterstroke
on Mr. Munger's part ; how could John
Mainwarinof confute such a mass of conviction
? Of course he was bound to make
a brave fight for his client ; but — and here the
public shrugged its shoulders collectively —
they were sorry for him, and sorry for the poor
figure he must inevitably cut ; and then went
to work to show their sorrow by discussing
Patricia's guilt as a proved premise, and her
probable fate only a question of time.

John Mainwaring had once again sought
Miss Hildreth, and, with every argument he
could bring to bear, every pleading of rhetoric
and common-sense, entreated her to reconsider
her decision, and loose him from that promise
of reservation respecting one point in her
confession.

But Patricia was not to be moved one jot
or tittle. She heard him to the end in
silence, sitting, as Philip had last seen herat
the little table, her hands clasped upon
it, and leaning slightly forward. Her face
looked worn and sad, her eyes pathetic in
their weariness, but the beautiful lips were
set in firm decision, their expression one of
dauntless course and endurance.

The sweet, pungent perfume of the Marechal
Niel roses, grouped together in a tall
glass vase, filled the heavy atmosphere with
overpowering sweetness. She waited until
John Main waring had quite finished speaking,
and then said, slowly, and with the musical
notes of her voice less reverberant than usual :

*'No, Mr. Mainwaring, I cannot alter my
decision ; I cannot give you leave to drag
my poor secret out into the light of day ;
not, believe me, on my own account, but on
his. To you only have I opened my whole
heart — you alone know my weakness and my
strength. For my own part, I should care

very little low much was known of my
motives ; but for him — for Philip Tremain —
I could not bear the thought and live, that,
through me, and my love, he should be exposed
to public ridicule. Ah, Mr. Mainwaring,
was it for nothing, do you think, that I sat
through those long, terrible hours yesterday,
and heard the murmurs of the crowd, their
open comments, their cruel innuendoes, their
still more cruel laughter ? Do I not know
how eagerly they would seize upon my poor
secret, and, tearing it limb from limb, dissect
it and discuss it, in their cold, cruel, analysing
fashion, until even the garment of reverence
that clothes all love, however poor and mean,
was torn from it, and it lay revealed — a poor
denuded passion in tatters ? Do you think
he could bear that ? Do you think Philip
Tremain could hold up his head against such
disgrace ? Would he not despise and hate
the one who brought it upon him, and would
he not have reason to cast from him for ever
all memory or recollection of such an one ?

Could I plead anything in extenuation to
him — then ? No ; better, far better, the worst
fate that can befall me than to clear myself
in the eyes of the world, at the expense of
sinking for ever in the estimation of him,
to gain whose love I have placed myself in
so terrible a position."

John Mainwaring made no reply ; indeed,
what answer could he make to such passionless
reasoning as this ? Whenever he was
brought face to face with Patricia, and listened
to her clear, calm voice, he felt himself carried
away by the very attitude of her pleading.
He saw things only from her point of view,
and was ready to acquiesce and agree with
her, however overstrained he considered lier
arguments. But when he was away from her,
and without the radius of her personal indigence,
he was apt to anathematise himself in
unparliamentary language, and to wish Miss
Hildreth's selection of a lawyer had fallen on
some one less susceptible to impressions.

*' Since you give me no option, Miss

Hilclreth," be said presently, somewhat sullenly,
" I must perforce make the best of
m}^ material ; but, I warn you, my reasoning
will sound very weak after yesterday's testimony,
and Munger is sure to pounce upon
its weakest point, in substantiation of which I
have nothing to advance — positively nothing."

I am very sorry for you, Mr. Mainwaring,
believe me," she answered, earnestly, " and
very grateful ; but I cannot change mv mind."

Then he had gone away, and for many
long minutes Miss Hildreth sat as he had
left her, her hands outstretched upon the
table, her face quiet and expressionless, save
for the close set curve of the mobile lips.

John Mainwaring, on leaving Miss Hildreth,
walked quickly to his ofBce, not in the most
enviable frame of mind. As he entered the
outer room, his clerk came forward and
whispered a few words to him, then preceding
him to the inner office, opened the door
and held it back for Mainwaring to enter.
As he did so, a dark figure rose up from

the depths of a lounging chair, and advanced
towards him. The brilliant sunshine from
the outer room struck full athwart the
stranger's face, and revealed the features of
the Italian, Mattalini ; then the door swung
to, and the clerk returned to his desk in
the full glare of the hot sunshine.

By ten o'clock the court-room was again
filled to overflowing, apparently with the
identical crowd of the day before. The battalion
of fashionable ladies showed an increase
of recruits, and the knot of lawyers gathered
about the Bench was augmented in numbers.
Close beside the railed off space, sat Mrs.
Newbold and Dick Darling, while not far
off, engaged in earnest conversation, were
Mr. Tremain and Main waring.

Again there arose the concentrated murmur
of many voices as Miss Hildreth took
her place within the rails, and at the same
moment Judge Anstice walked quietly to
his seat on the Bench ; and so began the
second act in the drag-ic drama.

o

Mr. MuDo^er intimated to his honour
that his part in the proceedings had terminated
with yesterday's evidence ; which, he
repeated, was in itself sufficient to incriminate
a dozen suspects, and to prove a dozen prima
facie cases. Bearing this in mind, it was
not necessary for him to recapitulate it in
detail, or indeed to make any comments
upon it. The point at issue was the identity
of the lady arrested with the person named
in the warrant as Adele Lamieu, or Lallovich.
Yesterday's evidence — that of Miss Hildreth's
intimate friends, and especially Mrs. Xewbold's
had conclusively established that point; there
could therefore be no hesitancy in proclaiming
the warrant a valid one, and surrendering
the lady up to the Russian Government. As
to the guilt or innocence of Adele Lamien,
or Lallovich, in the affair of Count Stevan's
murder, they were not called to pronounce
upon ; she must take her trial on that charge
in the country where the crime was committed.
The only point they were called upon to

prove, was the legality of the warrant papers,
and the identity of the person arrested ; this
point having been substantiated beyond question,
he could not see any cause for further
delay in the matter.

And then Mr. Hunger sat down with an
ugly triumphant frown on his rough-hewn
face, and out flew a shower of his favourite
paper pellets.

The silence that followed was intense.
The hot summer sun beating in through the
bare windows fell across a sea of expectant,
excited faces, all turned in one direction,
towards the slight, dark, upright figure seated
within the railed ofi" space. She, who, as the
rich and beautiful Miss Hildreth, had been
the object of their covetous envy, and who
now, as Adele Lamien, stood charged with so
vile a complicity in crime as to separate her
for ever from the poorest and lowest of that
looking multitude, beside whose poverty
and honesty her wealth and beauty fell away
in torn and soiled fragments.

In the midst of this silence John Main-waring
arose to address the Bench.

Mr. Mainwaring's face was at all times
non-committal, it wore now an absolutely
sphinx-like imperturbability. Tossing back
the heavy lock of black hair that fell over his
forehead, and squaring his shoulders with
a motion that bespoke both doggedness and
obstinacy, Mr. Mainwaring's first words fell
upon the listening audience with ringing distinctness,
and with sudden, unexpected surprise.

His learned friend," he said, " had
proved, beyond all shadow of doubt, the
question of Miss Hildreth's identity with the
lady, who, as governess to Mrs. Xewb old's
little daughter, was known as Adele Lamien.
It was not a point upon which they could
for one moment disagree ; he had no reason
or desire to raise issue upon it ; in fact, he
not only acknowledged the identity, but had
been cognizant of it from the outset. Miss
Hilclreth herself had no wish to dispute it ; sofar,
indeed, from that being; the case, he desired

particularly to impress upon this honour the
absolute truth of the assertion. Miss Hildreth
was one and the same person as that Adele
Lamien, who became Marianne Newbold's
governess. He wished to keep this fact
distinctly before them ; it was a very important
fact, as he would show them before
he had finished."

At this uncalculated-upon acceptance of
their theory, both Mr. Munger and Count
Mellikoff showed signs of perturbation. They
had not, at any one of their conferences upon
the line Mainwaring was likely to take up,
imagined so bold an expedient as his stitching
from them the very corner-stone of their plan,
and building upon it such an edifice as should
best suit his requirements. It was a decidedly
clever move, and sent John Mainwaring up in
Mr. Munster's estimation at a bound.

'' Well, then," continued Patricia's defender,
'that point well established, he would go onto
the next; and here he must just remind
them of Mr. Munger's concise recapitulation of

the case. They were not there on any other
business than that of proving, or disproving,
the legality of the warrant on which Miss
Hildreth had been arrested, as also of proving
the identity of Miss Hildreth with that of Adele
Lamien, or Lallovich, named in the warrant,
who was charged with complicity in the
murder of her husband, Count Stevan Lallo-
rich. This was the only point at issue ; all
other points were extraneous, and they need not
trouble themselves about them. Now, while
he acknowledged frankly that Mr. Munger
had proved the identity of Miss Hildreth with
that of the person received and known at the
Folly as Adele Lamien, he desired humbly
to submit one question to his honour. In
establishing the validity of this identity, how-had
they proved the identity of the Adele
Lamien — Mrs. Newbold's governess — with that
of the Adele Lamien, or Lallovich, who had
murdered her quasi-husband, Count Stevan ?
He unhesitatingly declared that they had not
established such identity in any particular.

VOL. III. L

'' They had heard," he said, " a great deal of
testimony, all of which had been cited only
to prove that Miss Hildreth and the governess
at the Folly were one and the same. That
was not at all difficult to prove, because Miss
Hildreth had never for one moment denied
the impeachment ; but he must say he failed
to see how proving that, proved also her
identity with the cast-off wife of the dissolute
young Russian noble, Stevan Lallovich ; and
until such identity was established, he certainly
should protest against the accused being-delivered
up to the tender mercies of the
Russian authorities. He would not call into
question the truth of the facts and details,
concerning the murder, as related to them —
they could all be verified if necessary ; but it
was not necessary. Undoubtedly the poor
deserted woman had committed the crime
imputed to her — it would be but a savage
justice after all. With that he had nothing
to do ; but when it came to the arrest of a
lady, an American citizen, in her own country,

on the chase of so o-rave a crime, it behoved
that country to be very careful in its investigations,
and to leave no stone unturned to come
at the actual truth. It ^Yas a terrible alternative,
that of handing over a fellow-countryman
to the despotic treatment of a foreign
Power, and before such a thing was made
possible, every item of extenuation should be
groped in behalf of the accused.

''He had listened to every word of the
evidence, and while in every instance he could
lay his finger on weak links, he would pass
them all over, and recall only to his honour
the substance of Miss James's, and Mr. Remain's,
statements. The former had dwelt
mostly upon the evidence of her own eyes,
and upon the nature of an interview which
had taken place between Mrs. Newbold's
governess and Mr. Tremain. Miss James
had not hesitated to affirm that she recognised
in the lady's face, despite artistic accessories,
the countenance and features of Miss Hildretb.

Mr. Tremain, on the contrary, assured them

L 2

positively that he had never at any time
during his visit at the Folly, entertained the
slightest suspicion of this identity ; it was
not until after Miss Hildreth's arrest that this
complication was made known to him, and
Miss Hildreth, to whom he appealed for confirmation
or reputation, refused to reply. Miss
Hildreth had her own reasons for thus treating
the matter.

He would next ask them to listen to a
very strange chapter in this strange story,
and if it appeared incredible and beyond
possibility, he must beg them to remember
that truth was often stranger than fiction.

'* Early in the autumn of the last year Miss
Hildreth had gone to Russia, with the intention
of travelling from place to place to
form her own opinions upon the customs and
people of that country. While on one of
her expeditions one of the horses cast a shoe,
and while waiting its replacement she was
invited to rest at a villa some four miles outside
of St. Petersburg. She did so, and was

greatly impressed by the luxury and beauty
displayed in the interior arrangements of the
unpretending mansion. It was some little
time before the lady of the house came to
her ; but, from the moment she entered the
salon, Miss Hiklreth was conscious of a sudden
curious sympathy, that sprang to life in her
heart, combined with a puzzling certainty of
having in some past situation met and known
the beautiful woman, who advanced towards
her with a smile of welcome. This perplexing
enigma was presently solved in the most
commonplace way ; Miss Hiklreth and her
hostess, rising together to examine some object
of art, passed a long mirror, and one glance towards
it was sufficient to explain the familiarity
of the stranger's countenance and bearing ; between
the two ladies there existed a marked
and positive likeness in feature, form, and
colouring. So pronounced indeed was it that
both commented upon it. The impromptu
visit lasted some hours, and on parting Miss
Hildreth carried with her the name and rank

of her chance acquaintance. She was known
to ber narrow, outside world as Adele Lamien,
but she was in reality secretly married to Count
Stevan Lallovich, a near relative of the Tsar.

'' Beinor often at Court and min ogling; in
Court society, it was not long before Miss
Hildreth came in contact with Stevan Lallo-
rich, who was accounted the gayest, wealthiest,
most fascinating:, and most dissolute man of
his circle. He chose to devote himself conspicuously
to Miss Hildreth, and though
posing as a bachelor, he more than once
hinted at some special reason for his attentions.
Miss Hildreth accounted for them asa
tacit acknowledgment of the likeness that
existed between herself and his wife. She
more than once drove out to the villa across
the Trotskoi Bridge, and each time returned
more and more interested in its mistress.

Early in December, all St. Petersburg was
thrown into a state of consternation by the
murder of Count Stevan Lallovich, who was
found dead in his palace, stabbed through the

heart. With one of those marvellous intuitions,
granted only to women, Miss Hildreth, on first
hearing; the bald details, felt confident as to
the hand that had dealt the fatal blow. She
hurried alone and by night to the villa, and
there found the poor wife, whom desertion
had changed into a demon of revenge, and
without a moment's reflection changed clothes
with her, and by morning both were flying
across country, making straight for the
frontier, protected by Miss Hildreth's passport
for herself and maid, and by her
unstinted use of money. In Paris they
separated, Miss Hildreth continuing her
journey to England, and embarking on board
the Suisse, of the International Line, as
Adele Lamien, for the express purpose of
turning the Russian police off the track.
The real Adele Lamien, or Lallovich, remained
under the protection of her mother's family,
well-to-do people in the west of France."

So far, Mainwaring had gone on from
point to point with rapid and uninterrupted

utterance, carrying his audience with him
who, from sheer amazement, sat spell-bound
and breathlessly attentive. He stopped now,
and with another upward toss of his head
threw back the offending lock of hair, turned
a quick comprehensive look at his audience
and then fixed his eyes for a brief second upon
Patricia.

She sat bending forward a little, her hands
folded, her face raised, on either cheek a streak
of vivid crimson staining their wax-like pallor ;
her eyes beneath the dark, straight brows met
his with one responsive flash of their old quick
fire.

With the very slightest smile of encouragement
upon his lips, John Mainspring drew a
deep breath and took up the thread of his
discourse.

A GLEAM OF LIGHT.

"And now, your honour," his deep voice rang
out, " I come, perhaps, to the most inconsequent
and incomprehensible part of any
that Miss Hildreth has delayed in this curious
and complicated history of a crime. I have
shown you how she, actuated by an enthusiastic
and Quixotic chivalry, imperilled her
own life to help and succour a sister-woman,
who, in a moment of mad passion, had committed
such a crime as put her life in danger.
Miss Hildreth, with a courage few men could
emulate, had not only planned her flight, but
accompanied her in it, and accomplished it
with safety. It was a daring and hazardous

undertaking ; but Miss Hilclreth considered
neither the danger nor the hazard, so long as
there was a chance of escape for that cruelly-wronged
woman, who had struck down the
villain who ruined her.

'the crime committed by Adele Lamien
was an offence against the laws of man, and
being such, she stood a criminal and fugitive
in the eyes of men. But what should be said
of the false-hearted traitor who had committed
a far graver moral crime, when he killed forever
the soul and heart of the woman he had
called his wife ? That was a question for a
higher tribunal than any mere earthly one to
answer, and before that eternal justice Stevan
Lallovich had entered, with the guilt of moral
murder fresh upon him.

*' As he had already told his honour, Miss
Hildreth parted from Adele Lamien in Paris,
and although she kept up her disguise and
name until she reached America, it was only
to gain time for the poor fugitive, and to give
a false scent to the police. On reaching New

York Miss Hildretli landed under her own
proper name, and proceeded at once to her
country place in the White Mountains, where
she remained for several weeks without
acquainting her friends with the fact of her
return home. This desire on her part to
remain C[uiet and unnoticed did not arise, as
Mr. Munster would have them believe, from
any criminal wish to keep her whereabouts
unknown, but was the outcome of purely
personal motives — motives he was not at
liberty to divulge ; but this much he would
say, these motives had nothing whatever to do
with Adele Lamien's movements; Miss Hildreth
had indeed heard nothing from, or of, that lady
since their parting.

During this month or six weeks of solitude
Miss Hildreth was engaged upon a very
delicate and purely personal matter, the
successful result of which she had very deeply
sat heart, and in the carrying out of which she
was willing to adopt any measures, no matter
how compromising.

Upon the nature of this work his lips
were sealed, but he was willing to stake his
honour as to the probity and lawfulness of
Miss Hildreth's intentions. In the furtherance
of this object circumstances arose
which, in Miss Hildreth's opinion, made it
necessary for her to adopt another character
than her own ; to enter, in fact, upon a little
play-acting, in which she personated the sole
character. What more natural than that she
should make use of the name and disguise
of the lady she had so lately protected ? As
Adele Lamien — a foreigner and dependent,
with the suspicion of a tragic past to give
effect to the present — she could enter without
fear of detection upon the delicate mission she
had marked out for herself.

"The danger of such a personation never
occurred to her ; Miss Hildreth was not one
always on the outlook for danger-signals.
She desired to borrow Adele Lamien's name
and story, the latter with modifications, fora
certain length of time, and she did so.

without thought of any possible evil arising
therefrom. But, to carry out her project, Miss
Hildreth was obliged to take some one person
into her confidence, some one who, knowing
the why and wherefore of this masquerading,
would, keep her secret intact while aiding and
abetting her. And this some one she found
in Mrs. Newbold. They had all heard Mrs.
Newbold's statement ; she acknowledged
frankly that Miss Hildreth and her governess,
known as Adele Lamien, were one and the
same, that lie had always known this to
be the case, and had given her countenance
and support to the deception. But here
he would remind them of Mrs. Newbold's
refusal to give any reason for her collusion
with Miss Hildreth, or any explanation of
the latter's motives. Like himself, Mrs.
Newbold's lips were sealed by a promise ; she
could not reveal her friend's motives, even
though that revelation were to save her from
a graver situation than the present one."
Once more John Mainwaring paused,

and once more a sympathetic murmur ran
throuo^li the crowd.

He had struck the right chord in his
opening sentences, and from the moment of
that favourable beginning he carried the
harmony of his audience along with him.

Even Judge Anstice leant forward in his
chair and followed him point by point with
a keen and appreciative interest. Mr. Munger
snorted and tossed back his leonine head,
and Vladimir Mellikoff's dark face grew
sterner and more set, while both of them
acknowledged that the young lawyer had
hit upon a productive mine, and was working
it to good advantage.

Patricia Hildreth changed neither her attitude
nor expression, only the crimson stain upon
her cheeks grew deeper as Mr. Main waring
entered upon more delicate ground.

Philip Tremain never took his eyes from
her face ; gradually, and at first in faint
gleams only that grew steadier as his memory
added the one touch needful, the true meanings

of John Mainwarinor's defence was breaking
him, and \Yith the overwhelming rush of
the revelation he felt all the old love and
tenderness for Patricia spring afresh to
life within his heart. He longed to snatch
her up from out that curious, eager crowd, and,
carrying her away to some spot of safety and
seclusion, lay her head upon his heart and bid
her be for ever at peace.

Meantime John Mainwarins: had beo"un
again.

*' Mrs. Newbold, your honour, having
consented to sustain Miss Hildreth in her
adopted character, the two ladies laid their
plans and modus operandi, and when the
invited guests assembled at the Folly, in the
month of April, they found there a foreign
lady whose appearance and manner were
unmistakably suggestive and interesting, to
whom they were introduced as Mdlle. Lamien,
the new governess, and whose strange story
Mrs. Newbold related one evenings during
dinner. And so well did Mrs, Newbold guard

her friends secret, that not even her husband
was entrusted with it.

Mr. Tremain was one of the guests, and
his attention was immediately attracted to the
quiet, retiring foreigner, an attraction which
soon developed into a stronger sentiment.
Mr. Tremain had told them, that he found no
point of resemblance between Miss Hildebrand
Mdlle. Lamien ; there were similar tones
in their voices, but that was no uncommon coincidence
: he had, however, never seen Mdlle.
Lamien in broad daylight, though this fact
made no impression upon him at the time ;
how positive had been Mdlle. Lamien's influence
over him was shown by his subsequent
proposal of marriage to her. He, Mr. Mainwarins:,
felt convinced that were he but free
to speak frankly at this point he could show
sufficient reason for this proposal ; reasons
arising from an outside source, and which
unfortunately he was not at liberty to explain.
Miss James had said that she suspected
Miss Hildreth from the first ; Miss James was

certainly a very clever young lady, for she
admitted entertaining similar doubts of Mdlle.
Lamien. She, however, if they excepted Count
Vladimir Mellikoff, would seem to have been
the only one who had suspected a play within
a phil. Miss Hildreth's arrival was announced
for the 2nd of May, and from the time of her
advent, in iwoprid persona, Mdlle. Lamien disappeared.
Miss James had not failed to make
a note of this coincidence. j\[r. Tremain's proposal
to Mdlle. Lamien, whose reappearance
took place after his adieux to Miss Hildreth,
was made on the afternoon of the 5th of May,
and from that day he had heard nothing from
her, although he considered himself in honour
bound to her. Nor had he again seen Miss Hill
up to his return from Maine early in September,
when he was met with the astounding
news of her arrest. Here again, unfortunately,
he was debarred from frankly explaining Miss
Hildreth's conduct at this juncture.

"She had carried out her project to a certain
limit, and then it would seem had capriciously

VOL. III. M

abandoned it ; for they must not lose sight of
the fact, that, though Mr. Tremain believed
himself to be addressing his proposals to Mdlle.
Lamien, it was in reality Miss Hildreth who
received them. On this point he would make
no comment, he was not in a position todo
so.

A good deal of stress had been laid upon
the two handkerchiefs, the one found in the
drawing-room at the Folly, the other left
in the apartment of the murdered Stevan
Lallovich, both of which bore the same embroidered
initials. To his mind there was
nothing incriminating in this, the coincidence
was a strange one, but nothing more. What
was more likely than that during one of
the frequent visits paid by Miss Hildreth
to the villa outside St. Petersburg, she should,
have taken in mistake one of the unfortunate
Adele Lamien's handkerchiefs, and, on seeing
her error, have remarked it carelessly with
her own initials ; or that after a time the
bit of muslin should have found its way back

to its rightful owner ? As to the second
handkerchief, that was a very simple riddle ;
Miss Hildreth had in her possession many
articles of dress belonging to Adele Lamien,
having required them in her first disguise
as that lady. The note-paper was easily explained
in the same way ; he could himself
prove that the penmanship was Miss Hildreth's,
though slightly disguised. As to the conversation
which took place in Mrs. Newbold's
boudoir, and the latter lady's evident agitation
during it, he would only ask his honour to
consider the decidedly awkward position in
which Mrs. Newbold was placed. She knew
what the consequences would be were Miss
Hildreth's Quixotic protection of the real
Adele Lamien to become known, and she
already had her suspicious regarding Count
Mellikoff: she alone rightly estimated the
danger run by Miss Hildreth in personating
one who was a fugitive from justice.

As to the part Miss James had played
in the whole matter, he should be sorry to

M 2

call it by its right name ; he believed there
was no enmity so bitter or treacherous as
the enmity of a jealous woman. Might not
the motive power of Miss James's conduct
be found in the one word — jealousy ? However,
with that he had nothing to do. He
begged again, and finally, to submit to his
honour's consideration the point at issue ;
namely, the proved identity of Miss Hildreth,
not with the governess known as Adele
Lamien, but with the real Adele Lamien,
the wife and murderer of Stevan Lallovich,
which identity he submitted, had in no particular
been established. The warrant of arrest
must therefore fall to the ground."

Up to a certain point Mr. Main waring felt
that he carried his public with him ; but
beyond that point — when he came to the-equivocal
position held by both Miss Hildebrand
Mrs. Newbold — he knew himself to be
losing touch ao^ain. He could calculate his
audience's pulse to a fraction of a beat, and
he was aware of the exact moment when their

allegiance fell away from him, and veered back
again to the opposing scale.

It was as he had warned Patricia it would
be ; the instant he touched delicate and doubtful
ground and advanced a theory in support
of which he could produce no proofs, that
instant the entente cordiale failed him. The
public likes to believe in its own strict integrity,
and its abhorrence of anything not
honest and above-board, and to have so
extravagant a story as this masquerading of
Miss Hildreth's thrust down its throat, accompanied
by such lame excuses as sealed lips
and secret promises, was not at all to its
taste.

Therefore when Mr. Munger sprang to his
feet, he but expressed the public's opinion
when he told his honour "that Mr. Mainwarins:
must gauge them by a fool's measurement,
if he expected them to swallow such a
cock-and-bull story as that he had expounded.
If Miss Hildreth had not some awkward secret
to conceal, why should she bind the tongues

of both her lawyer and her friend ? What
possible reason could she have for concealment,
unless the work she was engaged upon would
not bear official scrutiny ? Mr. Ma in waring
had begun boldly enough, and had not spared
his insinuations as to the good faith of those
opposing him ; but he must say he failed to
see how Mr. Main waring had established even
one point in his elaborate theory.

*' He had submitted that while Miss Hill
was Adele Lamien, still she was not
Adele Lamien. Such reasoning sounded to
him very like a page out of ' Alice in Wonderland,'
where everything was not what it
seemed, and seemed not what it was. Why
did not Mr. Main waring bring forward proofs
to establish his theory of there being two
Adele Amiens ? Were they to meekly accept
this melodramatic story of Miss Hildreth's
heroic championship of the wretched woman
who had killed her lover, and not ask
for proofs ? Both Mr. Main waring and Mrs.
Newbold had made a great show of acknowledging

Miss Hildreth as A:lele Lamien, the
governess; and then they asked his honour to
accept the absurd tale of Miss Hildreth's
personating Adele Lamien, only to further some
foolish plot of her own devising, some personal
intrigue that would not bear investigation.

"Either Miss Hildreth was or was not Adele
Lamien-Lallovich. She had been proved to bethe
Adele Lamien of the Folly, and had been
acknowledged by Mr. Mainwaring ons such,
and yet now, forsooth, he wanted to prove
that while she was the one Adele Lamien,
she was not the real Adele Lallovich — not
the Simon Pure article. It was about as logical
a deduction as that of a child, who told you
it either rained, or it did not rain ; it did not
rain, therefore it rained ! Altogether too much
time had been spent in such foolish arguments
; on his side time was valuable, would
his honour, therefore, make known his decision ;
a decision which could only be made in one
Away, and end this farce by declaring in favour
of the validity of the warrant, and the identity

of the Addle Lamien, therein named, with the
lady calling herself Miss Hilclreth."

Mr. MuDger's harsh voice threw out his
words energetically, while he clenched, each
sentence by a single hammer - like beat of
one hand upon the other. He had sprung
up so suddenly, and poured out his rough
eloquence in such a stream, no one had an
opportunity of interrupting ; he finished with
another contemptuous snort and settled himself
down in conspicuous defiance.

With the calling of the noon recess, the
case against Patricia Hildreth had assumed
a more ugly and threatening aspect than
ever.

CHECKMATE.

When the Court re-assembled, however, a
change in the moral temperature had evidently
taken place.

John Mainwaring entered with a certain
assured step, and with almost a smile upon
his sombre countenance.

The audience, quick to notice the bent
of any straw in this stream of sensationalism,
became at once aware of the slight increase
of definite self-possession in Mr. Mainwaring's
bearing, and whispered amongst themselves
that the young lawyer had " caught on " to
something new since his speech of the morning,
and was looking mighty pleased, and
smiling over it.

So soon as the room was reduced to order,
Mr. Mainwaring arose, and, addressing Judge
Anstice, begged to be permitted to substantiate
his statements of the morning through one
witness only.

He had," he said, " been jumped upon so
summarily by his learned friend, Mr. Munger,
almost before he had finished his few remarks
he could not dignify them by calling them
a speech — that he had had neither time nor
opportunity in which to introduce this vivid
voce evidence. He might be somewhat out of
order in wishing to do so now ; but, as to
that, the entire examination had been conducted
on purely informal lines. They had
all understood why it had been so conducted,
for, where such grave issues where at stake,
it was not to be cavilled at if a few exceptions
were given and taken."

As he understood, the present position of
affairs stood in this wise. Could he prove
that there were two Adele Amiens, or rather
that Miss Hildreth, in personating Adele

Lamien, had in truth portrayed the only
Adele Lamien, and that the whereabouts of
that lady were known to him and could be
substantiated ? Should he establish this, he
supposed the charge against Miss Hildreth
would be withdrawn. Doubtless the story
he had related to them, did sound incredible
and marvellous ; but they must bear in mind
that it was not given to every one to understand
and appreciate the higher gifts of heroism
and courage. Mr. Munger had clearly pointed
out that what was required were proofs, proofs
and nothing but proofs. As he had said, truly,
either Miss Hildreth was, or was not, the
woman, Adele Lamien, wanted by the Russian
police. If she was proved not to be Adele
Lamieu, then she would be released from her
present painful position, and would go out
from this examination without a stain upon
her character. On the other hand, if this
point was not established, but remained doubtful,
or if she was proved circumstantially to
be Adele Lamien, then her fate was a hard

one indeed ; she had only the tender mercies
of the Russian law to look to.

Mr. Munger had seen fit to taunt him
with his frank acknowledgment of Miss
Hildreth's personation of Adele Lamien ; he
had, indeed, made very merry over his childish
logic. He could not hope to emulate Mr.
Munger's flow of rhetoric, still he could and
would meet Mr. Munger's demand for proofs,
by introducing certain conclusive testimony.
He would put aside all extraneous matter,
whether personal or otherwise, and stick to
one or two points only. Was there another
Adele Lamien, beside Miss Hildreth, who was
the real criminal, and if so, where was she
to be found ? If he established these two
points he should consider the question of
identity definitely disposed of. He would
now produce his sole and only witness.

At the sound of his name the Italian,
Mattalini, stepped forward, and with the
slightest shrug of his shoulders, gave a

meaning smile, as his eye caught and held
that of his master Vladimir Mellikoff.

At the sight of this paid servant of the
Imperial Chancellerie appearing against him,
Vladimir Mellikoff gave a perceptible start,
and for the first time his belief in the
ultimate success of his mission wavered.
He was, however, too seasoned a diplomatist
to show any outward signs of his inward
disquietude, and, save for that momentary
impulsive change of expression, his dark,
cold face remained as inscrutable as ever.

Following Mr. Mainwaring's lead, the
Italian began by telling how and why he
had first become attached to the service of
Count Mellikoff. He had been sent by the
Imperial Chancellerie about a month ago to
wait upon Count Mellikoff as valet. He had
not been told in so many words that he was
also to act as a spy upon his master, but he
knew this was what was expected of him.
It was the system employed by the Chancellerie

; each one of their agents lead a
double, whose business it was to report to
headquarters the other's every action, movement,
or word : it was a fine system, because
it distributed power irrespective of rank.

From something he heard at Petersburg,
before joining Count MellikofF, he
had reason to believe that the Chancellerie
were not altogether pleased with the Count's
manner of procedure ; he was, therefore, despatched
to look after Count Vladimir, and
report upon his progress. He had not been
long in New York before he made up his
mind that Count MellikofF was working on a
wrong' scent ; he knew the nature of the
Count's mission, and he very soon discovered
that the Count was not showing his usual discretion
in this case ; he was, in fact, taken
in by a lay of circumstances, and by the
assurances of the young lady, Miss James.
He had endeavoured, on one occasion, to
speak to the Count upon the subject ; but
he had been told to hold his tongue : a

piece of advice lie strictly adhered to, until
sucti a time when his not holding: it would
most injure the Count. No one told him
to hold his tongue twice, for nothing;.

Yes, he was ready solemnly to swear
that the young lady, Miss Hildreth, was
in no way identical with the fugitive, Aclele
Lamien, the murderer of Stevan Lallovich.
He had at one time often seen Adele Lamien ;
there was a strong resemblance between her
and Miss Hildreth ; but he knew for a
certainty that Miss Hildreth was not Adele
Lamien, and that Adele Lamien was, at the
time he quitted Russia, in Petersburg, where
she still remained. He did not know this
when he first came to Count Mellikofi" ; but
he did know it for a fact now, and he
was quite ready to bear out this statement ;
and, what was more, he could prove that
Count Mellikoff was not unaware of this
fact ; that he had indeed been warned by
the Chaucellerie of Adele Lamien's presence
in Petersburg, which had been sworn toby

a member of the council, though, so far
they had not been able to verify the report.
He could not say why Count Mellikoff had
paid no heed to the warning and discredited
it ; it had come straight enough to him —
Mattalini — and from an unimpeachable source.
Miss James had several times visited
Count Mellikoff at his hotel; he had overheard
one of their conversations, he had
listened purposely ; it was the conversation
in which the manner of Miss Hildreth's arrest
had been planned ; it was arranged to take
place during the absence of Miss Hildreth's
friends. Miss James had urged Count Ellis
to greater haste in the matter ; she
had seemed consumed with hatred of Miss
Hildreth. Oh, yes, he knew quite well what
it meant to hate any one ; he hated Count
Mellikoff, and was glad to pay him back
for some of his haughty insolence. He had
known from the beginning of the inquiry that
Miss Hildreth was not Adele Lamien, but he had
had no absolute proof of it until that morning.

He had gone to Mr. Mainwaring and told
him what he was now telling his Excellency.
Mr. Mainwaring had asked him for proofs,
but he had none then, only the proof of
his inward convictions. Mr. Maintains told
him that they were no good ; but within the
last hour he had got proof, and that proof
he wanted to give up now.

Within the last hour a sea-telegram had
come for Count Mellikoff; it was his —
Mattalini's — business to receive all telegrams
and bring them to the Count ; it was not his
habit to open and read them first ; but of
this one the yellow envelope was not stuck
down — when an envelope was not stuck down
it was no crime to look at the contents. He
had done so, and the first words he saw made
him glad he had not been a stupid fool of an
innocent and stuck down the envelope flap,
as for a moment he had thought of doings

o

The telegram was in cipher, but he knew
enough of the Chancellerie cipher to make
it out. It was sent by one Paul Patouchki,

VOL. in. N

who was the chief of the Chancellerie Council,
and it ran to this effect :

The woman, Adeie Lamien, arrested this
evening in the Nevski. She attempts no
defence. Your presence before the Council
peremptory. Return immediately."

As the Italian finished he drew out of his
pocket a thin, crackling, yellow envelope,
indicative of a telegraphic message. He
looked at it fondly for a moment.

"Eccelo!'' he exclaimed, 'tis a little
thing with which to save one woman's life,
and yet big enough to kill another 1 "

Then he handed the missive up to the
Judge, and stood waiting further developments.


The sensation caused by the Italian's
statement was beyond all precedent; the
excitement of the crowd burst all restraints ;
it seemed as though, having once doubted
Patricia Hildreth, they could not now be
loud enough in vociferating her innocence.

The clamour lasted but a few seconds;

but ia that short interval Vladimir MelUkoff"
ganglia sight of such a sea of angry, menacing
faces, and heard the echo of such violent
threats as to shake even his trained courage,
and warn him of the perilous position he
should occupy if once that public Nemesis
was set loose.

The rage and anger of his own heart knew
no bounds. To be duped and done in such
a fashion by his own paid assistant ; to find
out all too late that a spy had been dogging
his actions at every step of the way, and that
that spy had been sent by the Chancellerie —
by Patouchki, his chief, on whose honour
he would have staked his own !

This then was his reward, this was Russia's
gratitude ! A thrust in the dark, a blow from
behind, and he was laid low, unable to defend
himself or fight for his life. He realised all
too well what this failure meant for him —
disgrace utter and complete ; the Chancellerie
never forgot or foro-ave a false move in the
game, any more than ii ever remembered the

N 2

many successes and triumphs achieved for it.
To fail once was sufficient, when one had
reached so high an altitude as his, and with
failure came a downfall more disastrous and
engulfing even than that of death.

And Olga ? But no, he must not think
of her now, or he should go mad. He must
forget her, put her by, believe in her, trust
her ; he must pull himself together, he must
not succumb like the veriest novice before this
blow. Were not all those cruel faces turned
upon him, those hundreds of eyes peering
with wonder and delight at him ? He must
not let them see any fear upon his face, they
must not hear a word of cowardice from
his lips.

Then he became aware of a single voice
addressing him, and the sounds slowly resolved
themselves into Judge Anstice's familiar
tones, asking him to examine the cablegram,
and state if the Italian's translation of the
cipher was a correct one.

He took the slip of flimsy paper with a

hand that never trembled, and scanned the
few bald lines. Mattalini had read them only
too correctly, they were confirmation positive
of the utter breakdown of all his elaborate
structure.

He could have leapt upon the Italian then
and there in his blind rage, and struck him
to the ground ; he could have beaten him
senseless and felt a savage joy in each blow
he dealt him. Had he not ruined him forever,
not only in the eyes of the Chancellerie,
but in those of Flora Naundorff? That was

o

where the lash cut deepest, that was the
agony impossible to bear.

And yet, despite all this mad tumult going
on within him, he still was conscious of
standing up and answering Judge Anstice
in his usual controlled voice. The Italian
Mattalini had perfectly translated the cipher,
the message ran as he had said. A person
called Adele Lamien had been arrested in
Petersburg ; he should immediately demand
farther confirmation of the matter ; in the

meantime he left the custody of Miss Hildreth
in the hands of the Bench. He had no statement
to make ; he had acted throughout in
good faith and according to instructions ; he
would at once communicate what further particulars
he received to Judge Anstice ; without
doubt his Government's Ambassador would
stand surety for the integrity of his future
movements. He begged to return the cablegram
to the keeping of the Bench.

Then he sat down, and after a few
moments' whispered conversation with Mr.
Munger and Mr. Mainspring, Judge Anstice
rose and withdrew, and the crowd were free
to force their way out into the streets, flooded
with the golden sunshine, and there to discuss
this last change in the day's excitements.
And so ended the second day of what, in
after years, came to be known as Patricia
Hildreth's trial.

OUR LADY OF KAZAN.

"When Ivor Tolskoi quitted the presence of
Patoiicbki, he carried with him the remembrance
of the chiefs troubled face, and almost
imperative appeal :

Find me the woman, here, in Petersburg,
and I shall know how to act."

"I will find her," he had replied, and it
needed no strong oath or asseveration to convince
Patouchki that Ivor would grudge
nothing in the fulfilment of this promise.

It was early afternoon when Tolskoi left
the Chancellerie ; it was long past sundown
ere the chief aroused himself from the anxious
reverie into which the young man's suspicions
and insinuations had plunged him.

Despite the hardness and impregnability of
Patouchki's nature, there existed somewhere,,
deep down in the inner recesses of his rugged
heart, a softer spot than he was ever given credit
for, and in that remote and hidden nook he had
set up the fidelity and friendship of Vladimir
Mellikoff, as the one bright sentiment in which
to believe and trust. He had watched his
career from the outset, and had spared neither
influence nor interest to advance the abilities
and talents he believed him to possess. He
entertained for him a feeling as nearly
approaching love as his temperament was
capable of experiencing. And he had beheld
with concealed delight the increasing regard
manifested by his august master towards his
favourite. It was owing entirely to his exertions
that this last delicate mission had been
entrusted to Mellikofl''s skill and courage, and
he had for once spoken almost with enthusiasm,
at the council, of Vladimir's peculiar fitness for
the undertaking. He had said to himself that
with his success in this Mellikofl's name might

be fearlessly put forward for some signal mark
of Imperial favour.

It may be imagined then with what proportionate
anger and disappointment he listened
to Tolskoi's plausible insinuations. They
did not lose one feather's weight of value in
Ivor's manner of expressing them ; the very
candour of his words, the collectedness of his
bearing, but increased their responsibility; and
Patouchki, with his quick perception, realised
this, and gave it more weight, perhaps, because
of that weakness which he knew existed in
his heart for the absent Vladimir.

There is no judge so cruel and relentless
as a human heart that owns but one outlet for
its affections. Unlike those happier natures
who sympathise, and in a manner love all
fellow mortals, because of their common humanity
and common redemption, this poor
starved soul sets all its store on one poor
fallible object, and then, when the floods of
doubt and mistrust are let loose and sweep
away the idol, marring its beauty and exposing

its blemishes, it owns no larger creed
to fall back upon, and so drifts into the
opposite extreme, and welcomes with sardonic
pleasure the mocking devils of resentment and
retaliation.

It was so with Patouchki. Out of the
very affection he had borne Vladimir, sprang
now the hydra-headed demon of doubt :
and since he could doubt him in one particular,
he could doubt him in all. Ivor had
set alight such a train of implacability as even
he would have hesitated to fire, could he have
foreseen its consequences ; for with the downfall
of Patouchki's perspicuity came his resolve,
to punish the one who had thus dared
to set at naught his judgment, and who by
playing the role of deceiver had inflicted on
his self-love so dire a wound.

It was well for Vladimir Mellikoff that
he could not see the chiefs face at that
moment, for, as the evening shadows closed
around the motionless, lonely figure, sitting
so still and rigid, they paused, half afraid

to creep about the stern hard countenance,
whose eyes gleamed with such passionate
fire, whose lips were locked in so firm and
cruel a line. And so he sat for hours, his
busy fingers idle, his active brain absorbed
in bitter contemplation of broken trust
and ruined faith.

It had appeared to Ivor an easy and
simple task to track and find the poor
fugitive, Adele Lallovich. Petersburg and its
environs covered a considerable area, it was
true ; but these, when compared with Paris
or London, sank into insignificance, and yet
every day fugitives from justice were hunted
down and trapped in those great cities,
whose mileage so far exceeded the Muscovite
capital.

It needed but system," so he told
himself, with a smile and a shrug of his
shoulders at the tactics of the Chancellerie
old women. " System and perseverance, and
a judicious use of gold," he would back
these three against the craft and finesse of

any woman. He therefore set about laying
the plan of his operations, being careful,
however, to keep himself out of the actual
work, and to be recognised in it only as the
agent of the Chancellerie.

But day succeeded day, and week followed
on week, without the least success attending
his efforts. Either he had mistaken a chance
likeness in some transient worshipper at St.
Isaac's for the fugitive, or else Adele Lallovich
had again made good her escape across the
frontier. Each day Patouchki looked at him
with the same strange, hard expression, ashe
asked :

Have you found her ? "

And each day Ivor, with a frown, was
obliged to reply :

'' Not yet ! but I shall do so."

Then the chief would turn away with
a grim smile, and Tolskoi would vow with
hot intemperance that he would be successful,
even if his life were to be the penalty.

And so the summer drew on apace.

and Petersburg became a desolate wilderness
; empty, save for the thousands of
poor souls who toiled on and on, irrespective
of the seasons' changes, and whose sole recreation
was a walk across the Trotskoi, or
Nicholas bridges, stopping for an instant's
prayer before the shrine of the good name-saint,
or leaning against the granite parapet,
drinking in the languid breeze that came,
touched with a suspicion of coolness, from
off the grey Neva ; or an hoar's stroll in
the Boulevard park, shorn now of its aristocratic
idlers, but gay enough with the
brilliant colours in the costumes of the less
favoured mondaines.

The Court had long since flown westward
; and after a few weeks' halt at
Gatschina, the gentle Tsarina had taken a
favoured few of her personnel, among whom
was Olga Xaundorff, and departed for her
native Denmark ; where, in the dear old
home of her childhood, she dropped the restrictions
of royalty even as she put off her

state robes and jewels, and in a cotton frock
and straw hat became a girl again, outvie-
ing even her daughter, the Grand Duchess
Xenia, in her happiness and delight.

Neither Patouchki nor Ivor left Petersburg.
The former because no place possessed
half the charm for him as did the frowning;
Chancellerie, and his own office within its
walls ; no music sounded so sweet to his ears
as the triumphant clang of the jubilate chimes,
or the mournful cadences of the miserere bells ;
no recreation so well pleased him as an hour
passed in reviewing the Chancellerie's past
achievements, or in building up vast schemes
for its future greatness.

And Ivor stayed because his self-imposed
task was not yet accomplished, and because he
felt the time growing daily shorter, when,
unless he could redeem his word and find the
woman Adele Lallovich, his rival would return
and snatch his prize from out his very arms.

Therefore he waited and he watched with
a dogged patience and perseverance. The

July days passed into August, and August
became September, and still be made no
further progress iu the path of victory ; while
on the other band, according to private despatches
from the Italian, ]\Iattalini, Vladimir
Mellikoff was apparently succeeding in ibis
undertaking beyond bis most sanguine hopes,
and spoke confidently of bis speedy return to
Petersburg.

Ivor felt the situation to be critical, and yet
was unable to force the march of events. Sofar
his every effort had miscarried ; each well-laid
plan, each secret scheme bad but resulted
in failure. Adele Lallovicb seemed to have as
completely vanished from out the orbit of ibis
machinations, as though she bad never come
within that of bis vision.

And so the 15tb of September dawned,
and Tolskoi, with the sense of defeat pressing
heavily upon bim, failed for the first time to
report himself at the Cancellaria. He felt be
could not bear with equanimity Patouchki's
piercing glance, or the harsh tones of bis voice

as lie put the invariable question — " Have you
found her ? " and still less could he meet the
slow, cold smile that curled the chiefs lips at
the monotony of his negative reply. He
knew, too, that this was the day appointed in
America for the examination of the warrant
papers, under which Count Mellikoff had
effected the arrest of a certain person calling
herself Adele Lamien, and should this inquiry
terminate in the establishment of the woman's
identity with the murderer of Stevan Lallo-
rich, Mellikofi' would lose no time in starting
for Kussia ; and, when once on the ground, and
his influence over Patouchki restored, what
would become of his, Ivor's, charges against
him ? The deepest laid schemes must fall
to pieces under the pressure of bald fact.
It had never been a part of Ivor's design that
Vladimir should return triumphant ; his defeat
and disgrace, while absent, were necessary
factors in the carrying out of his project. It
was on that very defeat and disgrace that he
depended most for his success with Olga ; like

her royal ancestress, she could not tolerate or
forgive the sin of failure.

The day had been very close and hot ;
what breeze there was came laden with a fiery
touch, the great gilded dome of Isaac's Church
blazed with blinding intensity, the tall, lance-like
spire of the great Petropavlovsk fortress
quivered in the palpitating atmosphere ; there
was no retreat, however secluded, that was
not laid bare and permeated by the searching,
cruel sunshine.

Ivor had remained a voluntary prisoner
all day ; but as evening drew on, and the
garish sun sank gradually down to rest ina
panoply of royal crimson and gold, he
roused himself, and passed out into the rapidly
filling streets. Walking idly along the
Boulevard de Cavalerio, he made his way
to the Nevski — the Rue Tivoli of Petersburg:
stopping now and then to look in the shop
windows, and to wonder aimlessly which one
of all the pretty baubles displayed in the Circassian
Bazaar would best please Olga's fancy.

VOL m.

After half an hour's wandering through
the arcades he turned in the direction of the
church of Our Lady of Kazan. The great
doors stood open, and on either side the semicircular
colonnades, like those of St. Peter's
at Rome, made deep and shadowy resting-places
for the weary.

Pushing past the kneeling beggars gathered
about the entrance, Ivor passed in to the deep
stillness and tranquillity of the grand interior.
No service was going on, and the hushed
silence was unbroken save for the occasional
footsteps of coming or retreating worshippers.
The rich glory of colour and ornament, for
which Our Lady of Kazan is famous, were
half hidden by the gathering on of night ;
here and there, where a taper gleamed, the
sparkle of gems, the reflection of gold, the
green of malachite, or the blue of lapis-lazuli
would flash out, lost again in the feeble,
flickering rays.

Half hidden by one of the great columns,
Ivor watched the ever changing stream of

visitors, as they came and went, and fell
to speculating upon the nature of the petitions
they pleaded so earnestly, throwing themselves
on their knees, bowing their heads,
beating their breasts, and making unceasingly
the sacred symbol upon brow and heart. He
did not kneel himself; he would have told
you that he had out-grown all such old-world
superstitions, but he watched with half-amused,
half sympathetic toleration the rapt
devotion of those about him.

Presently a woman, some little distance
away, got up from her knees, and, after a
moment's hesitation, turned and walked swiftly
down the dim aisle. Ivor looked at her
without much thought beyond the half-formed
one that her long cloak of black serge
and closely-veiled bonnet were ill fitted for
the heat of that summer evening. As she
drew near to him his attention wandered,
caught by the trifling incident of a baby's cry,
and when his thoughts returned to the heavily-draped
figure it had vanished out of sight.



In another moment Ivor also quitted the
now dark church and retraced his steps to the
Nevski, where fascinated again by the frivolities
in the Circassian shop he halted, and
returned to the vexed question of Olga's taste
in the matter of a gift.

Next door to the Bazaar was a small,
rather bare-looking shop, whose only sign
of business was the significant one of St.
Nicholas's three golden balls. The entrance
door was low, and as it opened or shut a tiny
bell above the trans beam save out a warning;
jangle. It was this bell that aroused Tolskoi's
attention and caused him to look up suddenly.
As he did so, a tall figure dressed in a thick
black serge cloak and close bonnet came out
of the low door ; the nature of the woman's
errand was painfully apparent, for in her hand
were two or three coins, over which her head
was bent down.

Ivor at once recognised her to be the same
woman he had seen in the church of Our
Lady of Kazan, not half an hour before, and

his interest thus reawakened, he watched
her not unkindly.

As she passed him the light wind caught
at her long black veil, floating out one
end of it ; she put up her hand to catch
it, turning a little as she did so, and therein
the half lights, partially concealed by the
black folds surrounding it, Ivor saw again
the face that had haunted him for so many
months: the face he had seen wild and haoffirard
and imploring at the great door of St. Isaac's
the face of Adele Lallovich !

His first impulse in his excitement was
to cry out, to speak to her, to stop her further
progress, to make her his prisoner by violence
if necessary, to force her to accompany him
to the Chancellerie. Then as swiftly reason
reasserted itself, and he determined to do
nothing rash ; he had no power to arrest,
he would but give her another chance of
escape if he raised a street emeute against her.
He understood too well the organised power
of the Nihilists ; at one cry from this woman

a dozen defenders would spring to her
assistance ; she would be rescued before his
very eyes, and he should get but a fool's
recompense for his pains.

No, what he must do was this. He must
follow her adroitly, without arousing her
suspicions ; he must track her to her place
of abode, and when sure of her refuge, send
for Patouchki and deliver her into his hands.

The woman walked on swiftly, threading
her way deftly between the droschkies and
heavier vehicles that thronged the Nevski,
and as stealthily as a sleuth - hound, Ivor
kept pace behind her. At the door of a
good - sized, respectable house she stopped,
raised her hand and knocked twice ; in an
instant the door opened on a cord, and
she passed into a narrow passage. The pent-up
shadows rushed forward to greet her,
and swallowed her up in their dark embrace.
Then the door swung to noiselessly, and Ivor
was left without, staring vacantly at the non-committal
walls and casements.

An hour later and night had thrown her
sombre mantle over the gay city. One by
one as the hours crept on, the noise of
returning revellers grew fainter and less
frequent ; gradually the peace of midnight
settled down upon the myriads of human
souls who make up the sum of Petersburg's
life. The heavens were dark and formless, save
for the millions of shining stars; Isaac's golden
dome loomed up in giant outline against the
sombre sky ; only the glittering lance-like spire
of Peter's fortress caught and held a transitory
gleam upon its slender shaft.

And then presently a noise of wheels broke
the stillness, wheels that came ever nearer and
nearer ; down the Boulevard first, and then
into the Nevski, where the pace slackened,
and a covered droschky drew up in front
of the commodious and respectable house,
before which Ivor had stood baffled.

Three persons got out of the carriage, two
of whom were easily recognisable, despite the
disguise of mufflers and low hats, as Patouchki

and Tolskoi. Not a word passed between
them, while Ivor, stepping a little in advance,
knocked twice distinctly. Instantly
the door swung back on its cord, and the
three men entering shut it quietly behind them.

A light gleamed at the head of the stairs,
and a woman's figure detached itself from
the surrounding gloom. She held a lamp
high up above her head, from which the
close black bonnet had been removed. And
thus looking do\vn upon them, calm and
unsuspecting, they saw the beautiful face of
the fugitive A dele Lallovich.

For, indeed, she was still very beautiful,
despite the lines passion and pain had graven
on her forehead, and about her eyes. The
eyes themselves were deep blue beneath black
pencilled brows ; the dusky hair, wherein a
thousand golden tints played at hide and
seek, fell loosely about her throat ; the curve
of the lips was proud, with a touch of suffering
in its downward droop.

This, then, was the woman they sought!

This was the defenceless being against whom
they came armed with Russia's law ! This
was Stevan Lallovich's wife — this was his
murderer !

For a moment they hesitated, stayed by
the fearlessness and dependence of her
position ; then Patoiichki stepped forward
and ascended the staircase. She watched
him as he came, step by step, and she knew
that her days were numbered.

She was alone in the house, save only fora
little serving-maid ; any resistance would
be but vain. She did not mean to resist.
She had prayed night and day for months
that some release might come to her. Had
she not that very evening begged Our Lady
of Kazan to have a little pity upon her ; to
give her some little respite from the horrible
dreams and spectres that haunted her ; tolet
her forget for only one small fraction
of time, the horror and reproach that had
settled on her lover's face when she dealt him
his death-wound ?

Our Lady of Kazan never turns a deaf ear,
it is said. Was not this her answer to that
wild, imploring cry ?

Patouchki reached her at last. She faced
him boldly and with eyes that never flinched ;
the lamp in her upraised hand burnt on
steadily, no tremble of weakness made its
flame flicker, or grow dim.

And now Patouchki laid his hand upon
her shoulder.

"You are Adele Lamien," he said, in his
harsh, bullet-like tones, " and as such I arrest
you, for the murder of Count Stevan
Lallovich."

She made no gesture either of assent or
dissent, she only looked at him, with all her
soul in her wonderful eyes. Then she spoke
slowly and with deliberation.

"I am Adele Lallovich," she said, "I
recognise no other name."

That makes small difference," replied
Patouchki. '' I must trouble you, madam, to
accompany me."

Again she raised her beautiful eyes to his,
and spoke, this time a little wildly.

"I am Adele Lallovich — and I killed him
my husband — sith my own hand."

Then she turned, and walked with quick
steps across a narrow hall, where on a peg-hung
her black cloak and bonnet. She set
down the lamp, and with dexterous fingers
put on her outside garments. When this was
accomplished she took some money from her
pocket — the few silver pieces Ivor had seen
her counting over in her palm — and, wrapping
them in a bit of paper, wrote across it.

It is for Pauline," she said iu explanation,
"my little maid."

Then she turned, and motioning Patouchki
to precede her, followed him down the stairs
and along the passage. The door opened as
noiselessly as before, and was closed with
equal caution. There was a moment's
whispered consultation, the slight dark figure
stepped into the waiting dioschky without
assistance, followed by Ivor and Patouchki; the

door was shut, and the vehicle moved quickly
away down the deserted Nevski in the
direction of the Chancellerie, whose frowning
portals were watched over by Petropavlovsk's
grim fortress.

As the noise of the wheels grew fainter,
the sad miserere bells rang out the quarter
past midnight.

On the following morning Patouchki, with
an unusual light in his eyes, and a cruel smile
on his lips, wrote out the telegraphic cable,
that sounded the death-knell to Vladimir
Mellikoff's love and hope.

NO Explanation.

Not many hours passed after that dramatic
scene in the court-room, in which the Italian,
Mattalini, played so conspicuous a part, before
ample confirmation of his statement came over
the ocean telegraph, establishing beyond all
question of doubt the arrest of the real Adele
Lamien, and the innocence of Patricia Hill


As John Mainwaring had said, his theory
once confirmed, all shred of suspicion must, asa
matter of course, fall from her, and she
would re-enter society's world stainless in
character and reputation. At the end of the
second day's examination, however, she returned

voluntarily to Ludlow Street Jail, refusing
with decision the conditional liberty
bestowed upon her.

''I had much rather wait," she said to
John Main waring. '' Please, Mr. Mainwaring,
do not urge me to go against my conscience.
You can surely understand my feeling in this
matter. I will not leave what has been my
prison, until my innocence is unqualifiedly
established, and until those who forced me
into this position are convinced of its falsity.
After a week's experience of the delights of
Ludlow Street, what can a few additional
hours matter ? "

She finished with one of her rare smiles,
which made John Mainwaring again realise
the utter futility of his eloquence, when
pitted against the charm of her loveliness.

So Patricia returned to her house of
detention, and John Mainwaring left her at
the entrance thereto, with a more cheerful
look upon his dark countenance than had
visited it for many a day.

It was still early in the afternoon when
the inquiry terminated, and the sunshine lay
upon all things external with so lavish a touch
and so tropical a force, that the dark corridors
and dim halls of the gloomy building appeared
most grateful to Miss Hildreth's tired brain
and eyes.

She entered her room, the scene of so
many conflicts between her love and pride,
and sank wearily down upon the chair before
the table, on which the yellow roses in their
tall glass vase made a single spot of golden
colour. Resting her elbows on the open
portfolio, she buried her face in her hands
and remained motionless, wrapt in a long
desultory retrospect of the week's events.

She was too weary even to remove her
bonnet, or the light scarf of lace about her
shoulders.

Now that the honos strain was ended, the
tension slackened, she felt her strength lapse
from her, and an overpowering weakness take
its place.

It was true she stood cleared in the
eyes of the public, who now regarded her in
the light of a heroine, concerning whose
courage and chivalry they could not say
enough. But was she cleared in her own
eyes ? It was well for her that the secret
of her disguise had not been dragged ruthlessly
out of its hiding-place. Had that been
the case, would not this same public be gloating
over it now; mouthing it and discussing it,
with even greater avidity than they had displayed
in the discussion of her late situation ?
She was spared' such an humiliation ; but
was she spared the humiliation of her own
thoughts, the scorn of her own accusing
conscience ? Must not the knowledge of her
motives, in thus playing With the misery of
another woman's crime, separate her for ever
from the very one for whose sake she had
entered on the path of deception ? Could
good ever come out of evil ? Did the end
ever justify the means ?

All the suffering; and anguish of those

last' seven days would seem as nothing, she
told herself, could she but face Philip Tremain
with unfaltering integrity ; could she but
look into his eyes and not feel her own
fall beneath the honesty of his. Woman-like,
she forgot his doubt of her, his half belief
in her criminality, a criminality which, if
proved, would have swept away all lesser
indiscretions in its magnitude.

No ; she gave no thought to the part he
had borne. A woman is never so happy as
when she forgives, with all her heart, some
wrong-doing on the part of the man she
loves. But with Patricia this active magnanimity
was not called into requisition,
for the simple reason that Philip's attitude
during the past week was clean forgotten
by her — swept away as where all lesser matters
in the contemplation of her own moral
obliquity.

How loner she sat thus absorbed and
motionless she could not have told ; but it
was long enough for the light in the room

VOL. III. p

to wane, and for the dying rays of the sun to
gleam aslant through the narrow window, casting
long tremulous bars of tinted light upon
the bare unlovely walls. Presently a slight
noise aroused her, and, the chain of reflection
thus broken, she raised her head and saw,
standing some little way from her, with the
tinted sun-rays resting on his stern face,
the man of whom she thought.

For a moment she gazed at him without
realising the actuality of his presence ; and
then, as her sad beautiful eyes sought his they
faltered, while a rush of sudden colour dyed the
pallor of her face.

"Philip!" she exclaimed, drawing in her
breath with a half sob, "Philip!"

Her voice broke the spell, and, while
its trembling cadences still lingered on the
air, Mr. Tremain came nearer and stood beside
her, looking down upon the troubled face and
anxious eyes that dared not meet his own.

Patricia," he said, " I have come to you
now, because I must know the truth. Because,

notwithstanding the speciousness of John
Mainwaring's pleading, there still remains a
little matter between you and me that needs
some explanation. I have come, Patricia, to
hear that explanation from your own lips."

His voice was harsh despite the tender
supplication of his eyes ; and Miss Hildreth,
looking down, missed this contradictory
tenderness, and realised only the commanding;
ring: of his tones.

Her face hardened, and the old look of
mocking defiance settled down upon it. She
gave a little laugh ; the artificiality of its
ring jarred on Philip's sensibilities, and caused
the tenderness in his eyes to give place to
quick anger.

'' Ah ! " said Miss Hildreth, '' how could I

forget that you, Philip, would require even

stronger proof than any afforded by Mr.

Mainwaring's eloquence, to convince you of

my inability to commit a murder ? I failed,

you see, to take into account the incredulity

of a legal mind."

p 2

If her words were insolent, the smile and
lauo-h accompanying them were more so, but
Mr. Tremain would not let his hasty temper
get the better of his discretion. He had
come to her with the unformed theory,
evoked by John Mainwaring's ambiguous
words, still at work within him, and he
determined, if it lay in his power, to force
confirmation of it from her.

You know that is not what I mean,"
he said gently; "no one can ever again
entertain so vile a suspicion against you."

"Yet you doubted me, Philip," she
interrupted ; ** you doubted me throughout."

Yes," he answered, " if you like to
classify a feeling, that scarce had formation
in my mind, under so grave an emotion as
(Doubt — why, then — I did doubt you, Patricia."

She made no reply to this, and after a
short pause he began again :

"That, as you know, is not the subject
to which I referred just now. You may
put me by with subterfuge and raillery,

Patricia, but I shall always come back to
my point, again and again. Patty, what
was your reason for personating that most
miserable woman, Adele Lamien ? What was
your inducement for imposing upon all at
the Folly ? "What was your motive in wishing
to deceive me ? "

Still she made him no answer. She had
turned her head away as he spoke, and
taken one of the yellow roses from the vase.
She raised this now, and drew it once or
twice across her lips. She felt his eyes
upon her, but she would not meet them.
She knew this to be the crucial moment ;
and she must meet and overcome it as best
she might.

Patricia," he said again, and his voice
grew sterner, 'you force me to impute
to you motives that are unworthy of you,
unworthy of any woman. But how can I
think otherwise, if you will not help me todo
so ? How can I put any other construction
upon your conduct, save that of

wilful and wanton cruelty, when I remember,
that twice as Miss Hildreth, you refused
me, scorning my love ; and then, that only
a few short hours afterwards, as Adele
Lamien you accepted me, and all I had to
offer — accepted me, with a lie upon your
lips, and deceit in your smile. Have you
no explanation to give me, Patricia ? Oh,
my dear, I will accept any pretext you may
offer ; only make some little excuse, no matter
how trivial, for the duplicity of your
conduct*

His voice grew pleading as he finished.
Looking at her, as she sat there, so near
to him, and yet so far ; a beautiful, lovely
woman, whose very beauty had brought
suspicion and distrust upon her, and remembering
how first he had loved her in
the full tide of her girlish fairness and
innocence, and how through all these years
he had cherished her memory, and could
not put her from out his heart, all the
old tenderness and longing surged up within

him, and he knew he could forgive her everything,
if only she would give him one little
opportunity for such forgiveness.

Had Miss Hildreth but looked up at that
moment, while the light of love still lingered
in his eyes, and trembled on his lips, surely
her foolish pride would have broken down,
and all the misery of those last few weeks
slipped from her, in the peace of a confession
made with his arms about her, her head upon
his breast.

But Miss Hildreth, like many a woman
before her, let slip the golden chance, and
passed by the propitious moment. She still
played with the yellow rose and avoided his
eyes as she replied, slowly :

I can explain nothing, Philip ; I have
no excuse to offer. You must form your own
opinion, and I must be judged and sentenced
according to it."

"But, Patricia," urged Mr. Tremain, ''I
ask for so little. Will you not at least assure
me, that it was no more wanton motive

than love of conquest and power of coquetry
that led you to deceive me, and draw from
me that mad proposal, which you, as Adele
Lamien, were pleased to triumph in against
your own proper self ? My dear, give me but
one such assurance, I will be content, I will
ask for nothing more."

"No," she replied in a dull, quiet voice,
'' I cannot. I have no thin q; to add to mv
former words. You had better leave me,
Philip, and — forget me."

That I can never do," he said, " I have
never for one moment forgotten you in all the
ten years of our separation. I am not likely
to do so now, when I have again looked so
often and so longingly, upon your beauty."

Her lips trembled a little at his words,
but she made no response.

Good-bye," he said sadly, and turned
from her.

She listened to his firm footsteps as they
traversed the floor ; then came the click of
the lock in the catch, the sound of the

opening and shutting door, and then again
the echo of his footsteps down the long
stone passage.

Then all was still. The tinted sun-rays
paled and faded, then vanished altogether ;
and Miss Hildreth, bowing her head upon
her clasped hands, burst into a passionate
storm of tears.

A WEEK later the daily papers chronicled
two events.

The first was contained in a short paragraph,
supplemented by a long leader, stating
that evidence having been received from
Russia, confirming the arrest of the real
criminal, Adele Lamien, or Lallovich, the
conspiracy against Miss Hildreth had fallen
to the ground, and she had been released
from her very unpleasant and unjust position.
Miss Hildreth, on leaving Ludlow
Street Jail, had immediately retired to her
country place in the White Mountains.

The second item was even more briefly

worded, though commented on exhaustively
in a still longer leader, and ran to the following
effect. That Count Vladimir Mellikoff,
having failed signally in his efforts to traduce
and incriminate a certain young lady, prominent
in New York circles for her wealth,
beauty, and amiable qualities, had sailed
on the previous Saturday for Havre, en
route for St. Petersburg,

And so the '' comity sensation," as it was
called by Toivn Optics, died a natural death,
and the next social scandal, hurrying close
upon its heels, crowded it out of general
consideration and recollection.

But those whom it had concerned so nearly
could not forget it thus easily ; to them it always
remained a very vivid and terrible experience,
out of which it seemed they had escaped
almost by a miracle.

Mrs. Newbold returned at once to her
island home, taking Dick Darling with her ;
and there, after several weeks had elapsed, Mr.
Tremain sought her.

He took an early afternoon boat from the
city, and walked up from New Brighton to
the Folly ; where not finding his faithful friend
within that Palace of Idleness, and beings
informed vaguely by Perkins that his mistress
was " somewhere about the partings," Philip,
declining his aid, set forth in search of
her.

And so it came about that unconsciously
his feet followed his memory, for very
soon he found himself at the opening of
the little hazel copse, where he and Patricia
had so nearly touched on reconciliation.

The marble boy Narcissus was still there,
and still holding aloft the vase from which the
water trickled in a gaily tinkling stream.
There, too, was the rustic bench, and seated
on it, doing nothing very gracefully, was
Esther Newbold.

She jumped up at sight of him and ran
forward, dragging her scarlet parasol behind
her. Her face was bright with welcome,
her smile affectionate and a little patronising.

My dear Philip, what a pleasure ! " she
exclaimed, putting out her small hand in a
loose gardening glove. "We began to think
you had given us up altogether for ' a bad
lot as my slang-loving Dick would say.
Why have you not come before, sir ? "

xVnd holding that frank little hand in his,
and looking into the sincerity of her blue
eyes, Mr. Tremain asked himself the same
question, and answered it truly, as he
replied :

"Esther, my dear, I did not come, because —
I was afraid."

"Ah," she said quickly. 'afraid ! That is
not like you. Of what, or of whom, were you
afraid ? "

Of you, and of your powers of persuasion,"
he answered ; at which Esther shook
her head, and laughed a little.

It is as well you should acknowledge
it," she said, "and with your first breath.
For, of course, you know, I don't mean to
speak with you upon any but one subject.

Philip, why are you here ; why are you not
already at the feet of Patricia ? "

"Yes, I knew you would ask that," he
answered; 'but, my dear Esther, how can I
go to Miss Hildreth, when she herself has
raised an impassable barrier between us ? "

But Esther failed to follow his reasoning.

Nonsense," she said, a little brusquely.
Nothing should be impossible to a man who
loves ; and all things should be forgiven to
the woman who loves him. I have no patience
with either of you ; but least of all with sou,
Philip. Were I a man, no fantastical barrier
should keep me from the woman of my heart.
Do you always intend to go on like this ? To
live and to die, or, worse, grow old and grey,
waiting for the barrier to tumble down of
itself, and never put out a hand to help its
overthrow ? "

Mr. Tremain could not but smile at her
vehemence ; he felt his spirits rise under the
energy of her assault.

It is for Patricia to make the first overture,"

lie said. ''I went to her, as you know,
at once, and begged of her to give me ever so
trivial and light an excuse for the ambiguity
of her conduct towards me, but she would
not. She had no explanation to offer, she said,
and she let me go from her without any word
of resistance, any sign of relenting."

** Then she was a little fool," cried
Esther, *rand I wish I had her here to scold,
and pet, and tease, and kiss. But you, Philip,
are not much wiser. I dare say you went
at her hammer and tongs, with your gravest
face, and in your longest words ! Of course
Patricia could not bear that sort of argument.
I wonder, for my part, that she listened to
you at all."

But, surely, my dear Esther, you must
admit I had a little show of reason on my
side," said Mr. Tremain, more quickly. " You
must acknowledge that Patricia's conduct in
refusing me repeatedly, as Miss Hildreth, and
then accepting me, as A dele Lamien, requires
a little explanation. It is not over pleasant

to one's amour propre to feel that one has
been duped ; but to have been duped wantonly,
is more than unpleasant — it approaches insult."

Mrs. Newbold looked at him earnestly for
several moments before replying ; when she
spoke it was in a far graver and more
serious manner.

And have you no idea, Philip, why
Patricia played this somewhat ignoble role ?
Cannot you form some theory concerning it ? "

Mr. Tremain shook his head.

I have formed a dozen theories, my dear
Esther, and dismissed them all ; each seemed
less tenable than the other."

And yet, you are very sure you love
her?"

'' Yes, I am very sure of that. I wish I
was as sure that she cared one-fifth part as
much for me."

Ah ! " said Esther, a satisfied smile
creeping in and out of her dimples. " Then,
Philip, I think I must read the riddle for you.
Patricia deceived you — because she loved yoiC'

But if Mrs. Newbold expected Mr.
Tremain to indulge in heroics at this declaration,
she was destined to be disappointed.
Instead of rhapsodies of delight, he replied
with an echo of scorn in his voice.

*' Are you aware what a paradoxical sentiment
you are promulgating, Esther ? Love
is not commonly supposed to take pleasure in
deception."

Ah," she interrupted, " but Patricia is
not a common woman ; perhaps she is as
paradoxical as my sentiment. However that
may be, I assure you, Philip, she deceived you
because she loved you. Do you remember
receiving a letter from her, early in the
spring ? "

I do indeed."

Very well. I don't absolutely know what
was in that letter, but I have my shrewd suspicions,
and I do know that your answer, when
it arrived, was not what she had looked for.
She came to me soon after she received it, and
I was positively frightened by the look of pain

VOL. m. Q

and determination on her face. She told me that
she had written to you, that she had humbled
her pride sufficiently to do so, because she
loved you, and had never loved any one else
but you. Then she told me of your answer to
her letter. She should never forgive you, she
said, never, until she had made you suffer,
through a woman, some portion of the pain
and humiliation you had brought upon her.
And then she told me her plan."

Here Mrs. Newbold paused and stole a
look at her auditor. He was standing with
his arms folded, his eyes fixed upon the sparkling
drops of water as they fell from the
uplifted vase, in the marble-boy Narcissus'
hand. With a quickly-repressed shrug of her
shoulders, Mrs. Newbold opened her scarlet
umbrella, and continued, watching Philip
meanwhile from under its friendly shade.

And this was Patricia's plan. She would
come down to the Folly, ostensibly as Mimi's
governess, and as such she was to be introduced
to you. I was to tell the story of Adele

Lallovicli, more or less modified, as if it were
her own, and she was to strive to win your
interest and regard, despite the damaging
evidences of so black a past. ' I will conquer
him yet,' she said, ' he shall not escape me
always ; and then, when he has acknowledged
himself vanquished, when he has laid down his
pride and his superiority for the sake of Adele
Lamien, why then, it will be my turn to scorn
and reject him, and he shall understand what
it is to make advances and be repulsed.' She
was very angry, Philip, and hard and desperate ;
and I was obliged to yield to her wishes for
fear of something worse. So we arranged it all
between us, and I comforted myself with the
thought that perhaps, after all, good might
come out of it, if even under a disguise,
Patricia could win you back again to her."

Again Mrs. Newbold paused, but Philip
neither changed his attitude nor raised his
eyes. So intent was his gaze, he might have
been counting the drops as they fell, with
rhythmic measure, into the marble basin.

Q 2

Mrs. Newbold continued.

And then at last you came, Philip ; and
the rest was easy work, because from the very
first, you were apparently strangely attracted
to Adele Lamien, and I felt almost righteous
when I saw how well all was working as we
had planned. Patricia came to me the evening
of the day you left the Folly, and falling on
her knees beside me, told me of her interview
with you, as Adele Lamien. She cried
and laughed and was girlishly happy over it,
because, as she said, she could see all the
time, even when you were urging your suit
most impetuously, she could see that it was
not Adele Lamien you really loved, but she —
in her own proper person — Patricia Hildreth.
Oh, Esther,' she cried, * I know, I know he
loves me ! And now, oh, how shall I ever
face him ; how shall I ever tell him by what
subterfuge and deceit I have won him from —
myself? Oh, Philip, it was unworthy of me,^
unworthy of my love; and yet I did it because
my love.' "

Once more Mrs. Newbold stopped, and
looked at him, but Philip was oblivious of
her gaze. She smiled, and closing her
scarlet umbrella moved a step or two nearer
to him.

*rand then you know," she went on, 'your
party broke up, and Patricia left me. She
promised me she would lose no time, she
would write and tell you all ; she would keep
nothing back, she would restore your pledge
to you, which she held as Adele Lamien, and
she would ask nothing from you but your forgiveness.
You who knows Patricia's proud
nature, can realise how difficult such a confession
would be for her ; and indeed, Philip,
she would have carried out her purpose had
I been able to keep near her. Away from me,
and alone, she grew fearful and lost courage.
I cannot do it,' she wrote me, ' Esther, I
cannot do it. I could not bear the scorn of
his eyes, the lash of his words. I cannot
tell him that I deceived him, wantonly and
cruelly, and of set purpose. My dear, I love

him, and yet see what my love has brought
me to. Do you think lie could ever believe
in it, or me, or trust to it, or me, again ? No,
let me say nothing ; let me drift out of his
life. As Adele Lamien I can easier bear the
certainty of his contempt, since I mean never
to claim his promise, but as Patricia Hildretb
I should die beneath the scorn of his just
anger. I have been rightly punished for my
wilfulness. Do not urge me any further. I
cannot tell him, Esther, I cannot.' Then you
know, Philip, came the terrible blow of her
arrest, and the first thing she demanded of
me, when I went to see her, was that I
should swear to keep silent regarding the
motive of her disguise. ' He must never
know,' she said, ' more than ever, he must
never know ; and Esther, of this be very sure,
I will face anything, Russia, condemnation,
exile, rather than that my weakness and folly
shall be dragged out as my excuse, and hebe
made the object of public derision. I
have harmed him enough, Heaven knows,

but he shall suffer no more through my
pride and weak revenge. I would rather he
believed me guilty of this horrible crime,
Esther, than that I should make him ridiculous,
as the dupe of a selfish woman, in
the eyes of the world.' That is why John
Mainwaring had so poor a defence to work
upon, and that is why both my lips and his
were sealed."

Mrs. Newbold came still closer to him, she
put her hand on his arm, her eyes forced his
to look at her ; there were tears in their blue
depths, her voice was tremulous and she spoke
impetuously.

You know the rest, Philip ; I have kept
nothing back, and I think when you remember
the severity of her punishment, the bitterness
of her suffering, the humiliation of her spirit,
you will forgive her. She loves you, Philip ;
it is from her very love that all this misery
has fallen upon her. Will you leave her to
bear it alone, or will you go to her ? Ah,
Philip, no one has ever had a braver opportunity

for carrying out the old, old precept ;
the legacy left to us by One whose mercy
and forbearance knew no bounds, and who
said, forgive, even if it be until * seventy
times seven.' "

Vladimir's welcome.

It was winter once more, and the gay Russian
capital had returned to its round of festivities
and merry-makings.

The Imperial family were in residence at the
Winter Palace, and the long salon resounded
nightly to the laughter and jests of the Court
circle. Not a cloud apparently marred the
harmony and well-being of Petersburg.

All without was bright and brilliant ; the
sun shone on the dazzling snow, the merry
sleigh-bells rang out on the frosty air, and the
Nevski arcades were thronged with richly-dressed
mondaines, who laughed and chatted,
and tossed over the costly trifles in the Circassian

shop with careless fingers. Within were
ease and comfort and luxury ; huge fires of
keen-scented woods, heavy draperies to shut
out the shrewd air, and respectful attendants
to minister to the most wilful caprice.

But beyond and below all this brave
assumption of security, there lay hidden a
terrible passionate hate. Slowly, slowly, the
patient masses of that under world had
wakened to the consciousness of their wrongs,
and with the bitter knowledge of contrast
came the thirst for compensation ; the burning
desire to throw ofi" the hand that had so long
oppressed them, the yoke that had galled for
centuries.

What maketh us to differ ? " was the
cry of thousands ; and, with the wording of
the dumb misery that had held them silent
so long, there awoke also the craving for
vengeance. '' How long," went up the cry
to heaven, " how long, Lord, shall the
wicked oppress us ? " And in the pause
that ensued between petition and answer,

pleasure was stalked by blood-red fear, and
distrust kept pace with merriment.

The Countess Vera had opened the season
by a grand bed costume, in the huge palace
of her name. It was the maddest of all
the little Countess's mad freaks, for her
guests were to come attired as beasts of the
forest, the chase, and the field. Grizzlies
from the Rockies elbowed white lambs,
elephants and camelopards hob-robbed with
pussy-cats and fawns, while tigers and wolves
flirted tentatively with rabbits and red
squirrels.

The Countess, in a delightful white-cat
costume, with diamond eyes and jewelled
paws, was the life and soul of the revels ;
flying hither and thither, her little feet in
their white fur boots treading as lightly asher
namesake, and startling more than one
king of the forest by the sharp tap of a little
fur paw, and the merry smile beneath the
pussy-head that covered her giddy little brain.

It was during one of these frolicsome

onslaughts that she caught sight of Ivor
Tolskoi's fresh face and yellow locks, looking
ridiculously out of keeping under the heavy
disguise of a polar bear. She ran up to him
lightly, and stood before him laughing, a
tiny figure set against his feet and inches.

Oh, my brave Ursa Major ! " she exclaimed,
'what a beautiful fierce creature
you are, to be sure ! I am quite frightened
to look at you."

Ivor glanced down at her smiling, but he
failed to toss back her jesting words with
an equally quick repartee.

The little Countess laughed and shook her
head, until the diamond eyes in the pussy-cat
mask danced with a thousand reflections.

Oh, what a cross Ursa Major it is ! " she
cried, *rand all because of some one who is not
here, and who will not come." Then she
came a step nearer, and, dropping her bantering
tone, said quickly : ''I am sorry for your
disappointment, mon cher, but it is one of
the prerogatives of beauty, to be fickle. She

would, and she would not, and the latter,
you see, won the day. Olga Naundorff has
declined to honour my ball with her presence.
But is that a matter of such grave importance
to you ? Ah, I see, it is the old story ; he
who has most, always craves more. You are
not satisfied with having won the Court
favourite, even to the naming of the wedding
day, but you must be miserable because she
is not always present to swell your triumph !
Be content, my dear boy, you have won her,
and broken Yladimir Mellikoff's heart, that
ought to suffice ; and after you are married,
you can force her to attend any and all
kinds of festivities."

Ivor did not respond to this pleasant
outlook, and Vera, with a mutinous grimace,
continued, banteringly :

'for my part, my sympathies all go
out to that most unfortunate Count Ellis
Only to think of what he has come to !
So established as he was in the Emperor's
regard, so esteemed by the Chancellerie ;

such a diplomatist and courtier, so distinguished
and beyond reproach. And now, behold,
where is he ? Poof ! he is but a feather,
blown about by each contrary wind of prejudice.
A failure, a fallen idol, a suspect.
Bah, I would rather die than be a failure !
Be content, mori chei^ be content ; you are on
the crest of the wave, don't spoil your success
by a fit of the sulks."

Then she laughed again, and shook her
fan of soft white feathers at him, and fluttered
off to a sedate elephant, whose thin
cheeks and eagle eyes beneath the grotesque
head-gear, betrayed him to be a certain State
minister, whose word was law, whose smile
power.

Such a foolish boy I never saw," cooed
the Countess Vera in the statesman's ear,
'' as that Ivor Tolskoi. Not contented
with ruining Vladimir Mellikoff, and wining
the lady of his affections, he mopes
because, forsooth, she is not here to illustrate
his triumph. Youth is very hard and

illogical, monsieur ; it takes older heads
and hearts to be merciful." And the little
Countess sighed profoundly.

*'Ah/' she said, suddenly, ''my heart
is all in tune with the fallen MellikoflP. 1
wonder, monsieur, what is to be the nature
of his punishment, and what his — destination
? "

But the wary minister was not to be
caught even by Vera's casuistry.

Punishment is so entirely a relative
matter," he replied. '' I, for instance, can
imagine no severer sentence, no more desolate
outlook than to be shut away for ever
from the light and sweetness of the
Countess Vera's presence."

"A thousand thanks," she answered quickly.
I appreciate your chivalry, monsieur ; but
when one adds the mines, or a casemate
in Petropavlovsk, to the lesser evil — what
then ? "

"Neither are to be desired, madame,"
he replied, gravely, '' and neither can ever

come within the experience of the Countess
Vera. The mines, and Petropavlovsk, are
for those who betray, or mock at, Kussia ;
not for loyal subjects of his Majesty."

*' Loyalty is such a very big word,"
sighed the Countess flippantly ; and then
she flew away with a laughing gesture. But
to herself she said :

I know your destination now, my poor
friend. I back a woman's wits against
a statesman's imperturbability. Alas ! poor
Vladimir ! "

It was as the Countess Vera had said.
Ivor Tolskoi had triumphed beyond his
most sanguine hopes. Olga was now his
formally betrothed bride, and the marriage
day was in the immediate future.

With the arrest of Adele Lallovich in
Petersburg, came the downfall of MellikoS''s
mission, and the ruin of all his cleverly -
laid schemes. He would reach Russia only
to find his disgrace had preceded him, and
only to find distrust and displeasure on

every side. He too well knew the nature
of Russia's resentment, to strive to stem
the current that set so steadily against him.

It was worse than useless to expect such
a, thing as justice, at the hands of the Chancellerie,
or to look for confinement from the
Council.

He had not only failed, but he had
bungled, and in so doing had opened the
flood-gates of public opinion upon the Imperial
policy. Russia never forgave inefficiency,
still less inefficiency that brought
ridicule in its wake. He knew this, and he
knew also that his disgrace was imminent.
Still he clung to Patouchki, to his belief in
the chiefs calm equipoise of judgment. He
could endure a public expression of disgrace,
if only Patouchki absolved him from intentional
failure.

And then, too, was not Olga awaiting
him ? He had done nothing to alienate her
love ; she stood far above and beyond the
lesser prejudices of political intrigue and

VOL. ni. R

jealousy. He was still her lover. What
mattered anything so long as he had Olga
to cling to ; Olga's love and trust for his
haven of refuge ? He would marry her at
once, and take her away, out of the foetid
artificial air of Petersburg, out of the network
of personal envy and political stratagem,
to those wide, far-reaching estates on the
Balkan frontier, and there they would be
free and untrammelled, removed from the
narrow suspicions and cruel dogmatism of the
Court.

And so planning, hoping, believing, Vladimir
Mellikoff turned his face towards Petersburg.
He lingered on his homeward journey,
hoping against hope at each halt to receive
more pacific communications from the Chancellerie
; and thus when at last he reached
the Russian capital, the first month of the
long Muscovite winter was already on the
wane. He drove to his lonely palace on the
Neva, where the dark windows and barred
doors afforded but a sorry welcome.

It was a dreary home-coming, and
Vladimir, as he crossed the threshold and
met the cold, damp atmosphere of long-closed
and disused rooms, shrank back
shuddering. Superstitious though he was,
he could not throw off the chill of apprehension
which seized him, as he entered the
echoing corridor and passed on to a small
drawing-room, that served as study and office.

A fire smouldered in the stove, and the
curtains were closely draws, giving a less
cheerless aspect to the apartment. A couple
of candles in tall silver sticks were lifted
on the chimney shelf, and beneath them were
arranged the numerous notes and cards of
invitation that had accumulated during his
absence. Somewhat apart from these lay a
small sealed envelope, addressed in a clear,
flowing hand.

Vladimir glanced over the notes and cards,
holding in his hand the while the huge ticket,
covered with a Noah's Ark gallery, by which
the Countess Vera had invited her friends

to her unique hal costume. With a half
smile on his lips, called out by the little
Countess's vagaries, Vladimir caught sight of
the note lying apart by itself, and in a
moment his heart told him who was the
sender.

It is from Olga," he murmured passionately,
as he took it up and touched it
with his lips. *' It is from Olga ; it is my
welcome home."

Then he broke the seal and drew forth
the thick, creamy paper ; as he did so a slight,
subtle perfume floated across the air.

It was a short letter ; brief almost to
cruelty. But when one deals a death-blow,
it is as well to strike swift and sure.

Vladimir read the words through, again
and again, without comprehension, without
understanding ; and then, suddenly, as their
meaning struck him, one low and terrible cry
burst from him ; he flung himself down on
his knees, burying his face in his hands. The
letter floated slowly from his grasp and fell

noiselessly upon the carpet, the distinct careful
penmanship plainly visible in the candlelight.


*' Vladimir," the lines ran, "I never
forgive or forget treachery or failure. You
have failed, and you are a traitor. Knowing
this, you must also realise that all is over forever
between you and

"Olga Naundorff."

That was all. No word of regret, no
expression of sorrow, no hint of personal
grief and pain.

Simply he had failed : failure was a sin
never to be condoned by Mdlle. Naundorff.
It was shipwreck utter and entire — shipwreck
without a chance or hope of rescue. He
knew it, he realised it, as perfectly as though
Olga had stood before him in her proud
beauty, and spoken the cruel words in her
sweet, cold voice.

What was death compared to this agony

of loss that overwhelmed him ? What was life
oh, God ! what could life be without Olga ?

How long he knelt there he never knew.
The hours crept on long past midnight, the
great house was silent as a tomb. Outside,
the stars shone in myriad numbers, lio^htino:
the cold, dark heavens with thousands of
fairy lamps. The snow lay dense and white,
stretching miles away, in unbroken masses
along the Neva's banks.

Presently the cathedral chimes struck
the quarter, and the miserere bells followed
with their minor chant, " Have mercy upon
me, Lord, have mercy upon me."

As the last note died away Vladimir arose ;
and with the change of attitude he became
aware of a stealthy, muffled sound — a sound
that came ever nearer and nearer ; and that
was neither the sweeping up of the wind, nor
the jangle of bells, but a sliding, creaking
noise, as of two smooth surfaces in friction.

A low exclamation escaped him, a look
of horror crept over his dark face. For a

moment he stood as if paralysed, then he
moved suddenly, with soft, quick steps, towards
one of the heavily-draped windows.

The stealthy, creaking noise had ceased.

He cautiously drew back a corner of the
heavy curtain and peered out. All was still
and silent ; a great field of glistening snow,
with the dull swish of the Neva against its
banks. Was he mistaken ? Had he not
heard aright ? For a moment the wild
beating of his heart threatened to overpower
him, then as suddenly it grew still.

Drawn up within the shadow of the deep
porte-cohere, standing out black and distinct
against the white background, stood a covered
droschky ; the horses' flanks steaming in the
chill air, the lamps carefully shaded. A
figure stood beside the vehicle, wrapped ina
heavy coat and peaked fur cap ; where the
folds of the coat opened a gleam of steel
was visible.

Vladimir dropped the curtain and came
back to the centre of the room.

*' It has come," tie said in a half whisper.
'' It is my turn at last. I, who have gloried
in Russia's stern vengeance, am I to feel her
power now ? "

Then his eye caught the open letter on
the carpet.

He picked it up, touching it half tenderly

How little it matters to me, now ! " he
said. "But you, Olga, shall be freed from all
reproach, and no one shall ever know that it
is through you the heaviest disgrace of all
has come upon me. That much I can still
spare you."

He looked at the signature she had written
with so firm a hand — Olga Naundorflf — " Goodbye,"
he said again, " good-bye."

He pressed his lips to her name, then
held the paper in the candle-flame with a
steady hand, and watched it burn slowly,,
slowly.

As the last bit fell from his fingers and
fluttered down to the little heap of ashes on
the velvet mantel-shelf, the door opened without

noise, and two men stepped within the
room.

Vladimir turned and faced them. The
foremost spoke quietly, and without menace
or threat.

"Count Vladimir MellikojBf, you are
arrested in the name of the Emperor. Long
live the Tsar."

Vladimir bowed, and a smile for one
moment passed over his dark face.

I am ready, gentlemen," he said, and turning,
took up his heavy coat and cap of sables.

In the meantime the second intruder had
crossed the room, attracted by the faint odour
of burnt paper. He fingered the little pile of
ashes suspiciously. Again Vladimir smiled.

A burnt-out passion, monsieur," he said,
a discarded love-letter. That is all ; nothing
ill any way interesting to the Chancellerie —
or, its agents."

Then he put on the heavy furred coat and
signified his readiness to depart.

A moment later the three dark figures

were lost in the shadowy interior of the
waiting droschky, and the curious scraping
noise of steel runners upon frozen snow began
again.

As one of his captors leant forward to
give a last instruction to the officer without,
a gleam from the shaded lamp fell across
the face beneath the high-peaked hat ; in it
Vladimir recognised the boyish contour and
innocent blue eyes of Ivor Tolskoi.

The heavy equipage moved on, and as
the hour of dawn struck from the great
cathedral clock, and the chimes clashed out
triumphantly the liturgical chant, " How
glorious is our Lord in Zion," Vladimir
Mellikoff stood a prisoner, within a nameless
casemate of the impregnable fortress of
Petropavlovsk.

AN Eternal Farewell.

It was the 4th of January — the New Year's
Day of Russia.

All the morning, from the earliest peep
of dawn, the bells had rung clamorously
and joyfully ; from every public building
the blue, red, and white standard floated in
the keen breeze; the streets were full of
merry-makers, the Boulevard de Cavaliers
and the Nevski, were thronged with sightseers,
the little shrine and chapel of St.
Nicholas, on the Nicholas Bridge, where buried
in lights, evergreen wreaths, and votive
offerings; an air of festivity and joyousness
pervaded the atmosphere, and even the
grim Chancellerie, and Peter's Fortress, crept

out of their habitual gloom, under the lavish
caresses of the brilliant sunshine.

The old year was dead — dead and buried
with all its weight of sin and failure ; of
wrongs frighted, of crimes unavenged, of
evils unremedied. Let it go, let it go !
Being out the false, ring in the true ! "
Welcome this jocund New Year, this youngster,
with the rosy cheeks and sturdy limbs,
this herald of a new regime, this hopeful
progeny of a decrepit past !

It wanted but half an hour to mid-day,
and already the approaches to St. Isaac's
Church were thronged by a numerous and
ever increasing crowd. The eight grand
entrances were all thrown open ; down the
wide central granite steps a rich carpet was
spread, and up this crimson pathway passed
a continuous stream of guests, the bright
costumes of the ladies mins^lino; with the
uniforms. Court dress, and plainer citizen
habiliments of the sterner sex, until one
and all became submerged and impersonal

in the greater glory of the grand cathedral's
gorgeous interior.

A line of the Petersburg Grenadiers, in
their sombre green uniform, were drawn upon
either side of the central approach, while
behind them were grouped a guard of honour
of the Caucasus Cossacks, their long scarlet
tunics adding picturesque vividness to the
scene. All that was best and brightest,
most distinguished and most renowned, of
the great Tsar's Court was represented within
St. Isaac's, on that winter morning, and
nothing could exceed the brilliancy and
vivacity of the scene.

For not only was it the festa of the gay
New Year, but it was also the marriage day
of Olga Naundorff, and the religious function
was to be celebrated with Royal splendour
and pomp, honoured by the presence of the
Tsar and Tsarina, who took this occasion
to testify their friendship for the beautiful
orphan, whose father had laid down his life
in the service of Russia.

And now excitement reached the highest"
pitch, for the Imperial cortege was in sight,
each equipage drawn by four black horses,
mounted by postillions, and accompanied by
outriders. The Tsarina, looking fair and fresh
and young, bowed her acknowledgments
to right and left, smiling as she did so,
while the Grand Duchess Xenia laughed
girlishly at the sparkling pageant. And now
Alexander himself appeared, the great Tsar
of all the Russia, wearing his favourite
crimson kaftan, and saluting courteously in
response to the old patriotic cry, as it echoed
again and again : " Health we wish your
Imperial Majesty ! Long live the Tsar ! "

But the greatest and final burst of enthusiasm
was reserved for Olga. When she
appeared — stepping down from the royal equipage,
her white draperies sweeping behind hera
cloak of regal ermine wrapped about her neck
and shoulders, from which her proud, beautiful
face arose as cold and white as the surrounding
snow, crowned by the shining masses of her

golden - tinted hair, in which the Imperial
gift of diamonds shone resplendent — a hush
of admiration held the onlookers for one
brief second ; then, as she passed up the
crimson foot-path, a deep low murmur burst
forth, growing in strength and enthusiasm,
until, as the great portal received her, it
broke all bounds and ended in a prolonged
and hearty cheer.

Within St. Isaac's all was hushed and
reverent, though gorgeous and magnificent in
its adornments. The lights from the eight
great candelabra threw their beams on the
golds and purples, the reds and blues of
the mosaic decorations, and flashed forth
in myriad reflections from the jewels that
gleamed and sparkled in the costumes of the
Court ladies.

The ceremonial was of the grandest ; the
Metropolitan, vested in cloth of gold, entered
by the central door and was met by a procession
of priests, who walked before him to
the great altar, where the eight massive

malacliite columns, and priceless lapis-lazuli
shafts, separated " the holy of holies " from
the body of the cathedral. The trained
voices of the Imperial choir rose and fell
in regular cadences, unsupported by instruments
of any kind, but perfect in harmony
and unison. The bells chimed at intervals,
while the worshippers, as they fell upon their
knees, repeated again and again the symbol
of the cross on forehead and breast.

And so it was that Olga Naundorff became
the wife of Ivor Tolskoi.

Sanctioned by the most solemn ritual of
her faith, surrounded by the highest nobility
of her land ; loved, admired, feared, and envied,
Olga, the beloved of Vladimir Mellikoff, pledged
her vows to Ivor Tolskoi ; and shuddered even
as she did so, at the light of triumph that
flashed in his bold blue eyes, when, as her
husband, he bent his head, and for the first
time pressed a kiss upon her proud lips.

She had made her choice. But, after all,
was it a wise one ? Could she be sure of

ruling this lover, who Lad now become her
husband ? Despite the insouciance of his
boyish face, despite the frank boldness of
his blue eyes and innocent smile, was he
not destined to be the master, she the slave ?
Already she could feel the iron hand beneath
the velvet glove, already she descried the
touch of cruelty beneath his gayest smile, the
echo of tyranny beneath his fondest caress.
Alas, poor Olga ! If the dawn of her
marriage morning was marred by such forebodings,
what were its noontide and evening
likely to prove ?

We may not follow her so far into the
future ; and even if we dared, it were wisest to
draw the curtain close about that ruined
life, and not seek to pry into its wretchedness.
A woman scorned is of all beings the most
desolate, so Vladimir Mellikoflf had said,
little thinking that his prophecy was one
day to come true of his passionately-loved
Olga. Let us refrain from gazing on her
in her hour of despair.

VOL. III. S

There is no fairer woman to-day, in all
Russia, than Olga Tolskoi ; one more envied
and feared, nor one more hopeless and beyond
hope. Like her Imperial ancestress, she has
forsaken the good for the evil ; and, in giving
rein to the lower passions of her nature, has
lost for ever the power of repentance and
contrition. She who once ruled supreme, is
now the neglected wife of a husband who
is one in name only, and whose indignities
have long since reached the climax of insult.

Ivor has risen higher and higher on the
wave of success. He holds a foremost place
in the Imperial Councils, he is esteemed and
feared in the Chancellerie, bowed down to
and fawned upon at Court. Only within the
privacy of his own household is his true
character known ; only there does he lay aside
the mask of hypocrisy, and let loose the passions
of cruelty and oppression ; only there
does he give rein to the bitter joke and cutting
mockery, which are all that remain of the
once humble wooing and suppliant entreaty.

And Olga, knowing low he has deceived
her, finding out too late by what cunning
subterfuge he turned suspicion upon YJadimir
Mellikoflf, and thus won from her the only
free gift a woman has to bestow' — herself —
hates him, with an ever increasing hatred
and loathing, that drives her to the wildest
deeds of imprudent folly.

And so the baser nature within her
triumphs, and the better nature dies ; crushed
out by passions too consuming to bear contradiction.
Alas, poor Olga ! So to her
has come the lesson, that not even the fairest
charms of woman's beauty aud purity can
bind the constancy of one, who, knowing
his legal rights secure, scorns to keep them
intact, and throws fidelity to the winds
in the indulgence of the moment.

"Well may the old despairing cry break

from her in her splendour and loneliness,

as she thinks of the time when Vladimir

loved her, and her faith and trust in him

were still unbroken :

s 2

Heu fugaces ! Posture, Posture ! Oh,
for the clays that are lost to me, lost to me ! "

Brilliant indeed was the scene within
the Onyx Hall, of the Winter Palace, on
that New Year's nio'ht, the morning of
which had seen the completion of Ivor
Tolskoi's highest hopes. The bride and
her husband were already far on their way
towards those vast possessions on the Ural
frontier, of which Ivor was so justly proud ;
but the time-honoured ceremonies of the
festa were no less gay and joyous because
shorn of Olga's fair presence.

The great Onyx Hall was filled with
guests, awaiting the magic signal, gathered
together in groups, chatting, laughing, intriguing,
while ever nearer and nearer the
hands on the dial of the large gold incrusted
clock, standing at one end of the apartment,
crept on to the hour of midnight.
Suddenly a single stroke from the great
bells of Isaac's Church, rang out, and a

hush fell upon the waiting assembly ; the
clock chimed deep and full — twelve slow
notes, whose dying echoes were caught up
and thundered back by twelve salutes from
the guns of Petropavlovsk, broken here and
there by the triumphant strains, '* How
glorious is our Lord in Zion ! " And as
these died away the cathedral chimes broke
forth in resonant glad music.

Simultaneously the folding doors at the
top of the great hall were thrown open, and
the Tsar entered, with the Empress leaning on
his arm, and followed by the Imperial family.
Passion down between the double lines of
the Preobrashensky Grenadiers, and the
Semenoflfskoie Guards, drawn up on either side,
his Majesty walked up to the chief actor in
this brilliant pageant, and, halting before the
tiny figure of the smallest cadet in the Russian
army, dressed in the historical uniform of the
Emperor Paul's Grenadiers, bent down over
the mimic warrior and bestowed upon him
the kiss of peace.

At this mark of kindly condescension the
trumpets burst forth in a grand flourish, the
bands struck up the spirited national air, and
all the guests cried out with one accord :

'' Many years to the Tsar ! Health we
wish your Imperial Majesty ! "

And thus the first day of the New Year
sinks to rest, crowned by the old but ever
fresh benison, *' Peace on earth, to men of
good will."

AVith the departure of their Majesties the
tongues of the guests were once more let loose,
and the little Countess Vera, flitting across
the wide hall, stops long enough beside the
grave keen-eyed State minister, who in the
guise of an elephant had graced her costume
ball, to say, in a half whisper, and with a
mocking smile :

Well, monsieur, and were you present at
the famous marriage function this morning ?
Was ever man so lucky as ce cher Ivor ? — if it
be luck to wain so cold and cheerless a bride
as Olga Naundorff. For may part, I could

think of no one save that unfortunate
Vladimir, ^Yllose shrift I hear is to be short
enough. No trial for him, poor soul ! He
has played his game but ill, and we know,
monsieur, you and I, what fate awaits one
who has played to win for the Chancellerie
and — lost. It's a dreary march to
Siberia, even in the best of company ;
what must it be then when one's companion
is a murderer by confession ? Helps, poor
Vladimir, you should not have failed ; for to
failure Patouchki is implacable, and for
failure Russia can punish silently and surely.
And so ends the farce, monsieur, or was it
tragedy ? But let me whisper one word — let
him laugh loudest who was last. There are
evil days in store for Ivor, or I am no true
prophet ; and for his bride ? Bah ! she will get
but what she deserves ; I will leave her fate
in the hands of the gods, whose mills, we are
told, 'grind slowly, but with justice grind
they all.' And, after all, her beauty will not
last. Sans adieu, monsieur, a tanto."

Then with another laugh the little Countess
flew away, and was lost in the undulations of
the crowd.

A second day's journey had begun for Ivor
and his bride ; the afternoon was already
closing down upon them as they halted at a
small post-house where a relay of fresh horses
awaited them. Ivor sprang out, glad to exercise
his cramped limbs and light a cigarette ;
but 01 ga remained within the sleigh, buried in
her costly Wraps of fur.

There was some little delay, and as she sat
alone, half lost in a retrospective dream, she
was suddenly aroused by the dull clank of
arms and the regular tread of marching feet.
Leaning forward she looked out, and saw coming
towards her a party of men and women,
who trod wearily, with downcast heads, and
hopeless hanging hands, and whose every step
was accompanied by the monotonous clank of
steel chains. As she gazed upon them she
realised their situation and their destiny. They

were Russian criminals, arrested by Prussian
law, on their way to Siberia and the mines.

Instinctively she drew back, shivering ;
as she did so the foremost detachment of
prisoners came into line with her sleigh. At
that moment a halt was called, to enable the
officers in charge to refresh themselves at the
bar of the post-house.

Once more Olga leant forward ; her heart
beat rapidly, her breath came quick and short,
she clasped her hands together passionately,
and as her white face gleamed out from the
heavy sables surrounding it, one of the
prisoners, he who was nearest to her, lifted
his head, and thrust back as well as he could
with his manacled hand, the peaked hat that
shaded his forehead.

As he did so he turned his head slowly
towards her, and in the dark haggard face,
the burning feverish eyes, Olga beheld the
countenance of Vladimir Mellikoff !

Fascinated, she gazed upon it, her own
face blanched, her eyes wild with horror.

She tried to speak, to call out, to break the
cruel band of silence that held her as in a
vice. It ^Yas useless. No words would come,
no sound, no cry.

And as she thus looked upon him, a sudden
light of recognition sprang to life within his
eyes. He bent forward, holding her gaze
with his ; studying each curve and line of
that fair, beautiful countenance, noting each
golden curl where the hair lay about her neck
and upon her brow, reading each fleeting
expression of the proud lips, and deep blue
eyes. And as he thus held her spell-bound,
a smile passed over his worn face, a smile
so pitying and accusing that Olga shuddered
and drew closer her rich wraps, as if toward
off the cruelty of its tenderness.

For full a moment they looked thus upon
one another, without word or gesture of
recognition. Then the order came for the
march to recommence, and Vladimir, with
a single upward movement of his manacled
hand, bade her an immutable farewell.

As he did so the figure next to him was

drawn forward by the heavy chain that linked
them together, and thus turned upon her companion
in exile a face so beautiful, despite
the marks passion and suffering had stamped
upon it, that again Olga started, and drew
back instinctively.

It was the face of Adele Lamien, the
murderer of Count Stevan Lallovich.

In another moment the exiles were in fall
march, and Olga, straining her eyes to the
utmost, could see nothing save an indistinct
moving' mass against the miles of far-stretching
snow ; which even as she watched was
lost in the evening shadows that crept up
with silent but resistless steps.

It was a farewell from out eternity.

Truly Ivor Tolskoi's vengeance was complete,
when Patouchki's cruel sentence was
carried out to the letter, and Vladimir
Mellikoff, linked to Adele Lallovich, passed
onward to that desolate Gehenna — Siberian
exile.

For Russia never forgets, and Russia never
forgives.

AFTER TEN YEARS.

It was a golden day in the golden month
of October, when Philip Tremain stepped down
from the railway train, and stood, a solitary
traveller, upon the platform of the open
station at Bretons, high up among the rolling
white hills " of New Hampshire.

An open waggon, drawn by four sturdy
mountain ponies, was in waiting beside the
rustic platform, and into this he sprang;
the driver cracked his long whip, accompanying
it by a shrill whistle, and off the
willing little creatures started.

Up the steep winding roads and down
again they went at a swift, even gallop, while

Mr. Tremain, with a sudden recollection of
Mrs. Newbolds park ponies and irreproachable
basket phaeton, laughed aloud at the dissimilarity
between them and his present
primitive conveyance, and at the contrast of
the solemn hills, and long wooded slopes, with
the suburban and ornamental prettiness that
environed the Folly.

All before him stretched the grand White
Mountain range, from Jefferson's and Madison
verdure-tipped sides, to Washington's rocky
clefts and snow-crowned peak. On every side
the richest glory prevailed ; scarlet and
crimson of the sugar maple, gold and amber
of beech and birch, russet brown of oak, and
sombre green of hemlock. A keen pine-scented
breeze swept past him, swaying the tall
golden-rod and blue asters, and shaking out the
bitter-sweet perfume from the purple gentian
where it grew far up the mountain side.

The road wound on, up and up, growing
steeper and steeper with each mile, fringed
on either side by tall ferns, grasses, and brown

bracken, and starred with late 
ox-eyed daisies. To his right the
steep mountains rose far above his head, to his
left the beautiful " wild Ammonoouc " leapt
from stone to stone, and dashed into rivulets
against the lichen-covered boulders, breaking
over them in creamy foam.

Once Philip bade his charioteer stop, and
climbing down over the high-sided vehicle,
he gathered a nosegay of the wild, white
daisies, adding a maple and beech leaf as a
set-off to the pure petals. Then, with a
smile upon his lips, he took his place beside
the taciturn Jehu, and on they went again,
with the same long swinging gallop.

As the last roseate glow of sunshine was
lighting up the western heavens, and the
great Phoebus was sinking to rest in the
arms of grey and violet clouds, they came
upon a long low house, built far out on a projecting
spur of rock, which seemed to hang
'twixt earth and sky, and looked as if a
stiff north-easter would make short work of

its walls and foundations. This house was
painted a dull Venetian red, and was covered
with creepers and wild vines, and brilliant
with rows of scarlet geraniums marking
each casement.

It glowed like some bird of tropical
plumage, alighted suddenly upon the cooler
neutral tints of this northern land.

And this was the home of Patricia Plildreth.

Door and window stood open wide, and
Philip's impatient feet carried him over the
threshold into the dainty atmosphere of
Patricia's drawing-room. And what a paradise
it was to his hungry eyes ! And how redolent
of her 1

Flowers, birds, books, an open piano,
and through the windows such a view of
mountain towering above mountain, all transfigured
and etherealised by the magic touch
of the dying sun-god. Ah, it was good to
be here, it was good to breathe this free,
keen air ; it was good to stand within her
home, to think how soon, how very soon,

he should look upon her face, and read within
her deep blue eyes the secret hidden therefor
iQTi long years.

The sunlight blinded him, the birds' son or
dulled his hearing, the perfume of the flowers-steeped
Lis senses ; he was lost in a day-dream
of ecstatic bliss.

And did he still dream, or was this
reality ? This graceful, bending figure, whose
hands flashed in and out among the piano's
ivory keys, awaking the music of a plaintive
strain, that, as it grew into melody, became
so strangely familiar ?

It was no surprise to hear it, and still less
was it a surprise to find the melody take shape
in words, falling across the refrain, half chanted,
half spoken as they were.

I am a woman,

Therefore I may not
Call to him, cry to him,

Bid him delay not.
Showing no sign to him,

By look of mine to him.
What he has been to me.
Pity me, lean to me,
Philip, my king ! "

Patty, my little Patty ! Oh, my darling,
I have found you at last, I shall never let
you go from me again''

'' And have you forgiven me, Philip ? " she
asked, some long minutes after. " Have you
forgiven me my selfishness, and wilfulness, and
deception ? I sometimes think I can never
forgive myself."

He framed the beautiful face in both his
hands, and feasted his eyes upon it.

*' Forgive you, my darling ! Forgiveness
is not necessary between us now. We have
found our love, Patty, after ten long years
of loss ; thank God, my darling, we have not
found it too late."

And to them both it seemed, that a little
of the joy and beatitude of heaven had comedown
to them on the golden sunset clouds.

"And so it was you, Patty," Philip says
again, " who sang that very song that evening
how long ago it seems, dear — at the Folly ;
and it was your presence and your personality
that influenced me so strongly, that drew

VOL. III. T

me to you as Adele Lamien, and yet that
perplexed and troubled and almost frightened
me ? "

"Yes, Philip, it was I," she answered.
And, do you know, through all my trickery
and deceiving, it gave me keen delight to see
how truly you did love me ; for, after all,'
Philip, even as Adele Lamien, when I won
your half avowal of love, I was scarcely
treacherous, because it could be no treachery
for Patty, to win you from — Patricia Hildreth."

It was specious reasoning mayhap, but
it served.

It was Miss Hildreth's old mocking laugh
that next broke the silence, and Miss Hildreth's
most tantalising voice that said :

'* Ah, but Philip, there is one thing more
that lies between us. Do you remember a
certain evening ten years ago, when an angry
lover parted from his fickle sweetheart ? And
do you remember his words when she begged
for one little good-bye token ? * When I can
think of you, look at you, speak of you as

other men do ; when all my love is dead ;
ask me then, Patricia.' "

And do you ask me ? " he cried, a little
of the old masterful ring in his voice. '' Nay,
Patty, do not ask me, for that supposes it
possible for me to refuse you. My dearest,
let me rather plead from you."

And there was that within her eyes that
gave him leave to gather her close into his
arms, and bending down to lay his lips on
hers.

And so, after ten years, the kiss was given
and taken.

THE END.

CHi.BLES Dicere And EyA.KS, Crystal FAJiACE FBSSS.
