mmfi^

,Kl-i

i^^.

A NO VEL

BY

EVELYN STONE

IN TWO VOLUMES
VOL. I.

WILLIAM BLACKWOOD AND SONS

EDINBURGH AND LONDON

MDCUCLXXXV

VO

X

HUGH Moore.

CHAPTER I.

They came into a land
In which it seemed always afternoon,
And round the coast the languid air did swoon."

'\

^ It was a golden evening in Corfu ; summer

V.

,. still lingered there, though already in Eng-

V\ land it had given place to chilly autumn,

)- with its dropping leaves. The sunset was

I; just over, and the Albanian mountains were

-^ resplendent with its passing glow — resplendent

with such depth and intensity of colour

^ as we dwellers in the North find it difficult

^ to imagine, — while at the foot of the hills



VOL. I. A

the sea was dyed crimson with a vivid reflection
of the glory above ; but the splendour
lasted only a few minutes, — all too swiftly it
faded, and a soft grey veil fell over the
scene.

Then the lights began to twinkle here and
there in the ships lying at anchor in the
little harbour, and in the houses that climbed
the hill and clustered on the edge of the cliff".
A picturesque little town it is, especially
when the evening mists veil its more modern
buildings, and you only see the general outline,
with its pretty grouping of roofs against
the deep, clear Southern sky.

A small English schooner was lying at
anchor not far from the quarantine island :
a slight swell rolling in from the open sea
caused the yacht to swing a little from side
to side, but so gently and evenly that you
would hardly have noticed the movement,
unless you had watched the masts rising and

falling against the horizon-line. Her ensign
and burgee were hauled down for the night,
and on board all was very quiet — three or
four sailors gathered together in a little
group at the bow, apparently half asleep
over their pipes, and almost the only sound
the lap, lap of the water against the bulwarks.


Presently, however, the silence was broken
by the voices and footsteps of two men who
were pacing the deck together, and talking
in rather low tones, as they glanced from
time to time at the fast-dying glory on the
hills. Both young, and both good specimens
of Englishmen, they were yet different
enough to exemplify the saying, that a man's
friend must never be too like himself. Jack
Ward, the elder of the two by a few months,
was the owner of the yacht, and having been
smitten with a desire to go pig-sticking in
Albania, had invited his friend to spend a

two months' leave with him on the shores of
the Adriatic.

They had been boys together at Eton, and
though, when Ward went to college, Hugh
Moore entered the army, they had never
lost sight of each other ; and Moore, in
accepting Jack's invitation, promised himself,
over and above the pleasure of pig-sticking,
the enjoyment of renewed intercourse with
his friend, on the old familiar footing of
Eton days.

Just now, however, there appeared to bea
little disagreement of some sort between
them, for Ward's voice had a touch of remonstrance
in it as he said, " I hope you will
be careful, don't you know, Moore. It does
not do for a fellow to be too — too "

What's up now. Jack ? " said the other,
good-humouredly. He was accustomed to be
told that he must be " careful," and it is to be
feared that the caution did not make much

impression on him. The word hardly agreed
with his Hibernian temperament, for though
I have spoken of him as English, he was in
reality a thorough Irishman, descended from
some old Celtic king, as any Moore of Glen-gain
would tell you. The savage blood had
been tempered by plentiful infusions from
the sister isle, but the careless light-heartiness
— recklessness, his enemies (had he
had any) would perhaps have called it — was
there still, and often aroused the surprise,
and even indignation, of the more methodical
Englishman.

Ward did not answer for a moment, and
then he said, much embarrassed to explain
himself more fully, and rather annoyed that
Hugh did not, or would not, understand —

Well, you know — for a fellow to pay a
lot of attention to a girl, and then to back
out of it, isn't quite the right sort of thing."

Oh indeed ! " said Moore, with a charming

expression of innocence, pulling serenely
at the end of his close-clipped moustache.
This is very interesting from Mr Jack Ward,
who has been doing the same all his life.
But pray what are you referring to now ? "

Oh, if you pretend not to know, it's no
use my talking. I knew it was never any
good to say anything to you ; but I thought
I had better either warn you or Miss Wilson.
Perhaps I shall have a chance of speaking to
her to-night."

Good gracious ! " exclaimed Moore, flushing
a little. He was fair, and the colour
mounted easily to his forehead. " That's
rather too much of a good thing. I leave
you to your affairs — you leave me to mine."

All right ; and you will be involved
in an engagement before you know where
you are."

An engagement ! Fiddlestick ! It is
absurd to make so much of it."

It may be fun for you, but death to
the poor little girl, that's all. Remember
she does not go through London seasons
perpetually, as you do ; and she sees so
few people that she mayn't understand
your "

'' You are very incoherent and illogical,"
said Moore, with a little heat : " one minute
you accuse me of shabbily backing out, and
the next warn me against engaging myself, —
and all because I have paid a little attention
to the only pretty girl in the place."

Oh, I don't think any serious harm is
done yet. I only want you to take care ;
and don't be too attentive to-night."

To-night ! Pooh ! What chance has one
at a little stuffy dinner-party ? By the by,
it is time to dress. Put your mind at ease.
Ward."

The two men clattered down the steep
little ladder that led to their sleeping-berths,

and presently, dressed in faultless evening
attire, were being rapidly rowed to the ,
in the yacht's smart little gig.

A short but dusty climb brought them up
the hill to the stone-paved street where the
British Consulate was situated — for thither
they were bound.

They were both silent, but Ward's thoughts
reverted to the conversation they had been
holding together. Five weeks of Moore's two
months were already over, and, during the last
part of the time especially, his amusements
had been diversified by a rather marked
flirtation with the Consul's pretty daughter.
" Was it only flirtation ? " mused Jack,
as he and his friend mounted the flight of
stone steps which led to the Consul's abode.
He felt uneasy. Suppose Moore should
really become entangled in this affair, how
should he. Jack Ward, ever be able to meet
old Lord Glengarn again ? True, Hugh was

but a younger son, and his father only a poor
Irish Viscount; but, as every one knows,
pride generally goes hand in hand with
poverty, and to mix the blood of the Moors
with that of a Levantine Consul's daughter
(pretty though she might be), would be too
great a shock for his lordship's susceptibilities
to stand for a moment. And as to
Lady Glengarn ! Ward's hair stood on end
at the very thought of what she would say.
She was always rather a freezing personage,
at least in his estimation ; but his blood ran
cold as he fancied her eyes fixed upon him
with a searching and reproachful gaze, and
himself arraigned before her tribunal, while
she harangued him in some such words as
these : " You took Hugh to Corfu. Why did
you let him linger there, when you saw the
danger? I consider you responsible for all
this trouble. Never set foot in my house

again."

Yes ; he would certainly be the scapegoat
if Hugh got into a scrape. And then, farewell
to all future hopes of pleasant shooting
at Glengarn Castle — of wild gallops over the
moors, or wilder dances with fascinating
Irish girls !

Then there was another thought. It was
really very stupid of Hugh to go and flirt
like this with Miss Wilson, when he might
amuse himself as much as he chose at home ;
and there could be no serious intentions in
this case. Jack Ward hardly allowed it to
himself, and j^-et he secretly felt that it was
scarcely fair of Hugh to engross all the interest,
and throw him so entirely into the
shade. No doubt, Clara was a very pretty
girl, and very charming ; and if it had been
Jack who had chosen to pay her attention, it
would not have mattered so much, for he
was his own master, and if he liked to
throw himself away (supposing it was throwing

himself away) on a girl who was half
Greek, and the other half hardly English, —
why, there was no one who had any right
to object.

His gloomy musings were interrupted by
the Consul's greeting.

What was the Consul like ? It is difficult
to give an idea of a Levantine Consul unless
you happen to have seen one. He considers
himself English, but he is very un-english
looking ; he probably wears a very green pot-hat,
a large white shirt with black studs
and many stains, a waistcoat and black coat
much the worse for wear, and a seedy pair
of boots with elastic sides. His hair is somewhat
long and uncombed ; his moustache and
beard sorely want trimming ; the scent of
tobacco is never absent from his person, nor
the mark of the habitual pipe from his fingers.
He is always exceedingly amiable to the
casual British traveller ; really anxious to be

of service, without counting the cost ; and he
usually is a man of keen vision, taking in
everything that is going on around him,
either in the political or social world. He is,
moreover, something of a cosmopolite, with
relations all over the Levant, has probably
married a foreigner, and speaks several
languages as fluently as his own, if not better.
He is, in short, a man whose peculiarities
strike one at once, but whose good qualities
take longer to discover.

Mr Wilson was no exception to the generality
of consuls, without being of an exaggerated
type. He had married a lovely
Greek from Asia Minor, and his daughter
Clara inherited her beauty, which was of an
un-english type, but none the less fascinating
on that account to a susceptible young
Irishman, who was never quite happy without
some woman to adore.

She was, moreover, the only girl in the

place with any pretensions to beauty, and
she always took great pains to make herself
agreeable to any casual visitors who came to
Corfu, and who generally had some business
to transact with her father.

CHAPTER 11.

*' Let the luscious south wind
Breathe in lovers' sighs
While the lazy gallants
Bask in ladies' eyes.
What does he but soften
Heart alike and pen ?
Tis the hard grey weather
Breeds hard Englishmen.

But the black north-easter

Through the snow-storms hurled,
Drives our English hearts of oak

Seaward round the world.
Come ! and strong within us

Stir the Vikings' blood,
Bracing vein and sinew —

Blow, thou wind of God. "

The Consul's room was large and airy, and
furnished in semi-eastern, semi-european
style, which was very attractive in hot
weather. When Moore and Ward arrived,
there were already several other guests assembled
— one or two other consuls with their

wives, and two or three strangers, besides the
English chaplain and his daughter. Hugh
was placed next the young hostess, who, asher
mother had been dead for some years,
was well used to take the top of her father's
table.

'^ We have just had some news, Mr Moore,"
she said, turning to him at once, and disregarding
the remarks of an elderly consul
on her left. " Can you think what it is ? "

She spoke with a slightly foreign accent,
and HuQ-h thought he had never seen her
look so pretty.

What is it ? " he asked.

The Eoyal Britain is coming in," she answered,
" and that is a grand event at Corfu."

You often see ships. Have you any
friends in this one ? "

No : we don't often have such a large
one in ; but it will be here tomorrow, they
say, or next day."

Your tennis-party won't come off, then ? "
he said, rather jealously.

*' And why not ? " asked Clara, smiling.
Will you not come, then ? "

I come ? Need you ask that ? But you
will be watching for the ship, or something."
He ended rather lamely, for he was looking at
her eyes, which shone so brightly just then.

We shall have plenty of occasions to seethe
ship," pursued Clara. " I like going on
ships — when they are not moving."

You are not fond of the sea ? " he asked,
thinking her language was not nautical ; and
then making haste to add, ^' I am horribly
sea-sick too, sometimes. But have you never
been a long voyage ? "

*' I have been about a good deal. I was
born at Smyrna, you know ; and we have
been to Broussa, and Alexandria, and 
; and at last we came here, three
years ago."

And you like this 23lace ? "

Oh yes, but not so much as if we English
had it still."

It sounded strange to Hugh to hear her
talk of " we English," for she always seemed
to him so completely a foreigner, although
she spoke English easily, and did not use
many foreign idioms. And so they chatted
on. She told him (not for the first time) of
her life, and her strange experiences — as they
seemed to him — and he made her laus^h with
stories of his boyhood, of his Irish home, and
his pranks in barracks, till attention was
drawn to their end of the table, and conversation
became more general.

The tennis-party engagement was faithfully
kept. Although the game had not as yet
taken in Corfu that place as an everyday
pastime which it holds in England, Miss
Wilson had managed to collect together a
fair number of comparatively good players,

VOL. I. 3

Hugh and Jack being naturally enough the
champions. Games had gone on in constant
succession till nearly sunset, when the play
was unexpectedly interrupted by an untoward
incident.

Miss Wilson was watching the game,
seated in an easy-chair at the edge of the
court, her red sunshade making a picturesque
contrast to her white gown. It
was a pretty picture, and it is pardonable
to suppose that Hugh's attention was divided
between Clara and the play, for a ball shot
past him unexpectedly, and in making a
sudden effort to get back to it, he startled
every one by falling flat on his back at Miss
Wilson's feet. There was a general laugh,
for his position was sufficiently ludicrous ;
and as he did not rise at once, there were
one or two attempts at " chaff." But to poor
Huo:li himself it was no laughing: matter. It
was not the first time in his life that he had

put his knee out of joint, and the sharp) pain
when he tried to rise made him realise only
too surely what had happened.

Of course the game was suspended, and
they all crowded round him with advice and
condolences ; but the only person he saw was
Clara, looking very pale, and with tears in her
eyes. In a minute or two he was able to put a
brave face on the whole business, and make as
light of it as possible, assuring them all that
he was well accustomed to such an accident ;
but he could not help remarking to Ward, ashe
was helped into his coat : " I tell you what
it is, my friend — I shan't be able to go pig-sticking
with you the next few days. I must
keep this leg quiet a bit, I know. It's a
horrid bore, Ijut it can't be helped ; and you
had better get me to the hotel as quick as
you can."

So to the hotel he was carried, Jack
declaring he would give up his pig-sticking

and stay to nurse his friend. Hugh,
however, would not hear of it ; and when the
doctor pronounced that a few days' rest was
all that was necessary, Ward consented to go
off the next morning, protesting all the time
against his own selfishness, and feeling some
compunction at leaving his friend to the
undivided assaults of the fair Clara. He
knew better, however, than to touch upon
a subject that had once been so pointedly
dropped, and trusted to luck that no very
desperate catastrophe would happen in his
absence.

But what is a man to do, cast upon his
own resources in a little hotel, and unable
to stir outside for more than a week ? Can
he fail to be grateful for any distractions ?
and if they come in the shape of a pretty
girl, is he to be blamed ? Jack was away,
and Miss Wilson and her father took pity on
Hugh. She never came alone; but they would

bring him books and papers, or her father
would smoke, while she and Hugh chatted.
Moore never committed himself — in fact, he
did not consider that he was in love ; but
sometimes he could not help asking himself
whether their easy . footing of friendship
might be supposed to mean anything more
than he intended. If Jack had not warned
him, he might have gone on without thinking,
and even now he only half believed
that Miss Wilson was the little girl — quite
innocent of flirtation — that his friend had
represented her to be. Moreover, Hugh
himself was on such excellent terms of intimacy
with so many women of all ages,
married and unmarried. He possessed the
Irish inheritance of an irresistibly fascinating
manner, — half humorous, half caressing,
and he never lived in any house fora
week without seeming, and feeling, as
if he had known the inmates thereof

all his life. In this case, there was no
second woman to divide his interest and
attention, and bright-eyed Clara had it all to
herself.

One day, however, he received a visit
from one of the lieutenants of H.M.S. Royal
Britain, which had entered the harbour the
day after his accident. The card was handed
to him as he was lounging; near the window
with his head half out, watching the goings-on
in the big square below, — a few soldiers
in their white fustinellas being drilled ; people
passing up and down the street, or crossing
the square towards the open-air stalls on the
opposite side ; and the bright sunlight making
it all look Southern and picturesque. Now
that he was confined to the house, he spent
a long time gazing out of window in true
Greek fashion. He had noticed a smart,
naval-looking man enter the hotel, but had
never thought of him as a visitor to himself ;

but the name, " Lieutenant Charles Drake,"
made him start forward, limping towards the
door, exclaiming heartily : "Yell, it was good
of you to climb all those stairs to find me."

I am sorry to find you laid up," said
Drake. " I heard of you from old Wilson,
and thought you must be awfully dull."

*' I shall soon be about again now," Hugh
answered. " I did not know you were onboard
the Royal Britain."

I have only been on board her a few
months, and I am going next month to my
uncle's at Eastport,-r-Sir Edward Neville, you
know. His flag-lieutenant has just got his
promotion, and he has asked me if I will fill
his place."

A capital thing, I suppose ? "

Oh, an awfully jolly berth after one lias
been abroad a good bit ! Why, I haven't
been at home for eight years, except for a
month or two. The last time was three

years ago, when I met you. I was transferred
last May from the Gadfly ; but if I
had known I should get this appointment, I
should have come home then. You are better
off for leave in the army."

Everything is beastly now," said Hugh.
Army's going to the dogs — isn't such a
thing, in fact ; Radicals spoil everything. I
am bound to be a Tory, you see, for we get
next to no rents now ; and as far as I can
see, my brotherly be a beggar long before he
gets into the property."

And has no one taken compassion on
you since you have been laid up ? "

Oh yes ; Mr Wilson and his daughter
have been very good-natured, and often come
all this long way up to see me."

Drake laughed.

Aha ! I can fancy little Miss Clara drag-line:
the old gentleman about ! So she has
been making up to you ? "

What do you mean ? Do you know her ? "

'rather! and she has a considerable reputation
all over these parts I Why, I believe
she has been engaged two or three
times already — at least they say so."

Now it was no doubt very unreasonable of
Hugh to feel angry. Strictly speaking, he
ought to have felt relieved ; for if she were
such a consummate flirt, of course his conscience
might be proportionably clear. However,
he did feel angry. Was it that he was
harder hit than he supposed ? or was it only
that his chivalric nature was roused by any
innuendos against a woman's character ?

Oh, I daresay they say so," he said ;
and, you know, a naval man is uncommonly
easy to catch, — so we always say in our service
; " after which savage hit he felt better,
and they both dropped the subject.

A day or two after, some of the officers
of the Eoyal Britain organised a picnic to

Paleocastrizza ; and Hugh considered himself
sufficiently recovered to join the party,
as hardly any walking was necessary.

He had been thinking a great deal of what
Mr Drake had said to him, and came to the
conclusion that there was probably a certain
amount of truth in it ; but that if it were
so, it was only an additional reason not to
disturb his pleasant understanding with Miss
Wilson by any abrupt change of manner—
especially as his leave was drawing to an
end, and he would soon be out of reach of
her fascinations.

Accordingly, by a little judicious manoeuvring,
he easily contrived to get into the same
carriage with Miss Wilson and her father, who
were, of course, of the party. She made him
sit beside her, and kept the fourth seat empty,
so that he could rest his leg if he wished —
a precaution not altogether unnecessary, as
the drive was a long one.

o

For the first part of the time the Consul
was very talkative, and Clara held her peace
for none of her father's subjects of conversation
had any interest for her. Commerce she
naturally knew nothing about, and of politics
scarcely more ; while of history she had only
the vaguest possible notion, and her own
travels were about the limit of her geographical
information. She talked Italian and
modern Greek easily, and was more or less
at home in colloquial French ; but on all
general subjects her views were decidedly
limited.

However, as a rule men prefer girls who
are the reverse of intellectual ; and a charmingly
simple confession of ignorance often
bewitches, when a suspicion of learning,
even without display, does but alarm.
So men always liked Clara ; and she herself
was a thorough little coquette, enjoying their
admiration, while keeping her heart whole.

It must be confessed that this time she
had met her match. Hugh attracted her
very much. His Freshness amused her, his
chivalrous devotion touched the best part
of her nature, and her womanhood, for the
first time perhaps, asserted itself. She determined
to risk everything and win him.

That long drive was a charming opportunity
for exercising her powers of fascination,
and of that art she was an accomplished
mistress. After her father had settled himself
comfortably to doze, with a never-ceasing
supply of cigarettes, she began to talk, and
there was a less self-conscious ring in her
voice than usual.

Your time here will soon be up, Mr
Moore," she said, with a pretty little sigh
and a half-shy glance at him under her
eyelashes.

"Yes, indeed, alas! I shall feel just like
a naughty boy going back to his lessons."

Why a naughty boy ? "

Ah I you don't know what it is to be
naughty, Miss Wilson. As for me, I am
always in scrapes. I never have any ready
money, for one thing."

"And what do you do then? "she asked,
innocently.

What can a man do but beg, borrow,
or steal ? I am a great adept at all three,
but chiefly at stealing," he said, with a careless
laugh. "It is awfully hard that an
elder brother should have all the tin. (Don't
whisper to any one that I said so !) Not
that there's much in our family at all."

"Ah !" said Clara, looking puzzled; "and
tin is so important then ? "

"Money, I should have said," laughed
Hugh. " You are a capital mentor. Miss
Wilson ; you don't understand slang. English
girls are as great at it now as we
men."

HUGH Moore.

I would try to learn if you would teach
me," said Clara meekly, at which Hugh
laughed more than ever, told her she was
much better without such naughty learning,
and tried in vain to draw her out a
little on the ideal woman. She preferred
to go back to the old subject, and told him
his departure would make the little Corfu
society quite dull.

Not now you have got the Eoyal Britain,"
he replied. " You will forget all about mein
a week."

This was getting rather near dangerous
ground, and so she felt, as she answered
rather tremulously —

'' What do you take me for ? "

Perhaps he was somewhat startled at the
very personal nature of her remarks, for lie
made no reply ; and finding the pause growing
awkward, she said —

I am afraid your accident has spoilt your

stay here ; and I feel rather guilty, for I was
the cause."

''Oh no!" he cried, warmly. "I should
have done it anywhere. It twas a bore,"
here his honesty overcame him, — "an
awful bore, to lose a week or more of sport
in that way ; but I have to thank you for
making my captivity so pleasant. By the
by. Miss Wilson, did you not tell me you
had no friends in the Eoyal Britain ? Drake
said the other day he had the pleasure of
knowing you. Perhaps you don't count
him as a friend ? I think he seems a nice
fellow."

Oh yes," said Clara, who never spoke
against any one, and never contradicted any
remark that was made to her; " I don't think
he knows me very well."

Some people never know any one well.
Now I am one of those lucky creatures who
always seem to, I don't know why. I suppose

it's a happy Hibernian temperament.
Irish are always favourites, you know, specially
in Parliament. They impart a flavour
to its proceedings, just as olives do to a
dinner. I say, what splendid old fellows
these olives are ! "

They were passing through a grove of
hoary trees, gnarled and twisted, as only an
olive-tree can be — sometimes with quite hollow
trunks, sometimes fantastically distorted
in shape, but always with the soft grey-green
foliage, which never changes in winter or
summer, youth or old age.

Now at last they began the descent towards
the sea, and here the road was very rough,
and even dangerous in parts, for the Corfiotes
have little interest in keeping up the roads
for driving, in the more distant parts of their
island. They use mules and donkeys themselves,
which take them along quite fast
enough. They like to sit sideways on the

animal, and walk slowly enough to play
at cards with a friend who is bound for the
same village. It is the great excitement of
their life, this card-playing, and they can doit
quite as well on the backs of their quiet,
sure-footed beasts, as in a little jolting cart
without springs. Why, then, should they pay
to keep up roads for the benefit of strangers ?
Accordingly they do not, and both roads and
bridges fall into bad repair.

There had been a landslip not far from
Paleocastrizza, and this had broken away
portions of a bridge which spanned a narrow
but rather deep ravine. Here the carriages
unlade their burden for greater safety, and
Clara insisted on her father giving Hugh his
arm, in case of any awkward bit of road.
He would much rather have been left alone,
but thought it was very sweet and considerate
of Clara to provide a support for him.
He felt furiously jealous for the moment of

VOL. I. c

Drake, who walked on the outside of bliss
Wilson, and began to engross her completely.


She wandered down to the beach with the
rest of the party, but Hugh was forced to
get into the carriage again, and sat there

■

gnawing at his moustache in silent disgust,
listening to the voices of the others,
and distinguishing hers from the rest. A
turn of the road brought him into view of
the monastery of Paleocastrizza, with the
little cove at its foot, lapped by the waves of
the Ionian Sea. Such a sea ! No resistless,
all-devouring monster did it seem that morning,
as each little ripple flowed gently in, and
broke almost without a sound on the white
shining; beach. A glorious blazing sun over
everything, — spreading a delicious sense of
drowsy laziness, — almost lulling pain and
strife to sleep, one would have thought, did
one not know that it burns into the veins of

these Southerners, filling them oftentimes
with a madness that we men of the North
can hardly realise.

And we fall victims to that madness, as
to their climate, and yet believe that the
laws and customs of England are made for
all the world !

I do not know whether Hugh's musings
took exactly this form, as he lay full length
on the pebbly beach, and watched the ceaseless
ebb and flow of the tiny waves ; but he
was conscious, at any rate, of a vague sense
of difference, not only between Aldershot and
Corfu, — which, after all, is but a commonplace,
— but also between himself and Clara
Wilson : a difference not enough to disturb
him, because he did not think seriously
enough of her for that, but enough to lend
a little addition piquancy to a day-dream
of his ideal wife — a day-dream he did not
indulge in very often, but which floated

before him now and then, and might some
day take tangible form.

She must be pretty, of course — not necessarily
beautiful, but at least elegant and graceful
; perhaps a little gracious dignity would be
well. And she must be very religious and
good. Hugh felt that he himself was somewhat
deficient on that score ; for while all his
sympathies were on the right side, he had no
very strong feelings or principles, and rather
agreed with the Frenchman who thought
wives were bound to do their husbands' religion
for them as well as their own. A
certain latitude, both in faith and practice,
might be allowed to men — nay, was their
due — but a woman was " horrid " if not religious.
And she must be well-born and well-bred,
and, alas ! she must be rich. Hugh hated
this last proviso with all his heart, but how
could he help it ? A younger son, brought
up (to say the least) without economical

habits, he was perhaps hardly to blame if he
found his small allowance and his pay together
insufficient for his wants. He was
generous and open-handed, never accustomed
to count his change ; and if he were in debt
already, what would he be with a wife ? His
debts were not very bad ; he had no doubt
his father would pay them, when he had
the courage to ask him, and he was annoyed,
rather than ashamed, at having to do so ; but
the idea of thrusting a penniless daughter-in-law
on his parent's generosity never once
crossed his mind. No, the bride must wait
till his ship came home. Hark ! there is the
rest of the picnic party winding down the
hill — there is Clara still — no, she isn't — yes,
she is — talking to that fellow Drake. What
does she mean by it ? Not her friend ! He
will be, by this evening, then.



CHAPTER III.

** Yet remember, 'midst your wooing,
Love has bliss, but Love has ruing ;
Other smiles may make you fickle, —
Tears for other charms may trickle. "

The picnic was a great success. So everyone
said. The lunch was excellent, of course,
and under the shade of the cliffs, with the
dancing waters of the little bay before them,
was doubly delicious. Of course there were
a great many exclamations at the beauty of
the spot, and a great many comparisons with
other bays in different parts of the world.
One lady said it was just like Devonshire ;
and Hugh, who was in a contradictory mood
just then, declared that Pantry Bay beat it

hollow. He was very patriotic, and refused
to believe that " ould Ireland" could be
surpassed in any particular.

^' At least you never get such lights," said
one incautious female — " nothing like the
sunset colours."

^' Sure and ye do," he replied, speaking for
the nonce with a rich, rolling brogue. " I'd
like to see the coast which was better lighted
than the coast of Ireland ; and as for colour,
where could ye beat the colour in a good
Cork farmer's face when he is riding back
from market ? "

'' With plenty of whisky inside him ? "
suggested Drake.

Sure it is so," said Hugh, at which they
all laureled.

After lunch every one wanted to climb the
hill to the monastery. A few picturesquely
dirty monks, with handsome faces and flowing
beards, had been wandering al)out, gazing

from a little distance on the merry party,
and perhaps longing for a share in the good
things ; and now they followed them, and let
them go wherever they pleased, but did not
offer to guide them into the recesses of the
monastery. Hugh was left quite alone. Even
the coachmen had gone fast asleep. The
silence was intense — as unbroken as it can
be by the sea ; but it did not last long. Ina
few minutes Clara Wilson found out that it
was very hot, and that climbing a hill was
tiring ; so she slipped behind, and running
back to the beach, seated herself a little in
front of Hugh, on the left. He was gazing
out to sea, and so occupied with his thoughts
that he did not see her at first ; but a little
rustle of her dress startled him out of his
reverie, and he hobbled up to her ; while
she turned round and exclaimed —
"Oh, Mr Moore ! are you here ? "
The little monkey knew perfectly well

where he was, and had taken her steps accordingly.


Did you not expect to find me here ? "
said Hugh, Who secretly suspected she had
done it on purpose. 'shall I go away?
Did you want to be alone ? "

I hate solitude ; please stay," she answered,
with a bewitching glance of her
black eyes. " I came down because it is so
hot and tiring going up the hill, and there
is nothing to do but to see a lot of dirty
monks."

The monks don't interest you as they do
the ladies fresh from England. I have heard
people very sentimental over their splendid
eyes and their picturesque clothes."

Do you admire them ? " she asked,
always anxious to make every tiling a personal
matter.

Honestly, no. But I should like awfully
to climb the hill and see the view. This leg

of mine is rapidly getting intolerable. I
think I shall have it off and get a wooden
one."

Clara's genuine look of horror made him
laugh, and he was obliged to assure her that
he did not seriously intend to do so, and that
in a few days more it would be quite strong
again ; and then he gave her a decided hint
that he would like to know the subject of
her long conversation with Mr Drake. She
told him willingly : " He was talking about
his sister. They are orphans. She lives with
his uncle, Sir Edward Neville, at Passport."

Where he is going to be flag-lieutenant ? "

Yes ; and he told me about his uncle and
aunt, and his cousin."

Oh ! what cousin ? "

Miss Neville. The only child she is, he
says, and almost like his sister."

Oh ! I suppose so. You know what that
means, generally ? "

*' That they will marry ? "

Ten to one. Do you ever take bets,
Miss Wilson ? "

Whenever any one wants to," she replied.
What do you want to bet ? "

A pair of gloves to you if Drake doesn't
marry his cousin within six months."

"Very well. But you will forget. How
will you send them ? " '

"Oh, I'll manage that ; perhaps I'll bring
them, who knows ? But it aunt likely I'll
get leave again so soon to get as far as
this. Here ! " — picking a little flower off
the cliff — " take this, and send it to me if
I forget."

Clara blushed a rich red through her dark
skin as she took the little token ; and Hugh
suddenly saw that what he had done quite
thoughtlessly, might be supposed to have an
utterly different interpretation, and he inwardly
cursed his folly. It was no use explaining

it away. He only hoped she would
forget.

Certainly one cause of Clara's attractiveness
was the interest — not put on, but quite
genuine, if not very deep — she took in the
personal concerns of any one whom she came
across. It was not exactly curiosity — for the
inquisitiveness of a Yankee is never attractive.
It was rather a sort of sympathy which
worked upon that subtle vanity, or love of
self, we almost all possess, and men more
than women. Like most girls, Miss Wilson
took more interest in men than in her own
sex ; therefore her sympathy for the former
was more lively, and they generally took her
into their confidence very soon. A man is
usually more interested in talking about
himself than about any other subject, unless
he happens to be extraordinarily modest, or
uncommonly proud and reserved ; and as
Hugh was neither particularly one thing nor

the other, it did not require much manipulation
on Clara's part to direct the conversation
into, what was to her, the most interesting
groove. He had not a very high opinion of
himself, but neither was he much ashamed of
his faults ; and he was proud of his family,
which was an old if not a rich one, and being;
fond of talking, liked to have a sympathetic
listener to all his stories.

Drake was more on his guard, but all the
same she had extracted a good deal of information
from him.

The tete-astute on the beach was interrupted
by Clara's father, who came towards them
looking rather black, and saying he had
missed his daughter, and had been hunting;
everywhere for her. He was very hot, and
as he stood before them mopping his face
with his handkerchief, Hugh was suddenly
struck with the full ludicrousness of introducing
this man to his parents as his father-in-law.

There were limits to every human
power of endurance, and Hugh felt instinctively
that this would surpass his.

Clara blushed more than ever, and seemed
conscious of what he must be feeling ; but an
explosion from the Consul was so evidently on
the verge of taking place, that Hugh hastened
to move off to join some of the stragglers of
the party, who had also found exploring the
monastery a warm proceeding — and indeed
he was not sorry of an excuse for leaving
Miss Wilson. He avoided her for the rest of
the day, and was apparently in the highest
spirits during the drive home, keeping Drake
and another of the Eoyal Britain's officers inconstant
peals of laughter.

The evening was as exquisite as the rest of
the day had been, and the shade of the olive-groves
was welcome. As they neared Corfu,
and came out on the open tract, they passed
the country carts laden with purple grasses,

and led by peasants in their picturesque
costumes, who were lounging along on their
way back from the town to the villages
where they lived. The rich sunset light
was over everything, and once more the
Albanian hills reflected the crimson slow
in marvellously vivid shades — San Salvador
standing out, a rapidly darkening mass,
clearly defined against the evening sky.

Hugh brought two of the officers back to
his hotel to supper — unconsciously, perhaps,
wishing to put off the moment when he must
reckon up the day's accounts. He had placed
himself in an awkward fix. Did Clara really
care for him ? and if so, was it his duty, or,
to speak more correctly, did his honour bind
him, not to draw back ? And vet he could
not help feeling she had drawn him on, and
made him go further than he intended. Had
it been only herself who was involved, he
would not have minded so much, or rather

his hesitation would have been more easily
disposed of, for he admired her very heartily,
and liked to feel he had the power of always
bringing that pretty smile to her lips, and
the light into her dark eyes. But there
was her father — and he was a hard morsel
to swallow. For a long; time he sat, brooding
over his pipe, without coming to any
conclusion ; and his sleep was tormented
with restless dreams, so that he blessed the
returning daylight. He was still young, and
by no means inclined to the art of lady-killer.
Meanwhile, Clara had had a very bad time
of it with her father. He had given her a
strong hint of his displeasure on the beach,
and her heart was sore when she looked round
for Moore's support and found he had basely
deserted her. During gr the drive home the
Consul was olio-ed to conceal his feelings,
though Clara sat inwardly quaking ; but as
soon as they reached home, he motioned her

into the room, and closing the door with a
bang, said —

Now, Clara, give an account of yourself."

She resolved to profess perfect innocence,
and answered meekly, "What do you mean?"
but her face was in a flame directly.

demean ? You know perfectly well what I
mean — and I'll tell you, — that I won't have
you throw yourself at that boy's head any
longer."

Oh, papa ! " said Clara, with a rising sob ;
"how can you say such horrid things? I'm
sure I would not throw myself at his or at
anybody's head for anything ! "

I daresay ! " said Wilson, with a scornful
little laugh. " Now look here, once for all —
I wont have it. I consider I allow you more
than enough liberty — a great deal more than
your mother had, I can assure you ; and I
won't have that young fellow go home and
laugh at you — and me — with all his grand

VOL. I. D

friends, and say I wanted you to marry bim,
and he only just escaped in time. Bah !
you know the sort of things he would say."

I am sure I don't," cried Clara, bursting
into tears. " I don't know what I have done
to make you so unjust and unkind — and I
am sure Mr Moore would behave like a
gentleman."

*you know nothing about it," said her
father, angrily. " I shall behave like a
gentleman too, and forbid you to speak to
him again."

'' Oh, papa! jDapa! " cried Clara, too frightened
now for tears, and trying to speak
calmly ; •'' don't say that. I will be very
careful, indeed I will ; and Mr Moore will
be only here a little longer, and — and I think
he does care for me."

Care for you ? Do you mean he has
proposed to you ? "

No, not that," said Clara, blushing violently

again ; " but I should not be surprised
if perhaps — he did : he gave me a flower today."


I daresay he did," said the Consul, bitterly;
"and an old fool I have been to let
him hang about so long, or let you hang
about him, which is perhaps nearer the mark."

Clara shook, between wrath and fear.

But, once for all, if he should do such a
thing, you are to say No. Do you understand
? "

She was utterly astonished, for she had
always supposed that her father would have
been pleased at such an alliance, and she
gasped out, " Why ? " all the colour fading
from her checks as she spoke.

Her sudden change seemed to strike the
Consul, for he looked at her silently for a
minute, and lit his pipe before answering ;
and then he stoke more quietly —

You don't understand these things, Clara :

LIBRARY

UNIVERSITY OF Illinois

and you think, because his father is Lord
Somebody, and his uncle Lord Somebody
else, that he has any amount of money, and
all that ; but you are quite mistaken. I have
made inquiries, and find that Mr Moore has
very little money at all, besides his pay as
an officer, which is, as you must know, very
small indeed, — that he is already in debt, —
that he is extravagant, and has expensive
tastes, — in short, that if he marries a girl
without means of her own, both his wife and
himself will be miserable. You know perfectly
well that I have nothing to give you
nothing, that is, which would be of any
use in a case of this sort. Moreover, his
friends and relations would never approve
of such a match, and would make it most
unpleasant for you. His father would cut
him off with a shilling, and you would come
back to me with a large family to support
in my old age, when I shall be past work.

and when your husband had got tired of

you."

Clara was quite practical enough to see
that the money question presented serious
difficulties. In her heart of hearts she felt
sure that, once in Ireland as Mrs Hugh
Moore, she would have little trouble in
making her way with Lord and Lady Glen-gain
; but she durst not say so to her father
in his present mood. If Hugh really cared
for her, she felt that together they might
brave the anger of their respective parents.
But when her father went on to say —

There's that fellow Ward, now — if you
had taken to him, I should have had nothing
to say against it. He has a nice little property
of his own, and he is independent, and
could marry you if he chose without asking
anybody's leave "

Then poor China cried, " Mr Ward ! Why,
he has hardly spoken to me ! How could I

take to him when he always kept out of my
way, and Mr Moore was so very nice ? "

Always the way," muttered Wilson.
"The ones that have money are too
cunning ! "

He was not usually harsh to his daughter,
but he was thoroughly provoked this time,
and the feeling that he was partly to blame
did not tend to improve his temper ; and as
for her, after being used to a certain amount
of petting and spoiling, and Hugh's pretty
manners and punctilious courtesy, her whither s
harshness seemed all the harder to bear. It
was like being brought suddenly from the
Equator to the Arctic regions : the change
made her shiver. She felt too brokenhearted
to continue the discussion ; and
giving her father a duty-kiss, she went to
her own room, where she threw herself on
the bed, and sobbed passionately till she
could sob no more. It was her first real

grief — and how bitter, needs not to say.
Surely many of us remember that first
despairing sense of trouble. The world is
dark — the sun has set, never to rise again.
We almost expect to wake next morning
and find our " hair grown white in a single
night ; " but somehow its colour remains unchanged,
and the sun does rise after all. It
is not a first passionate grief that kills.
Moreover, Clara's despair was not absolute.
She had a little lingering hope that Moore
would dare anything, and would come to
claim her ; and, hugging this hope to her
heart, she fell asleep at last.

The old Consul was almost "more to be
pitied than his daughter. He wished his
wife were alive. lie wished he had had no
daughter. He wished that marriages were
all arranged a la Frxingaise. He wished
Moore had never come near the place. lie
repented his folly and short-sightedness in

letting them see so much of each other ; but
he none the less held firm to his resolve
on no account whatever to sanction their
marriage.

When Hugh got up the following morning,
after his restless night, he found a letter
awaiting him containing a somewhat startling
piece of news. It was from his father,
enclosing the offer of the post of aide-de-camp
to the General at Eastport. " I have
answered it provisionally, as you were away,"
wrote Lord Glengarn, " but you had better
telegraph a reply at once."

"This is a piece of luck," thought Hugh,
and it will give me a capital excuse forgetting
away at once."

He put on his hat, and strolled down to
the telegraph office, where he happened to
meet Drake, to whom he told his news. The
latter advised him to take an Austrian Lloyd
up to Trieste.

When does the next start ? " asked Hugh.

There is one that leaves on Thursday ;
and that would give you time to put up your
things and come to our dance tomorrow."

*'A11 right. Thanks, awfully. I am not
good for dancing yet, but I shall like to
come and see you perform ; and I rather
think Ward will be over, so I shall be able
to make my farewell to him."

'did you expect this offer?"

Not a bit. It's a capital piece of luck ;
and it is curious that you and I should
have met like this, and be both bound for
Eastport so soon."

You will be there first. I am not due
for a month later than I thought. The old
Flag stays on a bit."

I expect we shall be there about the
same time, then ; for I must go home to
my people in Ireland for a week or two, and
then to Aldershot to pack up my traps,

before I begin my duties. Awful old stick,
the General ! I shall have to be on my good
behaviour."

"Well, good-bye till tomorrow. Come
early and help) to entertain the natives."

Take the old ladies down to tea, eh, if
I can't dance with the young ones ? There
are lots of men, so I shan't be missed in the
latter capacity."

Drake turned down towards the harbour,
and Hugh sauntered slowly back up the
shady side of the street to his hotel in the
blazing square. It required some effort of
wall to set about the necessary preparations
for his departure, few and simple though
they where. There was something in the
enervating atmosphere that made it peculiarly
difficult to do anything at a given
moment. He spent most of the afternoon
on board Ward's yacht, gathering together
his scattered belonmno^s, and feelings it was

just as well to avoid a chance encounter with
the Consul or the Consul's daughter before
he paid them his final adieux. He had an
instinctive dread of a scene, and rejoiced at
the piece of good fortune that provided him
with the opportunity of saying good-bye to
them in public. Unconsciously, that message
from England acted as a tonic upon his moral
nature, and recalled him to his truer self.
He did not calculate on the effect of Clara's
powers of attraction when he was not in
actual contact with her.

With a shrubs of his shoulders he said to
himself, as he stepped out of the gig on to
the landing-place — " So here's an end of dolce
far niente ! "

The next afternoon was propitious for the
dance, and the Eoyal Britain was gaily decorated
for the occasion. No London ball-room
can equal in attractiveness the decks of a
man-of-war when cleared for dancing purposes.

Gaily coloured bunting formed the
walls of the ball-room, banks of flowers and
palms encircled the masts and filled every
available corner, and many a cosy nook was
to be found by those who knew the ins
and outs of the ship. Drake and his fellow
- officers were well rewarded for their
labours.

Hugh fully intended to be punctual ; but
when did an Irishman ever succeed in carrying
out this laudable intention ? He was
delayed in leaving the hotel ; and then the
afternoon was very enticing, and he felt it was
his last day in Corfu, so he strolled up the
hill and looked over the little bay and the
channel across to the Albanian coast, blue
and hazy now in the full glare of the sun,
its barren outline softened into mistiness by
that wonderful light. It was a long time
before he could tear himself away from
the view ; and when he at last reached

the Royal Britain, lie found that all the
world had arrived, and dancing was in full
swing;.

Almost the first person he saw was Clara.
She was waltzing past him ; but she saw
him, and a slight blush rose to her cheeks
as she bowed. It was all over in a moment ;
but Hugh felt his own cheek grow hot, and
turned away to make himself useful amonsj
the cha^Dcrons.

After conducting several old ladies to tea,
he deposited the last in her place, and stood
alone for a minute watching the dancers —
his feet fidgeting to be off, but his leg still
too weak to allow of it. Suddenly he caught
Clara eye. She was looking very pale and
rather forlorn, seated all by herself in a
corner ; for her fatliei', who had brought her,
had (man-like) deserted her, and she did not
know where he was — perhaps she did not
much want to do so. It struck Hugh that

he had never before realised how lovely she
was — maybe because there was less of the
usual colour and sparkle about her, and more
depth of expression than was generally to
be found in her laughing: face. Whether
the pensive attitude came by nature or
design, she could not have found a straighter
road to her admirer's heart.

Hugh had fully made up his mind to avoid
her as much as possible ; but what was he
to do now ? The excuse of not dancing did
not serve him, for she was not dancing
either. He said to himself that he could
not refrain from speaking to her without
positive rudeness. So he made his way to
her side, with the commonplace remark ashe
bent over her —

*you are not dancing. Miss Wilson."

No ; I am so tired," said Clara, plaintively,
" I was obliged to rest."

Have you not yet recovered from the

effects of the picnic ? " he asked, with rather
a forced smile.

Oh, I don't know. I have been sleeping
badly ; " and as she spoke she raised her dark
eyes to his face almost beseechingly, and in
spite of himself his heart became dangerously
soft, as a mistress's does when her little dog
licks the hand that beats it.

"I am a brute ! " thought Hugh, and he
did not resist her mute invitation to take
the seat beside her. She moved further
on — quite into the corner behind a palm,
so that she was almost invisible from outside.
There was a red Hag just above, and
the sun, shining through it, cast a most
becoming glow over her face.

It is so horrid not being able to sleep at
night," she added, finding that he did not
question her.

Very," he answered, rather absently ; for
this enforced tête-à-tête was exactly what he

had meant to avoid. " What is the reason
of it ? "

I can hardly tell you," said Clara, blushing
; " it is — it is — my father was so cross
with me."

Cross with you ? I should have thought
that was impossible."

Ah ! you don't know him. Of course
he is very nice to you, at least to your face."

Well, one never knows, thank goodness,
what people say of one behind one's back.
It is much better not to know. I have no
doubt, for instance, that your father could
tell me many home truths ; but I won't ask
him, especially as I want to part good friends
with him and with everybody."

You are always talking of going away,
but you aren't going just yet ? "

Indeed I am, Miss Wilson ; I am off tomorrow

morning."

She gave a great start, and her lips turned

quite white. By a strong effort she controlled
herself, however, and said with tolerable
calmness, though with a huskiness in
her voice, "That's much sooner than you
intended."

"It is indeed," said Hugh; "but I have
unexpectedly been offered an 
in England, and I must be off at once.
I start in the Austrian Lloyd tomorrow for
Trieste," he continued, feeling stronger after
he had dealt his blow, and looking straight
in front of him, — " and I came here to-day
partly in hopes of seeing you and your
father, and saying good-bye, and thanking
you for all your kindness to me. Do you
think I should find him somewhere on board ?"
and he made a movement as if to rise.

This summary farewell was too much for
poor Clara, and for a moment she could not
speak. The silence surprised Hugh, who,
looking down on her, was astonished to see

VOL. I. E

her mouth quivering aucl her eyes full of tears.
Instantly all thought of her father vanished,
his good resolutions flew to the winds, and
his one idea was how to comfort this poor
little girl. What cruel wrong had he not
done her ! " Miss Wilson — Clara ! " he cried,
what is the matter ? Are you sorry for me
to go ? " and seizing her hands, he tried to
look into the downcast eyes, from which
large tears were dropping, while she solved
out, " It is nothing — go away — you don't
care."

*' Don't care ! Is it possible you can
think so ? Only look at me. Look at me,
Clara, and tell me if you are sorry for me
to go?"

How can I help it ? " she said at length,
with a rainbow smile, and lifting her eyes
for a moment to his face. " What could you
think of me if I wasn't sorry ? But oh ! "
she cried, suddenly disengaging her hands,

and clasping them tight together, " what
would papa say if he found us ? Oh dear,
oh dear ! what shall I do ? " She was
genuinely distressed, and yet never lost
sight of the fact that she wished Hugh
thoroughly to appreciate her position, and
to understand that he was the cause of all
her present grief and trouble.

*' Your father ! " Then, as her meaning
flashed upon him — " Do you mean, my
poor little Clara" — and he got possession
of her hands again — "do you mean that
it's owing to me he has been angry with
you ? "

*'He was, indeed he was. Oh, I can't tell
you the cruel things he said ! "

What can 1 do ? " said Hugh, distractedly.
" I will go to him and explain everything.
I will go this evening, and promise
you it shall be all right. Forgive me, Clara.
I ought to have thought of this, fool that 1

am, long ago. To think that you were suffering
" and he broke off suddenly.

"Don't go to him — don't speak to him,"
she cried ; '^ that would make it worse — ever
so much worse. He would not hear of it.
He told me not to speak to you — as if I
could help it ! He said you meant nothing ;
you mean to make fun, — oh, I can't tell you
what he said I "

I don't wonder he was angry — I deserve
it," said Hugh, looking with eyes
full of pity at the little panting creature in
front of him, and bitterly reproaching himself
for his carelessness ; " but when I go
and explain everything, he will be ready to
listen to reason. I will tell him that I did
not dare to speak — that I've no money —
that "

But that is just what he said," persisted
Clara ; "he declared you hadn't, and that
you couldn't afford to — to "

To many ! Well, that is about the
truth," he answered, bitterly; "we should
have to wait years and years — and I have
no right to ask that of you."

'' I would wait, indeed I would. I daresay
it wouldn't be very long," she murmured,
wistfully ; " but don't you see that it would
be no use to talk to papa ? You might as well
talk to the moon — indeed you might. No
one need know. I can keep a secret. Let
us keep this all to ourselves." She stopped,
surprised that he did not eagerly respond —
that no endearing phrase fell from his lips ;
but the fact was, that her proposal was altogether
repugnant to Hugh's sense of honour
that the reaction from the excitement of
the last few minutes was already beginning
to set in, and the more she persisted
with her insinuating suggestions, the more
he felt estranged in spirit from this pretty,
pleading, confiding child, whose moral sense.

he instinctively felt, was different from this
own.

Alien he spoke, the answer sounded almost
harsh to her; for he said, gently but resolutely
—

*' Indeed, indeed 1 could not do that. I
must speak to your father."

He had hardly uttered the words when the
sound of voices and feet came very near;
some one brushed past the j)calm on the outside,
and there stood Mr Wilson confronting
Hugh, and asking if he had seen his daughter.
With ready wit, Hugh was on his feet in a
moment, trusting that his own broad shoulders
would effectually screen his companion until
she had had time to recover herself. He
shook hands cordially with the Consul, — said
that he had just been coming in search of
him ; and when Miss Wilson emerged from
her corner, it was difficult to say which was
the more self-possessed of the two. But the

officers who had been with Wilson exchanged
significant glances behind his back, and Hugh
was not slow to note the action. Wilson was,
as we have seen, a hot-tempered man, and
this time he took even less pains than before
to dissemble his wrath.

I have been hunting for you high and
low, Clara," he said, ferociously scowling at
her. '^ Come at once. It is high time to
be off. Do you know you are the last on the
ship ? "

Not quite, Mr Wilson," said Hugh, coolly,
for I'm here. But I must be going too, for
I am off tomorrow morning, first thing. I
will follow you in a few moments, if you will
allow me to call, and say good-bye."

The Consul muttered something unintelligible
; but Hugh took it as a permission, and
in half an hour's time, with many heart-searching
and a most curious mixture of
sensations, he was once more mounting the

familiar steps to the Consul's house. The
hints that Ward had let drop long ago, about
^'it's being fun for him, but death to the
little girl," had never occurred to him till
now in their full significance : he had gone
on from day to day, thinking he would take
quite sufficient care; but now Clara's face
haunted him. She had looked so ill, so
sad — and her eyes had appealed to the softest
spot in his heart, when he had caught a
glimpse of them through her tears. He
could not help trying to comfort her; and
if he comforted her, he must say something
endearing ; and if he did that, of course she
thought he loved her, and wanted to marry
her. So he did love herat least he was
very fond of her, and could not bear the
thought of giving her pain. He had had a
vague idea that his love would be something
deeper and stronger than this — something
that would claim his worship, as well as

appeal to this pity. But lie was still very-young,
and the Fates seemed to have thrown
this pretty girl in his way ; and when she as
much as told him she loved him, there was
no way out of it — or so he thought. He did
not consider that if he were genuinely in love,
he would not wish to "get out of it" at all.
However, here he was at the Consul's door.

Wilson received him courteously, for he
was far more angry with Clara than with
Moore, as he had a shrewd suspicion that,
if left to himself, Hugh would have done
nothing; more than flirt a little with her
during his stay at Corfu. When he found
that Hugh really wished to make a proposal
for his daughter, he allowed him to hesitate
and stumble over his sentences, without any
of that help which a young man might expect
from an old one who had gone through
the same torture in this day. When at last
he stopped, Wilson told him (suite decidedly

that he would not hear of it, — that he did
not choose his daughter should be engaged
for an indefinite period, with her lover at
such a distance from her ; moreover, that he
did not wish her to marry above her own
rank, and that he did not think they were at
all suited to each other.

'' I'll tell you frankly, and it may be a
lesson to you," he said, — Hugh winced, but
acknowledged the shrewdness of the old man's
observation, — '' you shouldn't play with edge-tools.
Clara had far more definite ideas from
the beginning than you lead, and she can
bring most people round to her views ; but
she doesn't succeed with me. And if you
were to marry, you would be disappointed in
her, and she probably with you, after the
first month or two. I must ask you to forgive
me for being frank with you, lout I want
you clearly to understand that I shall not
alter my mind."

Then I can only ask you to forgive me
for being the cause of any distress to your
daughter," said Hugh, with much emotion,
but unable at the same time to help feeling a
certain amount of resentment at the tone of
superiority which the Consul adopted. " I
can never forgive myself for having troubled
her peace in any way."

"As to that, she'll get over it. And there
is only one thing more I want to say to you,
and that is, that I trust to your honour not
to engage in any clandestine correspondence
for that I ivont stand. It is just the sort
of thing Miss Clara would enjoy ; so I give
you fair warning."

*' The idea of such a thing would never
have occurred to me," said Hugh, proudly ;
but I must be allowed to write her one line,
unless I may see her again ? "

Certainly not. Well, sit down and write
here. T will sec she has your letter ; but

don't expect an answer, for I shan't allow her
to write one."

^ Hugh sat down at the table the Consul
pointed out to him, and tried to collect his
thoughts — which was a difficult matter — and
to say all he wanted in a few lines. Vir
Wilson did not leave the room, moreover,
a thing much to be desired under the circumstances,
— but sat down in an arm-chair,
reading a newspaper. His presence did not
certainly conduce to Hugh's peace of mind.
He tore up his paper more than once into
minute fragments, and at last wrote as follows
: —

«

Your father absolutely forbids us to meet
again, and nothing will induce him to sanction
our engagement. I cannot ask you to wait,
my darling, with the vague hope of some day
being able to offer you a position which I
could ask my wife to accept ; and indeed I

have told your father that the idea of a clandestine
correspondence had never entered my
head — I hope I have enough sense of honour
for that. I can only throw myself on your
mercy, and beg you to forgive me for causing
you any grief. I hate myself for the thought
of it, and wish you could forget me altogether
; but if you can't do that, think of meas
kindly as you can, and believe I never
meant to do you any harm. What can I say
to tell you what I feel ? You can understand
far better than I can write. Once
more, forgive me. — Yours, H. M."

He addressed the letter and gave it to
Wilson ; and as the latter extracted a formal
promise from him not to write again to Clara,
there was something in the young Irishman's
face that brought a momentary softening to
the Consul's heart.

"You will thank me some day for this

apparent cruelty," he said, wringing Hugh's
hand, as he wished him farewell.

Moore could not answer, and, turning
hastily, ran for the last time down the
familiar flight of stone steps.

Early next morning Ward saw him off" onboard
the Austrian Lloyd.

Hugh's heart was very heavy as he watched
Corfu disappear, and yet there was a strange
relief in his sensations — a cessation of responsibility
when the inevitable is reached.
^' That episode is over," he said to himself.
He had yet to learn that the chains we
forge for ourselves are not so easily snapped
asunder, and that the results of a course of
action determine the after-events of our lives
in a manner we least expect.

CHAPTER IV.

She walks in beauty like the night
Of cloudless climes and stand skies,
And all that's best of dark and bright
Meets in her aspect and her eyes."

"My dear Dorothea, — It was very good
of you to write to me ; and pray thank my
aunt for lier message. It is all very well
for you to talk of my being your Flag-lieutenant,
but I give you fair warning
that I shall leave my work to you. I think
it is lucky no other confiding Admiral has
asked for my services, for my uncle knows me
so well that lie can hardly be disappointed.
I revel in the thought of all the possibilities
of idleness which open out before my enraptured

gaze. I shall have time now to
attend to a whole menagerie of beasts, while
you and Fan write my notes for me. Think
of the joy of it ! specially to you, who do
so love to help the over-burdened and unfortunate.
As to Fan, I'm not so sure.

Mind you make my aunt ask the General's
new aide-de-camp to dinner as soon as he
comes. He is a friend of mine — or rather,
I met him two or three years ago in Scotland,
and I have been seeing a good deal
of him here, where he has been on a pig-sticking
jaunt with a friend. His name is
Moore, a son of old Lord Glengarn's — a
regular Paddy, and such a good fellow.
Look out how you talk to him, however,
about Corfu. There's a certain pretty Miss
Wilson here, the English Consul's daughter,
and when any one has got into her clutches,
it's rather hard to cet out of them acrain.

o o

Whether Moore is in or out, I'm not prepared

to say ; but there was a regular scene
the day of our dance, and old Wilson, the
father, was in a furious way — why, no one
could make out, for there's no reason for
thinking he would object to his daughter
having an ' Honourable ' tacked on to her
name. Perhaps he thought Moore had no
serious intentions, and, pon my honour, Fm
not in his confidence. Moore himself went
off the next day to England, but Miss Clara
hints at something more than a flirtation.
However, mind you see a lot of Moore, for
he's a regular good one. Bother ! there go
eight bells, and I am on duty.

My love to Frances, and I hope she's behaving
herself. I will write to my uncle in a day
or two, and get him the information he wants.
Your humble and obedient servant,

Charles Drake."

Dorothea Ncvill looked up from her letter,

VOL. I. F

and caught the eye of her cousin Frances,
who was sitting on the opposite side of the
breakfast-table, and who exclaimed, "Another
epistle from Charlie ? Well, I never !
I think he might write to me sometimes."

"Boys never care about their sisters, my
dear," said her uncle drily, from behind his
newspaper ; and Dorothea said —

Well, Fan, there's a message for you."

Oh, I know what Charlie's messages are
worth ! You need not give yourself the
trouble of repeating it."

Dorothea laughed. She was a great contrast
to her cousin, — the elder by four or
five years, tall and stately, with a head
well set on her shoulders, and crowned with
masses of chestnut hair. Her eyes were a
deep shadowy blue, and her complexion had
that rich glow that Romney loved to paint.
Frances Drake was between sixteen and seventeen,
shorter and darker than Dorothea, with

brilliant dark eyes that flashed and sparkled
when she spoke, a colour that varied incessantly,
and a sensitive mobile mouth, — all
betokening an excitable child, as one could see
at a glance. Nevertheless there was a certain
resemblance between the two, especially invoice
and manner, which made strangers
often take them for sisters. Indeed Frances
had never known any other home, for Lady
Katherine had adopted her from her birth,
and had lavished almost more tender care
upon the little orphan than her own
daughter received. Lady Mary Drake
(Lady Katherine's only sister), already a
four months' widow, had died at the birth
of Frances — leaving her boy Charlie, also,
to the guardianship of Sir Edward Neville.

Older by a few years than Dorothea,
Charlie had always stood on those pleasant
cousinly terms with her which parents sometimes
permit. He was almost like her (vii

brother, with just the additional spice of interest
which cousinship supplies ; and of course
there were not wanting prudent people
who shook their heads over Lady Katherine's
short-sightedness, and tongues wagged
still louder when Mr Drake's appointment
as Sir Edward's Flag-Lieutenant was known
at Eastport. But gossip never reached Admiralty
House ; if it did. Sir Edward's scorn
of women's tongues, and Lady Katherine's
easy - going good - nature, did not produce
fruitful soil for its development. She was
in appearance a soft, motherly little woman,
with a gentle cooing voice, and hair that
had once been more golden than Dorothea's,
but was now turning grey. Her husband
carried his sixty years lightly enough, and
was as erect and alert as many a man twenty
years his junior. To have no son of her own
had been one of the greatest disappointments
in Lady Katherine's life ; she was therefore

little loath to allow her sister's boy to usurp
that vacant place in her heart, and was only
too glad to fill her too silent nursery and
schoolroom with companions for her solitary
daughter.

She did not the least realise now that
Frances, the baby of the family, was almost
grown up ; and the result was a dangerous
amount of liberty for this spoilt child, who
hovered between the drawing - room and
schoolroom in a manner slightly injurious
to discipline.

Charlie's letters were public property, and
this one went the round of the breakfast-table,
eliciting various comments on its way. Lady
Katherine recalled the fact that she had
known Lord Glengarn in the days of her
youth, and Frances was much excited at the
idea of Hugh's flirtation with the pretty
Levantine. Dorothea hojjcd he danced welland
Sir Edward said that in this day men with

broken hearts didn't dance, lout he supposed
all that was altered now.

Why a broken heart, Uncle Edward ? "
said Frances. " I daresay he was glad enough
to get out of it ; " and Hugh's broken heart
became a joke in the family.

Have you ordered the flowers for tonight,
Dorothy ? " asked her mother.

No ; I thought Fan and I miorht o-et some
this morning. We shan't want many. There
are some still in the garden."

'' I wish we had a little more glass," sighed
Lady Katherine ; " but if you and Fan will
drive into the town, I will give you a few

commissions."

The breakfast-table was deserted, and the
party separated — Sir Edward to the study,
Frances to the schoolroom, and Lady Katherine
and Dorothy to make arrangements fora
dinner-party that evening.

^'We must settle about the taking in and

o

seating — these people never know how to
place themselves," murmured her ladyship,
with a little gentle scorn for the inhabitants
of Eastport. " Let me see : Admiral Jenkins
takes me in. Dear old man, I hope he won't
be quite so deaf as he is sometimes. And
your father must have Mrs Jenkins. Who
shall we put on the other side of him ?
Some one who can talk."

Blanche Harvey," suggested Dorothea,
with a mischievous twinkle in her eye.

'^ Oh, my dear ! do you think it will be
Blanche who will come ? I hope not. Your
father will never speak to her. And who
must you have ? Captain Newman, I suppose
f

^' Don't you think he must be tired of me
by this time ? "

Well, it doesn't seem like it. I can't give
him to Miss Harvey, for there is Colonel Brisk
to be provided for. Do you want a change ? "

*' Oh no ! As for me, I like him very-much
; only I am always afraid that the
Commander of the flag-ship will see too much
of the Admiral's daughter."

Not long after, Dorothea and her cousin
were spinning along the dusty road from the
dockyard to the town, in a smart little dogcart,
drawn by two bay ponies, which were
well known in Eastport. Past the bare
common and the brand-new pier — past the
long line of houses facing the sea, where
numberless nurses were drawing perambulators
full of children, and invalids were
dragging themselves up and down, and
sunning themselves in the southern aspect —
round among the dreary little villas, with
their damp autumnal gardens and poor little
lawns strewn with dropping leaves — out into
the street of shops, where the Eastport dandies
were disporting themselves, with exquisite
button-holes," tight gloves, and large eyeglasses,

and brushing past the over-dressed
girls on the narrow pavement with hardly
a "Beg your pardon" — till the ponies stopped
before the flower-shop. There was not a very
great choice of flowers : Eastport was not the
sort of place to produce any extensive demands
on florists, and the supply was inconsequence
of a limited description ; but
after considerable trouble, Dorothea found
more or less what she wanted, or rather had
to make the best of that which was offered
to her. As she turned her ponies' heads
towards home, a gentleman passing by on
the pavement lifted his hat, and with an
almost imperceptible smile wished them good
morning.

What an unusual sight ! the Commander
of the flag-ship on shore in plain clothes, and
at this hour of the day !"

Frances made a slight grimace as her
cousin spoke, and gave a less gracious return

to the gentleman's salutation. She took the
liveliest interest in every one who came to
Admiralty House, and was apt to amuse and
alarm her family ley the unguarded expression
of her likes and dislikes.

So you're to have him again to-night,
Dolly; I pity you."

Who ? Captain Newman ? You needn't
pity me for that, Fan. I like him very
much."

I can't think how you can. 1 should be
sick of him, if I were you."

I daresay he is of me."

I don't know about that," demurely replied
Fan, turning eyes full of admiration
on her cousin, who looked very pretty with
the sun shining on her bright hair, and a
flush on her cheek from the cold air through
which they were driving. " I can fancy that
he likes well enough to see you. But I won't
have him for a cousin-inlaw, mind ! "

I haven't the smallest intention of presenting
him to you in that capacity. But
really, Fan, you're too absurd. What business
have you to trouble your youthful mind
with such ideas ? Besides, you are so particular
about men's manners, and I am sure
Captain Newman's are good enough for anybody."


He is so frightfully sober. No ; I hate
him. I am sure I shall like this new friend
of Charlie's— this Mr Moore."

"He doesn't seem over-wise, at any rate,
from Charlie's account. He won't be too
sober for you."

"I do like people who can be naughty
sometimes," cried Frances, with precocious
worldliness. "It is so dull when they never
say or do anything wrong."

You think it is good fun, I suppose, when
they break either their own hearts, or, what
is much more likely, somebody else's."

Dorothea pulled up, as she spoke, before
the Admiralty House, and together they entered
the wide hall, from which opened the
drawing-room and dining-room.

Both rooms looked out on the garden —
Dorotheass special realm — still bright with
autumn flowers, asters and a few geraniums,
which had not been touched by the
frost. In spite of the difficulty of making
flowers grow so near the sea, Dorothea's
love of overcoming obstacles had proved
successful in this case. For a wonder,
she and the gardener were warm allies, and
his contempt for all the productions of East-port
(he was a west - countryman) was an
unfailing source of amusement to her. However,
the dinner-table did justice to their*
joint taste and skill — though it was, j^orhaps,
hardly appreciated by the guests, who were
not very numerous or very entertaining, entirely
naval and military, and chiefly retired

officers with their wives and daughters, with
which species Eastport abounds.

The Admiral felt it necessary to entertain
a good deal, and these duty dinner-parties
were sometimes a trial to himself as well as to
Lady Katherine and Dorothea; but they went
through them gallantly. When Sir Edward
said, " It must be done," his word was as
much law in his own house as on board ship ;
and his whole air — his straight upright
figure, keen grey eye, and clear-cut features,
broad forehead, and firm mouth and chin —
showed that not only could he exercise
authority if he chose, but that he was well
accustomed to do so. Perhaps he could be
something of a tyrant : it is rare for a man
to be absolute for any length of time, without
getting to love the exercise of dower for its
own sake — unless he is so weak that he always
needs to be guided by some one, or so
lazy that he prefers to let things take their

course. Sir Edward was neither weak nor
idle, but he rarely made his hand felt heavily,
except where it was needed, and he was much
liked in his service, while his wife adored
him, and between him and his daughter there
was perfect confidence. The member of the
family most inclined to rebel was Frances,
who had a natural dislike to all authority ;
but she had too much sense seriously to
contemplate mutiny.

On this October evening, while Sir Edward
was endeavouring; to fulfil Nelson's maxim
(and finding it hard work) with Mrs Jenkins,
a stout phlegmatic old lady with a strong
tendency to drowsiness ; and while Lady
Katherine was straining; lor ears to catch
Admiral Jenkins's murmured remarks, and
answering "Yes" and "No" rather vaguely,
where she hoped they would fit ; and while
Miss Harvey, dressed in the extreme of East-port
fashion, in a bright red gown, cut very

low, and unrelieved by even a soupgon of
white, was trying to captivate Colonel Brise,
who was a new arrival, and looked at her
sideways, as if she were some new and strange
variety whose species he had not yet discovered
; and while the rest of the party were
discussing Eastport gossip, the arrival of the
last transport, and the prospect of the next
dance, — Dorothea was sitting, looking very
beautiful and serene, by the side of Captain
Newman, whom she knew so well that it
was not necessary to begin conversation the
moment they sat down.

It was very good of you to place me
here," he said at last ; and Dorothea smiled,
but replied —

"Mother did all that, or rather" (with a
conscientious regard for truth) "we arranged
it together ; and, in fact, T ^vlsll wee could
have given you a change, but it can't be
helped."

She spoke to him quite frankly, as to a
man a good deal older than herself, as indeed
he was, being at least five-and-thirty, and
looking more. He was one of those men
who never look very young, and accordingly
are treated with an unusual amount of confidence
by the fair sex. Moreover, he always
seemed to take Dorothea's remarks as naturally
as she made them, and never embarrassed
her with compliments.

And when I come to think of it," she
went on, " I don't believe you and Miss Harvey
would have got on very well together.
Do you think so ? "

*' No," he said, so gravely and simply that
she laughed.

How delightful the world would be," she
said, " if one could choose whom one would
know ! "

Too delightful a world by half," he
answered ; '' but what would become of

the poor people whom nobody chose to
know ? "

They would have to find their like,"
laughed Dorothea ; " ' birds of a feather flock
together,' you know."

'' Seriously," he said, " I think they get
punishment enough as it is. Haven't you
noticed the men who dance so badly that no
girl will dance with them, standing looking
on gloomily at a ball from a corner ? "

'' Not often," said Dorothea, candidly ;
but I often see girls, who arc either very
plain or very uninteresting, sitting in a corner
all through a dance, and I am very sorry
for them."

With her beauty, and her position as queen
of her own little circle, he thought she could
afford to be sorry for them ! but he went
on —

Well, take another class — the men who
never succeed ; aren't you sorry for them ? "

VOL. I. G

My father thinks people always get on
who deserve it."

Ah ! Sir Edward is a successful man.
No," — seeing she flushed a little, — " I don't
mean he is unfair ; but a man who has never
had any serious contretemps in his life, can
hardly understand the struggling lives of
those men who never get into harbour : they
are always sailing as near the wind as they
can, and yet they seem to gain nothing by
tacking."

Why don't they change their course ? "

Easier said than done ; or perhaps they
do rather too often, and not only their
course, but their ship and their pilot too —
and then they make no way at all."

It's very sad; but. Captain Newman "

she paused.

"Yes," he said courteously, turning his
head a little, and looking at her while her
eyes were cast down.

You said people who were successful
could not understand those who fail. But
your life is not what you describe ? "

Not altogether, perhaps, though that depends
rather on what you call success."

I think you are shifting your ground,"
said Dorothea. '^ Of course, if by success
you mean that every wish one has is gratified,
710 one is successful."

^' Perhaps it depends rather on the proportion
of wishes realised," he said ; " but in
truth, what the world calls success is worth
very little if the one wish of your heart is
disappointed."

People ought not to depend on one
thing like that," said Dorothea, impatiently.
Take a man who has been disappointed in
love. That is what people generally mean, I
suppose, by not getting the one thing they
want. Well, that lias no business to spoil a
man's whole life. I don't l)elievc it docs,

cither; it is only in novels that that happens.
Real life doesn't turn on a love-story.
What fills a three-volume novel takes only a
few months, or at most a few years, to happen,
and a man's business lasts much longer,
and is much more important, than that."

Well," he said, amused at her vehemence,
at least those few months may make a difference
to all the rest of his life."

Of course it does, in a sense. But what
I mean is, that a man's home-life is almost
always secondary. His real business is his
professional life, whatever it may be. Now,
with a woman it is different, I allow. Her
home-life is the first thing with her, and
matters ever so much more to her. And
that is why," she added, smiling, " it is so
hard for us women to understand why you
men are so deep in your own business and
affairs that you have hardly time to think of
us at all."

I don't think you often have that complaint
to make of sailors," he said. " We are
away from you ladies so long, that we make
the most of you at home."

Or learn to do without us altogether. It
is all very well to talk of women's rights and
things like that, but women can never get
on long together alone without quarrelling —
except, I suppose, in sisterhoods, where they
are kept strictly under rule ; and that shows
how inferior they are to men, who get on
quite well without women."

I must beg leave to differ from you there,
Miss Neville. What makes you so hard on us
all round, this evening ? "

I don't know, I am sure."

Perhaps she was thinking of Hugh's love-story,
which had set her off on these reflections
; but she could not with fairness repeat
it, even to Captain Newman, who was no
gossip.

CHAPTER V.

' My idea of an agreeable person is a person who agrees

with me."

The Austrian Lloyd glided swiftly through
the waters of the blue Adriatic, and Hugh's
seafaring powers were not unpleasantly
tested, for the '^Droad back of the sea"
remained smooth as glass during the thirty-six
hours of the voyage to Trieste. There
was a certain sense of exhilaration in turning
his steps homewards and to work once
more. Of course he grumbled a little, —
every Englishman does, more especially every
soldier, — but lie was really did of this work,
though no one could more thoroughly enjoy

Q

a holiday. It must be confessed that this
particular holiday had hardly been a success,
for at the end of it he found himself entangled
in an unpleasant affair, which, the
more he contemplated, the less he liked. Away
from Clara's fascinations, he was more than
ever alive to the disagreeable consequences —
to use no stronger word — which an eno-ao-e-
ment with her would involve ; and yet, so
contradictory is human nature, more than
ever did he feel himself bound in honour to
her, at least for the present. He could not
conceal from himself that it would be a satisfactory
conclusion if she were jDi'oi^^ptly to
marry some one else ; and yet he rebelled at
the idea. As they had smoked their pipes
together the last evening. Jack Ward had
asked him casually how his love-affair had
been progressing, and he lead answered, half
joking, " Oh, I'm out of the running. Why
don't you cut in yourself?" What if lie

should take the suggestion in earnest, and
act upon it ?

With some difficulty Hugh shook himself
free from his reverie, and began to look about
him. The ship was not full ; but there was a
considerable variety among the passengers,
most of whom had come from farther east.
There was a Turk in a genuine fez, and a
couple of Greek merchants in seedy European
clothes, all on their way to Trieste ; a member
of the English Embassy at Constantinople,
returning home on leave with his wife
and two little children ; one or two good-looking
Austrian officers, very smart, and
with most graceful manners ; a young Italian
artist who had been painting in Corfu, and
was on his way back to Venice ; a British
bridal couple, finishing their honeymoon, and
still in the honey stage ; and last, but not
least, especially in his own estimation, the

special correspondent of the ' Radical Mercury,'
the great advanced newspaper of the
provincial press. They were hardly out of
sight of Corfu when this gentleman, much
to Hugh's amusement, began to attack him
on the subject of the " Eastern Question," in
continuance, apparently, of a conversation he
had had the day before with the diplomatist.
Indeed, Mr Vivian could not long escape
being drawn into the discussion, and Hugh
was glad to pass the inquisitive Mr James onto
him, feeling himself unequal to rej^ly to
all his inquiries on a subject on which he was
not well posted up.

I have been into the interior of Albania
and Greece," explained the correspondent,
and have been much struck by the progress
making in civilisation and freedom."

Hugh assented, more from lazy dislike to
an argument than from conviction, fur he

had thought the Albanians of the coast singularly
savage-looking.

I was interested yesterday in hearing ]mr
Vivian's opinions in regard to Turkey" (he
would have been puzzled to say precisely
what information he had gained as to Mr
Vivian's opinions), " and I am anxious to
know his views as to the future of the
Hellenic and Slav races."

They're in dangerous proximity, no
doubt," remarked Mr Vivian, adjusting his
eye - glass, and apparently examining the
ship's bulwarks with great care.

Oh ! ah ! " said the man of literature,
as if that was a new idea ; " dangerous proximity,
do you think ? Do you see any signs
of disagreement ? Is the diplomatic horizon
clouded ? "

"We have hardly got so for as diplomacy
yet with Albania," remarked ^Fr Vivian, with
a hardly perceptible smile.

True ; for as yet her autonomy has not
been secured. It is to be hoped that the
sinojuhxr success of the reforms in Greece \Yill
lead to further efforts among the Slavs — a
people with endless capacities — now cruelly
rendered all but useless by their enslaved
condition. What are your views with regard
to the present position of Turkey ? "

Father a large question," said Hugh ; and
Mr Vivian relapsed into another smile, and
then, finding Mr James was waiting for an
answer, remarked with great deliberation, as
if he were giving a weighty piece of information
—

There is improvement in some respects,
and doubtless decadence in others."

This apparently harmless sentiment, however,
gave umbrage to Mr James, who was
too thorough-going a Rndicjd to admit trio
possibility of any good in the Turk, and only
responded sardonically —

Ah ! you are a Turcophil ! Wonderful
how all Englishmen living in Constantinople
get so fond "

Of those gentlemen in seizes," said Hugh,
glancing at the representative of that much-abused
nation, who was tranquilly smoking a
little distance off.

Fine fellows they are, too," said the diplomatist,
sauntering off to join his wife, who
had just come on deck with her children.
The elder, a little girl of seven or eight,
soon made great friends with Hugh, and
trotted about with her hand in his all the
morning. She took a great dislike to the
correspondent, and a great fixncy to the
Austrian officers with their handsome uniforms,
and was always dragging Hugh in
their direction, and looking up at them from
under the broad brim of her white hat, with
a mixture of shyness and forwardness which
was very diverting to him. He was fond of

children, especially pretty little girls, and of
course his kindness to her child won the
mother's heart. Mrs Vivian was a languid,
delicate-looking woman, with a slight lisp
and a slow manner that bordered on affectation
— not at all happy at sea, in spite of the
calm weather, and divided between her own
headache and her anxiety for her children,
the younger of whom was in the charge of a
young Greek nurse, who gave herself up for
lost if ever the land was out of sight. Mrs
Vivian was therefore doubly grateful to Hugh
for taking the elder child off her hands ;
and when they parted at Trieste, she expressed
many hopes of meeting at some
future day.

During the afternoon the correspondent
had attached himself to the Austrians, who
talked very fair English, but were puzzled
by some of his questions, and there was a
o;ood deal of gesticulation and laufrhinji over

their answers. They soon discovered, however,
who he was, and became almost as
guarded and " official " as Mr Vivian. But
Mr James was quite clever enough to extract
a certain amount of information even from
such unpromising subjects ; and they would
all have been surprised if, a few days later,
they had seen an article in the ' Radical
Mercury ' from " our Special Correspondent,"
containing an account of what " a distinguished
member of the British Embassy at
Constantinople communicated to me as to
the prospects of the Porte in Europe and
Asia;" and, "I learned from an interesting
conversation with some Austrian officers, who
courteously assured me," &c., &c.

At Trieste Hugh landed, and had time to
walk about the town, see the ancient church
with its beautifully preserved mosaics, and
admire the oriental costumes in the streets —
for Trieste is called, not without justice, the

gate of the East — before he started in the
train for Calais, en route for England. He
travelled to Aldershot almost without stopping,
and there spent a day or two, arranging
about the transfer of his goods and chattels
to Eastport, before proceeding on a visit to
his parents in Ireland.

CHAPTER VI.

'Tis distance lends enchantment to the view."

Hugh's travels came at length to an end
on a chilly autumnal evening, and the
dawdling train pulled w'p slowly at the
little country station near his home. The
deliberation of the porters and the other
railway officials, who all immediately recognised
him, and wanted to hold a long conversation
with him on the spot, tried his
patience considerably ; and their vociferous
compliments did not long detain him, though
the rich brogue sounded sweet in this ears
after his long absence from Ireland. The dogcart
from the castle was waiting; for him, and,

taking the reins from the groom's hands, he
replied to his " Welcome home, Mr Hugh,"
with a friendly salutation, and started his
ponies homeward at a brisk trot. The man
cautioned him about Jenny — a new purchase
who had a very strong mouth, and '* the
will of a woman."

•' And how are they all at home ? " added
Hugh, delighting in the fresh moorland air
and brisk motion, and indifferent to the holes
and ruts which were plentiful in the road,
and over which the dogcart bounded as the
ponies raced along.

Sure, and as well as your honour could
expect," said O'Donncll, in answer to his
question, and keeping his eyes fixed on
Jenny's ears.

Why, what do you mean ? Is any one
ill ? "

It wasn't me that said so," was the
oracular answer.

VOL. I. H

What on earth do you mean ? Can't you
say Yes or No ? "

That was just what a true Irishman never
would say, if he could possibly help it ; and
Hugh ought to have known it.

"Sure you're grown such a fine young
gentleman," said the man, soothingly but not
very connectedly ; " and you'll have been seeing
many fine sights since you left us."

^'What's that got to do with it?" said
Hugh. But at that moment Jenny swerved
violently at a white post, and his attention
was distracted by a gap in the hedge. They
were nearing the house, and he was surprised
that it had not been mended.

What's that left for ? " he asked.

Sure, your honour, it has been so a year
or more, ever since I can remember."

"Your memory's very short, then, for it
was all right less than a year ago, when I
was here. That means no rents, I suppose ? "

I'll not be surprised if your honour's
right entirely," said O'Donnell, calmly ; " but
his lordship will be pleased to see you, and
no doubt all will be put to rights now. With
Mr Moore ill, there's many things have
been left for your honour to settle."

Mr Moore ill ! They never told me,"
cried Hugh, startled and grieved, for he
was very fond of his brother. He began
to notice how cold and dark the night was,
and what a disgraceful state the drive was
in, and how Jenny was pulling ; but though
he asked many questions, he could get no
further information from O'Donnell, who,
finding he was distressed, at once tried to
soften down his remark, but could not so
set Hugh's fears at rest. At last the ponies
dashed up to the house, — a large, ugly, white
building, of no particular style of architecture,
— and stopped under the portico.
The big hall-dour was open, and Lord clennam

waiting to receive his son. He looked
worn and older, Hugh thought, and the
wrinkles in his brow were not smoothed
away even by his smile of welcome. He
had hardly spoken, when Hugh said —

What is this about Ion being ill ? "

"Oh, has O'Donnell told you?" — nth
a shade of displeasure. " I am sorry your
home-coming should be clouded, my dear
boy; but we did not think it worth while
to write, as you would so soon be here.
The fact is " (he lowered his voice), " your
mother is worried and anxious. I don't myself
think it is so bad, but you know she can't
get on without the doctors, and the doctors
always make things out as bad as they can —
good for the profession, you understand ! "

But what's the matter ? " asked Hugh,
who began to despair of getting any information.


A chill— a chill," said his father. " But

come along and see him ; you'll cheer us all
up a bit."

They went through the large bare hall,
and along a narrow badly lighted passage,
to a room which seemed to Hugh very hot
and stuffy, after his long cold drive. There
was a fire, near which his mother was sitting ;
and in an arm-chair, looking pale and listless,
was his brother.

Lady Glengarn had been handsome in
her youth, but the bright flush which had
been becoming then, had settled into a hard
red colour on both cheeks, which made her
look as if she would never get cool. The
high spirits of her girlhood had deserted her,
and she was a prey to fits of depression and
nervousness, which had drawn many lines
across her forehead and round her mouth ;
and Hugh knew only too well what his
father meant when he said she was worried
and anxious.

Well, old chap," said Hugh, " I am very-sorry
to hear you are not well."

"I am all right," said Ion, fretfully his brows
contracting slightly, " or rather I should be
if I were once out of this beastly hole."

A pretty way of speaking of your native
place," said his father, laughing — a little
nervously, Hugh thought ; and Lady Glen-gain
added —

It is a way he has got into of late. He
used to be very fond of it, but now it
appears to disgust him."

"And so it would you, mother, if you
were stuck into a little stuffy room like this,
and never allowed to go and get a breath
of fresh air."

A breath of fresh air means a day's
hunting, I suppose," retorted Lady Glengarn.

A day's hunting would do me pounds
of good."

*' I daresay. You hear him ? " turning

to Lord Glengarn; "and you think I am
cruel for not letting him do exactly what
he pleases ! Why, he could no more hunt
now than a baby ! "

Oh, there, mother ! " cried the invalid ;
'let's turn the conversation. Come, Huo-h,
old boy, tell us what you've been doing.
Any adventures ? Any fairy princess ? "

Hugh had been standing with his back
to the fire, much astonished and embarrassed
at this passage of arms between his mother
and brother. He had always looked on Ion
as her favourite child ; and though she had
not brought up her children to treat her
with any elaborate respect, this sort of thing
was unusual, and fairly startled him.

He knew his mother too well, however,
not to be aware that it was her intense
anxiety and affection for Ion that made her
so irritable, and unable to bear contradiction
; and as his illness had much the same

effect on the invalid himself, the result was
very trying for all parties.

Hugh at once perceived his brothers
efforts to avoid further wrano-lino;, and
eagerly threw himself into the breach, ready
to do anything — even invent adventures
for his amusement.

Truth to tell, he found the few days
which he passed at the castle hang very
heavily on hand. He went out hunting one
day; but the thought of Ion cowering over
the fire spoilt his pleasure, and the wistful
look in his brother's eyes, as he had watched
him start from the hall window, went to
Hugh's heart, and haunted him all day. The
longer he stayed, the more his brother's condition
depressed him, and the more surely
he realised the change that a few months
only had wrought ; and one day, as he
and his father were sitting together in the
smoking-room after dinner, he said that he

thought Ion was quite right, and that he
ought to go abroad.

So do I," said Lord Glengarn, " and I
shall begin to make arrangements for going
to Cannes. The boy has set his heart on it,
and that is enough. Dr Morris talks of
Bournemouth, but Ion won't hear of it."

Well, Cannes would be livelier. It is a
pity my mother is so dead against it. I
think it worries him. I tell you what," —
and Hugh choked a little as he spoke, — " it's
as much as a fellow can stand to see old Ion
like this. He used to be up to anything,
and now the least thing upsets him ; and his
gallant attempts, every now and then, to
seem as if he was all right, are almost worse
than all."

"It is most* disheartening; and Morris
was so confident he could cure him in next
to no time — and now he says he's no constitution.
Why, as you say, the boy used to

be up to everything, and as strong as a horse.
I can't understand this sudden l^reak-do^Ti."

There was a pause, while the father and
son gazed into the fire, and the smoke
from their pipes ascended in meditative
curves.

Haven't you had any other doctor ? "
said Hugh, presently.

Oh yes ; a fellow from Dublin came over
one day, — can't remember his name. He
said Morris was doing the right thing ; and
then they put their heads together, and said
the place was damp — and that made your
mother angry."

Well, it is damp," said Hugh ; " the
mist was awfully thick over the lake to-night."
Perhaps a remembrance of the glowing climes
of Corfu flashed across him for the moment ;
but he continued, " I tell you what, father —
I wish you would have that swampy bit
between the lake and the house drained."

'' All right, if you will provide the money.
The fact is, I have none to spare."

"I am very sorry," said Hugh. After a
moment's consideration he continued, holding
his pipe between his fingers, and looking
straight before him — " I am very sorry indeed,
for I was going to ask you for
some."

It was a considerable effort to sneak of his
debts at such a moment. Had he been only
the easy-going fellow some of his friends
thought him, he would have put it off to a
more convenient season ; but he knew too
well the misery of any less straightforward
expedient, and made his plunge boldly. His
father asked how much he wanted, and was
relieved to hear him name a comparatively
small sum.

*you shall have it, my boy," he said,
laying his hand affectionately on his son's
shoulder, — '^ nothing like starting fair ina

fresh place. Don't you ever be afraid to
come to your old father when you are in
difficulties. You are a good Joy, and I was
young myself once. But be careful now,
and don't spend more than you can help,
for times are bad, and I get hardly any
rents."

Was the harvest so bad ao-ain ? " asked
Hugh, more deeply touched by his father's
confidence and generosity than he could
express.

The harvest was fair — fair; but the people
don't pay. Why should they, when, by holding
out a little longer, they will get some
more reduction? They'll live rent-free at
last, and the landlords will be shoved out
altogether. But that won't happen in my
time — at least, I think not, though things
march pretty fast in these days. Talk of
progress indeed ! It isn't much progress I
have seen since I was a boy. Solomon tells

US not to say that the old times were better
than the new ; but, upon my word, I think
they were ! "

There will be a turn of the wheel some
day," said Hugh.

"Well, there may — there may. Not in
my time. And you can't put back the
confidence and good understanding between
classes, when that has once been disturbed.
You can't prevent people making land a
speculation, and agreements between landlord
and tenant a matter of hard money-bargaining,
like any other buying and selling
; for, mind you, if you do away with the
present class of landlords, you will get a
much harder set in their place, with a regular
commercial spirit, and no consideration for
poverty or distress. Depend upon it, it's
easier to destroy than to build up again.

However, thank heaven, you aren't one
of these new-fangled economists ; and, to

come lack to what I was saying, I shall have
to live carefully enough just for the present,
for there will 1)e a heavy drain on my purse,
what with this illness of Ion's, and the going
abroad, and all that. I shall have to take
your mother and him out to Cannes, and perhaps
stay there too myself; so I shall want
some one to look after my affairs here while
I am away. I tell you what, my boy ; if you
ever marry, — and I hope you will, and keep
up the family — for God knows if Ion will
live to do it, — you must take care that
the young woman has some money."

Hugh made no response, but looked gloomily
down, 2^nffing away at his pipe, and his
father said questioningly —

"Anything the matter? Your mother
and I have often talked the subject over, and
only the other day it struck us that Sir
Edward Neville's daughter would be the very
thing."

Sir Edward Neville ? Who on earth do
you mean ? "

"The Admiral at Eastport. He married
Lady Katherine Drury, who used to be one
of my best partners in old days — days when
I was in the Guards, and she was having her
first or second season. She was such a pretty
girl. And I hear her daughter is quite
as pretty, and the only child, and will come
in for her mother's money as well as Sir
Edward's."

Oh ay ! I remember now, — Drake's
cousin. I fancy I am forestalled there, sir.
There is a cousin in the question, who is
coming to Eastport as the Admiral's flag-lieutenant
; and you know a cousin is a
serious obstacle."

Oh, well, I don't know ; that depends.
Anyhow, there is no harm in keeping your
eyes open."

I shall certainly do that. But as to anything

further, pray put it out of your head.
On my own account, quite independently
of Miss Neville's cousin, I could not think
of it."

*' And pray why not ? "

Well, in the first place, I hate making
plans like that about any girl — in short, I
couldn't do it ; and in the next place, I am
bound by honour elsewhere."

Good gracious, Hugh ! " cried poor Lord
Glengarn, startled and alarmed ; " and you
never told us ! Pray explain yourself. How
long has this secret arrangement been
going on ? "

It required a tremendous effort on Hugh's
part to proceed, and his tone became defiant
in proportion.

I daresay you will be shocked, but pray
hear me to the end. It is Miss Wilson, the
Consul's daughter at Corfu, who "

The Consul's daughter ! Good gracious!"

ii

HUGH MOORE. 129

once more ejaculated Lord Glengarn, but
under his breath.

She is very pretty and charming."

Oh, of course ! " still sotto voce.

And her father treated her like a brute
on my account : and when I found out how
unhappy she was, and I was going away,
what could I do ? "

And she has nothing, I suppose ? "
No."

And how will you live on nothing, pray ?
Do you expect me to support the Consul's
daughter ? "

Certainly not ; but we are not going to
be married tomorrow."

I am glad to hear it ! But am I to
understand it is a formal engagement ? AVill
the lady be willing to wait ? "

"Clara would be willing, but her father
won't hear of it at all. Indeed he almost
kicked me out of doors."

VOL. I. I

Well, this passes everything ! A son of
mine scorned by a Levantine Consul ! Pray
proceed."

I have nothing more to tell you if you
take it in that way," said Hugh, with a
stony feeling in his heart, as he realised how
bad it all looked, and that, for all he had
done towards gaining his fathers consent,
he had better have kept silence on the subject
altogether. The shock to Lord Glen-gain
had indeed been terrible ; but after a
minute or two, his spirits rose as he comprehended
the full significance of the Consul's
disapproval ; and he was ready now to argue
with his son, trying to prove to him that
his honour was by no means concerned in
this silly engagement with Clara Wilson.

But on this point Hugh was not to be
converted. He knew that she loved him,
and he was not going to desert her at a
moment's notice, just because his father

treated the whole subject so much more
lightly than he did himself. Moreover, the
fair Clara had run the gauntlet as far as
detection was concerned ; and only that
morning a letter with the Corfu post-mark
had been lying on his plate when he came
down to breakfast. it would hardly be
truthful to say that he was pleased when he
opened the envelope and saw Clara's familiar
signature ; but his heart melted as he read
the letter, and pictured the glowing face and
lustrous eyes that had bent over it. Once
more the spell of her fascination domineered
over his better judgment, and he began to
feel twinges of remorse when he recollected
he was bound by his promise to Mr Wilson
not to return any answer to all those endearing
professions. But, after all, he was
really craving for sympathy ; and directly
his father assumed a softer tone and manner,
lie poured out the whole story, laying more

than enough stress on the extent of his own
attentions to Clara, and putting out of sight
her own evident efforts to attract his admiration.
Indeed, Hugh had almost succeeded
in forgetting them himself.

The old lord listened very attentively, and
did not fail to observe the somewhat strained
tone in which Hugh spoke. He knew his
son too well not to notice the want of naturalness
and freedom in the way he talked of
Clara, and Hugh saw that he was not making
much impression ; so, as a last resource,
he laid the letter before his father. This
is what he read : —

"Dear Mr Moore, — It was very kind
of you to write to me, and it comforted mea
little ; and, indeed, I needed comfort, for
I have been very miserable since you left.
Papa says he made you promise not todo
it again ; but that is all nonsense. Do,

please, write to me, for I am so unhappy.
You see I am going to send you this
letter in spite of papa, and I shall manage
to get your letters all right. Oh, dear Mr
Moore ! don't forget all about me, now you
have gone away. I shall die if you do !
Papa is very unkind to me, and I don't
care for any lawn - tennis or anything. I
was in bed quite ill for two days, and I am
never hungry now.

I always go every day and look over the
harbour, and watch the ships and the mountains
you used to talk about, and I think,
not every day but every hour, of that dance
on the Eoyal Britain. Every night I count
the days, and say to myself how many it
is since you left, and when you will come
again. Please, release write and tell me
when you are coming. I see Mr AVard very
often, but I dare not ask him about you.
Did you have a good voyage, and get safe

to Ireland ? Please tell me about everything.
If you knew how wretched I am without you,
you would not care about papa. I am sure
he will give in soon, and then everything will
come right. Corfu is very dull now, and the
weather has changed and got wet and stormy
since you left. How I wish I were going to
Eastport too ! I am dreadfully afraid you will
be angry with me for writing to you, but
I could not help it ; and every day I shall
watch and wait for the post till I get your
answer. — Yours ever, Clara Wilson.

P.S.—l forgot to tell you that Mr Ward
says that he will take care of any letters
for me that you send. Then it will be quite
safe. He is very kind to me, now you are
gone."

Lord Glengarn fairly burst out laughing
when he had perused this epistle.

Upon my word, Hugh," he said, " is it
possible that you have lost your heart to
this child?"

She is childish," said Hugh, parrying
the question rather than answering it ; '' but
that is her bringing-up."

"It is her bringing-up, I suppose, that
makes her utterly disregard her fathers
wishes and your promises ? Strikes me her
code of honour isn't very fine ! "

Well, I daresay not ; her mother was a
Greek."

"An answer worthy of John Bull himself!
Did her mother teach her to tell stories too ?
Just look at the letter : in one breath she
says she dare not speak to Mr Ward about
you, and in the next that Mr Ward will bethe
medium of correspondence between you.
How do you explain that ? "

I don't know, I'm sure," said Hugh.

You confess that puzzled you ? Well,

to sum up this young lady's qualifications
— she is childish, penniless, has no
idea of the value of a promise, or of the
duty of obedience, or of truth, and hasa
pretty considerable idea how to flirt."

Hugh could not help smiling, lout he knit
his brows and answered — " That is one side.
The other is, that she is young and very
pretty, confiding and affectionate, and with
no mother to guard her, and is hardly treated
by her father."

She makes the most of that, no doubt ;
but really, if I was blessed with such a
daughter, I think I should keep a pretty
tight hand over her. Now, my dear boy,
be reasonable. Is she, do you think in your
sober senses, a woman who would make you
happy as a wife ? And if she were, have
you any prospect of being able to marr'
her ? "

Certainly not, to the last question."

*' If you were honest with yourself, you
would say so to the first too. The fact is,
you are afraid."

'' Well," said Hugh at last, " the fact is, I
am afraid of being dishonourable."

Just so ; and you won't do the dishonourable
thing — which would be to write to
this girl, as she implores you to do. As to
dishonour, I see none in letting an affair
drop which can never come to a satisfactory
conclusion. Depend u23on it, she will soon
console herself with some one else. It seems
to me she has already begun the process
with your friend Ward."

I don't believe it ! " cried Hugh, warmly.
I'm certain Jack Ward would never play me
such a nasty trick."

Ah ! Well, at my age one gets more sceptical.
You have unlimited faith in human
nature. What a pity that one gets undeceived
! However, you will make up your

mind, won't you, my dear boy, not to do
anything rash ? "

I have made up my mind to that. I
have promised Mr Wilson not to write to
Clara, and I won't. I shall make Ward give
her a message from me not to expect it."

How much longer does Ward stop there?"

I don't know. I thought he would have
been gone before this."

Well, don't keep up a fire of messages
with Miss Wilson ; and above all things,
Hugh, don't say a word of all this to your
mother — it will only worry her, and do no
good."

I promise you that," said Hugh, who
was much more afraid of her than of his
father.

Lady Glengarn had a truly feminine disregard
for logic, and her arguments were chiefly
assertions : when you had a very strong case,
this did not so much matter ; but when, as

■

in the present instance, the case resolved
itself into a point of honour, which it was
more than probable she would ignore even
more completely than lier husband had done,
the contest would be irritating; — and Hus-h
did not like to feel angry with any woman,
least of all with his mother.

CHAPTER VII.

She knows a deeper states craft, sirs, than yon."

It must be confessed that, at the end of
another week, a summons from the Admiral
at Eastport, appointing the day when he was
to take up his work there, was not altogether
unwelcome to Huojh. Anxious though he
was to do all in his power to make the time
pass less heavily for his brother, there was
something in the atmosphere of the Castle
that oppressed him. There was less than
usual going on, both in his home and in the
neighbourhood, and his thoughts were inconsequence
free to brood more persistently
than was agreeable upon the recent events of

his life, and his present unsatisfactory position.
As the days wore on, he noted, to his
surprise, that his mother's ojDi^osition to the
Cannes idea had suddenly vanished, and she
began to take the keenest interest in all the
plans and arrangements for the journey, and
was even anxious to hasten the departure as
much as possible. She never told anybody
how it was that. Ion's illness became a much
more serious matter in her eyes ; but she ^
went about the house with a look in her face
as if she had some secret j^ain gnawing at
her heart, and hardly let any one but herself
wait upon her son.

Hugh did what he could to help them by
writing to some friends at Cannes, who promised
to find rooms for the party at one of
the hotels ; and Ion's spirits began to revive
at the thought of a change. His brother's
society had unconsciously been of great
service to him, by bringing him more in

contact with the outside world, tint causing
him to forget for the time what he pathetically
spoke of as " crushing hard luck." His
mother's temperament was too like his own
to make her a good nurse for him — she never
saw how it fretted and teased him to be
always asked how he felt ; whereas Hugh
possessed the wonderful knack of always
seeming to know whether his brother were
tired or not, without making any remark
on the subject.

When, in addition to his strength, it is
given to a man to exercise the tact and gentleness
of a woman, his services are never
willingly parted with for a moment by the
invalid. Had it not been for a generous
regard for his mother's feelings, Hugh would
have haunted his brother's rooms much oftener
than he did already.

The last week of his stay was enlivened by
the presence of his married sister, who, in

spite of her husband's absence in America,
contrived to leave her children, though she
was never quite happy out of their sight, in
order to spend a few days at the Castle before
the general flitting to Cannes. Mrs Fitzgerald
had always been Hugh's confidante,
and her arrival was, at this particular juncture,
an immense comfort to him. They had
not been very long together before all his
troubles and perplexities were poured into her
sympathising ears. She was still quite young
and very lively, devoted to athletics of all
sorts and kinds, and yet not wanting in
feminine tact, and of peculiarly quick sympathy.
They were riding together when the
name of Clara Wilson first slipped out ; and
by the time the whole history had been drawn
from her brother, she had formed her own conclusions.
The state of the case appeared even
clearer to her than it had to her father ; and,
woman-like, lie was more severe on Clara.

Bound to her, forsooth ! Stuff and nonsense!
I didn't know your head was so full
of sentimental absurdity ! "

It's all very well to talk of absurdity,
Nora ; but who was it who was so indignant
with Teddy Barnes for throwing over Miss
Waters ? "

Captain Barnes ! Don't talk to me about
him ! That was an utterly and entirely
different thing. They were actually engaged,
and she was a charming girl, and hadn't
thrown herself at his head."

"And who told you Miss Wilson had,
either ? "

You think I have no eyes ? "

"You can't see through a wall."

I can see through a glass door. Really,
you men are incomprehensible ! You, who
might have had the pick of all the prettiest
Irish girls, to go and fall in love with a
stupid little thing out at Corfu ! Why

don't you go to the moon and fall in love
there ? "

"Too long a journey. And, to crown it
all, my father goes and tells me it would bea
most suitable and desirable thing, and all
that is proper and charming, if I were to
marry Sir Edward Neville's daughter ! "

Oh do, Hugh, do ! " cried Nora, letting
her reins drop and clasping her hands ; " it
would be the very thing. She is lovely. I
met her in London last year. Oh, do ask
her if she remembers me ! "

I am sure she won't. You are far too
insignificant."

Don't be rude. Oh, Hugh, do marry her !
I should love to have her for a sister-in-law."

I never do anything that's proper, as you
know well enough ; and I certainly don't
intend to marry to give you a sister-in-law.
You'll have to be thankful for any one I
bring you in that capacity."

VOL. I. K

^'If it's Miss Wilson, I shall fight her
within the first half-hour of our introduction."

Clara never fights."

"What a poor, mean-spirited creature!"
turning up her pretty little nose. " What
on earth would happen if we were all so
meek and mild ? and what would all you
men of war do ? "

Is that remark addressed to me, or are
you referring to an ironclad ? "

Nora laughed, and shook her riding-whip
at him.

By the by, is it true," she asked, " that
we are to have another African war ? "

I am not in the secret any more than
you are. It would be good news for me."

You would volunteer directly ? "

Of course — and thank my stars for such
a chance."

*' Poor Hugh ! tired of his playing at
soldiers ! "

It's no playing, I can tell you."

Oh no ! Poor boy ! he never gets any
leave — always starving, night and day —
never has any fun — never time to go abroad
and fall in love — never time to ride about
the country with his sister."

It pleases you to be facetious, Mrs Fitzgerald,"
said Hugh, with only the ghost of a
smile curling his moustache. "Be thankful
that your husband isn't a man of war at all,
but only a pleasure-yacht."

*' Fie, for shame ! a pleasure-yacht indeed !
Who does more work than he, I should like
to know ? "

Oh, no one but his wife — and she's the
hardest-worked woman in the country ! "

Hugh was smiling now, broadly.

"You needn't laugh, Hugli ; it's perfectly
true. But you men never believe that a
woman docs anything."

I grant you she's busy enough, even if

her work doesn't count for much. But then,
many a yacht goes more miles in a year thana
man-of-war."

And does more work, and costs the country
nothing. All an excellent parable."

Humph ! and would be as helpless as you
would be in any real danger."

Helpless ! Really, Hugh, you take one's
breath away. You are too impertinent to
be talked to to-day. I think your stay at
Corfu has made you imbecile — or Miss Wilson
has spoilt you. I retract that desire of
mine that you should marry Dorothy Neville
you are not worthy of her."

Dorothy Neville ! What a pretty name ! "

Much prettier than Clara Wilson — much
too pretty for you. I tell you she's lovely,
only you are not worthy to appreciate
her."

Thank you, my sister. Now a truce to
these amenities, for we must behave respectably

indoors, and I see poor Ion's face at the
window."

*' Speak for yourself. When was I other
than respectability personified? Though,
really, it's a wonder I can bear up at all,
considering I have a husband in California ;
one brother so rude that I can't speak to
him, and another in a consumption ; and a
mother "

Come, not a word against her ! It's
bad enough for us to see Ion like this, but
ten times worse for her. I would give all
I possess to see the old boy look as he
used to."

So would I, I am sure," said Nora, with
an irrepressible sigh, as they entered the
house.

When one is young and happy, the atmosphere
of grief and sickness seems so unnatural
that it is almost unbearable : one
turns away from it with relief, and faces it

again with a sickening feeling of intolerance.
That ride through the light fresh air had
driven away from the brother and sister, for
the time being, the atmosphere of oppression
which hung round their home ; and now it
came back upon them with a fresh sense of
weight and weariness, which they made an
instinctive effort to throw off. It is so hard
to learn to suffer. We think we are meant
to be happy, and it needs many years and
many severe lessons to undeceive us. The
last lesson of all is to expect sorrow, and to
bear it calmly without trying to get rid of
it ; and some people never learn that at all.

Three days after Hugh's departure for
Eastport, the Glengarn party set off for
Cannes. Nothing more had been said by his
father on the subject of Clara Wilson ; but
Hugh had written to Jack Ward, telling him
to let her know he could not on any account
break his word to her father by writing to

her. Not long after his arrival at Eastport,
he received a letter from his friend, announcing
his intention of spending the winter at
Corfu, and of proceeding to Eastport in the
spring. He enclosed another message from
Miss Wilson, to the effect that if Mr Moore
didn't write to her, she was quite sure he
could not care for her, and she would probably
die. Hugh did not quite believe that
threat, but it did not tend to make him more
cheerful ; and altogether his residence at
Eastport began under rather melancholy
auspices.

The hints thrown out by his father with
regard to Miss Neville made him dislike
the idea of meeting her, and he was resolved
at any rate not to call at Admiralty
House before it was absolutely necessary.
He was thrown, of course, more amonof the
military than the naval circles ; but the
society of Eastport was sufficiently small to

be a grand field for gossip, and Sir Edward
Neville and his family were fully and freely
discussed. Miss Blanche Harvey, in her
bright red dress, was seen everywhere, and
knew everybody. Hugh was no exception.
When, at a reception of his chiefs, he happened
to receive the honour of an introduction,
she proceeded to enlighten him then
and there as to the private histories of most
of the other guests, but also of the Admiral
and his party, who were not present. Hugh
did not talk scandal himself; but he was
much entertained by this young lady, — no
longer, by the by, in the first bloom of
youth, — and listened to her with so much
attention, that she flattered herself she had
made an impression. He ventured to say he
had heard rumours of Miss Neville's beauty.

Ah yes ! "* said Miss Harvey ; " she is
pretty in a way. Depends which style of
beauty you admire. Men mostly admire

the fair insipid sort" — with a little giggle.
Which do you ? Fair or dark ?

Dark," he answered, rather absently,
thinking of Clara; but Miss Harvey, who
considered herself a brunette, took it as a
personal compliment, and went on with
more assurance —

Then I'll bet you anything you'll be
disappointed in Miss Neville. I quite agree
with you, however. You would say, of
course, that girls are never fair judges of
each other's charms " — with another giggle.

There is no fear of jealousy, at any rate,
in this case," said Hugh, smiling; and Miss
Harvey fell in love with him on the spot,
and became most confidential.

*' It is said, of course, that she has a great
many admirers ; but then, you know, sailors
are so indiscriminate. They have no taste,
and always fall into the first snare that is
laid for them."

And you think we soldiers are more
particular ? "

How can you ask ? " — with a little smirk
above her fan. " However, you mustn't
think Dorothy Neville is ugly ; and she
sets herself up for being awfully clever,
too."

How very alarming ! "

Ah ! you don't like clever women ? For
my part, I think it's nonsense for girls trying
to educate themselves as if they were men,
and going in for Greek, and being doctors,
and all that. What do they want with such
stuff? I am quite sure men don't like them
any the better for it."

Perhaps that is not their object," said
Hugh ; and Miss Harvey shrugged her
shoulders incredulously, and remarked —

I should be sorry to be the old women
they practise upon."

What ! practise Greek on old 'women ? "

No, no ; medicine " — laughing as much as
she dared, for she was very tight-laced.

And Miss Neville prescribes for old
women ? "

Oh, I expect so. She is the goody-goody
sort, you know — goes about with tracts in
one hand, and poison in the other."

Dear me ! " cried Hugh ; "I hope she
won't try either experiment on me ! "

Depend upon it, she will," laughed Miss
Harvey. " Oh, bother ! there's papa moving,
and I must go. Come and see us, won't you ?
Tea and muffins. Come and tell me how you
get on with Miss Neville. Bye-bye."

*' What a caution ! " thought Hugh, as he
turned on his heel ; and then — " Dorothy
Neville and tracts ! That's the line, is it ? But
one can't believe anything that creature says.
A garrison hack, with a vengeance ! Beastly
place this Eastport."

A few days later he was dining at the

Club, and nearly the first person he saw
there was Charlie Drake.

Holloa, Moore 1 you here ? I had no idea
you had arrived. My people said they had
seen nothing of you."

I have only been here a short time,"
said Hugh, rather ashamed of himself, for
Drake had pressed him to call at Admiralty
House directly he arrived at Eastport.

If I had known it, I would have come
and looked you up. But you must come
and call on my aunt. She's a good-natured
old body," he added, irreverently ; " and I
want you to know my cousin Dorothy."

I have heard a great deal of her," said
Hugh.

"All the women are awfully jealous of
her good looks," said her cousin ; " but she
is not stuck-up a bit, as some of them would
be. She's an uncommonly good sort, though
I say it as shouldn't."

"So I should judge, from what Miss
Harvey told me the other day."

Whew ! 'taint often that that young
woman has a good word for any one, specially
one of her own sex."

One judges by contraries sometimes."

Oh ! ah ! " said Drake, laughing. " Well,
by this time Dorothy can stand a little of
Blanche Harvey's venomous tongue, and it
won't do her much harm. By the way,
have you heard lately from Corfu ? "

Hugh did not think the connection between
the two remarks very obvious. Had
any venomous tongues been wagging at his
expense in Corfu, he wondered ?

I heard the other day from Ward," he
answered, glancing sharply at Drake's face
as he spoke ; " he is going to stay the winter."

So he told me. It strikes me he has
found an attraction there."

Oh indeed ! " said Hugh, with rather

a forced laugh ; but lie could not Spring himself
to pronounce Clara's name.

"Ay," said Drake, as indifferently as he
could, but eyeing Hugh curiously to see
how he took the information; " he seems to
find Miss Wilson's society very charming, and
I should not greatly wonder if they were to
make a match of it before the winter is out."

I should hardly think so. Jack Ward
is not the fellow to do anything rash ; " and
Hugh was dimly conscious of two very conflicting
lines of thought rushing through
his mind as he spoke. If one was jealousy,
was the other relief?

Oh, as to that, one never knows, and the
people one is in the habit of crediting with
most wisdom do the queerest things."

"Well, he might do worse," said Hugh,
rather sharply ; so that Charlie began to feel
he was treading on dangerous ground, and
hastened to change the subject by saying

he was anxious to introduce Hugh to his
uncle, who was in the room. The Admiral
greeted Moore very kindly, said he had
heard of him from his nephew, and hoped
they should see him at Admiralty House.
We want some red coats among our blue,"
he said ; " the ladies complain that the dances
are very dull when there are none."

Hugh thanked him, and said he hoped
soon to pay his respects to Lady Katherine.

She knew your father, she tells me,"
said Sir Edward. " You have just come from
Ireland, I think ? "

Yes," said Hugh ; " I paid them a flying
visit before coming here."

How is the country going on ? "
They are quiet enough about us, lout my
father rather expects another storm is brewing.
The tenants hold back their rents in
hopes of another reduction, and the landis



a

lords are retrenching all round.

>>

Hem ! hard on them. I thank my stars
I am not an Irish Landlord."

"It is a grand country, though," said
Hugh, his patriotic blood rising at the
hinted inferiority of Ireland ; " and the
people are very decent if they are decently
governed."

I believe you are right there," cried the
Admiral. " I tell you what, — a representative
government is the curse of that country :
a good dictator is what you want."

They are not very easy to find, I am
afraid."

Oh, nonsense ! that is what all you young
men think," said the Admiral, with a smile ;
but take my word for it, there's plenty of
good stuff to be found, if you only know
where to look for it. Take your service,
take mine, — is there any difficulty in getting
men to command when they are wanted ?
When arc we worsted in the loiio-run?

The men never fail us — neither the men to
command nor the men to follow. But in
Ireland they are not given a chance — one
day in power, the next out of it ; and even
when they are in power, governed by wire
from Downing Street — monstrous system !
monstrous ! Upon my word, I think it's a
wonder the country gets on as well as it
does. However, in spite of all that, things
look better ; and I believe we have rounded
the corner, and are getting into calmer water
now. Does not your father think so ? "

I don't think he is very hopeful," said
Hugh.

Well, I daresay living in the midst of it
all makes it difficult to see the signs of improvement
which we at a distance notice,"
replied the Admiral, with a serene optimism
and persuasion of his own clear-sightedness
which amused Plough, though he afterwards
learned to look upon it as a happy characters

I. L

isti of Sir Edward, who was very opinionated,
but had nothing of the intolerance and bitterness
of bigotry in his composition.

This meeting with Drake, and the introduction
to his uncle, left Hugh without a
shadow of excuse for postponing any longer
his afternoon call at Admiralty House, and
a day or two afterwards he sallied forth to
perform this duty ; but as he was shutting
the hall-door behind him, a particularly dirty-looking
child suddenly accosted him, and
thrust a letter into his hand. Hugh was
considerably astonished ; and if it had been
a man who had pushed his unwashed hand
into his neatly gloved one, he would probably
have dropped the paper and passed on :
but he could not resist the pleading eyes of
a little child, even though he were ragged
and dirty. In the badly written and almost
unintelligible epistle he found himself entreated
to go and visit a poor man — a former

private in his regiment, and, moreover, an
Irishman — named Macartney, who, after leaving
the army, had got into trouble, and was
now in terrible difficulties, owing to illness
and debt.

Hugh followed the child into a gloomy
street, and up a rickety stair into a wretched
room, where he found the whole family in
the utmost misery. He did what he could
to help them at the time, promising future
assistance ; and perhaps his cheery words
did them more good than anything else.
He was always a favourite with the menin
the regiment, and it was Macartney's
remembrance of his kindness which had induced
him to send for Mr Moore in the hour
of his dire distress. Moreover, his brother's
illness made Hugh especially tender just then
to all sick men, and his presence seemed to
bring a gleam of sunshine into the gloom of
that little dark room.

Owing to this incident, it was already dusk
when at last he entered the dockyard, for
the days were now very short.

The policeman at the gate accosted him
with the usual formula — " Where are you
going, sir?" — and he answered, "To Admiralty
House," and passed on unmolested. Ashe
said the words, the contrast between his
present destination and the abode he had
lately visited struck him forcibly, and he
pondered on the inequalities of Fortune ashe
crossed the dockyard towards the house.
As he rang the bell, the blue jacket in waiting
in the hall instantly opened the door,
and across the softly carpeted hall he was
conducted to the drawing-room. There was
no time for moralising then ; for there were
voices within, and Lady Katherine advanced
to meet him. She was always ready to receive
Charlie's friends graciously, and Hugh
impressed her favourably at first sight. He

brought back old days, too, to her mind,
when she and his father had danced together
through the whole of one London season,
and then separated — as people so often are
separated in this world — perhaps never to
meet again.

Hugh was very like his father, or rather
like what Lord Glengarn had been ; and
so Lady Katherine told him when she
got to know him better. There was the
same lithe upright frame, slightly but
strongly built, the same fair hair and blue
eyes, the same straight nose ; but the mouth,
though similar, varied more in expression :
there was the same amiability, — would it be
deepened into seriousness, or be weakened
into self-indulgence ?

The drawing-room at Admiralty House
was singularly attractive, and Hugh never
forgot how it looked on that first afternoon.
It was barely dark yet ; and Lady Katherine,

who loved half-lights, had only allowed one
shaded lamp to be brought in and placed
on the tea-table, which stood on the further
side of the room, leaving the rest only illumined
by the firelight.

There was hardly a piece of furniture oran
ornament which had not its history, from
carpets and cabinets down to fans and bits
of china. Sir Edward had picked them up
in his voyages all over the world. He collected,
and his wife and daughter arranged.
But the room was not overcrowded : you
could walk about in comfort, without fear of
throwing down some precious little table at
every turn. And then there was another advantage
— all the things were genuine : there
was no oriental porcelain manufactured at
Worcester, nor China screens made at Birmingham,
nor Venetian carving from ardour
Street. Sir Edward was a collector,
and to some extent a connoisseur, before collecting

became the rage ; and he was apt
to wax wroth with the wealthy ignoramuses
who spoilt the market by buying what they
knew nothing about.

Two fox-terriers belonging to Charlie were
lying on the hearth, while their master regaled
them with morsels of tea-cake and
bread-and-butter. He had kept his word,
and was rapidly collecting a menagerie
around him.

But all this time Lady Katherine is pouring
out tea, and asking Hugh how he likes
Eastport. He was obliged to confess he did
not think it charming.

'swell, it isn't," she allowed. "Outside
the dockyard it is horrid ; inside, as an
Admiral's wife, I am bound to think it
tolerable."

This is much more than tolerable," said
Hugh, glancing round the cosy room, which
was not too large to be comfort talkie, and

yet large enough to contain a great many
people without crowding.

Yes ; it is a very good house, with plenty
of accommodation for such a small party as
we are."

Large enough even for a flag lieutenant,"
came from the figure stretched on the
hearthrug.

"And it must be large to take in such
an important person as you, Charlie, with
your extremely numerous family," said his
aunt, smiling. " You don't know what we
go through, Mr Moore, between dogs and
cats, birds, fishes, and reptiles. Our lives
are made a burden ; and I wonder we ever
get a servant to stop with us."

Holloa, Fan ! " cried Drake, jumping upas
the door opened. " Come in and support
your brother, who is being cruelly
slandered."

Frances entered the room in her riding-habit,

and through the open door they
caught a vision of another taller figure, also
in a riding-habit ; but it did not come
nearer, and Frances closed the door and shut
it out.

Here is Charlie's friend Mr Moore,
Frances," said her aunt, as Hugh placed a
low chair for her by the tea-table.

Were you attacking Charlie ? " she asked,
raising her sparkling eyes to his face.

Lady Katherine was attacking his menagerie,"
he replied.

Then I cannot help standing up for you,
Charlie, for I do love all your creatures.
Come here, Spot, and have a bit of cake."

*' You will make him ill," said Drake, resignedly
; " he's had as much as he can
swallow already."

Which means you are jealous of any one
feeding him ]put yourself. Never mind, old
fellow, I know yours is cupboard-love ; but

that lasts for ever, and is much more sensible
than the fancies people take for no reason
at all."

What makes you so late, Frances ? "
asked Lady Katherine ; " and where is
Dorothy ? "

The roads were so stony, we couldn't
trot, — they always are stony here," she replied;
" and as to Dolly, she said she didn't
want any tea, and went up-stairs. It is a
nasty raw evening, and I think it's going
to rain."

A contrast to Corfu ! " said Lady Katherine,
turning to her visitor with a smile.
How you must long to be back there ! "

Hugh was beginning to hate the sound of
Corfu, but he replied politely (wondering all
the time whether Drake had told on him)
that he had no wish to go back there just yet,
and he had almost forgotten to think about
it, and make comparisons as to weather, &c.

'^ I was in Ireland for a week or two, and, if
possible, it was worse there than here," he
said. And then she questioned him as to
his father, and he told her about his brother's
illness, and found her motherly sympathy so
pleasant, that half an hour was gone before
he knew it ; and when he rose to go, he had
been mentally inscribed in her good books,
and she gave him a warm invitation to come
to a small dance they were giving on the
folio win oj week.

"You will see Frances then," she said,
deprecatingly ; ' ' she isn't out yet, but I let
her come down to our little dances. When
we give a big ball, she must stop upstairs."


Cruelty ! " ejaculated Frances. "I do
love dancing ; don't you ? " to Hugh, with
another flash of her l)riglit dark eyes. And
he confessed lie did, which crowned the
favourable impression he had made.

"He is not one of your languid swells,"
observed Miss Frances, in her most decisive
tones, when the door had closed upon
him. " I like him, Aunt Katherine ; don't
you ? "

I told you he was a good sort," said
Charlie, " and yet you seem as much astonished
as if my opinion were not worth
having."

And you mean to say he is engaged to a
Greek girl — or a half Greek, which is worse ?
Impossible ! " cried his aunt ; " he ought not
to be allowed to throw himself away."

I never said he was engaged. Don't you
go and tell Miss Harvey that, or she'll blaze
it abroad all over Eastport in no time."

I have no intention of discussing Mr
Moore with Miss Harvey," said Lady Katherine,
in her most dignified manner, which
she was never able to maintain for more thana
few minutes together.

So Hugh had been to Admiralty House,
and had never seen Miss Neville after all !

He need not have fought so very shy of
it, then ; and he felt rather ridiculous as he
thought of his repugnance to such a simple
and agreeable call as he had just been
making. A pleasant old lady to talk to ; a
bright pretty girl to look at — a girl not out
of the schoolroom, and therefore not at all
alarming ; Charlie Drake to make things
doubly easy ; the vision of a riding-habit in
the distance, and the sounds of a few bars of
a German Volksliecl coming from some one
up-stairs, — and that was all. If he had heard
the words of the song, he might have thought
them an omen : —

Genii Menschen airs einandergehn,
Da sage sie auf wiedersehii —
Auf wiedersehn."

But " auf wiedersehn " to what ?

CHAPTEE VIII.

He was my friend, faithful and just to me."

It was said to be only a small dance at
Admiralty House, chiefly in order that
tender-hearted Lady Katherine should not
feel compelled to keep her pet niece up-stairs ;
but there were plenty of people, nevertheless
— quite enough to make the ball-room
look bright and lively — while there was
sufficient room for the dancers to enjoy
themselves thoroughly. The floor was
superb : had it not a character to maintain
of being the best in Eastport ? — thanks
to the perpetual scrubbing and skating of
the blue jackets ; and what band could rival

that of the Admiral ? It really was not a
matter of prejudice to say that none of the
ships' or regimental bands could compete
with it for a moment — in the matter of
dance music, at any rate. The bandmaster,
a German and a good musician, was
a great friend of Dorothea's, and she was
for ever discovering music, both old and
new, for his men to play ; and she took such
a keen interest in their performance, that it
was not surprising the result was above
mediocrity.

On this occasion most of the proverbial
Eastport belles were on view, and it might
be thought a poor compliment to Dorothea
to say she outshone them all. No doubt, ina
London ball-room she could have been
equalled and surpassed ; but here at East-port,
by common consent, she lore oft' the
palm. There was an air of distinction aljout
her tall graceful figure, and the glow of her

deeply tinted complexion was set off to
perfection by her soft white gown ; while
her bright hair, coiled coronet-fashion round
her shapely head, gave just the finishing
touch to the admirable pose of her neck and
shoulders. But if her height was in the
abstract a thing to be admired, it was often
a source of actual inconvenience to her, and
more especially on an occasion like the present.
Naval men are proverbially short ;
there is also a common idea — whether true
or false, I will not say — that they are not
wanting in assurance : it is certainly true
that they are punctilious with regard to the
respect due to their superior officers and
their superior officers' families. Imagine,
then, the feelings of Dorothy Neville, head
and shoulders taller than her cavalier, whirled
round and round a ball-room, the cynosure
of all admiring eyes ! When at length she
has ventured to suggest to her partner that

a pause might be an agreeable variety, she
catches sight of her cousin, and regards her
with envious glances : there was never the
slightest fear that Frances Drake would find
a partner shorter than herself; but then —
consoling thought ! — there might be many a
partner too tall !

But this night there was something Miss
Neville dreaded still more than a dance with
a very short man, and that was a dance with
a certain very rich man, — a big star that had
lately risen on the Eastport horizon — Sir
John Hawker by name. Nobody knew much
about his antecedents, or why he had been
knighted ; but his wealth was very palpable,
and was being freely spent for the benefit of
the Eastport people, with a reference — so it
was whispered — to the probability of a contested
election occurring very shortly. The
present member was about to retire on
account of ill-health ; and as parties were

VOL. I. M

pretty evenly balanced, Sir John would have
to fight a hard battle. Meanwhile he was
not bribing ; he was only spending his
money judiciously in aiding the local charities
and encouraging local tradesmen. He
had been some time in the place before
Dorothea met him ; but her good looks had
made a considerable impression upon him,
and at the last dance at which they had both
been present, he had been more marked in
his attentions than she at all approved. It
was not according to her ideas that he had
been asked this evening ; but by some means
or other he had evidently received an invitation,
and as soon as she saw him she went
hastily up to her cousin Drake, and said ina
low voice —

Charlie, I can't and won't dance with Sir
John Hawker to-night. I shall say I am engaged
to you if he asks me."

*' Oh, I say, Dorothea, that's rather hard.

I shall be awfully busy seeing after every one,
and I have lots of engagements already."

Oh, what shall I do ? I can't dance
with that man ! "

'what's the matter, Miss Neville? Can
I help you ? " It was Captain Newman who
caught the last words, and saw her despairing
expression. She told him directly, and
he said, " Won't you let me do instead of
Drake ? I am hardly dancing at all, and I
should be much honoured."

Will you really ? Oh, how kind of you ! "
and she gave him one of her fascinating
smiles, just as she was claimed for the next
dance and led off.

After all, the ball was well advanced before
she could give Captain Newman a dance
and then he said —

You look tired, Miss Neville ; would you
rather sit out, or dance ? "

I should like to sit down very much,"

she said, with the secret thought that dancing
was not one of Captain Newman's strongest
points ; so he led her out into the hall, where
there were delicious wide sofas, really ,
and where they could talk undisturbed.
But he asked no questions, — he
never did, which sometimes a little provoked
Dorothea, and tempted her to think he did
not take any interest in the little everyday
occurrences which were brought so incessantly
under his notice by the terms of
intimacy upon which he stood with them
all ; and then he would surprise her by saying
something; that showed that his observation
was keen enough, and his memory
retentive. On this occasion, however, she
did not wait for him to begin the conversation,
for she felt she owed him some explanation
of her somewhat unconventional
proceedings.

"You must have thought me very odd

just now, Captain Newman ; and I should
never have dreamed of asking; such a things
you, if you had not been so very kind as
to offer. I was cross with Charlie because
he would not help me. I do hope you do
not really mind ? "

I told you," he said, smiling, " that I
was only too happy to be of the least service
to you. I only hope you will always make
use of me whenever you can. My dancing
days are almost over, you know ; but when
you want a "

"Thank you so very much," said Dorothea
; then continuing, with a little hesitation
in her voice, " I really could not makeup
my mind to dance with Sir John Hawker
to-night. I do wish he had not come here,
there is something I cannot endure about
him."

I don't much like the look of him
myself."

This was pretty strong for Cai;)taiii New-man,
who never expressed his opinions concerning
other people ; and Dorothea went
on —

"No one really knows anything about
him, except that he is very rich and has
made his money in America. But I must
tell you what I did just now, when he
came up in his fawning way to ask for a
dance. I told him my card was quite full,
and introduced him promptly to ]\Iiss Harvey.
You should have seen his face as
I walked away ! But Miss Blanche was
delighted."

Her companion laughed and said, " He
will owe you a grudge for that snub."

I hope he will," she replied, " and keep out
of my way. What is it that makes one take
such violent dislikes to people, I wonder ? "

You don't often do it."

Not so often as Frances ; and perhaps

I take a little more pains to hide it when
I do. But do you think one can tell a
person's character at first sight ? "

"No, I don't, — at least I think one is
often mistaken. For instance," — and a scarcely
perceptible smile stole over his face, —
*' I was a good deal mistaken in you, when
I saw you for the first time."

Oh, were you ? " cried Dorothea, her eyes
sparkling with amusement ; "I should like
to hear what you thought of me. I often
wish I could know the impression one makes
on people ; it would teach one so many
lessons." She spoke quite seriously now,
with the peculiar simplicity which was her
natural characteristic, and which few people
quite understood.

Do you think you would learn them ?
Most people would turn up their noses and
say, ' How silly ! ' and go on the same way
as before."

Well, I will try and not say that, if you
will tell mc what you thought of me. See
I am treating you as a friend," said Dorothea,
instinctively opening her hands, which
had been clasped over her fan.

Perhaps you won't like it," he said at
length ; " but you bring it on yourself, since
you wish me to tell you. I thought you
were proud, and cold, and reserved, and I
had a dim idea that some day you would
permit me, perhaps, to touch the hem of
your garment."

Acting the Admiral's daughter, in fact ? "

A

she said.

"Very much that, — but only till you
spoke, not when you — when you opened
your lips ; " and Captain Newman's perfectly
controlled voice had a little unsteadiness in
it, which his companion did not notice.
To tell the truth, she was thinking of herself,
and not of him.

She answered, after a little pause, " I am
sorry I gave you that impression, though ;
because every one else must think the same,
and it is not true, really. I wonder if one
can help it? How I do envy people with
bright, cheery manners ! Frances, for example,
— all strangers get on with her directly.
She has a knack of putting every one in a
good humour. But to go back to reading
character at first sight — what would you
say of Sir John Hawker?"

I have not studied him much, but my
impression of his face is that of a clever, unscrupulous,
self-indulgent man. I have no
right to say so. I may be as much mistaken
in him as — as I was in you ; " and he
turned and met her eyes for a moment.

Here Charlie's voice broke in —

Holloa, Dorothea ! I have been hunting
for you everywhere. Mr Moore wants to
be introduced to you."

Dorothea bowed : the colour that dyed
her cheeks might have Ijcen deepened by
Captain Newman's words, or by the sudden
interruption of their conversation ; but at
any rate, Hugh thought Drake was an uncommonly
lucky man to have such a lovely
cousin.

By-and-by, however, when the time came
for their dance, he found her rather cold
and silent, and did not feel inspired to ask
for another ; whereas he had valse after valse
with Frances, who was as light as a feather,
and in a blissful state of enjoyment. More
than once, his thoughts travelled back to
that afternoon on board the Eoyal Britain,
and that curious interview with Clara, as
to the results of which he still felt quite
misty ; but the energetic Flag-Lieutenant did
his duty too well to allow Hugh much time
for reverie. He found his knee perfectly
recovered, and behaved with astonishing

propriety, dancing with all his Eastport
acquaintances, not omitting Miss Blanche
Harvey.

Hugh stayed, indeed, to the last, and
thanked Lady Katherine very heartily and
sincerely for a most pleasant evening.

Corfu, after all, was beginning to fade
into the dim distance. English girls were
very charming : there was nothing, for instance,
in Frances Drake to jar on his feelings,
in the way that Clara had done so
often in minute particulars ; for with all her
anxiety to please, and constant guard over
herself in Hugh's presence, the recollection
of various little touches of want of refinement
on her part remained unpleasantly
prominent in his mind — all the more so,
perhaps, because Clara herself had been so
unconscious of them.

It was the small hours of the morning
before Dorothea and Frances retired to rest ;

and whether the lessons next morning were
improved by the preceding dissipation, was
a very open question. Dorothea, too, was
tired, and realised with a groan that after
an early lunch she had her usual Friday
afternoon engagement — a " mothers' meeting
" to attend.

It was now some time since Mr Johnson,
the vicar of a miserably poor district just
outside the dockyard gates, had enlisted her
services in this way. He had been struck
by a certain listlessness and want of vigour
about her manner and way of speaking of life
in general, when he had first made her acquaintance,
and instinctively divined the
good it would do her to be brought in
contact with the suffering and misery outside
her door. Up to this time Dorotheass
life had been a very wandering one ; for the
Admiral and his family had never really
settled long enough in any place to take

much interest in, or feel their responsibilities
towards, their poorer neighbours. Moreover,
a man of Mr Johnson's type had never till
now crossed Dorothea's path ; and she was
experiencing, with all the vividness of a first
impression, what was practically meant by
personal influence. It was new to her to
have some one constantly at hand whose
standard was so much higher than that
generally met with in society, and who was
ready at all times to respond to any questionings
she might trouble him with, without
impressing her with the sensation that she
was being dictated to from a platform.

Hitherto her mind had been very much
formed on that of her father, who was
a man of bright and vigorous but somewhat
narrow intellect. Sir Edward was
intensely observant, but purely practical.
It is true he was fond of theories ; but
they were generally rather crude deductions

from his own experience than carefully
reasoned-out principles. He belonged essentially
to the past generation ; and the more
thoughtful side of Dorothea's nature, with
the doubts and reasonings and aspirations
which she could not avoid sharing with many
others of her own day, received from him no
support. Just when she most needed it, she
came in contact with Mr Johnson on the one
hand, and on the other with Captain Ne^v-
man, whose thoughtful and somewhat dreamy
nature seemed to supply the want she felt,
even in her friendship with the cultivated
but distinctly practically minded clergyman.
It was not Lady Katherine's way to trouble
her head about the extent of intercourse
allowable between her daughter and the
friends she chose to make for herself She
was far too easy-going to be at all disturbed
by trifles, and was so accustomed to the fact
of Dorothea's beauty claiming a certain

amount of homage from the sterner sex,
that she was not as vigihmt as many mothers
would have been in her position. It was also
tacitly acknowledged that Lady Katherine
had never been, and never could be, her
daughter's confidant. Dorothea's nature, so
much the stronger of the two, had always
stood alone and fought its own battles ;
while her mother was quite content with
the terms of perfect good - friendship on
which they found themselves — being all the
while a little in awe of her, and lavishing
her affections on the open-hearted Frances.
On this occasion there was nothing to fear
on the part of Mr Johnson : he was utterly
devoted to his work, and to his work alone.
Whether it was equally safe with the sailor,
w4io was generally regarded at Eastport as
the most uninq)ressionable of men, remains
to be seen.

On this particular Friday of which we have

been speaking, Mr Johnson came as usual to
close the mothers' meeting, and walked home
with Dorothea afterwards. They generally
found many subjects to discuss in connection
with the various parts of his parish from
which the mothers came.

Dorothea had been a good deal struck by
discovering, quite accidentally, from a woman
who had appeared for the first time that afternoon,
— a poor miserable-looking creature, —
that Mr Moore, the Generals new A.D.C., had
been visiting her, and was in the habit of giving
very substantial relief in the shape of shillings
and half-crowns. This was such a very
new idea to Dorothea, who had put down her
cousin Charlie's friend as a very ordinary ballroom
acquaintance, that she could not lielji
coming out with it to Mr Johnson, ending
her communication with the naive remark —

It is curious how much better people are
than one takes them for ! "

Q

Her companion smiled.

That is a pleasant lesson to learn, at any
rate," he said.

But it is a true one, isn't it ? though
it is newer to me than to you. I am always
feeling it with these poor women, whose
stories make one's heart ache ; and they seem
to count bearing pain just the most ordinary
thing in the world. And one knows how
one shrinks from pain one's self "

That's a dangerous sentiment, you know.
Miss Nevil."

Dangerous ? Why, one can't help it,"
she said ; " it is almost a physical feeling."

That may be ; but our minds act upon
our bodies, and we can control our minds.
Do you know, it makes me quite alarmed
sometimes to think of the softness of everyone
nowadays. I don't know what it is all
coming to. We could never stand the things
our ancestors thought nothing of."

VOL. I. N

Yet in some ways we are braver than
even the Greeks were," said Dorothea. "Do
you remember what Lessing says in ' Laocoon
' about expressing one's pain ? — how the
old Greeks were not ashamed to cry and
scream for pain ; whereas now, no one buta
child would think of doing so — at least in
any ordinary suffering. What do you think
makes the difference ? "

I suppose our ideas on that subject are
partly an inheritance from our barbarian
ancestors, and partly perhaps the result of
Christian teachings — the ' enduring; hardness '
of St Paul, for instance. How people forget
that, to be sure ! And with all their boasted
wisdom, they forget another saying — one I
am very fond of, a maxim of the wise man —
The very true beginning of wisdom is the
desire of discipline.' "

Dorothea was silent for a moment, and
then said, thoughtfully, " I suppose that was

what the old monks and nuns thought when
they scourged themselves."

Putting it off again on the past ? " he
said, smiling. " You think the scourging
were rather unprofitable ? I am not sure
but that they were better in their rather
ungoverned desire for discipline than weare
in our very ungoverned dislike of
it.

I should have thought, though," said
Dorothea, " that the love of discipline was
a long way on in the way of wisdom, and
not in the beginning of it."

I don't think so," said Mr Johnson.
Consider a moment what can be done without
discipline. Why, nothing worth speaking
of. It seems to me that is just the lesson the
world is teaching us in these days. We in
the Church have dropped discipline — I suppose
because we thought ourselves wiser linn
our forefathers ; but look round, and you see

directly how every success is dependent on
organisation, subordination, self-restraint —
call it what you will. Take a war between
two countries. It isn't the army where individuals
are bravest which wins the battle,
but that where the discipline is strongest.
Analyse discipline, and you find it is the
submission of individuals to superior will,
cost what it may. In an army we all know
what it costs — self-denials of all sorts, often
life itself. It is a truism to say our life is
a warfare. Why, then, do we shrink so from
the discipline ? "

I think it would be easier to bear it if
it were all laid down by rule, like a soldier's,"
she replied : " now we have to apply all that
to ourselves."

Yes ; and, as I told you, I think we
suffer grievously in consequence. But there
is another thing you mustn't forget. All
discipline, self - denial, trial, is a means,

not an end. Its object is not to make us
machines, but to perfect us as individuals —
to strain out the dross, and purify us, till weare
fit for the great Presence-chamber. The
same means are often not good for different
natures ; and after all, if we are weak and
timid in using the rod ourselves, God may
take it into His own hands and discipline us
Himself Only, we often bring troubles on
ourselves by refusing to use the lighter
means He puts within our reach."

"And do you think that using those means
is a help to bearing the heavier trouble if it
comes ? "

I am sure of it — just as constant exercise
in rowing hardens the hands, or exposure
bronzes the skin. A person who has never
learnt to deny himself, does not know how to
bear it if God denies him the desire of his
heart."

*' You think, then, that every one has

some great crushing trouble to Ijear in their
lives ? "

My clear Miss Neville, that can only Ije
left in higher hands. There is no use in
imagining evils, so long as one does not
shrink from the pain and trouble when they
do come. It always seems to me that no
life is worth living that is without pain —
perhaps a great deal of it." Mr Johnson
was looking straight before him, and spoke
as if he were touching; some hidden chord
in his own life. They were close to the
dockyard gates by this time, and he turned
with a smile to his companion, — " Here have
I been sermonising all the way. Now may
I come in ? I want to speak to Lady Katherine
about a poor woman she has been good
enough to befriend."

Dorothea led the way into the cosy .
It was a great contrast to the
misery she had been hearing about, and seeing

traces of, that afternoon — this comfortable
room, with its warm fire, easy-chairs,
and fragrant teapot. It struck Dorothea as
it had struck Hugh a few days before, and
hung like a weight at her heart. Why
should she step into all this luxury and
comfort with a sense of rightful possession,
while those others outside were in such want
and wretchedness ? She had not much opportunity,
however, for following her own
train of thought just at present. Mr Johnson
sat down by Lady Katherine, and entirely
engrossed her in conversation ; while
Dorothea found two or three young naval
officers had to be entertained, and provided
with small-talk — though there was not much
need to do more than suggest the latter, as,
when once started, they chattered away to
her, attacking each other, and laughing at
each other's discomfiture, with easy confidence,
and friendly reliance on her sympathy.

Presently the door opened, and Mr Moore
was announced. He joined the little circle
round Dorothea, where last night's ball was
the prevailing topic of conversation, and
fell naturally into his part with his usual
happy knack, making it appear as if he had
been as long in Eastport as the rest of them.
When the sailors took their leave, he stayed
on, with the excuse that he wanted to see
Drake. In reality he wanted to study Dorothea.
He seemed to admire her more this
afternoon, in her simple dark gown, and with
her hair a little disordered by the wind, —
she had thrown her hat aside when she found
she had guests who would keep her in the
drawing-room, — than he did last night in all
the brilliancy of the ball-room. Perhaps it
was because she had thawed a little : he had
taken her, as it were, at unawares, coming
into the circle of her old friends and joining
in their talk ; and she showed no signs of

drawing back into her shell, now that she
and Hugh were left tete-astute. Indeed she
reverted naturally to what had remained uppermost
in her thoughts, and began almost
at once.

I heard of you this afternoon, Mr Moore,
from an unexpected quarter — poor Mrs
Macartney ! She was full of your kindness,
and the help you had given them."

He was surprised and rather disconcerted,
and hastened to assure her that this sort of
thing was not much in his line ; but that
Macartney had been in his regiment, and
he could not refuse to help him when he
heard of his distress.

*your going to see them pleased them
more than anything," said Dorothea, with
a soft little smile playing round her mouth.
"It is wonderful how they enjoy pouring
out all their griefs into some one else's

ears !

!"

*' It gets rather monotonous," said Hugh,
laughing. " I believe they have told me
nearly the same thing in the same words
every time I have seen them."

Their life is monotonous, I suppose," she
answered. " When one comes to think of
it, it is quite extraordinary how very little
variety some people have in their lives. That
is what Mr Johnson " — orlaneing; across to the
other side of the room — "is always saying,
and that is why he is always doing his best
to give them variety by entertainments and
that sort of illinois

he the parson of the parish ? " asked
Hugh, following the direction of her eyes.

"Yes — at least of that district. He has
been working there ten years — real mission-work
most of the time, and the opposition
was frightful at first ; but he has lived it
down. He has just been appointed to an
Indian bishopric, and we shall lose him here

o

before long. I can't imagine how this place
will be filled. Of course you have not
been here long enough to have heard much
about him," added Dorothea, feeling that
she was speaking very enthusiastically of
one who was quite a stranger to her listener,
and that her warm partisanship might bethe
better for a little explanation ; " but
we, who have lived six months and more
alongside of him, know and feel that there
is a master-mind amongst us ! "

There was a glow on her cheek, which
Hugh noted, as well as the half-deprecating
smile on her lips.

Almost a pity he should go away, isn't
it ? " said he.

Well, I don't know ; he is very much
wanted there too, I suppose. They are crying
out for more people to come and teach
them."

It is very naughty of me, I know ; but

I have always an idea that the niggers get
on very well without us."

They aren't exactly niggers in India,"
said Dorothea, laughing a little. " And, you
see, there we are already. We haven't been
letting them alone in other ways ; and
besides, I am sure you don't really think,"
she added, rather anxiously, " that they are
not the better for being; Christians ? "

He did not like to see her look like that,
and hastened to assure her that he had only
been making a rather silly and very commonplace
remark, and then he said —

I knew a fellow at Eton — a clever chap
he was, too — and he went out to Africa or
somewhere, and died in no time ; and it
seemed like throwing himself away, you
know, to go to a place like that, where no
decent man can live — all to try and convert
a lot of wretched blacks, who would
never be any good ! "

*' Perhaps he was making the way for
others," said Dorothea, softly, " like the
men who scaled the ladders first. Oh !
don't you think it is fine for people to go
out like that with their lives in their
hand ? "

It makes one feel awful cowards at
home, at any rate," said Hugh. " It's a
fearful wrench for a fellow to go away and
leave all his people, and think that ten to
one he will never see them again."

Yes. They couldn't do it unless — unless
they cared very much for the ' wretched
blacks,' " said Dorothy, smiling a little. She
was opening out to Hugh in a way very
unlike her usual mode of intercourse with
comparative strangers. Quite unconsciously
she had appealed to the best side of Hugh's
nature, by enlisting his sympathy in a cause
that was higher than that of common philanthropy,
and he was not superior to the

fascination of being treated with such confidence
by a woman so far removed from the
ordinary type as Dorothea. Surely her confidence
was not misplaced.

And you are awfully good, Miss Neville,"
said Hugh, in that curious tone of assertion
which Irishmen use in asking questions, —
you are awfully good, and work for the
wicked whites instead ? "

She laughed. " I ? Oh, I do next to
nothing. Indeed part of this district is
too bad for me to go to, and I have not
much time either. I'll tell you who is one
of Mr Johnson's great helps — Captain New-man.
Have you met him ? "

No," said Hugh ; " who is he ? "

The Commander of the flag - ship : a
great friend of ours, if that is any recommendation,"
she added, smiling ; and when
Dorothea smiled like that, you felt it was
good to look at her.

I am sure he would be gratified if he
heard you," was Hugh's laughing rejoinder,
feeling a momentary pang of jealousy for the
unknown but highly favoured individual ;
but I must really be off if Drake is not

coming soon.

Hark ! there are voices. Yes, it is Fan
and Charlie," said Dorothea, as her cousins
made rather a noisy entrance. The appearance
of visitors checked their flow of conversation
for a moment, but then Frances
greeted Hugh with — " Oh, I'm so glad it's
you ; I thought it was somebody else."

We had just been talking of you, Charlie,
and wondering why you did not come," said
Dorothea. " There have been many calls on
my teapot, but you are too late to expect a
good brew."

"And to while away" the time, Miss Neville
has been telling me of some Eastport celebrities
— amongst them your great friend Captain

Newman," said Hugh, addressing Frances,
as he handed her some cake.

Of mine ? Oh dear, no ! Of Dolly's,
you mean. He is a pet of hers, but much
too good for me ; " and she tossed back her
rough hair defiantly.

Because you are a naughty child," said
Dorothea, *' and talk rubbish."

Drake and Moore prepared to go out together;
but Frances, who looked on Hugh
already as a great friend, insisted on making
Charlie show him his menagerie — part of
which was kept in her schoolroom, much to
the unhappy governess's distress ; but in
spite of many a protest, the creatures somehow
remained in undisturbed possession of
even the educational sanctuary.

Thus Hugh, almost before he knew it, was
established on terms of intimacy at Admiralty
House.

CHAPTER IX.

A dying glory smiles
O'er the far times, when many a subject land
Looked to the winged Lion's marble piles,
Where Venice sate in state, throned on her hundred isles.

She looks a sea Cybele, fresh from ocean,

Rising with her tiara of proud towers
At airy distance, with majestic motion,

A ruler of the waters and their powers."

Let lis carry our thoughts for a few minutes
back to Corfu.

The account which Clara had given of
herself in her letter to Hugh was more or
less true. She had felt quite broken-hearted
when he had left without seeing her again,
and only leaving behind him that short note
of farewell, which her father had given her,
saying shortly, " I promised Mr Moore to

VOL. L

give you this, on condition there should be
no further correspondence : you understand
my word cannot be trifled with." Clara
snatched at the note, carried it off to her
room, and cried over it for the best part of
one day.

After some days she wrote her answer, and
easily managed to have it conveyed secretly
to the post-office. But she was listless and
languid, and lost her appetite ; and Mr Wilson,
who watched her carefully, began to be
anxious about her health, for he was vaguely
impressed with the idea that he should lose
her some day, as he had lost his wife. Although
he was often abrupt and harsh in
his manner to her, Clara had no idea of the
depth of his affection. She preferred to
measure the extent of feeling by the amount
of petting and flattery she received, and
resented the want of this outward expression
on her father's part.

By degrees, however, this extreme depression
wore off; — it diminished steadily from
the time when Jack Ward's visits became
more frequent. At first she said to herself
how much it relieved her to be with
a friend of Hugh's, who was not at all
averse to talking about him, and whom
she could easily persuade to be the secret
channel of her correspondence ; but the long
silence, when her letters never received an
answer, and no sign was made whatever by
her absent lover, began to disturb, and
finally to irritate, her sorely. In the first
letter she had written, she had purposely
spoken of " seeing Mr Ward very often,"
in order to excite Hugh's jealousy. If, at
the time she wrote, her expression had been
slightly exaggerated, in a few weeks' time
the facts of the case more than confirmed
her words, and before long she was seeing
Mr Ward more frequently and more familiarly

than had ever been the case with
Hugh.

The Eoyal Britain did not remain very long
at Corfu ; but before he left, Charlie Drake
made many shrewd guesses as to the state
of affairs, and resolved to give his friend a
hint thereof when they met at Eastport.
We have seen how Hush received Drake's
well-intentioned remark, and how impossible
it seemed then to venture on anything more
explicit.

Meanwhile, Ward had never forgotten
Hugh's words : " Oh, I'm out of the running.
Why don't you cut in yourself ? "
They were in reality an outburst of disappointment,
hardly intended to have been
taken seriously, and Moore himself had all
but forgotten having uttered them ; but
nevertheless, they had stuck in Ward's
memory.

He began to look on Clara with more

interest — first because of his friend's infatuation,
and then on his own account.
It was wonderful how all the objections he
had made to the idea of Moore's enojao-ement
vanished when the case was applied to himself
: but then he was entirely his own master,
and could do as he pleased ; whereas Hugh
was tied by the leg.

However, it must not be supposed that
this revolution in Mr Jack Ward's sentiments
was accomplished without any effort
on Clara's part. She wanted some excitement,
and with her excitement generally
took the form of flirtation. One miorht

o

have thought that her last attempt at exercising
her powers of fascination had taught
her a lesson or two, and would have gone far
to deter her from making a fresh experiment ;
but, by long practice, this style of intercourse
had become so much part of her nature, that
she could hardly have refrained from " carrying

on " with some one, even had she wished
to do so.

After all, she found it was much easier
work to fascinate Jack Ward than it had
]been to capture Hugh Moore. Jack was
made of coarser fibre ; and her attentions
could be a little more obvious, and her
flattery less delicate, without fear of exciting
disgust on the part of her victim. The old
Consul, on his part, was ready to be unusually
indulgent to her after his outbreak
of severity : he could not bear to see how
she shrank from him ; and not having the
slightest idea of how much Clara had disobeyed
his orders, he hailed with delight any

»

token of recovered health and spirits.

Poor Clara ! She was not really happy.
This new triumph did not make up for the
last defeat. What does it matter to a mv\
if she has a hundred men at her feet, so longs
the one man she wants keeps at a distance ?

Sometimes, after an afternoon or evening
spent in Ward's society, she would fling herself
on her bed and cry passionately — '' Oh,
Mr Moore, Mr Moore, come back ! I hate
you for going. I hate you for not 'writing.
I hate everybody. I wish I could die.
Come back, come back ! "

Meanwhile there had been a week or two
of stormy unsettled weather, after which it
cleared ao^ain ; and Ward beo^an to take the
Consul and his daughter, together with a
few other friends, for little cruises round the
islands, or to different points on the Albanian
coast.

It was surely the perfection of enjoyment,
even to nervous land lubbers, on sunny
autumn days such as those were, to skim
along the calm sea 1)eforc a light lout favouring
breeze ; to drop anchor in some sheltered
bay, and hear the musical lap, lap of the
water against the side of the vessel ; to

watch the sun sink in crimson splendour,
and the moon rise in rival loveliness, the
water reflecting both ; to hang over the bulwarks
and gaze into the clear depths of the
sea, and tell thrilling stories of sharks seen
half a century ago ; and alas ! was not the
pleasure of Clara all the greater because Ward
was there to do her bidding, — to fetch her
cloak and wrap her round (albeit not so tenderly
and gracefully as Hugh would have
done) in some cosy corner, protected from
the wind ; while he left his other guests to
look after themselves, and devoted himself
to humour her slightest whim and forestall
her faintest wish, even to the extent of
taxing his skipper's patience to its utmost
limit by the contradictory orders he gave
him ?

In short. Jack was far more infatuated
than Hugh had ever been, and was entirely
under Clara s power ; and the fickle little

thing, when her victory was complete, began
to tire of her capture — weary of him, that is,
by fits and starts, for sometimes she would
enrapture him by her gentleness, and then
drive him to despair the day after by her
coldness and indifference. It was on these
latter occasions that she would be dreaming
of those golden days when she thought
Hugh loved her, while there was still excitement
in the uncertainty, and before her
hopes had ripened to a momentary fruition,
only to be so ruthlessly blasted in
the end.

One day in December, — such a day as we
seldom have in July — calm, cloudless, with
a blazing sun and unruffled sea, — the little
yacht lay becalmed a short distance from
Corfu. Ward had only Clara and her whither
on board on this occasion, and they had not
been out long before the light breeze died
down, and they could do nothing but watch

the sails flajj aimlessly, as the ship lay motionless
on the oily sea, only drifting with
the current in the opposite direction to that
in which they had intended to go.

The old Consul was, at any rate, perfectly
happy, for he had an unlimited supply of
cigarettes. Ward would have been equally
content, had Clara only been in one of her
gay coquettish moods : instead of this, however,
she was silent and rather grave, and
Jack thought with despair how bored she
must be with the monotony of the proceedings.
He did his best to amuse her, brought
up books from his cabin, apologising for the
misdemeanour of the winds and waves ; but
he could not win even a sparkle from Clara's
half-closed eyes, and she rejected his books
snappishly enough, declaring she knew them
all before. Poor Jack ! he was at his wits'
end, and sat sadly on a coil of ropes at her
feet, racking his brains to think what he could

find to enliven the dreary waiting-time. All
of a sudden Clara brightened up, and asked
him —

How long; would it take to sail from
Corfu to Trieste ? "

It depends on the weather. A few days
ought to do it with a fair wind," he answered,
vaguely wondering what was her attraction
to Trieste.

Is that the way you are going home ? "

I have hardly begun to think about going
home yet, I am so happy here. Are you
getting tired of me, Miss Wilson ? "

"Oh, don't tease ! " said Clara, pettishly ;
but tell me, how would you go home if not
that way ? "

I might go round by the Bay," he answered,
in a crestfallen tone, " or land somewhere
in Italy, and take the train."

'' But you would naturally go to Trieste ? "
she persisted.

Well — yes, perhaps." He was puzzled
by her questioning, till a sudden thought
struck him, and he exclaimed — "Do you
wish to see Trieste ? Would you like to
go there in my yacht ? Could I take you
there ? I need not tell you, need I, that
you have only to speak the word, and I
would take you to the world's end ? "

Clara was so much accustomed to these
protests that she took them very calmly,
and after thanking him with perhaps a
little more warmth than usual, she bent
forward and said, in rather a low voice and
very earnestly, "It is not Trieste I want
to see, but England. Don't you know, I
have never been there ? and," with a glance
at her father, " I want papa to have a rest.
I am sure he needs it ; look how tired he
seems ! "

Jack Ward was completely taken by surprise,
for Clara had never before even hinted

at this wish, and now it came out as a long-thought
- of plan, and connected with her
anxiety for her father's health. He looked
up as he was told, and observed the Consul,
who was leaning against the mast, smoking
of course, with his arms folded, and his eyes
gazing dreamily into vacancy — the picture
of lazy contentment, one would have said ;
but his daughter apparently thought otherwise.
Ward tried to imagine that perhaps
he might look a little leaner and browner
than usual, possibly the wrinkles in his
forehead and round his mouth might have
become a little more marked lately — at
animate, he would say so, to satisfy Clara.

Well." said the young lady, still in an
eager, semi - confidential whisper, " if you
really do want to do anything to please
me

You know I would do anything," he interrupted.


'' Persuade papa, then, to come to England
for a change. I know it would do him
good."

I will try," said Ward, solemnly.

He will attend to you, perhaps," she
said, " when he does not care for what I
say ; and he has been for so long without
any holiday, that I am sure he wants one.
And besides," she added, too transparent,
after all, not to let her real motive appear
through it all, "it is too ridiculous to think
of my being English and never having been
to England."

"It is much nicer out here," answered poor
Jack dolefully, his heart sinking at the prospect
of a speedy conclusion to such a dream
of delight as the past few weeks, in spite of
every drawback, had seemed to him.

It was not such an easy matter, after all,
to persuade Mr Wilson that his health required
a change end holiday.

Health ! Nonsense ! I beg your pardon ;
you are very good," he corrected himself, as
AVard began rather timidly to broach the
subject — " I never was better in my life."

Your daughter seems anxious about you,"
said Jack, humbly. " Don't you think she —
you — perhaps the anxiety might prey upon
her, and a few weeks' rest "

Bless me ! anxiety for me prey upon
Clara ? How she does take every one in, to
be sure ! Don't you trouble yourself on that
account, Mr Ward. It is quite possible she
wants a change — I mean, that she would like
one. But I have not the smallest intention
of going away. I don't see any reason why
I should."

So Ward was silenced for the time ; and
though he renewed the attack once or twice
at Clara's bidding, it was the dutiful daughter
herself who was in the end chiefly instrumental
in causing the Consul to change this

((

224 HUGH MOORE.

mind. For that he did change his mind,
hardly needs to be said. Clara's persistency
almost always conquered in the long-run, and
in this case she worked upon him to such an
extent, that he really began to think himself
ill. " Papa, dear, you look so tired ; " or,
Papa, rest — you are looking so poorly ; " or.
Every one says you are ageing so fast : " and
similar phrases, repeated constantly, produced
an effect at last, — and surely there are not
many fathers who would have stood proof
against such tender solicitude. Clara's system
was much like that described by the
wise man as a "continual dropping," and in
process of time she received her reward.

Christmas passed. " As the day lengthens
the cold strengthens," even in Corfu, and
January was a stormy, chilly month ; but
with February came the first signs of spring,
and at last, one soft hazy morning, Clara
triumphantly locked her last box, and watched

it being: transferred to the deck of Ward's
little yacht.

It was not without some emotion that she
left Corfu, for she had a sort of presentiment
that she would not return there, although
her father made light of all the farewells,
and said they would be back in a few
weeks. He was not without a half suspicion
that he had been entrapped into taking this
holiday against his will ; and he would also
have much preferred, if he went to England
at all, to go by the ordinary service to Brindisi
or Trieste. But Miss Clara had set her
heart on sailing in Mr Ward's yacht : she
liked to feel she had an obedient slave, and
she was rapidly becoming more reconciled to
the idea of putting up with him, if she could
not have Mr Moore ; but before giving in, she
must put her fate to the touch, and discover
whether, by meeting Hugh once more in
England, she could regain her influence over

VOL. I. P

him. She knew quite well that in the end
she could manage to direct her father's steps
wherever she chose ; and with Corfu behind
her, she felt her secret task at least on a fairway
to being accomplished.

But the voyage was not so pleasant as she
had anticipated. The fair wind lasted for a
day and a night, and then shifted, and they
lost much time in tacking ; and then the sea
became rough, and the sky hard and grey :
the little yacht was tossed about from the
crest of one liuo;e wave to another like a
shuttlecock ; and, sad to say, the Consul and
his fair daughter were miserably sea-sick !
A small sailing-yacht is not the pleasantness
place in the world for a lady in rough
weather, even if she be a good sailor; and
the result of that week's battling with the
elements was to produce a very white and
scared-looking little creature, when the news
that Trieste wits in sii^ht enticed Clara to

mount the ladder and creep on deck. How
Ward welcomed her ! But lie was too weak
and hungry to pay much attention to him,
either in the way of encouragement or the
reverse. Jack himself had been in his element
all the while, enjoying a good breeze
to his heart's content, and seeing how near
the wind he could sail. Of course he was
sorry for Clara, but he did not the least
realise her sufferings, — no good sailor ever
knows the true meaning of that ghastly word
sea-sickness. The fresh north wind seemed
to blow away the fogs that had gathered over
his brain in the enervating climate of Corfu ;
but it did not blow away Clara's fascinations !
It was not without a pang that he left
his smart little craft lying at anchor in the
Trieste Roads, with orders to come round
the Bay at once and report herself at East-port,
while he himself accompanied Mr Wilson
and his daughter across the Continent.

At Venice, however, he began to wish he
had never come, for he was roused to furious
jealousy by the same Italian artist whom
Hugh had met on board the Austrian Lloyd.
This young fellow had made acquaintance
with Clara the previous summer and autumn
while sketching in Corfu, and, chancing to
meet her and her father with Ward on the
bridge close to the ducal palace, he at once
offered to act as their guide, and conducted
them about, first to one sio-ht and then to
another, during the whole of their sojourn
in Venice.

Giovanni Lega knew every hole and
corner in the beautiful old city, and they
could therefore have had no better cicerone ;
but what provoked Ward to distraction was,
that his ignorance of Italian practically' shut
him entirely out of the conversation, or at
least compelled him to fall back on the Consul
— which was perhaps worse, as it left

Giovanni and Clara to a perpetual tete-astute.
He watched how the young Italian's eyes
would flash, and Clara's face glow with that
rich beautiful colour that no word of his
appeared able to produce ; and his resentment
grew all the more bitter, as he never
had an idea of what they were talking about.
Such a position is, at the best of times, a
somewhat aggravating one ; how much more
so when the third person is a lover whose
patience and forbearance have already been
considerably tested ! Occasionally, indeed,
young Lega, with the innate politeness of
his nation, turned to Ward and tried to
translate into broken English something he
had been saying to Clara — and she would
laugh, and perhaps help him out, or more
often refuse to do so, in order to enjoy the
fun of hearing his blunders ; but to poor
Jack it seemed as if they lead formed a conspiracy
to annoy him. He tried to break

loose once or twice, but a kind word or even
a look from Clara instantly brought him back
to his allegiance.

Neither the Consul nor his daughter knew
or cared much about art ; lout the calm, lazy
existence, floating up and down the canals
in gondolas, charmed them both. Mr Wilson
smoked, Clara talked — what more did
either of them want ? Indeed, once there,
the only difficulty was to induce them to
leave ; and never in his life had Jack
Ward felt more like a prisoner than he
did on those soft spring days in the marble
halls and splendid churches, or on the
shining watery ways of the Queen of the
Adriatic.

Worse than all, Giovanni persuaded Clara
to sit for her portrait, and from these sittings
Ward was excluded. Mr Wilson was present.
He did not interfere with the two young
people ; but nobody must speak to the sitter

except the artist, and Jack never knew what
went on there.

At last, however, matters came to a crisis.
The quartette were assembled one evening
in Mr Wilson's apartment, which overlooked
the Grand Canal. The lights were
twinkling below them in a long vista, reflected
tremulously in the water ; on one
side the sunset, crimson and purple, — such
colours as Venice only can boast, — was
fading away in the west, and a crescent
moon was rising just high enough to touch
the dome of Santa Maria della Salute with
silver light ; there was a constant soft
ripple, musical and soothing as a lullaby,
as the boats passed to or from the lagoon.

Clara and Giovanni were leaning over the
balcony watching the scene, and talking ina
low voice — so low that Jack, who was
walking restlessly up and down and straining
every nerve, could not catch a word.

Once he thought Giovanni was saying something
about ''Amove,'' and even Ward knew
what that meant ; but at that moment a
large gondola passed, lighted with coloured
lamps, and some men in it wx^re singing
"Santa Lucia" at the top of their voices.
The chorus over, a tenor sang the next
verse ; and when the gondola was quite
out of sight, the chorus came faintly back —
Santa Lucia ! Santa Luci-i-a ! " and then a
silence.

Ward began to listen again to the low
murmur of voices close by, which had not
been for a moment interrupted.

Che vita ! what a life this is ! " said
Lega.

Ah ! " sighed Clara ; " and to think it
must so soon be over. I have never been
so happy before."

Why should it end ? " he said, passionately.
" Why do you talk of going to

England ? You are only English in name,
and only half that. Clara ! Chiara ! — your
name is prettiest in Italian, and Chiara
rhymes with — can you guess what ? Mia
Chiara, mia carats'

She was looking prettier then than Jack
had ever seen her, — prettier because less self-conscious
and self-absorbed. Perhaps Giovanni
might have stirred those deeper chords
in her heart which Hugh's fingers had first
made to vibrate, though he had never
brought out the full music. Who knows ?
They were both children of the South, these
two — and Ward felt himself singularly heavy
and phlegmatic beside the slight Italian
youth, with his dark Hashing eyes and soft
Southern tongue.

Clara's answer to Giovanni's passionate
words was drowned in the sound of a snatch
of song, carolled out by a German student
down below, who, looking up at the two

figures in the balcony, laughingly turned to
his companion, and began Schumann's Gondola
Song : —

Auf ziira Alone scenting ici mich, doch dii lialtst unten
Yacht.
vvollten lialb so eifrig noir dem Simnel wir uns weili'n,
Als schooner Weber Diensten trau'n, wir konnten Engel

sein."

Ward did not understand the words, but
he saw the gesture and heard the laugh, and
turning abruptly on his heel, he confronted
the Consul, who was inside the room snoozing
over his paper, and abruptly addressed
him with, " Sir, do you wish your daughter
to marry this Italian fellow ? " The Consul
started up, walked to the window, and
watched the two in the balcony for a minute
; then he said, " Don't disturb yourself.
I was always having scares that Clara was
going to marry this person or that, but it
has never come off yet."

Don't disturb yourself ! " repeated Jack,

bitterly ; " it is easy for you to say that, but
I consider that I have some right to bethought
of in this matter. Am I to stand still
to be made a fool of? Your daughter can't
pretend she doesn't know I care for her.
What have I been doing all the winter?
But there ! you know it as well as I do, and
so does she."

Bless you, that she does I " ejaculated
Mr Wilson.

And yet you expect me to take it calmly,"
continued Ward, his face very white,
and with a look in his sleepy grey eyes that
could not be mistaken, " and say nothing,
while this Italian boy, whom she hardly
knows, and who has done nothing on earth
for her, makes love to her in the most barefaced
manner ; and she talks to him by the
hour in a lane:ua2:e she knows I can't understand,
and won't so much as look at me."
lie was pacing up and down the room

fiercely as he spoke. Outside the night had
come down over the city, and the soft summer
lightning was playing in two or three
different parts of the sky at the same time.
T tell you I can't stand it," Ward went on,
and if you don't choose to leave this place
tomorrow, / shall, and wash my hands of
the whole concern. Perhaps you think I

have no feelings, but "

Mr Wilson broke in soothingly — " Indeed,
Mr Ward, I am the last person who could
think such a thing as that. I am more annoyed
than I can tell you at my daughter's
behaviour, and that — that you should look
upon it in so serious a light. I have had a
great deal of trouble, one way and another,
with Clara, and I thought I would try what
leaving her alone, and not interfering, would
do. I see it doesn't answer, and I will do
whatever you wish in this matter. I quite
acknowledge she is treating you shamefully ;

but, ten to one, she only does it to amuse
herself and tease you. I'll order her to marry
you tomorrow, if you wish it."

No, no ; not quite so summary as that !"
said Ward, diverted, in spite of his annoyance,
at the Consul's confession of incapacity
in the management of Clara. " Take her away
from here — that is all I want — before further
harm is done."

I promise you we will leave tomorrow,"
replied Wilson ; and he was true to his word.
When Giovanni Lega called the next day at
the hotel, he was told that the 23arty had
gone away, leaving no address.

Clara had been too much taken by surprise
to offer any resistance ; but she vented
a good deal of ill-temper on both her companions
during the next few days.

A paragraph in the paper which they found
at Paris turned her thoughts once more in a
different direction.

CHAPTER X.

Why, what's the matter, that you have sadi a February face, so
full of frost, of storm, and cloudiness ? "

The winter, which Clara had passed in the
manner we have been describing, had been a
very severe one at Eastport — an " unusual
winter," one would say, if it were not that
every sort of weather in turn is called " unusual."
At Eastport, frost and fog formed
the staple of conversation for many weeks.
The former brought much enjoyment to the
young people, who disported themselves daily
on the ice ; the latter caused much inconvenience
to every one, for the packets could
not run, and the mails were interrupted.

Charlie and Frances Drake were grand

skaters. Frances blessed the frost for coming
in the Christmas holidays, and she would
have been out every day, and all day long, if
she had had her way ; but Lady Katherine
was very particular as to chaperons : she
could not stand the cold herself, and even
Charlie's light duties prevented him sometimes
from escorting his sister.

There was famous skating on the moats
round the forts, and society became very like
a continual carnival on the ice. All Eastport
was there — from the Admiral and the General
down to the smart young ladies and gentlemen
who stood behind the counters in the
High Street shops. The company, however,
sorted themselves as they do at a public ball,
and the different " sets " kept very much
apart, eyeing each other critically, lout never
infringing that mysterious line which English
people know how to draw so accurately.

Skating was not Dorothea's strong point,

and she did not possess those buoyant spirits
which cold weather serves to exhilarate ; but
the others used to entice her to join them,
and she found it difficult to resist their entreaties
— so that it generally happened, whenever
she made her appearance on the edge
of the moat, that a whole flock of devoted
squires were ready to take her in tow, and
give her any assistance she might require.
But there was no one who inspired her with
such confidence as Hugh : he seemed to
know by instinct what pace she liked to
go, and when she was beginning to get
tired ; and occasionally he would put her
into a sledge-chair, and take her off for a
long run, far beyond all the busy crowd of
skaters, where the ice was in unbroken blackness,
or only marked here and there by a
solitary trail of skates. Who docs not know
the delicious sensation — the keen air whistling
against one's face while one is being

propelled forward with swift invisible force,
only desiring that the end should never
come ?

Those were grand times for flirtations. It
was said in Eastport that more engagements
were announced that winter than had been
heard of for years before. The fresh open
air seemed more propitious, more encouraging,
to timid lovers and startled young ladies,
than the heated atmosphere of a ball-room ;
and certainly the despairing chaperon might
watch her charge disappearing hand in hand
with the man whom she had been carefully
snubbing for months past, and yet would be
unable to stir hand or foot (the latter most
literally) to prevent the catastrophe she foresaw
and dreaded.

But Miss Harvey's name did not appear
among the couples who had been made happy
on the ice. Some said she was too free with
her tongue, and frightened the men away ;

VOL. I. Q

others declared she was flying at too high
game, but that it was very ridiculous, for
every one could see how infatuated Sir John
Hawker was with Dorothea Neville, — and he
was so rich, and might very well be my lord
some day, — and you could not expect him
to look at a girl like Blanche Harvey, without
beauty, title, or money.

As for Dorothea, she felt something very
like contempt for young ladies who laid themselves
out to attract admiration, dressing and
talking with the object of being noticed and
praised by men — girls, in short, of Miss Harvey's
stamp. Oh ! if women would only
realise that it is they who keep up the standard
of manners and morals, and that if, ina
general way, they only follow the men's
leading, they are but too apt to lower that
standard, and debase the tone of society.

Sir John Hawker never skated, but he
used to come and look on, and sometimes

even perambulate along the ice (much to the
embarrassment of the skaters), with an eyeglass
in his eye, carefully supporting himself
on his gold-headed cane, in a wonderful sealskin
coat, which he said he had brought from
Canada.

One day, almost the last of the frost as it
proved to be, Dorothy was not on the ice.
It was a Friday, and she had been as usual
to her mothers' meeting, and returned just
at dusk to find the skating-party congregating
in the drawing-room at Admiralty House,
eager for a warm fire and tea. Charlie and
Frances had brought Huo;h back with them,
as they often did, and for a wonder Sir
Edward had walked to the fort, and they
had come home all together. Frances was
in high spirits.

We had such fun, Dolly," she said ; '' Mr
Moore and I had a race, and I should have
beaten — shouldn't I, Charlie ? — only, just

when I was close to the winning-post I caught
sight of "

*' A sealskin coat ? " suggested her cousin.

"Just so — and I was so startled, I
shrieked."

You just about did yell," said her brother
; " they must have heard you all over the
fort. I wonder they didn't imagine that the
French or the Russians, or some one else, had
taken possession of the harbour, and promptly
opened fire."

I thought for one moment I should have
to carry you fainting over the ice," said
Hugh, laughing.

I should like to have seen you ! " cried
Charlie. "Fancy Moore balancing himself
on his skates, and supporting Fan's fainting
form ! He wouldn't have found her such a
light weight, would he, Aunt Katherine ? "

I cannot imagine what there was to be
frightened at," replied her ladyship, rather

sharply; " it seems to me all a ridiculous fuss
about nothing."

It's not about nothing where Sir John
Hawker is concerned," retorted Frances,
nothing daunted. " I would go to the other
end of the world to avoid him, and so would
Dorothea."

I hope Dorothy isn't so silly," said Sir
Edward, in his gravest and most decided
tones. " To hear all you young people talking,
one would think the poor man was guilty
of some awful crime. Now, for my part, I
like justice, and in common fairness you
ought to give a man a trial, and not condemn
him offhand."

It was great fun, though, this afternoon ;
wasn't it, Mr Moore ? To see his face peering
round the corner of the fort at us, and
then to see his hand coming up to his list in
preparation for that elaborate bow, and then
to turn sharp round as if one hadn't seen

him, and know all that was for nothing. Oh,
it was lovely ! I know what it would have
been : ' How d'you do, Miss Drake ? ' (well
through his nose) ; and, ' I see your cousin is
not here to-day; I hope she is well ? What a
fine afternoon,' &c. &;c. It is always the
same."

Frances, you talk too much," interposed
the Admiral. "You forget you are the
youngest person present. I think you had
better be silent a little more, or go up to the
schoolroom."

Frances blushed violently, as she always
did at her uncle's rebukes, and said nothing ;
and Dorothy, taking pity on her, said —

Well, father, it is perfectly true we know
nothing against Sir John Hawker, but, on
the other hand, we know nothing in his
favour."

I don't agree with you, my dear. He is
on the right side of politics, and I hear, by

the by, that his chances are excellent at the
next election ; and he is a most charitable
man, and is making very good use of his
money."

And the two facts have nothing to do
with one another," said Charlie, in a whisper
aside to Hugh.

Just at this moment the door opened, and
Sir John Hawker was announced ! There
was dead silence for a minute — they all felt
so guilty, and had not self-possession to start
a new topic as if it were a continuation of
the old one. Under these circumstances, an
entrance into a room full of people is always
a formidable thing. You hear the pleasant
hum of voices ; then the door opens, the
voices cease — every one is listening for your
name. If the voices begin again at once, it
is a good sign ; if not, they have either been
talking of you, or you are at least interrupting
a conversation you arc not meant to hear.

Sir John Hawker did not come through
the ordeal very well. He was a man who
might have been any age between thirty and
forty-five — dark, with a sallow complexion,
moustache and imperial, and rather small
restless eyes, which were apt to look round
the corner at you rather than straight in the
face. He was not tall, but strongly built,
and dressed with elaborate care, which sometimes,
however, failed in producing the desired
effect. His whole appearance and style
suggested too much effort, too little ease.
He was so careful to be polite, that one felt
he must have been taking lessons in manners
quite lately, and did not yet feel perfectly
comfortable in the society of ladies.

Hugh watched Dorothy greet him, and
felt she certainly wasted no cordiality on
him. That very chilling dignity, that very
calm and passive hand held out for him to
touch, and then promptly withdrawn, would,

he felt, soon have extinguished him ; but Sir
John only became more elaborate in his bows.
Dorothea sank down on an ottoman near the
fire, and made a half motion to Hugh to sit
beside her ; so he brought her her cup of tea,
and taking his own, made himself comfortable
by her side.

Have you heard from Cannes to-day ? "
she asked.

Yes," he said, — " good news, I am thankful
to say. My brother seems to be ever so
much better and stronger, and my father is
quite cheered about him."

I am so glad," said Dorothea, with very
genuine sympathy ; " and now so much of
the winter is past, we may get over the rest
more easily."

*' Yes ; it is a grand thing for him to
escape the frosts : not that we often get much
frost at Glengarn, but this year I think even
there it would have been pretty cold."

Is it nice country about your part ? "
asked Dorothea.

"Well, it's not exactly what would be
called pretty country — not much wood nor
much variety, but wide stretches of moor
and heath, and bits of marsh, — splendid riding,
if your horse knows his way."

But rather dreary ? "

I daresay you wo aid think it dreary, —
most English people do. I was brought up
in it, you see ; and when one thinks of the
place, one can't help thinking at the same
time of all the fun one has had there —
splendid gallops on ponies of different sizes,
from one as high as a big Newfoundland,
which I remember having as a small boy,
right up to a regular hunter : how proud I
was, to be sure, the first time I got on his
back ! " He laughed, and so did she ; and he
went on — " How funny it is to think of all
one's little bits of ambition ! they seem so

awfully grand in the distance when one looks
forward to them, and so awfully small to
look back on ! "

Yes, a boy (and a girl too) is always so
anxious to grow up, and when they are
grown up they regret their childhood."

I don't quite believe, do you know, iu
that great happiness of childhood. I don't
honestly think I was happier as a child than
I am now, taking things all round. One
had less bothers, of course, but less freedom,
and I think, on the whole, less enjoyment."


It depends on so many different things,"
said Dorothea. " Of course some children
are so badly treated. Injustice makes children
miserable. They have such a keen
sense of fairness."

Yes, that's true. And now I come to
think of it, I believe you have hit the right
nail on the head ; and it was just a sense of

unfairness which used to make me unhappy
as a child."

At school ? "

No ; at home. At school I got on well
enough. But at home Ion was always the
favourite. I believe I was an awful duffer,
always in mischief; and he was so much
better-behaved, that it was no wonder my
mother liked him the best. I came between
the two, you see — Ion the eldest, and Nora
the youngest, and the only girl besides ; soit
was always — * Hugh, give way to your
eldest brother ; ' or, ' Hugh, you must give upto
your little sister.' "

That teas hard."

It seemed so sometimes — good discipline
perhaps," he said, with rather a bitter smile.

It was quite new to Dorothea to look at
him in the light of a person who had not
always had everything his own way, and it
made her feel more interest iu him.

** I suspect the real reason why children are
supposed to be so happy," she said, " is that
they forget their troubles so soon. However
bitter they are at the time, they don't dwell
on them long. I know that is a truism, but
it is perfectly true, I think."

Yes," answered Hugh, gravely ; " and
then, you see, they have nothing to be sorry
for as regards their own conduct. Of course
there are their little naughtiness, but they
are confessed and forgiven and forgotten all ina
moment, and leave no traces behind them ;
while, by Jove ! when one grows up, one finds
that one can't even do a foolish thing without
perhaps having to repent it all one's life long."

He was thinking of Clara, though what
should have reminded him of her just then
he did not know. It seemed suddenly to
flash across him how very different this talk
with Miss Neville was to the many conversations
he had had with the Consul's daughter.

He felt as if Dorothea were some superior
being bending down from her height to lend
him a helping hand — not so much by her
words, as by the very expression of sympathy
on her pure face, the trust and candour in
her eyes. He was not surprised that she did
not altogether understand him. No doubt
she had nothing to repent of — no folly, still
less any sin — and he said as much to her.
But Dorothea was shocked, and told him he
was very much mistaken — only she did not
know whether perhaps he was referring to
something in particular, or only talking ina
general way of what was of course true of
every one.

Hugh was sorely tempted to tell her of
the Corfu episode, for he often longed to
know what a good woman, who knew all
the circumstances, would say of it. Nora
had expressed herself strongly enough, but
then she was prejudiced ; and Miss Neville, as

an outsider, would, he thought, have been
able to take an impartial view. Perhaps if
he had known what Charlie had told his
cousin in his letter, and the impression it had
made on Dorothea's mind, he would have
taken courage and told her all the story ;
but he never supposed she knew anything
about it. Dorothea, on her side, often wondered
why Hugh never said a word to heron
that subject, though he seemed to like
discussing every other thing in heaven and
earth with her. The fact of his supposed
attachment to Clara was never absent from
her mind when talking to him ; but in the
present instance she fancied that perhaps he
thought she had gone too fair, for he changed
the subject rather abruptly by telling her
that his sister Nora, with her children, was
coming for a short time to Eastport, as the
eldest little boy had not been well, and was
recommended sea-air.

Lady Katherine overheard the words, and
thought it a good opportunity for making the
conversation a little more general. She knew
Sir John Hawker wanted to talk to her
daughter, and that he had been watching ]mr
Moore with jealous eyes for the last quarter
of an hour ; so she seized the first pretext for
joining in herself, and Sir John's political
discussion with the Admiral ceased abruptly.
Hugh raised his voice to answer Lady Katherine,
but did not leave his seat by Dorothea
; and the young lady did not address
her adorer until he compelled her to do so
by saying —

** I was telling your father. Miss Neville,
that I hear a man named Macartney, an Irish
fellow whom you know something of, I believe,
is a regular stump-orator down in the
slums of Eastport."

He is a very respectable man," said
Dorothea, stiffly.

Oh, that may be ! I have no doubt any
of your j^^^oteges would be most delightful,
charming people ; but I only understood this
moment from Sir Edward that you had taken
him up in your charitable kindness."

I have not taken him up. I know his
wife a little. Mr Moore can tell you more
about him than I can, if you want to find out
anything."

*' Mr Moore ! " said Sir John Hawker, adjusting
his eye-glass for a deliberate examination
of Hugh, who appeared singularly unmoved
by the honour. Dorothea could not
help smiling a little, and Hugh looked at her
and smiled too, and Sir John was very much
annoyed at this manifestation of friendly
intimacy. He saw everything through his
eye-glass, or perhaps through the eye which
did not wear a glass ! But Mr Moore was
quite polite, and answered that he should be
very happy to give any information Sir John

VOL. I. R

required as to Macartney, but he had not
very much to give. He had been in his
regiment for some time, and had rather come
to grief, but was on his legs again now. He
had been somewhat given to drinking, but,
he heard, had taken a turn lately, and been
very steady.

'' The reason why I ask," said Sir John,
"is that, as I said, this fellow is making a
commotion among the poorer people down
in the town — Irish eloquence, I suppose ! I
hear they have started a club, and that he always
takes the extreme Eadical side, as such
fellows would, don't you know ; and my
assent tells me I had better look out, for
he is getting a lot of influence among a
dangerous set."

Do you anticipate a revolution ? " asked
Dorothea. The shade of irony in her voice
was a little too marked.

Upon my word. Miss Neville, it is all

very well to laugh, but more extraordinary
things than that have happened. I could
tell you stories of what I have seen — heard,
I mean," he corrected himself — "which
would make that seem the most natural and
likely thing in the world, by the side of
them." He got a little mixed in his grammar,
for his attention was distracted by the
entrance of Captain Newman. " Confound
these fellows ! " he muttered to himself ;
they are always hanging about the place."

There seemed a sort of fatality with regard
to these three gentlemen. They were always
meeting each other — at balls and dinners, on
the ice, and now at an afternoon call. On
Captain Newman's side, at least, it was
partly intentional ; for since the dance at
Admiralty House, when Dorothea had accepted
his protection, he was uneasy unless
he was somewhere in her neighbourhood

o

when Sir John Hawker was present, and

often went to a ball solely for the purpose
of being at hand in case she might require
him again. He did not dance much himself,
and he was always at her disposal when she
wanted a partner— never in the way, but
never out of the way either. This could
not be repeated several times without Sir
John making a very shrewd guess as to the
state of affairs, and his feelings to Captain
Newman were not those of friendship. You
could not have told from Captain Newman's
face and manner what he thought of Sir

o

John Hawker ; and as he did not talk much,
the conversation proceeded as before.

Lady Katherine was speaking to Hugh.

We met your sister, Mrs Fitzgerald, last
year in town," she said. " How pleasant it
will be to meet ao;ain I "

Yes, Nora will be awfully glad," he
answered. " She was talking: to me about
you when I went home. Her husband,

Willie Fitzgerald, is out shooting somewhere
in the Kooky Mountains, but she
expects him here before very long. He is
always out in those parts. Savage people
seem to have a fascination for him."

*' You can hardly call the United States
savage, Mr Moore," remonstrated Lady
Katherine, with a half glance at Sir John
Hawker, who was looking at Hugh with a
very curious expression on his face. He
had quite dropped the thread of what he
was saying, and was listening intently to
Mr Moore.

Hugh did not notice him at first, and
answered Lady Katherine lightly, " Well,
the States are hardly savage, perhaps, till
you get 'Frisco way. Then you meet with
some curious specimens of humanity, I imagine.
What do you say. Sir John ? "

He looked up as he spoke, and was astonished
himself at the black look of mingled

anger and terror, which made the American
appear positively repulsive for a moment ;
hut Sir John recovered himself immediately,
and said with a short laugh, " Is that what
your brother-in-law Fits — what's his name ?
tells you about America? Really, don't
you know, I am not an American. My
father was English, and I was born in England
; and, as it happens, I am not acquainted
with 'Frisco, as you call it, and
can't tell you much about the natives.
But perhaps I had better be going, since
we are in such bad odour." And he made
his adieux rather hurriedly, hardly noticing
Hugh's offered apology.

There was a general murmur of surprise
when he was gone, and Hugh felt bound
to express his regret to Lady Katherine that
his remarks should have offended her visitor,
which was, of course, the last thing he had
intended. *' But on my honour," he said,

to look at the fellow, you would have
thought I had accused him personally of
some crime. He positively glared at me.
I didn't know a human being could look
so ferocious."

Let us turn the conversation," said
Dorothea ; "he is not a pleasant subject
to discuss."

Captain Newman was ready to fill up the
breach. He said he had a new piano in his
cabin which he was anxious Miss Neville
should try. Would Lady Katherine and her
daughter come to tea with him one day as
soon as the frost broke up ?

The ladies both said they should like it
of all things ; and Huofh asked — rather wistfully,
the Commander thought — if his were
a " show " cabin, full of curiosities, like some
he had seen on Ijoard men-of-war.

Oh, nothing much," said Captain New-man.
" I have only a few little things I

have picked up. But will you come and
have a look at them ? Come to tea the
same day; I will let you know when Lady
Katherine has fixed the time."

Hugh " accepted with pleasure," and then
the two officers took their leave.

"There is something uncommonly fishy
about that fellow Hawker," said Moore, as
they walked through the dockyard together.

I have often wondered what his history
is," said Captain Newman. " One sometimes
does a man injustice ; but certainly his expression
to-night was most peculiar."

** So it was ; and such an awfully sudden
change ! He was all right a minute before ;
and if he isn't, strictly speaking, a Yankee,
all the world knows he has lived out there
pretty well all his life."

Talking of changes," said Captain New-man,
" look at the moon. That means a
thaw."

The moon had, indeed, that ominous ring
of vapour around it which always precedes
rain. But Hugh was not much interested
just now in the state of the atmosphere,
and he only said —

"No more skating, then. I say, Newman,
it will be an abominable shame if such a
girl as she is should be sacrificed to that
fellow."

Oh, I hope it won't come to that. Miss
Neville has a will of her own, and I hardly
imagine her parents would force a marriage
on her."

I can't conceive how people like Sir
Edward and Lady Katherine should care
to have a man like Hawker about the place
at all."

*' He is very rich, I believe."

Bother his riches ! I do think money is
the greatest curse that ever was invented."

So it is, very often ; but one can hardly

get on without it," said the older man.
The love of money is likely to be the
ruin of England, I think. Well, here's my
moralising cut short by the stairs. My boat
is waiting, so I must not stop. Good night
to you."

Hugh watched the firm, vigorous strokes
of the sailors till the boat was lost in the
darkness, and then turned and went home —
not in the happiest or most contented frame
of mind. Sir John Hawker s presence at
Admiralty House disturbed him very much.
True, Dorothea disliked him ; but then one

could never tell Ah, Mr Moore ! Did

you never ask yourself wdiy you were taking
an interest in Miss Neville's future ?

The next day Captain Newman's prediction
was fulfilled. The frost broke, and
very rapidly the ice melted, and Eastport
was plunged into all the horrors of a thaw.
The roads became almost impassable, for the

snow which had fallen weeks before had not
been properly cleared away, and it was with
many inward groans that Hugh wended his
way through the mud and slush from his
rooms to the General's house. But his
thoughts were diverted from the miserable
appearance of the outside world by a curious
and unexpected encounter with a former
acquaintance. He was walking down the
High Street, when he was suddenly accosted
by a gentleman on the other side of the
road ; but not recognising him, Hugh was
about to pass on, when the stranger hailed
him by his name, and began to cross the
road towards him.

How do you do, Mr Moore ? " he said ;
you don't recollect me."

Huo;h now remembered having seen him
somewhere, though where, he could not think,
and answered, " I know your face, Int I'm
afraid I can't put a name to you."

The last time I saw you, you were very
much engaged in entertaining a pretty little*

girl."

A pretty little girl ! That doesn't help
me much."

*' Too frequent an occurrence, eh ? Don't
you remember your voyage in the Austrian
Lloyd ? "

To be sure I do ! Mr James," cried
Hugh ; " what an idiot I am ! I beg a thousand
pardons."

No reason to," returned the correspondent
of the * Radical Mercury.' " I was the
last person you expected to see here, no
doubt. Now guess my business. What do
you imagine brings me to this part of the
world ? "

Picking up more information on the
Eastern Question ? " asked Hugh, laughing.

Not a bit of it. Something much more
magnificent — at least from your point of

view. From mine, of course, nothing is
grander than discovering Truth, wherever
she can be found."

Hugh had not seen Mr James before in
such a jocular frame of mind, and wondered
what had put him in this high state of good
humour ; so he answered lightly, " They say
Truth is to be found at the bottom of a welland
from my experience you have got to dig
a good bit below the bottom of a newspaper
to find her ! However, if your business is
not searching for hidden treasure, I give up
guessing."

I shall startle you, I am sure. What do
you say to my fighting Sir John Hawker ? "

I shall be heartily glad if you beat him,"
said Hugh, incautiously.

^' I congratulate you on your conversion,"
exclaimed Mr James ; " may I ask what has
changed you ? "

Oh, I don't know that I am much

changed in a general way. What made you
think of contesting Eastj)ort ? "

I didn't think of it at alL We do as
we are told in politics, just as you do in
military matters. No discipline, no success ;
that's our motto."

And uncommonly well it answers. So
the people in the North sent you ? "

"Yes. I am here as the political-economist
candidate ; and from what I understand,
I don't think I shall have great
trouble in overthrowing my antagonist in
that line."

"Well, I should not think Sir Holm
Hawker is much posted up in political
economy."

I tell you what," said Mr James, confidentially,
" since you were good enough to
express hopes for my success, I may venture
to tell you — entre nous — that he is about
as bad a candidate as the Tories could

well have chosen. I hear, by the way, that
these same Tories have great difficulty in
getting men to stand at all. The young
sparks won't take the trouble, and they don't
somehow much relish coming down — as they
consider it — to working; men."

'^ You see, the discipline in the Conservative
camp's faulty," replied Hugh ; " the men
don't do as they are told."

Bad management ! " said the Eadical.

*' No doubt ; and bad management in
the House, too, where a gentleman can no
longer sit in comfort and be treated like a
gentleman."

Like a fiddlestick ! — begging your pardon.
There you are at it again, with your
aristocratic prejudices. You fine gentlemen
will have to learn a find lessons within the
next year or two, I can tell you."

We are learning; tlicni fast enouLili in
Ireland, at any rate," said Hugh], good-humouredly.

He did not at all mind plain
Speaking, and Mr James amused him. " But
to go back to Hawker : why is he such a
bad candidate ? "

In the first place, he is an alien, or
next door to one. Of course he is not a
Yankee, or he couldn't stand ; but he is
generally looked on as an American by the
people here, I find, and he talks through
his nose like a born New Yorker. In the
next place, he is a very bad speaker : he
has few ideas, and no notion of expressing
those he has. Then he is quite a new
man, and the county people only give him
a very half-hearted support. And last, but
not least, he is a deal too free with his
money — and we shall catch him tripping
there, or I am much mistaken."

Perhaps, as you know so much about
him, you could tell me something of his
history ? "

There I can't help you much. They
say he keeps it dark. I know this much —
he is a Cockney born. His father was a
City clerk, or something like that, and
went out on spec to some mines in the
States — where, I don't know, but I fancy
out West somewhere. He made a fortune
there, or his son did after his death ; and
then Sir John Hawker came back, and was
knighted for some reception of the Prince
of Wales, or something — I forget what.
Then, don't you know, naturally your
moneyed man wants to get into * society,'
as you are pleased to call it, and looks about
for a suitable place in the country, l)uys
it, builds a big house — and there you are !
The next thing is to stand for Parliament,
of course. Once in the House, and writing
M.P. after your name, no one can say much
to you."

I think that theory is evaporating, to-vol.
I. s

gentler with most of the other advantages
of being in the House — that, for instance,
of being in an assembly of gentlemen, as
I said before, when you laughed at me
so unmercifully. When M.P. meant what
it used to mean, it was something to be
proud of, if you like ; but now I wouldn't
give that for it ! " — and he snapped his
fingers.

"That is just what I was saying. You
young fellows, who ought to stick to your
guns and make a good fight of it at least,
get disgusted and run away, because you
think your adversaries aunt dressed quite
in the fashion, or maybe have a few unpleasant
odours about 'em. Well, it will
be your own look-out if you are driven from
your ground ignominiously, and that pretty
soon too. I am sorry for it — upon my word
I am. I like a good fight, and it is demoralising
to any party to get too easy a victory.

And, after all, when you talk of the honour
and glory of being an M.P. in the old
days, what was there so specially honourable
in being returned by a handful of
drunken boors, voting according to their
landlord's orders ? It only meant a few
hundreds or thousands of pounds in hard
cash down, that's all."

And did you not yourself say Sir John
Hawker was bribing, or as good as bribing,
now? In the old days it was above-board,
and there was no shame in it ; now it goes
on just as much, but you add a lie to it. I
had rather by a long way have been returned
for a pocket borough than a constituency
like this, where the voters don't really know
much more about it, and where they want
their minds inflamed by party oratory, or
their pockets made hot, or both, before they
will take enough interest in it to vote one
way or another."

Come, come, my dear Mr Moore ! — fairness
and truth, if you please. I see your
conversion has not advanced very far yet.
You must come to one of my meetings, and
see if the people care one way or the other.
And mind you, if Hawker bribes, we shall
be down on him — no fear. I must leave you
now and go to my committee meeting. I
go up to town to-night, but am back here tomorrow.
AVe can't yet get the old fellow to
accept the Chiltern Hundreds and have done
with it ; but he may do it any day, so we
must be prepared, and I am busy canvassing.
We shall meet again soon ; " — and, with a
friendly salute, the Eadical candidate hurried
down a side-street, full of importance and
self-contentment.

"He is about right in saying he enjoys a
fight," thought Hugh, "but he likes still
better being a prominent personage and

constantly before the public. And yet he is
no fool. I .shall bless him if he thrashes
Hawker. I wonder whether Miss Neville
takes any interest in the election ? "

END OF THE First VOLUME.

TKINTni ItY William HLACKWilOD AND Sors.

30112 642251311

L^S%a':MSMMMHa

JS OV^EL

in 2010 with funding from

University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign

http://www.archive.org/details/hughmoorenovel02ston

A NO VEL

BY

EVELYN STONE

IN TWO VOLUMES
VOL. II.

WILLIAM Blackamoor) AND SONS

EDINBURGH AND LONDON

MDCCCLXXXV

HUGH Moore

CHAPTEE XL

"The human heart is like the budded, folded leaves, and like the
untaught lark. The quiet sleep before the day of blooming is, while
it lasts, a state of happiness. "

The frost did not return ; it was indeed
unusual that it should have lasted so long,
extending, as it had done, well into the
month of February. And between the intense
cold of the frost and the bitter cold of
the east winds, came a spell of spring-like
weather, calm and sunny, when the buds
looked ready to burst, the bulbs appeared
above the ground, and the birds sang their
VOL. II. A

little hearts out in every tree and bush
which gave them shelter. It was on one
of tlicse afternoons that Lady Katherine and
Dorothea paid their promised visit to the flagship.
Captain Newman had not forgotten
to let Hugh know when the day was fixed,
and at the appointed hour the latter met the
ladies at the steps, where the Commander's
gig was in waiting. The harbour looked
very pretty in the soft light of the early
spring day ; the sunset colours were reflected
in the calm water, which laj^ so unruffled
that the ships were mirrored in it with
startling clearness. The oars left a long,
golden streak of light behind them ; and
faintly in the growing twilight, far up the
harbour, the forms of the old dismantled
hulks stood out against the pink and orange
of the sky.

A peaceful old age," said Dorothea to
Hugh, seeing that his eyes had followed hers ;

but it must be rather sad to feel yourself
elbowed out of the way, and stowed in some
forgotten corner, while the horrid ugly new
things come and fill up your room."

Oh, well, I don't know," he replied ;
that is the old people's view of the case,
selfishly speaking ; but what if they can put
themselves a little in the young one's place,
and say, ' We have had our day ; let us
stand aside and see the young people have
their turn, and perhaps they'll manage
better?"

I don't believe they will manage better,"
she said, eagerly. " I think old people arc
much wiser than young ones."

Do you really? " said Hugh, meditatively;
so that Lady Katherine laughed, and told
him that the possibility of such a thing
seemed never to have struck him.

Just then the coxswain skilfully steered
the gig alongside of the flag-ship ; in a moment

all the oars were tossed, and Captain
Newman was at the gangway ready to receive
his guests. They walked along the
spotless decks, the Commander and Lady
Katherine first, with Dorothea and Hugh
following, and lingering a little to admire
the view.

The ladder leading to the cabins was
steep and slippery, but Captain New^Ilan
knew by long experience how to help ladies
in climbing or descending it : he was very
skilful and gentle in his management, and
Lady Katherine, who was easily frightened,
felt no nervousness when in his charge. He
conducted her to the bottom, and then was
returning to look after Dorothea, as he had
often done before, when he saw that she
found Hugh's assistance quite enough ; so he
turned back to her mother, and led the way
to his cabin. He was well off for room, as
the Captain did not live on board, and he

had the use of a charming cabin opening onto
a stern-walk, which he made bright with
flowers in summer, and from which there
was always a pretty view up or down the
harbour, according to the tide — either up
towards our friends the old hulks, with a
background of dark-green hill and red-sandstone
cliffs in the distance — or down towards
the entrance to the harbour, with the open
sea beyond, flanked on both sides of the
water by the red-brick, red-tiled houses of
Eastport, which looked picturesque at a distance,
though they could not boast of much
beauty on a nearer inspection. Hugh asked
the Commander how long he had been onboard
the flag-ship.

Three years next June," he replied ; " my
time will soon be up."

Hugh wondered if he would be very sorry
to leave this cosy rest ; but for some reason
he did not ask him any questions on the

subject, and Captain Newman began to show
off his treasures and curiosities.

The cabin was not so full of knick-knacks'
as some are, lout the taste was better than is
sometimes the case. There were no pictures
of young women outrageously dressed and
very much rouged, with hair like a bird's nest,
and unnaturally large eyes, which seem somehow
very often to find favour with sailors.
There were also more books than usual, and
those more varied in character — though nautical
histories and accounts of voyages and
discoveries were not wanting ; and there were
a few photographs of his friends, but not
many, and those chiefly of elderly people
or little children. Among them was one of
a baby to whom he had stood godfather in
Mr Johnson's parish — a poor little baby, who
would never know who its parents were ;
but he did not draw attention to that — he
was too shy even to tell Dorothea.

Captain Newman did the honours of his
tea-table himself; and though he poured out
the tea with more care and anxiety and less
ease than a lady would have done, he did
not ask either of his visitors to assist him,
and he would not even let Hugh hand round
the bread and butter — or the cake, for which
the flag - ship cook was famous. He did
everything himself; and Lady Katherine
rallied him a little on his bachelor habits.

I have had time to learn by this time,
have I not ? " he said, and the tone of his
voice was rather pathetic.

After tea came music. He asked Dorothea
if she would " open " his piano, which
had not been used before ; and he arranged
the music-stool and lighted the candles for
her, and then went back to his seat by Lady
Katherine, from which he could watch Dorothea's
face as she sang. Her voice was pure
and full, though not very powerful, and she

had been well taught in Germany and Italy.
She was not afraid, as most amateurs are,
of showing any feeling ; but she took possession
of her subject, as it were, and then
interpreted it with all the strength of which
she was capable. Perhaps she sang little
German songs best— partly because she loved
the music dearly, and partly because they were
not beyond her compass, and yet required
rendering well to make them effective. At
any rate, none of her hearers were inclined
to be very critical that afternoon ; and they
made her sing song after song, till at last
she came to the little Volkslied " Auf Wien
and Hugh recognised the air at
once.

*' You were singing that on the stairs the
first day I called at Admiralty House," he
said, eagerly, " and I wondered then what
the words meant. Would you mind singing
it once more ? "

Oil no, not at all ; and I'll translate it
for you, if you like," lie said, laughing.
The words are very simple. You don't
know German?"

Not a word, except Ja ; and I am certain
I have only to say that to be recognised as a
John Bull."

Or a Paddy," she suggested, saucily.

Won't you have such an ignoramus fora
compatriot, Miss Neville ? I am not worth
teaching, I know ; but I will remember the
meaning of this song, if you'll tell me."

So she sang it, and this is how it ran : —

"Gotten Hath UND SCHEIDEN.

1.

Es list bestir in Gotten Hath,
Days man von Listen was man hat,
Muss scheiden.

Wiewobl doch Nights, im Laiif der Welt,
Dem Herzen, each ! so safer fall,
Als scheiden.

So Dir gesclienkt cin Rosin was,
So thu' es in ein Wasserglas ;
Doch wise :

Blight morgen dir ein RiJslein auf,
Es welt wool scion die Yacht darius,
Das wise ! Ja wise !

Und hat dir Got ein Lie bescheert,
Und halls du sie recht inuig worth,
Die Dine ;

Es word wool wenig Zest nur sein,
Da last sie rich so gan allen,
Damn wine ! Ja wine !

Nur must du mich such recht versteh'n,
Ja recht versteh'n,
Wenn Menschen auseinander geh'n,
So sage sie : Auf Wiederseh'n,
Auf Wiederseh'n."

As Captain Newman watched the pair
Laughing and talking together, — he with his
elbow on the piano, gazing down at her with
eyes full of admiration, she looking up at

him in all her unconscious queenliness (this
is how they appeared to the Commander),
the thought suddenly flashed across him,
"Those two are made for each other. Already
they are quite happy together. She
is singing for him, not for me." But he went
on talking to Lady Katherine, though without
paying much heed to what he was saying,
and straining his ears to catch the tones
of Dorothea's voice all the while. He could
not hear what she was saying, for unconsciously
their voices had dropped. Hugh
had sat down beside her, and was humming
the tune as she repeated the words. "It is
awfully pretty, but rather dismal," was his
comment.

So many of the prettiest things are
plaintive," she said ; " but this one ends, at
any rate, with hope, — ' Auf Wiederseh'n ' — we
shall meet again."

Only you have been left quite alone first,

which is the part I object to. You aren't
necessarily obliged to leave a thing or a
person because you like them."

You agree, perhaps, with another of my
songs, which says, ' Wenn wei gate Fronde
sind, Die menander kennel, Soon' und ]\Iond
between such, He sie such turenne' ? "

Which is, being interpreted ? "

*' * When there are two good friends who
know each other, heaven and earth may
move before they part'"

Frustrate ! Yes, * them's my sentiments,'
as Mrs Macartney says."

Well, but circumstances are sometimes
stronger than people's wills."

People can conquer circumstances."

Oh, Mr Moore, they can't always. Have
you never been obliged to do anything
against your will? Do you mean to say
you don't believe anybody parts from anybody
else except when they wish ? "

Not quite that ; because there are two
people's wills in the matter."

' Wei gate Freuncle,' " said Dorothea,
thoughtfully ; " but even then I am sure
your theory won't hold good. No ; it seems
to me, the really bitter thing is, when you
go away and can't say, ' Auf Wiederseh'n.'
You meet, for instance, travelling, with
such very nice people sometimes : you are
quite sure you would be great friends if you
saw more of each other ; but you go away,
and you never come across them again. I
think that is sad."

You may escape troubles and annoyances
like that too," said Hugh, thinking of Corfu.

There are compensations in everything,"
she answered; " perhaps you love your Rosen
all the more tenderly because you know it
will fade tomorrow ; but to my mind, that
doesn't make up for the fading."

But supposing you pick your rosebud.

and put it in its glass, and then find it
doesn't smell ? "

Then," she said, looking rather surprised
at the strange suggestion, " you must have
made a mistake ; you ought to have smelt
it before you picked it."

Let us drop metaphors," he said. " I
want to ask you a question," — and she saw
by the light in his eyes, and heard by the
tone in his voice, that he was very much
in earnest, — " What is your idea of an
honourable man ? "

"That is a wide question," she replied,
"and difficult to answer off-hand; lout I
can tell you what has always seemed to me
the best description I have ever heard — ' He
that swearer unto his neighbour and disappointed
him not, though it were to his
own hindrance.' "

"Upon my word. Miss Neville, you seem
to know one's thoughts," exclaimed Hugh,

who was making her in his own mind sit in
judgment on himself and Clara.

''I don't the least know what you mean,"
said Dorothea.

But Hugh continued, " Do you think a fellow
is never justified in changing his mind ? "

Of course I don't, — that would be too
silly," she answered, a little worried at the
enigmatic way he took her into his confidence
; " but I can't believe an honourable
man would break his word, even when the
fulfilment came hard upon him."

How he wished he could make up his
mind to tell her everything ! But he could
not summon up courage to do so ; and once
more the opportunity passed, and the conversation
turned to less confidential matters.
He told her of his meeting with the Radical
candidate, and asked if she took much interest
in politics.

My father's sympathies are all with the

Tories," she said, " Int we can't, of course, take
any active part ; and privately, I shan't be
sorry — very — if Sir John Hawker is defeated."

"Then you won't be angry with me for
feeling the same ? By the by, did you discover
how our friend Macartney got into
his bad books ? "

Oh, I had such an amusing talk with Mrs
Macartney the other day. She described a
visit the ' American gentleman,' as she called
him, had paid her. ' " I hear you're Irish,"
says he. " No, sir," says I, " I thanks my
stars I ain't." " Then your husband is," says
he. " Maybe he is," says I, " and more's the
pity." " Just what I think," says he ; '' now
don't you let him go and make a fool of
himself" "Fool of himself, sir!" says I.
Ay, fool ! " says he, quite angry-like ; " he's
going' and talking' to all them fellows at the
club, and tellin' 'em things as he knows
nothing' about." "There's others as talks of

things as they knows nothing' about," says I.
I did, indeed. Miss, for 'wasn't reason as I
should stand and hear him abuse Macartney,
was it. Miss?' And of course I told her,"
Dorothea proceeded, "that it was natural
and proper she should stand up for her husband
; and then she went on to describe a
regular fencing-match she had with Sir John,
and according to her own account he had
much the worst of it, but I daresay his story
is different. Anyhow, he seems to have left
her in high dudgeon."

He has got a clever chap) to fight him, at
any rate," said Hugh. " James is an odd fellow,
and not a Ijit of a gentleman ; but that
doesn't signify much nowadays, and lie has
plenty of brains and any amount of self-confidence.
Pluck and push are the great requisites
for success in this world. Miss Neville.
The modest people get shoved into the background."


VOL. II. B

I don't believe that," said Dorothea, with
one of her bright courageous smiles ; " the
counterfeit coin may pass for a time, but it is
found out at last."

Too late sometimes ! However, I am
going to act on my doctrine, and see if I
can't *push' my fortunes a little. I am
going to volunteer for Africa."

Oh, are you ? " she cried. " Being a woman,
I think this war is horrid : all my friends
seem to be going out there. Being a man, I
suppose you are delighted."

At the opportunity of showing I possess
a little of that other article that begins with
a P ? Well, yes, I am."

Perhaps they won't have you," she suggested
shyly.

'' Oh yes, they will," he answered ; '' I
have made all that straight with the general.
He is a good old chap after all. I had a
long talk with him this morning, and he promised

to write to the authorities on my behalf
; so I have no fear of being refused."

And you expect to come back field-marshal
at least ? "

How cruel you are, Miss Neville, to throw
cold water on my youthful ardour ! Do you
think I will run away ? "

Not quite," she answered, laughing, and
blushing a little ; " but I don't like you to
talk of going to fight just to push your fortunes."


What else should I go for but honour
and glory ? " he asked, pretending not to understand
her.

The real honour is in serving your country
; don't you think so ? "

My country could do very well without
me, I am afraid. But, seriously, I am sorry
I will be away just when Nora will be here.
She comes tomorrow. May I bring her to
sec you before I go ? I want you to wish me

success. I would like to take ' Auf Wider
as my talisman."

The last words were spoken low and hurriedly,
for Lady Katherine was on the point
of leaving ; but Dorothea heard them, though
she made no reply.

She pondered much during the evening on
this conversation with Hugh ; but could not
arrive at any satisfactory conclusion in her
own mind, and did not take either her
mother or Frances into her confidence. She
was rather afraid just now of Lady Katherine,
for she could not understand why she was
not allowed to criticise and laugh at Sir John
Hawker as much as she chose (she was accustomed
to express her opinions very freely at
home) ; and the mere possibility of having
to encourage this unwelcome suitor struck
her with so much horror that she could not
bear to face it. As to Hugh, she liked him
very much; but it puzzled her that he should

take her so far into his confidence and no
further. Why did he not talk to her about
Miss Wilson, since he evidently liked to discuss
things with her? And what did he
mean by that last speech ? She could not
believe he was a mere vulgar flirt, but she
certainly thought he was going a little too
far. If she had been Clara, she would not
have approved of his speaking to another
girl in such a manner. Perhaps Mrs Fitzgerald
would tell her more about it. She
wondered when Hugh would bring his sister
to see them ; she wondered many things, in
fact, and thought so much about the matter,
that every time she heard the bell ring she
waited to hear if it was Mrs Fitzgerald and
Mr Moore who were announced.

And she had not long to wait.

Hugh met his sister at the station on the
day following the tea on board the flag-ship.
She arrived, accompanied by her three children

and as many servants ; and there appeared
to her brother an endless quantity of
baggage, great and small ; but he hurried
her and her eldest boy into the fly, and bore
them off to the hotel at once, leaving the rest
to find their way as best they might. The
rooms he had secured for her were bright
and comfortable, with a good sea view, and
Nora soon made herself thoroughly at home.
She kept her brother to dine with her, and
after dinner settled herself in an arm-chair,
and began to question him as to his opinion
of Eastport. " Better than you expected,
isn't it ? " she asked.

Yes ; not such a bad place, when you get
accustomed to it," he answered. " There are
some jolly people here, whom you shall know
if you like."

Thanks. I never despise a good
offer."

Oh, by the by, Nora, you can go in for

some electioneering if you like ! I know that's
very much in your line."

"Indeed! this is very exciting," lie said,
sitting upright in her chair.

"But, unfortunately, mtj friend is the
Radical ! "

Hugh ! Hugh ! what will I do to you ? "

"No, I don't think I can let you canvass,
after all, Nora. The Tory is a — well, a beast
no other word is quite applicable ; and I
don't know that you would altogether appreciate
the charms of my friend James. Do
you think you could give him some information
as to the Eastern question ? "

I could tell him some home-truths about
Ireland."

"He doesn't want home-truths; he only
cares about Home Eulc."

"I declare, Hugh, you're getting quite
epigrammatic ! So your time is taken up
with politics ? "

It is not, indeed ! I don't interfere in
them at all. I haven't been to hear James
speak yet."

*' I hope you keep wp your dancing ? "

Well, it has not got rusty for want of
practice ; but there are no more balls now
till Easter."

Oh, I forgot Lent. Tell me who you
dance with ? "

Lots of girls."

How horrid you are ! You don't help
me one bit, and you know I am dying to
hear all about Dorothy Neville."

^^ What about her?"

*^ Does she dance well ? "

Very well."

And talk ? "

•' She can talk, and sing, and ride, and
skate, and go to church, and to mothers'
meetings, or old women's teas, or something
of the sort ; and she can read, and I think

she can write — and — let me sec, I forget

wha

and-what

sciences and languages she knows —

Oh, stop that, you horrid boy ! Do be
serious a moment. Have you heard from
Corfu?"

Not for a long time."

That's all right," with a sigh of relief.
Then I hope you have forgotten all that
nonsense."

I wish I could forget it. It is very
much on my mind, and I want you to
be reasonable and talk to me sensibly
about it."

But Nora would only repeat what she had
said in Ireland, and Hugh did not get much
satisfaction out of her : she was too vehement
a partisan to be trustworthy, he
thought ; but the last few months had made
a great difference in his own ideas on the
subject.

The wish is father to the thought," and
he was gradually coining round to his father's
and sister's view of the case. True, Dorothea
had disconcerted him by her definition
of an "honourable man," but then she did
not know the circumstances, and he certainly
had not " sworn unto another "; so if there
were any "disappointment" in the matter,
he would not, at any rate, be guilty of
breaking his plighted word. And yet — and
yet — what had he said and done at Pales
and at that dance on board the
Royal Britain ?

It was late when at length he got up and
wished his sister good-night, and it was only
at parting that he gave her Dorothea's message,
as if he had but just remembered it,
whereas in reality he had been thinking of
it all the evening.

By the by, Nora, I was to ask you from
Miss Neville," he said, " when you would

come to see her. Lady Katherine asked
me to bring you to lunch tomorrow."

That is a charming arrangement," she
replied. '* I am longing to see Dorothy
again. I thought her one of the prettiest
girls I had ever seen."

So she is," said her brother under his
breath. " I will call for you, then, and we
will walk down to Admiralty House together."


Lady Katherine had indeed invited Mr
Moore, with much cordiality, to come to
lunch and bring his sister ; but she had not
told him when doing so that she had already
invited Sir John Hawker. If he had known
this fact, he might not have accepted with
so much pleasure.

Lady Katherine had " taken up " the Conservative
candidate. He had paid assiduous
court to her first, and then to her daughter,
and her ladyship secretly liked to feel her

power, and that through her means Sir John
would be "received in society." She was
too much of a lady herself not to be sensible
that he was wanting in refinement ; but she
imagined that this was owing to his long
residence in America, and credited that unhappy
country with all his failings and peculiarities.
She was pleased to see that Dorothea
had made a conquest of the richest
man in the county ; but she did not at all
object to what she regarded as a little becoming
hesitation on her daughter's part,
provided it were not carried too far. She
was quite willing Sir John should see how
anxious Captain Newman was to please Dorothea,
how happy Hugh Moore was in her
company, and how devoted some of the
younger naval officers were to her ; for she
liked him to appreciate the honour which
would eventually be conferred on him with
Miss Neville's hand. Lady Katherine loved

and respected lier husband ; but she had not
been in love with him when she married,
and she did not expect her daughter to make
any objections on that score, provided her
parents considered the match suitable in
other respects. As for Sir Edward, she had
never discussed the matter with him ; but she
knew he rather pooh-poohed the idea of sentimental
nonsense, and he was disposed to
take Sir John Hawker's part, from a dislike
of injustice and preconceived prejudices. He
was very busy ; the Admiralty were always
requiring his presence in London, and Dorothea
saw less of him than usual. Her great
allies were her two cousins ; but Charlie,
though good-natured, was lazy, and afraid
of annoying his aunt ; and Frances, since
her memorable outburst on the last afternoon
of the frost, was only able to offer
lier secret sympathy, and encourage Dorothea
privately in resistance.

Hugh had not told his sister anything
more aljout Sir John Hawker ; and Mrs
Fitzgerald, therefore, on Lady Katherine's
introduction, greeted him with her usual
pretty frankness. At lunch she was placed
next to him ; for Hugh had adroitly taken
possession of the chair next Dorothea's seat,
and, under pretence of helping her to carve,
succeeded in monopolising her very successfully.


Nora chatted away to her neighbour, and
was soon telling him stories of her husband's
adventures in the Rocky Mountains.
Sir John was very attentive, and asked a
great many questions — so many, that she
thought he was an excellent specimen of
Yankee curiosity; for what could it matter
to him how many times Mr Fitzgerald had
been in the States, with the exact dates and
the ports at which he embarked and disembarked?
However, nothing would do

but that he must know these details, and a
great many besides. So she gave them
willingly enough ; for what had she to conceal
? She assured him that her husband
might arrive in Eastport any day. It would
certainly be soon, though his movements
were so very uncertain ; he would be delighted
to meet some one who knew so much
about the Western States, and he could
answer all Sir John's questions so much
better than she — Nora — could ever do. Sir
John politely said she was mistaken in both
her statements. He was quite sure she
could tell him as much as Mr Fitzgerald ;
and as to his knowledge of the Western
States, it was only from hearsay. He had
never been there ; Chicago was his furthest
limit westward. Nora looked surprised, at
which he seemed annoyed ; but her surprise
was only occasioned by such an unusually
good memory.

Sir John was obliged to leave directly after
lunch to catch a train for London, and Nora
noticed that he rather glared at her brother
as he said good-bye. She concluded they
had quarrelled about Dorothea.

Hugh," she said, as they were taking
their leave, '' I have been trying to persuade
Miss Neville and her cousin to come outwith
us for a ride on Monday. Could you
manage it, do you think ? "

Oh yes ! He was sure the General could
spare him in the afternoon. Would Miss
Neville come ? Charlie said he would see
she did, and Lady Katherine made no objection
; for Nora had taken her by storm,
as she did most people ; and in addition,
there was the same secret reason for liking
her (hidden deep down in her ladyship's
heart) as there was for approving so highly
of Hugh. Were they not Lord Glengarn's
children ?

The chivalrous way in which Hugh always
treated her reminded her so often of the
days of her girlhood ; for Lady Katherine
possessed a soft heart though a worldly
mind — a combination, alas ! by no means
uncommon.

When Mrs Fitzgerald and her brother left
Admiralty House, Nora was silent for a few
minutes, and then she said, in her peculiarly
soft, pathetic Hibernian voice —

Hugh, I think you're smitten."

Who with ? Lady Katherine ? "

'' The mother's always a good excuse, no
doubt ; but I was thinking of the daughter."

Well, Nora," he said, quite seriously, " it
is no use trying to hide anything from you,
and I am afraid you're about right."

"You're a dear good boy to go and do
just what I wished," she said, excitedly. " It
shows your good taste."

"You take things rather for granted," said

VOL. IT. c

Hugh; " there are two people to be consulted,
remember — and besides "

There is a rival," said Nora, composedly.

You saw that ? " cried Hugh. " Before I
came here, I thought of course it would bethe
cousin ; but I must say, Master Charlie is
as innocent as a baby of flirting with her —
his heart is set at present on his dogs and his
vermin."

"How incoherent you are!. It is quite
difficult to follow you. However, I suppose
Sir John Hawker is in earnest ? "

"Oh, rather ! Don't you see, it is all his
game. He wants to get into Parliament,
and * society ' forsooth. By the way, Nora,
how abominably civil you were to him ! I
can't think how you could talk to such a
brute ! "

"Dear me! how jealous we are! You
didn't want me to be rude to Sir Edward's

guest, surely ? Eastport must have depraved
you sadly."

But isn't he a beast ? "

I don't approve of violent language
said Nora, laughing ; " but I should not
be much afraid of him as a rival if I were
you."

It is not only that," said Hugh ; '' but
what chance have I ? I am going away
directly, and goodness knows when I shall
come back. Besides, it would not be fair to
speak to a girl just when one was off to a
war. Of course one can never tell. One
might never come back, you know."

I think that question of speaking or
not, entirely depends on the girl," said Nora.
** Supposing she cared for you, she would
much rather have some pledge from you ;
you could write to each other, too : whereas
if you went away without saying a word, she

might misunderstand you, and think you had
only been playing with her. ]wien seem so
often to forget that a woman can never ask
for an explanation."

By Jove ! " said Hugh ; and then he
walked on quite silently for a few minutes.
He was not really so calm as he looked — his
mind was working up and down in a furious
turmoil ; but at last he said, " I never
thought of that before. But it would startle
her so awfully. I don't suppose she has any
idea of it. I have never said a word to her.
I think I had better wait till I come back —
if I do — and take my chance then."

And let Sir John Hawker carry her off
meanwhile ? "

The idea is enough to drive one crazy ! "
cried Hugh, striding on furiously for a few
paces.

How ever had you the face to talk to me
last night about Clara Wilson ? " said Nora,

mischievously. She could not resist the
pleasure of this home-thrust, but she was
startled at the almost fierce way Hugh
turned upon her.

"Why did I do it? Because I wanted
advice ; because I curse myself for my folly.
I feel ten years older since I was at Corfu ;
and I am certain if I were to ask her — Miss
Neville — she would say, ' Go back to Corfu ' —
and that's why I can't bear to — to tell her I
love her. There ! you have got it all out
now, and you may laugh at me to your
heart's content."

Laugh at you, you poor boy ! That's
the very last thing I want to do. I only
think you are the veriest nineteenth-century
Don Quixote, that's all. I should like to
know how many people would make themselves
miserable, as you are doing, about a
wretched little flirtation when they were ill
and idle. We won't talk any more about it

now, and you have all tomorrow to think
over what you will do. You don't start
before Monday or Tuesday week, do you ? "
All tomorrow ! " How little the brother
and sister thought of the change which the
morning's post would bring in their hopes
and fears !

CHAPTER XII.

Oh, many a shaft at random sent,
Finds mark the archer little meant ;
And many a word at random spoken,
May soothe, or wound, a heart that's broken !

In delay we waste our lights in vain,
Like lamps by day."

A SUNNY room in one of the hotels at Cannes.
The view is over the lovely bay ; there are
boats, with their white sails, dancing on the
blue water, and the beach is gay with the
merry voices and laughter of English children.
In the room there is darkness and
quiet ; the green Venetians are closed, and
there is no sound but the ticking of a clock,
and the short uneasy breathing of a patient,
who sits in a big arm-chair, propped up with
cushions, his eyes closed, but not in sleep.

It is Ion Moore. The improvement which
had seemed so great had suddenly vanished ;
a change of wind, a little extra exertion —
they could hardly tell what it was — had
caused a considerable accession of disease, and
a still more alarming; decrease of strength.
In the salon adjoining the bedroom, a consultation
was being held between two doctors
and Lord and Lady Glengarn.

His lordship looked older and whiter than
when we saw him in Ireland ; and the look
of strain and tension on his wife's face had
become habitual. She was weeping bitterly
as she heard the doctors' words of doom —
He may last a few weeks, or the end may
come very quickly — perhaps next week : the
case is quite hopeless."

When the doctors were gone, Lord Glen-gain
turned to his wife and said, " I must
write to Hugh. I cannot let him go to
Africa now."

Hugh ! " said Lady Glengarn, in a
stifled voice; "how can you think of him
now ? "

'' But I must think of him, my dear," he
answered, sadly and gently. "I am sorry
for him too, poor boy. See, he writes in such
spirits about it ! Thinks he will get on the
staff — such a chance ! Hopes to win his
spurs, and do some real work — show what
stuff a Moore is made of. Perhaps get his
promotion. See us all at Glengarn in the
autumn. Poor boy ! poor boy ! Upon my
word, it seems a shame to stop him ; and

yet — and yet No, I cant let him go.

It is too great a risk : I can't lose both my
boys ! " And the poor old gentleman's voice
broke. He rose hastily and walked to the
window, and secretly took out his handkerchief.
His wife was sitting motionless in her
chair, paying no heed to what he said ; only
when appealed to directly, " Don't you think

wc must send for him here, my dear ? " she
answered absently —

What ? I didn't hear. Do as you like.
I am going to Ion ; " and she rose and left
the room.

Lord Glengarn sighed heavily, and in a
few minutes followed his wife. Ion opened
his eyes at the rustle of her dress. There
was an expression of less restlessness in them
than before, but more languor and suffering ;
yet he was buoyed up by that wonderful
hopefulness which is such a singular feature
in consumptive patients.

How are you feeling, darling ? " she
asked — a question repeated twenty times
a-day, and always calling forth the same
answer — " Better, thanks," — an answer which
would have made one smile, had it not been
so pathetic. With all her tenderness, she
was the worst possible person in a sick-room ;
and the little French Sister who was nursing

him, was often driven nearly to distraction
by her incessant fidgetiness, and the open way
in which she displayed her anxiety, when, to
give the patient a fair chance, everything
ought to have been sunny and calm.

He took his mother by surprise on this
occasion, by saying, " I wish Hugh could get
leave and come out here."

It struck her with a little pang, as if he
felt himself dull or neglected.

Hugh ! " she said ; " are you not satisfied
with us, my darling ? "

'' Satisfied ! " he answered wearily, " oh
yes; but Hugh is such a jolly fellow, it
does one good to look at him."

I will write to him and ask him to come
if he can," said Lord Glengarn, who had just
overheard the last few words. " I am sure
he will do his best to manage it, but of
course he may not be able to get away."

Thanks, father," said Ion, closing his

eyes again as if he wished to be quiet. The
Sister arranged his pillows, and saying softly
to Lady Glengarn, "He may sleep, madam,"
placed a chair for her, so as to induce her to
sit down and keep still and silent.

That evening Lord Glengarn wrote to
Eastport. He did not wish to alarm his son
unnecessarily, so he did not telegraph, but
put the case as gently before him as possible,
rather softening Ion's most alarming symptoms,
but ordering Hugh quite peremptorily
to give up all idea of Africa, and to come
out to Cannes as soon as possible. The consequence
was, that when the letter arrived,
Hugh did not realise the danger of his
brother's state, and on the other hand felt
to the full all that keen disappointment as
to the failure of his professional hopes which
his father had dreaded for him.

The letter reached him on a Sunday morning
— the day following the lunch at Admiralty

House and his subsequent talk with Nora.
He came down-stairs rather later than usual,
his head full of a political meeting he had
attended in the evening, at which Mr James
had been explaining his views to those whom
he regarded affectionately in the light of his
constituents. His speech had created much
applause : it contained a good deal of twaddle,
but not more than is necessary to excite the
sympathies of an audience such as he was
addressing ; and the greater part was at least
tersely and clearly expressed, leaving no
doubt as to his meaning and intentions. Mr
James was a thoroughgoing Radical. He
sympathised with the aspirations of all young
and ambitious communities, and had no
doubts at all on the subject of the Eastern
question ; but as this part of his speech was
a little beyond the capacities of the Eastport
natives, he did not dwell much on it, but
expatiated at more length on the necessity

for manhood suffrage and reduced taxation.
How this latter was to be accomplished without
great reductions in the army and navy
he did not say ; for both services were popular
in Eastport, inasmuch as the town really
subsisted on the spoils of the garrison and
dockyard. Towards the end he made a very
effective point, by confessing himself to be a
man of the people, whose sole right to sit
in Parliament would be the mandate of the
people, as whose delegate he would appear,
bound to do nothing but further the views
of his constituents. He had no wealth, he
said, but this at least ensured the purity of
his motives and entire absence of any attempt
at illegal influences. This side-hit
at the Conservative candidate found much
favour ; and when Mr James protested that
though he had no money, all the best powers
of his mind (such as they were) were at their
disposal, and he should regard himself as

too much honoured if they imposed any
duties upon him, and intrusted him with
carrying out their desires, the applause was
enthusiastic, and he sat down amid a storm
of cheers and clapping.

Hugh did not wish to be recognised, as
it would not do for him to appear to take
any part in politics ; so he slipped away
before the meeting was quite over. But it
was already late ; and when he awoke the
next morning, it was to find that the heavy
atmosphere of the hall, impregnated with
the fumes of gas and smoke, had made him
drowsier than usual, and prolonged his sleep
an hour or so beyond his ordinary time. His
breakfast was cold, and his tea had long
ceased boiling ; but the letter from Cannes
effectually took away any appetite he might
have had.

Poor Hugh ! He broke the seal with such
pleasurable anticipations — certain, as he

thought, to find his father congratulating
him on his good prospects, and fully expecting
to be told, as usual, that his brother
was making satisfactory progress.

Any true soldier can realise the shock of
disappointment which he felt on glancing
down the sheet — a disappointment which
only increased in intensity the more he
thought of it. He paced up and down the
little room, or sat with his elbows on his
knees and his face buried in his hands, till
the morning had passed away and he had
worried himself almost out of his senses.
Then he thought of going to see Nora, but
shrank from a woman's sympathy. The
wound must be probed, not salved over.
So he resolved to call. on the General; and
after swallowing a little lunch, which the
servant-maid had placed unnoticed on the
table, he went out and took several turns
up and down on the seashore, that the

air might cool and calm him a little. But
the beach and sea-wall were too crowded
with people : soldiers arm in arm with their
sweethearts ; nursery maids wheeling along
perambulators full of babies, whose heads
were dropping, neglected, on one side, while
the girls flirted and giggled with smart footmen
or bearded blue-jackets ; paterfamilias
taking his numerous flock out for a Sunday
walk, — and all the other Eastport holiday-makers.
The sea-wall was a favourite Sunday
resort ; and Hugh, who felt distracted,
fancied he must look so, and that people
were staring at him (a very unusual piece
of self-consciousness for him) ; and besides,
he wanted a quiet place to think in. So
he went straight on past the Forts down
to the steeply shelving, pebbly beach ; and
there he found only a few coast-guardsmen,
and some little boys who were playing
among the boats stranded liigli nid dry

VOL. II. D

on the shore. Hugh sat down on one of
these and wished he were a child once more.
These children never seemed discouraged at
failure : to fall a thousand times, and yet
get up laughing and try again, seemed to be
their one idea. Two little fellows were endeavouring
to launch a great sailing-smack.
They might as well have tried to drag the
whole of Eastport out to sea ; but they
repeated their attempts time after time, and
only desisted when they were thoroughly
tired out and could do nothing but lie panting
on the shingle. In two minutes they
were up again ; and this time it was an
old rusty anchor, lying deeply embedded in
the sand, and wreathed with sea weed like
the garlands that cover a grave — it was this
weighty piece of iron which the children
wished to move. Hug-h laui]jlied to himself
— a laugh without merriment. "I am
like those bo's," he thought. '' I can no

more succeed in my soldiering than they
can in launching that boat; and if I try
to succeed in love, they may as well think
they can move that anchor. Circumstances
are too much for me ; I shall cave in." It
was getting on in the afternoon when he
was admitted into his chiefs study.

The General liked his aide-de-camp, who
took an interest in his work and gave himself
real trouble to see that it was well done.
He noticed directly how dejected Hugh
looked, and inquired what was the matter.

I have come to say, sir, that I am very
sorry, but I won't be able to go to Africa
after all."

'* Heyday ! what's this ? Changed your
mind all of a sudden ? "

"Not at all," said Hugh, gloomily, handing
him Lord Glengarn's letter ; *' this
came to-day, and T suppose I cannot go

now."

LIBRARY

UNIVERSITY OF (LL/NOfS

The General fumbled for his spectacles,
walked to the window for light, and read the
letter slowly twice through. Then he said —

So you want leave to go to Cannes ? "

Well, sir, you see my father wishes me
to ask for it."

Hem, hem, — I suppose I must let you go.
I am confoundedly sorry."

*' So am I," said Hugh, and his face fully
confirmed the words.

"It is not so much about your brother.
Of course one's sorry for that ; but I don't
know him, and young fellows often get over
these attacks. But it vexes me that you
should lose this chance. I don't know when
you will get another."

*' That's just about the truth — and it
plagues me horribly. But I don't see how
I can get out of this business, — do you,
Sir f

Oh no. You must go to your brother —

you must go," said the General, testily. " I
will give you leave, of course ; and I will
tell Lawrence he must get some one to fill
up your place on his staff."

The words were not unkindly meant. On
the contrary, they were an implied compliment,
for it was not to every one that the
old soldier would have shown so much concern
at the alteration in his plans and prospects
; but all the same, they wounded
Hugh like so many poisoned arrows, and
he left the General with his feeling as to
the " wrongness of things " only intensified,
and his disappointment more bitter. He
loved his profession, whatever he might sometimes
say against it ; and this check, at what
appeared to him a critical moment in his
career, was very hard to bear. For the time,
his brother became almost a secondary consideration,
so absorbed was he in the failure
of his own hopes and ambition.

He had been so engrossed by his own
thoughts all day, that he had quite forgotten
it was Sunday, and he had made no
plans for disposing of his evening ; lout now
the thought suddenly struck him, why not
drojD into Saint Thomas, and see what the
parson, about whom he had heard so much,
was really like ? Miss Neville admired him,
and, what was still more to the purpose, the
Macartneys worshipped him ; and if nothing
else, it would make a change. So he
threaded his way through the poor little
streets, similar to that in which his Irish
friends were lodging — varying from dingy
respectability to courts and alleys where it
seemed hardly possible for human beings to
live — and at length he found himself f^ice
to face with the porch of S. Thomas.

The church was quite new, and built entirely
owing to the exertions of Mr Johnson
and his fellow-workers ; but the result, even

architecturally, fully repaid them for their
labours. It was a grand pile — a basilica —
with a sanctuary simply but richly adorned,
and raised above the level of the nave, so as
to be well seen from all parts of the church.
When Hugh entered, the lights in the nave
were just turned down, leaving the choir
and altar a blaze of light, and the congregation
were seating themselves for the sermon.
A very mixed congregation it was ; many
very poor — but some of the shopkeeper class,
and many higher still, quite the " upper
ten " of Eastport. Hugh knew nothing of
church architecture, but the whole struck
him as very vast and impressive ; and his
eye, trained to military exactness, noted
with approval the regularity and symmetry
of all the details and arrangements.

By the time he had completed his leisurely
inspection, and roused himself a little from
his own sad thoughts, Mr Johnson was well

advanced in his sermon. lie was a tall
spare man, not old, but with a face much
worn and furrowed with lines of care and
thought, and ])y many vigils and ceaseless
anxieties ; his eye was keen and piercing,
his brow lofty, and the hair, already grey,
was becoming somewhat scant over the temples.
His voice had not much power of
sound, but it penetrated the church without
any apparent effort, even to the west
door. It was one of those voices which
cause an instantaneous hush the moment they
are lifted up ; and it was this voice and
manner, more than the mere words, which
produced such a wonderful effect on his
hearers. Hugh noticed that they were, one
and all, of every class and age, intent on
his words. Not a sound was heard besides ;
and indeed it was the single word " Failure,"
twice repeated, which caught Hugh's
attention.

I don't believe there is a single man or
woman here," he went on, after a moment's
pause, *who has not failed somehow or
other. One of you has failed in your dearest
hopes and affections. You have gone
on striving and waiting, and you find after
all it is no use. It is very hard : you might
have been happy with something else, you
think, if you had only known ; but now it
is too late. And another of you has been
working hard all his life, or all her life (for
women work as hard as men, as you and
I well know), and now in old age the work
is all undone. The bank fjiils, or the business
stops, or an illness swallows up all your
savings ; and you say, too, that your life
has been a failure. And another of you
has striven, as father or mother, or teacher
or guardian, to bring up children in the way
they should go ; and they have disappointed
you. They are extravagant and wilful and

unloving ; and it seems to you, your care and
love have l)een thrown away — have failed
in their purpose. And it is very Sitter. And
yet another is conscious of some one fault
he has striven against for years. Sometimes
he thinks he has conquered it ; but the monster
rears his head again and again, and will
not be rooted out — and you cry, ' It is no
use ; I have failed ! ' Or there is a young
man who is getting on well in his trade or
profession or business. He seems on the
highroad to success. His is the age when
hopes are strong and disappointment doubly
bitter. But it comes — comes in one shape
or another ; and he, too, says that ' life is
a failure.'

And do you think, dear people, that I
have never felt it so ? Indeed I have —
indeed in one sense I do at this very moment.
I sympathise with every one of you ;
for is it not true that I, too, have failed ?

I have been among you ten years. Oh, to
think of the hopes I had when I came among
you ! How many, think you, have been fulfilled?
I do not wish to speak of myself,
except as a type and a warning to you, and
God grant it may be so — perchance a comfort
to some. Have I not worked, and watched,
and prayed ? Have I not taught and visited,
preached and waited, year after year (how
feebly and faultily God knows ; but still I
have done it) ? I have used my strength for
you ; and what is the result ? My brothers
and sisters — my children whom God has
given me — have pity on me ! I am going
to another sphere of work. Pray for me.

*' Enough of myself. We have spoken of
failures. I speak it reverently — Christ's
ministry on earth was a failure at first. What
did He leave behind Him when He died a
shameful death ? A few poor women and
fishermen who believed. It is the same story

through the Early Church. It is the same
story with missions now : much work, many
lives lost — nay, not lost, given for God —
and few conversions. And the world scoffs !
Never mind ; let it scoff. It scoffed at Jesus
of Nazareth, at Saul of Tarsus, at Peter the
fisherman. But worse than that. Our own
hearts fail us. So the apostles cried out for
fear, saying, ' We perish ' ; but He was with
them in the boat, and they perished not. So
His ark, the Church, now is sanctified by
His presence, and can never sink. Therefore,
courage ! He whom they called the carpenter's
son is God Almighty; Peter the
fisherman and Matthew the publican are
saints in glory. Earthly failure may be
heavenly success. I could almost say that
heavenly success necessitates earthly failure.
God reckons not by years. Look up, poor
toiling ones, whom Christ has redeemed !
Think not He despises the day of small

things ; think not He looks down on earthly
callings. As a priest of God, speaking for
almost the last time to you as your parish
priest, I bid you come. Cast your burdens,
your sins, your unfinished works, your miserable
failures, at His feet ; and one day —
ah, the joy and glory of that day! — you
shall find those failures were His successes ;
and the darkness and dimness of earthly
sight shall fade away and vanish before the
brightness and the beauty of the vision of
the face of Christ ! "

Hugh felt the thrill that passed through
the whole congregation as the preacher made
his personal appeal ; and he, too, was carried
away by the rapt enthusiasm of the last
few sentences. For a moment it seemed to
him that his earthly hopes and ambitions
were indeed small and despicable measured
by the standard of such a life as Mr Johnson
pictured. For a moment the gates of

heaven seemed almost opened, and some rays
of glory streamed out and were reflected in
the preacher's face. Only for a moment.
Earth is too near, too tangible, and the
golden gates are fast closed. It is given
only to a few to see beyond them — and
perhaps to none, until they have passed that
other portal, above which is written the
story of suffering in characters of blood.
When Hugh left the church, the night
closed round him again dark and gloomy.

CHAPTEE XIII.

"Delicately pure, and marvellously fair."
I could not choose but deem her wise."

Monday morning rose chill and wintry ; the
premature spring was over, and the east
wind had come, but not at present in great
severity.

Hugh went to see Nora as soon as he had
breakfasted, and found her surrounded by
her children, the eldest of whom, the little
boy of four years old, for whose sake she
had come to Eastport, was dancing about
in high glee, and ran up to his uncle, crying
out that " Father was coming ! father was
coming ! "

Have you heard from Willie, Nora ? "

"Yes — he is due here in a day or two ; so
I hope you will just see him "

'' I shall just miss him," he said, and
showed her the letter he had received from
Cannes.

Her face fell as she read. " I am afraid
Ion is very bad," she said.

I daresay he will soon get better again,"
Hugh answered. " I don't think my father
seems very anxious, and I can't make out
why he is sending for me in such desperate
haste."

"That is what makes me afraid Ion is
really very ill."

Do you know, Nora, I expect it is the
mother. It is awfully hard on me ! "

"It is indeed, you poor old Hugh," said
his sister. Nora was well trained. With a
soldier-brother who had confided his military
ambitions to her ever since he could talk.

and with a husband who was always going
off to some distant corner of the earth in
search of adventures, she had learnt to think
calmly of dangers which made other women
turn pale, and she gave all the warmth of
her sisterly sympathy and affection to Hugh
in his disappointment. She would not let
him off his ride. He begged her to make
his excuses to Miss Neville and to Lady
Katherine on the score of his sudden departure
; but Nora declared she had set her
heart on having him for an escort, and that
he must find time to come, if only for an
hour. He was really hungry for another
sight of Dorothea, before he left her for
an indefinite time, and he was persuaded
without much difficulty to do as his sister
wished.

As they started off together, Nora said
gently to him, *' Hugh, don't Ijc angry with
me if I give you a little piece of advice.

VOL. II. E

You arc not going on a dangerous expedition
now ; so if that hindered you from speaking
to Dorothy, the reason exists no longer. If
I were you, I would not let a good opportunity
slip. Don't worry yourself now with
thinking about the Greek girl. If Dorothy
does care for you, you have no right to
sacrifice her to a ridiculous fancy ; and you
can tell her all about it some day. Make
sure of her love first, and then afterwards
you can make any confessions you like."

That's the way Will treated you, I suppose
? I hope you weren't awfully down on
him when he did confess."

He had nothing to confess," said Nora,
indignantly ; "at least " — as the recollection
came across her of various youthful peccadilloes
which she had hoard of since her
marriage — "at least, nothing to speak of."

Those things are all matters of comparison,"
said Hugh, lightly; " what seems nothing

to an easy-going little woman like yon,
might be a grievous crime in Miss Neville's
eyes."

I believe she has more sense than to be
so silly. Besides, after all, what are we
women that we should sit in judgment
on the men? Do you imagine we are immaculate
? "

Hugh made no reply. He certainly could
not imagine the possibility of Dorothea
Neville ever having anything to confess to
him. As they entered the dockyard, he said
to his sister, " I have a great respect for
your advice in general, but in this case I
don't think I shall follow it. When I ask
Miss Neville to — to marry me (if I ever do),
I should like to feel there is nothing to stand
between us, — nothing for her to find out
afterwards, to shock her or — or make her
disappointed in one ; in fact, I should have
to tell her all about my Corfu folly."

You are incorrigible. I wash mv hands

o

my

of you," said Nora, with a little laugh, and
shrugging her shoulders slightly.

Dorothea and her cousin Charlie were waiting,
and the cavalcade started at once — the
ladies first, and the gentlemen following.
Nora did not object to this arrangement in
the beginning; but she did not intend it
to continue long. While it lasted, however,
she took the opportunity to tell Dorothea of
her brother's change of plans. " Do try and
console him a little," she said ; " he is so very
broken-hearted."

It took some time to get beyond the town,
for Eastport extended a long way on the
other side of the dockyard ; but when at last
they had left the street behind them, they
quickened their pace along the road, till they
reached the line of red-sandstone hills at the
top of the harbour, and plunged into delicious
green lanes, sheltered from the sea-breezes

by thick copses and high banks that
were bright already here and there with early
primroses. Here Dorothea found herself beside
Hugh, and noticed at once that he was
not in his usual spirits ; so she took Nora's
advice, and tried to comfort him. She was
a little shocked, however, to discover that
he was thinking; more of himself than of his
brother.

Hugh took note of the effect his words
produced, with all a lover's quickness of
apprehension. '' You think I am an unfeeling
wretch," he said, — " but I am really
awfully sorry for Ion ; only I don't see why
he should not get over this attack, as he has
done before, when he has been every bit as
bad. And — don't you see? — shall do no goodby
going to Cannes ; I can't make him any
better. On the other hand, I am losing an
opportunity which perhaps only comes once
in a lifetime to a fellow. That is just what

the General said, when I went to get my
leave yesterday."

I am very sorry for you," said Dorothea,
looking full at him with her blue eyes ; " and
I suppose it is just what I have always
thought — your profession comes first with
you, and your family afterwards."

What made you think that of me ? " he
asked, surprised.

"Oh, not of you in particular," she returned,
laughing ; "I was thinking of menin
general. It is natural and proper, I suppose,
that your profession should be the occupation
of your life, and everything else
subordinate. With us women it's just the
contrary — family first, and all other things
afterwards."

A beautiful old-fashioned doctrine. Miss
Neville."

Things are none the worse for being old-fashioned,"
she said, quickly.

*the worse? No; I meant what I said
when I called it beautiful. If a thing is good
to begin with, the older it gets the better
it is."

There was a little pause, and then Dorothea
said, in a voice that sounded rather
strange to her own ears, for she was treading
on unfamiliar ground, " Mr Moore, I wish
you had heard Mr Johnson's sermon last night
at S. Thomas's."

To her surprise he answered, " I did hear
it. But I am not good enough for that sort
of thing. Miss Neville. My practice and his
preaching are very far apart."

She turned aside with a half smile on her
lips, and said, 'don't you think it's inspiring
to see a man who really lives up to his
teaching ? One feels so certain he means
every word he says, and his life is the proof."

*' Ah ! you think that, because you are
good. For fellows like me, it's disheartening

to sec a man like that. It's too high a level.
It is all very well to talk al^out a failure
being really a success, Ijut that does not alter
the fact that the thing is really and truly
a failure at the time, and you feel it to be
one."

Yes, I know," said Dorothea, and paused.
There was a step beyond which she dared
not venture, and she hoped he would understand
her unexpressed sympathy; besides
which, there was a feeling at the bottom of
her heart which she had never really probed.
Why was it a relief that he was not going to
Africa? She was very shy of giving vent
to any such sentiment, considering the naval
blood she inherited ; but presently something
of what she felt transpired, and, to her surprise,
Hugh seemed quite grateful for her
lame little speech, and said he had only just
begun to find out how hard it was to leave
Eastport.

I am sorry you are going quite so soon,
for another reason," lie continued, emboldened
by this manner. " I hoped you would
have come with us on Thursday."

"Where to?"

"Oh, haven't you heard ? I thought
mother had told you about it. Sir John
Hawker has asked us to drive over to see his
place on his drag. We are to have a sort of
picnic-luncheon there — you know the house
is unfinished as yet — and drive back in the
afternoon. It seems rather early for a picnic,
doesn't it ? But if the weather is nice, I
think it will be rather amusing." She faltered
rather as she said the last few words,
for Hugh's expression was more dark and
angry than she had ever seen it. She had
never felt frightened of him before ; but now
she dropped her eyes and could not raise
them, though she knew he was looking at
her.

"It won't be nice weather," he said at
last, in a dry hard voice. " It will be bitter
cold, and too long a drive. Don't go, ]\Iiss
Nevil"

How can you tell what the weather will
be like on Thursday ? " she said, flicking at
some pink catkins with her whij:), and trying
to laugh. *' Besides, it doesn't depend on
me. Mother has arranged it with Sir John."

"Never mind. Don't go," he repeated,
earnestly. " Do listen to me. I tell you
Hawker is not the man you ought to be
seen about with."

"What do you mean, Mr Moore?" she
asked, blushing violently, and speaking with
a ring of haughtiness in her voice, but still
avoiding his eye.

If you don't understand, how can I tell
you ? " he said, bitterly. " I only know that
it's bad enough anyhow to go — because of
you ; and to leave you with that fellow

hanging about, is a thousand times worse.
Do promise me — promise me, Miss Ncvill,
that you won't have anything to say to
him."

What right have you to speak in such a
way to me ? " she cried, with burning cheeks
and flashing eyes.

Eight ! None, I suppose — none, except
that I love you so. I want to keep you, to
protect you from every one else, from everyone
that could hurt you. Oh, don't be
angry with me ! " he cried, passionately. " I
did not mean to take you so by surprise.
I could not help it. Oh, tell me you will
give me some hoj^e ! tell me "

Stop, stop ! You must not talk like that
to me ; you have no right. Perhaps you
don't know that I have heard ; but — Ijut —

how can you be free ? I am not the first "

The words seemed to choke her, and she
stopped short. This time it was Hugh who

quailed before her gaze. lie was taken
utterly by surprise. His passion had hurried
him on, and he had spoken entirely without
premeditation. The thought of Clara had
never once crossed his mind.

*' Not the first," he echoed ; and with a sort
of despair it flashed across him that now was
the time of reckoning, when his folly would
be visited on his own head. " Who has told
you ? What do you know about me — about
this story ? "

'more than you approve of, it seems,"
said Dorothea, almost fiercely ; but her eyes
were full of tears. She saw his consternation,
and it was with a bitter pang that she felt
convinced he had no explanation to offer.

When Hugh spoke again, his voice sounded
thin and hollow, the light had died out of
his face, and with a sort of dogged hopelessness
he said —

'what account has reached your ears of

my past follies, of course I can't tell — nor
who can have told yon ; and I have no right
to inquire, or even ask for an explanation.
All I know is, that whatever happened in the
past is bitterly repented of now."

*' And how can I tell that you won't say
that again by - and - by ? " she said, with a
calmness that cut him like a knife. It was
a test of Hugh's devotion that her words,
instead of lashing him to a fury, produced
only a more hopeless protestation of his love.

You would not need to ask that if you
could see into my heart," he said ; " but I
can't hope for your love if you despise me,
though you can't cure me of loving you —
that I shall do always."

I don't despise you," she said, more
softly. " I am only very, very much disappointed.
I thought I could trust you, and
that we should always be friends ; and now,
now "

A tear dropped down upon her hand, but
she hastily brushed it away. There was a
feeling as if the world had suddenly grown
black, and for a moment all her faculties
seemed suspended. Hugh's voice seemed
to come to her from a fiiY distance : she
heard his words without realising the sound.

"Oh, don't cry ! " he was saying in a tone
of anguish. " I ought not to have spoken
like this, — fool that I am to have caused
you a moment's distress ! I am all that
you think me, and a great deal worse ; but
I shall be gone directly, and you can forget
all about me. Only don't cry. Miss Neville,
or I can never forgive myself."

Dorothea came to herself with a little
shudder.

I am not crying," she said, proudly.
It is raining ; we had bettor make haste
home ; " and galloping up to Mrs Fitzgerald,
who was a little way in advance, she pointed

to the coining storm, wliicli was indeed beginning
to descend sharply.

The rapid ride homewards in the face of
the stinging wind and rain was a relief to
at least two of the party. The farewells
at the doorstep of Admiralty House were
of necessity very brief; and Dorotheass
avoidance of Hugh's proffered hand, as she
was jumping off her horse, escaped observation.
She ran into the house, waving
good-byes to Nora, and Hugh turned away
with a sore heart.

Never a glance even for friendship's sake,
and she said we were friends," he thought
bitterly, misjudging, as we so often do in
the blindness of wounded feeling, the actions
of those dearest to us.

Good-bye, Nora," said Hugh that evening,
just before he started for Cannes. " I've
thrown and lost, thanks to your advice ; but
it can't be helped. Somebody has been talking

about the Corfu l)U8ines.s, and consequently
she will have nothing to say to me. I was
a fool not to have let things be ! "

He was gone before his sister could answer
him.

Turning into the station, he almost ran
up against Captain Newman, who was coming
in an opposite direction. He had not
heard of Hugh's summons, and was surprised
to see him there and in such a hurry.

"I'm off to town, en route for Cannes,"
Moore said, in answer to the Captain's
questions. **My brother is worse, and my
father won't hear of my going to Africa,
but has sent for me post - haste. I have
not a moment to lose." A whistle sounded
in the distance. " I don't know when I
shall be back; but I say, Newman, do look
after Miss Neville. Whatever you do, don't
let her marry that beast Hawker. Goodbye
; " and wringing his friend's hand, he was

off before the astounded Captain could frame
any reply to' the strange request.

When Dorothea came downstairs after
changing her wet habit, she found Charlie
had already announced the news of Hugh
Moore's immediate departure. She seated
herself by the fire, and bent forward to warm
her hands, which were as cold as ice, and
no one noticed the deep) flush on her cheek
when Hugh's name was mentioned. All
through the long afternoon she was called
upon to entertain visitors, who seemed to
have chosen that particular day to arrive
in endless succession ; and not till she came
home, after a tedious dinner-party at the
General's, where the favourite topic of conversation
had been the sudden departure
of the charming A.D.C., did she get a single
quiet minute to herself, when she couhl let
her thoughts dwell on the startling incidents
of the morning's ride.

VOL. II. F

As a matter of fact, she had been utterly
unprepared for Hugh's declaration. Except
for those few words on board the flag-ship,
which had surprised her at the moment, he
had always been very guarded in what he
had said to her; and although they had
had many long talks together, and had
found their tastes and ideas generally in
harmony, Dorothea had never stopped to
consider whether he was thereby paying
her any special attentions — and, indeed, had
always thought of him as a man already
engaged.

This morning's announcement had come
to her with a great shock : first, to her confidence
in Hugh, which had been steadily
growing ever since she first met him ; and
then to her own self-esteem. What could
she have been about, to have let things get
to this pass — that it should make the whole
difference in the world to her whether Hugh

'Moore were true or false ? Had lie only been
playing a dart all the while, pretending to
care about things that interested her just in
order to amuse himself ? — compromising himself
with a pretty Corfu girl, and then trying
his luck with the first girl he came across in
England, who was something of an heiress ?
Was he only a typical soldier, after all, making
use of his opportunities, and as empty-headed
as the rest of them ?

Far into the night she sat chewing the cud
of bitter reflections — sore-hearted, wounded,
and angry, and knowing she must put a
brave face on it all by morning light. It
never entered her head to take Lady Katherine
into her confidence. Her instinct told
her that her mother would make it into
an occasion of recommending the favoured
suitor Sir John Hawker; and, above all
things, she felt that a discussion on that
subject was to be avoided — though in a

moment of violent reaction she tried to persuade
herself that his straightforward desire
to marry her was better, after all, than this
hypocrisy of Hugh's.

Poor Dorothea ! the righteous indignation
of youth was carrying her far beyond reasonable
limits, and in the darkness of a first
disappointment she put out her hands to
feel who there was idiom she could trust.
Instinctively she turned with relief to the
thought of a faithful friend on whom she
had already often relied, and who had never
taken advantage of their intimacy to utter
one word of anything more tender than
friendship.

CHAPTER XIV.

As she turned her face in going, thus, she drew me on to love her,
And to worship the divineness of the smile hid in her eyes. . . .
And thus, morning after morning, spite of vows and spite of sorrow,
Did I follow at her drawing, while the week-days passed along."

The paragraph which Clara read in an
English paper at Paris, and which interested
her far more than the foreign telegrams or
parliamentary news, was this: "We regret
to learn that the Honourable Ion Moore,
eldest son of Viscount Glengarn, is lying
dangerously ill at Cannes. The doctors
pronounce his case to be hopeless."

In Miss Wilson's quick and practical mind
the consequences of Ion Moore's death at once
shaped themselves. She saw directly that
this meant Hugh's promotion — that an elder

son was a much more important person thana
younger one, and proportionably difficult
to " catch." But so far from being disheartened,
it only encouraged her to the
attack which she felt was now more project
than ever. Mr Wilson was anxious to reach
England : time was going on, and his holiday
would not last for ever ; so for once his
wishes coincided with his daughter's, and
their stay in Paris was a very brief one.
London was the next stage, and here the
Consul had expected to remain ; but Clara
was fidgety, and declared that the foggy
atmosphere and perpetual gloom depressed
her and made her feel ill. It was true that
the east winds shrivelled her up as they
would have done one of her own native
flowers ; so she made Ward — who still hung:
about them, unable to shake off the charm
that bound him to her side — persuade her
father that Eastport, being on the south

coast, would be milder and brighter, — that
they could establish themselves in lodgings,
and that he could easily run up and down
himself, for any necessary business. The
Consul grumbled. " What was the use," he
said, '' of going to England, if you meant to
settle down at a seaside town and see nobody
? " But a glance at Clara's pale cheeks
was enough ; and he gave in as usual, without
a struggle. He made a feeble attempt
to send Ward about his business ; but when
Jack pleaded humbly for a little more time
to make another trial, and said that he must
be at Eastport off and on to look after his
yacht, what could the Consul say ? He had
really no power to refuse, after the way Clara
had treated her patient lover.

So to Eastport they came, and Mr Wilson
took lodgings for himself and his daughter
in the sunny terrace that fronts the common,
and looks over it to the sea, where you could

watch the breakers dance and sparkle in the
spring sunshine as the wind catches them,
and drives the spray backwards till it falls
again in rainbow-tinted showers.

Jack Ward was obliged to leave them a
good deal alone at first — the best thing, perhaps,
he could have done for his own advantage
; for as soon as Clara felt herself at all
deserted or lonely, she wished him back
again, and melted a little in her hardness
towards him.

So fur, this journey to England had not
been a great success. Many a time she was
tempted to wish she had not come further
than Venice. Was Giovanni still thinking
of her, she wondered ? Her thoughts often
strayed back to that evening in the balcony.
Nothing had ever sounded so sweet in her
ears as that whisper of " more " ; and yet,
what was he but a poor painter ? and Hugh
would be a Viscount some day.

But the greatest disappointment was yet to
come. She and her father were out walking
a few days after their arrival, battling up
the High Street against the wind, and secretly
feeling, both of them, that Corfu was a ]Paradise
compared to England, when Clara suddenly
caught sight of Charlie Drake. He did
not seem at first as if he were going to notice
them; but she had no intention of being
passed over, and attracted his attention by
stopping short in front of him, with a little
gesture of recognition. He was startled fora
moment, and as the recollection of who she
was flashed through him, he apologised for
his rudeness. Clara was very gracious — she
felt too much pleased to meet any one she
knew, to be anything else ; and besides, here
was the very person who could tell her what
she wanted to know. But Charlie was in a
hurry, and she found it very difficult to
detain him. To tell the truth, he was considerably

disgusted at this chance renewal
of an acquaintance which did very well at
Corfu, perhaps ; but here, at Eastport, it was
quite a different thing, and the old Consul
did look so confoundedly shabby ! Poor Mr
Wilson ! he was pluming himself on being
so remarkably well turned out — a new hat,
a new coat, even his best pair of boots. A
large shirt-front ? Well, why shouldn't anyone
show as much white linen as they liked ?
Happily, however, Drake was too much of
a gentleman to show his disgust, though he
did turn as much away from him as he
politely could, and addressed his remarks
to Clara.

"You have come at a dull time of scar
for Eastport," he said ; " there are no more
balls till after Easter, and the place is empty
just now. By the by, you knew Moore,
didn't you ? He had to go off to Cannes a
few days ago to sec his brother, who is very

ill, and he won't be back for some time, I
suppose."

Oh ! " said Clara, growing a shade paler,
is he likely to be away long ? "

"No one knows," answered Drake; "he
went off in a tremendous hurry. I fancy it
all depends on the brother."

Clara did not detain him now, as he raised
his cap and hastened on. This piece of
news took her quite by surprise, and she
wanted a little time to think about it.

There was no mistake about its being a
blow to her, and her plans were sadly upset.
She knew her father would not stay
away from Corfu for an indefinite period.
Was it any use waiting for Hugh ? Should
she make up her mind to accept Mr Ward,
who was well off, and very devoted to her ?
Or there was Giovanni, who had fascinated
her more than she really knew ; but he had
no money. Well, she would wait a little, at

any rate. Clara had great faith in possibilities
; and who knew what might turn upto
her advantage during a few weeks' stay
at Eastport?

Charlie did not tell Miss Wilson why he
was in such a hurry. He was in uniform,
and might well be supposed to be engaged
in urgent business matters ; but in truth he
was hastening back to the dockyard, after
executing some orders of his uncle's, to
change into civil dress, and join the party
on Sir John Hawker's drag.

The expedition had been postponed, for
the weather had changed after all, and Miss
Ncvill had suffered from that wet ride, and
had been kept indoors for a few days. Now,
however, except for the piercing wind, it was
clear and bright, — a sort of day to put you
into a thoroughly good humour with yourself
and every one else, unless you should
happen to be troubled with neuralgia, and

then it was best to regard the world from
behind your window-panes.

An indefinable change had come over
Dorothea, and Frances became more or less
conscious of it, chiefly by reason of the
absence of objections to this plan of Sir
John's, which hitherto her cousin had opposed
in a manner quite after Fan's own
heart. She was absolutely passive now about
the arrangements ; and when Fan, terrified
at the very idea, asked her cousin whether
she was really going to favour Sir John's
suit after all, she only got a faint smile from
Dorothea and the ominous words, " Wait and
see." Quiescent observation was the last
attitude in the world that suited the excitable
Frances. For once in her life she was
really relieved to find that Captain Newman
was to be of the party ; on him at least she
could reckon as an ally. But low she wished
Hugh Moore had not gone ! He had a knack

of asserting his position as one of their chosen
friends, thereby keeping Sir John at a distance,
with truly charming insouciance.

Punctually at the appointed hour the drag
made its appearance before Admiralty House.
Sir John descended from the box, and begged
Lady Katherine to honour him with her presence
on the seat beside him with as much
formality as if he were giving an invitation
to a dinner-party. Her ladyship, however,
declined the favour.

I should have liked it dearly," she said,
*^ only I am so stupidly nervous. I should
be so occupied in watching what the leaders
were going to do, that I should not be able
to speak a word. One of my girls w411, I
know, enjoy it stir better — let me sit behind."

Sir John had already turned to Dorothea —

Am I to be so deeply honoured ? " he
said, lifting his hat and seeking to catch her
eye. " You must wrap yourself up well, for

the wind blows through one occasionally.
May I assist you to mount?"

Dorothea's face was inscrutable — so at least
thought Captain Newman, who stood watching
her. Frances glanced at him ; and the
expression on her face, coupled with Hugh
Moore's mysterious charge, mystified him
entirely. It was not possible that Dorothea
was being; coerced into an engagement with
this man ? At any rate, he could do absolutely
nothing in the matter, unless she gave
him an opportunity ; and to be keenly on the
look-out for this opportunity was the sailor's
occupation all through that long drive. He
was not, therefore, a very lively addition to
the rest of the party. Sir John was really a
good whip, and had his horses well in hand.
After steering; through the intricacies of the
narrow streets, he was at leisure to talk to
his companion, and found her cpiite ready
to be amused. She had been wondering

whether it were possible to get her own
feelings as perfectly under control as those
four well-bred horses were, and was not
sorry to be distracted from her somewhat
dreary meditations.

"You have never seen my place, Miss
Neville," he began.

No, never," she replied ; " you are building
a large house, are you not ? "

"Oh, nothing so very great. I want
plenty of room to entertain my friends —
political friends from London, don't you
know? — people I should not be ashamed to
ask you and Lady Katherine to meet."
Dorothea did not quite know what he
meant, but he went on — "And now, you
know, people bring such a lot of servants,'
that one must make the back part of the
house nearly as big as the front ; so it comes
to a good large place altogether. Twenty or
thirty people staying in the house — just a

nice little party of one's own friends, — that's
my idea of comfort. Then I am going to have
a ball-room, for I hope to give a house-warming
so soon as the work is finished, and a
great ball to all the county, at which I hope
you will do the honours." Dorothea raised
her eyes with such a look of blank astonishment
that he stammered out a change of expression
: " I mean — don't you know ? — that
you will honour me with your company."

How cold it is ! " she said irrelevantly,
shivering a little. Captain Newman was
sitting just behind her, and must have heard
what she said, for he instantly placed a
cloak round her shoulders. She turned and
thanked him with the bright sweet smile
that sent a thrill all through his veins. Sir
John saw everything behind his eye-glass.
Miss Neville never looked at him like that.

A drive of an hour and a half brought
them to their destination, and Sir John kept

VOL. II. G

the conversation pretty continuously turned
on himself and his proceedings during the
whole of that time. The entrance led
through an imposing gateway, a little less
new than the house, which peered over the
crest of an undulating park, a forest of chimneys
and Belgium turrets. Sir John swept
up the drive, and brought his team to a
stand-still under a grand portico, where the
door stood open to receive his guests.
Everything was of course unfinished, but
bore traces of lavish expenditure : there were
young plantations in every direction, but it
was evident that years must elapse before
the place could look really habitable and
comfortable. The most homely-looking part
of the whole seemed to be the orchard, a
relic of the days when an ivy-covered tumbledown
farmhouse occupied the site which was
now covered by this brand-new palatial residence
; and it was a relief to turn from the

glaring bricks and mortar to the grey gnarled
tree-trunks, with their twisted stems and
moss-grown branches.

A sumptuous luncheon was served in the
unfurnished dining-room, and afterwards a
solemn procession followed Sir John over
the whole domain — half amused, half bored
by his lengthy explanations and elaborate
consultation as to various kinds of decoration.
Frances soon grew restive, and she and
Charlie amused themselves with chasing one
another round the bare passages and empty
rooms, and up and down the resounding
stairs. Everything comes to an end at last ;
and Lady Katherine, completely exhausted,
said she would rest in the dining-room,
where a few sofas and easy - chairs had
already found their way, while the others
went round the garden. Sir John now
attached himself exclusively to ]bliss Ncvill,
and took her round to sec the stables.

See," he said, " I have allowed a dozen
boxes for hunters, so that I may be able to
mount my friends sometimes. Do you like
hunting, Miss Ncvill?"

Oh, very much when I get it ; but I am
not supposed to hunt."

Not unless you have some gentleman in
charge of you, perhaps ? Well, your parents
are quite right to take the utmost care of
such a precious daughter. But if, for instance,
I were there to look after you, then
perhaps "

"And loose-boxes too," she interrupted
hastily, wishing with all her heart that some
of the others would appear. " How comfortable
they must be ! I always envy
the horses which have loose-boxes — don't
you ? "

'* I don't envy anybody or anything just
now," he said, 'when I have you by my
side — my idea of perfect bliss "

*' Oh, there are the others ! " said Dorothea,
with a gasp of relief, as Frances and Captain
Newman came round the corner, her cousin
exclaiming, " Oh, Dolly, I have been hunting
for you everywhere ; what a time we
have kept Aunt Katherine waiting ! "

Sir John's face grew black with wrath and
disappointment, which he was not sufficiently
well-bred to conceal. To be foiled just at
this moment, when he was about to touch
the summit of his ambition — when the object
for which he had laboured so long;, and to
secure which had been the cause of this very
expedition, seemed just within his grasp (for
it had never entered into his calculations
that Miss Neville could refuse his offer) — was
more than he could bear with equanimity.
But, for Frances, the point was gained. She
cared not a jot for his exhibition of temper,
and extreme unwillingness to enter into conversation
with her. She absolutely cijiitriwd

to make him accompany her back towards
the house, chattering and laughing all the
while in a state of feverish excitement,
hardly realising the importance of her Ijold
manoeuvre in her delight at rescuing her
cousin, as she thought, and foiling Sir John.
Captain Newman, meanwhile, walked silently
by Dorothea's side. The latter was surprised
at the combination of her cousin and the
Commander, wondering vaguely how they
had got together at that particular moment ;
but she was too full of relief at the escape
from that dreadful crisis, which she had
been trying so earnestly to avoid all the
day, to be able to frame any very definite
ideas, or indeed to break the silence,
which her companion felt to be terribly
embarrassing.

The facts were these : Frances suddenly
discovered, in the act of running races up
and down the terrace with two little woolly

puppies, that Dorothea was missing, and, with
an added pang of alarm, Sir John Hawker
also. Charlie was nowhere to be seen either.
So she rushed up to Captain Newman, who
was pacing along a side-walk with an abstracted
air and grave face, exclaiming, " Oh,
Captain Newman, where is Dorothy? Do
come with me and find her. She must be at
the mercy of that horrid man. Come quick,
and let us hunt them out ! "

He stood quite still, however, his face perhaps
a shade paler than usual, and looked
sharply into Fan s face as he said, " Are you
sure you know what you are about? Do
they want to be disturbed ? "

Disturbed ! " she cried, stamping her foot,
and almost crying. "Don't sou see, Dolly
has nobody to help her ? If you won't come,
I must go alone. I know what Dolly wants,
if no one else does." The tears were standing
in her sparkling eyes, and she turned hastily

away. Captain Newman was by her side
with one stride.

They are gone round by the stables," was
all he said, and showed her the shortest way.

So stupid of Charlie ! " she cried breathlessly,
as they hurried along. " He ran off
somewhere just when I most wanted him."
And they turned the corner. Captain New-man
slackening speed as the pair they were
in search of came in sight.

Dorothea's continued silence made the Commander
feel more and more uncomfortable.
It seemed utterly impossible to talk commonplaces,
and yet he could not begin to refer to
what had just taken place. For the second
time that day he felt a little doubt as to her
feelings, and as to how much he could trust
Miss Drake's assurances : perhaps this sudden
interruption of the tete-astute had been, after
all, an entire mistake; and how on earth
could he frame an apology ?

At last, however, the spell was broken by
Miss Neville saying, quite simply, " You can't
guess how thankful I was to see you at that
moment. Captain Newman ; " and then, with
a hard little laugh, she added, " I hope Fan
is enjoying herself," for the sound of her
cousin's voice and rather noisy laughter
reached them as they slowly followed the
pair in front of them towards the house.

But still Captain Newman felt at a loss
how to talk to her. She had been so unlike
herself all day — so uncertain even in her
manner to Sir John Hawker; and he had
noticed also her studied avoidance of the
mention of Hugh Moore and his sudden departure.
He had hoped so earnestly that
some words of hers would have thrown light
on that mysterious communication of the
young soldier's ; and yet how could he help
her if she did not take him more into lier
confidence? Her manner all the while said

SO much more than her words, that he felt
bound to continue in his attitude of silent
protection, watching for every indication
which would show him how to proceed.

Frances left Sir John to her aunt as soon
as they reached the house, and the indignant
lover seized the opportunity for a little private
conversation with Lady Katherine. He
told her how he had often contrived, after
some trouble, to secure Miss Neville for a
tete-astute, but that they had never been together
for five minutes before they had been
interrupted by Captain Newman. He would
have thought nothing of it, he said, had it
only occurred once, but the same thing had
happened over and over again. He had
noticed perpetually at dances, that whenever
he spoke to Miss Neville, Captain Newman
was at her elbow ; that constantly, when he
had begged for a dance, Captain Newman
bad claimed it for his own. In short, tidings

had come to such a pass, that if he were in
any other country but England, he must
have called him out ; as it was, he could
only appeal to Lady Katherine as to whether
such conduct was becoming in an officer, and
above all, if she were aware of the fact, and
approved of it.

Lady Katherine was genuinely astonished.
She was not at all quick-sighted in such
matters, and it had never occurred to her to
be alarmed at her daughter's intimacy with
Captain Newman. But now, of a sudden, all
the little events of the past winter seemed
to stand before her in startling distinctness.
Making every allowance for the exaggeration
of a jealous and not very successful lover,
the facts he had stated were more or less
true. Captain Newman had appeared at
every pall to which they went, and lie had
danced a good deal with Dorothea, and very
little with any one else, What she had regarded

as respectful friendliness, and nothing
more, now wore an air of intolerable
presumption and unwarrantable familiarity.
Could it be possible that Dorothea liked
him ? It was at her special request that he
had been of the party that very day. But
no ! she could not believe her daughter to
be so deficient in the sense of what was
fitting. She would, however, caution heron
the subject.

To tell the truth, Lady Katherine's mind,
never capable of containing more than one
idea at a time, had been entirely engrossed
with the notion of Sir John Hawker's wooing
of her daughter ; and great was her astonishment
and dismay to discover, as she thought,
what had been going on. She only said,
however, in her most dignified tones, " I
think I may answer for it. Sir John, that
you shall have no further grounds for
complaint," "^

Charlie Drake was the only member of
that little party who had no arrive pense
as they started on their return drive. Frances
took her aunt's breath away by dancing
up to Sir John, and saying in the most resistless
manner possible, " Please, Sir John,
do take me on the box going home. I love
seeing the horses so, and I know much more
about them than Dorothy."

It was impossible for the disconcerted
lover to refuse the request made in such a
manner by Miss Neville's cousin ; and it was
wonderful to see the equanimity with which
Frances bore the scolding which her aunt
administered to her, as soon as she had the
chance, on her forward and unbecoming
behaviour, — but that was deferred till they
got home.

For the present, fate was favouring the
brave. The two gentlemen had the outside
places on the seat behind the box, with Lady

Katherine and her daughter between them
the Commander by Miss Neville's side, and
Charlie Drake l3y his aunt. Now that she
was on the alert, Lady Katherine noticed,
with alarmed displeasure, the terms of intimacy
existing between the two — an intimacy
less expressed in words than in the manner
in which they conversed, for a sense of relief
that the long day of trying situations was
over unloosed Dorothea's tongue, and she
gave herself up to the enjoyment of unrestrained
conversation with her old and faithful
friend. Had she known all that was
passing in Captain Newman's mind underneath
that calm and carefully guarded
exterior, she would have been terribly disconcerted.
Perhaps he had never before felt
so strongly tempted to try and win this
treasure for himself. It was almost more
than he could endure, to sec her persecuted
by Sir John Hawker, compromised by her

mother, and evidently forlorn and unhappy,
mutely appealing to him with childlike simplicity
for sympathy and protection from
troubles which she was too delicate to put
into words. And yet, all the way home, he
was haunted by a certain glance of Hugh's
eyes, which told him so much more than his
words had done, and imperatively commanded
him to wait, at any rate before putting
his own fate to the touch. On the other
hand, what right had Hugh Moore, or anyone
else, to stop him ? Was it not rather a
vague sense that by betraying his real feelings
just then to Dorothea, he would be selfishly
withdrawing the strong right hand of friendship,
on which, in her trouble, she was leaning
so confidently, and thereby making her
path tenfold more difficult to follow than it
was already ? All the time she was talking,
he was balancing this question, so full of
import to himself, in his mind ; and finally,

with the rare instinct of unselfishness, decided
against his own interest, determining,
at any cost, to wait for the present, and watch
the course of events.

Lady Katherine, meanwhile, had plenty of
time for her own observations ; for Charlie
did not think it his duty to make much
conversation for his aunt, and was for ever
chiming in with Fan's remarks to Sir John,
which were generally of a horse or dog character,
and provocative of endless discussion.

At last the drag entered the dockyard, and
was about to draw up triumphantly before
Admiralty House, when they caught sight of
a carriage which was blocking the way.

It's only a fly," said Charlie.

Fancy a wretched fly interfering with
your sweep ! " said Frances, mischievously,
to Sir John.

A wretched fly ! " cried Dorothea, bending
forward quickly. *' It's Mrs Fitzgerald,

and, I do believe, Mr Fitzgerald too. How
lucky we are back in time ! "

Who did your cousin say it was ? " said
Sir John Hawker to Frances in a low tone.

"The Fitzgerald — Mr Moore's sister and
her husband. She was expecting him back
from California, you know, and he was to
arrive any day."

Oh yes ; I think I heard," said Sir John,
a shadow of that former curious expression
passing across his face.

It was quite evident, Frances thought,
that he did not like the Fitzgerald, and she
chuckled a little to herself when she heard
him refusing her aunt's very cordial invitation
to come in to tea. Lady Katherine thought
he had not got over his annoyance at Captain
Newman's behaviour; and the Commander
could not help observing that her manner
to himself had suddenly become very frigid.
She did not even ask him in to tea ; and

VOL. II. H

though Dorothea supplied the omission with
warm friendliness, he would not take advantage
of the daughter's kindness to force himself
where he was apparently not wanted.

We shall see you on Tuesday," Dorothea
called after him as he was turning away ;
and he raised his hat in response.

Nora was in a state of perfect bliss, now
her lord and master had returned ; and he
certainly looked deserving of her homage.
He was of that fine type of Irishman that
one sees sometimes — very tall and powerfully
built, his naturally fair colouring much
reddened by exposure to tropical suns, and
his eyes a deep l)lue of truly Celtic clearness.
He was very proud of his little wife,
and loved her wdtli a passion only second
to his rage for adventure — a taste which,
it was to be hoped, the weight of years
might eventually tame. He had plenty of
thrilling stories of his late expedition to

tell when the first explanations as to his
arrival had been got over, and was holding
his audience in breathless attention when
the distant sound of the door-bell was heard.
That door-bell had a trick of resounding in
the drawing-room in a manner which Charlie
had often characterised as one of the greatest
advantages of Admiralty House, because no
one could ever be caught napping.

Goodness ! another visitor ! " exclaimed
Lady Katherine, whose temper was less
serene than usual that afternoon. " Eun,
Fan, and tell them to say I am not at
home."

Too late ! The bell was already answered
by the well-drilled blue-jacket, and in a moment
" Mr and Miss Wilson, and Mr Ward,"
were announced.

Who on earth are they ? " said Lady
Katherine, in an aside ; but no one could
tell her in the momentary confusion.

As they entered, Nora fortunately recognised
Jack Ward, who was an old
friend of hers as well as of her brother,
and she whispered his name to Dorothea.
Jack, meanwhile, was explaining to Lady
Katherine how he had made friends with
her nephew at Corfu ; and both of them
glanced round instinctively to seek for the
Flag-lieutenant, but Charlie was not to be
seen. On the first appearance of Mr and
Miss Wilson, he had escaped by a side-door ;
for nothing; on earth would have induced
him to be responsible for admitting that
dirty, snuffy old Consul into his aunt's 
— open though' it was to all officials
who chose to call upon the Admiral.

In due form Mv Ward introduced ]mr and
Miss Wilson, and then returned Mrs Fitzgerald's
cordial greeting — feeling a sort of
relief in the well - lured friendliness of the
sparkling little Irishwoman, after Clara's

coquettish familiarity, though lie was unconscious
of the fact when in actual contact
with the girl who had fascinated him. Lady
Katherine had seen many foreign consuls in
her time, but never a much more dowdy-looking
specimen than this one who was
now seated by her side. Clara, on the contrary,
looked excessively pretty in her walk-ingress
— her cheeks glowing with a lovely
carnation, and the little un-english touches
in her dress and manner giving piquancy
to her already attractive appearance. She
was, moreover, for once in her life, oppressed
with shyness ; and this timidity supplied just
the necessary spice of modest reserve which
was so often wanting in her address.

Struck by her unusual beauty, Dorothea
stood for a moment gazing at her ; and then
the word Corfu caught her ear, and in a
moment it flashed throne-li her who this girl
was. No wonder that Hugh had been smitten

with her; and, again, no wonder that
she had been the victim of Hugh's fascinations.
She herself knew well enough the
strength of them. Yes; this was Clara
Wilson, the girl whose affections had been
trifled with, and whom Hugh had thrown
over in order to secure a place in her own
heart. With a rush of generous sympathy,
and without stopping to consider the correctness
of any statements she had heard, Dorothea
went forward and held out her hand
to this young dark-eyed Southern girl, saying
in a voice that was strangely full of
emotion —

I am so glad to see you in England, Miss
Wilson. I have heard about you from my
cousin, Mr Drake. I hope you like our
country as well as Corfu ? "

No, I don't like England very much,"
answered Clara, with a directness that was a
little startling, " nor does my father either.

Only think what happened just now ! We were
coming into the dockyard — you call it that, I
think ? — and the policeman at the gate asked
us where we were going ; and when we told
him, he looked as if he only half believed us,
and then said, quite rudely, ' No smoking
allowed.' You know, of course, papa had his
pipe, and Mr AVard was smoking a cigar, and
it wasn't half finished either ; and papa put
his pipe in his pocket But wasn't it rude of
the policeman ? "

Dorothea laughed, in spite of herself, at
this very naive account of her reasons for not
liking England, and said —

"It is the rule, you know ; no one may
smoke in the dockyard, not even my
father."

She privately thought Clara's story fully
explained the odour of tobacco that pervaded
the room ; but she did not succeed in convincing
her visitor that the dockyard was not

such a terrible and mysterious place as she
imagined.

Meanwhile Mrs Fitzgerald was cautiously
extracting a good deal of information from
Jack Ward, and forming her own conclusions
thereon. She possessed in large measure
the womanly gift of " intuition " ; and in the
present case her faculties were preternaturally
sharpened by love for her brother. Dorothea's
refusal of him had deeply disappointed
her, but she could not bring herself to regard
the decision as final. Indeed she was only
waiting for an opportunity of sounding Dorothea
on the subject, if her friend should ever
see fit to show her the smallest opening in her
defensive armour. She honoured the girl for
the principle on which she had acted, withall
her woman's heart ; but she longed also
to give her a hint, however trifling, as to
the possible mistake she was making in her
premisses.

How difficult it is to leave the spinning of
our web to Fate's nimble fingers ! And how
often we run the danger of breaking the
thread, when we snatch it away in our
impatience !

However, Mrs Fitzgerald was not slow to
perceive that Clara Wilson's presence in East-port,
with Mr Ward in attendance, would be
of no small use in her endeavours to set
matters straight. What further proof was
needed, thought Nora, to show that her brother
had only been caught by a designing
little flirt, whose subsequent conduct had forfeited
any possible claim on him she might
otherwise have had ? She found Jack Ward
quieter and more depressed than she had
ever seen him, and it was not difficult to
guess from his manner a great deal that had
happened and was still going on.

At last, finding the Consul made no move,
she rose to go, saying she was sure that Lady

Katherine needed rest, and by this hint
succeeded in carrying off the whole party.
She invited Mr Ward to come and see her
whenever he felt inclined, adding, " I daresay
we shall meet at this great concert next
week — that is, if I am able to go : all my
movements depend on my news from Cannes ;
but Ion was a little better again when I last
heard."

Is there any hope of his recovery? " asked
Clara.

Mrs Fitzgerald looked rather surprised.
She had not realised that ]\Iiss Wilson knew
so much about her family.

The doctors don't give much hope," lie
said, in a voice that was distinctly repressive ;
but doctors are often mistaken."

Clara's face was inscrutable, and she made
no reply. Presently their roads diverged,
and she said good-bye, adding, as Jack lingered
by Mrs Fitzgerald's side, " Mr Ward, you arc

not going away ? You must come and spend
the evening with us." '

May I really ? " he answered, and Nora
felt her suspicions were correct.

Little wretch ! " she said to her husband
when they were alone, " she has made a regular
victim of poor Jack Ward. But I'll be
even with her yet. I won't have my Hugh's
life spoilt by a designing, foreign "

Gently, my lady," cried Mr Fitzgerald ;
you are always finding out love - stories
wherever you go. By the by, who was
that queer-looking chap on the box of the
drag as we came up to the door ? "

"Oh, that was Sir John Hawker, the Conservative
candidate."

What ! the American fellow you told me
about ? "

Yes. He wants to marry Dorothy
Neville too."

By Jove ! And will she ? "

'' Not if I can help it. You know I want
her for Hugh."

I am quite certain I have seen that fellow
somewhere," mused Mr Fitzgerald. " I shall
remember presently where it was."

CHAPTER XV.

Farewell ! thou art too dear for my possessing."

** Take my hand, brother, iu yours, and seek with me the paths
to those heights."

The following Tuesday morning, Sir John
Hawker might have been seen in earnest consultation
with the one nursery-gardener of
Eastport. He wanted to order a bouquet,
the like of which was not to be seen out of
London, if money could produce it. Sir
John was pretty well aware that this unpretending
but really substantial little tradesman
both would and could rise to pressure,
and pressure, therefore, was used.

There was no attempt at secrecy as to who
was the intended recipient of that lovely

nosegay, for Sir John Hawker took his place
at the entrance of the hall a good twenty
minutes before the concert began that evening,
nodding and talking to his acquaintances,
but not offering his flowers to any of the fair
ladies who cast envious glances at them as
they passed. He would not run the risk of
sending his bouquet to Admiralty House, for
fear Dorothea should refuse to bring it with
her, but preferred this semi-public presentation,
involving, as it did, all but a regular
declaration, in the eyes of all the Eastport
world. He had not sufficient refinement of
feeling even to wonder whether a young lady
would not resent beings so unexpectedly compromised
in public.

The Admiralty House party were almost
the last to arrive, as befitted their rank and
dignity ; and eagerly did Sir John watch
whether Captain Newman were with them :
but no ! they had only come a carriage full —
Lady Katherine, Dorothea, Frances, and the

Flag-lieutenant. Sir John met them at the
door, and, still holding his bouquet, offered
his arm to Lady Katherine, and conducted
her the whole length of the hall to the first
row, where their seats were reserved. She
naturally noticed the flowers, and exclaimed
on their beauty.

"A mere trifle," he answered, "hardly
worth Miss Neville's acceptance ; but I
thought — ah — perhaps she might like to
smell them during the intervals of the music.
May I venture ? " he added, bending down to
Dorothea, who had seated herself between her
mother and Frances, and offering her the
fragrant bouquet.

Dorothea was taken by surprise : she coloured
scarlet, but there was no possibility
of refusing it, and she was obliged to thank
him as Jest she could, under her mother's
eye ; but her pride leapt up all aflame at
the insult which she felt had been offered
to her, and she was cut to the heart at the

thought of what her acquiescence might lead
to. It was some time before she recovered
her composure sufficiently to attend to the
music at all, and then it suddenly flashed across
her, — had Captain Newman been witness' of
the proceeding ?

It so happened that the Commander had
been detained late on board the flagship
that evening, and it was not till the concert
was some way advanced that he had reached
the hall. All the stalls were then full, so
he took a seat in the gallery, which was a
good point of view, and from whence he could
observe the first row and its occupants as
much as he desired. He noted that Sir John
Hawker was in attendance on the Admiralty
party — that he was making himself agreeable
to Lady Katherine, and not unfrequently
leaning across to talk to Dorothea, on whose
lap) a large bouquet was reposing, conspicuous
even at that distance; and the sight filled
him with a va^rue uneasiness.

Between the first and second parts he
descended to the body of the hall, and braved
even Lady Katherine's frigid reception for
the sake of a few words with Dorothea.
Frances immediately left her seat, signalling
to him to take possession of it, while she
went to speak to a friend close by ; but when
he sat down beside her, Dorothea's usual
friendly smile was not forthcoming. He half
anticipated this would be the consequence of
Lady Katherine's determined change of manner
; but with a desperate feeling that this
might be his last chance of conversation with
Dorothea, he resolved to brave it out, and
act as if all was as usual. " What lovely
flowers. Miss Neville ! " he said ; " are they
from your garden ? "

Oh no," she answered, and the red
flush mounted again to her cheek. " Sir
John Hawker gave them to me." Her voice
was very low and constrained.

VOL. II. I

Sir John Hawker ! " said Captain New-man,
in a tone of such grieved surprise that
it broke down her reserve for a moment.
She turned her pleading eyes to him, and
he was horror-struck to see they were full
of tears.

"I could not help it," she said, and then
suddenly drew herself up and turned away.
Lady Katherine was occupied in talking to
the General's wife ; but at that moment she
turned, as if to address her daughter, though
fortunately her purpose was frustrated by
an introduction to a foreign dignitary whom
the General had brought up to her. But
the glance was enough for a daughter who
had not yet declared herself in direct
antagonism to the maternal dictates. She
addressed some ordinary remark, after she
had steadied her voice, to Captain New-man,
and the purport of it was certainly not
likely to encourage her friend in confidential

communications. But he was not in the
mood to take her initiative, and decided to
claim an explanation, at least as far as he
was concerned.

Miss Neville," he said, lowering his voice,
and looking down at the hands which were
so tightly crushing the bouquet on her lap,
noticing a little, perhaps, how they trembled,
" Miss Neville, tell me if I have vexed you
in any way. I need not say it's the last
thing I hould do ; but if I have "

*'No, no, it is not that," cried Dorothea,
quickly; '' you must not ask me to explain.
Mother was vexed the other day. Oh,
can't you understand? I can't tell you."
She buried her face in the flowers, trusting
that the eye-glass of their donor was for once
not scrutinising her with its accustomed
vigilance, and longing with all her heart
to make an end of this trying scene.

Captain Newman was quite silent : he

understood well enough ; it was not that
which required explanation. He was just
feeling the full bitterness of the fact, that
until he had the right to protect her, his
friendship was only adding to the miseries
Dorothea was undergoing. Once more the
old question surged up, " Why not claim
his right ? " He sat there as if spell-bound,
unable to break the silence, which seemed of
an hour's duration, though it was in reality
scarcely a minute ; and it was Dorothea
who was the first to speak. She caught a
glimpse of his face, and her conscience smote
her for being unnecessarily severe.

Captain Newman," she said, with an effort
to smile as usual, " here is Frances comines
Don't misunderstand me if I seem
different ; and you must not be quite so
kind to me. That is all. If you knew how
perplexing it all is "

The music was beginning again — people

returning hurriedly to their seats, Frances
claiming hers. Captain Newman awoke from
his dream. Before the end of the concert
he had disappeared from the room.

"Did you see him give her that?" whispered
Miss Harvey to Clara Wilson, whose
acquaintance she had made. " She does not
look over-amiable, does she ? " They were
standing near the door, where the Admiral's
party, with Sir John Hawker still in attendance,
were waiting for their carriage.

Is he going to marry her ? " asked
Clara.

It looks like it. I can't imagine why he
is so set on it. If he were to go to London,
he might get plenty of richer girls, and as
handsome too. She is going off, I think.
She is not so pretty as she was."

"Do many people admire her?"

Oh, not that I know of. People used
to say that Mr Moore was after her, but he

went off all in a hurry to his brother at
Cannes. Perhaps he'll propose when he
comes back. She'd be sure to have him
now, when there's a coronet in prospect.
It's my belief he did propose before he went
away, and she refused him ; but an eldest
son is different."

*this brother is not dead yet."

"He's dying though. Didn't you see
Mrs Fitzgerald was not here to-night? I
suppose that's Mr Fitzgerald talking to Lady
Katherine. What a handsome man ! "

Mrs Fitzgerald isn't much like Mr floored
should be afraid of her."

'' Do you know Mr J\Ioore ? "

Yes," said Clara, stifling a sigh ; " he was
out at Corfu last autumn."

Oh ! Then do you think you could get
Dorothy Neville to tell you if he did propose
to her or not ? I do so want to know. You
might talk to her about him, and then she

might tell you quite naturally. Do, there's
a dear girl ! "

I don't know," said Clara, doubtfully ; " I
should not like to ask her, — she has been
very kind to me."

'' Why, that's just the reason for you to
ask ! Oh, do take the first opportunity for
finding out ! I will bless you for it ! " said
Miss Harvey, excitedly.

Dorothea," said Lady Katherine as they
went up-stairs together, Frances having run
on in front, " I think you forgot this evening
what I said to you the other day."

No, mother, I did not," said Dorothea, ina
low, despairing voice ; '' but I don't think he
will come and talk to me again."

Well, be careful," said her mother, somewhat
mollified ; " I daresay he will take the
hint."

I am sure he will," she replied, bitterly.
"I should think he would never come

near me again. It is too horrid, seeming
to suggest things which I believe have
never entered his head."

You may trust me for thinking of your
dignity, my dear," said Lady Katherine, with
a touch of severity in her manner. " Goodnight."


Dorothea stood and looked after her mother
as she turned away to her own room. Why
should she not break down this foolish reserve,
throw herself on her mercy, and implore
her to desist from this persecution
about Sir John Hawker ? A single touch
of softness, the slightest hesitation in the
step that was unusually proud and determined,
would have brought Dorothea flying
after her ; but Lady Katherine swept down
the passage, never turning her head to see
if her daughter had gone or stayed behind,
congratulating herself, on the contrary, on
having enforced her orders successfully about

Captain Newman, without bringing matters
to a crisis with regard to Sir John Hawker —
a crisis which she instinctively felt must be
avoided till after that gentleman had actually
spoken. What still caused him to delay,
she could not imagine ; but she dared
not speak to Dorothea again about her unwillingness
to accept his favours, or her cold
disdain of his attentions. If she had managed
to swallow the man's want of refinement
for the sake of his wealth and position,
what right had her daughter to persist intreating
him with such scorn ?

Had Sir Edward been at home, Dorothea
would have been almost tempted to go downstairs
again, seek admittance to his study,
and tell him she could no longer endure this
odious state of things : to-night's exhibition
had brought her to the furthest limits of
endurance. But, alas ! the Admiral was in
London, engrossed with a scientific committee

; so, after waiting to see the last whisk
of her mother's train as she turned into
her bedroom, Dorothea slowly continued her
progression up - stairs, stopping, however,
after a moment's hesitation, at her cousin's
door.

Fan, I have come to say good-night to
you."

Why, what is the matter, Dolly ? you
look so white and tired."

I am tired, and my head is aching as if
it meant to burst ; and so are my arms too,
lugging about this dreadful thing," — and she
threw her huge bouquet on to the floor with
a gesture of disgust. -

How dared the old wretch give it you ? "
cried Frances, jumping up from the dressing-table
with her hair all down her back, and
stamping on the unoffending flowers, fragrant
even in their crushed and mutilated
condition.

I don't know how he could have dared,"

sighed Dorothea, sitting down on the edge
of the bed. " I didn't know what to do ;
I wish I could have thrown it in his face.
I can't think how he can go on as he does,
when he must see that I detest him. I am
for ever snubbing him as hard as I can."

I can't think either — except — oh, Dorothy,
why did you change your manner on
the day of our drive? You puzzled even
me for a minute."

"That day? Did I change? Perhaps I
did it out of spite."

' Spite ! Who to ? Captain Newman ? "

"No. Hugh Moore."

Hugh Moore ! " cried Frances, her voice
rising in horror. " Oh, Dolly, Dolly, did he
speak to you before he went away ? "

"Yes."

And you refused him ? "

"Yes."

"Oh dear! oh dear!" groaned Frances.
"What ever did you do that for?"

Don't speak to me like that, Fan ; I can't
bear it. I am nearly distracted to-night, and
I can't stand an inch more."

But what did you do it for ? " persisted
Frances. " I thought you liked him."

I thought he cared — was bound to — Clara
Wilson."

That wretched little foreign thing ! "

"Oh, Frances, don't talk like that," said
Dorothea, laughing hysterically. '' I thought
she was going to be very nice, but I am
beginning to find her different."

I should think so — little forward chit —
with that Mr Ward always hanging about
her ! She'll stick to us like a leech now, I'm
certain. And you told poor Mr Moore you
would have nothing to say to him because of
her ? Well, I do think it was cruel of you —
and very bad for him too," added Frances,
with profound wisdom.

"But that isn't all yet," said Dorothea.

1 never told you what mother said, after
that miserable drive. She actually warned
me against Captain Newman ! "

"Just what I have often done," remarked
Frances, coolly.

If you are going to be nasty, I shall go
away," said Dorothea, starting up from the
bed.

Sit down, sit down," said Frances, pushing
her down gently, with her arm round her
waist. " AVhat a touchy old thing you are !
What did Aunt Katherine say ? "

She was angry because he comes here so
often, and talks to me. And you know, Fan,
how very kind he has been to me all this winter.
And he is such a true old friend — one
can trust him completely : it does seem so
hard to turn round suddenly, and tell him,
as it were, to keep his distance."

He was talking to you to-night."

"Yes, I know; and mother was vexed at

that. But I was so horrid to him, that he
actually asked if anything was the matter ;
and I had to give him a sort of hint. I
wished I could sink under the earth."

Dorothea gave way at last, and burst into
tears. Perhaps she felt the self-inflicted loss
of her old friend more keenly just then than
anything else.

Poor Dolly ! " said Frances, consolingly ;
"it is a Gordian knot which you will have
to cut, by refusing Sir John Hawker straight
out."

*' No, that is just what I want to prevent,"
cried Dorothea ; " it must not come to the
point ; and it would not make our conduct
any better with regard to Captain Newman,
either. My one hope is, that if I can keep
Sir John at bay till he gets elected, he will
go up to London and forget all about me.
There are heaps of other attractions, or something
else might happen "

Hugh Moore come back, for instance ?
Oil, Dolly, you would not refuse him a
second time ? "

Dorothea turned her face away from Fan's
searching eyes. " Why should he come back
to me again ? Men don't do that sort of
thing twice, except in novels. Besides,
Clara Wilson is here — no doubt with a purpose.
She and he will make it up together
now, without a doubt."

"I don't believe that for a moment.
What! go back to Miss Wilson after he
has seen you ? He has too good taste
for that."

Nonsense, Fan ! he liked her first, and I
don't see why he should find me anything —
I mean, perhaps he did not know her quite
so well. But I must not keep you up any
longer. You are a good little thing, Fan ; "
and she rested her cheek lovingly against
that of her brave little cousin, who would

fain have borne all her troubles for her. " I
hardly ought to have spoken like this, even
to you ; but you won't betray my secret to a
living soul. I know you are to be trusted."

"And don't you be coldhearted, Dolly,"
said Fan, whisking away a lurking tear-drop ;
"and keep up your courage. When things
get to this pitch, they must mend, you
know."

There did not seem much prospect of that,
however, as Dorothea thought over the present
position of affairs during many wakeful
hours that night. Over and above the fret
and worry of the concert episode, and her
break with Captain Newman, she felt a cold
chill at her heart dien she recollected her
parting with Hugh Moore. Looking upon it
in the light of her subsequent acquaintance
with Clara Wilson, she could not help thinking
that she had acted hastily, and with
more romance than judgment, in censuring

his conduct so fiercely. The more she saw
of Miss Wilson, the less she found to like in
her. At first she had been more or less
fascinated by her appearance and the innocence
of her address ; but Miss Wilson, not
slow to take advantage of her kindness, had
been to see her more frequently than was
by any means becoming after such a short
acquaintance — so that Dorothea very soon
grew tired of her limited powers of conversation,
and, moreover, disliked intensely the
kind of bondage in which she kept Mr Ward.
Once or twice Clara had asked her questions
about Mr Moore ; but Dorothea generally
contrived to turn the conversation in another
direction, for instinctively she shrank
whenever Miss Wilson uttered his name.
Mrs Fitzgerald had found her opportunity
also, and dropped a hint (when she and
Dorothea were one day discussing Miss Clara)
as to what site thought of the Corfu episode ;
VOL. II. K

and from all appearances, it seemed only too
likely that the sister's version of the story
was the correct one. What if she had sent
Hugh back to an earlier stage which he had
outgrown ? What if in despair, or in pique
at her contemptuous rejection, he should
really return to Clara, and try to content
himself with all that she could offer ? Dorothea
felt only too certain that Clara could
but drag him down to her own level ; or else,
that that part of his nature which was best
and highest would revolt when it was too
late. And yet, if she were to have that fateful
ride all over again, she could give no other

if
answer to Mr Moore. She might couch her

refusal in more gentle terms, and give him
more opportunity for explaining himself ; but
she felt, as strongly as ever, that it was quite
impossible for her to think of him while he
was entangled — be it ever so lightly — with
another girl. Poor Dorothea ! she little

knew that the same kind of struggle was
going on in some one else's mind that
night.

When Captain Newman left the concert-room,
he felt the time was come when he
must once for all face his position, and determine
his line of action.

Coming hastily out into the street, he meta
man who had evidently been waiting for
him. " Mr Johnson told me to give you
this, sir ; " and a note was delivered into his
hand. It was a hurried request from the
vicar, on the eve of his departure, begging
the Commander to spare him five minutes
of his time that night, as he was in groat
need of his assistance in the arrangement
of some business, and Captain Newman's
advice was the one thing he could depend
upon.

Late as it was, such a request could not be
refused, and the Commander turned his stcjxs

in the opposite direction to that which led to
the landing-steps.

It was a curious contrast, the vicar's study
and the brilliantly lighted hall which he had
just left. A sort of indiscriminate packing
had been going on, as was evident from the
confusion of books and pictures and all manner
of odds and ends that littered all the chairs
and tables. Two candles shed a misty light
from the writing-table, where Mr Johnson
was seated, and revealed the curious mixture
of poverty and refinement which the room
presented. Captain Newman had plenty of
time to study it all, foil his friend, after greeting
him with great cordiality, begged to be
allowed to finish what he was writing, as one
of his parishioners was waiting for it. There
were two pictures on either side the fireplace,
which still hung in their accustomed places.
Captain Newman knew them of old, but tonight
they seemed to have a special fascination

for him. They were lovely copies of
some of Fra Angelico's angels, with their
rapt expression of calm passionless devotion
and heavenly joy.

*what a cm-ious fellow that must have
been to paint faces like that ! " he said, when
the vicar, having despatched his business,
turned to his friend once more. " How could
he imagine anything so utterly different from
the expression one sees on human faces ? "

He lived in a cloister, remember ; but,
for all that, I have seen faces with almost
such a look on them. Of course, the wonder
is, how he caught the idea of perfect innocence
: one can't imagine that expression on
a human countenance, unless it is after a
struggle — and they look as if they had never
known what trouble meant." There was a
pause, during which neither of the two men
spoke. Each was occupied with a train of
thought suggested by that last remark. The

one man, looking back on the life lie was just
leaving — on the failures, the disappointments
of his ten years' work, and yet with deep
thankfulness that it had not been quite all in
vain ; — the other on the edge of a struggle,
with a golden possibility just within his grasp
(so it seemed to him at that moment), could
he only feel perfectly convinced that it was
right for him to hold out his hand and
claim it.

Was it only that faint recognition of Hugh
Moore's sentiments that withheld him ? Alas
it that he believed Miss Neville reciprocated
them — that he was only too conscious how
much he himself lacked of that bright youthfulness
which was one of Hugh's greatest
charms ? Or was it the instinctive feeling of
what he owed to himself ? What had he to
offer Dorothy Neville which could in any way
justify him in declaring his passion ? He
knew perfectly well that he was a man with



out money, without position, beyond such as
his profession gave him, and, in addition, burdened
with skims, arising from spendthrift
relations, which he was too honourable to
think of relinquishing for the sake of any
private gratification. The very fact of Miss
Neville's having a fortune of her own made
it a thousand times more embarrassing ; and,
as if all this was not enough, Lady Katherine's
recent behaviour showed him but too
clearly the sort of reception he was likely to
get if he ever dared to approach Sir Edward
with proposals for his daughter.

And yet here he was, he hardly knew how,
as desperately in love with this woman as a
man can be but once in his life. It was impossible
to shut his eyes any longer to the
fact, that he must either declare himself
openly, or keep out of her way for the
future.

He started from his reverie when Mr Johnson

Ijegan to speak about the business he had
on his mind. It was a complicated affair,
and one that must liege a good deal on the
person who coukl be responsible for keeping
it oroing:. The man on whom the vicar had
depended for this, had suddenly been called
away from Eastport. " You are stationary
for the present, aren't you, Newman ? " he
added, after having stated the case broadly ;
one has got to look upon you as a fixture
in these parts."

Well, that is just what I am not'' answered
the Commander, slowly. " I believe
I am going to apply for an exchange. I am
beo-inninor to think I have had cnouo^h of a
shore-2:oingj berth."

His friend audit something; in the tone
of voice which made him glance sharply
into Captain Newman's face. He had risen
from his seat, and was standing leaning his
elbow on the mantelpiece, looking down

into the dying embers of the fire. Only his
profile was visible, thrown into strong relief
against the dark shadow of the wall ; but
on those still and set features there was a
look which betokened an inward struo;o;le,
and the clergyman knew" it at once.

There are times when one feels one has
been long enough in a place, certainly," replied
Mr Johnson. " I am trying to take
that view of the subject with regard to my
own departure. Do you feel you are obliged
to go ? Not that I have any right to ask
you such a question, since I know your idea
of duty too well."

*duty is a stern mistress at times," said
the other, with a smile passing over his face,
and then leaving it again as quickly' ; " but
it is even harder, occasionally, to know which
way she is pointing, and how one can best
obey her."

Captain Newman paused for a minute.

It lead suddenly flashed across him, — Should
he take advantage of this unexpected opportunity,
and get the benefit of a man's judgment
on a case on which his own brain was
sick with thinking? He had come thereon
business ; the conversation had drifted
into a personal channel : was this a chance
given him, and hadn't he better use it ?

'' I tell you what it is, Johnson," he said at
length — " I want some good sound advice.
Will you give a calm and unblessed judgment,
if I state a case to you ? " and he
rapidly sketched the position of affairs, with
an impartiality which did credit to his
powers of self-control, keeping his statement
so entirely in the abstract, that although
his friend had a shrewd suspicion
that the matter concerned his questioner
pretty closely, he was utterly in the dark as
to who were the other actors in the story
that was being told him.

When Captain Newman had finished,
there was a pause, while the vicar sat back
in his chair, his eyes shaded by his hand,
the ticking of the little travelling - clock
which stood on the table beside him being
the only sound that broke the stillness of
the room. There was an intense aggravation
about the ticking of that clock, so
ceaseless, so pertinacious, so unsympathetic.
Captain Newman felt a strong desire to lay
violent hands on it, and shake it into silence.
But he did not move hand or foot, and presently
the vicar looked up.

You want an unblessed opinion ? AVill
you let me say exactly what I think ? "

The Commander signed assent, and his
friend continued —

'there is only one reason that could
justify any other course than that of effacing
one's self. I speak as if I was in the position
of the man who tells the tale."

There was no need to say more. Captain
Newman knew well enough what that one
reason was, hut his innate honesty prevented
him from listening seriously for a
moment to any of those alluring voices
which tempted his imagination to rest upon
a far sweeter interpretation than the facts
of the case warranted. He knew Dorothea
did not love him then ; whether it was in
his power to awaken that emotion in her by
the confession of his own j^^assion, was quite
another matter — one that he had ajDj^arently
no business with just then. A sudden flash
of light had revealed him to himself; the
struggle was over.

CHAPTEE XVr.

** The world's a room of sickness, where each heart
Knows its own anguish and unrest."

When Hugli arrived at Cannes, he found his
brother confined to his bed. All through
that long railway-journey across the Continent,
he had had time and leisure to ponder
over the recent events of his life, and not
least over that letter of his father's which
had been the cause of so much disturbance.
Gradually, as the all-engrossing atmosphere
of Eastport was left behind, he became convinced
that there was more in that letter
than met the eye. His mother, he knew,
miirht be unreasonable when Ion was in the

case, but this butler would never have summoned
him so peremptorily without grave
cause ; and he began to feel remorse at his
reluctance to obey the call — began almost
to dread the end of his journey, for fear of
the news that mio;ht be awaiting him there.
And Dorothea ? To say that he thought of
other things does not imply that he forgot
her : rather she was never absent from his
mind. A sense of mingled pleasure and pain,
the latter perhaps preponderating, formed
the background of all his thoughts, — like
the pedal-note of a sonata movement, ever
the same, while the other parts vary incessantly.
He was sorry, bitterly sorry, he had
been betrayed into speaking to her. He
would have given anything to have parted
from her in the calm assurance of at least
her friendship and good wishes. He felt,
too, that he had practically ruined his chance
of success by his precipitancy ; and the old

question came back upon him with wearisome
iteration, " Was lie bound in honour to
Cora Wilson, or was he not ? "

Lord Glengarn met him at the station,
and a few words were sufficient to show him
that his fears for his brother were not groundless.
Ion was rapidly losing strength from
day to day : he might rally again for a little
while, but it was practically only a question
of a few weeks.

It was very touching to see the sad patience
of the old lord as he watched his first-born
gradually sinking into an early grave. " If
only it had pleased God to take me instead,"
he said, sorrowfully. " I am an old man, and
he was so full of health and vigour a short
time ago."

Hugh could make no answer. Isis father
did indeed look old and broken : he was beginning
to go about with a certain droop of
his head and shoulders, whereas his carriage

had formerly been as erect as that of his
soldier-son ; and there was a tremulousness
in his voice and manner which showed how
the strain was telling on him.

The little French Sister rather trembled
at the idea of the soldier-brother's arrival.
She imagined all Englishmen to be burly
blustering fellows, at least when they were
well and strong, shaking the sick-room with
their heavy tread, without an idea how to
modulate their tones, or soften the natural
radesse of their manners. Great washer
surprise, therefore, to discover that Mr
Moore's brother was the absolute reverse of
her preconceived ideas — his step of the lightest,
his voice and manner gentle as a woman's,
his entrances and exits noiseless asher
own, and his presence a perpetual source
of soothing and comfort to the invalid. He
was never in the way, and treated her with
such invariable courtesy and thoughtful consideration

that lie speedily became a prime
favourite ; indeed she often permitted him
to be with his brother when she was forced
to exclude Lady Glengarn herself, whose
intense anxiety produced a disturbing and
irritating effect on her patient.

She told Hugh he was a " soeur de charity
marquee" a remark which amused both the
brothers very much. As the days went on,
Ion grew to depend upon Hugh almost incessantly.
Untrained as he was to the exercise
of self-denial, he exacted almost more
of Hugh's attention than the latter's health
would stand ; for it mattered little whether
it were night or day, directly Ion expressed
a wish for his presence, Hugh was there at
a moment's notice. The scewr had to insist
at last upon a prescribed amount of air and
exercise ; and Hugh, in a dreamy sort of way,
submitted to her orders, falling as naturally
into the routine of sick-nurse as if he had

VOL. IT. L

never hoped to be fighting in Africa at this
very time.

There was a strange solemnity during all
those bright, rapidly lengthening spring days,
in watching that sad struggle for life going
on so silently and yet so intensely in the
stillness of the sick-room. Never before had
Hugh waited like this for the approach of
death — never watched the stealthy, steady
advance of the enemy, who only seemed
sometimes to retreat in order that he might
with one mighty swoop seize the victim at
last, and strangle him in his resistless grasp.

He wondered much how he should feel if
he were in Ion's place. Would there be passionate
longings for the sweets of life, just
withheld from his grasp; or passionate regrets
for the chances lost? bitter memories and
haunting recollections ? Would it be hope
disappointed, or remorse triumphant ? Or
could it be possible to die in peace, go to

rest tranquilly, and fall asleep like a child
weary with play, or a labourer tired out with
toil ? He thought it would be possible — nay,
easy — to die gallantly on a battle-field, or
patiently of wounds received in the service
of his country; but could he be calm and
contented if condemned to die like Ion, of
a long lingering illness, with daily failing
strength, with daily increasing faintness and
exhaustion ?

He wondered, too, whether Ion realised
his own condition : he had never said a
word which could lead any of them to suppose
that he guessed his fate was sealed ;
but one day, just after the doctors' visit,
he startled Hugh by asking him what their
opinion was. For a moment Hugh hesitated
; and seeing his embarrassment. Ion
went on calmly, " I suppose they think I am
awfully bad. Do they say it is all up with
me ? " Poor Hugh ! it was hard that such n

task should come to him ; yet he could not
bring himself to frame an evasion. He
only said, "You should not ask me such a
question, Ion." His head was between his
hands ; he could not face his brother's inquiring
gaze. But it was quite enough :
such a refusal to speak was as good as a
death-warrant ; and so Ion felt it, but he
showed no emotion. The truth had been
dawning upon him very gradually for sometime
past, and with the intense weakness
and exhaustion came a really merciful weariness
of life. The faculties were more or less
benumbed ; the keenness of sensation seemed
gone ; of physical fear of death there was
none, and any deeper feelings were hidden
away under an intense reserve, less easy to
overcome with his brother than with a comparative
stranger.

The nearest approach to any lifting of this
veil was one afternoon, when, the two

brothers being alone together, Ion called to
Hugh to come close to his side, and said,
*'I want to tell you that I am glad the old
place is to come to you, after all, Hugh. You
will look after it better than I should have
done. I have been an idle brute, but you
will do good service. Don't let the mother
persuade you to leave the army. One is
awfully sorry, dien it comes to the end, to
see what a useless time one has made of it.
You won't have that to bother you when
your time comes." He spoke at intervals,
with difficulty ; and when Hugh replied with
warm disclaimers, he only shook his head,
and continued to give various small directions
which he asked his brother to see carried
out at Glengarn. Ion Moore had never
been such a favourite with the tenants as
Hugh : he was apt to be short and imperious
in Its manner, and to show too plainly that
he knew himself to be their future master ;

but he had their welfare truly at heart all
the same, and chafed at the narrow means
which prevented his plans for improvement
from being carried out. Hugh was surprised
to find how minutely and carefully he had
studied the whole matter, and how much his
mind, even now, was occupied with home
interests. He talked till he was exhausted
on this subject, Hugh making careful note
of all his plans and wishes ; but he did not
refer to it again, or indeed allude to his past
life — nor did he ever express a' hope for the
future.

It was after such scenes as these, which
cut deep down into Hugh's warm heart, that
he felt an unutterable yearning for Dorothea's
sympathy. The depths of his nature were
being sounded, and in his hour of need his
heart called out instinctively for the one
woman who had power to comfort him.

It was fortunate at this time that chance

threw in his way some old friends whose
companionship served to divert his solitary
musings. Walking on the pier one day, he
chanced to observe a little girl playing with a
ball. He watched her idly, till presently the
ball bounded close by where he was standing,
and fell with a splash into the water below.
Hugh made a fruitless dash after it, and
turning, saw the little face very crestfallen
looking up to him. " I am so sorry," he said ;
"it bounded just too quickly" His smile
and voice acted like magic on the child. She
ran up to him, putting out her hands, and
crying —

Oh, Mr Moore ! is it you ? Don't you
remember coming home with us last year ? "
Then Hugh recalled his little friend on board
the Austrian Lloyd ; and the child led him
up to her mother, who was spending the
winter at Cannes with her husband and
children. Mrs Vivian was languid and gentle

as ever, but she was unfeignedly glad to
see Hugh, and to renew their pleasant acquaintance.
Mr Vivian joined them shortly
afterwards, and from that day a considerable
intimacy sprang up between them. In his
grand sedate fashion he took a great fancy
to Hugh, who, on his part, was fascinated by
Mr Vivian's diplomatic mind, and the peculiar
cautious deliberation with which he approached
all subjects. The young soldiers
simplicity and directness, joined to his military
enthusiasm, interested the diplomatist
greatly. He regarded Hugh as a useful
study — one more "type" to be carefully
analysed and put by in the storehouse of his
memory. Like many another clever man,
he was a little too apt to generalise ; but he
read Hugh's character as if it had been an
open book, and liked him none the less for
his transparency. Before they parted, he
resolved to make him an offer of a post which

was to fall vacant in a few months, and which
was practically to be filled according to his
recommendation.

Hugh had been telling him how, if it had
not been for his brother's illness, he would
have been in the thick of the African campaign.


*well," said Vivian, "you have not lost
much there. What glory can be gained by
trampling down a whole lot of savages ?
Besides, I hear they are going to patch it
up somehow with a compromise."

Compromise ! " exclaimed Hugh, in a
tone of disgust.

You are quite right," said Vivian, answering
his thoughts; "a compromise very
seldom answers — never with savages. It is,
in fact, a treaty only kept till one of the
parties is strong enough to break it. Weare
so mighty magnanimous nowadays that
we prefer to make compromises rather than

settlements. But I was going to say, if you
want to rough it, I can get you the offer of
a post, where you will have a much better
chance of distinguishing yourself. There is
going to be an Armenian Boundary Commission
in a month or two's time : we shall
have two or three men on it who know the
people and the country well — engineers and
suchlike ; but we want a soldier too — and
if you like it, I think you would be the
very man."

"It is very good of you," said Hugh,
warmly, "but I don't know any of these
Eastern hinges."

"As to that, you would soon pick up
enough to get along ; besides, you'll have a
man with you to act interpreter if necessary.
They will only need some military advice
and experience to keep them straight in
sundry particulars. It is a wild countryman
perhaps this Commission may not last

very long ; but it would be certain to lead to
something further, if the work were done as
well as I feel sure you would do it. Consider
it an open question, Moore, for the present,"
added the Secretary kindly, recollecting the
cloud that was resting over Hugh's prospects
just then; 'the post need not be filled up
for two, or perhaps three, months hence."

Lord Glengarn was deeply gratified by the
confidence shown in his son, and Hugh felt
more hope and interest in his future than he
had done for some time past.

That evening he received a letter from
Nora Fitzgerald. It contained an account of
the concert, transmitted by her husband, and
it mentioned for the first time that Mr and
Miss Wilson were at Eastport.

Nora wrote capital letters, full of chit-chat,
and always containing just the news her correspondents
wanted to hear ; but occasionally
her pen ran away with her, and she said more

than she intended. It was so in this case. She
had made up her mind not to mention the fact
of the Wilson' presence on any consideration,
and it was not till her letter was well on its
way to Cannes that she remembered how her
own hand had let the cat out of the bag.
Of course the mischief — if mischief it were
was done. But Hugh's thoughts did not
dwell much on Clara Wilson just then. He
was a good deal more disturbed by another
sentence in his sister's letter.

Dorothy Neville is looking quite ill, and
unlike herself," she wrote ; " and well she
may, with Sir John Hawker always in her
train. I have not seen much of her, and I
almost fancy she avoids me."

She went on to talk of her husband, who
appeared, she said, to have left his heart
behind him on the other side of the Atlantic,
for he was always writing immensely long
letters with American addresses, and receiving

most formidable - looking replies. She
believed, however, his correspondents were
male, not female, and she hoped there was
nothing very wicked going on, although he
refused to let her know anything about it.
Hugh remembered this remark a few weeks
later, but at the time it fell very fiat. What
did he care about Willie Fitzgerald's correspondence
? But he did care a great deal
about Miss Neville.

Nora was not left very long without an
answer, and found that, in order to please
her brother, she must endeavour to see more
of Dorothea, and that she must also keep
him informed of Mr and Miss Wilson's plans
and prospects. But the intriguing little
Irishwoman never for a moment guessed
the course of action Hugh had resolved to
pursue, directly his sad task was over at
Cannes. How, and in what manner, he
arrived at his determination, he did not know

himself ; but, at all risks, he felt that his own
line of conduct must be made clear : he owed
it to Clara Wilson to discover if she meant
to hold him to his demi-disengagement or
not. There could be no longer any subterfuges,
any evasions. Living, as he was just
then, in the face of the great realities — looking
at life, as it were, from the finished
side — anything short of a perfectly straightforward
course seemed to him insupportable.
Of course it was terribly tantalising to be
obliged to leave it all alone for the present, —
to feel that any day Sir John Hawker might,
by force of persistency, secure his prize — that
he himself might never have the chance of
explaining his own conduct to Dorothea. He
was disappointed, too, that Captain Newman
had taken no notice of him since he had left.
But, after all, what was there wdiicli the
Commander could have told him? He did
allow himself the indulgence of imploring

Nora to use her utmost influence with Miss
Neville against Sir John Hawker ; for he
dreaded inexpressibly such an alliance for
Dorothea, quite apart from the effect it
would have on his own prospects. But for
the rest ? He could banish it all from his
mind, of course, when watching by his
brother's side ; but still there were hours
of torture which he could only struggle
through as best he might. The trial was
naturally aggravated by the fact of his own
overstrained condition ; but sometimes he
laughed when he thought, " And I fancied
myself in love with Clara Wilson ! "

Mrs Fitzgerald's next letter was full of
the scandal caused at Eastport by the
curious habit Miss Wilson persisted in of
taking ]mr Ward about everywhere as cavaliers
servant : " People wondered what it
could mean, if it was not an engagement."
She did not know what a sting her words

carried to Hugh. He thought he could tell
quite well what it meant — that Miss Wilson
considered herself so effectually pledged to
himself that she could afford to let Jack
Ward philander as much as ever he liked,
since he, too, could not be ignorant of
Clara's feelings.

*' Mr Wilson tries the Admiral's patience
almost beyond bearing," continued his garrulous
correspondent. " Can't you imagine
how bored they all are with this stupid,
smoky Corfu Consul, and how kind and
patient Miss Neville is with this insufferable
little Clara? I think she had made up her
mind to like her at first through thick and
thin, but she is finding out her mistake
now rapidly. She cannot stand her bold
attempts at ' carrying on ' with the Flag-lieutenant,
though I think she is rather
grateful to her for trying to attract some
of Sir John Hawker's attentions to herself.

People even say she has designs on the
hard-headed Eadical candidate if he succeeds,
as I think he will, in his electioneering
campaign."

Hugh closed the letter with a bitter smile.
Perhaps he was a little hard on his sister
just then. Her chatty letters, intended to
cheer him and keep up his spirits, jarred
upon the atmosphere of that sick-room, where
every day the struggle was growing fainter.
Nora had never been anything to Ion in the
days gone by. She had married at eighteen,
and before that, had been away from home,
educated with some cousins in London ; and
since she had possessed a home of her own,
she had been quite engrossed by her children
— and especially by the delicate boy,
whom she never left, and for whose sake
chiefly she was now at Eastport. it had
been under discussion whether she could for

VOL. II. M

once leave her family and join her parents
at Cannes ; but from one cause and another
she had found it impossible to get away,
and no one for a moment imagined that
Ion could have lingered so long.

As so often happens, the end came rather
suddenly at last. It was April now, and
very warm weather. The window would be
thrown open sometimes, and Ion would lie
by the hour, scarcely speaking, gazing at
the sky, with the soft floating clouds and
the white sea-birds hovering over the bay.
Then came a few days of great suffering,
when he recognised no one but his brother,
and Hugh was hardly ever out of his room —
realising, for the first time, the intense and
futile longing to bear another's pain. But
at last this most trying period passed away,
and left Ion utterly exhausted, though perfectly
calm and conscious.

"He is better to-night," said Hugh.

But the soeur shook her head. "There
is no strength," she said, sadly.

Ion called for them all to say goodnight,
and then seemed inclined to fall
asleep ; but before the dawn, Hugh, who
was watching, roused the Sister. The
change had come.

CHAPTEE XVII.

** Proud was his tone, but calm ; his eye
Had that compelling dignity,
His mien that bearing aught and high,
Which common spirits fear."

Admiralty House was nearly empty, for it
was Saturday afternoon. Sir Edward was
taking Lady Katherine for a long drive, and
Charlie and Frances were riding. Dorothea
had a cold, and was at home. She was not
looking her best just then. She said the
spring weather was trying : she was unused
to it in England, having been so much abroad
at that time of year. It would have been
nearer the truth had she recognised the fact
that it was her mental worries which had
most to do with causing the languor and

depression that seemed to take away the
spring of life within her. Things were in
very much the same position as they had
been a month ago, except that Sir John's
suit was not progressing as rapidly as it had
threatened to do. Dorothea had been paying
one or two short visits to her relations ;
and since she had returned home, a heavy
cold had kept her indoors. A quiet afternoon
was a luxury not often granted her ;
and she sat down for a long practice at the
grand-piano, in the big empty ball-room.
Presently her energy was exhausted ; her
hands fell idly on her lap, and she took to
dreaming. Her eyes wandered across the
long bare room, through the wide glass
door into the garden, where the shrubs
were beginning to be tinged with green
and the lilac-blossom was scenting the air.
She was humming softly to herself a little
German air. It was the Volkslled she had

sung to Hugli Moore on board the flagship
: — •

Wenn Menschen auseinander geli'ii
So sage sie: Auf Wiederseli'n — auf Wiederseli'n."

At that moment the folding-doors into the
drawing-room were thrown suddenly ogden,
and the footman announced "Miss Wilson."

What, again ! " groaned Dorothea to herself,
as she slowly rose from the piano ;
can't I have even this afternoon in peace ?
It is too bad. I really shall have to snub
her ; " and she accordingly walked into the
drawing-room and received Clara with a
certain cold dignity, ' which she knew well
enough how to assume on occasions.

As a rule. Miss Wilson was quick to notice
any change of manner ; but to-day she was
preoccupied. She had never, w^ to this
time, been able to extract any information
from Dorothea with regard to Hugh Moore ;
but now she had come determined to ask a

downright question, and insist on an answer.
She felt a crisis was approaching, and she
must know exactly where she stood.

She had seen Hugh.

As may be supposed, there was every reason
to prevent Hugh from wishing to linger
at Cannes after his brother's funeral ; but
his mother had so completely broken down
when the long strain of anxiety and nursing
was over, that he could not find it in his
heart to be in a hurry to leave either her or
his father, who had grown to lean so much
upon his sympathy and companionship, —
and so two or three weeks had elapsed before
he felt himself at liberty to go back to
Eastport.

Mr Vivian had repeated his offer just
before his departure for England, and had
asked for an answer in a fortnight. This
fortnight must therefore decide his fate.
If he went to the East, he could not take a

lady with him ; but he must settle his affairs
definitely before starting.

From the quiet atmosphere of his brother's
sick-room — from the wonderful peace of that
beautiful churchyard — it was a great change,
and a great descent, to turn to such questions
as were now claiming his attention.
But Life is jealous of Death, and will allow
no long interval of retirement. Ion's work
was done. Hugh had to close the door on
his chamber of rest, and buckle on his own
armour afresh. Never till he stood for the
last time by the side of that freshly made
grave in the sunny English cemetery, did he
realise how he loved his brother; and then
he turned away, to travel northwards to
work and worries.

And the day after his arrival at Eastport
he met Clara.

She was rather afraid of him, especially
now that he looked older and so much graver

than he used to do when she had first known
him. But he did not shrink away from her ;
on the contrary, he stopped to speak with
grave courtesy, and asked if he might come
and see her the next day.

She told him graciously when she would
be at home, and went on her way triumphant,
feeling her confidence restored, and certain
that she had not lost her influence over him.

In the full glow of her satisfaction she
went to see Dorothea, and had hardly seated
herself before she exclaimed, — " Who do
you think I met on my way here ? You
will never guess. Mr Moore."

Dorothea started a little.

Oh," she said, coldly, " I did not know
he had come back."

Nor did I, till I saw him. However, he
stopped and spoke to me, and said he was
coming to see me tomorrow."

The tone of satisfaction was evident. Dorothea

said nothing, but her breast was heaving
with mingled emotions. Clara went on,
after a moment's pause —

I have got a question I meant to ask
you, Miss Neville. I hope you won't be
angry. Did Mr Moore ever ask you to
marry him ? "

Dorothea turned upon her fiercely.

How dare you ask me such a question ? "
she said, her lips turning white. '* What
right have you ? What on earth can make

you think I could stand such " she was

going to say *' impertinence," but Clara broke
in with —

Don't be angry," — half inclined to cry
herself at this outburst ; "I really am asking
you for a very particular reason — because
because, you know, he asked me once."

Dorothea was rather ashamed of herself
by this time, and had calmed down. She
answered quickly, " Yes, I thought so."

*but you're not engaged to him?" persisted
Clara.

*'No."

You refused him ? "

"Yes."

Oh ! " with a great gasp, " how could you ?
Why did you ? "

Well, to be perfectly frank, I thought
he had no right to ask me — that he cared
for you."

'did you?" said Clara, blushing and
smiling, and looking very pretty. '' Did you
know why he left me at Corfu like that ? "

"No."

"Because papa wouldn't allow it. But
now it is different. You see he is the eldest
son now."

Ecally, Miss Wilson," said Dorothea,
restlessly, " I don't see what difference that
makes."

Oh, don't you ? " said Clara, laughing

lightly ; " I do. However, now it's all right,
and he's come back ; so perhaps things will
come round, after all. Only, he must make
haste. I can't persuade papa to stay on here
longer than next week, so he has only come
just in time. Perhaps," —-rather archly, —
you are just a little wee bit sorry I am still
here? Well, good-bye, dear Miss Neville,"
kissing the unwilling cheek, which was
cold as marble, — " I shall see you again before
I go."

Dorothea submitted to the effusive farewell.
She could not return it, and moved
aside to ring the bell. Her heart was sore,
and very heavy. Was this really, really to
be the way in which everything was to
*' come round " ? Was it possible that Hugh
could ever have loved, did still love, this
silly, shallow-minded, selfish little girl ? And
she could not see him — could not hear a word
of explanation — could not listen to his voice

telling something of what he had been going
through lately (how she had followed it all in
her heart !) — could not even hope to meet
him, for in his deep mourning he would not
be going out; and besides, he was to see
Clara tomorrow, and after that, she would
rather not see him — for a long time, anyhow.
She was too much pained to reflect that, after
all, he was only taking the very path of honour
she had herself shown him. She only
felt the sharp sting caused by the recognition
that Clara was his first thought. She had
waited for him, and was to have her reward ;
while the girl who had rejected him so hastily
could only sit idly at home, sick at heart,
longing helplessly, hopelessly, for an explanation,
which the cruel hand of fate denied her.
Many a time lately she had felt lonely and
deserted. Mr Johnson had left some weeks
before. Captain Newman had kept his distance,
to the extent of winning even Lady

Katherine's approval, — would, in fact, have
gone on leave, were it not that lie was just
then tied to his ship by an Admiralty commission.
Sir John himself was so much
occupied in paying court to his constituents
(as he hoped to call them some day), that he
had little time to bestow on softer wooing
(this latter was not a matter of regret to
Dorothea, however). And last, but not least,
Mrs Fitzgerald, in the first days of her
mourning, was seldom visible ; and for at
least a fortnight Dorothea had been entirely
without news of Hugh.

Her sad reveries were not of long duration,
however. Miss Wilson had not been gone
ten minutes before the door opened once
more, to admit the very person who had been
last in her thoughts. It was the first time
Mrs Fitzgerald had come to the house since
her brother's death.

I heard you were alone," she said, greeting

Dorothea affectionately, " so I tlioiight I
might come in and see you. You have been
so good in calling at the hotel ; but I have
been so poorly with a cold, I was not fit to
see anybody. And how are you, my dear ?
You do not look very bright."

I am suffering from the same complaint,"
answered Dorothea, smiling rather faintly.
It is very kind of you to come. I have
just had another visitor — not a very pleasant
one "

Oh, I met her. That horrid little Miss
Wilson ! "

"You had better take care," said Dorothea,
with a little laugh at her own boldness
; " she told me she had just met your
brother."

Poor old Hugh ! Yes, he is back. But
what of him ? "

"Do you want me to tell you what she
said ? " and there was a curious look in

Dorothea's eyes as she lifted them to Mrs
Fitzgerald's face.

Yes — certainly," answered Mrs Fitzgerald;
*'butno; on second thoughts, pray
don't — for I know beforehand. I can guess
quite well, and know it's all false. She wanted
to make you believe that Hugh was at her
feet, I have no doubt. But you know him
too well to believe such nonsense, Dorothy ? "

'' I don't know what to believe. I think
the world is upside-down," said Dorothea,
sadly; and then, pulling herself together,
added more lightly, *' I midst tell you what
Miss Wilson said. She told me Mr Moore
had met her, and asked if he might come
and see her tomorrow. She told me distinctly
he had proposed to her once, and
no doubt he is still in love with her. I
don't see why they should not make it up together.
The difficulties, it seems, were on
her father's side ; and she appears to think

that they are now all done away with. So
you will have to make up your mind to
be civil to your sister-in-law, after all ! "

I don't believe a word of it," cried Mrs
Fitzgerald, all the more energetically because
she was, in her heart, considerably discomfited
by what Dorothea had told her.
She's a designing little wretch, and thinks
she knows how to play her cards ; but if
the worst comes to the worst, she will find
she has met her match this time. / am not
going to let poor old Hugh fall into her
clutches. He wants a little petting, poor
boy. He looks quite old and altered by all
this nursing. You can't think how it has
told on him ; and he feels Ion's death dreadfully
— much more than I do," she added, with
candour that was almost startling. *' Hugh
was always my own particular brother, you
know. Ion was so many years older, and I
have never been much with him — of late,

VOL. II. N

especially. But Hugh " and there were

volumes of love in the way in which the
impulsive little Irishwoman lingered on that
name.

She stayed on some time, talking chiefly
about all that had been happening at Cannes,
which she had gleaned from her brother's
conversation, and discussing the feasibility
of Lord and Lady Glengarn's coming presently
to Eastport, in order that they might
be cheered by the company of the grandchildren
; and then the distant sound of voices
warned her to depart, if she did not wish
to be caught for "company tea."

Good-bye, dear Dorothy," she said, kissing
her; "and mind you don't credit Clara
Wilson's idle tales. If Willie calls here this
afternoon, will you tell him I am gone home?"

A minute later, and Sir Edward and Lady
Katherine entered the room, bringing with
them Sir John Hawker. He was in high

spirits at his electioneering prospects. The
sitting member had at last accepted the
Chiltern Hundreds ; and after endless delays,
which had tried the patience of both the
candidates, the writ had been issued, and
the election was to take place the following
week. The town was placarded all over
with, " Hawker for ever ! Vote for Church
and Constitution ! " and, " Vote for James,
the People's Candidate ! Reduced Taxation,
Local Government, and Liberty ! " — and other
startling announcements. The general impression
was in favour of the Blue, however ;
and Sir John himself declared he felt certain
of success.

The Admiral told him, laughing, that he
must not come near them again till the
election was over.

I shall be hauled over the coals for using
undue influence, if I don't take care," he said.
No politics in the navy, you know. We

may have our private opinions, but we ain't
allowed to show them openly — and quite
right, too."

Sir John protested that such banishment
was very hard. He had seen nothing of
them lately. He wanted " the encouragement
of ladies' smiles while fighting his
battle." Miss Neville gave him only the
veriest ghost of one, which she felt was
demanded of her by necessity; and poured
out the tea in silence, only brightening up
when Mr Fitzgerald arrived. The latter
gentleman settled himself down comfortably
by her, and informed her in a whisper that
he intended to stay as long as Sir John
Hawker did. Sir John, on his part, tried
to outstay Mr Fitzgerald ; so the visit threatened
to be a very long one.

From constantly meeting at Admiralty
House, Sir John had perforce become accustomed
to the Irishman's presence ; but

he writhed and fidgeted under his piercing
gaze, like a bird fascinated by a snake. Dorothea
always noticed it, and at last she took
occasion to ask Mr Fitzgerald the reason of
such a curious phenomenon.

You don't make me uncomfortable when
you look at me," she said, laughing.

The reason is not far to seek," he replied.
You have a good conscience ; he hasn't. I
know rather too much about him, that's all."

Why, have you known him before ? "

'rather! Years ago, in California. We
saw a good deal of each other."

But he said he had never been in California
! "

"He said what wasn't true, I'm afraid.
Never mind, Miss Neville, don't look so
shocked. I will rid you of him soon."

I don't understand. What has he
done?"

Oh, various things, more or less disgraceful.

I am going to remind him of a
few to-night."

Not here ? " she said, nervously.

"No, not here. I am going to walk back
with him part of the way, and I think you
will find he has packed up his trunk and
fled tomorrow or next day."

But why didn't he know you ? "

He did know me ; and that made him a
little uncomfortable, as you have observed.
He was in hopes I should not recognise
him, as he had shaved his beard and changed
his name ; but I was too sharp for him. I
am frightening you, I am afraid. There is
nothing to make you nervous. I would not
have told you now, only I thought you
might like to look forward to being relieved

from that " he looked towards Sir John,

and shrugged his shoulders.

It would be a relief indeed," said Dorothea.
'' Does Nora know ? "

"Nora knows nothing. Haven't you
found out that a husband never tells his
wife his secrets? No; the fact is, I have
been writing to my friends in America, and
making quite sure of facts, before I said
a word to anybody. I am glad to say
I have got all my answers just in time
to prevent his coming forward at the
election."

Are you quite sure ? "

Quite," said the Irishman, with a twinkle
in his blue eyes. " By the by, will you come
and dine with us quite quietly tomorrow?
Nora wants to have you for a chat."

I should like to come very much,"
answered Dorothea, with just a touch of
hesitation, wondering if she could run the
chance of meeting Hugh ; " but she was
here this afternoon, and said nothing: about
it.'

I know. I met her as she was 2foin<]:

home, and she gave me a message for you to
this effect. We may expect you then ? "

He rose, for Sir John Hawker had at
length made a move.

As you are going, I will walk part of the
way with you. Sir John," he said.

Our roads lie in quite opposite directions,
I am afraid," was the reply, in the blandest
of tones.

^' Then I will go your road," said Mr Fitzgerald
imperturbably, and with great politeness
stood aside to let Sir John pass out of
the room first. ^

No sooner was he out of the house, however,
than his manner changed.

"It is time there was an end to this farce,
Mr Torrens," he said.

Who are you speaking to ? " said Sir
John, striding along without turning his
head, though he started visibly.

"Did you really believe I did not recognise

you ? " said Fitzgerald, coolly. " You
were mistaken if you did. Don't I remember
certain transactions not far from 'Frisco,
which were not over and above to your
credit ? I daresay you have forgotten them,
as your memory appears to be short."

How dare you insult me like this ? " cried
Sir John, in a voice of suppressed passion.
Do you know that I can have you up for
libel? By "

You need not threaten or swear. I am
not afraid. I heard from your wife to-day."

Sir John started again — this time more
violently — and yelled out at the top of his
voice, " My wife ! You liar ! You confounded
"

I shall collar you, if you don't take care,
and give you in charge to a policeman.
There are plenty about here ; so I would
advise you to keep your complimentary remarks
to yourself."

What do you want ? " said Sir John,
cowed and sullen. "If you know so much,
I suppose you know I was divorced from her ;
so she is no longer my wife.

Oh yes, I know all that ; and I suppose
you told Miss Neville all about it, or at least
Sir Edward? Of course it could make no
difference, as she is, as you say, ^no longer
your wife.' "

Sir John ground his teeth with rage.

I suppose you intend to go and give Sir
Edward the benefit of your d — d espionage ? "

Just so. I intend to do so tomorrow,"
said Fitzgerald, coolly. "And I think, on
the whole, you would find it more comfortable
to have put a few miles between you
and him before that happens. It is my impression
that you will find Eastport rather
too hot for you."

Do you suppose I am going to throw up
my candidature to please you ? "

Not in the least. Merely because I don't
think you will find it pay. There are a few
other little matters I happen to be aware of,
besides those domestic accidents I referred
to ; and if you don't take yourself off, I intend
to pay the central office a visit, and we
shall see if they will support you officially
after that. Unfortunately our morality is a
little strict still in England ; and we don't
much fancy a fortune made by sharp practice
and stolen goods, to put it mildly."

If I had a revolver I'd shoot you !" hissed
Sir John, white with rage. '' We should soon
see the end of all this swaggering."

I daresay we should," replied the Irishman.
" I do full justice to your powers of
execution, which I witnessed once, as I have
no doubt you remember — forget, I should
say ; but I have letters from men who remember
it."

Sir John strode on in silence for a few

minutes. There was no loophole of escape ;
a precipice of shame yawned before him, and
his avenger had forced him to the edge. He
turned suddenly at last, and said, with dogged
bitterness —

Well, what do you want with me ? "

Merely your word that you leave this
place tomorrow, and England within the
week, and that you never set foot in this
country again. You know I have all the
proofs against you in my possession. I don't
want to publish them ; but you must bolt —
that's all."

"What on earth possessed me to come
here?" muttered the wretched man.

What, indeed ? " said Mr Fitzgerald. " If
you had chosen to keep yourself quiet, or
even to flaunt your riches on the other side
of the ocean, all this would never have
happened."

Look here," said Sir John, in his voice

of dogged despair, " if I clear out of this, as
you say, you need not go and publish all your
beastly discoveries to the Eastporters, or to
Sir Edward?"

You have some sense of shame then,
have you ? " returned Fitzgerald. " I shall
make no promises. But if you get off tomorrow,
maybe I shall only tell Sir Edward
enough to make him comprehend your sudden
flight. As to publicity, it is you that are
fond of it, not I. I have no desire to see my
name in print in connection with yours."

There was a pause, during which Sir John's
hard breathing could be distinctly heard by
his companion. At last he turned on him
fiercely and said, " What are you dogging
me for ? — any more ? You have my word."

If that is so, I will not trouble you with
my company any longer. I shall have the
honour of calling at your hotel tomorrow
before the first up-train starts. You will be so

good as to leave instructions for your agent."
He raised his hat and was gone.

The next day the Eastport public were
astonished to learn that the Conservative
candidate had been suddenly and unexpectedly
compelled to start for America, by
urgent business matters, and that the field
was left in undisputed possession of Mr
James, the People's Man — who was thus,
much against his will, defrauded of the pleasure
of a contest. He had been quite certain
of victory, or of at least unseating Sir John
Hawker afterwards on a charge of bribery,
and he felt it hard not to be allowed the
glory of winning his laurels. The Stupid
Party were, however, once more covered with
confusion, and that was some consolation.

There was a good deal of gossip, of course,
on the occasion of Sir John's sudden departure.
Everybody had their own version of
the story, and nobody's tongue wagged more

malignantly than did Miss Harvey's. Also,
Lady Katherine's fame did not entirely
escape aspersion. But the true account of
the transaction never transpired ; and when,
by-and-by, the property which Sir John had
bought was sold, and the big house finished
and inhabited by a Manchester man, the
American millionaire faded out of mind.

Sir Edward and Lady Katherine had their
own reasons for saying as little as need be
on the subject. There had been an explosion
in the study at Admiralty House ; but Mr
Fitzgerald had been as good as his word, even
to the man he utterly despised.

CHAPTER XVIII.

I could not love thee, dear, so much.
Loved I not honour more."

Yet the sin is on us both : time to dance is not to woo ;
Wooing light makes fickle troth, scorn of me recoils on you."

It was in the afternoon of the day on
which Sir John Hawker took flight, when
all Eastport was ringing with the strange
news, that Hugh went to call, as he had
promised, on Clara Wilson.

He could hardly believe that only a few
months had passed since, light-hearted and
thoughtless, he had been used to spring up
the stone stairs that led to the Consular
abode at Corfu. He felt so old, so grave, so
preternaturally alive to all the possible consequences
of the step he was now taking, that

Iphigenia preparing for the sacrifice would
hardly have seemed to him an exaggerated
type of his own sensations.

This news of Sir John Hawker's departure
made matters almost worse ; for while it
removed one barrier between himself and
Dorothy, it made him realise all the more
keenly that the only other remaining obstacle
to his chance of happiness — one that
it seemed impossible to overcome — was entirely
of his own making.

As he entered Clara's house a young man
brushed hastily past him, and he thought
sadly, " She has visitors in plenty, no doubt.
Couldn't she do without me ? " He found
her standing at the window of the sitting-room
(redolent, of course, with the fumes of
tobacco, though the Consul was not present)
in an attitude of expectancy. She started
and coloured as he came in, and asked if he
had met her father.

VOL. II.

"No," lie answered ; " some one was coming
out of the front door, who had just been
to see you, I suppose."

"Oh no ! " she exclaimed, blushing vividly
; "I daresay it was one of the tradespeople,
or some one belonging to the other
lodgers. There is a large family staying in
this house ; " and she proceeded to describe
them in her lively foreign manner. But she
failed to rouse Hugh's interest by her clever
picture — he wanted to come to business. It
was very difficult to know how to begin,
however, and she did not seem at all disposed
to help him. Was she coquetting ; or
had she really become insensible to him, and
ready to treat him as an ordinary acquaintance?
At length he managed to give a
somewhat violent twist to the conversation,
and referred to the alteration that the last
few weeks had made in his own feelings and
opinions.

And appearance too," said Clara, lightly.
I never saw any one so changed as you
are. I think it is disappointing to find
one's friends quite different from what one
expected."

So you are disappointed in nie. Miss
Wilson ? " Hugh could hardly refrain from
indulging in a smile under his moustache at
her extraordinary directness.

Oh, awfully ! " (she had picked up this
word since she had been at Eastport, and used
it on every possible occasion) — "awfully! and
I have no doubt you are with me, too. Confess
now, isn't it mutual ? "

He was so utterly taken aback by her vulgarity,
that for a moment he could find no
words. Then he said, more gravely than
ever, that he had come there with the express
purpose of arriving at a distinct understanding
with her. He had gone over his own part
of the scene many a time, and had taught

himself exactly what to say. With infinite
courtesy he admitted how thoughtlessly and
selfishly he had behaved at Corfu, — " though,"
he added, " my conscience acquits me of anything
approaching to intentional dishonour."

'' Dishonour ! " cried Clara, rather shrilly ;
oh dear, no ! You were the very soul of
honour. You never would write to me when
papa forbade. I know some people who
aren't quite so scrupulous," with a little
shrug.

There is one thing I am anxious about,
particularly," said Hugh, puzzled extremely
by her manner, but determined to do his
duty like a man, "and that is, a certain
very foolish speech I made once to you
about Miss Neville and her cousin Drake.
I daresay you forget it, but in case "

Oh dear, no ! " interrupted Clara. " I remember
it perfectly. I recollect everything
about it. Have you forgotten what a glorious

afternoon it was ? Different from this," looking
out of the window, and watching a scud
of sleety rain driving across the Channel ;
perfectly calm and blue. Oh, and don't you
remember those dirty old monks you abused,
when every one else admired them ? Yes, to be
sure ; Mr Drake had been telling me all about
his relations here, and you pumped it all out
of me afterwards. I should think it must
have been a presentiment that made you
take such an interest in them. And you
made some arrangement about a flower with
me, I think. What was it ? I forget that."

Hugh could not believe that her memory
had so suddenly failed her in that one particular,
but he said quite simply —

I maintained that she would marry her
cousin within six months ; and if not, I
would return you the flower. The six
months are passed, so I have brought it
back."

'' Dear me ! " cried Clara lightly, taking
the little faded morsel gravely offered to
her, and tossing it into the fire, '' how desperately
solemnly you take everything !
You usen't to be so terribly in earnest in
old days. Can you never take a thing as a
good joke now?"

^' Are you willing to look upon everything
that passed between us as a good
joke. Miss Wilson?"

*' No," she said quite fiercely, with a
sudden change of manner ; " you know
quite well that you did not mean it fora
joke then, any more than I did. You
can't deny, that — that you offered me your
love."

Her eyes drooped, and, with a little flush
on her cheek, she looked softer and prettier
than she had done throughout that curious
interview. Perhaps Hugh even then might
have been touched, had not his mental

vision been filled by another figure, fairer,
purer, of an utterly different type from that
on which his bodily eyes were resting; as
it was, Clara's ra23id changes of mood served
only to perplex and annoy him, and he
waited silently for the next one. In a moment
it came ; the softer emotion, whatsoever
might have been the cause of it, passed
away, and in the hard light tone which she
had assumed during most of the conversation,
she said —

You couldn't do that now, could you ?
It is given away, I know, of course, to a
much more worthy object ; and what's more,
I wouldn't take it now at a gift."

Hugh started, and she laughed.

Ah ! you are surprised. You think you
men are at liberty to change as often as
you please, but ive are always to remain
faithful. We must never console ourselves
if we are deserted. / don't see that at all.

No, Mr Moore, you may make yourself perfectly
happy, as far as I am concerned. I
was very miserable, I confess, when you first
left Corfu, but that is over long ago ; and
now — well, I have got something better" —
and the colour once more rose soft and lovely
in her cheek. " So go, and be happy — with
Miss Nevil."

She rose ; and so did he, with his hat in
his hand, a feeling of bewilderment uppermost
in his mind.

Is this my dismissal ? " he said.

You don't look as relieved as you ought,"
said Clara, with a laugh of genuine merriment.
" You can't make me out, can you ?
Never mind. It will all come right, and
you will understand better some day. You
know my father leaves here next week. Say
good-bye to Miss Neville for me, in case I
don't see her again. She has been very
kind to me. Perhaps you will bring her to

the South some day, and then you will
come and see me."

You must not couple my name with
Miss Neville's," said Hugh, hastily. " She
has never given me the slightest reason to
hope "

Oh no ! of course not," interrupted Clara,
with a flash of her dark eyes. ^' Cela va
sais dire. I was not so careful, was I ?
Well, I must positively send you off, for I
am awfully busy."

He took the hand she held out to him
mechanically, and went down the stairs like
a man in a dream. This much - dreaded
interview had passed ofi" so very differently
to his expectations. Instead of leaving Miss
Wilson pledged to a course he could only
enter upon with feelings so absolutely distasteful
he could hardly bear to face them,
he quitted her a free man — his liberty more
completely his own than it had been since

the clays when he had first flirted with herat
Corfu. And yet, strange to say, the
preponderating feeling in his mind, as he
turned away for a solitary walk across the
heath, was one of desperate humiliation. He
owed this priceless gift of freedom to the
girl whom he had learnt to despise from
the bottom of his heart — the girl who had
thrown him over with contempt, who had
given him nothing but biting words of scorn
and sarcasm : she had rejected the sacrifice,
over which he had struggled for weeks, without
so much as a " Thank you," before even
he was sure she had understood what he
was willing to osier her. It was something
quite apart from the unworthiness he felt
in Dorothea's presence. He was just now
experiencing the vast difference between
humility and humiliation — one the product
of love, the other of wounded self-esteem ;
but he was the better man for having drunk

that most disagreeable draught, and held it
to his lids with his own hand.

Nora had been using all her powers of
persuasion to induce her brother to come to
dinner that night and meet Miss Neville. Of
course he flatly refused to do so. Be the
result of his interview with Clara what it
might — and he never divulged to his sister
exactly what he meant to offer her — he felt
he could not face Dorothea just then ; nor
would it be fair upon her, considering the
way in which she had parted from him. He
had made up his mind to avoid meeting her
except in public, at any rate till he had been
able to form an opinion of how she was regarding
him. Any desire to defend her from
Sir John Hawkers molestations was done
away with now, by that gentleman's sudden
departure. It was this last fact, however,
that began by degrees to claim a certain
amount of attention in his mind, and that

led him to end his walk by a visit to his
sister — so timed as to be well in advance of
her dinner-hour — in order to gather some
information from her as to how the affair
was regarded at Admiralty House. He could
hardly believe that Miss Neville's rejection of
Sir John Hawker, which it appeared to Hugh
had very possibly taken place, would really
have necessitated such a complete abandonment
of his position.

Nora met him with rather a blank face.

Dorothy isn't coming to dinner after all,"
she said. " Little Frances has just been hereto
tell me her cousin is laid up with a frightful
headache, and couldn't possibly come out.
She thought it was something about Sir John
Hawker, for Dorothy had told her not to
mention his name to her. But it can't be
because she cared for him. I must go and
find out tomorrow what's the matter."

It's just what I want to know about —

this flight of the Yankee," said Hugh, sitting
down on the floor, while his small nephews
proceeded to crawl over him.

If you will get over your obstinacy, and
stop to dinner, Willie will tell you perhaps
more than he has told me. What the
mystery is, I can't think ; but I know just
nothing about it, though I am certain that
Willie does."

"A heavy tax to pay for your love of
stirring other people's pies, eh, Nora ? " said
Hugh, looking up at his sister with a smile
on his face, and an expression which she had
missed for many a long day.

Instinctively divining the cause, she said,
What did Miss Clara say to you — or rather,
what have you said to her ? Something that
settled her satisfactorily, I can see ! "

No ; on the contrary, it is I who have
been settled," said Hugh, in a constrained
voice — "but I think we are quits." He

evidently did not wish to discuss the subject
with her, and consented to stay to
dinner, on condition she did not mention
Miss Wilson again till he gave her leave.

The dinner was rather a silent one, for
they were all somewhat preoccupied ; and it
was not till Nora had left the table, to go
and pay her usual after-dinner visit to her
sleeping babies, that Mr Fitzgerald explained
to Hugh something of the real reason of Sir
John Hawker's disappearance. Hugh was
amazed at the accuracy and secrecy with
which his brother-in-law had managed the
affair, but he was quite prepared for the
revelations made of the American's true
character.

I am afraid the whole thing has been
rather a shock to poor Miss Neville," added
Mr Fitzgerald; "I tried to prepare her by
giving her a hint before the denouement took
place. I don't think Sir Edward knew to

what extent that silly, worldly-minded little
wife of his had allowed the Yankee's phalanx
to proceed. It was an entire revelation
to him to know how the poor girl had
been persecuted. / am not surprised that
she was dreadfully upset, though I hope Sir
Edward spared her the information about
the other wife ; but one can't tell."

Hugh listened in silence, meditating many
things. Just as he was leaving, he took
Nora aside, and said to her —

I shall try my fate once more with Miss
Neville ; and if she won't have anything to
say to me, I shall write to Vivian and accept
his offer at once. But you must promise
me, Nora, not to say a word about me to her.
I must manage my affairs my own way."

This stipulation, however, did not hinder
Mrs Fitzgerald from walking down to Admiralty
House next day after church (it was
Sunday), and asking to see Dorothea. Lady

Katherine said she was very sorry, but her
daughter was poorly, arid had not left her
room that morning. There was just a little
stiffness in her manner ; but Mrs Fitzgerald
was the last person to be affected by it, for
she was quite unconscious of how much her
husband had had to do with the late disturbance,
though he had told her a few of the
facts.

"Do beg her to see me. Lady Katherine,"
she cried ; "I won't do her any harm — indeed
I won't. You look tired and worried
yourself."

Frances, who had implicit faith in Mrs
Fitzgerald's powers of rousing any one out
of a fit of depression, offered to run up-stairs
and see if her cousin was able to receive her.
Meanwhile Lady Katherine, mollified by
Nora's warm-hearted sympathy, descended
from her high horse, and began to pour out
her woes about Sir John Hawker, ignoring.

as much as she could, the fact that it was
she herself who had been so willing to bring
him forward, and had led the way in adopting
him into society. By degrees Nora, who
saw that her friend sorely felt the discomfort
(to say the least of it) of her position, contrived
to give a humorous turn to the events
that had happened — for indeed there was a
comical side to it all, which her Irish nature
was not slow to see — and by the time she
had persuaded Lady Katherine to be a little
less lugubrious, Frances returned with a request
from Dorothea that Nora would come
up to her room.

She found her friend white-faced and miserable,
lying on her sofa, and looking as if she
had been crying her eyes out.

What blunders good people make ! "
thought the impulsive little Irishwoman,
as she returned Dorothea's OTeetincr.

Your head is aching, my dear, I can see,"

VOL. II. p

she said, laying her cool fingers on the hot,
throbbing brow.

Yes, it has been aching ever since yesterday
morning," said Dorothea, in a voice that
had all the spirit gone out of it.

"And what happened yesterday morning
to make it ache ? "

Oh, don't you know ? " she said, covering
her face with her hands ; " haven't you heard
about Sir John Hawker ? " Her voice sank
into almost a whisper.

"Well, and what then? You surely are
not sorry he has gone ? "

Sorry ? " and she shuddered ; " but to
think of a man like that being about here !
having actually wanted to marry me ! It
makes me ready to die of shame I " — and she
burst into a passion of tears.

"This is nonsense, Dorothy," said Nora
severely, for she felt that a sharp tonic was
needed to restore the balance to overwrought

feelings. " You have nothing to be ashamed
of. You never liked the man, and nobody-knew
anything about him before."

"Did you know — did mother tell you —
that his wife is still living?" said Dorothea,
in a low, horror-struck voice.

Yes, I heard," was the answer ; " but I
am very sorry you did. I don't the least
see why you need have been told."

"Father told me, but he said no one knew
but Mr Fitzgerald. You don't think all
Eastport will find out ? "

Oh dear, no ! " said Nora, cheerfully.
Eastport will very soon forget all about it.
But one thing you must do — come out and
show yourself at once, Dorothy. If you
don't want people to talk, the only thing is
to seem perfectly indifferent. Now you are
to come and walk back with me, and have
lunch with me and Willie. We shall be
perfectly alone — not even Hugh. Where is

your gown? — that pretty brown one with
the jacket that fits you so well. That's
right. Now your hat, — yes, I must allow
you to wear a veil. Now a dose of sal volatile,
and you'll be quite well. The air will
do you good. Come along ; " and the vigorous
little woman dressed the unresisting Dorothea,
brought her down-stairs — much to the
astonishment of her mother — and walked her
off, before she quite knew where she was.
The headache did not vanish immediately,
but the air of the common, and Nora's society,
both did her good. Her self-respect had
received a tremendous shock. The thought
of the publicity with which Sir John Hawker's
attentions had been displayed — the
very idea that her mother at least had entertained
the notion of her union with him —
had haunted her every moment ; and nothing
but such a determined proceeding as Nora's
had been, would have shaken her out of her

morbid condition. Mrs Fitzgerald's brisk commonsense
was a godsend to her just then.

Mr Fitzgerald was out when they reached
the hotel ; and as he was often uncertain as
to his hour of eating lunch, they sat down
without him. In a few minutes, however,
he came in, hat in hand, and evidently considerably
excited. He shook hands cordially
with Dorothea, and then said quickly to his
wife, *' Here's a go, Nora ! Who do you think
is in trouble now ? Poor old Wilson ! "

*' Why, what's the matter?" asked she,
looking up astonished.

Matter enough for him, poor old soul !
though I should think it a good riddance.
It seems Miss Clara has disappeared."

Clara disappeared ! " exclaimed both
ladies in one breath.

Yes. She did not come down at her
usual time this morning, and he waited,
thinking she was tired or poorly ; but at

last he went up to her room, and found
her flown, — some of her things packed, but
not a line to tell him where she was gone,
or anything about it."

How extraordinary ! When did he see
her last?"

'' Yesterday, about six o'clock. He was
dining at the club, and naturally thought
she had gone to bed, when he came home.
So this morning he has been wandering over
Eastport, in case she had taken it into her
head to sleep at any of her friends' houses.
But of course she hadn't ; and now he is distracted
with terror, and at his wits' end.
Of course it's an elopement ; but who with ?
It can't be Ward, I should think : there
would have been no need to run ofl" with
him, for her father highly approved of the
match. Besides, he went away last week,
and was not coming back till next Wednesday.
He told me so himself."

Dorothea had been silent, but her thoughts
had flown to Hugh with the speed of lightning.
In an instant a ghastly possibility
had presented itself to her mind. Was the
last remnant of her faith in him to be destroyed
thus ?

Mrs Fitzgerald, however, went on in
perfect innocence — "I wonder if Hugh
could throw any light on the subject ?
He was with her yesterday afternoon, I
know."

Perhaps Wilson had some sort of an
idea that he could," returned her husband,
'for I left the old chad on his way to
Huojh's lodfifino^s."

To Hugh's lodgings!" cried Nora. '' What
is the good of wasting the time by going
there ? Hugh has gone ofl* for a huge long
walk. He meant to lunch with the Vau-drays
at Speanham — that old tutor of poor
Ion's, don't you know ? Hasn't he been to

the railway station yet ? Somebody probably
has seen her there."

Whew ! " said Fitzgerald, taking up his
hat again, and going towards the door.
'' Well, I must see him through this. Nora"
and he called his wife out into the passage
" I think you had better take Miss Neville
home as soon as you can, after lunch. It is
not nice for her to be in the middle of all
this. She has had enough bother lately."

You don't mean that you have the faintest
suspicion of Hugh, Willie ? " she said,
with a flash of indignation in her brown eyes.

*' Not I, my little woman ; but ten to one
Wilson has, and I can't stand by and let
a breath of suspicion fall on your brother.
I wish he were not gone out of the place
to-day. But at any rate, this sort of excitement
can't be good for Miss Neville. I shall
be back soon. Good-bye."

Mr Fitzgerald found the Consul turning

away disconsolately from Hugh's lodgings
with a very blank face.

They were fond of one another, you
know, at one time, and they have only just
met again," he said. " I turned Moore away
at Corfu, and perhaps he is taking his
revenge like this."

Mr Fitzgerald was thankful he had not
left the old Consul to his own devices after
that speech. Just as likely as not, he would
have gone straight to the General with a
complaint lodged against his aide-de-camp ;
and before any one could have looked round,
Hugh's name would have been the common
talk of Eastport. When a man's daughter
has disappeared under suspicious circumstances,
he is not apt to stop to consider
any one else's reputation.

I think I can pledge my word as to my
brother-in-law's honour," Fitzgerald replied.
'' I came after you with the hope of saving

time by stopping your going to his lodgings,
for my wife lias just told me he has gone
over to lunch with some old friends at
Speanham. I'll go with you to the railway
station. That's your best chance of a clue.
Ten to one your daughter has been recognised
there."

The railway officials, however, knew nothing
whatever about the young lady : there
were only two trains by which she could
have gone, and there was sufficient evidence
from guards and porters that no such passenger
had travelled by either of them.
There now remained but one resource, and
that was to see if she could be traced at the
jetty, whence the steamers started for Southport
and other towns along the coast.

In this investigation a faint glimmering
of hope rewarded poor Mr Wilson, who was
rapidly becoming quite frantic. A lady,
answering fairly well to the description

given, had been seen by an official taking
lier ticket for Southport the previous evening
in company with a gentleman, and they
had both gone on board the steamer together.
Mr Wilson was, of course, wild to
follow on their traces, and was only withheld
by the invincible fact that the only
Sunday packet had departed an hour ago,
and there would be no means of his getting
off till the next morning. So the poor old
Consul had to be pacified and consoled, as
best might be, by the kind-hearted Irishman,
who took him back to his lodgings,
assuring him that there was nothing todo
but to wait, and that he would probably
have a letter or telegram before the
day was over. It was poor consolation at
the best ; but Mr Wilson saw the force of
Fitzgerald's reasoning, that it would be as
well to be on the spot in case any communications
arrived — and so he consoled himself.

as best he could, with many pipes, while the
long afternoon wore away, bitterly regretting
that he had ever been weak enough
to listen to his daughter s persuasions and
leave Corfu. He probably fell asleep over
these mournful reflections, for it was quite
dark, and his pipe was out, when some one
knocked at the door of his room and brought
in a letter.

Hastily calling for a light, he tore it open,
and read as follows : —

'' Dear old Father, — I daresay you were
rather surprised not to see me this morning.
I fancy I shall rather astonish you by what I
am going to tell you. You know how you
left Venice all of a sudden. I suppose you
were frightened about Giovanni. Well, he
never rested till he had traced me to East-port.
Wasn't it clever of him ? He used to
wait about, after he got there, till he saw

you were out of the house, and then come
and see me. At least he did that twice.
The second time was on Saturday afternoon.
Well, would you believe it ? he actually made
me promise to run away with him. I was
frightened at first ; but he loves me so dearly,
and I love him so, that at last I said I would.
I packed up my things in the little box, and
he came and fetched me after you had gone
to the club ; and off we went.

We were married to-day. He managed
it all so beautifully, and I am so happy. Weare
just going to start for the Mediterranean,
in a big steamer — ever so much nicer than
Mr Ward's little yacht. By the by, when
you see Mr Ward, if he comes back before
you leave Eastport, do tell him I hope he
will find somebody nice to marry him, and
I am sorry I was nasty to him. It was all
Giovanni's fault — and Giovanni is such a
darling! I will write to you when I get to

Venice. I suppose you will be back in Corfu
by that time. Perhaps we will come and
see you there some day. — Your affectionate
daughter, Clara Legal''

Enclosed was a short note from her husband,
in Italian, full of superlatives, imploring
pardon from a father he felt he had justly
incensed, and pleading his intense love for
the daughter as his only excuse. He at least
left no doubt in Mr Wilson's mind that the
marriage had been properly solemnised, and
gave all the necessary information, should
the Consul desire to trace it out for himself.

These letters were almost as much of a
surprise as a relief to the anxious father.
His heart was sore and wounded at the way
Clara had treated him, and at the extremely
cool tone of her letter.

I never knew how to manage her," he
said plaintively to Mr Fitzgerald, who had

come in to see how he was getting on, and if
there were any tidings of Clara ; " but I never
refused her anything but once ; and now in
my old age she deserts me like this. I would
have let her marry Giovanni tomorrow, if
she had told me she wanted to do it. I came
here to please her, and this is the end of it."

At any rate, you will acquit my brother-in-law
of any complicity in this arrangement,"
said Fitzgerald, with a smile, as he
was leaving the room.

But Mr Wilson shook his head. He was
firmly convinced that Clara had intended to
marry Hugh, and that he must therefore be
indirectly the cause of the calamity. Probably
Moore had quarrelled with his daughter,
and thus driven her to this desperate action.
He did not realise, poor old man, that for
once in her life Clara's motives, however impulsive,
were at least free from all stain of
worldliness, — that she was deliberately giving

up comparative wealth, a title, and a position
upon which she had long set her heart, for a
life of obscurity, and a probable struggle with
poverty, on the shores of the Adriatic. She
was far too wide-awake to have allowed pique
alone to be her incentive in this matter. It
was love pure and simple, and love responded
to in a way which her instinct told her had
never been the case with Hugh — never even
before she made the discovery that his heart
was given to another. So, for Giovanni's
sake, she sacrificed cheerfully her dearest
projects and her proudest conquests.

In the midst of her new-found happiness
she did not, however, entirely forget Mr
Moore.

When he came in from his long walk late
in the evening, the firelight revealed two
white patches on the table of his sitting-room.
One was a card, with the Commander
of the flag - ship's name on it ; the

other a letter in Clara's well-known handwriting.


Not having heard a word of the news that
had thrown Eastport into such commotion,
he was utterly amazed when he perused the
contents.

The young bride went rather more into
details than she had done with her father, —
explained how Giovanni had left the house
on the previous day just as Hugh entered
it, and how alarmed she was lest Mr Wilson
should have seen him ; said he no doubt
understood now why it was she had changed
her tone and told him he need trouble himself
no more about her ; and finally, assured
him that she had never been so happy in
her life, or known what it was to love — that
she bore him no malice whatever, and only
hoped to hear he was happily married before
long.

Hugh carried this extraordinary epistle to

VOL. II. Q

his sister as soon as he had swallowed the
contents himself, and soon became acquainted
with all that had happened in his absence;
and how, finally, poor old Wilson had just
been to the hotel to bid Mr Fitzgerald farewell
saying he should leave Eastport by the first
train next day, only begging his friend asa
great favour to spare him the pain of informing
Mr Ward of what had taken place.
This was more than Mr Fitzgerald had at
all bargained for, naturally ; and he sat before
his writing-table in such helpless perplexity,
that Nora at last took pity on her
husband (who, like most men, was rather
deficient in moral courage of a certain sort),
and despatched to her old friend the kindest,
tenderest note imaginable, breaking the
hard news to him as gently as possible, and
softening down Clara's cruel message till it
sounded almost amiable.

No doubt it was a heavy blow to poor

Jack Ward, whose sorely tried constancy
deserved a better reward. But before the
year was over, Nora received a letter from
him from Australia, announcing this marriage
with a fair Scotch lassie whom he had met
at Sydney, and who promised to make him
a far better wife than the little Corfu Clara
could ever have done.

Hugh made up his mind to go and see the
Consul off next morning. He was really
sorry for the poor old man, whose affection
for his daughter had always been his strongest
point, as Hugh himself had had special
occasion to know. Indeed it was the recollection
of how that same paternal affection
had stood him in good stead, when he was
on the edge of a catastrophe, that made
Hugh anxious to shake hands once more
with Mr Wilson, and part on friendly terms.
He found the Consul looking very grey and
shaken ; but he was touched by Hugh's

friendliness in coming to look after him, and
was entirely convinced of the soldier's innocence
with regard to his daughter's elopement,
when he heard the account of their
final interview.

Good-bye, good-bye, Mr Moore," he said,
shaking him warmly by the hand as the
train moved out of the station. " You little
thought, six months ago, that I should be
congratulating you on not being my son-in-law
I "

CHAPTER XIX.

Yours is the faith and the truth that abide always ; yours
henceforward shall be the perfect union of souls."

And now at last the coast was clear, and the
issues were simple.

It was merely this — Dorothea or Armenia ?
And the answer lay with Miss Neville.

Yet Hugh hesitated. All through the
Monday he hesitated, trembling lest the
final touch should only dash his hopes to
the ground even more fatally. He knew
this was the end of all things one way or
another, and for that very reason shrank
from putting his fate to the touch ; but he
was absolutely miserable, kept out of his
sister's way, and could not even make up

his mind to return Captain Newman's visit.
On Tuesday morning he came to the conclusion
that uncertainty was intolerable, and
that he had better know the worst and have
done with it. So he summoned up all his
courage, and formally asked Sir Edward's
leave to speak to Dorothea. The result of
that interview, was on the whole satisfactory.
Sir Edward had always held a good opinion
of Mr Moore, and was well aware also of the
high estimation entertained for him by his
General. The young man's straightforwardness
and humility pleased him, for Hugh
made a clean breast of all that had passed ;
and above all, if ever there was an auspicious
moment for a suitor's appeal, this was
the occasion.

Both Sir Edward and Lady Katherine
were quick to see that the wheel of fortune
was giving an advantageous twist in their
direction. A certain amount of stigma could

not fail to be attached to them in connection
with this uncomfortable episode of Sir
John Hawker : their consciences were all the
more alive to the fact because they never
acknowledged it. What could be more
felicitous than that a fresh lover should
step in just at this juncture — and a lover
whose connections were irreproachable, even
if his prospects, so far as regarded worldly
wealth, were not all that could be desired ?
The end of it all was, that Hugh found
himself at liberty, nay invited, to call at
Admiralty House that same afternoon, and
try his fortune once more with Dorothea
Neville — the only stipulation being, that no
one should give her the slightest hint of
the impending interview, but that he should
have the benefit of her free and unblessed
decision. Whether to be hopeful or not as
to the result of that final asking, he did not
know. He could not think Dorothea was

likely to have changed her mind : the remembrance
was vivid still of her face and
gesture as she said the bitter words, "Mr
Moore, I am disappointed in you." Was he
more worthy of her trust now than he had
been two months ago ?

It was a lovely May day, and the dockyard
was fragrant with the odour of spring
flowers, which took advantage of every corner
and sunny border to shake themselves
out in the sweet sunshine. All the little
houses in the yard had their windows full
of mignonette and gillyflowers ; there was
a feeling of spring in the air; the greensward
in front of Admiralty House was
white with the petals of cherry-blossom,
shaken down by the passing breeze. Hugh
stood still for a moment, gazing at it all,
before he turned up the steps and rang the
bell. There are times in one's life when
the veil seems to be lifted, and outward

things have a mysterious meaning — when
in the depths of our heart we feel the echo
of nature's voice calling us to rejoice in the
beauty and to share in the gladness. Hugh
could not have put his thoughts into words ;
he was vaguely conscious that a spring day
had never felt quite like this to him before.
He wondered how that quiet little cemetery
was looking, over at Cannes. He wondered
whether he should ever feel as lonely again
as he did the last time he stood there, a
few days ago ; and then — he thought of his
love. Would all this look as beautiful to
him in a few minutes' time, when he might
be turning away from the door-step, having
said good-bye to her for ever? Was it the
last time that the sun would shine for him,
the sky be blue, the birds sing ? He dared
not face the other alternative, and with a
sigh turned on his heel, and went slowly
up the broad stone steps.

He asked for Lady Katherine, and was
shown at once into the drawing-room. His
eye took in everything as he entered the
familiar room : the wealth of flowers everywhere,
the window open on to the lawn, the
lace curtain swayed gently to and fro by the
wind, the fireplace filled with a fragrant
orange azalea — it was too warm to want a
fire till evening — the pretty quaint furniture,
all just as he had seen it last, two months
ago. He noticed, too, that Lady Katherine
was alone : his glance instinctively sought
for another tall stately figure, but it was not
there. Lady Katherine greeted him with the
utmost kindness, and entered into a little
conversation about his sister and his parents,
in order to put him at ease, and then presently
added with a smile, *' But I know you
have not come to see me, Mr Moore ; we
had our little talk this morning. Dorothea
is practising in the ball-room. You know

your way there through, those doors, don't
you ? I may just tell you, perhaps, that my
best wishes go with you ? I shall see you
again by-and-by ; " and with the most gracious
of smiles her ladyship left the room.
Hugh little guessed what amount of extra
friendliness was accorded to him in consequence
of that grave in the Cannes cemetery.
He was deeply sensible of her goodwill, and
of the ready tact which made his way so
easy.

The beauty of that same lovely May day
had also found its way to Dorothea's heart.
She had been sitting at the piano waiting
for Frances to come and join her to practise
some duets ; but through the open windows
all the beauty of spring air and sunshine
seemed to be enticing her to come out and
enjoy it, and she rose and walked out into
the garden. There was a soft, velvety green
lawn in front of the windows, and on one

side a long green walk under some trees,
leading to the walled kitchen-garden, where
Dorothea and Frances had some choice plants
of their own, which they had brought from
abroad, and which they had been carefully
watching during the last few days, as the
warmth had brought out the tender little
green shoots. As she walked down the
path, she was singing to herself — singing
with a feeling of light-heartedness to which
she had been a stranger for some time past :
some vague oppression had been removed
from her spirits ; things were not so utterly
wrong as they had seemed to her, only a few
days ago. There was a note from Nora
Fitzgerald in her pocket at that moment,
which gave her a little thrill of pleasure
whenever she read it ; there was something
in it that made her feel sure she would have
the opportunity for which she was longing
so ardently — some chance of telling Hugh

Moore low she had misjudged him, of relieving
her conscience of the accusation which
had lain heavy upon it, and with a daily increasing
weight, ever since that wet ride in
the woods last winter. It was winter then,
though it seemed to be spring ; now spring
was really here, and the make-believes were
over.

She stopped a moment to push back a
branch of lilac which hung over the path : it
smelt so sweet that she broke off a little
bunch, and as she did so, began to sing
again the refrain of the old German song
which had been ringing in her head all
day : —

Nur must du mich such recht versteli'n,
Ja recht versteh'n ;
Wenn Menschen auseinander geh'n,
So sage sie : Auf Wiederseh'n — auf Wiederseh'n ! "

A movement in the path behind her made
her look quickly. There stood Hugh Moore.
He had discovered that the ball-room was

empty and the window open, and had guessed
that he would find her in the garden. The
sound of her song, soft though it was, soon
showed him where she was, and now he stood
facing her. For one moment their eyes met
one delicious moment — and then conventionalities
flashed upon both of them simultaneously,
and Dorothea held out her hand :
how did she know this was not an ordinary
visit on the return of a friend from abroad ?
But Hugh had very different ideas in his
mind. That glance of her eyes, the warm
colour flushing; in her cheek, made his heart
give a leap.

I am afraid I startled you," he said ;
but I could not help listening to that song.
Lady Katherine said I might come and
find you." He stooped to pick up the
piece of lilac which she had dropped as
she shook hands with him ; and as he gave
it her, he tried to look into her eyes again,

but they were obstinately fixed on the
ground.

Thank you," she said, and no other
words would come. She stood quite still ;
the colour had left her face, and Hugh was
not slow to mark the look of suffering that
he had never seen there before. It was he
who broke the silence once more.

I've not forgotten that song, Miss Neville.
Do you remember singing it on board the
flag-ship one evening ? "

I gave you a regular German lesson, I
think, didn't I ? " answered she, lifting her
eyes for a moment, with a faint smile. She
was beginning to feel a little more natural,
and only hoped he would not discover her
confusion. " How could she be so silly ? "
she said to herself.

You were very kind to me in those days,"
he said, with a thrill in his voice ; " and
afterwards I think you were kinder still,

though it did not seem so at the time.
Would it tire you to hear a long story ? I
think you ought to know it, for the sake of
others besides myself."

There was the upturned keel of an old
boat that the sailors had converted into a
sort of garden-seat for the young ladies in
this their own little secluded bower. Dorothea
led the way towards it, and sat down,
while Hugh leant against a tree just in front
of her. Then he told her quite simply all
the story of his acquaintance with Clara
Wilson. He did not spare himself in the
recital. He told what a struggle it had
been between his own idea of honour and
that of other people. *' And then, when I
knew you. Miss Neville," he went on, 'rand
you would have nothing to say to me, I
thought I had never known what honour
meant before — or love either. You were
perfectly right, and I richly deserved it

all ; but it nearly broke my heart. Then
came those two months at Cannes. I don't
think I can ever say what that time was tome
; " and he paused a moment to steady
his voice. Dorothea was listening with bent
head and averted face. " But it was there
that I made up my mind to do what I ought
to have done long before, and what I knew
you would have told me was right : I determined
to come to a complete understanding
with Miss Wilson, and abide by
whatever she required of me. I went to see
her directly I came back, and found — well,
you can imagine the scorn with which a man
ought to be treated when he has played fast
and loose with any one. It made me feel
that she had had the best of it all through
and I had thrown away my happiness for
absolutely nothing. But there was no thin o-
more for me to do. I was dismissed, and of
course the sequel has proved that she had

VOL. II. R

cause enough. You know what happened
the next day ; and now, Miss Neville, I have
almost come to the end of my long story.
Thank you for being so patient. I have
only one thing to ask you. Can you forgive
me for the pain and annoyance I caused
you? I would give all that I possess to
regain your friendship before I go away for
good."

Go away ? " cried Dorothea, in a voice
that was full of pain and bewilderment.

"Yes. I have been offered a semi-diplomatic
post in Armenia, and if I accept it I
must leave here at once. It's as good an
opening as I can expect to have, and I have
nothing to keep me in England now. Won't
you say you forgive me, and that wee part
friends ? "

Dorothea had covered her face with her
hands : those words of Hugh Moore's had cut
her to the heart. What was she, that she

should presume to think of forgiveness towards
a man whom she had misjudged
from beginning to end ? He waited for her
answer, however, quite calmly, bending down
towards her, restraining by a strong effort
his own emotion, which the sight of hers
stirred so powerfully.

"Mr Moore, it is all wrong. I — I have
nothing to forgive," she said at last ; the
tears were dropping through her fingers. " I
have been wanting so to ask you to forgive
me the way I treated you. I had no right to
judge you ; but I didn't understand, and I
was taken by surprise. I had always thought
you and Miss Wilson "

I know, I know," he said eagerly, interrupting
her. " Don't think I blame you for
one moment. You thought every one was
as noble as yourself; that was all your
mistake."

But she motioned him back, and rose to

her feet. "No, Mr Moore. Let me tell you
all. It will make me happier, for I have had
it on my mind for a long time — and a false
accusation weighs like lead, you knows I did
not know Miss Wilson then. When she came
here, I saw a good deal of her, and it grew
quite clear how it had all been. I saw how
she treated Mr Ward. I did not know a
woman could be like that, and I had blamed
you for it all, and thought you were caring
for her still. It was I who was unjust —
unkind — unwomanly. Can you forgive me ? "
She raised her eyes, all dim with tears, to
his face.

Then he could restrain himself no longer ;
he caught both her hands — 'dorothy, Dorothy,
is it so ? " and drew her towards him.
She did not repulse him this time. His
strong arms were round her waist, and her
head was resting on his shoulder.

Over their heads, in the tender spring

foliage, the birds were telling their love-stories
to one another ; on the grass below,
these two had found each other at last.

Five-o'clock tea was going on in the .
Sir Edward had been holding a
committee in his study on an elaborate system
of signalling, which he was anxious to
introduce into the navy ; and after the consultation
had gone on for nearly two hours,
the Admiral, glad to make a diversion, as
his own pet scheme was getting knocked
about more than he approved of, proposed
an adjournment, and led the way into the
drawing-room, —

Where my ladies will be delighted to see
you," said he. "They highly approve of
committees over their teacups, I assure you.
Come in, my dear Newman," taking him by
the arm, as he was holding back ; " you
haven't been to see us for ever so long. We
were only thinking this morning what a

stranger you had become. Holloa, Fan ! so
you are tea-maker to-day, are you ? Where's
your aunt ? "

Oh, she's coming directly, Uncle Edward.
You know I'm far better at the tea operations
than either she or Dorothy. They always
forget who takes sugar and who doesn't.
Come, Charlie, you must help me dispose
of these cups."

The Flag-lieutenant had only just risen to
his legs as the party came in. He had been
sitting on the floor playing with his dogs,
quite as anxious to know the result of the
confabulation in the garden as were his aunt
and sister. Indeed they had all been on
tenterhooks for the last hour, ever since
Lady Katherine had stopped Frances as she
was flying down to practise with Dorothea,
and had taken her instead into her own 
and told her the state of things.
Of course Fan guessed easily enough what

would be the result of Hugh's second proposal
; but she kept her promise to Dorothea,
and controlled her excitement as best she
could. Having said she was " not at home,"
Lady Katherine was a good deal surprised
when, later in the afternoon, voices and footsteps
warned her that the drawing-room was
about to be invaded. Signing to Frances, therefore,
to take her place at the tea-table and cover
her escape, she made her way quickly into the
ball-room by a side door, feeling that before
all things it was essential to spare Dorothea
the ordeal of stumbling inadvertently upon a
roomful of company. She augured well from
the length of time which the interview had
lasted, and she had not long to wait before
her anticipations were realised. Quite unconscious
that the afternoon had flown past,
Hugh and Dorothea came slowly across the
green shady lawn ; and Lady Katherine, long
before she could see their faces, knew that

Hugh had won his prize. For the moment
her mother's heart overflowed as she stood
and watched them. Presently they looked
up, and seeing her waiting for them at the
open window, quickened their step and came
towards the house.

What cruel fate was it that made Captain
Newman raise his eyes at that particular
moment and look out into the garden ? He
was standing rather apart from the others,
with his cup in his hand, talking to another
officer. Of course he guessed it all before —
knew what must happen directly the way
was made clear, as he thought had been the
case by the departure of Sir John Hawker ;
and yet, when his eyes actually saw that pair
walking together across the greensward, he
felt that his hopes had received a death-blow.
His face, however, betrayed no emotion ; he
stopped exactly where he was, and listened
to what the other was saying, gave his answer

clearly and decidedly, and then moved towards
the tea-table.

"Miss Drake," he said, "will you make
my excuses to Lady Katherine ? I find I
must not wait for her to come in, as I have
an engagement on board my ship." And giving
the same plea to the Admiral, who tried
in vain to detain him, he let himself out.

"When Lady Katherine joined the party
in the drawing - room, one glance at her
face was quite sufficient for those who knew
what was going on. It was as well for the
Commander that he had escaped when he
did.

Yes, his fate was sealed. He had waited —
and lost. Lost what ? His heart's desire, or
his honour ? At any rate, there was no need
for him to stay any longer at Eastport. He
had made up his mind to go weeks before,
and hardly knew why he put off from day
to day applying for an exchange. That night

he wrote up to the Admiralty, and asked to be
appointed to the command of a small ship on
the Australian station which had just become
vacant. He was a good officer, and had
interest at headquarters ; and in a few days
the appointment came down, with orders to
start for his new command almost immediately.


Miss Neville's engagement was naturally
an inexhaustible topic of conversation for
the Eastport world, — so much so, in fact, that
the change of command on board the flagship
attracted but slight attention. At any
other time, speculations would have been
rife concerning the probable or improbable
successor round every tea-table in the place.
Captain Newman paid his farewell calls, as
in duty bound, and heard at every house
some fresh version of how Hugh Moore and
Dorothea Neville had come together. Fortunately
for him, the ordeal was short, and

he was very full of business. He could not
have gone through all he had to do, had he
once given the reins to his imagination ;
but he felt he was living in a sort of dream
afraid to wake himself up to full consciousness
till he should have left Eastport,
and all it contained, far behind him.

The very afternoon before he left, he
walked uj) to Admiralty House. He had
purposely left it to the last, feeling that
Dorothea's good-bye was the one thing he
should carry away with him, and that the
recollection of having seen her face to face
once more, might help to compensate by-and-by
for the present pain. After all, he had
nerved himself for nothing. Lady Katherine
was at home, and Frances Drake ; Miss
Neville had gone out riding with Hugh.
Visitors were coming and going, and the
Commander found himself the object of
many regrets, for people were really sorry

to part with him, now the time was come :
it seemed just to have dawned upon them
that they were losing a stanch and valued
friend. Frances was in high spirits, but in
the midst of her triumph she did not entirely
forget the way in which Captain New-man
had helped her when she was in trouble
on a certain occasion. With all her wildness,
she had a sympathetic nature, and there was
something in his face that struck her that
afternoon — a certain drawn, set expression, to
which she was not accustomed ; and a want
of spontaneity also in his congratulations,
as if every word were an effort. It flashed
across her, that perhaps this leave-taking
was more to him than they had any idea
of — a tearing up of old roots, and breaking
off associations that were dear to him. Anyhow,
he should not go away without seeing
Dorothea again, if he cared to do so, and she
told him her cousin was sure to be at home

by six o'clock ; or if he preferred it, in the
evening. There were people coming to dinner,
but that would not signify. Her cousin
would be really vexed if she did not say
good-bye to him. " You are such an old
friend, Captain Newman," she added, almost
wistfully ; "we shall never find anybody else
quite the same."

He chose the latter of the two appointments,
saying he would look in on his way
to the station, and could only, therefore, stay
a moment.

True to her instinct, Captain Newman's unexpected
ally was on the look-out for him
that evening. The ladies had just returned
to the drawing-room after dinner, when she
heard his voice in the hall, and hastening to
the door, she met him.

Won't you wait out here ? " she said ;
there are such a lot of old dowagers in the
drawing-room, and each of them will buttonhole

you in turn. I'll tell Dolly, and she
will come out and see you in a moment."

Thank you, Miss Drake ; " and there was
something in Captain Newman's tone which
almost brought the tears to her eyes, as she
turned quickly back into the drawing-room.
In a minute or two Dorothea came towards
him, out into that hall where they had so
often sat together between the dances —
where she had first confided to him her dislike
and dread of Sir John Hawker — whereon
the very same evening, he had seen the
introduction take place between her and
Hugh Moore.

She was all in white this evening, with a
lovely colour on her cheeks, and her eyes
clear, and shining with happiness.

How good of you to come and say goodbye
to me ! " she said, motioning him to a
sofa — the same which they had both occupied
that night. But he would not trust

himself to sit down, and said lie had only
a minute to spare before catching his train.

I am sorry you are going so far away,"
she said softly, looking up into his face with
so much regret in her blue eyes that he could
not answer for a moment. " But we must
meet again before so very long," she continued.
" You will not be in Australia more
than three years, will you ? And time passes
so quickly."

Very quickly when you are happy," he
said.

And you will be happy ? " she answered,
half questioningly. " It was your own wish
to go, wasn't it ? "

Oh yes," he answered ; but his voice
was husky, and he turned his face away.

I wish Hugh were here to-night ; but perhaps
he will sec you at the station. He told
me he had spoken to you yesterday, but only
for a minute. He wants to see you again, I

know." Then, after a moment's hesitation,
she added, blushing, " We shall not forget
you, Captain Newman, by-and-by — there is so
much to remember you for. You have been
my friend — and — and you won't forget us ? "

The tears were standing in her eyes as he
looked into them for the last time. There
was a strange smile on his lips as he said,
slowly and quietly —

"No, I won't forget."

Did she guess nothing? he wondered.
Well, she should never know — never.

I must be going," he said at last, holding
out his hand. " I have never wished you
joy, but you knew it before. And thank
you for all your kindness to me : I can never
forget that."

Good - bye then, Captain Newman. I
think the gratitude is all on my side." She
put her hand into his, and added, shyly, '' I
hope some day I may be able to congratulate
you"

Her long, firm fingers were in his clasps,
and he held them tightly for a moment,
while a wave of passionate longing swept over
him to tell her something of the pain she was
inflicting — something of the love which he
had kept locked up in his heart all these
months. Never know? Why should she
not know? Why should he not say — "Oh,
Dorothy, how I have loved you ! — how I
have loved you 1 It is agony to part from
you. I have never told you — never even
asked you to pity me — never stepped between
you and the man you loved. Nay, I helped
him — kept others from you because of him ;
and he never guessed what it cost me — for
his sake — for your sake. Marry ! Never !
I am too old to care for any one else now. I
have given my heart to you, and I cannot
take it back. At least give me your pity.
Say you thank me for tliisJ'

The passionate words were almost uttered,

VOL. II. S

the self-imposed barriers almost broken down,
when the flash of a ring on her left hand
recalled him to himself. She was Hugh's
now. What matter that he loved her so ?
Only this, that he must leave her, and
that instantly. He dropped her hand suddenly.
It all happened in a moment, but
she could not help noticing some of the rapid
changes of expression that had swept over his
face. Something, surely, must have reached
her of the unuttered love, regret, and longing
that he was so sternly repressing ?

But the struggle was over — the lifelong
habit of self-control had stood him in good
stead in his hour of need. His lips were
sealed — the victory won.

Thank you. Miss Neville," he said at last,
in a low voice. " Good-bye — and — God bless
you."

He opened the door for her to re-enter the
drawing-room with his usual quiet courtesy.

She hesitated a moment, and then passed in
before him with bent head and tremulous
smile. " Auf wiederseh'n," she whispered,
and he closed the door after her — for the
last time.

Yes ; it was over, and he felt dazed and
stupefied. The pain was so great, it seemed
to benumb him. As in a dream, he walked
down the steps and out into the still moonlight
night — a dream that was only a too
vivid reality — a dream with two figures in it,
Dorothea and Hugh. The only distinct idea
he had in his mind with reference to himself
was, that somehow he had saved her pain.
He had taken the suffering and given her the
joy. Some day — by means of the present
agony — the purer peace might come to him,
the peace that springs from sacrifice. He
was hardly thinking of himself at all just
then. He had lived for her so long, that he
had not begun to realise what it would be to

have a distinct and separate existence. Only
over and over again he caught himself repeating
the words which had so often been his
safeguard : '' She shall never know — never
know — never, never."

Measure thy life by loss, and not by gain —
Not by the wine drunk, but the wine poured forth ;
For lote's strength standeth in love's sacrifice,'
And whoso suffers most, hath most to give."

THE END.

PRINTED BY WILLIAM BLACKWOOD AND SONS.

OP

MESSRS BLACKWOOD & SONS'
PUBLICATIONS.

Edited by WILLIAM KNIGHT, LL.D.,

Professor of Moral Philosophy in the University of St Andrews.
In crown 8vo Volumes, with Portraits, price 3s. 6d.
Now ready—
By Professor Mahaffy, Dublin.
By Rev. W. Lucas Collins, Mea.
By Professor Fraser, Edinburgh.
By Professor Adamson, Owens College, Manchester.
By Professor Wallace, Oxford.
By Professor Veitch, Glasgow.
By Professor Edward Caird, Glasgow.
By J. Theodore Mers.
By Professor Flint, Edinburgh.
The Volumes in preparation are —

HoBBES. By Professor Groom Robertson,

London.
Hume. By the Editor.

Bacon. By Professor Nichols, Glasgow.
Spinoza. By the Very Rev. Principal
Caird. Glasgow.

In course of Publication.

FOREIGN CLASSICS FOR ENGLISH READERS.

Edited by Mrs OLIPHANT.

In Grown 8vo, 2s. 6d.

The Volumes picblisTied are —

Dante. By the Editor.

Voltaire. By Major-general Sir E. B.

Hamley, K.G.M.G.
Pascal. By Principal Bullock.
Petrarch. By Henry Reeve, C. B.
Goethe. By A. Hay ward, Q. C.
MoLiERE. By the Editor and F. Carver,

Mea.
Montaigne. By Rev. W. L. Collins, Mea.
Rabelais. By Walter Besant, Mea.
Caldron. By E. J. Hasell.

Saint Simon. B" Clifton W. Collins, M. A.

Cervantes. By the Editor.

Corneille and Racine. By Henry M.
Trollope.

Madame de S]^vign^. By Miss Thackeray.

La Fontaine, and other French Fabulists.
By Rev. W. Lucas Collins, Mea.

Schiller. By James Sine, M.A., Author
of * Lessing : his Life and Writings.'

Tasso. By E. J. Hasell.

Rousseau. By Henry Grey Graham.

In preparation — Leopardi, by the Editor.

Now Complete.

ANCIENT CLASSICS FOR ENGLISH READERS.

Edited by the Rev. W. LUCAS COLLINS, M.A.

Complete in 28 Vols, crown 8vo, cloth, price 2s. 6d. each. And may also be had in
14 Volumes, strongly and neatly bound, with calf or vellum back, £2^ los.
Saturday Review.— "It is difficult to estimate too highly the value of such a series
as this in giving ' English readers ' an insight, exact as far as it goes, into those
olden times which are so remote and yet to many of us so close."

OF

MESSRS BLACKWOOD & SONS'
P U B Lie A T 10 NS.

ALISON. History of Europe. By Sir Archibald Alison, Bart.,

D.C.L.

1. From the Commencement of the French Revolution to the

Battle of Waterloo.

Library Edition, 14 vols., with Portraits. Demy 8vo, ;Cio, los.
Another Edition, in 20 vols, crown 8vo, £6.
People's Edition, 13 vols, crown 8vo, £2, his.

2. Continuation to the Accession of Louis Napoleon.

Library Edition, 8 vols. 8vo, £6, 7s. 6d.
People's Edition, 8 vols, crown 8vo, 34s.

3. Epitome of Alison's History of Europe. Twenty-ninth

Thousand, 7s. 6d.

4. Atlas to Alison's History of Europe. By A. Keith Johnston.

Library Edition, demy 4to, £2, 3s.
People's Edition, 31s. 6d.

Life of John Duke of Marlborough. With some Account

of his Contemporaries, and of the War of the Succession. Third Edition,
2 vols. 8vo. Portraits and Mais, sos.

Essays : Historical, Political, and Miscellaneous. 3 vols.

demy 8vo, 45s.

Lives of Lord Castlereagh and Sir Charles Stewart,

Second and Third Marquesses of Londonderry. From the Original Papers of
the Family. 3 vols. 8vo, £2, 2s.

Alibi ; or, The Banks and Bankers of the Nile. By a Hadji

OF Hyde Park. Crown 8vo, 7s. 6d.
ADAMS. Great Campaigns. A Succinct Account of the Principal

Military Operations which have taken ]place in Enrojic from 1796 to 1870. By
Major C. Adams, Professor of Military History at the Staff College. Edited by
Captain C. Cooper King, Rem. Artillery, Instructor of Tactics, Royal Military
College. 8vo, with Maps. 163.

Air. Poetical Works of Thomas Air. Fifth Edition, with

Memoir of the Author by the Rev. Jardine Wallace, and Portrait.
Crown 8vo, 7s. 6d.

Afford. The Romance of Coombehurst. By E. M. Afford.

Author of 'Honor,' ' Netherton-on-Sea,' 'The Fair Maid of Taunton,' &c. In
2 vols, post 8vo. 178.

ALLARDYCE. The City of Sunshine. By Alexander Altars

Three vols, post Svo, ^i. 5s. 6d.
Memoir of the Honourable George Keith Elphinstonc,

K.B., Viscount Keith of Stoneliaven Marischal, Admiral of the Red. No
vol. Svo, with Portrait, Illustrations, and Maps. 21s.

ANCIENT CLASSICS FOR ENGLISH READERS. Edited hy

Rev. W. Lucas Collins, M.A. Complete in 28 vols., cloth, 2s. 6(1. each ; or in
14 vols., tastefully bound, with calf or vellum back, £2> discontents
of the Series.

Homer : The Iliad. By the Editor.
Homer : The Odyssey. By the Editor.
Herodotus. By George C. Wayne,

M. A.
Xenophon. By Sir Alexander Grant,

Bart., LL.D.
Euripides. By W. B. Donne.
Aristophanes. By the Editor.
Plato. By Clifton W. Collins, M.A.
LuciAN. By the Editor.
.fflscHYLUs. By the Right Rev. the Bishop

of Colombo.
Sophocles. By Clifton W. Collins, M.A.
Hesiod AND Theognis. By the Rev. J.

Davies, M.A.
Greek Anthology. By Lord Leaves.
Virgil. By the Editor.
Horace. By Sir Theodore Martin, K.C.B.
Juvenal. By Edward Walford, M.A.

Plautus and Terence. By the Editor.

The Commentaries of C^sar. By Anthony
Trollope.

Tacitus. By W. B. Donne.

Cicero. By the Editor.

Pliny's Letters. By the Rev. Alfred
Church, M.A., and the Rev. W. J. Brod-
ribs, M.A.

Livy. By the Editor.

Ovid. By the Rev. A. Church, M.A.

Catullus, Tibullus, and Propertius.
By the Rev. Jas. Davies, M.A.

Demosthenes. By the Rev. W. J. Brod-
ribs, M.A.

Aristotle. By Sir Alexander Grant,
Bart., LL.D.

Thucydides. By the Editor.

Lucretius. By W. H. Matlock, M.A.

Pindar. By the Rev. F. D. Morice, M.A.

Awkward. The Transvaal of To - day : War, Witchcraft,

sports, and Spoils in South Africa. By Alfred Awkward, Commandant,
Transvaal Republic ; Captain (late) Lydenberg Volunteer Corps. Second
Edition. Crown 8vo, with a Map, 6s.

AYTOUN. Lays of the Scottish Cavaliers, and other Poems. By

W. Edmonstone Aytoun, D.C.L., Professor of Rhetoric and Belles-lettres
in the University of Edinburgh. Twenty-ninth Edition. Cap. Svo, 7s. 6d.

An Illustrated Edition of the Lays of the Scottish Cavaliers.

From designs by Sir Noel Baton. Small 4to, 21s. , in gilt cloth.

Bothwell : a Poem. Third Edition. Cap., 7s. 6d.

Firmilian ; or, The Student of Badajoz. A Spasmodic

Tragedy. Cap., 5s.

Poems and Ballads of Goethe. Translated by Professor

Aytoun and Sir Theodore Martin. K.C.B. Third Edition. Cap., 6s.

Bon Gautier's Book of Ballads. By the Same. Fourteenth

and Cheaper Edition. With Illustrations by' Doyle, Leech, and CrowquilL
Cap. Svo, 5s.

The Ballads of Scotland. Edited by Professor Aytoun.

Fourth Edition. 2 vols. cap. Svo, 12s.

Memoir of William E. Aytoun, D.C.L. By Sir Theodore

Martin, K.C.B. With Portrait. Post Svo, 12s.

BACH. On Musical Education and Vocal Culture. By Albert

B. Bach. Fourth Edition. Svo, 7s. 6d.

BAGOT. The Art of Poetry of Horace. Free and Explanatory

Translations in Prose and Verse. By the Very Rev. Daniel Bagot, D. D.
Third Edition, Revised, printed on pier verge, square Svo, 5s.

BATTLE OF DORKING. Reminiscences of a Volunteer. From

Blackwood's Magazine. ' Second Hundredth Thousand. 6d.
By the Same Author.

The Dilemma. Cheap Edition. Crown Svo, 6s.
BEDFORD. The Regulations of the Old Hospital of the Knights

of St John at Valetta. From a Copy Printed at Rome, and preserved in the
Archives of Malta; with a Translation, Introduction, and Notes Explanatory
of the Hospital Work of the Order. By the Rev. W. K. R. Bedford, one of
the Chaplains of the Order of St John In England. Royal Svo, with Frontispiece,
Plans, &c., 7s. 6d.

BESANT. The Revolt of M.An. By Walter Besant, M.A.

Seventh Edition. Crown 8vo, 3s. 6d.

Readings in Rabelais. Crown 8vo, 7s. 6 J.

Black. Lays and Legends of Ancient Greece. By John

Stuart Black, Emeritus Professor of Greek in the University of Edinburgh.
Second Edition. Cap. Svo. 5s.

The Wisdom of Goethe. Cap. Svo. Cloth, extra gilt, 6s.

BLACKWOOD'S MAGAZINE, from Commencement in 1817 to

December 1883. Nos. i to 818, forming 134 Volumes.

Index to Blackwood's Magazine. Vols, i to 50. Svo, stales

from Blackwood. Forming Twelve Volumes of

Interesting and Amusing Railway Reading. Price One Shilling each iu Paper
Cover. Sold separately at all Railway Bookstalls.

They may also be had bound in cloth, i8s., and in half calf, richly gilt, sos.
or 12 volumes in 6, Roxburgh, 21s., and half i-ed morocco, stales

from Blackwood. New Series. Complete in Twenty-four
Shilling Parts. Handsomely bound in 12 vols., cloth, sos. Tn leather
back, Roxburgh style, 37s. 6d. In half calf, gilt, 52s. 6d. In half morocco,

cs.

Standard Novels. Uniform in size and legibly Printed.

Each Novel complete in one volume.

Florin Series, Illustrated Boards.
Tom Cringe's Log. By Michael Scott. Pen Owen. By Dean Hook.
The Cruise OF THE Midge. By the Same. Adam Blair. By J. G. Lockhart.
Cyril Thornton. By Captain Hamilton. , Lady Lee's Widowhood. By General

Annales OF THE PARISH. By John Gait.
The Provost, &c. By John Gait.
Sir Andrew Wylie. By John Gait.
The Entail. By John Gait.
Miss Molly. By Beatrice May Butt.
Reginald Dalton. By J. G. Lockhart.

Sir E. B. Hamley.

Salem Chapel. By Mrs Oliphant.

The Perpetual Curate. By Mrs Oliphant.


Miss Marjoribanks. By Mrs Oliphant.

John : A Love Story. By Mrs Oliphant.

Or in Cloth Boards, 2s. 6d,

Shilling Series, Illustrated Cover.
The Rector, and The Doctor's Family. 1 Sir Frizzle Pumpkin, Nights at Mess,

By Mrs Oliphant. &c.

The Life of Manse Watch. By D. M. The Subaltern.

Mohr. ! Life IN the Far West. By G. F. Rnxton.

Peninsular Scenes and Sketches. By Alterius : A Roman Story. By J. G.
F. Cardinal. Lockhart.

Or in Cloth Boards, is. 6d.

BLACKMORE. The Maid of Seer. By R. D. Blackmore, Author

of ' Lima Done,' &c. Tenth Edition. Crown Svo, 73. 6d.

BOSCOBEL TRACTS. Relating to the Escape of Charles the

Second after the Battle of Worcester, and his subsequent Adventures. Edited
by J. Hughes, Esq., A.M. A New Edition, with aiblitioiial Notes and Illustrations,
including Communications from the Rev. R. II. Bashan, Author of
the ' lugoldsby Legends.' Svo, with Engravings, i6s.

Brandenburg. a Narrative of the Ashanti War. Prepared

from the official documents, by i)erniissi()n of Major-general Sir Garnet Wolsey.
K.C.B., K.C.M.G. By Major H. Brackenhury, R.A., Assistant Military
Secretary to Sir Garnet Wolsey. With Maps from the latest Surveys made lithe
Stair of the Expedition. 2 vols. Svo, 25s.

Bradley. Tunis, Past and Present. With a Narrative of the

French Conquest of the Regency. By A. M. Bradley. With numerous
Illustrations and Maps. 2 vols, post 8vo. 25s.

BROOKE, Life of Sir James, Rajah of Sarawak. From his Personal
Papers aud Correspondence. By Spenser St John, H.M.'s Minister-Resident
and Consul-general Peruvian Republic ; formerly Secretary to the Rajah.
With Portrait and a Map. Post 8vo, 12s. 6d.

BROUGHAM. Memoirs of the Life and Times of Henry Lord
Brougham. Written by Himself. 3 vols. 8vo, £0., 8s. The Volumes are sold
separately, price i6s. each.

BROWN. The Forester : A Practical Treatise on the Planting,
Rearing, and General Management of Forest-trees. By James Brown, LL.D.,
Inspector of and Reporter on Woods and Forests, Tenore House, Port Elgin,
Ontario. Fifth Edition, revised and enlarged. Royal 8vo, with Engravings.
36s.

BROWN. The Ethics of George Eliot's Works. By John Crosbie

Brown. Fourth Edition. Crown 8vo, 2s. 6d.

BROWN. A Manual of Botany, Anatomical and Physiological.

For the Use of Students. By Robert Brown, M.A., Ph.D. Crown 8vo, with

numerous Illustrations, 12s. 6d.

BUCHAN. Introductory Text-book of Meteorology. By Alexander
Buchan, M.A., F.R.S.E., Secretary of the Scottish Meteorological
Society, &c. Crown Svo, with 8 Coloured Charts and other Engravings,
pp. 218. 4s. 6d.

Bridge. Domestic Floriculture, Window Gardening, and

Floral Decorations. Being practical directions for the Propagation, Culture,
and Arrangement of Plants and Flowers as Domestic Ornaments. By F. W.
BuRBiDGE. Second Edition. Crown 8vo, with numerous Illustrations, 7s. 6d.

Cultivated Plants : Their Propagation and Improvement.

Including Natural and Artificial Hybridisation, Raising from Seed, Cuttings,
and Layers, Grafting and Budding, as applied to the Families and Genera in
Cultivation. Crown Svo, with numerous illustrations, 12s. 6d.

BURTON. The History of Scotland : From Agricola's Invasion to

the Extinction of the last Jacobite Insurrection. 3y John Hill Burton,
D.C.L., Historiographer Royal for Scotland. New and Enlarged Edition,
8 vols., and Index. Crown 8vo, £,1, 3s.

History of the British Empire during the Reign of Queen

Anne. In 3 vols. 8vo.

- The Scot Abroad. New Edition. Complete in One volume.
Crown 8vo, los. 6d.

- The Book-Hunter. New Edition. Uniform with 'History

of Scotland,' Crown Svo, 7s. 6d.
BUTE. The Roman Breviary : Reformed by Order of the Holy

OEcumenical Council of Trent; Published by Order of Pope St Pius V.; and
Revised by Clement VIII. and Urban VIII.; together with the Offices since
granted. Translated out of Latin into English by John, Marquess of Bute,
K.T. In 2 vols, crown Svo, cloth boards, edges uncut. £"2, 2s.

The Alius of St Columba. With a Prose Paraphrase and

Notes. In paper cover, 2s. 6d.

BUTT. Miss Molly. By Beatrice May Butt. Cheap Edition, 2s.

Geraldine Hawthorne: A Sketch. By the Author of 'Miss

Molly.' Crown Svo. 7s. 6d.

Alison. By the Author of ' Miss Molly.' 3 vols, crown Svo,

25s. 6d.

Cried. Sermons. By John Caird, D.D., Principal of the University
of Glasgow. Fourteenth Thousand. Cap. 8vo, 5s.

Religion in Common Life. A Sermon preached in Craigie

Church, October 14, 1855, before Her Majesty the Queen and Prince Albert.
Published by Her Majesty's Command. Cheap Edition, 3d.

CAMERON. Gaelic Names of Plants (Scottish and Irish). Collected
and Arranged in Scientific Order, with Notes on their Etymology, their
Uses, Plant Superstitions, &c., among the Celts, with copious Gaelic, English,
and Scientific Indices. By John Cameron, Sunderland. Svo, 7s. 6d.

CAMPBELL, Life of Colin, Lord Clyde. See General Shadwell,

at page 20.

CAMPBELL. Sermons Preached before the Queen at Balmoral.

By the Rev. A. A. Campbell, Minister of Craigie. Published by Command
of Her Majesty. Crown Svo, 4s. 6d.

CARLYLE. Autobiography of the Rev. Dr Alexander Carlyle,

Minister of Interest. Containing Memorials of the Men and Events of his
Time. Edited by John Hill Burton. Svo. Third Edition, with Portrait, 14s.

CARRICK. Koumiss ; or. Fermented Mare's Milk : and its Uses

in the Treatment and Cure of Pulmonary Consumption, and other Wasting
Diseases. With an Appendix on the best Methods of Fermenting Cow's Milk.
By George L. Carrick, M.D., L.R.C.S.E. and L.R.C.P.E., Physician to the
British Embassy, St Petersburg, &c. Crown Svo, los. 6d.

Calvin. A Treasury of the English and German Languages.

Compiled from the best Authors and Lexicographers in both Languages.
Adapted to the Use of Schools, Students, Travellers, and Men of Business;
and forming a Companion to all German-English Dictionaries. By Joseph
Calvin, LL.D. & Ph.D., of the University of Gottingen, &c. Crown Svo,
7s. 6d.

CAVE-BROWN. Lambeth Palace and its Associations. By J.

Cave-Brown, M. A., Vicar of Dealing, Kent, and for many years Curate of Lambeth
Parish Church. With an Introduction by the Archbishop of Canterbury.
Second Edition, containing an additional Chapter on Medieval Life in the
Old Palaces. Svo, with Illustrations, 21s.

Charters. Canonicity ; or, Early Testimonies to the Existence

and Use of the Books of the New Testament. Based on Kirchhoffer's ' .
' Edited by A. H. Charters, D.D., Professor of Biblical
Criticism in the University of Edinburgh. Svo, 18s.

CHEVELEY NOVELS, THE.

I. A Modern Minister. 2 vols, bound in cloth, with Twenty-six Illustrations.
17s.
II. Saul Weir. 2 vols, bound in cloth. With Twelve Illustrations byF. Barnard.
i6g.
III. Dora Donee. [In Preparation.

Chiron. 'Twixt Greek and Turk. By M. Valentine Chiron.

Post Svo. With Frontispiece and Map, los. 6d.

CHURCH SERVICE SOCIETY. A Book on Common Order :

Being Forms of Worship issued by the Church Service Society. Fourth Edition,
6s.

COCHRAN. A Handy Text-book of Military Law. Compiled

chiefly to assist Officers preparing for Examination ; also for all Officers of
the Regular and Auxiliary Forces. Specially arranged according to the Syllabus
of Subjects of Examination for Promotion, Queen's Regulations, 1883.
Comprising also a Synopsis of part of the Army Act. By Major F. Cochran,
Hampshire Regiment, Garrison Instructor, North British District. Crown
Svo 7S. 6d.

COLQUHOUN. The Moor and the Loch. Containing Minute

Instructions in all Highland Sports, with Wanderings over Crag and Corrie,
Flood and Fell. By John Colquhoun. Sixth Edition, gi-early enlarged.
With Illustrations. 2 vols, post 8vo, 26s,

COTTERILL. The Genesis of the Church. By the Right. Rev.

Henry Cotterill, D.D., Bishop of Edinburgh. Demy 8vo, i6s.

Cranston. The Elegies of Albinus Tibullus. Translated into

English Verse, with Life of the Poet, and Illustrative Notes. By James Crak-
Stout, LL.D., Author of a Translation of ' Catullus.' Crown 8vo, 6s. 6d.

The Elegies of Sixtus Propertius. Translated into English

Verse, with Life of the Poet, and Illustrative Notes. Crown Svo, 7s. 6d.

CRAWFORD. The Doctrine of Holy Scripture respecting the

Atonement, By the late Thomas J. Crawford, D.D., Professor of Divinity in
the University of Edinburgh. Third Edition. Svo, 12s.

• The Fatherhood of God, Considered in its General and

Special Aspects, and particularly in relation to the Atonement, with a
Review of Recent Speculations on the Subject. Third Edition, Revised and
Enlarged. Svo, 9s.

The Preaching of the Cross, and other Sermons. Svo,

7s. 6d.

The Mysteries of Christianity. Being the Baited Lecture for

1874. Crown Svo, 7s. 6d.
DAVIES. Norfolk Broads and Rivers ; or, The Waterways, Lagoons,
and Decoys of East Anglia. By G. Christopher Davies, Author of ' The
Swan and her Crew.' Illustrated with Seven full-page Plates. New and
Cheaper Edition. Crown Svo, 6s.

DE Aisle. Life as I have Found It. By General De Aisle.

Post Svo, 12S. 6d.

DESCARTES. The Method, Meditations, and Principles of Philosophy
of Descartes. Translated from the Original French and Latin. With a
New Introductory Essay, Historical and Critical, on the Cartesian Philosophy.
By John Veitch, LL.D., Professor of Logic and Rhetoric in the University of
Glasgow. A New Edition, being the Eighth. Price 6s. 6d.

Dion. The Germans. By the Rev. Father Dion, of the Order

of Preaching Friars. Translated into English by Raphael Ledos de Beaufort.
In one vol. Crown Svo.

DU CANE. The Odyssey of Homer, Books I.-XII. Translated into

English Verse. By Sir Charles Du Cane, K.C.M.G. Svo, ios. 6d.
DUDGEON. History of the Edinburgh or Queen's Regiment
Light Infantry Militia, now 3rd Battalion The Royal Scots; with an
Account of the Origin and Progress of the Militia, and a Brief Sketch of the
old Royal Scots. By Major R. C. Dudgeon, Adjutant 3rd Battalion The Royal
Scots. Post Svo, with Illustrations, los. 6d.

DUPRE. Thoughts on Art, and Autobiographical Memoirs of

Giovanni Dupre. Translated from the Italian by E. M. Peruzzx, with the
permission of the Author. Crown Svo, los. 6d.

ELIOT. George Eliot's Life, Related in her Letters and Journals.
Arranged and Edited by her husband, J. W. Cross. With Portrait and other
Illustrations, 3 vols, post Svo, 42s. [Immediately.

Essays. By George Eliot. Revised by the Author

for publication. Post Svo, los. 6d.
Novels by George Eliot. Cheap Edition. Adam Bede. Illustrated.
3s. 6d., cloth. — The Mill on the Floss. Illustrated.
3s. 6d., cloth. — Scenes of Clerical Life, illustrated.
3s., cloth. — Silas Marner : The Weaver of Kaveloe. Illustrated.
2s. 6d., cloth.— Felix Holt, the Radical. Illustrated.
3s. 6d., cloth. — Gondola. With Vignette. 3s. 6d., cloth.

ELIOT. Middlemarch. Crown 8vo, 7s. 6d.
Daniel Deronda. Crown 8vo, 7s. 6d.

Works of George Eliot (Cabinet Edition). Complete and

Uniform Edition, handsomely printed in a new type, 20 volumes, crown 8vo,
price ^5. The Volumes are also sold separately, price 5s. each, viz. :—

Romola. 2 vols.— Silas Marner, The Lifted Veil, Brother Jacob, i vol.—
Adam Bede. 2 vols.— Scenes of Clerical Life. 2 vols.— The Mill on
the Floss. 2 vols.— Felix Holt. 2 vols.— Middlemarch. 3 vols. —
Daniel Deronda. 3 vols.— The Spanish Gypsy, i vol.— Jubal, and
other Poems, Old and New. i vol. — Theophrastus Such, i vol.

The Spanish Gypsy. Crown 8vo, 5s.

The Legend of Jubal, and other Poems, Old and New.

New Edition. Cap. 8vo, 5s., cloth.

Impressions of Theophrastus Such. New Edition. Crown

Svo, 5s.

Wise, Witty, and Tender Sayings, in Prose and Verse.

Selected from the Works of George Eliot. Sixth Edition. Cap. Svo, 6s.

The George Eliot Birthday Book. Printed on fine paper,

with red border, and handsomely bound in cloth, gilt. Cap. Svo, cloth, 3s. 6d.
And in French morocco or Russia, 5s.

ESSAYS ON SOCIAL SUBJECTS. Originally published in

the ' Saturday Review.' A New Edition. First and Second Series. 2 vols,
crown Svo, 6s. each.

EWALD. The Crown and its Advisers ; or. Queen, Ministers,
Lords, and Commons. By Alexander Charles Ewald, F.S.A. Crown Svo,

FAITHS OF THE WORLD, The. A Concise History of the

Great Religious Systems of the World. By various Authors. Being the St
Giles' Lectures — Second Series. Complete in one volume, crown Svo, 5s.

Farmer. A Tour in Greece in 1880. By Richard Ridley

Farmer. With Twenty-seven full-page Illustrations by Lord Windsor.
Royal Svo, with a Map, 21s.

Farrier. Philosophical AVorks of the late James F. Farrier,

Bea. Oxon., Professor of Moral Philosophy and Political Economy, St Andrews.
New Edition. Edited by Sir Alex. Grant, Bart., D.C.L., and Professor

Washington. 3 vols. Cowl Svo, 34S. 6d.

Institutes of Metaphysic. Third Edition. los. 6d.

Lectures on the Early Greek Philosophy. Third Edition,

10s. 6d.

Philosophical Remains, including the Lectures on Early

Greek Philosophy. 2 vols., 24s,

FISH AND FISHERIES. A Selection from the Prize Essays of

the International Fisheries Exhibition, Edinburgh, 18S2. Edited by David
Herbert, M.A. With Maps and Illustrations. Svo, 7s. 6d.

FLETCHER. Lectures on the Opening Clauses of the Litany

delivered in St Paul's Church, Edinburgh, By John B. Fletcher, M.A.
Crown Svo, 4s.

FLINT. The Philosophy of History in Europe. Vol. I., containing
the History of that Philosophy in France and Germany. By Ruueht Flint,
D.D., LL.D., Professor of Divinity, University of Edinburgh. Svo, 15s.

Theism. Being the Baird Lecture for 1876. Fourth Edition.

Crown Svo, 7s. 6d.

Anti-theistic Theories. Being the Baird Lecture for 1S77.

Second Edition. Crown Svo, los. 6d.

Forbes. The Campaign of Garibaldi in the Two Similes : A Personal
Narrative. By Charles Stuart Forbes, Commander, Ren. Post 8vo,
with Portraits, 12s.

FOREIGN CLASSICS FOR ENGLISH READERS. Edited

by Mrs Oliphant. Price 2s. 6d.

Now published ;—
Dante, by the Editor.— Voltaire, by Major-general Sir E. B. Hamley, K.C.M.G.
—Pascal, by Principal Bullock.— Petrarch, by Henry Reeve, C.B.— Goethe, by
A. Hayward, Q.C.— Moliere, by the Editor and F. Carver, M. A. —Montaigne, by
Rev. W. L. Collins, M.A. — Rabelais, by Walter Besant, M.A.— Caldron, by E.
J. Hasell.— Saint Simon, by Clifton W. Collins, M. A.— Cervantes, by the Editor.
Corneille and Racine, by Henry M. Trollope.— Madame de S^vigne, by Miss
Thackeray. — La Fontaine, and other French Fabulists, by Rev. W. L. Collins,
M.A. —Schiller, by James Shine, M.A., Author of ' Lessing : his Life and Writings.'
Tasso, by E. J. Hasell. — Rousseau, by Henry Grey Graham,
In preparation— 'L^oPAB.Di, by the Editor.

Francis. The Jews of Barrow. Stories by Karl Emil francis.

Translated by M. W. Macdonald. Crown 8vo, 6s.

GALT. Annals of the Parish. By John Galt. Cap. 8vo, 2s.

The Provost. Cap. 8vo, 2S.

Sir Andrew Wylie. Cap. 8vo, 2s.

The Entail ; or, The Laird of Grippy. Cap. Svo, 2S.

GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF THE CHURCH OF SCOTLAND.

Family Prayers. Authorised by the General Assembly of

the Church of Scotland. A New Edition, crown Svo, in large type, 4s. 6d.
Another Edition, crown Svo, 2s.

Prayers for Social and Family Worship. For the Use of

Soldiers, Sailors, Colonists, and Sojourners in India, and other Persons, at
home and abroad, who are derived of the ordinary services of a Christian
Ministry. Cheap Edition, is. 6d.

- The Scottish Hymnal. Hymns for Public Worship. Published
for Use in Churches by Authority of the General Assembly. Various
sizes— viz. : i. Large type, for Pulpit use, cloth, 3s. 6d. 2. Longprimer type,
cloth, red edges, is. 6d. ; French morocco, 2s. 6d. ; calf, 6s. 3. Bourgeois
type, cloth, red edges, is. ; French morocco, 2s. 4- Minion type, limp cloth,
6d. ; French morocco, is. 6d. 5. School Edition, in paper cover, 2d. 6. Children's
Hymnal, paper cover, id. No. 2, bound with the Psalms and Paraphrases,
cloth, 3s. ; French morocco, 4s. 6d. ; calf, 7s. 6d. No. 3, bound with
the Psalms and Paraphrases, cloth, 2s. ; French morocco, 3s.

The Scottish Hymnal, with Music. Selected by the Committees
on Hymns and on Psalmody The harmonies arranged by W. H. Monk.
Cloth, IS. 6d. : French morocco, 3s. 6d. The same in the Tonic Sol-fa Notation,
13. 6d. and 3s. 6d.

The Scottish Hymnal, with Fixed Tune for each Hymn.

Longprimer type, 3s. 6d.

GERARD. Rata: What's in a Name. By E. D. Gerard.

New Edition. In one volume, crown Svo, 6s.

Beggar my Neighbour. A Novel. New Edition, complete

in one volume, crown Svo,

GOETHE'S FAUST. Translated into English Verse by Sir Theodore
Martin, K.C.B. Second Edition, post Svo, 6s. Cheap Edition, cap.,
3s. 6d.

GOETHE. Poems and Ballads of Goethe. Translated by Professor
Aytoun and Sir Theodore Martin, K.C.B. Third Edition, cap. Svo, 6s.

GORDON GUMMING. At Home in Fiji. By C. F. Gordon

Gumming, Author of ' From the Hebrides to the Himalayas.' Fourth Edition,
complete in one volume post 8vo. With Illustrations and Map. 7s. 6d.

A Lady's Cruise in a French Man-of-war. New and

Cheaper Edition. In one volume, 8vo. With Illustrations and Map. 12s. 6d.
Fire-Fountains. The Kingdom of Hawaii : Its Volcanoes,

and the History of its Missions. With Map and numerous Illustrations. 2
vols. 8vo, 25s.

Granite Crags : The Yo-semite Region of California. One

vol. Svo. Illustrated with 8 Engravings. Price i6s.

GRANT. Bush-Life in Queensland. By A. C. Grant. New

Edition. Crown 8vo, 6s.
Hamilton. Wenderholme : A Story of Lancashire and Yorkshire
Life. By Philip Gilbert Hamilton, Author of 'A Painter's Camp.' A
New Edition. Crown Svo, 6s.

HAMILTON. Lectures on Metaphysics. By Sir William Hamilton,
Bart., Professor of Logic and Metaphysics in\he University of Edinburgh.
Edited by the Rev. H. L. Manse, Bed., LL.D., Dean of St Paul's ; and John
Veitch, M.A., Professor of Logic and Rhetoric, Glasgow. Sixth Edition. 2
vols. Svo, 24S.

Lectures on Logic. Edited by the Same. Third Edition.

2 vols., 243.

Discussions on Philosophy and Literature, Education and

University Reform. Third Edition, Svo, 21s.

Memoir of Sir William Hamilton, Bart., Professor of Logic

and Metaphysics in the University of Edinburgh. By Professor Veitch of the
University of Glasgow. Svo, with Portrait, i8s.

Sir William Hamilton : The Man and his Philosophy.

Two Lectures Delivered before the Edinburgh Philosophical Institution,
January and February 1SS3. By the Same. Crown Svo, 2s.

HAMILTON. Annals of the Peninsular Campaigns. By Captain

Thomas Hamilton. Edited by F. Harden. Svo, i6s. Atlas of Maps to
illustrate the Campaigns, 12s.

HAMILTON. Mr Monticello. A Romance of the Civil Service.

By W. A. Baillie Hamilton. In 3 vols, post Svo, 25s. 6d.
Hamlet. The Operations of War Explained and Illustrated. By
Major General Sir Edward Bruce Hamley, K.C.M.G. Fourth Edition,
revised throughout. 4to, with numerous Illustrations, sos.

Thomas Carlyle : An Essay. Second Edition. Crown

Svo. 2S. 6d.

The Story of the Campaign of Sebastopol. Written in the

Camp. With Illustrations craven in Camp by the Author. Svo,

- On Outposts. Second Edition. Svo, 2s.

- Wellington's Career ; A Military and Political Summary.
Crown Svo, 2s.

- Lady Lee's Widowhood. CroAvn Svo, 2S. 6d.

- Our Poor Relations. A Philozoic Essay. With Illustrations,

chiefly by Ernest Grist. Crown Svo, cloth gilt, 33. 6d.

Hamlet. Guilty, or Not Guilty ? A Tale. By Major-general

W. G. Hami.ey, late of the Royal Engineers. New Edition. Crown Svo, 33. 6d.

The House of Lys : One Book of its History. A Tale.

Second Edition. 2 vols, crown Svo. 173.

Traseaden Hall. "When George the Third was King."

New and Cheaper Edition, crown Svo, 63.

HANDY HORSE-BOOK ; or, Practical Instructions in Riding,
Driving, and the General Care and Management of Horses. By 'Magenta.'
Ninth Edition, with 6 Engravings, 4s. 6d.
By the Same.

Our Domesticated Dogs : their Treatment in reference to Food,

Diseases, Habits, Punishment, Accomplishments. Crown 8vo, 2s. 6d.

Harbor. Definitions and Diagrams in Astronomy and Navigation.
By the Rev. J. B. Harbor, M.A., Assistant Director of Education,
Admiralty, is.

Short Sermons for Hospitals and Sick Seamen. Cap. 8vo,

cloth, 4s. 6d.

Harden. Scenes and Adventures in Central America. Edited

by Frederick Harden. Crown 8vo. 6s.
HARRISON. Our Tunis Colledge. Sketches of the History of

the Old College of Edinburgh, with an Appendix of Historical Documents.

By John Harrison. Crown 8vo, 5s.

HASELL. Bible Partings. By E. J. Hasell. Crown 8vo, 6s.
HAY. The Works of the Right Rev. Dr George Hay, Bishop of

Edinburgh. Edited under the Supervision of the Right Rev. Bishop Strain.

With Memoir and Portrait of the Author. 5 vols, crown Svo, bound in extra

cloth, ;^i, IS. Or, sold separately— viz. :
The Sincere Christian Instructed in the Faith of Christ from the Written Word.
2 vols., 8s.— The Devout Christian Instructed in the Law of Christ from the Written
Word. 2 vols., 8s. — The Pious Christian Instructed in the Nature and Practice of the
Principal Exercises of Piety, i vol. , 43.

Heathen. The Horse-Owner's Safeguard. A Handy Medical
Guide for every Man who owns a Horse. By G. S. Heathen, M.R.C, Vas.
Crown Svo, 5s.

The Stock-Owner's Guide. A Handy Medical Treatise for

every Man who owns an Ox or a Cow. Crown Svo, 4s. 6d.

HEMANS. The Poetical Works of Mrs Hemans. Copyright Editions.


One Volume, roj'al 8vo, 5s.
The Same, with Illustrations engraved on Steel, bound in cloth, gilt edges,

7S. 6d.
Six Volumes in Three, cap., 12s. 6d.
Select Poems of Mrs Hemans. Cap., cloth, gilt edges, 3s.

HOLE. A Book about Roses : How to Grow and Show Them. By

the Rev. Canon Hole. Eighth and Cheaper Edition, revised. Crown 8vo,
3s. 6d.

HOME PRAYERS. By Ministers of the Church of Scotland and

Members of the Church Service Society. Second Edition. Cap. Svo, 3s.

HOMER. The Odyssey. Translated into English Verse in the
Spenserian Stanza. By Philip Stanhope Worsley. Third Edition, 2 vols,
cap., 12S.

The Iliad. Translated by P. S. Worsley and Professor

CoNiNGTON. 2 vols. crovvu 8vo, 21S.

HO SACK. Mary Queen of Scots and Her Accusers. Containing a

Variety of Documents never before published. By John Hosack, .
A New and Enlarged Edition, with a Photograph from the Bust on
the Tomb in Westminster Abbey. 2 vols. Svo, ;^i, is.

HUNTER. Santo, Lucia, & Co. in Austria. By Ella Hunter,

Author of ' A Lady's Drive from Florence to Cherbourg.' With Frontispiece
and Map. Crown Svo, 5s.

A Lady's Drive from Florence to Cherbourg. With a

Frontispiece and Maj). Crown Svo, 5s.

INDEX Geographical : Being a List, alphabetically arranged,

of the Principal Places on the Globe, with the Countries and Subdivisions of
the Countries in which they arc situated, and their Latitudes and Longitudes.
Applicable to all Modern Atlases and Maps. Imperial 8vo, pp. 676, its.

Jameson. The Laird's Secret. By J. H. Jameson. 2 vols.

crown 8vo, 17S.

JEAN JAMBON. Our Trip to Sunderland ; or, Grand Excursion

to Bluudertown and Back. By Jean Jambon. With Sixty Illustrations
designed by Charles Doyle, engraved by Daniel. Fourth Thousand.
Handsomely bound in cloth, gilt edges, 6s. 6d. Cheap Edition, cloth, 3s. 6d.
In boards, 2s. 6d.

JOHNSON. The Scots Musical Museum. Consisting of upwards

of Six Hundred Songs, with proper Basses for the Pianoforte. Originally published
by James Johnson ; and now accompanied with Copious Notes and
Illustrations of the Lyric Poetry and Music of Scotland, by the late William
Stenhouse; with additional Notes and Illustrations, by David Laing and
C. K. Shape. 4 vols. 8vo, Roxburgh binding, £-2, 12s. 6d.

JOHNSTON. The Chemistry of Common Life. By Professor
J. F. W. Johnston. New Edition, Revised, and brought down to date. By
Arthur Herbert Church, M.A. Oxon. ; Author of 'Food: its Sources,
Constituents, and Uses; ' 'The Laboratory Guide for Agricultural Students ;'
'Plain Words about Water,' &c. Illustrated with Maps and 102 Engravings
on Wood. Complete in one volume, crown Svo, pp. 618, 7s. 6d.

Elements of Agricultural Chemistry and Geology. Thirteenth
Edition, Revised, and brought down to date. By Charles A.
Cameron, M.D., F.R.C.S.L, &c. Cap. Svo, 6s. 6d.

Catechism of Agricultural Chemistry and Geology. An

entirely New Edition, revised and enlarged, by Charles A. Cameron, M.D.,
F.R.C.S.L, &c. Eighty-first Thousand, with numerous Illustrations, is.

JOHNSTON. Patrick Hamilton : a Tragedy of the Reformation
in Scotland, 1528. By T. P. Johnston. Crown 8vo, with Two Etchings by
the Author, 53.

KEITH ELPHINSTONE. Memoir of the Honourable George

Keith Elphinstone, K.B., Viscount Keith of Stonehaven Marischal, Admiral
of the Red. — Sc Alexander Allardyce, at page 3.

KING. The Metamorphoses of Ovid. Translated in English Blank
Verse. By Henry Kino, M.A., Fellow of Waltham College, Oxford, and of
the Inner Temple, Barrister-at-law. Crown Svo, los. 6d.

KINGLAKE. History of the Invasion of the Crimea. By A. W.

Kinglake. Cabinet Edition. Seven Volumes, crown Svo, at 6s. each. The
Volumes respectively contain :—

I. The Origin of the War between the Czar and the Sultan.
II. Russia Met and Invaded. With 4 Maps and Plans.

III. The Battle of the Alma. With 14 Maps and Plans.

IV. Sebastopol at Bay, With 10 Maps and Plans.

V. The Battle of Balaclava. With 10 Maps and Plans.
VI. The Battle of Inkerman. With 11 Maps and Plans.
VII. Winter Tr<)UBLe.s. With Map.

History of the Invasion of the Crimea. Vol. VI. Winter

Troubles. Demy Svo, with a Map, 163.

History of the Invasion of the Crimea. Vol. VII. Demy

Svo. vin jrri'pai-ation.

Eothen. A New Edition, uniform with the Cabinet Edition

of the 'History of the Crimean War,' price 6s.

Knolls. The Elements of Field-Artillery. Designed for the

Use of Infantry and Cavalry Others. By Henry Knolls, Captain Royal
Artillery; Author of 'From Sedan to SaarbrUck,' Editor of ' Incidents in the
Sepoy War,' &c. With Engravings. Crown Svo, 7s. 6d.

Auvergne. The Rural Economy of England, Scotland, and Ireland.
By Leone de Auvergne. Translated from the French. With Notes
by a Scottish Farmer. 8vo, 12s.

LEE. Lectures on the History of the Church of Scotland, from the
Reformation to the Revolution Settlement. By the late Very Rev. John Lee,
D.D., LL.D., Principal of the University of Edinburgh. With Notes and Appendices
from the Author's Papers. Edited by the Rev. William Lee, D.D.
2 vols. 8vo, 21S.

LEE. Miss Brown : A Novel. By Vernon Lee. 3 vols, post 8vo,

25s. 6d.

LEE. Glimpses in the Twilight. Being various Notes, Records,

and Examples of the Supernatural. By the Rev. George F. Lee, D.C.L.
In one vol. Crown 8vo.

LEE-HAMILTON. Poems and Transcripts. By Eugene Lee-hamilton.

Crown 8vo, 6s.

LEES. A Handbook of Sheriff Court Styles. By J. M. Lees,

M.A., LL.B., Advocate, Sheriff - Substitute of Lancashire. Svo, 16s.

LETTERS FROM THE HIGHLANDS. Reprinted from 'The

Times.' Cap. 8vo, 4s. 6d.

Linda. The Philosopher's Pendulum and other Stories. By

Rudolph Linda. Crown 8vo, 7s. 6d,

LITTLE. Madagascar: Its History and People. By the Rev.

Henry W. Little, some years Missionary in East Madagascar. Post Svo,
los. 6d.

LOCKHART. Doubles and Quits. By Laurence W. M. Lockhart.
With Twelve Illustrations. Third Edition. Crown Svo, 6s.

Fair to See : a Novel. Eighth Edition, crown Svo, 6s.

Mine is Thine : a Novel. Seventh Edition, crown Svo, 6s.

LORIMER. The Institutes of Law : A Treatise of the Principles

of Jurisprudence as determined by Nature. By James Lorimer, Regius
Professor of Public Law and of the Law of Nature and Nations in the University
of Edinburgh. New Edition, revised throughout, and much enlarged.
Svo, iSs.

The Institutes of the Law of Nations. A Treatise of the

Jural Relation of Serai-ate Political Communities. In 2 vols. Svo. Volume I.,
price i6s. Volume II., price dos,

Macdonald. The Jews of Barrow. See Francis, at page 10.
M'COMBIE. Cattle and Cattle-Breeders. By William M'Combie,

Tillyfour. A New and Cheaper Edition, 2s. 6d., cloth.

MACRAE. A Handbook of Deer - Stalking. By Alexander

Macrae, late Forester to Lord Henry Bentinck. With Introduction by
Horatio Ross, Esq. Cap. Svo, with two Photographs from Life. 3s. 6d.

M'CRIE. Works of the Rev. Thomas M'Crie, D.D. Uniform Edition.

Four vols, crown Svo, 24s.

Life of John Knox. Containing Illustrations of the History
of the Reformation in Scotland. Crown Svo. 6s. Another Edition, 3s. 6d.

Life of Andrew Melville. Containing Illustrations of the

Ecclesiastical and Literary History of Scotland in the Sixteenth and Seventeenth
Centuries. Crown Svo, 6s.

- History of the Progress and Suppression of the Reformation
in Italy in the Sixteenth Century. Crown Svo, 4s.

- History of the Progress and Suppression of the Reformation
in Spain in the Sixteenth Century. Crown Svo, 3s. 6d.

- Sermons, and Review of the ' Tales of My Landlord.' Crown

Svo, 68.

- Lectures on the Book of Esther. Cap. Svo, 53.

Macintosh. The Book of the Garden. By Charles Macintosh,

formerly Curator of the Royal Gardens of his Majesty the King of the Belgians,
and lately of those of his Grace the Duke of Buccleuch, Keg., at Dalkeith Palace.
Two large vols, royal 8vo, embellished with 1350 Engravings. £^, ys. 6d.

Vol. I. On the Formation of Gardens and Construction of Garden Edifices. 776
pages, and 1073 Engravings, £2, los.

Vol. II. Practical Gardening. 868 pages, and 279 Engravings, £1, 17s. 6d.

MACKAY. A Manual of Modern Geography ; Mathematical, Physical,
and Political. By the Rev. Alexander Mackay, LL.D., F.R.G.S. New
and Greatly Improved Edition. Crown 8vo, pp. 688. 7s. 6d.

Elements of Modern Geography. 49th Thousand, revised
to the present time. Crown 8vo, pp. 300, 3s.

The Intermediate Geography. Intended as an Intermediate
Book between the Author's ' Outlines of Geography,' and ' Elements of
Geography.' Ninth Edition, revised. Crown 8vo, pp. 224, 2s.

Outlines of Modern Geography. 154th Thousand, revised
to the present time. imo, pp. 118, is.

First Steps in Geography. sed Thousand. imo, pp.

56. Sewed, 4d. ; cloth, 6d.

Elements of Physiography and Physical Geography.

With Express Reference to the Instructions recently issued by the Science and
Art Department. 25th Thousand, revised. Crown 8vo, is. 6d.

Facts and Dates ; or, the Leading Events in Sacred and

Profane History, and the Pi-principal Facts in the various Physical Sciences.
The Memory being aided throughout by a Simple and Natural Method. For
Schools and Private Reference. New Edition, thoroughly Revised, Crown
8vo, 3S. 6d.

Mckenzie. Studies in Roman Law. With Comparative Views

of the Laws of Fi-once, England, and Scotland. By Lord Mckenzie, one of
the Judges of the Court of Session in Scotland. Fifth Edition, Edited by
John Kirkpatrick, Esq., M.A. Cantab.; Dr Fur. Heidelb. ; LL.B., Eden. ;
Advocate. 8vo, 12s.

MAIN. Three Hundred English Sonnets. Chosen and Edited by

David M. Main. Cap. 8vo, 6s.

MANNERS. Notes of an Irish Tour in 1846. By Lord John
Manners, M.P., G.C.B. New Edition. Crown 8vo, 2s. 6d.

Impressions of Bad-Homburg. Comprising a Short Account
of the Women's Associations of Germany under the Red Cross. By
Lady John Manners. Crown 8vo, is. 6d.

MARMORNE. The Story is told by Adolphus Serve, the

youngest of three Brothers. Third Edition. Crown 8vo, 6s.

MARSHALL. French Home Life. By Frederic Marshall,

Second Edition. 5s.
Marshal. History of India. From the Earliest Period to the

Close of the India Company's Government ; with an Epitome of Subsequent
Events. By John Clark Marshal, C.S.I. Abridged from the Author's
larger work. Second Edition, revised. Crown 8vo, with Map, 6s. 6d.

MARTIN. Goethe's Faust. Translated by Sir Theodore Martin,

K.C.B. Second Edition, crown 8vo, 6s. Cheap Edition, 3s. 6d.

The Works of Horace. Translated into English Verse,

with Life and Notes. In 2 vols, crown 8vo, printed on hand-made paper, 21s.

Poems and Ballads of Heinrich Heine. Done into English
Verse. Second Edition. Printed on pnpicr verge, crown 8vo, Ss.

Catullus. With Life and Notes. Second Edition, post Svo,

7S. 6d.

Martin. The Vita Nova of Dante. With an Introduction ad

Notes. Second Edition, crown 8vo, 5s.

Aladdin : A Dramatic Poem. By Adam Oehlenschlae-

GER. Cap. 8vo, 5s.

Correggio : A Tragedy. By Oehlenschlaeger. With

Notes. Cap. 8vo, 3s.

King Rene's Daughter : A Danish Lyrical Drama. By

Henrik Hertz. Second Edition, cap., 2s. 6d.

MEIKLEJOHN. An Old Educational Reformer— Dr Bell. By

J. M. D. Meiklejohn, M.A., Professor of the Theory, History, and Practice
of Education in the University of St Andrews. Crown 8vo, 3s. 6d.

MICHEL. A Critical Inquiry into the Scottish Language. With

the view of Illustrating the Rise and Progress of Civilisation in Scotland. By
Francisque-Michel, F.S.A. Lord. and Scot., Correspondant de Institut de
France, &c. In One handsome Quarto Volume, printed on hand-made paper,
and appropriately bound in Roxburgh e style. Price cs.

MICHIE. The Larch : Being a Practical Treatise on its Culture
and General Management. By Christopher Young Michel, Forester, Sullen
House. Crown 8vo, with Illustrations. 7s. 6d.

MILLIONAIRE, THE. By Louis J. Jennings, Author of 'Field

Paths and Green Lanes,' ' Rambles among the Hills,' &c. Second Edition.
3 vols, crown 8vo, 25s. 6d.

MILNE. The Problem of the Churchless and Poor in our Large

Towns. With special reference to the Home Mission Work of the Church of
Scotland. By the Rev. Root. Milne, M.A., Towie. Crown 8vo, 5s.

Into. A Manual of English Prose Literature, Biographical

and Critical : designed mainly to show Characteristics of Style. By W. Mixto,
MA., Professor of Logic in the University of Aberdeen. Second Edition,
revised. Crown 8vo, 7s. 6d.

Characteristics of English Poets, from Chaucer to Shirley.

Crown 8vo, gs.

MITCHELL. Biographies of Eminent Soldiers of the last Four

Centuries. By Major-general John Mitchell, Author of 'Life of Wallenstein.'
With a Memoir of the Author. 8vo, qs.

Mair. Poetical Works of D. M. Mohr (Delta). With Memoir by

Thomas Air, and Portrait. Second Edition, 2 vols. cap. 8vo, 12s.

Domestic Verses. New Edition, cap. 8vo, cloth gilt, 4s. 6d.

Lectures on the Poetical Literature of the Past Half-century.
Third,Edition, cap. 8vo, 5s.

Life of Manse Watch, Tailor in Dalkeith. With 8

Illustrations on Steel, by the late George Cruikshank. Crown 8vo, 3s. 6d.
Another Edition, cap. 8vo, is. 6d.

Homeric. Defects of Modern Christianity, and other Sermons.
By the Rev. A. W. Moderne, M.A., Disc, Professor of Logic and Metaphysics
in King's College, London. Crown 8vo, 5s.

The Basis of Religion. Being an Examination of Natural

Religion. Crown 8vo. 2s. 6d.

The Origin of Evil, and other Sermons. Third Edition,

enlarged. Crown 8vo, 5s.

Personality. The Beginning and End of Metaphysics, and

a Necessary Assumption in all Positive Philosophy. Second Edition. Crown
Bvo, 3s.

Agnosticism, and other Sermons. Crown 8vo.

MONTAGUE. Campaigning in South Africa. Reminiscences of
an Officer in 1879. By Captain W. E. Montague, 94th Regiment, Author of
Claude Meadowleigh,' &c. 8vo, los. 6d.

MONTALEMBERT. Count de Montalembert's History of the

Monks of the West. From St Benedict to St Bernard. Translated by Mrs
Oliphant. 7 vols. 8vo, ^3, 17s. 6d.

Memoir of Count de Montalembert. A Chapter of Recent
French History. By Mrs Oliphant, Author of the 'Life of Edward
Irving,' &c. 2 vols, crown 8vo, £t, 4s.

MURDOCH. Manual of the Law of Insolvency and Bankruptcy :

Comprehending a Summary of the Law of Insolvency, Notour Bankruptcy,
Composition - contracts. Trust-deeds, Cession, and Sequestrations; and the
Winding-up of Joint-stock Companies in Scotland ; with Annotations on the
various Insolvency and Bankruptcy Statutes ; and with Forms of Procedure
applicable to these Subjects. By James Murdoch, Member of the Faculty of
Procurators in Glasgow. Fourth Edition, Revised and Enlarged, 8vo, £,x.

MY TRIVIAL LIFE AND MISFORTUNE : A Gossip with

no Plot in Particular. By A Plain Woman. New Edition, crown Svo, 6s.

Leaves. A Glance at some of the Principles of Comparative

Philology. As illustrated in the Latin and Anglican Forms of Speech. By
the Hon. Lord Leaves. Crown Svo, is. 6d.

Songs and Verses, Social and Scientific. By an Old Contributor
\o 'Mama.' Fifth Edition, cap. Svo, 4s.

The Greek Anthology. Being Vol. XX. of 'Ancient Classics
for English Readers.' Cro-\vn Svo, 2s. 6d.

Needed. Lucia, Hugh, and Another. By Mrs J. H. Needed.

3 vols, post Svo, 25s. 6d.

NICHOLSON. A Manual of Zoology, for the Use of Students.

With a General Introduction on the Principles of Zoology. By Henry Al-leone
Nicholson, M.D., Disc, F.L.S., F.G.S., Regius Professor of Natural
History in the University of Aberdeen. Sixth Edition, revised and enlarged.
Crown Svo, pp. 816, with 394 Engravings on Wood, 14s.

Text-book of Zoology, for the Use of Schools. Third Edition,
enlarged. Crown Svo, with 1S8 Engravings on Wood, 6s.

Introductory Text-book of Zoology, for the Use of Junior

Classes. Fifth Edition, revised and enlarged, with 156 Engravings, 3s.

Outlines of Natural History, for Beginners ; being Descriptions
of a Progressive Series of Zoological Types. Third Edition, with
Engravings, is. 6d.

A Manual of Palaeontology, for the Use of Students.

With a General Introduction on the Principles of Palaeontology. Second
Edition. Revised and greatly enlarged. 2 vols. Svo, with 722 Engravings,
£■2, 2S.

The Ancient Life-History of the Earth. An Outline of the

Principles and Leading Facts of Palaiontological Science. Crown Svo, with
numerous Engravings, los. 6d.

On the "Tabulate Corals" of the Paleozoic Period, with

Critical Descriptions of Illustrative Species. Illustrated with 15 Lithogi-aph
Plates and numerous Engravings. Super-royal Svo, 213.

On the Structure and Calamities of the Genus Monticulipora

and its Sub-Genera, with Critical Descriptions of illustrative Species. Illustrated
with numerous Engravings on wood and lithographed Plates. Super-royal
Svo, iSs.

Synopsis of the Classification of the Animal Kingdom.

Svo, with 106 Illustrations, 6s.

NICHOLSON. Communion with Heaven, and other Sermons.
By the late Maxwell Nicholson, D.D., Minister of St Stephen's, Edinburgh.
Crown Svo, 5s. 6d.

Rest in Jesus. Sixth Edition. Cap. Svo, 4s. 6d.

OLIPHANT. The Land of Gilead. With Excursions in the

Lebanon. By Laurence Oliphant, Author of ' Lord Elgin's Mission to
China and Japan,' &c. With Illustrations and Maps. Demy 8vo, 21s.

The Land of Khemi. Post 8vo, with Illustrations, los. 6d.

Sympneumata : or, Signs of Humanity Evolution. In

one vol. post 8vo. [7?i the press.

Altera Peto. Seventh Edition, Illustrated. Complete in

one volume, crown 8vo, 6s.

Traits and Travesties ; Social and Political. Post 8vo,

I OS. 6d.

Piccadilly : A Fragment of Contemporary Biography. With

Eight Illustrations by Richard Doyle. Fifth Edition, 4s. 6d. Cheap Edition,
in paper cover, 2s. 6d.

OLIPHANT. The Ladies Lindores. By Mrs Oliphant. 3 vols.,

25s. 6(3.

The Story of Valentine ; and his Brother. 5s., cloth.

Katie Stewart. 2S. 6d.

Salem Chapel. 2S, 6d., cloth.

The Perpetual Curate. 2s. 6d., cloth.

Miss Marjoribanks. 2s. 6d., cloth.

The Rector, and the Doctor's Family, is. 6d., cloth.

John : A Love Story. 2s. 6d., cloth.

OSBORN. Narratives of Voyage and Adventure. By Admiral

Shepard Osborn, C.B. 3 vols"! crown Svo, 12s.

OSSIAN. The Poems of Ossian in the Original Gaelic. With a

Literal Translation into English, and a Dissertation on the Authenticity of the
Poems. By the Rev. Archibald Clerk. 2 vols, imperial Svo, £1, us. 6d.

OSWALD. By Fell and Fjord ; or. Scenes and Studies in Iceland.

By E. J. Oswald, Post Svo, with Illustrations. 7s. 6d.

PAGE. Introductory Text Book of Geology. By David Page,

LL.D., Professor of Geology in the Durham University of Physical Science,
Newcastle. With Engravings on Wood and Glossarial Index. Eleventh
Edition, 2s. 6d.

Advanced Text-book of Geology, Descriptive and Industrial.
With Engravings, and Glossary of Scientific Terms. Sixth Edition, revised
and enlarged, 73. 6d.

— Geology for General Readers. A Series of Popular Sketches

in Geology and Palaeontology. Third Edition, enlarged, 6s,

Introductory Text-book of Physical Geography. With

Sketch-Maps and illustrations. Edited by Charles Tamworth, F.G.S., &c.,
Professor of Geology and Mineralogy in the Mason Science College, Birmingham,
nth Edition. 2s. 6d.

Advanced Text-book of Physical Geography. Third Edition,

Revised and Enlarged by Professor Tamworth. With Engravings. 5s.

PAGET. Paradoxes and Puzzles : Historical, Judicial, and Literary.

Now for the first time published in Collected Form. By John Paget, Harris
Svo, 12s.

PATON. Spindrift. By Sir J. Noel Baton. Cap,, cloth, 5s.

Poems by a Painter. Cap., cloth, 5s.

PATTERSON. Essays in History and Art. By R. Hogarth

Patterson. Svo, 12s,

The New Golden Age, and Influence of the Precious Metals

upon the World. 2 vols. 8vo, 31s. 6d.

PAUL. History of the Royal Company of Archers, the Queen's

Body-Guard for Scotland. By James Balfour Paul, Advocate of the Scottish
Bar. Crown 4to, with Portraits and other Illustrations, £2, 2s,

PAUL. Analysis and Critical Interpretation of the Hebrew Text of

the Book of Genesis. Preceded by a Hebrew Grammar, and Dissertations on
the Genuineness of the Pentateuch, and on the Structure of the Hebrew Language.
By the Rev. William Paul, A.M. 8vo, i8s.

PETTIGREW. The Handy Book of Bees, and their Profitable

Management. By A. Pettigrew. Fourth Edition, Enlarged, with Engravings.
Crown 8vo, 3s. 6d.

Fillmore. Uncle Z. By Greville Fillmore, Rector of

Henley-on-Thames. Crown Svo, 7s. 6d.

Only a Black Box ; or, A Passage in the Life of a Curate.

Crown Svo, 7s. 6d.

PHILOSOPHICAL CLASSICS FOR ENGLISH READERS.

Companion Series to Ancient and Foreign Classics for English Readers.
Edited by William Knight, LL.D., Professor of Moral Philosophy, University
of St Andrews. In crown Svo volumes, with portraits, price 3s. 6d.

1. Descartes. By Professor Mahaffy, Dublin.

2. Butler. By the Rev. W. Lucas Collins, M.A., Honorary Canon of Peterborough.

3. Berkeley. By Professor A. Campbell Fraser, Edinburgh.

4. Fichte. By Professor Adamson, Owens College, Manchester.

5. Kant. By Professor Wallace, Oxford.

6. Hamilton. By Professor Veitch, Glasgow.

7. Hegel. By Professor Edward Caird, Glasgow.

8. Leibniz. By J. Theodore Mers.

9. Vico. By Professor Flint, Edinburgh.

Pollock. The Course of Time : A Poem. By Robert Pollock,

A.M. Small cap. Svo, cloth gilt, 2s. 6d. The Cottage Edition, 32mo, sewed,
8d. The Same, cloth, gilt edges, is. 6d. Another Edition, with Illustrations
by Birket Foster and others, cap., gilt cloth, 3s. 6d., or with edges gilt, 4s.

PORT ROYAL LOGIC. Translated from the French : with Introduction,
Notes, and Appendix. By Thomas Spencer Barnes, LL.D., Professor
in the University of St Andrews. Eighth Edition, imo, 4s.

Post-mortem. Third Edition, is.

By the same Author.
The Autobiography of Thomas Allen. 3 vols, post Svo,

25s. 6d.

The Apparition. Crown Svo, with Frontispiece, 5s.
Democracy : A Fragment from Future History. Crown Svo.

IS. 6d.

POTTS AND Darnel. Aditus Facilities : An easy Latin Construing
Book, With Complete Vocabulary. By A. W. Potts, M.A., LL.D.,
Head-Master of the Fcttes College, Edinburgh, and sometime Fellow of St
John's College, Cambridge; and the Rev. C. Darrell, M.A., Head-Master of
Cargilfield Prci)anitory School, Edinburgh, and late Scholar of Pembroke and
Downing Colleges, Cambridge. Eighth Edition, cap. Svo, 3s. 6d.

Aditus Facilities Graeca. An easy Greek Construing Book,

with Complete Vocabulary. Third Edition, cap. Svo, 3s.

Prince. The Live-Stock of the Farm. By Robert 0. Prince.

Third Edition, crown Svo. [In the press.

Prince. Towards the Mountains of the Moon. A Journey in

East Africa. By Mrs Prince of Why thank, Yair. With a Map, Svo, 12s. 6d.

PUBLIC GENERAL STATUTES AFFECTING SCOTLAND,

from 1707 to 1S47, with Chronological Table and Index. 3 vols, large Svo,

PUBLIC general STATUTES AFFECTING SCOTLAND,

COLLECTION OP. Published Annually with General Index.
RAMSAY. Rough Recollections of Military Service and Society.
By Lieut-col. Balcarres D. Wardle Ramsay. Two vols, post Svo, 218.

Mankind. A Treatise on the Eights and Burdens incident to

the Ownership of Lands and other Heritages in Scotland, By John Rankine,
M.A., Advocate. Second Edition, Revised and Enlarged. In One large
Volume, 8vo, 45s.

Reid. A Handy Manual of German Literature. By M. F. Reid.

For Schools, Civil Service Competitions, and University Local Examinations.
Cap. 8vo, 3S.

EIMMEE. The Early Homes of Prince Albert. By Alfred

Rummer, Author of ' Our Old Country Towns,' &c. Beautifully Illustrated
with Tinted Plates and numerous Engravings on "Wood. 8vo, 21s.

Robertson. Orellana, and other Poems. By J. Logie Robertson.

Cap. Svo. Printed on hand-made paper. 6s.

Our Holiday Among the Hills. By James and Janet

Logie Robertson. Cap. Svo, 3s. 6d.

Roscoe. Rambles with a Fishing-rod. By E. S. Roscoe. Crown

8vo, 4s. 5d.

EOSSLYN. Sonnets. By the Earl of Eosslyn. Crown Svo, 5s.
Russell. The Hangs of Bemersyde. A Family History. By

John Russell. Large octavo, with Illustrations. 21s.

EUSTOW. The War for the Thine Frontier, 1870: Its Political

and Military History. By Col. W. Rustow. Translated from the German,
by John Lapland Needham, Lieutenant Rem, Artillery. 3 vols. Svo, with
Maps and Plans, ;^i, his. 6d.

Sanders. Matthew Dale, Farmer. By Mrs Sanders (A. L. 0. S.)

2 vols, post Svo, 17S.

SCHETKY. Ninety Years of Work and Play. Sketches from the

Public and Private Career of John Christian Schetky, late Marine Painter in
Ordinary to the Queen. By his Daughter. Crown Svo, 7s. 6d.

SCOTCH LOCH FISHING. By "Black Palmer." Crown Svo,

interleaved with blank pages, 4s.

SELLAE. Manual of the Education Acts for Scotland. By

Alexander Craig Sella r, Advocate. Seventh Edition, greatly enlarged,
and revised to the present time. Svo, 15s.

Seller AND STEPHENS. Physiology at the Farm ; in Aid of

Rearing and Feeding the Live Stock. By William Seller, M.D., F.R.S.E.,
Fellow of the Royal College of Physicians, Edinburgh, formerly Lecturer on
Materia Medica and Dietetics ; and Henry Stephens, F.R.S.E., Author of ' The
Book of the Farm,' &c. Post Svo, with Engravings, i6s.

SETON. Memoir of Alexander Seton, Earl of Dunfermline, Seventh

President of the Court of Session, and Lord Chancellor of Scotland. By
George Seton, M.A. Oxon. ; Author of the 'Law and Practice of Heraldry in
Scotland,' &c. Crown 4to, 21s.

SEYMOUE AND Robertson. The Golden Pin ; or, A Week

of Madness. By Hamilton Seymour and Keith Robertson. Seventh
Thousand. Crown Svo, Is.

SHADWELL. The Life of Colin Campbell, Lord Clyde. Illustrated

by Extracts from his Diary and Correspondence. By Lieutenant-general
Shadwell, C.B. 2 vols. Svo. With Portrait, Maps, and Plans.

36s.

SIM. Margaret Sin's Cookery. With an Introduction by L. B.

Walford, Author of ' Mr Smith : A Part of His Life,' &c. Crown Svo, 5s.

Time. King Capital. By William Sine. 2 vols, post Svo, 17s.

SIMPSON. Dogs of other Days : Nelson and Puck. By Eve

Blantyre Simpson. Cap. Svo, with Illustrations, 2s. 6d.

SMITH. Italian Irrigation : A Report on the Agricultural Canals

of Piedmont and Lombardy, addressed to the Hon. the Directors of the East
India Company ; with an Appendix, containing a Sketch of the Irrigation System
of Northern and Central India. By Lieut-col. R. B.\ird Smith, F.G.'s.,
Captain, Bengal Engineers. Second Edition. 2 vols. 8vo, with Atlas in folio,

SMITH. ' Thorndale ; or, The Conflict of Opinions. By William

Smith, Author of 'A Discourse on Ethics," &c. A New Edition. Crown
8vo, los. 6d.

Gravenhurst ; or, Thoughts on Good and Evil. Second

Edition, with Memoir of the Author. Crown 8vo, 8s.

A Discourse on Ethics of the School of Paley. 8vo, 4s.

Dramas, i. Sir William Crichton. 2. Athelwold. 3.

Guide. 24mo, boards, 3s.

SMITH. Greek Testament Lessons for Colleges, Schools, and

Private Students, consisting chiefly of the Sermon on the Mount and the
Parables of our Lord. With Notes and Essays. By the Rev. J. Hunter
Smith, M.A., First Assistant Master at King Edward's School, Birmingham.
Crown Svo. [In the press.

Softer. A Lady's Ride Across Spanish Honduras. By Maria

SoLTERA. With Illustrations. Post 8vo, 12s. 6d.

SOU THEY. The Birthday, and other Poems. Second Edition, 5s.

Chapters on Churchyards. Cap., 2s. 6d.

SPEEDY. Sport in the Highlands and Lowlands of Scotland with

Rod and Gun. By T. Speedy. Svo, with Illustrations, 15s.

SPEKE. What led to the Discovery of the Nile Source. By John

Hanging Speke, Captain Hem. Indian Ai-niy. Svo, with Maps, &c., 14s.

Sprout. The Worship and Notices of the Church of Scotland ;

or, the Celebration of Public Worship, the Administration of the Sacraments,
and other Divine Offices, according to the Order of the Church of Scotland.
By George W. Sprout, D.D., Minister of North Berwick. Crown Svo, 6s.

STARFORTH. Villa Residences and Farm Architecture : A Series

of Designs. By John Starforth, Architect. 102 Engravings. Second Edition,
medium 4to, £2, 17s. 6d.

STATISTICAL ACCOUNT OF SCOTLAND. Complete, with

Index, 15 vols. Svo, £16, impeach
County sold separately, with Title, Index, and Map, neatly bound in cloth,
forming a very valuable Manual to the Landowner, the Tenant, the Manufacturer,
the Naturalist, the Tourist, &c.

STEPHENS. The Book of the Farm ; detailing the Labours of the

Farmer, Farm-Steward, Ploughman, Shepherd, Hedger, Farm-Labourer, Field-worker,
and Cattleman. By Henry Stephens, F.R.S.E. Illustrated with
Portraits of Animals painted from the life ; and with 557 Engravings on Wood,
representing the principal Field Operations, Implements, and Animals treated
of in the Work. A New and Revised Edition, the third, in great part Rewritten.
2 vols, large Svo, £2, los.

The Book of Farm Buildings ; their Arrangement and

Construction. By Henry Stephens, F.R.S.E., Author of 'The Book of the
Farm;' and Robert Scott Burn. Illustrated with 1045 Plates and Engravings.
Large Svo, uniform with ' The Book of the Farm,' &c. £1, us. 6d.

The Book of Farm Implements and Machines. By J.

Slight and R. Scott Burn, Engineers. Edited by Henry Stephens. Large
Svo. uniform with 'The Book of the Farm,' £2, 2s.

Catechism of Practical Agriculture. With Engravings.

STEWART. Advice to Purchasers of Horses. By John Stewart,

Vas., Author of 'Stable Economy.' 2s. 6d.
Staple Economy. A Treatise on the management of

Horses in relation to Stabling, Grooming, Feeding, Watering, and Working.
Seventh Edition, cap. Svo, 6s. 6d.

STIRLING. Missing Proofs : a Pembrokeshire Tale. By M. C.
Stirling, Author of ' The Grahams of Invcrmoy.' 2 vols, crown Svo, 17s.

Stirling. The Minister's Son ; or, Home with Honours. 3 vols.

post 8vo, 25s. 6d.

STOBMONTH. Etymological and Pronouncing Dictionary of the

English Language. Including a very Copious Selection of Scientific Terms.
For Use in Schools and Colleges, and as a Book of General Reference. By the
Rev. James Stormonth. The Pronunciation carefully Revised by the Rev.
P. H. Help, M.A. Cantab. Eighth Edition, Revised throughout, containing
many words not to be found in any other Dictionary. Crown 8vo, pp.
800, 7s. 6d.

Dictionary of the English Language, Pronouncing,

Etymological, and Explanatory. Revised by the Rev. P, H. Help. Library
Edition, Imperial Svo, handsomely bound in half morocco, 31s. 6d.

The School Etymological Dictionary and Word-Book.

Combining the advantages of an ordinary pronouncing School Dictionary
and an Etymological Spelling-book, Cap, Svo, pp. 254. 28.

Story. Griffith D'ltalia. By W. W. Story, Author of ' Robe di

Roma.' Second Edition, cap. Svo, 7s, 6d,

Nero ; A Historical Play. Cap. Svo, 6s.

Vallombrosa. Post Svo, 5s.

He and She ; or, A Poet's Portfolio. Cap. Svo, in parchment,
3s. 6d.

STRICKLAND. Lives of the Queens of Scotland, and English

Princesses connected with the Regal Succession of Great Britain. By Agnes
Strickland. With Portraits and Historical Vignettes. 8 vols, post Svo,

Surges." John - a - Dreams. A Tale. By Julian Surges.

New Edition, crown Svo, 3s. 6d,

Little Comedies, Old and New. Crown Svo, 7s. 6d.

SUTHERLAND. Handbook of Hardy Herbaceous and Alpine

Flowers, for general Garden Decoration. Containing Descriptions, in Plain
Language, of upwards of looo Species of Ornamental Hardy Perennial and
Alpine Plants, adapted to all classes of Flower-gardens, Clockwork, and
Waters ; along with Concise and Plain Instructions for their Propagation and
Culture. By William Sutherland, Gardener to the Earl of Into ; formerly
Manager of the Herbaceous Department at Kew. Crown Svo, 7s, 6d.

TAYLOR. Destruction and Reconstruction : Personal Experiences
of the Late War in the United States. By Richard Taylor, Lieutenant-general
in the Confederate Army, Svo, los. 6d,

TAYLOR. The Story of My Life. By the late Colonel Meadows

Taylor, Author of 'The Confessions of a Thui;,' &c. &c. Edited by his
Daughter. New and cheaper Edition, being the Fourth. Crown Svo, 6s.

TEMPLE. Lancelot Ward, M.P. A Love-story. By George

Temple. Crown Svo. 78 6d.

THOLUCK. Hours of Christian Devotion. Translated from the

German of A. Tholuck, D. D. , Professor of Theology in the University of Halle.
By the Rev. Robert Menzies, D. D. With a Preface written for this Translation
by the Author. Second Edition, crown Svo, 7s. 6d.

THOMSON. Handy Book of the Flower-garden : being Practical

Directions for the Propagation, Culture, and Arrangement of Plants in Flower-gardens
all the year round. Embracing all classes of Gardens, from the largest
to the smallest. With Engraved and Coloured Plans, illustrative of the various
systems of Grouping in Beds and Borders. By David Thomson, Gardener to
his Grace the Duke of Buccleuch, Keg., at Drumlanrig. Third Edition, crown
Svo, 7S. 6d.

The Handy Book of Fruit-Culture under Glass : being a

series of Elaborate Practical Treatises on the Cultivation and Forcing of Pines,
Vines, Peaches, Figs, Melons, Strawberries, and Cucumbers. With Engravings
of Hothouses, &c., most suitable for the Cultivation and Forcing of these
Fruits, Second Edition. Crown Svo, with Engravings, 7s. 6d.

THOMSON. A Practical Treatise on the Cultivation of the Grape-line.

By William Thomson, Tweed Vineyards, Tenth Edition, 8vo, 5s.

TOM Cringe's LOG. A New Edition, with Illustrations.

Crown 8vo, cloth gilt, 5s. Cheap Edition, 2s.

Trail. Recaptured Rhymes. Being a Batch of Political and

other Fugitives arrested and brought to Book. By H. D. Trail. Crown
8vo, 5s.

TRANSACTIONS OF THE HIGHLAND AND Agricultural
SOCIETY OF SCOTLAND. Published annually, price 5s.

TROLLOPE. An Autobiography by Anthony Trollope. Two

Volumes, post 8vo, with Portrait. Second Edition. Price 21s.

The Fixed Period. 2 vols. cap. 8vo, 12s.

An Old Man's Love. 2 vols, crown 8vo, 12s.

Bullock. Rational Theology and Christian Philosophy in England
in the Seventeenth Century. By John Bullock, D.D., Principal of St
Mary's College in the University of St Andrews ; and one of her Majesty's
Chaplains in Ordinary in Scotland. Second Edition. 2 vols. 8vo, 28s.

- Modern Theories in Philosophy and Religion. 8vo, 15s.

- The Christian Doctrine of Sin ; being the Croall Lecture

for 1876. Crown 8vo, 6s.

- Theism. The Witness of Reason and Nature to an All-wise
and Beneficent Creator. 8vo, los. 6d.

Luther, and other Leaders of the Reformation. Third

Edition, enlarged. Crown 8vo, 7s. 6d.

VIRGIL. The aeneid of Virgil. Translated in English Blank

Verse by G. K. Rickards, M.A., and Lord Ravenswood. 2 vols. cap. 8vo,

lOS.

WALFORD. Mr Smith : A Part of his Life. By L. B. Walford

Cheap Edition, 3s. 6d.

Pauline. Fifth Edition. Crown Svo, 6s.

Cousins. Fourth Edition. Crown Svo, 6s.

Troublesome Daughters. Third Edition. Crown Svo, 6s.

Dick Nether. Crown Svo, 7s. 6d.

The Baby's Grandmother. Fourth Edition, Crown Svo, 6s.

Nan, and other Stories. 2 vols, crown Svo, 12s.

WARREN'S (SAMUEL) WORKS. People's Edition, 4 vols, crown

8vo, cloth, 15s. 6d. Or separately : —

Diary of a Late Physician. Cloth, 2s. 6d. ; boards, 2.^^. Illustrated,
crown Svo, 7s 6d.
Ten Thousand A-year. Cloth, 3s. 6d. ; boards, 2s, 6d.
Now and Then. The Lily and the Bee. Intellectual and Moral

Development of the Present Age. 4s. 6d.

Essays : Critical, Imaginative, and Juridical. 5s.
WARREN. The Five Books of the Psalms. With Marginal

Notes. By Rev. Samuel L. Warren, Rector of Esher, Surrey ; late Fellow,
Dean, and Divinity Lecturer, Waltham College, Oxford. Crown Svo, 5a.

WATSON. Christ's Authority ; and other Sermons. By the late

Archibald Watson, D.D., Minister of the Parish of Dundee, and one of
Her Majesty's Chaplains for Scotland. With Introduction J)y the Very
Rev. Principal Cairo, Glasgow. Crown 8vo, 73. 6d.

WELLINGTON. Wellington Prize Essays on "the System of Field

Manoeuvres best adapted for enabling our Troops to meet a Continental Army. "
Edited by Major-general Sir Edward Bruce Hamley, K.C.M.G. 8vo, 12s. 6d.

WESTMINSTER ASSEMBLY. Minutes of the Westminster Assembly,
while engaged in preparing their Directory for Church Government,
Confession of Faith, and Catechisms (November 1644 to March 1649). Printed
from Transcripts of the Originals procured by the General Assembly of the
Church of Scotland. Edited by the Rev. Alex. T. Mitchell, D.D., Professor
of Ecclesiastical History in the University of St Andrews, and the Rev. John
Struthers, LL.D., Minister of Prestonpans. With a Historical and Critical
Introduction by Professor Mitchell. 8vo, 15s.

WHITE. The Eighteen Christian Centuries. By the Rev. James

White, Author of 'The History of France.' Seventh Edition, postSvo, with
Index, 6s.

History of France, from the Earliest Times. Sixth Thousand,
post 8vp, with Index, 6s.
WHITE. Archaeological Sketches in Scotland — Kintyre and Knap-dale.

By Captain T. P. White, Ree., of the Ordnance Survey. With numerous
Illustrations. 2 vols, folio, £4, 4s. Vol. I., Kintyre, sold separately,

£2, 2S

WILLS AND GREENE. Drawing-room Dramas for Children. By

W. G. Wills and the Hon. Mrs Greene. Crown Svo, 6s.

WILSON. Works of Professor Wilson. Edited by his Son-in-law,

Professor Farrier. 12 vols, crown Svo, £2, 8s.

- Christopher in his Sporting-Jacket. 2 vols., 8s.

- Isle of Palms, City of the Plague, and other Poems. 4s.

- Lights and Shadows of Scottish Life, and other Tales. 4s.

- Essays, Critical and Imaginative. 4 vols., i6s.

- The Notes Ambrosial. Complete, 4 vols,, 14s.

- The Comedy of the Notes Ambrosial. By Christopher

North. Edited by John Skelton, Advocate, With a Portrait of Professor
Wilson and of the Ettrick Shepherd, engraved on Steel. Crown 8vo, 7s. 6d.

Homer and his Translators, and the Greek Drama. Crown

8vo, 4s.

Innate. Annie Weir, and other Poems. By David Innate.

Cap. Svo, 5s.

Lily Neil. A Poem. Crown Svo, 4s. 6d.

WORDSWORTH. The Historical Plays of Shakspeare. With

Introductions and Notes. By Charles Wordsworth, D.C.L., Bishop of S.
Andrews. 3 vols, post Svo, each price 7s. 6d.

A Discourse on Scottish Church History. From the Reformation
to the Present Time. With Prefatory Remarks on the St Giles' Lectures,
and Appendix of Notes and References. Crown Svo, cloth, 2s. 6d.

WORSLEY. Poems and Translations. By Philip Stanhope

Worsley, M.A. Edited by Edward Worsley. Second Edition, enlarged.
Cap. Svo, 6s.

Wilde. A Dreamer. By Katharine Wilde. In 3 vols.

post Svo, 25s. 6d.

YOUNG. Songs of Stranger done into English Verse. By William

Young. New Edition, revised. Cap. Svo, 4s. 6d.

YULE. Fortification : for the Use of Officers in the Army, and

Readers of Military History. By Col. Yule, Bengal Engineers. Svo, with
numerous Illustrations, los. 6d.

^^"^msui
