'Z7/. -I mr s-JMmt

TOL, I.

MILLER AND BAKER

BY

SARAH Tatler

AUTHOR OP ' CITOYEXNE JACQUELINE ' ' SCOTCH FIRS ' ETC.

IN THREE VOLUMES

VOL L

LONDON
SMITH, ELDER, & CO., 15 WATERLOO PLACE



[All rights reserved]

S TO MARGARET

CD



MOTHER AND SISTER IN ONE : LOVING AND FAITHFUL FELLOW-worker
WHOSE EAGER INTEREST IN THIS STORY PROVED ITS

AUTHORS GREATEST ENCOURAGEMENT IN WRITING IT : WHOSE
DEATH BEFORE THE STORY WAS FINISHED DARKENED LIFE AND
£J WORK TO ONE SOLITARY WORKER

IN HOPE OF
THE TIMES OF RESTITUTION OF ALL THINGS

Oxford : 17^A April 1880

OP

THE EIKST VOLUME.

Chapter PAGE

I. Friarton Mill 1

II. Oliver Constable's Return . . . . 2->

III. Oliver's Announcement 54

IV. A Hot Argument 80

V. A Last Appeal 112

VI. Louisa and Catherine Hilliard . . . 13(5
VII. How Mrs. Hilliard and Catherine

JUDGED THE LAST St. GEORGE OF

Friarton 107

VIH, Oliver's Proclamation in the Mill and

the Bakehouse IDe!

IX. The New Tenants of Copley Grange

Farm 227

X. Oliver's Notion of Good Citizenship . . 274

Oliver CONSTABLE,

MILLER AND BAKER,

-*o+-

CHAPTEE I.

PRIAKTON MILL.

Old mills which were built to be worked by-water
power are mostly picturesque objects in
the landscape. They command without fail
certain advantages of situation. Certainly they
are not likely to possess extensive views, where
they stand in the low lands which claim a fall
of water. But water is their specialty, and
where there is water, there is generally wood.
My readers must call up without any difficulty
VOL. i. B

before their minds' eyes pleasant pictures of

such mills with their placid dams and flashing

weirs, their great mill wheels and their noisy

clappers, their dusty sacks and their equally

dusty millers, so proverbial for their white coats

as to have lent a popular name to one pollen

sprinkled auricular. Mill and water, wheel and

man, are all set in a green leafy nook which

forms the broadest possible contrast to the grey

bare downs on which the windmill extends its

giant arms and swings its flapping sails.

Picture and song have enshrined the old water

mills from the days when Constable the painter

loved to represent on canvas such a Suffolk

mill as that which was familiar to his youth, to

the later days when Tennyson wrote his idyll

of the Miller's Daughter.

Of all mills which had their sites chosen
with reference to water, though the millers —
not anticipating Mr. Buskin's objections — had
long before the present day, by the help of

machinery, set seasons of drought at defiance,
none was more thoroughly picturesque in its
own line of picturesqueness, pleasant to all
the senses, more homelike, restful and sweet,
like a thrush's 'nest or a tuft of primroses,
than Friarton Mill in Holmshire. It was so evidently
agreeable to the eye, and had attained
to such an amount of fame for this desirable
quality, that it had been suffered to remain
where it had been built in primitive easy-going
times, within a stone's throw of the park of
Copley Grange, and in full view of the manor
house. In fact it had been found that, after the
fashion of those happy accidents which create
leaning towers and whispering galleries, and
which can never be copied with any certainty
of success, the indifference to aesthetic which
had made the old squire of Copley Grange
permit the miller of his day to erect his mill at
his liege lord's elbow, had been oddly enough
rewarded by furnishing the Squire's descend -

B 2

ants or successors with one of the choicest bit
of what we may call landscape vertu — a home
lion which, as the modern squires were not
needy men, and had further acquired the
modern culture of beauty to their finger tips,
they would not have lacked for a good many
broad acres. If the reigning miller and owner
of Friarton Mill had been Vandal enough to
propose to demolish it — which he could have
done since his fathers had bought it and certain
pasture fields of the original suzerain
he would have awakened the liveliest consternation
in the breasts of his social superiors.


The loss of Friarton Mill would have gone
far to destroy the picturesque charm of Copley
Grange, with all its advantages of wood and
water. For, to the deep regret of its younij
sons and daughters, their ancestor under the
second George had taken it upon him with
no consideration for the tastes and feelings of

his great-great-grandchildren to pull down a
gem of a rambling, inconvenient, half-ruinous
Elizabethan manor-house. And he had replaced
it with a distressingly heavy, square pile
of masonry, in which he and the architect had
actually thought of little save of expressing
pompously their ideas of space and comfort.
The little which went beyond these prosaic requirements
had borne the doubtful fruit of an
Italian portico. It had been voted elegant and
classical by the contemporaries of the unfortunate
squire who was thus severely reflected
upon by his heirs. In a few more years
it might rise again into value. It might be
prized as a proof of past style, of the tendency
of the day, serving as a key to the prevalence
of fiddle brown in artists' work, and to the
choice of subjects in Richard Wilson's paintings,
or as an indication of something else
equally interesting. But in the present day,
with which after all this generation has most

to do, it was regarded as an incongruous humbug.


The living representative of the family at
Copley Grange had done what he could to
remedy the fatal error of his ancestor. He had
succeeded, when he came of age, to the savin:
of a long minority. He was also the manager
in chief of a large endowment which a pious
and charitable predecessor had bequeathed to
support a Copley Grange row of almshouses.
By a most fortuitous circumstance, if not by a
clear interposition of Providence, as the young
Squire was disposed to think, this endowment
had been legally disputed, and had remained in
abeyance till the lawyers picked as much flesh
as they could off its bones, so that the rearing
of the fabric, which was to be emblematic to
all time, fell to a nineteenth century man. He
improved the circumstance. Instead of building
a set of ordinary red brick cottages with
little cottage kail yards, which might have fitly

housed and afforded recreation to twenty old
Copley Grange labourers and their aged partners,
he let in a little light on the crass ignorance
of the destroyer of the Elizabethan manor-house,
by building in the immediate vicinity of
Copley Grange a terrace of dainty little structures,
all gables and mullions windows, and
stacks of chimneys — with pleasure-grounds
having thickets and lawns to correspond, which
took several experienced gardeners, told off for
the purpose, to keep them in order. Finally
he built a tiny alms-house chapel on the strictest
principles of mediaeval architecture. The carving
within and without, the painted glass, the
frescoes, the Latin texts which might have been
Greek or Hebrew to the daily worshippers, the
peal of bells, supplied a boast to the county
guide-book.

It is another question whether the poor old
bodies, whose number was now limited to eight,
and whose taste could hardly be supposed to

have reached the stage at which that unlucky
forefather of the Squire's had committed his
solecism, did not feel far from home, aggrieved,
and made mountebanks of in their new quarters.
The arrangements, which included endless
draughty corners, and troublesome, perilous
steps up and steps down, were purely perplexing
and affronting to the occupants of the
almshouses. These pensioners were taken out
of ugly houses on a level with their capacities,
and therefore more to their minds. The old
men and women, too old to learn, were elected
according to the reigning Squire and his wife's
will and pleasure, and somewhat with reference
to the worn-out labourers' venerable beards
and their wives' smooth silver braids of hair, or
to the couples' reasonable disposition to avail
themselves of blackthorn sticks and silver-rammed
spectacles, as well as to their general
good behaviour, and what might be reckoned
upon in the matter of their punctual and decorous

attendance at the chaplain's daily services.


Naturally, perhaps, the recipients of the
Squire's bounty were not particularly grateful
for the manner of its bestowal. They were too
practical and hard pressed to refuse a refuge
which after all was far before the poor-house.
But old Mrs. Scud expressed boldly the secret
sentiments of six out of the eight women when
she declared she ' wished Squire's lady would try
a day's washing herself, and see if she would like
it, in a nasty cold common wash-house which
anybody might halve and quarter, and who
wanted that inherent, pushing Mrs. Webb, or
sly Anne Sole, to come in and take a inventory
of their old men's wussen shirts, and their own
darnedest stockings, when they had been accustomed
to wash nice and comfortable in
private on their own warm hearth-stone where
nobody could come and spy, without the missus
of the house's leave ? Ah ! she were missus of

her house in them days, and not bound to say
her prayers at the gentlefolks' pleasure. What
good could that do to her poor old soul, she
would like to know? It " might lend a lift " to
her betters' souls, since they were always in
luck, but forced prayers never did no good to
them as said them, that she would take her
Bible oath on.'

And old Mr. Fry (the members of the
stranded colony were each strictly Mr. and Mrs.
among themselves, unless in the case of a miserable
spinster who had missed her mark, like
Anne Sole) daringly defined the opinions of his
brethren when he protested he would give all
1 them bandages of shrubberies and grass that
were of no good save to the screeching birds of
the air as he was not allowed to put a finger
on, for his old cabbage bed, where, as everybody
knew, he had riz the whitest-hearted
cabbages in the parish, not to say for his pig-stye,
where, when he could do a double day 'a

work, and was well to do — never thinking what
he would come to — as some there could
bear him witness, he had fed prime pigs as
were a pleasure to look at.'

So it became another question whether the
owner of Copley Grange had altogether fulfilled
the intention — always supposing it to have been
kindly and not ostentatious or selfish in disguises
his forerunner, as he was fully persuaded
he had done, while he fumed over the thanklessness
and discontent of the poor, or whether he
had served himself and ridden his hobby to the
death, by way of loving his neighbour.

When all was done, the Copley Grange
Almshouses were only a modern antique, and
the Squire had too much taste not to prefer the
real antique of Friarton Mill, which was not
his property, indeed, but was set down within a
stone's throw of his grounds. As he took care
to keep on the best terms with the miller, the
Squire flattered himself, it was as safe almost,.

as though it were in his own hand. He was
at liberty to take his guests over it at all houris
the course of the shortest of strolls, and he
had so managed a vista of old thorn trees
that the mill formed the loveliest vignette
from the grand drawing-room windows.

There was no inscription on the building,
and there is no existing architecture which
could decide the date when Friarton Mill was
built. Popular tradition, which always tends to
the age of good Queen Bess, as if it had been
golden and not iron in English annals, loosely
attributed that date to the mill. Undoubtedly,
it was so old that even its unsophisticated
millers had grown proud and careful of its age,
as a man who will ignore and trample upon his
years at sixty, nay, at threescore and ten, will
boast of them, and cherish them tenderly from
eighty upwards. Everything about the mill,
except the iron machinery which was kept out of
sight, was white powdered or silvery grey, or

rich brown, or toned in sage or olive green,
dull crimson, and dusky orange by stonecrops
and lichens, as no art-school design could tone
colours. The building stood as near the water
as an old Venetian palace is to its canal. The
site must have been untenable in an English
climate to any miller who was not proof against
the chest complaints and rheumatism that
English flesh is heir to, had not the water which
in floods lapped the mill walls been the flow
just below the weir. It was always rapid in
its current, thus carrying off a large proportion
of its own vapour, never stagnated in pools,
nor, even when there was least water, dried up
in portions of its channel, throwing off unwholesome
miasma in the process. Another protection
to the miller and his family was, that his
two-storied, stone-roofed, dwelling house, built
at right angles to the mill, stood by the whole
breadth of its court back from the water where
the ground rose, and a natural drainage filtered

away the damp in the soil. Actual evidence
removed all reproach of slimy or mildewed unwholesomeness
from Friarton Mill, or, for that
matter, from the mansion-house of Cophv
Grange, which stood only a little farther from
what was still called ' the Brook,' or * Buller's
Brook.' No races of men or women in the parish
had been, in the memory of the oldest Friarton
man (and he was to be found in the Copley
Grange Almshouses), stronger and longer-lived,
in the main, than the two families which had for
generations dwelt in the mill and the manor-house.


On the face of the mill, as it fronted the
water, opening from the second story, was a
curiously carved wooden gallery, such as one
meets with in Nuremberg and some of the older
German towns. It had been intended originally
to hold sacks of corn or flour, which were
hoisted up or lowered down by a crane from,
or to, the narrow road-way — only broad enough

at the widest to hold a single farm cart with
its horses — that interposed between the mill and
the water. The gallery had become obsolete
for this purpose, having been superseded by-other
and ampler contrivances on the other side
of the mill ; and a great willow tree had been
allowed to grow up and still farther impede the
road way, which it narrowed to a footpath, as
it spread out its roots, and flung across its
higher branches until they drooped over the
water. But the respect which had been developed
for every sign of the mill's antiquity
not only saved the gallery from destruction, butin
order to keep up its character, caused it to
be occasionally used still, as a place of deposit
for floury sacks. It was more frequently
employed as a point of vantage which the
miller could appropriate — a place for smoking
his pipe and staring at the water
beneath his feet ; where the gentle folks
from Copley could come and loiter and gaze

abroad into the recesses of Copley Grange Park,
which was only divided from the mill by the
Brook and a sunk fence.

The park was by no means large, but the
ground was undulating, and, furnished with
patches of bracken, old thorns, brakes of hazel
and blackberry, and some magnificent oaks and
beeches, it formed of itself dells and dingles,
which had the appearance of stretching far
and wide.

At two seasons of the year the view from
the gallery of Friarton Mill which did not extend
beyond the park, and had the objection,
if you will, of being shut in, ' tame and dim
tic,' formed at the same time a nearly perfect
bit of woodland, while the well ' seasoned '
Georgian house, with the Italian facade in the
foreground, stopped short of being an eyesore.
In late spring, when the tender green of the
beech and oak contrasted with the sombre
green of the fir, and was relieved by the

white blossoms of the wild crab and pear
trees ; when the gnarled hawthorn bushes, in
the dim light of early morning or late twilight,
stood crowned like ' aged men,' or in the glory
of noon bent like veiled brides ; when clusters of
red May and the spikes of the red-flowered
chestnut — introduced to compete with the native
trees — lent a half tropical brilliance to the sweet
English purity of the colouring ; when the turf
below was here and there pale gold with
primroses or misty blue with hyacinths ; when
blackbirds and thrushes sang openly and unblushingly
to their mates on every spray, and
the cuckoo's note and the ringdove's call
sounded from hidden hollows ; when the first
nightingale made night tuneful and poured out
his passion till it rose in liquid clearness above
the monotonous rush and tinkle of the waters,
then Copley Grange Park, and Friarton Mill
were at their second best. For the autumn
suited them even better than the spring, nothing
vol. i. c

could surpass the exquisite rich mellowness and
tender delicacy when the ripe brown chestnut
was dropping from its husk on the 
coloured grass, in the dullness of October ;
when the five fingers of the chestnut leaves and
the vine leaf of the maple were burning in maize
colour; when the oak was russet, the beech
and wild cherry crimson darkening into purple
or streaked with scarlet ; the birch and the elm
straw and daffodil colour ; when the bracken
was rusty ; when only the trill of the robin and
the distant bark of a dog broke the stillness of
the earth resting from its labours with a curtain
of haze falling between it and the dappled sky.
But in winter also, when Buller's Brook was
hanging with icicles, and ' roaring and reaming*
after it had broken its frozen bounds, and the
grass was sere, and the boughs of the ti
stood out bare and black, unless where the
sunlight caught those near at hand, and
brought out their furry greys, and the bine

bloom of a plum, hovering about the twigs and
bourgeois ; or when they were feathered with
hoar frost or panoplied with snow, standing out
in dead cold masses against the leaden grey of
the clouds — the park, as seen from the mill
gallery, was not to be despised by any hardy
sight-seer who could face with fortitude benumbed
toes and tingling fingers.

The court before the mill-house had its own
tree, a round-headed bushy mulberry tree,
while the house itself was covered with several
old-fashioned rose bushes, including a monthly
rose which did not wait for June, but sent out
its china pink buds early in May, and went on
obligingly, supplying large instalments of
various shades of magenta-coloured, faintly
smelling roses, from month to month, till
November, if the winter were not a hard one.
The other roses, noisette and a crimson — acquiring
a duller purple tinge, perhaps the nearest
approach to 'blue roses' in fading — adhered

c 2

strictly to June and July for flowering in one
blow, but they made up as much as possible
for their unbending character in this respect
by pouring forth, when they did blossom, a
prodigal wealth of roses, which in their turn
discharged a perfect avalanche of crumbled
petals into the court and on the breast of the
brook, that ran, for days at a time, pied like a
daisy, impartially divided into the colours of
York and Lancaster, as other rivers have run
yellow with gold or red with blood. One side
of the house would show sumptuous crimson
without a green leaf for a whole fortnight, when
it was not a rainy summer ; and as for the ivory
white noisette roses, the half-blown buds and
flowers on a branch could be counted by the
fifty, and a single cluster would fill one of
Fan Constable's crazy, tottering flower-gnat
one time the older of these rose tn
with the ' mulberry bush,' as it was called, had
served for a flower garden to the mill-house, as

the bough of a tree or a few stones on the
stage used to stand for a forest or a rocky pass.
Then the dwellers in the mill-house became
less primitive in their notions, and not so
easily satisfied. The miller's wife had her
border round her court with daffodils and
carnations, sweet-williams and sun-flowers in
their order, until at last the border merged
into a walled garden, which, in addition to its
apricot-trees and its early peas and potatoes,
had its dahlia and salvia beds, and its frames
for raising geraniums and verbenas, all of them
not so far behind the terraces and green-houses
at Copley Grange.

But full of living beauty as Friarton Mill
and Copley Grange were, their owners did not
escape the curse of humanity, and the dead
were lying at the same time both in the millhouse
and the grange. Old Peter Constable
had paid his last debt, and been gathered to his
fathers — full of days and of such honours as an

honest, active useful life cannot fail to gather ;
and the Squire's wife had inherited so little
strength that she had died, worn out with sustaining
the dignity and refinement of her station
and with bearing three children, before she had
attained her twenty-fifth year.

Q

CHAPTER II.

OLIVER CONSTABLE'S RETURN.

Fan Constable was in the drawing-room of the
mill-house, awaiting the return of her brother
from his last term at Oxford. A mill-house
may have its drawing-room, and its son may-have
been at Oxford, and that not in the old
capacity of a servitor, in the experience of
modern England.

Old Peter Constable, who had inherited
from his father not only Friarton Mill and its
meadows, but the chief baking business in the
town of Priarton, had possessed other flour
mills also, and had died a well-to-do man. He
might have gone a little way off and kept a

much more pretentious establishment than that
of Friarton Mill, without being guilty of extravagant
housekeeping for his means. But
he was neither ashamed of his origin nor of
his business ; he was unassuming in his nature >
and he was almost as proud of the old place
with an instinctive unquestioning fondness, as
Iris neighbour the Squire adored it on the last
principles of taste.

The miller and baker's only son had distinguished
himself as a boy in his classes at
Friarton Grammar School — which was rather
famous among grammar schools, and, having
acquired a good name for sending up lads who
took scholarships, and became in due time
fellows and tutors of Oxford colleges, was eager
to keep up its reputation, and, by the mouths of
its masters, egged on promising pupils to go in
for the prizes of learning. The case of Oliver
Constable formed no exception. It seemed as if
he were only fulfilling his part of the obligation,

when, after having been head boy at Friarton,
he went up to Oxford and immediately vindicated
the propriety of the step by gaining a
scholarship — though indeed his father was sufficiently
well off to make no objection to paying
his son's college terms in full.

Old Peter Constable continued to have no
scruple on the point of maintaining his son at
Oxford, because at the end of Oliver's first
term there occurred a passage between the
father and son which may sound incredible,
but which actually had a precedent, that appeared
in print in the life of a Scotch earl and
his heir. The miller, like the old Earl of
Elgin, feeling highly gratified by his boy's,
success, thought to reward it by sending him
as big a cheque as the elder man felt justified
in giving over and above the younger man's
income, bidding him spend that in any manner
which might please him best. And the young
miller, like the young earl, returned the cheque

with a grateful acknowledgment of the kindness
of the intention, and an announcement that he
had no use for the money; he was amply
provided with the sinews of war already ; he
would rather the sum were spent in procuring
some special pleasure for the father, who was
frugal and self-denying in his personal habits,
or for the sister Fan, who, being a girl — and
an only and motherless girl — needed particular
indulgence. It remained to be proved whether
the young miller would follow up his extraordinary
moderation by a career in any respect
parallel to that of the patriotic statesman.

But in spite of Peter Constable's pride and
confidence in his son from the beginning, it had
not been without a certain ruefulness that the
man had consented to the single lad of the
constables' household forsaking the old path,
which in Peter's eyes was the safest and
pleasantness in the world, and which had been
trodden smooth — as it were, sprinkled white —

for young Oliver by his father, grandfather, and
great-grandfather. The Constables were not
of a rank to go beyond a great-grandfather,
but there had been at least three generations of
them in Friarton Mill and Friarton bakehouse,
and mill and bakehouse had flourished under
the Constables' rule, and had been known far
and wide for as unadulterated, well-ground
flour, and as honestly kneaded bread as could
be expected from fallible men. The staff of
life, preserved as nearly as possible intact, had
proved a boon to the community, while the
community in its turn had rewarded its faithful
servants by becoming their steady patrons.

Of course the mill and the bakehouse must
pass away from the family if Oliver developed
into a scholar and gentleman, unless, to be sure,
Fan married a miller and baker, winch did not
seem likely. On the whole, fully sensible as
Peter felt that Oliver was a credit and even an
honour to his people, the miller would a good

deal rather that his son had remained in his
own rank of life, and taken over from his failing
hands the old mill, which was the next thing
to 'parent, child and wife' in its owner's
estimation.

Events had not so shaped themselves, while
Peter Constable was modest, just, even generous.
He would not set up his judgment
against the combined opinions of those who
ought to know better — the learned masters
and parsons of Friarton Grammar-school. Old
Peter would not let his prepossessions and
prejudices stand in the way of Oliver's rise in
life, if Oliver chose to rise ; though to Peter's
mind such an ascent was very often neither
a comfortable nor a creditable process. He
would not constrain the lad to sacrifice an
ambition which, with his gifts, might be natural
and proper in him, in order to maintain old
landmarks.

As for Oliver, he responded practically to

the promptings of his early teachers. He was
keen on colleges and college-learning with all
the power and delight which those ideas then
involved for him. And the child Fan was
even more enthusiastic than her brother on
the associations and attainments he was entering
upon. She set herself with the pertinacity and
absence of reasonable calculation of a woman,
from the day Oliver left for college, to qualify
herself for being, at no distant day, the worthy
sister and fit companion of a great don — a
dignitary high up in the Church, or an honoured
judge.

So Peter tried also to accommodate himself
to the will of Providence and the force of
circumstances. He was too old, indeed, to
begin a course of training in order to figure
suitably as the father of one of the magnates
whose laurels were so quickly and easily won —
in Fan's imagination. He knew full well, that
though his boy as yet was the same to him,

and came home in the long vacation, rather to
Fan's disgust, forgetful of and indigested
with a single homely detail of the old life,
though Oliver was, as he had ever been,
perfectly natural and unaffected, and would
lend a hand to make up accounts and to help
his father with the management of the large
business and many servants in every way in
the young man's power, still in the course of
time Oliver's widely different occupations must
separate father and son.

Even already, in the midst of the son's
staunchness to first ties, the father recognised
with a curious mixture of fatherly pride and
sharp twinges of pain, in spite of his fatherly unselfishness,
the certain consequences of Oliver s
withdrawal from handicraft or trade and absorption
in the pursuit of learning, and in the
companionship of the class with regard to
which Peter, in spite of his sagacity, folly
believed the pursuit of learning was the regular

business of the members' lives, unless when
they took a little bodily recreation in the form
of cricket, or boating, or sport. Oliver might
be as humble and hearty as he liked, but he
was growing in the very tone of his voice, and
carriage of his head, and movement of his
hand, more and more of a gentleman, like the
Squire and his friends. The boy could not
help himself; it was to his credit that he
should, like good wood, take on polish so rapidly.
But though he would never turn his back on
his father, the men would gradually grow
strange and shy as companions to each other.
All the more reason, Peter thought bravely
and disinterestedly, for him to make matters as
smooth and easy to Oliver when he should
come after him, his father, as the old miller could
contrive. There were certain things which he,
Peter, could still do better than his clever r
cultivated son, and it was some indemnification
to Peter for his own loss to do them for Oliver.

Peter sold advantageously the leases of the
mills he had taken on in addition to Friarton,
and laid up the purchase-money in the funds,
where it would be no trouble, but a decided
boon, to a gentleman and scholar, as well as to
Fan. Peter was on terms for the sale of the
baking business, but he could not find it in his
heart to dispose of Friarton Mill, though he
knew he should always find a ready buyer in
the squire of Copley Grange, who would willingly
suffer Peter to stay on as tenant in the
place for the rest of his fife. But the miller
fancied Oliver might care to retain the mill,
letting it to a tenant who should reserve
quarters for the landlord if ever he liked to
revisit the mill-house.

Death stepped in and settled all the arrangements
before Peter had come to an end
of his plans for his son's greater ease and wellbeing.
The miller died peacefully with Oliver
sharing Fairs watch by their father's pillow,

raising, for an interval of relief on the broad
young breast, the bowed shoulders on which
the young man, as a child, had so often ridden
triumphantly, and receiving reverently and tenderly
the last fluttering sigh.

In those first days of mourning little had
been said of Oliver's future line of life, which
had still remained so far undecided at the
time of his father's death. As a matter of
course, Oliver had returned to Oxford to finish
his term and take his degree, which he did withall
the eclat that had been expected from him,
winning a first class, and immediately afterwards
returning to Friarton Mill — his first
return since his father's death — with Fan
awaiting him to do what she could to make up
for the absence of another face and voice by
lavishing upon her brother her unbounded congratulations.


It was the month of June, one of the two
seasons when Friarton Mill was the nearest to

VOL. I. D

an Arcadia. Enough of time had passed for
Fan Constable to be comforted for her old
father's death. She was able to hail her
brother's arrival on the heels of his achievement,
with all it implied to her, in a spirit of
exalted approbation. She was anxious to do
him all the honour in her power, and she displayed
her anxiety according to her instincts
and training.

It was the fashion in Friarton to say that
Fan Constable was a worldly-minded as well as
an unjustifiably proud and assuming young
woman. But Fan expressed herself on this
occasion in a sufficiently simple manner. She
conned a cookery book, and tormented the
miller's old housekeeper to cook a dinner,
which Sally Pope said might have been another
funeral or wedding feast ; and farther exasperated
Sally by bidding her serve it at a late
hour. In the meantime Fan repaired with all
her belongings to the drawing-room, which

had not been her ordinary sitting-room. She
had previously dressed herself in her best
gown of dim black silk and crape, with its
sweeping train, and she now sat down to lookout
for Oliver with an impatiently throbbing
heart.

That drawing-room had been inaugurated
by Fan, and yet it did not reflect her character
in the slightest degree. It was a singularly
colourless, pointless room, and Fan's was not a
colourless or pointless nature. Fan's taste had
been just so far educated as to have reached
the chill circle of negation. She was able to
reject with aversion the stuffy crowd of incongruous,
inconsequent tables and chairs, the
tawdry or glaring vulgarity of ornament in the
houses of the wealthier tradespeople, and even
of the condescending professional people of
Friarton, with whom her visiting-list began and
ended. Therefore there was none of the embarrassment
of more than doubtful riches apt to

B 2

distinguish third or fourth-rate drawing-rooms
in the room at Friarton Mill. There were
no Berlin wool or bead monstrosities, notable
books ' overpoweringly gorgeous, like
the Queen's Lifeguards, in scarlet and gold
bindings ; no terrible specimens of art in watercolours
or chalks, no china chimney vases
painted coarsely in all the colours of the rainbow,
and reckoned very handsome jars by their
complacent possessors ; no starched tangles of
white cotton, crackling at every touch, on the
backs of chairs and sofas, or on the faces of little
tables, attaching themselves without permission
to the collars of coats and the sleeves of gowns.
Fan knew better than these attributes of half
civilisation went, but her knowledge stopped
short there, and only served to reveal her remaining
amount of ignorance. And she was & i
afraid of compromising herself in her ignorant
that she restricted herself as severely in her
drawing-room as though she had been a social

Puritan : she ventured on little or nothing beyond
the absolutely necessary rosewood tables and
cane seats of the simplest form, the carpet and
hangings of the most subdued tint and pattern,
the plain cottage piano with its heap of music,
not in admired disorder, but in deliberate tidiness
in the background, — the attenuated flower-glasses
which would only hold the most attenuated
bouquets. The one error which Fan had
allowed herself to fall into, was still on the side
of powerlessness and coldness. There was a
large mirror over the plain white marble chime
which reflected and intensified with
a stony, topographical correctness the dim,
meagre effect of the room.

There could not have been a wider contrast
between the interior and the world without, to
which the room ought to have had an affinity,
between the natural homeliness and affluence of
sweet beauty and gaiety in the Friar ton Mill
surroundings, and the artificial vow of perpetual

frigidity and austerity — according to which
Fan's drawing-room was arranged.

1 That drawing-room of Fan Constable's i-
another version of the glacial theory,' Mrs.
Hilliard, the most privileged and liveliest woman
in Friarton, used to declare, with a shrug of her
shoulders and a real shiver. 4 It is the bondage
to starvation of rising gentility.'

Fan was perfectly conscious of a deficiency,
while she would rather lay herself open to a
charge of something lacking in her room, than
to the counter charge of false adornment. But
she was not sensible that the chief and unpardonable
defect was the absence of all trace of
human joy or sorrow, all touch of human character
and token of individual bent, which
might have redeemed the barest room ; and that
it was the sense of uneasiness and uncertainty,
of doubting and halting on the threshold of a
new order of existence which rendered the atmosphere
of this room repellant as well as cold.

Mrs. Hilliard was speaking a certain amount of
nonsense when she added that Fan's room contained
the last drawing-room suite advertised
by Maple or Shoolbred, weeded to death, since
neither Maple — nor Morris himself — could have
adequately supplied the fatal weakness of that
room.

But Fan's own presence did something to
enrich it. Fan in her sweeping mourning
was a small, fine-featured, keen-eyed, dark-haired,
restless little woman, whose temperament
was the reverse of lymphatic, who had
none of the facile, mindless, heartless sweetness
that would have added the last mawkish offence
to the other offences. How a creature like Fan
could exist even for an hour at a time in such
a domestic desert, how she could fail to impress
on it some token of her ardent identity, only
proved the strong self-restraint, the determination
of purpose of which the girl was capable.

Fan was idle this afternoon as she was rarely

idle, since her energy, like that of Michael the
Wizard's little fiends, demanded a constant field
for its operation ; and as she was inclined to
treat with withering contempt all the poor little
girlish fancy-work which had ever come under
her notice, she was notable, for her years, in
household management, and practical in feminine
wisdom. Fan could have kept the house,
and regulated and overlooked the menage very
nearly as well as Sally Pope — in fact she did so
when Sally would let her — and this is no small
testimony to Fan's talents, for old Sally Pope
was an experienced and efficient, if conceited,
housekeeper and cook. Not a girl in Friarton,
not one of the well-born vicar's daughters,
who had each received an excellent education,
seen something of the great world, was clever
in her own way, and knew herself compelled to
make the most of her allowance for dress and
minor expenses, could spend that allowance more
judiciously in every respect than Fan Constable

who might have been supposed to revel in
rude abundance — could dispose of her private
income. Not a girl, hardly a matron in the
parish, was so available for choir-practising,
school teaching, managing the details of charitable
clubs as Fan Constable had already proved
herself, — facts which the vicar's wife, and the
mistress of Copley Grange, when she was alive,
knew right well.

Fan acted more from general good principles,
and, perhaps, in some measure, unconsciously
from policy, than from a purely benevolent
temper. Yet at the most unexpected seasons,
and in circumstances which were not so much
out of the common as to warrant an exception
to the rule, Fan Constable would suddenly
amaze and overcome her coadjutors by a burst
of womanly tenderness, deep, wistful and self-accusing,
perfectly irresistible in such a woman.

It was by dint of her early strength of will,
and of something sterling in her earnestness even

when the game did not seem worth the candle,
quite as much as on account of her father's
purse and a credulous faith in her brother's
genius — with the future honour which it might
reflect on Friarton, that Fan had been lifted
over the heads of her compeers and promoted
to a somewhat difficult footing, for which it is
needless to say that she had to bear much
obloquy, in a rank of society considerably above
what was the original sphere of the owners of
Friarton Mill.

Fan could not work on the eve of what she
was firmly persuaded must be one of the great
crises of her life. Oliver was coming home
crowned with the only laurels he could have
gathered; and Fan had the entire sympathy
with the gathering which belonged to the consciousness
that she too was capable of enterprise
and application, though not in securing such
triumphs as Oliver had won. Fan knew perfectly
that she was not clever in one sense ; she

was even slow where book-learning was concerned.
Of course, she had by perseverance
mastered the obstacles which had lain in the
way of her becoming a fairly well-educated girl,
after her father had been induced to send her
to good schools both at home and abroad ; and
she had striven hard to cultivate her mind and
taste still farther, so as to become a tolerable
companion for Oliver — one of whom he need
not be ashamed when educated men and refined
women were his daily associates.

Still the truth remained that Fan was not
intellectual — like Catherine Hilliard at the
Meadows, or Lucy Houghton, the vicar's eldest
daughter, who might have made some pretence
to enact ' sweet girl-graduates.' None
could be better aware of what she lacked in
this respect than Fan, who had even an inordinate
value for the attainments in winch she
failed — who felt only the more called upon,,
with a half-pathetic meekness and humility in



the middle of her pride and high spirit, to support
Oliver's dignity by the sedulous exercise
of the faculties Providence had given her. She
believed she was lady-like, she knew she was
sensible, she felt none could be more deeply
attached to Oliver and his interests. She was
prepared to prove an excellent mistress of his
establishment and manager of his household
expenses, so long as he needed her. What
was still stronger evidence of her devotion, she
was prepared to vacate the post she craved,
for the consummation of her wishes, on a
suitable marriage on Oliver's part. Of course
Oliver ought to marry and marry well, winch
would be a help to his social position. Then
her services would no longer be required, and
well, she might possibly marry in her turn.

Oliver was coming home to Friarton Mill,
but there was little likelihood that he would
stay there. He might already have formed his
plans — whatever they were Fan was ready to

give in her adherence to them. She had no
desire to remain at Friarton Mill ; she had, on
the contrary, a great inclination to get away
from all that hampered her and would hamper
her brother. She was a woman of strong and
faithful family affections, but she was as nearly
as possible without local attachments. She had
a feeling for beauty — rather in form than in
colour, bat she was not possessed with the
admiration which Friarton Mill frequently
called forth. She rather resented its ardent expression
to her, as some Scotchmen resent the
enthusiasm many foreigners entertain for them
in the light of the countrymen of Eobert Burns
and Sir Walter Scott.

She did not at all approve of the shape
the furor took ; and she kept herself out of the
way of those visitors from Copley Grange, who,
in spite of the hints of the Squire, were too
stolid in their superior rank to understand that
Fan was not the typical miller's daughter and

were fain to patronise her under an altogether
erroneous impression.

Such gratuitous patronage would fill Fan
with an intensity of indignation and affront
so far beyond what the offence deserved, that
the wrath became ludicrous in its anti-climax.
It was the new order of things, it was the
coming dignity, it was Oliver the chief bestower
of the dignity, that were all affably patronised
in the person of Fan, and Fan had to be angry
for the whole.

At last Oliver turned into the court, walking
and carrying his bag from the station as usual
' as if nothing had happened,' Fan exclaimed
to herself, with a quick shade of vexation,
while she ran downstairs to welcome him on
the threshold.

There was little family likeness between the
brother and sister, as there were few points in
unison in their characters, beyond what existed in
their uprightness and the depth of regard between

the two — who, so far as near kindred was
concerned, stood alone in the world and were
all in all to each other. Certainly Oliver was
spare as Fan was slight, and there was a little of
a worn look about the young man's thin face,
which testified to the work of nervous energy
there also. But he was big and Fan was little.
His hair was brown, straight, and already thin.
Hers was black, wavy and luxuriant. He had
a ruddy tinge in the brown of his complexion
which no burning of the midnight oil — and he
had burned it in his time with a young man's
superb recklessness — had served to rout. Fan's
complexion was the clear paleness often found
in a brunette.

But the greatest contrast in Oliver and Fan
Constable's features was found in the eves,
though in both brother and sister these were
brown. Fan's had the hazel tint and the keen
observation combined with the shyness of a
pheasant or a partridge's eye. Oliver's eyes

were darker in hue, and though they were not
without repressed fire, had much of the brooding
reflectiveness — verging on doggedness — of
the ox's eye.

Oliver Constable was firmly knit, and ought
to have carried himself as easily, and with as
natural a grace, in his broad-shouldered height,
as Fan did in her low stature. But the peculiar
neatness and daintiness of personal belongings
which constituted not only a crowning
distinction but a ruling passion in Fan, so that
slovenliness and disorder caused her absolute
pain, were wholly absent in her brother's case.
There could not have been the remotest chance,
even supposing he had been a short instead
of a tall man, of his worst enemies calling
Oliver c dapper ' or ' smug as some of Fan's
k dear friends ' chose to term her ' natty ' orc
trim.'

But although Oliver wore the grey morning
suit which has replaced the ' purple ' in connection

with the ' fine linen ' in the dress of a
Dives or a duke, which is at once perfectly
unassuming and perfectly good of its kind, the
miller's son and heir suffered from an innate,
incurable personal negligence, such as besets
some men in all ranks and in all nations — only
the defect in an Englishman belonging to one
of the upper classes is free from the repulsive
element of uncleanliness which is aot to attend
on the Bohemian negligence of a foreigner.

Fan was chronically distressed by this flaw
of negligence in Oliver's idiosyncrasy. She
had made a searching analysis to discover its
origin, in the course of vigorous attempts to
overcome the weakness, but she had been no
more able to reach its root than she had succeeded
in shaking its influence for a day. It
was not that Oliver was so ill-made that his
coats and trousers would not sit properly on his
figure, for he was really a handsome man if he
could have done himself justice. It was not

VOL. I. E

that the habits of a gentleman did not come
naturally to him, and had not been long
practised by him. For that matter their father,
who had never aspired to be more than his
father had been before him, had shown himself
a tidy old martinet in his ways — just as she,
Fan, could not bear a pin out of its place,
long before she was subjected to school training.
Yet here was Oliver, who had enjoyed every
advantage since he was a mere lad, who was, as
Fan owned willingly, more fastidious than herself
in all essentials of manly and womanly
good breeding, in non-essentials a picture of
helpless, hopeless disorder from the crown of
his head to the sole of his foot ; with the shifting
hat or cap on the drifting clouds of brown hair
which no close clipping of barber could keep a
week in its place ; with his crumpled collar, his
loosened, twisted necktie, his eccentric cuffs —
one of which would disappear up his coat-sleeve,
while the other would out-herod fashion

by hanging not merely over his knuckles,
but nearly to the tips of his fingers. The last
offence was in his boots, which, let Oliver buy
them from the prince of honest and accomplished
boot-makers, in the course of a week or
two, took to disreputable curling up at the toes
and going down at the heels, with an air of
being hard upon the parting of upper leather
and sole, and of affording an irresistible attraction
to mud and duster like the sorriest hobnailed
shoes of any day-labourer.

All this in a young, handsome, college-bred
man would have been unpardonable if there
had been any cure for it ; but Fan in her despair
was profoundly conscious there was none.
She might call Oliver to account every hour of
the day, as a mother who is a disciplinarian may
lecture a careless hoyden among her daughters.
Oliver would take her remonstrance in perfect
good humour, but he would not be a bit
the better for it. She might quote for his

E 2

U. OF ILL LIB.

benefit with cutting sarcasm the old tripping
compliment to the very wildness of abandon
in woman's dress —

Hair loosely flowing, dress as free ;
Simplicity more taketh me, — '

and ask him if he thought that applied as well
to a man's toilet?

Oliver would laugh and put up his hand,
with a sense of guilt, to his dishevelled moustache,
then let it travel further to the Bicquet-
like tufts of his hair. He would look down
with too tranquil deprecation at the handkerchief
dangling by one end from his pocket. But
though hair and handkerchief were remedied
for the moment, they would be in a worse condition
twenty times before the day was done.

Oliver was also spasmodically awkward in
his gestures, a peculiarity sufficiently noticeable
in a well-made man who had taken his share of
muscular exercise and learnt the noble art of
self defence.

Fan's consolation was that Oliver, though
the reverse of a puppy or even alas ! of an
Adonis, was still unmistakably a gentleman in
his most extraordinary gaucheries ; and when
he was roused and in earnest, his passion and
determination mastered his mixture of indifference
and nervousness, until the bodily movements
responded to the spirit within, and
acquired a certain untrammelled dignity and
power.

CHAPTEE III.
Oliver's announcement.

The brother and sister met with the ' Here I am,
Fan,' and the ' So you've got home, Oliver,' of
the thoroughly English brother and sister, who,
however cordially attached and however much
they may have to say to each other on particular
occasions, rarely exceed such words — accompanying
the grasp of the hand, and the kiss
on the cheek, even on meeting after months of
separation. Effusive speech and lavish caresses
are not for the true representatives of the
Anglo-saxon race.

Oliver, in writing to his sister, when his
name was in the prize list, had so far forgotten

This origin as to let his pen slip into the short
regretful sentence, 'He would have been
pleased that I had not missed the mark.' But
even on paper he did not further specify the
tie, and now Oliver gave no sign of remembrance,
that it was the first time he had come
home and failed to receive his father's greeting.
For the old man was yet alive, though on
his death-bed eagerly watching for his son,
when Oliver obeyed the summons which had
last brought him to Friarton Mill. It did not
follow by any means that Oliver forgot the
past, though he remained dumb as he followed
Fan to her room.

Do you sit here now, Fan ? ' he asked his
sister with a little surprise, and an involuntary
tone of disappointment. But even as he
spoke, he began to reproach himself privately
for the question — so like a man's blundering to
put it, within the first moment of his arrival too.

To be sure poor Fan still found the old sitting-room
too full of sad memories to be encountered
without an effort. How could he,
even in imagination, have condemned a girl to
sit alone where the old family circle had been
formed, with a dreary sense of a blank never to
be filled up, in one corner, and in one chair,
constantly present to her mind ? It mattered
little what room they occupied just then, and
only a stupid, thoughtless fellow would have
drawn attention to the change, thus carelessly
probing the wound.

Oliver hastily directed the conversation to
something else, without waiting for an answer
his question, and in doing so accepted the
new domestic arrangement without protest — all
the same his thoughts had been dwelling
vaguely but persistently throughout his railway
journey on the familiar low-browed room.
The local attachments, which did not exist for
Fan, approached to a passion in Oliver's nature.

He had seen, without trying to see them, his
father's big chair and ponderous writing-desk,
opposite which Fan's little table and work-basket
used to stand. He had contemplated
idly and half absently as if he had been on the
spot, the high wooden chimney-piece painted
grey, and having in relief, only in stucco unfortunately,
clusters of wheat ears — as if the
chimney-piece had been designed expressly
for a miller and baker's hearth — the corner
cupboards, the odd nondescript article of
furniture in old mahogany which was
neither side-board nor side-table, nor cabinet,
but which had the handiest shelves, the
roomiest drawers conceivable. At this season
the purplish red roses were budding in such
profusion round the windows of the old parlour,
that if a high wind came when the roses were
in full bloom, their petals would — as Oliver had
seen them before — be stripped off, and swept ina
stream on the faded worsted moss of the carpet

as thick as leaves in Vallombrosa. There were
seats in the windows on which Oliver had
often gathered up his long legs and disposed of
his arms in an attitude the most excruciating to
the eye of the spectator, yet the most restful
to the body of the performer. Oliver had been
addicted, from boyhood, to employing these
low window ledges as convenient steps to the
court, a practice which obviated any trouble of
opening and closing doors. He had been prone
to sitting half in half out of a window, with his
legs dangling to the ground ; when he occupied
the post in June, he had felt himself like an old
Greek crowned with roses, and as it was his only
chance of such a distinction he had borne with
stoicism sundry pricks and scratches from
aggressive stems, and faced philosophically the
dropping of rose leaves — possibly of earwigs
and ladybirds — within the collar of his coat.

Oliver was exceedingly fond of the old
parlour, and he was decidedly not fond of Fan's

drawing-room ; at the same time he was cast
in a different mould from the Squire of Copley
Grange. Oliver had his own views on aesthetics
as on everything else, but the pattern of a wallpaper
or the tone of a carpet did not cost him
agonies. He was not always calling out for
calm and repose and key notes. His residence
in Oxford had no doubt cultivated his taste
without his knowing it, but the training had
failed to beget in him a special mania — apart
from intrinsic beauty or pleasant associations —
for old oak and blue china, Venetian glass, or
Queen Anne needlework, unless the last were
the homely old garden-flower which bears that
name. Now, as it had more than once occurred
to him, if Fan had been in some of the men's
rooms, and had possessed rooms of her own,
she would by this time have been engulfed
beyond the redemption of her natural taste ina
charmed region of dim and soft hues, faded
colours and faint tracery varied by bold interjections

; she would have sat surrounded by
mystic dados, quaint Indian and Japanese
matting, stately Jacobin chairs, gorgeous
peacock's plumes and sunflowers. Yet it was
Oliver and not Fan — as both were aware — who
was imaginative and susceptible. Except where
her prominent bump of order was concerned, it
was he and not she, who was sensitively affected
by the surroundings ; above all it was he who
was tenderly faithful to his first love in household
gods, as in inanimate nature.

Oliver and Fan Constable talked at dinner
of the hundred-anemone nothings which the
members of one family, meeting after some
months' separation which has not divided the
speakers in more than space, find to interest
them. Oliver took occasion to remark, apropos
of the dinner itself, that Sally Pope had not lost
her skill, and that he was quite able to do justice
to her fried soles and lamb cutlets though
he had dined at Haddington. He had not

meant either to try Sally's patience, or to keep
Fan's dinner waiting. He had intended to
some in for her tea.

I don't mind dining late, indeed, I greatly
prefer it,' said Fan with decision ; ' and since
since poor father is gone,' it was an effort for
her still to get out the words, though she
showed no inclination to cry, — she was not the
ordinary sort of woman, who is given to express
her deepest feelings in tears, — ' we have
not his tastes and habits to think of first.
There is no need for you to dine early after
you have been so long accustomed to dine late
in hall.'

'The hour for dining in hall is not considered
late feeding-time now-a-days,' said Oliver,
carelessly ; * but it is a great deal too late for me,'
he added, with more interest. ' I am not like
you, Fan ; I detest dining late. I stick to one
o'clock as the hour which appetite, commonsense,
the testimony of our ancestors, and the

practice of our continental neighbours have all
agreed to honour. I know what you are going
to say, that noon is the correct time. Well, I
don't object to anticipate matters ; dining at
noon is nearly the only mediaeval custom, about
the restitution of which, with advantage, I am
quite clear.'

I was not going to propose dining at
noon,' denied Fan, emphatically ; ' it would bean
exceedingly inconvenient arrangement, unless
households rose at daybreak again.'

6 And why not ? ' inquired Oliver, innocently.


'Why not, indeed?' retorted Fan, with
lively impatience. * It is sufficient they don't,
and few people would like to form solitary
exceptions. You may try it yourself if you
like ; not that I mean to say you're a bad riser
as it is.'

I don't often see the sun rise in summer, '
acknowledged Oliver, penitently, as he carved

Sally's piece de resistance. He carved badly —
worse than his father had carved, causing Fan,
who was an expert in such feats, to fidget and
marvel afresh. But Oliver himself was not in
the least put out by his deficiency in table accomplishments.


6 If sunrise is so well worth seeing in Switzerland
continued Oliver, ' it cannot be wholly
unworthy of our notice here, as our actions
seem to imply.'

1 But if you get up in time for the sunrise,
you must be content to go to bed with the sun
said Fan ; ■ when all your neighbours are widest
awake and fullest of life.'

6 There's the rub,' admitted Oliver, shaking
his finely-proportioned head, with its towselled
thatch ; ' but there ought to be some compensation.'


I don't think you men, wise as you are,,
take consequences into consideration sufficiently,"
dogmatism Fan.

My dear child, don't treat us to ironical
flattery, though I grant ours is a belated kind
of wisdom, so that we have to go to you women
to make it practical for us. There was Greatorex,
one of our tutors, who kept me in company in
groaning over dinner in hall not being supper
and the winding up of the day at once, supposing
we were condemned to eat a meal in
common. You will say the remedy was in
Greatorex's hands as well as in mine, but he
never found it till he married a nice young soul
who condescended to work out his theory for
him. He has his dinner now at the time he ought
to have eaten his lunch, but generally forgot or
made a muddle of it. He is saved from becoming
an ignoble martyr to mingled starvation
and dyspepsia quite as much as to work. He
has his evening stroll or his book, and his wife's
music by his own fireside in winter, when other
men are at table, where he can join them for a
little variety when he chooses.'

'Ay, the little variety when he chooses,
which no doubt will be pretty frequently, makes
all the difference in the world,' said Fan, drily.
4 But I thought, Oliver, men could not work
after dinner ? '

1 Can't they ? ' questioned Oliver, with equal
dryness. ' What ! not after an hour's rest such
as a labouring man takes ? Why, they do it
every day they live when they eat a sufficient
meal and call it luncheon. If they eat less it is
at the peril of their health, with the temptation
to gorge in the evening.'

4 But head work, Oliver, head work,' remonstrated
Fan.

Is much like other work,' maintained
Oliver, stoutly. ' It is not head work which
stands in the way. Are you such an innocent
as to suppose that head work is the engrossing
occupation of the mass of the men at Oxford,
or, for that matter, the mass of late diners?
You may as well say prayers and have done

VOL. I. F

with it. Bless you, Fan, I wish you saw some
of the drags coming into the town, or watched
the men in their boats at every hour of the
twelve save the dinner-hour. True, many of
the undergraduates do their reading on the
water, only the subjects of study are apt to
consist of the " Field "or " Bell's Life," or the
fastest, trashiest novel.'

But you read, Oliver,' protested Fan, almost
indignantly, for she had not so many
cherished visions that she could afford to have
one demolished in this cool manner.

Oh yes, I read,' he asserted, as the simplest
matter of course. 'There are always some
fellows who sap, some men whose business and
pleasure are made up of reading under any
circumstances. And I may give it as my experience
that a proportion of the reading men
are of my mind and Greatorex's. How I did
envy Greatorex going home to eat his wholesome
little early dinner — call it a dinner of herbs, if

you like — in peace, tete-astute with his wife, in
his own little dining-room ; returning to Mrs.
Greatorex's cheerful, pretty tea-table, walking
with her, having his book, and his lounge, and
smoke, his song and his chat afterwards ; supping
with his family, perhaps bidding a solitary
beggar like me, who did not go in much for
riotous " wines," share his supper, like a
Christian and a gentleman.'

'But "the feast of reason and the flow of
soul," the very spirit of the feast, there would
not be room for that, Oliver ? ' It was characteristic
of Fan that she never contracted her
brother's name.

6 " Oceans of room," according to Trades
the immortal. Where there is a will there is a
w T ay, Fannikin. Besides, you are referring to a
rare sort of spice, not often to be found at any
dinner, " late or ear," as Sandy Carmichael
would say. Now you are the lady of the
house, will your ladyship let me carry ther

2

claret, and the strawberries, and biscuits over
to the mill gallery ? It is the hour, as a hundred
poets have sung in a thousand styles of verse,
as well as the season for enjoying the cream of
out-of-door delights, including beetles and bats
but I'll smoke the last away to a respectful
distance if you object to them. Don't let us
lose more of the first evening, and Fan, what
an evening ! The sun is not to say shining onus,
he is setting for us, like an affable, royal old
fellow, at the height of his June splendour.
Come along, Fan.'

She would much rather have gone to the
drawing-room, but, to do her justice, she had
always humoured Oliver in trifles. She went
with him without apparent reluctance, only
trying in vain to make him leave the transference
of the wine and fruit to the housemaid,
whom Fan had drilled into a deft and dexterous
table-maid.

4 No, no! ' Oliver would have his way ; ' you

go before, and I follow after. Imagine yourself
a lady of the last century, Fan, with a
black boy grinning, and covetously eyeing the
best strawberries in the dish, at your heels.

Then she had to wait a little impatiently
till he exchanged a jesting compliment with
Sally Pope, who had smoothed her ruffled
plumes, put on her afternoon gown, and was
ready to waylay and have a word with the
young master on his return, as he passed across
the court. Had she not done so, unquestionably
Oliver would have repaired to Sally's
region of the house before the end of the

evening.

'Welcome home, Master Oliver, the sight
of you is good for an old woman's eyes,' Sally
hailed him.

'Of course, Sally, and ain't I growing a
handsomer fellow every day ? As for you, why
you look a dozen years younger than you did
last summer. You'll be having the banns put

up, and coming upon me for a wedding-present
before I have time to think what it shall be

Come, now, Master Oliver, none of your
young man's chaff — and me old enough to be
your granny,' remonstrated Sally, with great
relish of the stale joke.

Fan was considerate of Sally's claims where
they did not interfere with the girl's own plans.
She was substantially kind to the old woman,
and Sally, like everybody else who came in
contact with Fan, had a just respect and regard
for her young mistress. Notwithstanding this
laudable sentiment, Sally looked upon life in
the light that it was alike her duty and privilege
to bear her testimony against the crying sin
and folly of new-fangled, upstart ways, and to
resist them to the utmost of her power. The
opposition was fruitless ; Miss Fan got the
better of the old housekeeper, and Sally was
Lot without a secret, half-grudging admiration
of the girl's capacity for ruling.

But the old servant entertained a totally different
kind of pride in Master Oliver — of fondness
half-protecting, half-reliant for him. She
detained him at this moment entirely with his
own will, though to the chagrin of his sister.

Fan could not understand Oliver's accessibility
to servants, and his ease with them. She
was tempted to think he did not know and
keep his own place where they were concerned.
On the other hand, this conclusion did not
coincide with some of her independent observations.
Fan had a candour and liberality of observation,
in spite of her essential narrowness
and concentration of mind, which forced her
often to remark effects that puzzled her in her
rooted convictions. Fan had learnt from local
gossip that there was something of the same
bearing as that of Oliver towards his servants
in Mr. Ayott of Copley Grange to his confidential
and superannuated gamekeepers and nurses.
She could not be altogether sure that the simplicity

and geniality were not among those
secrets of good breeding which were somehow
beyond her acquisition. Certainly no servant
abused Oliver's frankness and bonhomie.

The brother and sister stood in the twilight
darkness of the oldest room in the mill, empty
at this hour. Oliver would have paused again
to make comments on what machinery w r as
dimly revealed, and what store of grain could
be faintly discerned. But Fan, who had never
from her childhood cared for such details,
nipped his intention in the bud and dragged
him on. ' You said you wanted to be in the
open air, dear ; don't stay in this musty fusty
place, where I always dread rats Then they
went out into the gallery.

Oliver pulled out a pile of new sacks to
serve as a seat for Fan, and converted a full
sack into a pedestal to support the tray he had
carried. For himself he was content to loll
on the old carved railing, munching up his

o

shoulders, sinking his head in his breast,
thrusting out his bearded chin, squaring his
moustached mouth, and blinking with his
brown eyes, contriving altogether to look as
like a dwarf or humpback, with the grotesquely
ugly face which would have served
for a burgoyne, as a stalwart, comely Englishman
could well look.

At the couple's feet flowed the Brook, over
which the long pendent boughs of the great
willow drooped and swayed and dipped their
leaves — the blue-green of which was whitened,
yellowed, and stained with olive in the water.
Before the two stretched the undulating bosky
park of Copley Grange, with the rich foliage of
its fine trees still in the gay vivid green of June,
before it has grown dull, heavy, and monotonous
under the heat of July, with the red
and white clusters of the thorns competing with
the red and white spikes of the chestnuts. The
sun was sinking like a ball of fire in the gold

and crimson west, where all the magnificence
of the sky was still gathered, leaving what had
been the dim soft blue of a midsummer day,
for a moment, by contrast, cold in its purity in
the east.

No nightingale yet lifted up his voice and
poured forth his fervent appeal, but a whole
chorus of thrushes and blackbirds spoke and
answered in their hearts' content. Occasionally
the continuous gurgle of the water was broken
and accentuated by the leap of a trout or the
splash of a water-rat.

Oliver looked and listened in silence for
some time, turning his face to the sunset light.
Then he suddenly, and as it were, involuntarily,
took off his cap, and the radiance about his
head brought out threads of chestnut and gold
in his brown hair.

He drew a long breath — a kind of sighing
keigho ! as with a depth of enjoyment that by
reason of its very depth had a strain of sadness

in it, because of the shallowness and transitoriness
of all human pleasure, and then announced,
confidentially, that people ought not to boast,
but he believed Friarton Mill in its own
peculiar line beat England, beat Europe hollow
for beauty.

1 Yes, it is beautiful here,' said Fan, quietly,
with her eyes turning naturally to the pillars
and arcades of that unfortunate Italian front
to Copley Grange, seen at the end of the vista
directly opposite the mill, f I know judges
object to the house, and Mr. Ayott cannot bear
it. If he had money enough he would pull it
down and begin rebuilding tomorrow. They
know best, no doubt, and I am prepared to be
told it is bad taste in me, but the house always
strikes me as stately and imposing.'

'I was not thinking of the house,' said
Oliver ; ' but I don't see why it should not be
allowed a sort of English classicism, though of
course its Italian classicism is humbug here.

It is not without associations, — calls up George
Lord Lyttelton and Johnson's " Lives of the
Poets." '

Not to me,' said honest Fan ; ' but I
wonder,' she persisted, sticking to her idea,
and desiring, without changing the conversation
abruptly, and putting a point-blank
question with brutal plainness, to lead the talk
to the great point with which she began to
think Oliver was dallying, seeking to keep it
in the background, ' I wonder you are so little
critical of Copley Grange and so much in love
with Friarton Mill after you have been at
Oxford.'

Oxford was Fan's Some or Jerusalem. She
had visited Oxford more than once in Commemoration
Week, and though that was hardly
the proper season at which to estimate academical
glories, it had been enough for her
to see her brother at home among distinguished
men and refined women. Fan secretly hoped

that Oliver's destination, with her own in his
company, would be Oxford. In spite of what
he had told her, his university town still stood
to her in the light of the capital of the great
English empire of letters — not a Bohemian
empire, but such a dignified, decorous, learned
empire as Fan's soul loved, to which Oliver had
a birthright and title, to which his claim would
be Fan's passport. Nowhere else, she fancied,
could they without pretence get into such good
society, escaping finally from the penalties of
the most unvarnished trading antecedents.

Everything in its own place,' said Oliver,
lightly. ' I am fond of my " 'Varsity," too — of
every stone of my college. I think Cambridge
is the only place worthy of being named in the
same breath with Oxford. I do not give a rap
for the pretensions of Salamanca, or Padua, or
Paris, or Heidelberg, or Zurich, or Edinburgh,
matched with those of Oxford and Cambridge.
I am as besotted proud of my " 'Varsity " as

an Oxonian and a John Bull can be. But
after all, my connection with it, though I shall
never forget it, was a passing accident compared
to my life-long connection with this
place.'

Fan's hopes fell a little. Oliver's words,
however appreciative of his ' 'Varsity,' did not
indicate an intention of returning to it and
settling in it. ' I am afraid it will cost you a
pang to leave Friarton Mill,' suggested Fan,
still feeling her way to her object, as the sincerest
woman will sometimes.

8 But I am not going to leave it,' said
Oliver, with quiet assurance, staring down into
the water, as if in contradiction of the words
which the poet had put into its mouth — .

Men may come and men may go,
But I go on for ever.'

1 At least, not so long as I can help it, I hope
Oliver corrected himself quickly ; ' not till I

have to make that exodus which lies before
every mother's sou of us

'My dear boy, what are you thinking of? '
Fan was driven to ask, in discomfited surprise
and bewilderment. ' Father was not able to
make you independent of a profession. You
may, indeed, become one of the masters of the
Grammar School in the town here. But oh !
Oliver, I am sure it would be a great mistake.
The Fremantles and the Wrights,' naming the
families of two of Oliver's old patrons among
the masters, 'have been kind, but even they,
while they are ready to acknowledge your
honours, don't forget that you are the son of a
tradesman.'

'They are heartily welcome to remember it,'
said Oliver, with perhaps more heat than there
was occasion for. ' What ! deny our father,
Fan, who never did a thing to be ashamed of?
which is what few men's sons in any rank can
say. It is my turn to wonder. My origin is

the last thing I should wish my associates to
forget if I were to become a master in Friar-ton,
which I have not the slightest intention of
being.'

4 You know that is not what I meant,' protested
Fan, growing pale with reproach and
excitement ; 1 1 loved and honoured father withall
my heart, Oliver, you know I did. And it
js no dishonour to his memory to say that
while I am proud to think he had qualities far
above those of an ordinary tradesman, I am
sorry he had to go into trade, and to continue
in it all his life.'

8 1 don't know what you call an ordinary
tradesman,* said Oliver ; ' but though I am perfectly
aware that you were the best of daughters,
Fan, — I would not for a moment think of
questioning it, — I must in common truth blame
you for inconsistency. My father, who was as
you say all his life in trade, had not the opinion
of it which you appear to hold ; and I must say to

look upon trade as degrading, is rather an odd
way, though you don't intend it, of honouring
the man who was pleased to be the miller and
baker of Friarton.'

Father was an old man who belonged to
another generation than ours,' Fan defended
herself.

I have no doubt there were as many fools
in the past generation as in the present,'
growled Oliver, not very politely, but his spirit
was beginning to kindle into a flame.

4 He got on in the world,' continued Fan,
paying no attention to the growl. ' Our starting-point,
thanks to him, is not what his was. He
was willing that you should go to Oxford and
become a scholar and gentleman.

Yes, God bless him ! ' said Oliver, shortly.

After all I cannot think what we are arguing
about ; ' Fan took herself back with a faint
smile. ' Over what you imagine is my undervaluation
of trade — but that is past so far as we

VOL. I. G

are concerned. And I promise to respect any
profession you may choose, Oliver.'

I am not going in for any profession,' said
Oliver, still a little moodily. He was a man by
nature eager for the sympathy of those he cared
for, though he was not dependent upon it, and he
knew he would get no sympathy from Fan in
what he was about to do, therefore he had
instinctively put off to the last moment telling
her his intention.

Are you going abroad then ? ' inquired
Fan, with her heart sinking fathoms deeper than
at its first disappointment.

Was Oliver, her only brother, all that she
had in the light of mere kindred, deliberately
purposing to cut himself off from her ? He professed
to put small weight on his advantages ;
but was he meaning to let them — as in the case
of so many men who rose in the world — be the
means of creating a sniff between him and the
single person who represented his relations and

his early life? Which of the two was the
inconsistent person ?

Oliver penetrated so far into Fan's suspicions
— they were altogether unjust, but they
were too cruel towards herself for him to resent
the reflection they cast on him.

6 My dear Fan, didn't you hear me say I
was going to live and die at Friarton Mill ? '
he contented himself with putting it strongly.

1 But what are you to do here ? ' demanded
Fan, in a voice half mystified, half sharp. She
felt a little relieved ; but such a terrible
suspicion was rising in the background of her
thoughts that it threatened not merely to cloud
her returning serenity, but to overwhelm it
more entirely even than the apprehension of her
brother's forsaking her had done. Oliver at
his best had always been somewhat incomprehensible
to Fan, unmoved by the things which
keenly affected her, powerfully worked upon
by influences which did not touch her. They

G 2

had always been an affectionate brother and
sister, but in some respects they had never
been of one mind and soul from babyhood
upwards ; she felt at this moment of doubt and
alarm that she could not venture to predict
what Oliver might not do or leave undone at
any crisis of his history.

Of course be a miller and baker, like all the
heads of the family I ever heard of,' said Oliver,
trying hard to look and speak as if he were not
aware that he was inflicting a shock on his
sister. But the fact was he was agitated in
giving his decision, and he showed the amount
of his agitation, by relinquishing the bodily
contortions in which he was prone to indulge.
He stood up tall and straight facing Fan, merely
thrusting his hands into the depths of his
pockets, as he proceeded to unfold his intentions.
' I shall bolt the cleanest flour, and
bake the purest bread, and have my finger in
the capital and labour pic — there is an appropriate

figure for you ; and as bread is the staff
of life, and the capital and labour question one
of the most vexed questions of the day, I
should think the duties and interests involved
will last my time.'

CHAPTER IV.

A HOT ARGUMENT.

1 You will never do it,' gasped Fan, rising to her
feet also.

6 Yes, I will,' said Oliver, now perching
himself precariously on the ancient carved
railing. c I mean what I say and I will do what
I mean.'

'What! waste all your talents and education
? '

1 I should not call them wasted ; "the better
man the better deed." If I have any talent out
of the common — '

You know you have ; what is the good of
mock humility ? ' poor Fan assailed him.

Well, granted I am not a blockhead, even
granted I were a genius, which would be a
gross delusion —stop, I'll light my pipe, as
we've got the length of talking the matter
calmly over.'

He had recovered his composure and
cheerfulness the moment he had broken the
truth to his sister, but that did not make the
truth less exasperating to Fan.

Hans Sachs,' Oliver recommenced with easy
discursiveness, ' remained at once a minnesinger
and a cobbler, and I do not know that lie
either sang or cobbled the worse for it. You
will go and listen with satisfaction to an opera
of Wagner's, but not take the moral of the
text into account, you most illogical of Fans.
Hans Sachs lived in the blooming time of
Nuremberg, in the middle ages to be sure.
You may think the world has grown too old
for simplicity and a higher ambition than
rising above the class one was born in.'

'What is a higher ambition ? ' interrupted
Fan, abruptly and incredulously.

To raise one's class and rise with it — much
the truer and surer, if it be the slower process,'
answered Oliver, without hesitation or circumlocution,
as announcing a thought out and
incontrovertible proposition. 'But if you think
Hans Sachs forms too remote a precedent, there
is Jasmin, the French barber and poet, quite in
our day. And I have heard of a very worthy
fellow who is also more than a poetaster, and
has yet worked out his " shifts ' like a man,
going down day by day with his pick and his
lamp into the blackness of darkness of a Scotch
coal mine. I tell you, child, it is the notion
that ability and education will not grace any
honest calling and station which is the essence
of snobbishness and vulgarity. It has tainted
every class in this country. It plays the very
devil with many a man who might otherwise
have been respected and respectable, a useful

citizen and worthy member of society. It
causes a certain order of talents and refined
tastes to prove a curse instead of a blessing to
a working man, even to a clerk, or a shop-lad.
I look upon it,' said Oliver with restrained
passion, 'as being at the bottom of much
of the unprincipled extravagance, fraudulent
speculation, and criminality and misery which
are eating out — not to say the prosperity — the
integrity of the nation.'

Then you would introduce Hindoo castes
or Russian serfdom into England ? ' Fan was a
little confused and incoherent in her examples,
which was not like her, for she was. clear-headed
as far so she saw, but she was driven
nearly beside herself. ' You would forbid any
man to exercise the gifts which God has given
him, and rise to their level in the social
scale.'

4 1 would do nothing of the kind. I would
have every man be a law to himself, and act

up to his own standard — doing his best to raise
that standard. I don't quarrel with any
fellow for abandoning tailoring — say, and
adopting painting — always provided he has a
clear justification for the change by finding it
absolutely necessary for the expression of the
gift that is in him. I only say that it is done a
thousand times every day, when it is neither
justifiable nor necessary. It is high time somebody
made a stand against the disloyalty and

folly

'And you are the somebody who knows

better than every one else ! ' said Fan, sarcastically.


There had always been great freedom of
opinion and speech between the brother and
sister in the middle of their warm mutual
regard. Oliver was not the man to behave
like a Turk to his womankind. Fan had not
been accustomed to be treated as an inane
dove, neither was she the woman to consent

readily to the treatment, whether from father,
brother, husband or son.

1 Oh, Oliver, how can you be so conceited and
self-willed?' she protested, indignantly. 'I
thought you were too clever — really, not to be
modest; I begin to think learning has made
you mad ! '

Oliver shrugged his shoulders.
c An unlucky, unintentional quotation, my
dear, which, after all, I dare not presume to
take to myself. But I am not the only man
who holds views which, thank God, are gaining
ground in our day. Look here, Fan, I hope
this is not altogether a case of want of ambition,
sloth, a taste for low life — if you care
to apply that term to the trading class to which
our father belonged. It is a point of conscience
which is beginning to be mooted among
men, whether or not they may be able to act
upon it as they ought. You think a great deal
of Oxford. If you were down there, you

would find some reading men, far before me in
scholarship, regretting that they had not learned
a trade and maintaining the dignity of labour in
its most primitive form.'

'Young men will take up any crochet for
the sake of contradiction,' said Fan, with a girl's
narrow dogmatism and ready scorn.

Still, if it is any comfort to you,' continued
Oliver, with a laugh not so genial as his laugh
was wont to be, ' there are far more cads and
fools in Oxford and the world than such would-be
reformers — idiotic as you may reckon them
in their own line. There are fellows who, like
Tito, would not only cut as neatly as possible
their greatest benefactors if they happened to
be grocers and linen-drapers, but would go
far bcyoud Tito in boasting of the creditable
performance. There are numbers of young
Englishmen prepared to turn their backs, on
the first opportunity, on the iron or the cotton
by which their fathers have played their parts,

according to their lights, like men, with success
(while the iron and the cotton trades were
never in greater need of fresh light and guidance),
all in order that young England in this direction
may vegetate, run to seed, starve or steal,
as officers whom the piping times of peace
suit best, briefless barristers, or incompetent
clergymen.'

But you would not be a briefless barrister
or an incompetent clergyman,' said Fan.

Oliver shook his head. ' I cannot speak
in public, I can only hold forth to my own
cronies.'

This was true ; Oliver was not calculated to
shine as an orator ; his highly wrought nervous
awkwardness was entirely against him ; a certain
turgidness in the rush of his thoughts proved
even a more serious obstacle.

Occasionally, when lie was ' dead in earnest,'
as he said, he could surmount both defects,
lie would then speak tersely and clearly while

he towered the head and shoulders above his
brethren, and flung out an arm with something
like might and majesty. But, as a rule,
a singular shyness and self-consciousness came
over the young man in any general assemblage,
from a debating club upwards, and left him a
fettered and dumb giant.

I should make a bad advocate and a worse
judge,' said Oliver ; ' I have not the making of a
brood lawyer in me — none of the sifting impartiality,
critical acumen, and hard-headed common
sense which ought to dispense justice.
My own ideas, instead of authorities and precedents,
would possess me. You have only to
put on a wig and gown in order to be a
sounder, safer judge yourself, though I can't
natter you, little woman, by pretending you
would prove another Portia.'

'But a clergyman is different,' said Fan,

faintly.

He shook the whole man, not his head

alone, in his impatience. ' Do you suppose I
should think myself warranted in becoming a
clergyman if I had not the highest motive and the
clearest bent ? ' he demanded, with more indignant
sharpness than he had yet spoken. 'I
would rather break stones on the road. I
might preserve my self-respect as an honest man
while I hammered at flints ; I should certainly
despise myself as a profane cheat and liar if I
offered spiritual stones for bread — all because
the Church was a gentleman's calling, and by
great good fortune, policy, energy, and carefully
cultivated interest I might die a right
reverend bishop. I wonder though if a miller
and baker's son ever did die a bishop — out of
the colonies,' speculated Oliver with returning
good humour.

Oliver,' said Fan, solemnly, ' I cannot think
you are in earnest. I seem not able to believe
my ears. After father resigned your services,
after you have kept all your terms, taken more

than one scholarship and gained this first class,
which everybody who knows anything about it
said you could do, and added that it would bea
great honour to you and the making of you in
any profession, to throw it all up in the end, to
act as if you had been keeping another man out
of his place, and wasting money the whole time !
For you would have made as good — I should
say a far better miller,' (Fan could not bring
herself to say the word baker,) t if you had never
gone to Oxford, if you had left the Grammar
School when you were fourteen or fifteen at
the latest, and served your apprenticeship like
other lads who meant to be tradesmen, and
then father might have had your help in his
old age.'

1 There is something in that,' answered
Oliver in a low tone, with the pain which the
reminder roused in him perceptible in his voice.
1 I shall never cease to regret that I did not
see things as I do now from the first. I would

give a great deal even to have made up my
mind sooner — in time to tell father. But
nothing Avill convince me that he would have
opposed my decision.'

He might have said that you were spoilt
either for a miller or for anything else,'
retorted Fan.

'If he had done so, it would have been the
result of an old-fashioned prejudice ; and if I
had been able to show him that he was in the
wrong, he would have been the first to admit
it gladly,' said Oliver, keeping his temper.
1 Why, on earth, should a man not make as good
a miller — or coal-heaver for that matter —
because he knows a little Latin and Greek, and
can read Horace and Virgil, Sophocles and
Plato, in the original, if he chose, when his
work is done ? '

Fan was getting desperate. No one save
herself could tell how grievous had been the
downfal of all the castles in the air which she

VOL. I. H

had been building since her earliest girlhood,
while she sat or stood, during the last half-hour,
in the familiar mill gallery, looking down,
as she had looked many a time before, on the
lovely home landscape, in the midsummer twilight,
and only betraying her emotion by her
changing colour and tightly clasped hands. It
was all so utterly wrong-headed and delirious
in Oliver ; what one might have expected in a
French Communist, but what one could never
have imagined would find a fitting soil at
Oxford.

Fan had prepared herself for so different a
conclusion. She would have done anything;,
taken any pains and faced any ordeal for Oliver
the Oliver of her dreams. Had he been
called to fill a throne, she would have toiled to
qualify herself to stand on its lowest step. She
was one of those women who have high enterprise
in their composition. But if Oliver's
regalia were to consist, after all, of the mill-wheel

and the baker's oven, which had been
thorns in Fan's flesh when they were connected
with her father and grandfather, she had not
the enterprise to follow her brother in that
adventure.

Oh ! Oliver, if yon would only think it allover
again ! ' besought Fan, with tears, which
she had too much pride and endurance to
shed, dimming her bright dark eyes, as the
evening star came out above the Copley Grange
woods, and glimmered over the two. ' You
have been away from home, for the most part,
for years and years, ever since you were little
more than a boy. You have forgotten what
the conditions of a tradesman's life really are,
how hopelessly commonplace and vulgar —
worse in some respects than the life of a day
labourer. There may be some dignity in hard
toil and grinding poverty bravely borne — though
I should not like to be the one to bear them,'
said Fan, in parenthesis ; yet even as she spoken

2

Oliver recognised that this worldly-minded little
sister of his was a woman who, in the circumstances
she referred to, would have been found
capable of working herself to death and making
no sign, dying with the elements of true
tragedy and pathos in the self-respecting silence
and resignation of her humble end. ' But I
cannot see how there can be dignity in ordinary
buying and selling, in low chaffering and hunters
and often cheating. '

fc You are talking utter nonsense, Fan,' said
Oliver, half amused, half angry. ' There is
nothing dishonouring in trade, any more than
in a handicraft ; you might have known that.
There is dignity in any honest work which a
man does in the sweat of his brow. It is idleness,
however refined, which is clear degradation
and a blot on the social economy. We
have surely got a long way ahead of the early
rations that committed every useful art to
their slaves. When we go out now, with the

laudable aim of civilising savages, don't we first
qualify ourselves — those of us who have spent
our youth in the colleges — by graduating in
carpenters' and masons' work, cooking and
tailoring?'

That may be the way among savages,' said
Fan, with a nice distinction, ' but at home Ave
have not, in practice at least, gone so far
beyond the old theory.'

6 My dear Fan, have you never heard that
we are a nation of shopkeepers? How have
you managed to shut your ears ! In what corner
have you been hiding? '

Don't laugh,' said Fan, passionately ; ' I am
not able to bear it. And you must know that
when English people of the upper classes
own to be shopkeepers, it is on a grand scale
like the merchant princes of Venice.'

1 Or Tyre and Sidon,' suggested Oliver
and we know what they came to ; but don't
starve your simile.'

1 Trade, or anything on a grand scale,'
floundered Fan, 4 where the interests involved
extend far and wide and where the petty details
hardly reach the head trader, is very different
from a small business, with its meanness and
sordidness.'

Call nothing common and unclean which
human beings require,' muttered Oliver ; and
then he could not resist resuming his banter.

I have you now, Fan ; you go in for the
gulf between wholesale and retail, in the comparative
offences of selling a bar of iron and a
tin-tack. What a humbug you are! '

She disdained to defend herself from an
accusation which was particularly untrue and
objectionable to her.

4 1 am sensible that there is a tremendous
amount of humbug in society in the present
day. Doubtless it has existed in every generation,
but in ours, I think, the crop is an unusually
fine one,' commented Oliver, with provoking

coolness. He was swinging one leg with a

laziness that had an irritation in the very slowness
of the movement — monotonous as that of a
pendulum. Then he stopped the pendulum,
but caused it to quiver quickly, in a still
more trying manner, until Fan, under the
torture, w r as fain to cry out as if she had been
a vixen.

1 If you don't keep }-our leg still, this
moment, Oliver, I — I believe I shall leap down
into the water. You ought to have been
whipped when you were a child till you learned
to stand and sit still.'

8 But you see I wasn't ; and I believe it
would have been next to an impossibility to
teach me,' said Oliver, stopping on the instant,
contritely. He would not willingly have hurt
a fly if he could have avoided it, though he
was compelled to wound Fan to the quick.
Happily for him, he could not sound the depths
of her prejudices, or altogether realise the pain

he-was inflicting. But he struggled not to
chaff her any more, since she was so thin-skinned
and so much vexed by his determination.
He reverted to general illustrations of
humbugs. ' I will say nothing of the curious
favour which is shown to brewers in these
days ; but though I don't go in for total abstinence,
and can sing out for a glass of beer with
an easy conscience, it seems to me, in the name
of morality, the baker ought to be esteemed
the better tradesman of the two. Let me refer
further to the odd fact that a squireen, or duke,
or a prince, with an agricultural hobby may
farm his own land, grow corn, and fatten
beeves, without coming under the ban of a
spurious gentility — odious word, Fan ! But
society holds that when the same corn comes
to be ground into flour and kneaded into bread,
and the same cattle to be slaughtered and cut
into beef — very essential processes for the welfare
of the million, the men who take the processes

in hand and pledge themselves to bring
them to a fair issue, are justly to lose all social
status, and sink in the scale to depths of vulgarity
lower than the brutality of the most
stupid, ignorant, ragged, dirty lout ! (Of course
you understand I am pointing my moral by an
extreme instance of the working man.) Now, I
maintain that if we had — in addition to the great
farming landowner, and to that extraordinary
exception in position to other tradesmen, the
great brewer — the great baker, butcher '

Fishmonger and green grocer," chimed in
Fan, mockingly.

Why not ? ' Oliver accepted the addition
undauntedly. ' Men who should endow the
world with excellent bread, wholesome meat,
fresh fish — at reasonable prices, do you see?
for the credit of their trades and the good of
humanity — not merely that the baker and his
fellow-tradesmen might make haste to grow
rich and cut the shop, rear their sons for professions,

and marry their daughters to professional
men as the first step to a higher social
grade — they would deserve to be ranked as
public benefactors. I should not wonder,'
declared Oliver, breaking out into fun again,
though I had a statue erected to me one day
for leading the van in the beneficent movement.
Most likely I shan't be there to see. It won't
be, I dare say, till I'm " Old Constable " to a
third or fourth generation. But if the world
is only a little quicker in its appreciation and
gratitude than it is wont to be, as you are my
junior by a few years, it is just on the cards, if
you live to be ninety-nine, Fannikin, you may
behold the tribute. Won't it be glorious !
Won't you be proud of me then ? '

4 Oh don't,' groaned Fan. And Oliver repented
of an inveterate propensity to relieve
with a kind of licht humour his gravest moods.
Then Fan rallied sufficiently to say, ' If the
statue be true to life, it will be like that of

Hora thus Codes, " halting on one knee," or doing
something equally uncouth and grotesque.'

Never mind that,' said Oliver, who had
little personal vanity, and who was glad, in the
innocence of his heart, to suppose Fan was not
so much hurt that she could not take him off in
her turn. But Fan was simply galled into irony.
She was sharpening her weapons in the little
silence which succeeded for a new assault on
her brother's position.

4 Any ordinary man may be such a tradesman
as you describe.'

'The ordinary man is long of coming, then
he interrupted her briskly.

She paid no heed to the interruption. 'An
extraordinary man only rises to his natural level
when he forsakes some common occupation for
another more in keeping with his powers. You
may as well pretend that God made all men
equal in every respect, and it is a sin and
wrong that there should be different classes in

society, as hold that your talents and education
can be fitly applied to a trade.'

No. I say every new social movement
demands extraordinary men to be its pioneer
I confess I am rather ashamed to give myself
out as the extraordinary man in this case, but I
may serve till a better appear.'

It is not trade as it ought to be, it is trade
as it is, which you are bound to take into account
before you throw away all your hard-won advantages.
High-flown notions may be all very
well in theory, but they are not for real life
said Fan, hardly sensible that she was airing a
terribly unchristian doctrine, only aware that
Oliver was shaking himself in vehement protest.
The tricks of trade are proverbial.'

'Disgracefully proverbial,' assented Oliver,
briefly. ' But if I thought they were universal
I should be lit to hang myself. Do you infer
that our father was not an honest man ? '

8 1 have never said a word against father's
honesty protested Fan, hotly. ' I believe he
was as honest as man could be. But he went
into trade for a livelihood, not to regenerate
society, as you are bold enough to propose.
You will ruin yourself in the first place, I
know.'

Then I don't know it, and what is more, I
don't mean to do it. That is the common cant ;
no thinker outside the details of his trade can
steer clear of the bankruptcy court. And we
have the disastrous fate of Burns and of other
thinkers — poets, politicians and what not, in
their respective businesses — lugged in as a
timely warning. I tell you no man's thought
and culture, unless they were attended by some
radical mental defect or fatal self-indulgence,
ever disqualified him from managing his worldly
affairs. The reverse has been proved over andover
again ; but it does not suit the commonplace

world, and you as its present exponent, to
believe it. However, I am no poet or astronomer
or geologist. Unlike the Laird of Cock pen,
my head is not taken up with the affairs of the
State. Even my scholarship is of modest dimensions.
Moreover, I shall make it my careful
endeavour not to ruin myself, were it only to
give the he to my self-complacent friends who
go in for business on what they call business
principles, forsooth ! — every man for himself and
the most money soonest made — as if there were
not sounder as well as higher laws of political
economy than some of the political economists
themselves ever touched. Hit if I do ruin
myself in an attempt to regenerate society, as
you, Fan, term — rather grandiloquently — my
simple resolution to stick to the old shop and
do the best I can with it, can I ruin myself ina
worthier cause ? '

Then, in contradiction to his disclaimer of

anything remarkable in his purpose, he began to
repeat with repressed enthusiasm : —

1 Can a man die better
Than facing fearful odds ? '

She would not let him finish the verse. She
broke in with the old fruitless adjuration, ' Oh,
Oliver, think again '

CHAPTER V.

A LAST APPEAL.

6 Think twice over what you are going to do,
urged Fan, for the last time. ' I tell you that
you look back on the past softened by distance,
and I suppose surrounded by a sort of halo of
youthful associations and kindly recollections.
I have never been removed from Friarton Mill
for such a length of time as to forget all its ills
and only remember its advantages. How will
you like to hang on in the mill and, worse, in
the bakehouse and shop — to be bearded by
your own men, who will be the first to recognise
that you have not been bred to their trade and
to make good use of your ignorance — to be

worsted by trades' unions — for I conclude bakers
will go out " on strike," if they have not yet done
so — like other work people ? How will you
stand being patronised by the farmers and
corn-dealers, and having to submit to the whims
and insolence of your customers ? '

Upon my word, I do not see why I should
stand either, if I do my duty. And I would
rather hang on in a mill or a bake-shop than in
city chambers draped round with cobwebs and
filled with empty tin boxes bearing lying titles,
or in a vestry hall where I had no business to
be, or in a barrack yard where I should never
learn the goose step, or in stables or kennels

1 It is my duty to speak,' said Fan, solemnly
a fine talent for lecturing ; ' since you
have been so long away, you have forgotten
or you do not rightly understand a great deal
that will happen if you persist in your folly.
All the better class of people in Friarton —
the Fremantles and Wrights and that set, who

VOL. I. 1

took us up because they expected you to become
one of themselves and to do them credit — will
drop us again ; and who can blame them ? when
they discover that you have no ambition — that
you have a taste for low company — so it will seem
to them. We shall of course fall back among the
Polleys and the Dadds and the rest of the
tradespeople like ourselves,' said Fan, bitterly.
We choose their ranks deliberately as ours, and
how can we expect that the members of another
rank will continue to stoop to us, or consent, for
our sake, to anything so disagreeable as being
habitually mixed up with people far beneath
them in birth and breeding ? Are you notable
to recall how dreadful a tea at the Dadds,
or a supper at the Polleys, used to be ? How,
when you were a boy and knew little else, you
hated it and shirked it, when father would, let
you ? '

Oliver winced a little, but recovered himself
gallantly. 'I was an intolerable young fool —

giving myself airs, as old Dadd once told me to
my face. He is a shrewd intelligent old fellow
in his linen drapery line. One may easily
listen to the experience of a far inferior man.'

Have you grown fonder of his coarse familiar
jokes and the all-pervading smell of his gin
and water ? ' asked Fan, with scornful incredulity.
' If so, perhaps you can also better appreciate
young Dadd's jewellery and Mrs. Dadd's
mock " humbleness," like Uriah Keep's, to hide
her slyness and spitefully. And you may
have come to value, at their proper worth, the
Polley girls' giggles and shams, and their mother's
loud self-assertion and sheer impertinence. No
doubt you admire their combined illiterateness
and absorption in the pettiest gossip, their poor
aping of the faults, or else their rude defiance of
the merits, of their social superiors. Don't you
know that the Dadd and Policy idea of a life
w r orth leading, is to make money in order to
eat, drink, and lie in bed, to keep sporting dogs,

l 2

attend low races and offer and accept bets, to
have parties, " beaux," and flirtations to the
girls' hearts' content ? Are greediness, laziness,
bumptiousness and folly — gaudy, tawdry pretence,
and coarse gorgeousness, such admirable
qualities in men and women and their surroundings
? I declare the Dadds and Polleys are the
most irreverent undutiful people I know. Oh !
Oliver, it is too horrible that the end of your
cleverness and college training should be to
condemn yourself, and me with you, to close
contact and hopeless association with such people
— when we have no relief to expect save from
our own deterioration. We shall deteriorate
and grow like our neighbours speedily, I daresay,
and then we may not feel that we were
ever fit for something better. But how we —
one of us, at least — must sufFer in the process of
deterioration before it is complete ! '

Fan was perfectly sincere, however absurd,
in her horror and distress. She had a natural

abhorrence of the vulgar, gross self-indulgence
which she had described, and an intense
yearning for its opposite, the true refinement of
simplicity, self-restraint, and self-devotion, with
its outward expression in the subtle charm of
pure and graceful harmony. There was this
to be said for Fan's ambition, that it was not
composed of coarse materials. It was neither
sensual nor sordid. Fan would have been very
tolerably content to be a poor lady among
ladies and gentlemen. She would have made
the very best of her gentle poverty, because
she fully comprehended the self-respect involved
in self-denial, the essential honour
included in showing regard for the rights and
claims of her neighbours, and in energy,
diligence, and usefulness fitly exercised. Fan
had the making of a real lady — rich or poor —
in her. And if she were not speaking under a
delusion, it was a pity that her vocation should
be spoilt.

But Oliver dealt her a stern rebuke.

4 This is too bad,' he said, indignantly,
taking the pipe from his mouth. ' There is
only one grain of truth in your tirade against
the class in which you were born — its members
are guilty of aping the faults of a higher class.
As you have yourself said so, you cannot be
ignorant that greed, and its opposite — senseless
extravagance, laziness, levity, and worse, are
safe to be found — just masked by a thin veneer
of polish — in still greater abundance among
dukes and duchesses — or say at once kings and
queens, than among tradespeople. And you
have said nothing of the peculiar virtues of
tradespeople. You spoke of Mrs. Policy -
self-assertion. I grant it is offensive — but surely
you have been told what that woman has done
for her family. When her husband proved an
incapable ne'er-uo-wcll, who if left to himself
would have none straight to the docs, and
reduced his children to the workhouse, did not

his " missus " come to the front and stand by
her master like a brick and a Trojan ? She
kept him from both his and her undoing. She
maintained Polley's grocery business by her
industry, and made it flourish by her mother-wit,
till now her husband is no worse thana
tolerably respectable nonentity, and her
children have been reared in independence and
comfort. No blame will rest on her if they are
not able to hold their own in the world. I
have often heard, and so have you, my father
and old Floyd praise that woman for her
works. As for Mrs. Dadd, I don't say that her
meekness is the real thing, but she is not without
true motherliness and kindness of heart. Have
you forgotten how she left her own child
and came out and stayed here to nurse you
through scarlatina because she doubted Sally
Pope's experience and ability to cope with the
disease ? For shame ! Fan, a short memory is
unpardonable here.*

I have not forgotten,' said Fan, pettishly ;
if I had, I should not have kept up the amount
of intercourse with the Dadds I have consented
to keep.'

'No doubt it is a great reward for her
trouble and risk that you should call for her —
behaving civilly in the performance of your
duty, I take it for granted — once in three
months,' said Oliver, still in a fume. ' I am
not of your opinion. But though I have not
the same faith in the light of my countenance,
and the edification implied in the bestowal of
my company for a spare half hour, still I
have my own views on the subject. But upon
my honour, Fan, I hesitate at this moment
under a sense of my unworthiness, and a conception
of these respectable people's positive
virtues, to presume to weigh their comparative
defects and measure them against any supposed
superiority of intellect and training on my
part. Are brains and culture — of which one

hears so much from pedants and puppies — to
be named in the same breath with honest men
and women's fidelity to their sense of right ?
But if the questionable superiority has an existence,
am I not called upon by every dictate
of true public spirit and good feeling to show
that superiority by striving to do what I have
already spoken of — raise the tone of my class,
and lead it to higher aims and purer pleasures?
Is not that a nobler ambition than to content
myself with rising above my class — abandoning
it to grovel in materialism, if not to wallow in
the mire ? Do you know that Kingsley said
teachers and preachers to the rich and the
poor were not wanting, but where was he who
would go on a mission to the lower middle
and small trading; classes, and reclaim them
from their special form of animalism and
licence, " their irreverence and undutifulness,"
as you put it. Do you believe the Bible, Fan,
or do you hold that such injunctions as to

J

preserve old landmarks and not to forget our
own and our fathers friends, are out-of-date
precepts — simply fit for Orientals ? '

'You are clever, Oliver,' said Fan, coldly.
I cannot pretend to vie with you in quotations
misapplied.'

'As the devil is great in texts — no, you
don't mean that,' said Oliver, trying to conjure
back a friendly spirit into the dispute. He had
smoked his pipe and was knocking out its ashes.
There was silence for a time, and then he
pointed out that the moon had risen unobserved
while they were speaking. It was
flooding the landscape with a light which,
though it comes so often, never gives a familiar
impression, but always produces an effect
wholly removed from that of ordinary light,
causing both heaven and earth to be changed
for us, and to come out, in their every aspect,
a more solemn and grander sky, a sadder and

fairer world, than those we see by the beams of
the sun.

Under the rays of the moon, the midsummer
green of the Copley Grange trees
had grown dusky. They were massed together
and cast deep shadows over the turf,
while the waters of the Brook flashed here and
there like silver by contrast. In the sky overhead
the Pleiades were asking who should bind
their sweet influence? Orion the mighty
hunter was abroad. The Pole-star was glittering
with his special effulgence.

How small those lamps up yonder, whose
oil has never failed since the creation, make a
poor beggar and skirmishes of a day feel ! ' said
Oliver, suddenly. ' One would not say, either,
that they disdain the humanity they have given
light to throughout the centuries. I am not sure
whether Friarton Mill is not jollier by moonlight
than by daylight. If all you said were

true, Fan, what a compensation the beauty of
this place might still prove ! I defy you to say
that in one respect, and that of all save the
first importance, the lines have not fallen to us
in pleasant places.'

But she would not be appeased. Nature
was not to her at any time what it was to him ;
at this moment the perfection of the scene
before her, hurt her afresh, like a taunt added
to a blow. ' You will make me hate this
place,' she cried reproachfully ; ' you will make
me wish I had never seen this house which
was father's house, where I have lived the most
of my life.'

He was sorry for her pain, but he was also
disappointed and wounded at her utter want of
sympathy with him. ' You have one resource
left you,' he said, with some hardness, which
had not been there before, stealing into his
tone. ' You can go away and leave me and
the mill. My father made sufficient provision

for } t ou, to enable you to act as you like, and I
will do all in my power '

She interrupted him, turning upon him
with a passionate protest. ' Do you think I
could do it? Do you think I would leave you
alone to bear the penalty, though it may be of
your own incurring ? What do you take me
for ? You do not know me, Oliver.'

4 That may very well be, since I do not
believe your know yourself,' said Oliver, with
a shrug. ' But I am obliged to you, all the
same, for your magnanimity.' He was really
touched by her womanly love and constancy,
though he had been too much provoked to
show it.

c There is one question I am entitled to ask
you,' said Fan, more calmly. ' You admit you
did not always mean to sink into a tradesman.
I know you had very different ideas when you
went first to Oxford. What changed you ? '

He hesitated and did not speak for a

moment. He did not deny her right to put
the question, but lie did not know how to
answer it. In many things which related to
his words and acts, he was by disposition a
frank and open-hearted man, but in proportion
to his general frankness were his particular
reserves. He had sacred secrets which had todo
with convictions, feelings, and principles.
He could no more turn his nature inside out to
his dearest friend where these were concerned
than he could consciously practise self-deception
and social hypocrisy. He was even shy
with himself in dealing with the deep things of
his spirit. Still he owed some explanation to
Fan, who had been the happy confidant of the
early dreams which had passed away like the
morning mist, and who now stood there in
such estrangement from him.

Oh ! all sorts of arguments came in and
did their work,' he said at last, a little vaguely.
\ Some familiarity with learning bred the usual

contempt, I dare say. I was only her valet, and
so she ceased to be a heroine to me. I have
grown a good deal older and wiser — let ns hope
to begin with — and — well there was one affair
which made a considerable impression upon meat
the time that I can speak of to you. There
are plenty of tradesmen's sons who find their
way to Oxford, but there was just one other
baker's son who got there with me. He or his
friends for him made a grand mistake in somehow
procuring his admission, under false
colours possibly, into a notably aristocratic
college. I don't suppose his people had any
very honourable aim in sending him to college
at all, at least he himself was a vain, weak
fellow who thought chiefly of acquiring associates
— whom he called friends, in a rank of
life far above his own. I have no doubt he
intended to cut the baking trade entirely when
he left Oxford, and that he hoped by means of
his fellow-Oxonians to hoist himself into polite

society. For that end lie was willing to make
himself generally obliging and useful, poor
beggar, to his temporary companions. He
would help and back them in their money
transactions, cater for their entertainment, and
bear more than his share of the brunt of their
scrapes.

4 That was to be the great business of his
college life — with the securing of a high connection
for its end — not a very heroic end, eh,
Fan? But, to do him justice, he had no more
natural turn for study in any shape — classics,
history, philosophy, or philology, than nineteen
out of twenty of his chosen patrons had developed
in their more favourable circumstances,
or than had been shown by the whole of his
father's journeymen bakers with their adverse
surroundings. But, there was not any more
harm in him than being the wrong man in the
wrong place, which is not a very uncommon or
heinous transgression, though being that, he was

a mean little flunkey. But the fault was not
altogether his, and he was good-natured and softhearted
; though he was idle, I never heard
he was vicious. They said afterwards that
he was liked in his native town, and had been
a good son and brother.

4 The fact of his fathers disgraceful trade
had been kept in strict concealment, and did
not come out for some time. But when it did,
the enormity of the offence — though one would
say that most people are personally indebted to
bakers who mind their business — together with
the low deceit of the concealment, proved far
too much for any poor popularity Tom Leaves
had attained. The fellows he was amongst
could not get over the " rank impudence " of his
intrusion into their college, yet I should not
wonder though they imagined they admired
Thackeray — " Less of a cad, you know, than
Dickens " — and knew something about George
Osborne and " Figs." They judged Neaves de-vol.

I. K

served to be punished, and they sat upon him
to give him Its deserts, and above all to get rid
of him, as the officers of a crack regiment
sometimes agree to compel a wretched subaltern
who is not of their set, and so is not
fit for their mess, to exchange or sell out. Of
course in both cases the affair is so managed as
not to attract the attention or force the interference
either of a superior officer or a. dean,
and only what are considered legitimate weapons
are used against the common enemy. Mind,
Fan, I do not pretend that Neaves was without
blame ; and I am perfectly aware that the
young fellows who led the attack against him,
in their very contempt, did it more in thoughtlessness
than in malice. A few of them dropped
his acquaintance summarily, as they were perfectly
at liberty to do. But the greater number
settled to make him their butt till he should
endure it no longer. They assailed him with
a perpetual storm of allusions to his origin and

practical jokes on his father's trade. They inquired
gravely his opinion on dinner rolls. They
smuggled loaves into his gown. They showered
as much Hour upon him from the windows
of their rooms when he crossed the qua! as
ever was scattered from a costermonger's carton
a Derby day, or a Woman balcony during
the carnival. No doubt the wit of these gentlemen
was not very high-bred or unique in
its expression ; but what was lacking in brilliance
was made up in energy — the energy of a
pack of boys, of undergraduates — in teasing
and tormenting their victim. Of course, if
Neaves had possessed sense and spirit he would
not have minded a straw, or he would have
returned the assessors scorn for scorn — if he
had not risen to the height of repaying them
good for evil — and possibly brought them to
a more rational frame of mind. But unfortunately
sense and spirit were just the qualities
in which poor Neaves was lamentably deficient.

K 2

lie had already proved himself, as I have told
you, a silly, weak fellow, mortally ashamed of
this father's honest calling ; therefore his assailants
hit him on the tenderest point, and had
him at their mercy. He struggled against the
persecution for some time, tried to behave as if
he did not see it, then blustered a little, then
knocked under. To think such gnat-bites
could drive a fellow with a soul in him beside
himself ! They did ; therefore his body was
found floating in the Isis one fine morning,
down among the boats, not far from a place
where he had once, after his boat had bumped
another boat, given a sort of pic-nic, and
boasted that the greatest c nobs ' of his college
the wild younger son of a duke and an 
young viscount — had been his supporters.
There was some confusion in the
wording of the telegram which broke the
catastrophe to old Neaves. The family clung
to the idea that though an accident had happened,

and their Tom was the sufferer, he
might still be alive. So the mother hurried
to the spot along with the father.

I chanced to see them after they had been
told the worst and were starting for home
again to warn the rest of their children of what
was coming. The old man did not show what

he felt, but the mother 1 tell you, Fan, every

jury in the kingdom would, with justice, have
exonerated the perpetrators of the mischief from
even so much guilt as manslaughter, though
one of them — I need not say he was not a ringleader
— took the misfortune so much to heart
that he had to be removed from Oxford to save

his reason and to this day when that woman's

face comes into my mind, I think as I did then,
I would rather have been the wretched simpleton
in his coffin than those men in the flush of
their youth and strength and whatever goodly
birthright they claimed besides. By Heavens,
Fan,' protested Oliver, in the passion which had

been gathering dining his story, ' what these
fellows did was the farthest removed from the
chivalrous courtesy which was once held to constitute
gentle bearing, it was the grossest example
of caddish behaviour I ever came across.'

Fan was scared by the ghastly ludicrousness
and grievous pathos of the story, and by the
degree to which Oliver was moved in telling it.
She had never seen him in his grief for the loss
of their father betray so much emotion as he
did now, when he grew pale in the moonlight
with the violence of his anger, and clenched his
teeth in the height of his reprobation and
disgust. 4 It was very cruel, very ungenerous
said Fan, with a kind of shivering recoil. She
crept close to her brother and clasped his arm
with her two hands, clinging, to him. c They
never treated you so, dear? ' she asked with a
gasp, as if seeking to reassure herself.

Not they,' he said with an awkward laugh,
half ashamed of his excitement. ' Mv college

was not quite so exclusive, and I trust I was
made of sterner stuff. If the men had chaffed
me with a miff-wheel or a rolling-pin, I should
have replied, Yes, these were my arms, and I
did not see that something might not be said
for them as well as for a pair of wild men of
the woods, a Moor's head, a pirate's ship, or an
assassin's dagger. The gist of the matter is that
if I lost some of my ideals at Oxford I found
others to replace them. Let us be thankful.
Come along, Fan ; the dew has done falling,
indeed, but I am keeping you out far too late
with only that rag of a handkerchief over your
head.'

CHAPTER VI.

LOUISA AND CATHERINE Hilliard.

'Your settling down here as a tradesman,
Oliver, will be a nice story for Mrs. Hilliard
and Catherine,' said Fan Constable, tartly, over
the breakfast-table next morning. For Fan
was by no means permanently converted, however
touched for the moment, by the last
evening's conversation.

Oliver shook himself with some vigour, but
the gesture was so common with him as not
necessarily to imply any special depth of feeling
stirred by the observation ; however, his colour
rose as he spoke in answer.

What will Mrs. Hilliard and Catherine

make of it ? what can it be to them ? At the
same time Mrs. Hilliard puts little weight on
social distinctions ; you must do her the justice
to grant that, Fan,' he said, looking straight
across the table to his sister, and speaking with
a degree of emphasis which implied that, in his
opinion, Fan was not in the habit of judging
righteous judgment where Mrs. Hilliard was
concerned. ' As for Catherine,' he added, after
a moment's pause, c I imagine she is too much
in the clouds, as usual, to take much notice of
what happens on the common earth He said
the words with an attempt at carelessness, butin
reality he spoke with an effort, stiffly.

Oh, it may suit Louisa Hilliard to profess
that she is indifferent to public opinion and independent
of it, that she is a privileged, irresponsible
person, in short. But you are greatly
mistaken if you think you will escape her gibing
tongue and impertinent laughter. And you
will find to your cost that when the matter is

of the least importance she will take care to
comply with the world's standard

4 1 don't wish to stand between any genial
soul and her jest,' said Oliver ; ' and I am sure,
Fan, you need not quarrel with respect for
social standards.'

4 I don't quarrel with it,' said Fan, decidedly.
4 I think that whatever the social standards of
the past may have been, social standards in our
day ought in the main to be deferred to by all
sensible people. What I object to, naturally, is
that you should insist on running counter to
them in order to indulge in a wild dream.'

I plead guilty,' said Oliver.

4 As for Catherine Ililliard,' Fan went on,
4 she is not too much " in the clouds," as you
call it, to prevent her coming down among
ordinary people and saying very stinging sarcastic
things. Louisa is only too well content
with herself and her belongings ; but I think
Catherine Hilliard is a discontented girl.'

4 The level of "a low content," muttered
Oliver, gratifying his father's old, half-blind,
half-deaf English terrier ' Ned ' with a sardine.

Fan did not catch the quotation, or notice
the typical act: she was leaping to a conclusion.
'Catherine Hilliard is so dissatisfied
with herself and everything around her,
that I fancy she will learn to welcome any
change of circumstances, until she may get the
length of selling herself and her feelings some
day. Then, no doubt, after the bargain is
completed, she will turn round and decide that
this gain also is not worth a tithe of what she
has paid for it.'

You have no right to speak so, Fan,' said
Oliver angrily. 4 Of course, I don't pretend to
guess how Catherine Hilliard may dispose of
herself,' he went on more calmly ; 4 but she has
always appeared to me a kind of nineteenth
century vestal virgin, a " Christian priestess of
Nature " and such letters and art as have come

in her way. That is not the sort of creature
who sells herself.'

I beg your pardon, Oliver.' Fan contradicted
her brother with mingled dignity and
obstinacy.

And I beg your pardon, Fan.' Oliver
perpetrated with considerable success a mimicry
of his sister's manner.

1 There,' he said quickly, ' as you are
always tempted to be unfair to the Billiards,
we had better let the subject drop.'

Fan did not protest against the charge of
unfairness, or insist on prolonging the discussion.
Perhaps her conscience pricked her a
little. She was perfectly sensible in the truthfulness
of her nature that Louisa Hilliard washer
bete noire. Fan used to say to herself
without disguise, ' I can't bear Louisa Hilliard

This was one of the instances of natural
antipathy and comparatively causeless dislike,
which, like the opposite examples of instinctive

partiality, and hardly warranted attachment,
were apt to hold sway over Fan Constable's
ardent, concentrated temperament. Hers was
not an unjust or undisciplined character, while
it was loyal to the core; but it was full of
'likes and dislikes. 5 There was nothing lymphatic
or volatile about Fan, to her great loss
of ease and tranquillity. If she had been put
under an examination as to the provocation she
had received from Mrs. Hilliard, who was Fan's
remote kinswoman and early patroness, Fan
could not have given any save the pettiest
reasons of which she herself would have been
the first to feel ashamed. Yet her asperity
where this woman was concerned amounted to
rancour. Sometimes the sentiment in her own
bosom struck Fan as unchristian, and being
very sincere in her Christianity, she sought to
qualify her enmity by solemnly assuring herself
of what was the truth — that she would not
injure Louisa Hilliard for the world. It was

only incidentally that Catherine Hilliard came
in for her share of the dislike which Fan had
to Catherine's cousin. The two younger women
possessed nothing in common, but neither had
they any sharp points of antagonism. If it
had not been for Fan Constable's extraordinary
aversion to Mrs. Hilliard, Fan would
have viewed Catherine Hilliard with simple
indifference.

Mrs. Hilliard and her cousin kept house
together, chiefly upon Mrs. Hilliard's income,
at the 'Meadows,' which was at once the
largest, and, though it sounds a contradiction,
the cosiest, certainly the prettiest, of the villas
which had sprung up on the outskirts of Friar-ton.
The 'Meadows,' in fact, was more of a
small country house than a villa. It entitled
its occupant, unless she were a very objectionable
person otherwise, to revolve in the first of
the social circles — which, like the sap-rings in
the trunk of a tree, divided the townspeople

into various grades of enclosure. Nay, the
fc Meadows ' entitled its owner to hover on the
verge, which she crossed not infrequently, of
the county families.

For Mrs. Hilliard was only objectionable in
possessing a carelessness of mind — a rather pronounced
Bohemianism. She was regardless of
who took her up or who let her down, which
had an effect the reverse of what some people
might have expected. As she was also a lively
agreeable woman, superficially refined, a well-endowed,
comely widow of thirty-five years of
age, who relished her freedom too keenly to
have any thought of marrying again, but who
kept a pleasant house and welcomed her friends
to it, she was lifted clean above the ebb and
flow of social fickleness ; she was landed in
established popularity with carte blanche to do
very much as she pleased, and fill up her
visiting-list just as she chose.

In fact, Mrs. Hilliard's house was what

the vicarage often is in country society, a sort
of neutral ground and meeting place for different
classes — or degrees of classes, in the community
— not that its mistress would descend sofar
as to receive ordinary tradespeople and
fraternise with them, Fan now reflected,
gloomily. Yet Mrs. Hilliard had opened her
doors to the brother and sister since they were
a mere boy and girl, and had in her turn
visited at Friarton Mill. And she had not come
exactly as the Fremantles and Wrights, the
dignitaries of the Grammar School, had come,
because the mill family, so far as it had to do
with Oliver, might be regarded as in a transition
state, and on the point of taking flight
into higher regions ; but because Mrs. Hilliard,
though a well-born, well-married woman, the
daughter of a rural dean and the widow of
a commodore, was really distantly related to
the Constables through their mother. Mrs.
Constable, as Fan never forgot, had been the

daughter of a clergyman, not a dissenting
minister but a regular parson of the Church of
England. But, after all, there are clergymen
and clergymen even of the Church of England.
The poor curate who had been Mrs. Constable's
father had lived and died in very different
circumstances from those of the comfortably
situated rural dean to whom Mrs. Hilliard had
owed allegiance. The curate, to begin with,
had stooped and married the daughter of a
yeoman, who on his part had not enjoyed any
of the plain plenty apt to be associated with a
great farmhouse. Accordingly, the curate's
brood of children had been brought up in a
spare swell as homely fashion, until they had
been sent out into the world to earn their
living, and make their own way, as clerks and
nursery Governesses ; one of those governesses,
with her limited education and still more
limited earnings — not to be compared to a
good cook's wages — was found not unwilling

c; C to

VOL. I. L

to exchange her anxious dependence and
drudgery for the serene independence and
importance, in her own sphere, of the mistress
of Friarton Mill. Strange to say, the fact of the
slight tie of blood between the two women
failed to prevent Mrs. Hilliard from settling at
Friarton when the Meadows offered itself to
her and her man of business — at once as a good
investment for her spare money and a suitable
house which she could make a home.

Stranger still to relate, Mrs. Hilliard was too
secure of her position, and too defiant of
censure, to ignore for a moment the thread
of relationship between herself and the
Constables of Friarton Mill. On the contrary,
she proclaimed it openly with evident cold
blood whenever she had occasion to do so,
compelling confidence and respect in her
hearers. For if Mrs. Hilliard could afford to
make light of, nay, to sport, her far-away cousinship
to the family of a provincial miller and

baker, her acquaintances might rest on the conviction
that she had substantial claims on their
regard in much closer alliance with the families
in canons' houses in cathedral closes, in government
houses abroad, in pleasant little houses
near Hyde Park or at Kensington. But in
reality the eccentricity belonged rather to the
idiosyncrasy of the woman than to the remoteness
of the relationship which she elected to
count with the Constables.

Mrs. Hilliard had been ready to hold out
her hand to the Constable young people, which
was one of the offences Fan, though she could
not dispense with the hand, had not been able
to forgive. This was not pure perversity and
ingratitude in Fan Constable. It was the result of
the observation that Mrs. Hilliard laughed, without
taking the trouble to conceal it, at Fan's
serious pretensions, and that the older woman was
as little, as the younger was much, in earnest.

The . Meadows was a wide white house,

L 2

cheerful in its whiteness, and, at the same time,
amply shaded and sheltered by old and luxuriant
shrubberies, of which the Portugal laurels,
Irish yews and hollies were giants of their kind,
while the lilacs, Guelder roses, and springs
offered, in their season, pyramids, piles, and
thickets of flowers. The public rooms were all
on the ground floor ; and, in the case of the
drawing-room, the long French windows, which
faced the south, opened to the lawn with its
clumps of rhododendrons and brakes of thorns,
and its glimpse in mid distance, through an
archway of roses, of the flower-garden.

The drawing-room at the Meadows was the
sunniest, most cheerful room in a house the
great distinction of which was resolute, sometimes
slightly overpowering, social sunshine and
cheerfulness. Mrs. Billiard used to call it an
1 Omnium Gathered,' a flagrant instance of
eclecticism where rooms were concerned. Its
furniture, and the occupations she engaged in

there, did not date beyond her own reign at
the Meadows, and so would have been pronounced
worthless by connoisseurs. But, as
Mrs. Hilliard maintained, she had lived long
enough to have seen several styles of decoration
and ladies' work, and her drawing-room proved
with what catholicity of spirit she had ' gone
in ' for each in succession. The only drawback
was that she could not make up her mind to be
entirely off with the old love in order to be on
with the new. Thus she sacrificed the creat
aim of the last exposition of high art — unity, to
her unprincipled softness of heart and lack of
sternness of purpose. She retained the cold
whiteness and pompous glitter of the upper part
of her walls, and the undue warmth of colouring
and floweriness of her carpets — attempting
to combine them with dirty orange dados and
sage-green porters, just as she kept the faded
gorgeousness of her Berlin woodwork in stripes
of bold embroidery divided by bands of imperial

purple and emerald-green velvet, or in great
groups of Queen of Sheba flowers like the exuberant
flower-pieces of Flemish painters, introduced
into close contact with the dim,
delicate conventionalities and studiously faint,
long-drawn-out effects of nineteenth-century,
art needlework. It was a highly objectionable
compromise from an artistic point of view, but
somehow it was not only saved from absolute
f rightfulness, to a Philistine it had a charm of
its own, because of its little bit of mellowed,
blended life — such asonemav occasionally meet
with, on a grand scale, in a pile of building
which began by being a feudal castle, and went
on to be an old English manor-house, then
progressed into a Georgian mansion, ending by
proving the many-sided home of a race. So
time with lingering fingers had toned down
and tempered the robust gaudtnessof the abused
Berlin woodwork till it too had acquired something
of the exquisitely soft harmonies of ancient

tapestry. That was Catherine Hilliard's opinion,
and she had a fine eye for colour. The chairs
and tables, the books, the pictures and the
china in the room, were all about as incongruous,
and yet all in a manner represented
some phase and echo of human life, and had
come to fit into each other.

So much could hardly be said with regard
to Catherine Hilliard and her surroundings, as
she stood listlessly looking out of one of the
long windows on the lengthening shadows
falling across the lilac flowers of the rhododendrons,
and waiting for her cousin coming in to
afternoon tea. It might be because Catherine
belonged to all time that she did not belong
particularly to that room — in which, however, the
window where she stood with its round table,
heap of books, letter-case and blotting-book,
work-basket, and Nankin jar holding a bunch of
purple and pink and white pea-blossoms, constituted
Catherine's sanctum and private properties.

Catherine Hilliard was a young orphan
cousin of Louisa Hilliard's, who, when she left
school with a bare competence, had been invited
by the mistress of the Meadows to share
her establishment. Catherine had accepted the
invitation on the stipulation that, in proportion
to her more slender means, she should pay her
share of the joint housekeeping. ■ Catherine is
such a dragon of pride for a young girl,' Mrs.
Hilliard explained to anyone who had a right
to be made acquainted with the details of the
arrangement, ' that I dared not propose to her
to come and live with me and let me keep
house for both. Yet she micjlit have the sense
to guess that her company is a boon to me,
though she has little sympathy with my pottering
common] place ways, and lives in an intellectual
world of her own. It is my single regret
with regard to Catherine that she is a bit of a
blue stocking.' But though Mrs. Hilliard professed
and half persuaded herself to believe the

Q

contrary, in reality she neither objected to
Catherine's contribution to the general expenses
nor to the different line she took in society.
Mrs. Hilliard's hand was not so open that it had
not its seasons and occasions of closing, and she
did not care to run the risk, slight though it
might be, of a rival in her special field.

Altogether the arrangement, which had continued
from the time that Catherine Hilliard
was eighteen, up to the present date when she
was in her twenty-third year, had answered
admirably. Mrs. Hilliard was the reverse of
exacting, and she was even forbearing and indulgent
where Catherine's dissimilar tastes and
habits were concerned. On Catherine's side she
was not so ignorant and abstracted in her want
of knowledge of human nature and absorption
in her own pursuits, as to be unaware how
much colder and more forlorn a place the world
would have proved to her, if Mrs. Hilliard had
forgotten their cousinship and had not extended

to the girl an older woman's friendly protection,
and given her a home with a member
of her kindred. Catherine cherished in silence
and reserve sentiments of gratitude and affection
for her cousin Louisa, and was a good deal
more under her influence than could easily have
been supposed. But there was a hitch — what
miners call 'a fault' — between Catherine and
ordinary humanity, the consequences of which
were so plain that Fan Constable, who was not
in the other girl's confidence, could read them
though she could not trace them to their source.
Without near ties, without clear, positive duties
apart from the obligation to keep the ten commandments
and lead what she understood of a
Christian life, Catherine Hilliard was thrown
back and in upon herself, which, unless as a
discipline to teach her how insufficient she was
for any achievement she really valued, seemed
about the worst experience she could have encountered.
She was like a plant withdrawn

from the wholesome, common, out-of-door influences
of sun, rain, wind, and a touch of frost,
while the plant is at the same time subjected in
one part of its cellular tissue to the strain of
over-stimulus and over-cultivation. Though
Catherine lived in a house full of lively movement,
with many comers and goers, though she
was on excellent terms with the house's mistress
and its circle or circles, the girl remained always
like an unfamiliar visitor in what served her fora
home. She was only in, not of, its circles.
Catherine's was largely an inner world of fancy
and feeling ; its scenes furnished by the vivid representations
which she drew in her mind, of
places and incidents met with in her books ; its
characters, ideal personages, ghosts and shades —
goodly ghosts and heroic shades, no doubt, but
destitute of the substantiality and warmth, and
what is salutary even in the provoking contradictions,
the piteous failures, the tough warfare of
flesh and blood. There was a certain bloodless-ness

and fantasticalness about Catherine's world,
amidst much that was noble and sweet in it.
She had an aching consciousness of a hollow
emptiness about it, and not of a gaping void
alone, but of a harsh discord between it and
the actual world. She felt herself netting more
and more fastidious and captious and — she
feared — horribly selfish. She moped a good
deal, as well as mused. She dreaded instinctively
she knew not what, as the result of her
star-gazing and hero-worship. She was conscious
she shrank from the common work-a-day
world and from the vulvar and mean interests
often, of ordinary people with the common
business of life on their hands. But she did
not know in the least how to give up her
habits, or reconcile herself to society as she
found it. She was helpless in the bondage she
had made for herself — yet she was frequently
more weary and disgusted with herself than she
could possibly be with any other person. But

Catherine had one great resource against morbidness,
though she repaired to it as to other
occupations, either listlessly, or with a fitfulness
in her temporary eagerness, resorting to it with
no distinct comprehension of w T hat a safeguard
it was to her, from the consequences of the
continual exercise of those faculties which were
already over wrought.

Catherine was exceedingly fond of animals,
and she happened to be free to express her
fondness, since she was not merely the mistress
of half-a-dozen pets of her own, she was the
sovereign protector of the whole animal kingdom
as it existed at the Meadows. She was likewise
the head-gardener on the spot. For Mrs.
Hilliard had nimbly seized the opportunity of a
floricultural tyrant's throwing up his good situation,
in a fit of pique, to get rid of her hired oppressor
permanently. She had then vested in
Catherine supreme authority over a junior
gardener and a boy who were well broken into

obedience. The only obligation which Mrs.
Hilliard had imposed on her cousin was that
she should not indulge her predilection for
Shakespearian flowers in the beds, and untrimmed
luxuriance in the shrubbery, to the
extent of banishing every choice pelargonium
and perfectly quilled dahlia, which had formerly
crowned Mrs. Hilliard with honour at flower-shows
; neither should Catherine be guilty of
corrupting her subordinates to the degree of
reducing the grounds to the picturesquely disorderly
level of the gardens of a French or Italian
country house, so ruining the established reputation
of the Meadows for the trimness which
is the English gardeners delight.

Catherine, always overwhelmed as she was,
not with bracing work, but with a dreary
surplus of vacant time on her hands, in spite of
her reading, was fortunately capable of revelling,
in her desultory fashion, in this double resource.
She would leave Dante in the saddest region of

the Inferno, the Jungfrau when the Black
Knight had her at last, Mary Barton pursuing
the outward-bound ship, Janet in the agony of
her repentance, to take refuge in her own
section of the living world. She would play
for half-an-hour with Pepper and Crab or the
youngest kitten. She would watch the eight
rooks whose big, black-coated presence always
seemed to Catherine to lend a solid dignity to
the fry of small birds, just as the rooks' deep
cawing supplied a solemn diapason to the
lighter music of the orchestra in the shrubbery
on a bright morning in spring, or a quiet evening
in early summer. Catherine stoutly maintained
the innocence of the rooks against the respectful
representations of the modest under-gardener,
that the birds did not confine their bill of fare
to worms and the wide genus grub, as she
was fain to assert. And after all, the alleged
depredations committed by the rooks, were as
nothing to the frightful accusations brought

against a pair of demure sinners of cushat
doves, which were like the apple of Catherine's
eye, for whose condescension in coming of
their own sweet will and building a nest in
an old Scotch fir, and their affability in indulging
in soft comines, she could never be
sufficiently grateful. Catherine scouted the
idea of replacing the wild pigeons by a couple
of their tame kindred, which should be housed
in a neat little pigeon-house, submit to be fed
with grain and crumbs from feasts, or fly far
a-field for their meals instead of proceeding
with the marauding instincts of the most incorrigible
of thieves, and alas ! in spite of their
sleek, iridescent plumage, and the tender sentiment
associated with them, of the greediest
feeders belonging to the feathered tribes, to
devastate whole rows of newly-sown peas and
6 breaks ' of young cauliflowers.

What did Catherine care for peas and
cauliflowers compared to her cushat doves?

But Mrs. Hilliard, though she found some
food for laughter in the doves' exploits and
Catherine's dismay, was not so indifferent to
the wreck of her vegetables. Catherine was
very much obliged to Oliver Constable for
telling her, though it was in a measure another
disillusion in the way the information was
put, that wood-pigeons were the most arrant
cowards in addition to being the most* disgraceful
thieves, for the most transparent sham —
the least life-like scarecrow — sufficed to hold
the robbers at bay.

Catherine was as well acquainted with
every bird's nest within her bounds as were
the Friarton boys, whom she could not keep
out of the shrubbery in the bird-nesting season,
and whom she detested with an illogical detestation
— to say the least, enough to show that
she had never had a brother. She would
suddenly start out on these boys from a little
wilderness of green branches, and assail them

VOL. I. M

with a torrent of passionate reproach. The
boys would stare blankly at the apparition they
had aroused, but any unwonted bashfulness,
if excited at all, would speedily give way to a
sense of the utter disproportion between cause
and effect. The result would be an ironical
titter or guffaw (for the Friarton boys were by
no means models of good manners), and a
noisy, careless retreat to be followed by a
return rendered doubly certain by Catherine's
injudicious challenge.

Catherine retreated too, covered with swift
mortification for her extravagant anger. But
it was difficult to be patient with those young
savages, who could no more be barred out than
the waves of the sea could be held back, who
would make short work in one holiday afternoon
of all those exquisite little homes of moss
and leaves, leaving the poor, fond, helpless
architects fluttering in despair round their ruined
dwellings and pillaged treasures of blue, green,

black and red spotted, and freckled eggs, or,
more precious still, downy, yellow-beaked,
tottering, gaping fledglings. The nests were
perfectly beautiful and sacred to Catherine, and
she took great pleasure in visiting them all
round every morning, with elaborate precautions
not to disturb family arrangements or
trouble heads of houses in the performance of
their duties.

Catherine was almost as happy and much
less liable to worry, among her lilies, of which
she cultivated an infinite variety ; her trailing
love-lies-bleeding, like a warrior's plumes heavy
and drooping with the red stains of battle ; the
golden shields, with the dark discs and the stiff
grenadier stalks, of her sunflowers ; the pinked
perfection and spicy breath of her clove carnations.
She would hang over each of them, and
touch them with a lingering, fondling touch, as
if they were sentient creatures, and could welcome
and respond to a friendly caress. She

M 2

hated to shorten their brief blossoming time ;
she would never gather them with lavish wastefulness.
She liked to have them near her at
all times, and so woidd take a tribute from
their abundance to ' busk ' her person and the
Meadows drawing-room, but she never did it
unsparingly and recklessly.

Catherine Hilliard was of the middle size,
but looked taller than she was from the slenderness
of her figure. Her hah' was of that
dubious colour which enemies called red, friends
auburn, and gushing admirers golden. In
reality it was each tint as the light fell on its
simple braids and twists. Her complexion was
fair and pale — too waxen, in spite of her bordering
and gardening, for perfect health.
Her nose, mouth, and chin were well and
softly moulded. But the results of her temperament
and circumstances were visible in her
personal appearance. There was a languor
which had no vital purpose to conquer it, evident

in her air, that threatened to drain away
the last remnant of what ought to have been
the healthy hope and joyousness of her years.
Her mouth had a sensitive, plaintive droop.
The expression of her eyes varied continually
from hesitating dreaminess to spasmodic enthusiasm,
from short-lived enthusiasm to intolerant
scorn, from quick scorn to morbid depression.
The beauty of Catherine Hilliard's face, as it
struck strangers, dwelt principally in the dark
blue of her eyes. Withal, she was by no means
strictly beautiful, only endowed with a peculiar
charm for those on whom the charm worked
at all. She had a fancy for gowns of thin
material, in their season, like summer clouds
floating round or clinging to her, according to
the atmosphere, in the dry heat of noon, or in
the slight darkness of the dewpoint. But she
preferred the colour of her gowns to be softly
dark like the clouds after sunset, thus instinctively
rather than deliberately setting off* the fair

paleness of her complexion. She kept her
cousin Louisa marvelling where Catherine could
find so" many misty purples, heather browns,
and cool slate colours, as well as naval blues, of a
wire-woven texture. Catherine wore a gauzy
gown of a deep plum-colour at this moment.

CHAPTEE VII.

HOW MRS. HILLIARD AND CATHERINE JUDGED
THE LAST SAINT GEORGE OF FRIARTON.

At last Mrs. Hilliard came briskly into the
room still wearing her hat. She could not,
although she had tried, have walked otherwise
than briskly ; and if she had been a duchess,
her buxom and florid good looks, a little overblown,
would still have recalled a dairy-maid.
But as Mrs. Hilliard was perfectly aware of the
association, and, instead of attempting to
smother it by all lawful and unlawful means,
faced it courageously and acknowledged it
openly, she succeeded in surmounting it ; by
not pretending to be what she was not, she remained

herself in all essentials. She looked
what she had always been — a lady in spite of
excessive plumpness, a decided inclination to
redness, and an exuberant, lasting elasticity and
quickness of carriage and step — the reverse of
Catherine's listlessness — which would have been
more becoming in early youth, and which had
small connection with the sobermindedness,
not to say the stateliness and dignity, of mature
years.

The only sensitiveness which Mrs. Hilliard
betrayed as to her personal style, was that
while she was by implication resigned to, nay,
reasonably consoled for, the death of her husband,
whom she had married after the shortest
of wooing, and of whom she had not seen
much during their brief married life, she continued
faithful to her widow's black, though it
was twelve years since she had been a wife.
At the same time she could not get over her
cousin's eccentricity of taste when Catherine

could have fluttered so fitly, in every respect,
in white or in the palest of pinks, blues, or
primroses. For a girl to be addicted to sobriety
in anything, before her time, was incomprehensible
to Louisa Hilliard, save in the light of
affectation, if not hypocrisy, on the girl's part.
But though Mrs. Hilliard did not believe much
in most people — young or old, she had still
faith in Catherine's odd childish simplicity.

Have I kept you long waiting, my dear ? '
asked Mrs. Hilliard as she subsided, buoyantly
still, into her own low chair, and, untying
her hat, tilted it unceremoniously, for greater
coolness, on the back of her profuse brown hair.
Her action made conspicuous, what was a
marked feature in her round face, the great
expanse of white forehead — round like the face
itself, and big enough to have been, so far assize
was concerned, the forehead of a sage, but
so flat and smooth that, gazing on it, one felt
tempted to doubt the fact of which there was

no question, that Mrs. Hilliard represented a
woman of rather more than ordinary intelligence.


Not very long,' answered Catherine, with
her slow, absent-minded mode of speech,
dawdling as she spoke across the floor ; ' and
though you had, you know it would not have
signified,' she added indifferently.

It always signifies if one interferes with
another person's comfort said Mrs. Hilliard,
lightly ; c only you are too young to understand
the value of that jewel of an English word,
and I am bringing my excuse in my afternoon's
budget, Catherine.'

In their familiar household intercourse Mrs.
Hilliard never abbreviated her cousin's name,
or played affectionate or mischievous tricks
with it. This was not because Mrs. Hilliard
was in the least like either of those dignitaries
Fan Constable or the Vicar of Wakefield, who
loved to be particular, who might choose to

revenge themselves nobly on the base liberties-taken,
doubtless, with each in turn, when they
were addressed as ' Fan' and ' Dr. Prim.'

Mrs. Hilliard asserted that Catherine was
Catherine ' like her namesake of Sienna,
therefore the elder woman could not presume
to call the younger ; Kate ' or ' Kitty,' though
Mrs. Hilliard herself had never been anything
else to her intimates than ' Loo ' or c Lovey,'
unless c Tom ' sometimes in the days of her
youth.

Mrs. Hilliard was in the habit of referring
unblushingly, and with a merry defiance of the
contempt excited in the superior, highly cultivated
people who proclaimed themselves far
above gossip, to her diligence in collecting, and
keenness in enjoying, the Friarton news of the
day. Catherine did not often appreciate, in
themselves, the promiscuous heaps of news cast
down at her feet, for her to pick and choose
from without much trouble on her part.

But she did set wistful store on the merry
heart of the gatherer and scattered, and counted
herself a dull girl by contrast, Not that
Catherine was a dull young woman to speak
with, she was rather pungent in a quiet way, as
Pan Constable had described her. Yet with all
her pungency she had a singleheartedness and
magnanimity of character, a speedy inclination
to own herself in the wrong, after speaking her
mind, which generally forced her inferiors to
respect as well as to pity her, and to receive
her under their protection from the encroachments
of others, even while they were taking
advantage of her themselves.

You won't enquire what great event has
happened,' said Mrs. Hilliard, hardly waiting
till the servant had left the room.

1 shall hear it presently,' said Catherine
composedly.

4 Then you shall have it au nature!, without
any stuffing or garnishing, to punish a great

lazybones of a girl who will not so much as
get up a little curiosity to serve as a relish for
my tit-bit.'

I Too many cooks spoil the kale,' said
Catherine. ' I should only waste my small culinary
talents by setting them up against yours.'

I I am not going to punish myself, in order
to keep you in suspense any longer. I flatter
myself, though you are a mouldy book-worm,
you feel an agony of suspense, whatever you
may pretend. As for myself, I am itching to
create a sensation. Oliver Constable is going
in for the mill and bakehouse — what do you
think of that ? What an anti-climax to Fan's
solemn gentility ! '

Going in for the mill and bakehouse ? "
repeated Catherine, vaguely.

'My dear Catherine, you are getting as
pedantically precise in your English, and as
stupid, as the rest of your clever people,' protested
Mrs. Hilliard, with lively impatience.

1 Don't tell me going in for a thing is slang.
Very soon, if you don't take care, you will be
mistaken for a school-mistress. You will be as
incapable as a senior wrangler of speaking the
language of ordinary life, or of taking in a
simple statement. Oliver Constable has come
home from Oxford to be a miller and baker,
as old Peter Constable was before him — do you
understand that ? '

1 Yes,' said Catherine, with a faint smile.
What is your objection, Louisa? '

1 Mine ? I have none in the world. He
may be the bellman or the lamplighter — by-the-by,
these are two far more romantic occupations
than what he has chosen — for me. I am
father obliged to him for making the unexpected
happen, because, though it always happens,
according to Lord Beaconsfield, still,
somehow, it sets us talking, and talking — or
shall I call it gabbling — is my vocation.'

Don't you find it tiresome ? ' suggested
Catherine, with odd naivete.

4 To myself or other people ? ' enquired Mrs.
Hilliard, unmoved save for the twinkle in her
eyes. ' I can vouch it does not tire me;' and
she used her plump fingers French fashion to
help herself to another lump of sugar.

6 1 suppose Oliver Constable cares more for
making money than for winning success in
what is called a learned profession, and securing
a social position ; that is all it comes to,' said
Catherine, with a little sigh at the smallness of
the sacrifice and the result altogether. c I am
not sure that he may not be right, from his
point of view, unless he were to "go in "
(Louisa ?) for great scholarship or for travelling
to the North or the South Pole. You see there
are no Extrados or Regards left for men to
believe in, and go in search of now. Oliver
Constable is not a genius, to write an immortal

book, or paint a picture which will never be
forgotten. I do not know that there is anything
so very much better for him to do than
honestly add pound to pound, and take his
worldly pleasure by counting up his gains at
the year's end.'

'My love, what a Mammon-worshipping
speech from you, of all people ! '

But we don't seem to be able to keep
from worshipping Mammon,' alleged Catherine,
wearily, ' though we say and perhaps mean that
we are worshipping another god ; and I am not
at all clear that Mrs. Grundy is a more respectable
deity than Mammon.'

1 You can't accuse me of paying homage at
her shrine. But are you not sorry for sister
Fan ? What was her ultimatum for Oliver ?
That he should become Lord Chancellor or
Archbishop of Canterbury, while she should
be Jock the Laird's sister ? What a descent,
to be condemned to remain the sister, as she

was the daughter, of a well-to-do miller and
baker ! '

No, I am not sorry,' said Catherine, with
more animation than she had yet shown, for
there was a spice of short-lived indignation in
the tone. ' If she could have no higher ambition
for her brother than that he should bea
barrister or a rector — you know his rising
to be so much as a judge or a dean was
hardly to be thought of — I have not a spark of
pity to spare for Fan Constable's disappointment.'


You have very little pity to spare for anybody
out of a book, it appears to me,' said Mrs.
Hilliard, with cheerful absence of concern.
'Your little foible is that you are extremely
hard-hearted. I am not — at least nobody can
refuse to give me the credit of good nature. I
am really sorry for Fan in the collapse of the
dream of her life, if she would only believe me,
and if she would not make herself so ridiculous

VOL. I. N

by her fixed determination to be a lady. Of
course the determination defeats itself. She is
not and never will be a lady — conventionally,
though she is well enough in her irregular
way, if she would relax her resolution —
which she will not do so that I must laugh or
die,' finished Mrs. Hilliard, not looking like
dying.

6 I had quite a different idea of Oliver Constable,
however,' said Catherine, returning
voluntarily to the main thread of the conversation,
but not speaking as if this or any other
baffled idea mattered much. ' I never thought
him mercenary '

Wait a little,' interrupted Mrs. Hilliard,
with unquenched vivacity ; ' my hero is not
mercenary. He is the most disinterested, unselfish
of mortals, though he is a " sir saint '
to Fan. He has come back among us as the
self-appointed champion of the millers and advocate
of the bakers. He is to be the defender

of the tradespeople — the last version of St.
George in Friartoru'

But who is harming the millers, or what
need have the bakers of an advocate ? ' asked
Catherine, in a puzzled tone. ' I thought the
tradespeople here were particularly prosperous
much more so than any other class. I am
sure they are not deficient in a sense of their
own merits and in a capacity for bringing
them into the foreground.'

I agree with you entirely. But I suppose
their prosperity is their bane in one sense, and
that our taking them at their own word goes to
prove that we are a pair of would-be, bloated
aristocrats. But it is a fact that I never go
into Polley's or Dadd's shop without having
a distinct perception that Mrs. Polley and old
and young Dadd are thinking to themselves,
You need not look down on us ; we are every
bit as good as you are. We have as early
spring chickens and lamb on our tables as you

N 2

have on yours. We could buy you out any
day" (and I dare say they could, if the
Meadows were to sell). " We know our place,
so far as being civil in return for your custom ;
but don't try to turn up your nose at us " — as if
my nose would do anything save turn up — to
her Majesty the Queen on her throne in the
House of Lords. Catherine, you are aware of
its infirmity ? ' exclaimed Mrs. Hilliard, parenthetically,
tip-tilting the refractory member still
farther with her middle finger in the most
comical manner. ' "Don't go to think of trampling
us under your feet," which, as Sairey
Gamp used to say, " Betsy Prig will take her
Bible oath " is the last exercise she would seek
to take for the mere pleasure of the thing.'

Catherine was fain to laugh. 4 When I begged
Mrs. Polley to keep her errand-boy away from
the shrubbery — away from the birds' nests,' the
girl chimed in — ' Mrs. Polley was quite rude.
You must really look after him yourself, Miss,"

she told me sharply ; ' he is my servant here,,
but he is not answerable to me when he is out
of the shop. Excuse me, but it ain't any call of
mine to look after Mrs. Hilliard's place. Let
them idle fellows of gardeners as are in her pay
see to that, I have enough to do with my
business. You ladies would be the first to complain
and leave the shop if it were neglected." '
There is something in that,' said Mrs.
Hilliard, candidly. ' Indeed I have had
thoughts of giving up Polley's, because, according
to cook, Mrs. Polley will not amend the
error of her ways in the line of capers and
cloves. I have meditated making an experiment
in the new shop near the railway station,
only I feared that, on the whole, I should be
worse served there. For Mrs. Polley, to give
the woman her due, knows her business, keeps
a good article as a rule, and despises to ask an
absurd price for it. As for her " Britons never
shall be slaves " tone, it borders on the aggressive,

but then it is the reverse of servility and
it is the echo of a highly esteemed patriotic
song. I imagine Oliver Constable will call it
the expression of a fine independent spirit.'

'But what does Oliver Constable mean?'
repeated Catherine, looking as she was apt to do
sometimes, hopelessly mystified in spite of her
cleverness.

4 He means to regenerate the lower middle
classes — to make all the members ladies and
gentlemen in spite of themselves. Young Dadd
must learn Greek, and carry Plato, instead of
Verdant Green" and " Mrs. Brown at Margate,"
in his coat-pocket, and dip into ancient philosophy
in the intervals of handling his shears
or his yard measure, of cutting off a yard of
lace, and calculating how much cloth is required
for the present fashion in flounces. Mrs. Polley
and her girls will attend evening classes for the
higher education of women, and trip you and
me up with an opinion on the tertiary formation,

or the recently discovered satellite of Neptune,
when our small minds are full of bloom
raisins and Carolina rice.'

But I thought you said he was to identify
himself with the millers and bakers ? '

c That goes without saying, you little goose.
Charity begins at home.'

But they will still be millers and bakers,'
hammered Catherine.

I should hope so. Let him make them
what he likes, I trust he intends to leave us
our flour and bread, else we shall be in a bad
way. For, though the railway might bring usa
supply from a distance, still we should missa
little, our breakfast and dinner rolls. Even
these would be too heavy a price to pay for a
young fanatic's radicalism — is that the proper
name to call it, Catherine ? '

1 I cannot tell,' said Catherine, slowly, ' but
surely the thing itself is wasted on millers and
bakers and common tradespeople.'

The girl was not hard-hearted, as she had
been called. Any social arrogance which she
expressed was more an acquired trick of thought
and speech than a calm persuasion. She was
not a fool, yet she nourished a vague impression
that it might be a Christian, patriotic duty todo
something for the outcast and forlorn — that
a troop of soldiers or a crew ot sailors called for
care from their leaders ; while she held the
notion that millers and bakers, with tradespeople
in general, even though they were convicted of
gross self-indulgence, and that coarse materialism
which is the deadly enemy of a higher life
of all spirituality, might very well be left
to take care of themselves.

Will Oliver Constable's mission have any
success ? ' Catherine speculated, with mild, idle
curiosity. ' Will the great vulgar consent to be
refined ? '

I should think not,' said Mrs. Hilliard,
decidedly. ' If I were one of them, I should hate

to be poked up and enlightened. After all, I
have a strong suspicion I am one of them, with
just an outer coating of polish, the result of
circumstances,' Mrs. Hilliard announced impenitently,
with a keen perception of the fun
of taking guilt to herself.

It was Like Catherine not to contradict the
assertion beyond a certain point.

You don't speak fine language like one of
the Miss Polleys, or run away, after the fashion
of some of the others, when they have come
into the shop in their morning deshabille, and
are scared by the entrance of a customer
belonging to the upper ranks. You are not
slovenly, smart, and splendid by turns. You
don't giggle at every word and think it witty to
be rude to men, clenching your rudeness with an
emphatic " There ! ' as I have heard the Miss
Polleys do when I have gone to their shop with
some of Wedlock's commissions on market-day.
You don't spend your evenings sauntering up and

down the street, or paying perpetual visits to
your cronies.'

4 But I am a very prosaic, commonplace
person for all that,' said Mrs. Billiard, demurely.
You are sensible I have no sympathy with
high heroics or " high saluting " of any kind —
my nature is pitched in too low a key. The
rest is accident. You forget that I am twice as
old as the youngest Miss Polley — almost old
enough to be her mother — not to speak of the
cares I have gone through. I have no occasion
to walk out after dinner, or shop-shutting, as it
may be, since the whole day is mine, and you
must admit I make good use of the hours after
luncheon. I believe I am the best visitor in
Friarton. Oliver Constable ought to include mein
his mission, or get up a private one for my
special benefit. It is not fair to my needs, it is
impertinent to the tradespeople, to omit me in
his benevolent efforts. But perhaps he would
prefer to reform you, withdrawing you from

your books and converting you into a social
animal with a due regard to your neighbour's
welfare ; ' as she spoke, Mrs. Hilliard glanced
quickly at Catherine, but the glance fell without
effect like blank shot.

I don't think he will trouble with either of
us,' said Catherine, composedly. ' We are not
in trade, we should be wide of his mark. Will
he continue to come here? I mean, will he
drop you from his visiting list, or will you drop
him from yours ? '

Oh dear no, not so far as I am concerned.
I am not particular lest any offence should come
between the wind and my gentility, and my
friends know my Bohemian tendencies. My
acquaintances are aware beforehand of the risks
they run in countenancing me. Besides, the
Constables, as everybody has heard, are blood
relations of mine, and it does not suit my pride
to throw them over, though they were to take
to highway robbery, instead of grinding corn

and baking bread, as they have done all along,'
said Louisa Hilliard, raising her head with a
genuinely aristocratic movement, notwithstanding
the shortness of her neck. c Then,' she
resumed in her usual tone, ' I should lose the
opportunity of seeing Fan stiffening into stone
and at the same time kindling into a white heat
before the bitter draught she has to swallow.
And when all is said, Oliver Constable cannot
get rid of the rather important items that he
has been bred a university man, and has succeeded
to a considerable patrimony, even though
he should be eccentric enough to knead dough
with his own hands or carry round a basket of
loaves like St. Elizabeth on his head.' Mrs.
Hilliard ended hastily with a greater concession
to public opinion than her previous sentence had
implied.

The next moment she began to laugh at
the picture she had conjured up. ' I think I
see him,' she exclaimed, in high glee ; ■ as if he

did not make a sufficient spectacle of himself
already — an Adonis who must contort himself
into a Caliban — what a waste of good looks ! '

I do not agree with you,' said Catherine,
with her sincerity as striking and more
rampant than Fan Constable's. ' In the first
place, he is not an Adonis, though he is a fairly
handsome man. In the second, I should hate
good looks which were not liable to be affected
by temper and mood. They would be little
better than those of a barber's block. As a
contrast, I could easily understand the fascination
of the mobile ugliness of a Mirabeau. An
Adonis liable to be replaced at any moment by
a Caliban, is not at all a bad idea for enhancing
the fugitive graces of Adonis. But Oliver
Constable is not an Adonis.'

1 So be it, since you will have it so,' said
Mrs. Hilliard, shrugging her shoulders. ' But
my theory of real good looks is that they
should rise superior to every vicissitude.

Oliver Constable doth profess too much. I
do not say he is intentionally hypocritical,
but I imagine he has been nettled by his
connection with trade, and now he is going
to brazen it out, and thrust it down people's
throats, forcing his fellow-creatures to own that
there is nothing like trade in the end. Very
likely, too, he is not averse to drawing more
money from money-making concerns. What
more natural than that he should have inherited
the trading spirit, and be still keener in
business than his father was ? Only he ought
not to assume a cloak of philanthropy.'

Mrs. Hilliard deprecated enthusiasm as
stoutly as if she had been a great diplomatist, and
distrusted every profession which had not in it a
large leaven of openly proclaimed self-interest
and cynicism, while in her cheerful pessimism
she treated the reverse as a good joke.

1 The game is not worth the candle,' said

Catherine, letting her heavily weighted eyelids
drop.

4 It is far worse than that. Oliver Constable's
crotchet will not merely come to grief
like other crotchets, it will serve to unsettle the
young man. It will cost him the fair start in
life he might have commanded, and of which
he might have made something, if he has a
tithe of the ability which has been liberally
attributed to him. Though I laughed at first,
and though I cannot help smiling still, at what
I foresee of the manifestations of Fan's wrath,
still as an older woman and a relative of the
family, however remote, I am sorry. I have
sufficient grace left for that,' said Mrs. Hilliard,
with greater seriousness and with some genuine
good feeling.

Catherine continued to look as if she saw
no cause either for joy or sorrow, as if she
were drearily impervious to emotion from the

actual world outside herself aud her books.
Catherine's faith and hope in humanity had
reached the lowest ebb.

Oliver Constable's aims would meet with
nothing at the Meadows, save ridicule on the
one hand, and unbelief on the other.

Chapter VIII.

Oliver's proclamation in the mill and
the bakehouse.

Old Peter Constable had been a good master
in more senses than one — a better master, inasmuch
as he and his servants understood each
other, than his son seemed likely to prove.
Peter had kept his men long in his service, but
it so happened that at this date, from death and
other weeders-out of grey-headed workpeople,
the men in the mill were comparatively young.
The head man, who had been promoted recently,
was not older than Oliver himself, and
as yet supported such dignity as he had to
maintain in a sheepish fashion, while his

VOL. I.

trumpet still gave forth an uncertain sound.
Accordingly, the new master's announcement,
though it excited a good deal of curiosity, drew
forth no protest, not even a private one, in this
quarter.

Oliver's little speech was made with a
great effort in a pause of the drowsy hum of
the machinery and the equally lulling splash of
the water — churned into the likeness of foaming
milk by the rapid revolutions of the mill wheel.
In the middle of the self-consciousness and confusion
which beset him, and disturbed the clear
sequence of his best thoughts and ideas, Oliver
made it be heard and understood that he was to
keep on the mill and take the chief management
in the room of his father. He succeeded
in saying that he expected the men to do him
faithful service, while he would try his best to
make their close connection the mutual benefit
it ought to be. He hoped that each man of
them, as well as himself, saw only one interest

between master and servant, and would be
ready to back him in trying to do his duty.
Therefore, as he would not stint them in their
wages, without a good cause which he should
put plainly before them, or ask them to make
bricks without straw — that is, to grind corn
without sufficient water power, mechanical
power, reasonable time and competent guidance
— so he trusted they would be prepared to
play their pari: in furnishing the due amount of
labour, and not demean themselves to any of
the tricks of palming off bad, slovenly, half-completed
work, for good and thorough work,
which were bringing labour into general disrepute,
and threatening to become the curse
and ruin of the integrity and prosperity of
England, where employers and employed were
concerned. Oliver told them frankly that for
their sake — no less than for his own, he
would not consent to take scamped work, or
any known lazy, knavish substitute for honesto

2

work, from the best and most skilled workmen,
in other respects, among them.

In return, his work people had a right to
require from him not only punctual payment of
their wages, but intelligent consideration of their
position, helpful sympathy with their efforts,
forbearance for their blunders, as he should
claim tolerance from them for his mistakes.
Although he had thought it advisable to begin
by warning them of what he could not and
ought not to permit in their relation, he also
told them what they were not called upon to
bear from him — heartless indifference to their
welfare, and unprincipled gambling with flesh
and blood, as the means of keeping up the game
of speculation rather than fair trade. He was
ready to trust them for the loyal discharge of
their obligations, till they were put to the
proof. He asked them in return to trust his
father's son till they learned to know him better
as their master.

If it was a strain upon Oliver Constable to
make such a speech except to his cronies, and
he only made it by a kind of mental and
physical convulsion, it was also a strain upon
the young men in the mill to listen properly.
They could not compose themselves to catch
half the words, far less their meaning. They
grinned and gaped at each other, and every
man looked how his immediate neighbour was
conducting himself, rather than attended to
Oliver. Yet they did not fail to develop instantly
keen criticism of what might be called
Oliver's style of public speaking. ' Going' to
school and college hasn't made him speak out,
or thump with his fist in the right place, like
old Sam Snuffles the Method, as roars himself
hoarse, and lashes all around him so that a
chap has to duck his head for safety. Old
Sam beats the young master, old Sam does,
lout and lout,' reflected one lad, in a vein of
class conceit and agreeable superciliousness.

Another promising youth, who had been
reared at a seaport, made an apt comparison in
his mind between the speaker and a heavily-laden
vessel, sailing against the wind, labouring
and tacking ; ' and if I was only near him, I
would lay you any odds but I'd hear his
timbers groaning,' the ingenious youngster
silently pursued the simile which he was reserving
for future use.

But Ted Green, the head man in the mill,
never got beyond the news that ' the concern '
was not to stand still or be transferred to other
ownership, which might have endangered Ted's
late rise in the world. He pondered throughout
the whole of the remaining sentences, on
the substance of the introductory remark. He
wished he could go home to his wife and repeat
to her the welcome assurance. Wishes
were useless in the present case, they could not
even free Ted from the responsibility of acting
as the mouthpiece of the men under him in

replying to the address. Naturally, Ted only
replied to what had gone into his ears and
taken hold of his mind. Still, as the intelligence
grasped by him had been of a pleasant sort, one
might have expected that there would have
been warmth, at least, in the partial response.
But Ted was stolid as well as stupid — a large,
heavy-looking, fair-complexioned young man,
with the fairness increased to positive pallor
by such a plentiful application of flour to the
skin as would have put to shame the thick
powdering preceding the thicker painting of
the fine ladies of the last century. Ted leant
against the door-post with that hopeless incapacity
to stand upright which is mostly
shown by sailors on firm ground. ' You aire,
sir,' said Ted, abruptly and concisely, with
idiotic vagueness and apparently the utmost
phlegm.

Oliver had to knit his brows and think fora
moment before he recognised that the two

words replied concisely to the single statement
that he was to keep on the mill, while they
were totally irrelevant to what he considered
the gist of the speech which he had pumped up
by a severe struggle out of the depth of the
temporary chaos of his mind. It sounded as if
Ted and his fellows dismissed that with cynical
contempt and only troubled themselves to
grapple with the bit of information which was
practical in their eyes.

c Well, I take it, since there is no question
of parting company, me and my mates here
don't object to present terms — not at present
Ted resumed and ended with stiff and wary,
but unmistakable condescension, the moment
the decision had, in his judgment, passed over
to the men. ' Not at present, sir,' the young
millers confirmed their leader's opinion with one
voice, as if it were worked by the mill machinery,
and rendered a little husky and obscure
by the pervading dust.

Oliver's gravity was nearly upset. At the
same time, lie was aware of a slight sense of
repulse, and consequent disappointment, which
he said to himself proved him to be the inveterately
sanguine and hasty beggar with whose
foolish traits he ought at this date to have been
familiar enough to overcome them, and set their
reactionary influence at defiance.

But he could not help looking forward to
receiving a little more encouragement in the
bakehouse, were it only in an indignant apprehension
of some of his inferences, and a dogged
assertion of a working baker's rights, including
that of testing the quality of his work, and of
dealing with his master, in the full bloom of
class prejudice, as his natural enemy. It was
all very well to speak of the superior comfort
and general agreeability of a miller's life over
that of a baker. The former had the advantage
in the matter of picturesqueness like the
toil of the day labourer in the fields over the

artisan's — above all the petty tradesman's occupations.
Yet there could be no comparison
taking the two trades en masse — of which
was the more intelligent of the two.

There were honourable exceptions of
ploughmen-poets and young shepherds, among
the lowly pastoral hills, who had lived to
become — like David, king of Israel — leaders
of men. But the exceptions only proved the
rule.

In the same line of argument the sallow-faced
journeymen bakers, with their complexions
bleached by so much of their lives spent in the
atmosphere of the oven, even the forward lads
who, after the ancient fashion of Pharaoh's
chief baker, poised on their heads baskets full
of ' all manner of baked meats ' or more ponderous
loaves, and traversed the streets of Friar-ton,
had their minds and their very faces
sharpened by contact, at once wider and closer,
with their fellows. And the bakers were as far

in intellectual advance of the manly young
louts of millers whose employment consisted
chiefly in heaving up and down sacks of corn
and flour, and mechanically feeding the mill, as
the millers were before ordinary farm servants.
Oliver counted, too, on Jim Hull, his
father's old factotum and right-hand man, such
a long established ' institution ' in the bakehouse
and shop, that Peter Constable had been wont
to say, Jim was not only a great deal better
acquainted with the details of the business than
he, Peter, had been able to continue, so that he
should not like to venture on any step without
Jim's concurrence, but that, in fact, he would
hardly consent to such a liberty taken with
him and his position. He knew his own importance,
and while he had the interest of the
master as much at heart as any Constable of
them all could have it, Jim was just a trifle
inclined to take the rule into his own hands
and reign on his own account.

Oliver had compared Jim Hull to those
mayors of the palace who had founded the
Carlo indian dynasty in the west of Europe ;
but while Oliver himself felt by no means
inclined to act the lackadaisically sentimental
part of the long-haired monarchs of France,
he believed he might reckon on his man for
something shrewd and telling, whether on his
master's side or against him. And Oliver secretly
sighed for a foeman worthy of his steel, for the
stimulus of the sharpest opposition to balance
the enervating languor induced by his sister
Fan's despairing acquiescence, and Ted Green
and his companions' mortifying indifference
where Oliver's will was concerned.

The Constables' extensive bakehouse and
shop at Friarton bore no resemblance in any respect
to Friarton Mill. In place of being a venerable
structure — half superannuated, it was a
comparatively new building furnished with every
modern improvement, in full activity. Indeed

it had been erected by Peter Constable's enterprise
when he began to flourish greatly in his
twin trades. The large and somewhat staring
shop had an intimation inscribed over the door,
4 Peter Constable, Baker and Confectioner,' and
the pledge was fulfilled in the display of every
description of British bread within the windows.
The shop and its double sign stood out boldly
and with perfect confidence among the shops in
the old-fashioned High Street where the weekly
corn market was still held, on the pavement
before the door of the Ayott Arms Inn. Old
Peter Constable had attended the corn market
with the regularity of clock-work, and had enjoyed
the opportunity afforded him, in the
intervals between inspecting samples of grain,
of looking over the way with entire complacency
at the handsome shop and bakehouse
which were among the fruits of his industry
and enterprise. The immediate vicinity of the
shop had also enabled Peter to entertain hospitably

select little parties of his customers
among the farmers, in the hack shop, and to
conclude bargains with them there in greater
privacy than could be found in the street, or in
the commercial room of the inn. Fan Constable,
in walking up Friarton High Street, had
not looked upon the great bakeshop with the
same favourable eyes. But she was a true and
high-spirited woman. She had never gone out
of her way or got up an excuse to avoid passing
her father's shop-door. She had walked
straight by it, though she might not have been
able to prevent her foolish colour from rising,
in company with Mrs. Fremantle, and while
Fan saw Clara Houghton advancing in the
opposite direction. Fan would have risked
meeting Clara on the doorstep, and if the vicar's
daughter had declined to own acquaintance
with a valuable ally and an old school-fellow
to boot because of the fire of 
eyes which Fan knew so well

were watching the encounter, then let the
friendship come to a violent end on the spot,
the miller and baker's daughter would have
said without hesitation, though its destruction
must undoubtedly have proved a blow to Fan.
She had never failed her father or even betrayed
any repugnance to joining him at the
shop when she was in town with him on market
days, and he was to drive her home in the pony
phaeton, which to please Fan had superseded
a gig, just as the gig had in its time, to please
Fan's mother, taken the place of a spring cart.

Fan had only not been equal to getting up
an enthusiasm for the contents of pans and trays,
in well-raised loaves and crisp biscuits, and she
did not see that she was called upon — good
housekeeper though she was — to be one of the
severely initiated in the inner mysteries of
bread made with or without yeast, steamed or
not steamed. She was guilty of greater wilful
ignorance in the matter of bread than in any

other domestic question ; though of course she
was acquainted with such an A B C piece of
knowledge as how to distinguish a cottage
from a pan loaf when she saw them, while she
was perfectly aware that the Polley girls had a
joke among them and their companions, of her
affected ignorance in this particular.

It had certainly vexed Fan when her father,
in his satisfaction with his bread, would illustrate
its excellence by lightly patting the crust
or gently pinching the crumb. She confessed
to herself she hated to see him on an emergency,
when he had sent the showman out and no
other man or boy was in the way, quietly step
behind the counter, and in the innocence of his
heart, sell a twopenny loaf to a working
woman or a halfpenny biscuit to a child.
And Fan had the conviction that rather than
witness Oliver, with his college breeding, and
the gentleman-like character impressed on his
very twists and grimaces, demean himself to

dispense the staff of life, as his father had done
before him, to his fellow townspeople, she
would herself go behind the counter and wait
on the mocking public. It is to be feared that
Fan would have offered cakes and buns with a
tragedy air which would have repelled all save
the most persistent buyer.

Oliver had assured himself that he had long
ago got over the boyish weakness — barely excusable
in a boy, and the paltriest of all follies
in a man — which, to do men justice, a large proportion
of them cast off with the growth of
their beards, of wincing under the knowledge
that his father had been in trade — in the
primitive trade — of a baker. Oliver had fancied
he had well-nigh forgotten the sneaking sense
of affront at the pit whence he had been dug.
But it seemed the sillier and more James
a social definition was, the more it stuck
in the consciousness of its victim. Oliver, to
his disgust, experienced a sensation of personal

VOL. I. P

discomfort, an inclination to avoid public attention,
when he walked into the Friarton bake-shop
in the light of the heir come to take
possession. He had to relieve his self-disgust
by defying his self-consciousness, standing upas
large as life and lounging purposely in the
sight of the bystanders for a few minutes. He
had to sit down in the retirement of the back-shop
and smoke a pipe to recover his equanimity
as he meditated on the manliness of
Thackeray's Philip on his way through the
world, bowing with perfect nonchalance and
satisfaction from the ■ knife-board ' of an
omnibus, to his fashionable friends in their
carriages. Oliver ended by recalling the occasion
when as a small boy he was led by his
father through the same premises, then in the
process of building. Little Oliver had enjoyed
the inspection at least as much as his father had
enjoyed making it with him, and had listened
with pride while the owner of the place told
the child — when there w T as no thought of

Oliver's developing into a scholar — a gentleman
far above such low aims as baking and selling
bread — that the buildings would be his one day
he should get the chief good out of them after
they had paid their cost to the builder. ' And
you'll make something worth while out of them,
Folly ? You'll be up to all the new improvements
that ain't mere catch pennies ? You'll
bake and sell the best and cheapest bread in
the county — won't you now, my little chap ? '

Yes, Farmer,' little Oliver had answered,
with unhesitating cheerfulness, as children will
undertake without doubt or fear to conquer
kingdoms.

After that recollection, Oliver had only to
rise and perform a pantomime of freeing his
arms from an encumbrance, to get rid of what
shreds remained of that parti-coloured garment
of the conventional fool, which we have most of
us considerable difficulty to escape from wearing,
each in his turn.

p 2

212 OLIVER CONSTABLE,

Oliver was fit to go to the bakehouse, and, in
the sweat of his brow, deliver his speech a second
time — in this instance to his bakers. They were a
set of men both young and middle-aged, some
portly, some lean, all more or less yellow rather
than white-skinned — like the millers, for these
were not the lads who spent a large part of their
day in the open air distributing the bread.
These were journeymen who had not their time
at their own disposal, and even if they had,
would not, unless in perhaps one exceptional
case, have devoted their leisure with the enthusiasm
of genius to the pursuit of any branch
of natural history, taking the student out into
the fields and woods like the famous baker
whose book was the iron-bound coast and the
bleak moors of Caithness.

The sallow complexions of the bakers were
brought out in relief by their white caps as they
stood with their shirt sleeves rolled up to their

elbows. Th? men had left their baking boards
for the day, but still had to keep a vigilant eye
on the ovens in the background. As the party
came forward to listen to the new owner of the
business, they fell naturally into the attitude of
a deputation, with one man representing their
leader pushed well into the foreground, who
instinctively caught up his apron under his left
arm as a sign in character. But he was not
Jim Hull.

Jim Hull was in a white suit like the rest.
But his suit was conspicuously shrunk at the
wrists and ankles as if he had grown away from
the original fit in his growing days and yet had
adhered to the measurement in anticipation of
the time when he should begin tD grow down,
not up, to bend nearer the earth instead of
raising his head high above it. Jim stood a
little apart from the group of bakers and their
future master, as Oliver addressed his views to

his workmen. Contrary to Oliver's anticipations,
Jim preserved at least the attitude of
neutrality in the encounter.

Jim Hull was an elderly man with a compact
face, as if his rather neat and regular
features had been compressed so as to take up
the least room. He had a remarkably clear,
keen eye under the grizzled hair which hung low
on his square forehead, for a man approaching
threescore. He had been a faithful servant in
the Constables' service from youth to approaching
aae. He was not without a kind of feudal
sentiment both to the family and the business.
It gave him a certain amount of gratification
that they should still remain united — that
Master Oliver had not cut the whole concern
and turned his back on it as if it were a disgrace.
On the other hand, Jim had his own
deeply rooted prejudices and his own schemes,
and he was capable, as his former master had
foreseen, of becoming factious and troublesome

if he were thwarted in his opinions, and mortified
in his conceit.

Jim had not in the least anticipated the
course Oliver Constable was taking ; so far from
it, Jim had entertained a project of risking
his bachelor savings and enabling a favourite
nephew who was already a tolerably successful
master baker in a neighbouring village, to buy
the Constables' business, and carry it on in
Friarton with the further help of Jim's experience.


But, to do the old man justice, he would
have resigned this private plan with less reluctance
if he had been satisfied with Oliver
Constable's rearing, or with the young man
personally.

Jim listened and reflected, standing all alive
and vigilant with his hands clasped behind him.
Peter Constable kneaded his batch by my side*
many's the day, when we were lads. He could
set the sponge better than I could, when we were

fellow-apprentices to his father. Peter's mind
was in the baking business from the first. Now
young Oliver has been bred different, and his
mind has been in his books — that's what makes
me mistrustful of his proposal, and not altogether
agreeable to it, though it comes from
his father's son and does him no discredit — I'm
bound to say,' thought Jim. ' 'Any Wedlock
can look out for himself, and I'm not pledged
to take him up, if I were sure of this turn of
affairs. But young Oliver's an mature — that's
what he is — and no good comes of natures.
He'll make ducks and drakes of as fine and solid
a business as ever three generations got together ;
and he's a crotchety lad, too. Hear to him,
what he's telling the lads ! about everything
being above-board — as if there ever was a trade
without its secrets — and of his not passing over
a man's shirking his work and disobeying
orders, as if any tradesman — be he ever so
flourishing — can afford in them times to quarrel

with his best hand, maybe, because he has a
mind of his own, or will go on the spree nows
and tiens, or is not careful to make his batches
every bit as light and sweet as they may be.
Master Oliver has to find this is a world in
which a man must live and let live and act conformable
to circumstances.

He ought to be rare and perfect as a master
that demands a perfect servant, and them is not
the days for that uncommon commodity when
the servants are like to have the ruling of the
masters — instead of the masters the picking and
choosing of the servants. This young fellow
has to learn life out of college, and he had as
well learn Ins trade at the same time before he
takes upon him to be a master baker.'

But Jim Hull kept his counsel in the meanwhile.
It was the foremost man of the group
of bakers who spoke out in reply to Oliver.
Do you mean to say, sir,' said the man, not
disrespectfully, but with a flavour of offence in

his tone, ' that there are to be a set of fresh
arrangements made here, and that we are to
consent beforehand — without knowing what weare
doing — to a whole lot of new-fangled ways?'
And there was a murmur of assent to the objection
from the men behind him.

I don't see the obligation, Webster,' said
Oliver, who simply knew the man by name.

Webster was a young man of not more
than five-and-twenty, though he was put
prominently forward by his fellows. He had
bushy sandy-coloured hair, and a large upturned
nose with deep lion-like lines drawn
from its base to the corners of his mouth.

Oliver spoke calmly, but he felt in some
degree taken aback and ruffled by the commentary
on his words. ' The business has been
conducted on the same principles all along.
But if I see it advisable to make alterations, I
shall let you know, when you must be prepared
to agree to them, or quit my employment.'

All right, sir,' said Webster, promptly. * Of
course you are entitled to say that much, while
you will not refuse to allow that there are two
at a bargain-making.'

So the brief colloquy, which was only
1 feeling the way ' on the part of both master
and man, came to an abrupt conclusion.

Oliver returned to the back-shop, taking
Jim Hull with him.

Sit down, Jim, and make yourself comfortable,'
said Oliver, bringing out a bottle of ale
and glasses from the familiar cupboard and
taking the second armchair. 'Now, what
about that lad Webster who spoke up for the
others ? '

He's a good baker when he likes, which is
more than can be said of most of your speechless
and politicians,' said Jim.

Then he'll like to bake well for me, or
he'll turn out of the bakehouse,' said Oliver,
holding up his glass to the light.

'Stop a bit, not so fast,' said Jim, putting
down his glass for a moment, after a testing sip.
4 Your father always kept good ale in cask and
in bottle because he gave it time to clear and
ripen, so he did. You had better think — if I'm
at liberty to speak,' — he paused, and Oliver
nodded. 'You see, I was afraid new men
might mean new manners,' went on Jim,
clearing his throat. ' What I was going to say
comes to this, where are you to get a better
man to put in Sam Webster's place? You
must consider that, sir, before you speak of
dismissing Sam hot and sharp. Good bakers,
in a country town in especial, ain't as plentiful
as blackberries, now-a-days, Master Oliver ;
and if Sam go and stump the neighbourhood
that, and reading, and holding forth on
them newspapers is second nature to the fellow
if lie tell everywhere what an unreasonable
master young Constable is like to be, why 3-ou
may have to whistle long enough for a new

baker fit to stand in the shoes of Sam, though
he do be off and on troublesome

You and Sam had better wait and find if I
am an unreasonable master,' said Oliver, with a
smile. ■ Who is letting his imagination go
ahead, I should like to know ? I made no unreasonable
stipulation. I did not bid the men
do by me what I am not willing to do by them.
If I am to be a master baker I shall not
feed my customers on husks and worse, Sam
Webster and his allies may rest assured of that
and in order that I may be honest in all my
dealings, I will have proper work out of my
men.'

Jim looked dubious. ' Excuse me, sir, but
do you know what proper work of this sort is,
and what are the conditions of work in general
at this date ? You don't mean to be unreasonable,
but a man's intentions and his deeds
don't always square.'

'Granted. But do you mean there are

trades-unions and strikes among the Friarton
bakers, and that we may be reduced any day —
not as a matter of eccentric taste, or in obedience
to a doctor's prescription, but as a case of necessity
— to eat unleavened bread like the Jews hi
the Passover week, or to bake at home, a lost
art where housewives and maid-servants are
concerned ? '

c It ain't a laughing matter,' Jim rebuked the
young man's levity ; ' and if the things themselves
ain't here — and I have not heard tell yet
of trades-unions and strikes among the bakers
in Friarton — do you think their spirit ain't about
in the air ? Do you think the bakers alone of
working men,' continued Jim, with an accent of
injured esprit de corps , ' will be content to remain
without a voice, ay, and a precious influential
voice, in all that concerns them nearly —
their hours of work, their mode of work, and
mode of pay, and all the rest of it ? Are the
bakers to be left behind when every other

specie of working man is having his say ? I
should not have consented to that myself, when
I was a young baker ; now, I am nigh an old
man,' Jim cooled down at the recollection, ' and
I'm free to admit that I don't see much good
comes of speechifying and vapouring,' ended
Jim, drinking off his ale and drawing a long
sigh after the refreshment.

1 Well hit at me, old " specie," ' thought
Oliver, while he said, quietly, ' Nobody is preventing
any man from having his say in what
particularly concerns him. It is one of the privileges
that living in the present generation has
given him. I should be the last person to object
to it. I intended the men to take what I said to
them into consideration ; only I can't, for the life
of me, see what just and rational argument they
have to bring against it ; I touched on no debatable
point. If they are worth their salt in
morals as in ability, they are surely willing to
give a fair exchange of work for wages. And

if the men have a grain of common sense, they
must grant that no organised system of work
can be maintained without one person in
authority to enforce discipline on those under

him.'

1 The capital and labour question ain't so
easily settled as you suppose, Master Oliver,'
said Jim, shaking his head doggedly if somewhat
evasively. 'At the best it is a very
ticklish matter, and I only hope you won't burn
your fingers meddling with it.'

I can guess you are of opinion that I am
not setting about the task in the proper fashion ;
but wait till you see how I get on, Jim,' said
Oliver, good-humouredly ; ' don't damp my
spirits by forecasting evil.'

c I wouldn't wish to do that,' said Jim, more
formally than heartily or cheerfully. ' That don't
belong to my place. But I'm nigh an old man,
about as old as your father, and grown grey
with the Constables : if putting my experience

at your service could have been of any use, it
belonged to my booty.'

Thanks,' said Oliver, quickly. * You are
quite right to ease your conscience. But I am
afraid I must earn my experience like the rest
of the world — I must have my fling — try to
work out my theories, and when they breakdown,
then begin to mend them — do you take
me, Jim ? '

k Oh, ay, sir,' said Jim with polite dryness,
and I had as well say good morning to you,
and go about my own business in the bake-shop.'


Oliver let him go, and sat alone twisting
his stalwart body in his armchair. ' The game
would not be worth the candle,' he reflected,
4 if one paid heed only to these clods in the
mill and cheeky swaggerers in the bakehouse ;
and there is old Jim, conservative to the backbone,
even while he is full to the tongue of
class prejudice and jealousy. He feels the

VOL. I. Q

world turning upside down with him ; yet he
sets his face against the only hope of control for
the new spirit. But the principles of right and
wrong are eternal and as capable of being
fought out in a mill and a bakehouse as on any
other battle-field.'

CHAPTEE IX.

THE NEW TENANTS OF COPLEY FARM.

Oliver was standing before the mulberry-bush
in the mill-house court watching the colony of
white ducks which waddled up from the water
and claimed their right in the dropping mulberries.


He had stepped out of one of the windows
of the parlour, which Fan, with tacit reproach
and soreness of spirit, had re-constituted the
family sitting-room. Since Oliver chose to be a
miller and baker, the old mill-house parlour was
in keeping with his calling and good enough for
him. Oliver welcomed the change with much
satisfaction which escaped being damped from

his want of full knowledge of what was passing
in his sister's mind, and his absolute incapacity
of sympathising with it.

He stood munching up his shoulders, his
hands in his pockets. He was bareheaded, so
that the light summer wind lifted his hair,
blowing it across his forehead as near his eyes
as the shortness of the locks would allow, without
discomposing him. The same wind every
moment plucked off and strewed about the last
full-blown red and white rose petals and reversed
the leaves of the mulberry and the
willow round the corner, turning their white
sides uppermost and silvering whole branches
at once.

Oliver was wondering why he should feel
any particular pleasure in contemplating the
ducks wriggling their short necks with delight,
rolling about like ships at sea, quivering their
tail-tufts of feathers, making rushes to snatch
the beaded maroon morsel, each duck from his

neighbour, at last gobbling clown the mulberry
with an intensity of relish which in its breadth
of display was farcical in the extreme. Bat
Oliver did find so much satisfaction in the
spectacle that he was tempted to propose to
take Sally Pope's office out of her hands, and
feed the ducks from their basket of mill refuse
every morning. They would soon learn to
know his step and voice as they knew Sally's.
Pooh ! it was all egotism, to be gratified by a
duck's recognition. It was a thread of vanity
which in Rousseau reached the diseased pitch
of imagining that the sparrows were chattering
jibes at him. But how much more lovable,
after all, if less respectable, was a vain man or
woman than your Lucifer or Luciferina who-made
a boast of his or her proud indifference !

Oliver was aware that he had a sneaking-fondness
for approbation. He would have
liked Ted Green and every hulking hobble-decoy
about the mill, as well as Fan and Sally

Pope with her subordinates, to have a real
regard for him and trust in him. He would
have liked old Jim Hull and the men in
the bakehouse to believe that he meant them
well, and would serve them no less than himself,
if he could. It was a weakness of course, and
all that he was likely to get for his pains, was
that everybody would incline to suspect him of
being a humbug where he was not a fool, and
no one would understand that he was setting
himself, according to his light, to be a good
citizen, though the effort in his case went in
some respects against the grain.

Catherine Hilliard had plenty of sympathy
and admiration to spare for every good citizen
and patriot, a history of whose achievements
got between the boards of a book ; nay, she
wasted interest and regard on some patriots of
rather doubtful complexion — Count Egmont
and Camille Desmoulins, for example. £he
only saw them in their dress-coats and revived

togas, as the men figured in print ; she could not
guess that in their dressing-gowns and slippers,
or what stood for their undress, the fellows were
self-indulgent and ' rough customers ' enough,
like ordinary men. But a simple tradesman was
nobody in Catherine's eyes, because his ambition
reached no higher than to give back to his
branch of trade that integrity and excellence
which ought to be the crowning distinction of
all honest trade in an honest — not to say a
Christian nation — because he would magnify his
peculiar field of work and make it honourable,
feeding the people with material food convenient
for their bodily life, as Frederick Perches,
the prince of booksellers, strove in his day to
raise the book trade of Germany and sought
to feed the minds and hearts of his countrymen
with spiritual food. It was a trifle to her that
the faintest approach should be made to elevating
whole classes, with regard to which the
present absurd and dishonouring creed was

that no member could rise without abandoning
his homely trade and his fellow-traders. In the
name of Heaven, if the craft were honest, could
it not be ennobled in its loyal performance ?
Had it not been so with many a craft, such as
those of the goldsmith, the weaver, and the
dyer, now treated with comparative contempt,
in old burgher towns and free cities, when the
craftsmen were men of genius, skill, and taste
far advanced in civilisation ?

People might tell him — Oliver, that such
an ornamental craft as that of a goldsmith, for
instance, requiring notable skill and taste, was
one thing, and a purely useful business like that
of a baker, was another. But he was prepared
to show that the fine arts were very far from
being what their idle amateur worshippers, not
their true and humble disciples, represented
them to be, in the economy of a people. He
did not cry down art or learning, perhaps it
would have been easier for him, on the whole,

if he had appreciated each of them less. Yet
bread — not art — was the staff of life, arid One
who had come among them as the King of men
had not thought it beneath his Divinity to work
miracles in order to give common bread to
hungry multitudes.

There was a notion current among competent
authorities, that the physique and stamina
of English men and women, especially in the
large towns, were undergoing a gradual disastrous
deterioration. If this were true and
arrived at its natural culmination, the world
might not fare the better for the lapse of that
portion of the Anglo-saxon race which had
elected itself, in its more vigorous days, the
pioneer of civilisation and the champion of
liberty all over the world. Unadulterated
food — which also inferred less craving for intoxicating
drink — better lodging, legislation
which should enact and compel freer space,
purer air, fresher water, and the light of day,.

ought to do something to arrest the progress
downwards. But the great hope, under God
and his Son, lay in the recovery of true manliness
and womanliness ; to work — not dream —
1 for the love of the work, and not for the wages
alone ; to be in the world as one who served
with a will ; to recognise fully that life did not
consist of its lower gains, equally Philistine
whether they belonged to a respectable bankbook
or a disreputable betting-book. For
when one came to the rank materialism of the
things, it did not so much signify whether the
object of desire and attainment implied being
made secretary of state or mayor of Friarton,
churchwarden of St. Philip's or deacon of the
chapel, or whether it descended to the lower
level of the possibility of drinking champagne
on occasions, as a variety on unlimited gin-and-water.


Oliver was brought up short in his cogitations.
He heard footsteps and voices approaching,

and conjectured they belonged to two men
whose figures in grey suits and wide-awakes he
had seen ten minutes before, from the other
side of the Mill, making their way through
Copley Grange Park. He had remarked the
new comers particularly, since he had not
heard that the Squire had come home, and
visitors from that quarter proved comparatively
rare when the family were not at Copley
Grange. The Mill had to put up with the
plague of its picturesqueness, and Oliver found
himself called upon to display the good citizenship
he so insisted upon, in giving up a portion
of his privacy to render the picturesqueness
public property. He did not come out of the
ordeal without flaw. Certainly, he refrained
from inaugurating his reign as many another
good citizen has inaugurated his, by erecting
barriers where his father had raised none.
Oliver objected to calling his mill his castle,
and defying anybody who was not on mill

business, and with whom Oliver was not on
speaking terms, from approaching its time-mellowed
walls. Therefore he scouted Ted Green's
suggestion to keep a watch-dog, even on chain,
and for the protection of the outlying sacks of
wheat and flour.

But Oliver Constable did not show himself
remarkably cordial to absolute strangers, especially
when they came from Copley Grange.
On the contrary, he avoided them almost as
resolutely as Fan did. He would make a point
that the place should be free to the Dadds and
Polleys of Friarton, or, for that matter, to any
inhabitant of the town ; for he earnestly wished
that his fellow-townsmen of all classes — the
lower the better — should profit by the rural
beauty of Friarton Mill. But perhaps Catherine
Hilliard was right when she said that he
looked upon those persons who were not happy
enough to belong to the trading class as outside
his purpose. Indeed, Oliver Constable's relations

with the upper ten at Oxford, and all he
had insensibly acquired from them, only rendered
him more determined to have nothing todo
with them. He waged no war with his
superiors in social rank, but their respective
paths lay wide apart. There were plenty of
tuft-hunters and eager satellites struggling in
the wake of the objects of their homage without
Oliver's adding himself to the number. Indeed,
there was danger in the association ; for the
mere conception of another social atmosphere
had spoilt Fan for her world, and her world
for Fan. It should not spoil him — at least, sofar
as his work was concerned. It is very difficult
for an ardent reformer to steer clear of
partisanship.

On the present occasion Oliver put up his
back, and turned it in its rounded form on his
company. At the same time he accomplished
a feat in balancing himself, while winding one
long leg round the other, much as if he were

borrowing a pattern from a duck now standing
at ease on a single leg before him.

That's our man,' said a genial voice behind
him. ' I thought I knew the back, and the
attitude nails him beyond mistake. Constable,
what are you doing here ? '

Oliver could not lend a deaf ear to the
enquiry ; besides, he wondered who was making
it. He wheeled round, and saw that the
two figures in grey he had spied from a
distance, had developed into two men — with
whom he had been on terms of slight acquaintance,
though they had not lived in his set, at
Oxford. But what was a bare acquaintance on
the banks of the Isis threatened to assert itself
as a positive friendship up in Holmshire, on the
threshold of Oliver's mill.

When Oliver considered Harry Stanhope's
rashness and thoughtlessness, Oliver felt Ik* had
not a moment to lose. He had never concealed
his antecedents like poor Tom Caves, but he

must now state roundly what they had led to,
before Harry swore eternal comradeship on the
spot, and poor Horace backed his brother in
this as in all else.

What am I doing here ? ' echoed Oliver,
with a laugh. ' Everything. I am in my
proper place. This is Friarton Mill, and I am
the miller.'

1 Well, this is a go ! ' said Harry, without
the least attempt at the concealment of his surprise.
' Isn't it awfully jolly, Horry ? ' The
brother appealed to nodded in confirmation of
the extreme silliness of the situation, which
Oliver was slow to perceive.

I never knew these Stanhopess had such a
feeling for natural scenery,' said Oliver to himself,
puzzled at his acquaintances' manner of
taking his communication. ' I thought — give
Harry a rowing path or a hunting field, and he
would ask no more, while the other had not a
mind of his own. But I suppose they admire

this,' and Oliver glanced around him complacently.


But Harry was ready to supply a different
explanation of his enthusiasm. ' I knew you
hailed from a farm or a mill, old fellow he
said, lightly ; ' but I always thought the " 'Varsity
" old wives were starching and stiffening
you, preparatory to turning you out a parson
■or a schoolmaster. I am glad you knew a
thing worth two of that. And Horry and I
are in great luck to unearth you here.'

Oliver still remained in a fog as to what the
luck could consist of, unless Harry had private
views on the fishing in the Brook, and counted
on Oliver's making it sure to him. There was
one piece of hospitality which, as Oliver was
not really a churl, he did not see he could
avoid dispensing. He must invite these fellows
into the house to join Fan's tea-table. He
hoped Fan would forgive it, because they were
old college men — not merely sightseers.

6 You don't ask what brings us here,' said
Harry — clearly eager to tell his secret. ' Why,
we are nearly as much at home — at least we
shall be soon — as you are. We are the new
tenants of Copley Grange Farm. Horry and I
are going in for being English yeomen instead
of Ceylon coffee planters, as our governors
intended we should be. The doctors found
Horry's liver would not stand the tropics, and
as the old man and I have always stuck
together, the entire project fell to the ground.
We made up our minds to rough it at home instead
of in the colonies — to descend a few steps
in the ladder here, instead of crossing the seas
to do it there. Horry and I ain't either swells
or snobs, and we haven't got handles to our
names to make the descent more difficult. We
thought we should like nothing better than to
become yeomen — since we were not born
squires and could not very well be gamekeepers
or grooms without ceasing to continue our own

vol. I. R

masters. There are no English regiments — the
more's the pity — such as the French used to have,
into which gentlemen cadets could enlist without
losing caste altogether, and being reduced to
associate with the scum of the streets and the
fields in the guard room. Any people that we
have left, to speak of, are all settled in the
northern counties, well out of the reach of
the trial of coming across Horry and me driving
in a market cart, and selling our own pigs.
For that matter, princes of the blood and dukes
are pleased to play at being farmers, and I do
not see why poor gentlemen may not slide
down gracefully into the real tiling. We are
of age and can do what we like, but we have
also persuaded the uncles and aunts into giving
their consent to our taking this farm and investing
our princely capital in it. We have
got a good bailiff to put us up to the wrinkles,
and we mean to £0 the whole ho.'

4 You haven't asked my advice,' said Oliver,

but I am afraid it won't answer — this won't
answer, Stanhope.'

4 Now, look here, Constable,' argued the
sanguine advocate, ' you think we are going in
for being gentlemen farmers, and so will fall
between stools, but it is nothing of the kind.
Didn't I say we were going the whole hog?
Whatever that appropriate phrase may mean,
we are to learn to do everything for ourselves,
just as we should have done in Queensland or
Natal. It is not the season for holding a plough,
else I should have tried it tomorrow. But weare
in time for the first crop of hay, and weare
to help at the harvest. Won't it be jolly
fun, like a page out of " The Vicar of Wakefield,"
which somebody gave me to read when I

had scarlet fever at school a century ago only

I am afraid the Miss Primroses are still more
out of date, and will not show among the haycocks
next week. We thought of doing without
a woman-servant, and making our own beds

R 2

and cooking onr own grub. But since old
Horry is not as strong as a horse like me, we
judged it better to change our coats by degrees
You were right there,' said Oliver, asking
himself whether Harry Stanhope were a greater
young fool than he, Oliver, had ever taken the
trouble to rate the lad — the most thoroughgoing
donkey Oliver had encountered — whether
Harry were in earnest or simply talking bosh,
knowing it to be bosh all the time? And if there
should turn out to be some foundation for what
Stanhope was telling him, as, after all, Oliver had
no reason to question, here was a fine complication
of the difficulties of his position in these
fellows establishing themselves on the next farm
to him, with the deliberate intention, however
wildly carried out, of exiling themselves from
their own class and naturalising themselves in
Oliver's! He did not for a moment entertain
the idea that the Stanhopess would aid him in
his aims. The young men would simply import

their own faults and follies into a sphere
in which the brothers had neither part nor lot,
while they would assuredly ruin themselves ina
pecuniary sense.

I say, Constable, you are a nice liberal-minded,
benevolent fellow, not to speak an encouraging
word to two poor beggars seeking to
better themselves,' interposed Harry Stanhope —
partly in chaff, partly with a deeper meaning
in his words. c You are trying on the supercilious
dodge. But what would you have us
turn our white hands to ? ' holding up a pair
of paws very brown and a good deal hacked
about the knuckles. ' We haven't got any
brains to speak of, between the two, Our
education has been neglected, what with private
tutors and Oxford. Poor Horry was bowled
out without any fault of his as soon as the
wicket was set up,' he lowered his voice and
said the last sentence in a cautious undertone.
6 We are a likely pair to shine in the learned

professions, ain't we ? ' he resumed, with fresh
spirit and light bravado. ' All the people who
have the misfortune to be connected with us
have been in despair about what was to become
of us ever since we were small shavers in
petticoats. Indeed, I fancy it was rather a
mistake our being here at all. They might
have disposed of me in a marching regiment,
where I might have had a fair chance of being
comfortably knocked on the head and decently
put out of sight, in a fashion becoming my
station. But the Maori or Zulu, or whatever
gallant native gentleman was to do the deed,
must have looked sharp about it, else I was
tolerably certain to go to the dogs or the Jews
and create a scandal in the mean time. I put
it to you how could I have helped it, Constable
? I could not flatter myself, and what
was more no groaning old fogey of a relation
could cherish the forlorn hope that I was endowed
with the genius of keeping out of debt and

rising in the army, while all the time I should
belong to a set who might be tailors' sons and
duffers of various kinds, yet would, for the moat
part, have ten and twenty guineas to spend in
proportion to my one. Then we were two,' —
here he dropped his voice again, and spoke more
quickly to hide some under-current of feeling.
By Jove, I was not going to leave him in the
lurch, to be recommended to board and vegetate
in the country with one of your needy
parsons, as if Horry were a lunatic, or to be
treated as a poor relation, and a hanger-on at
other men's tables.'

The speaker, whom Oliver had known incorrigibly
light of heart and light of head
in a world where even youthful beards are
beginning to wag with ominous seriousness,
finished with some genuine though repressed
indignation.

The listener could not refuse to Harry Stanhope
the credit of fidelity to the solitary obligation

he had owned — that of honest brother ly
regard, and of a certain amount of reason in his
statement.

However, before Oliver could make any
amends, Harry Stanhope set upon him again
with his mixture of confident assertion and gay
banter. ' I should call it a shabby trick to treat
us as intruders in your ranks, even if you yourself
were not the greatest humbug going. A
reading man and a prize man, to pretend to
grind at any other stuff than Latin or Greek or
German philosophy ! I bet you I could do it a
great deal better myself without so much as
being coached beforehand. There was a song I
used to sing about the miller who " was drowned
in his own mill dam," and I remember a couple
of farces I have seen played on country town
boards and at circuses. There was a miller of
Brentford who rode like Dick Turpin, and there
was a Scotch beggar who pounded a king at
Diamond Brig. I could take the parts in

private theatricals any day. I am not sure,
indeed, whether I am not better cut out for the
role of a jolly miller than for that of a heavy
farmer.'

You do not know what you are speaking
about,' said Oliver, hotly, ' if you identify bona-fide
millers with stage ruffians.' Then he was
struck with the absurdity of quarrelling with
Harry Stanhope on such a count, ' Come along
with me,' he said, abruptly ; ' I'll show you a
mill-house and my sister will give us some tea,
if you don't prefer a glass of ale.'

Thanks,' said Harry with cheerful alacrity,
either will be uncommonly acceptable. Weare
as hungry as hawks and as thirsty as washerwomen.
She won't mind our muddy boots —
will she ? We have been trying to make out
the boundaries of our fields, and it saved
trouble and felt professional to walk in the
ditches, instead of the growing corn.'

Oliver was dubious that Fan would mind

more than the muddy boots in the unceremonious
addition to her tea-table, but he was in for it,
and it could not be helped.

Harry and Horace Stanhope were the
grandsons of an impecunious English peer.
The boys, together with an only sister, had been
left orphans at an early age with small patrimonies
to fall back upon. The children's kindred
and guardians had been, as Harry represented
them, a good deal at a loss what to do
with the lads in those hard times, where
slenderly-provided-for sprigs of the aristocracy
are concerned. It was far easier to deal with
the girl, the interest of whose portion would pay
the expenses of her education and furnish her
with dress and pocket-money at a modest
rate afterwards, while a childless aunt undertook
to give her a home and bring her out
in society until she attained her natural goal, a
suitable establishment. But not only were the
two lads destitute of any special ability which

should make up for their lack of fortune among
their compeers, one of the brothers, Horace, the
elder of the two, though he was always put
second to Harry, had started in life heavily
weighted in any race for worldly success. From
the effects of an illness in childhood in which
the infection was caught from his younger
brother, Horace had contracted a degree of
deafness, not enough to reduce him to an ear-trumpet,
but sufficient to put him at a serious disadvantage
in the ordinary routine of school and
college, and in social intercourse.

The two brothers had always been inseparable
; but though they formed a marked instance
of fraternal alliance, they were as unlike in
person and character as devoted friends sometimes
are. The very nicknames bestowed on
them at school and college, which burlesqued
their close association, referred as often to
the contrast as to the union between them.
They were dubbed not only ' Romulus and

Remus,' and ' Hengist and Horsa,' but 'Valentine
and Orisons and ' Day and Night,' or any other
couple of terms linked yet opposed to each
other, which schoolboy and undergraduate wits
could compass. Harry was a fair-haired, sunburned,
comely young athlete, great in muscular
development, the popular champion of boat-races
and cricket-fields, though he had not
reached the eminence of figuring in his university's
' eight ' or ' eleven,' and so had been
denied the crowning glory of forming one of
the heroes in any spring or summer at Purveyor
Lord's. He was so frank and cordial, so
honestly heedless of his own interests, no less
than those of his neighbours, that it was hard,
even for men as unlike him as Oliver Constable
was, to resist altogether the influence of Harry's
involuntary good fellowship when they happened
to come in contact with it.

Horace was sickly, sallow and stunted, with
a good deal of the captious testiness and jealous

moroseness which are said to distinguish unfavourably
the mass of the victims of deafness
from the bulk of their fellow-sufferers from
blindness. Horace Stanhope was as hard as
Harry was easy to get on with, and if left to
himself would have held aloof from his fellow-creatures
as sedulously as Harry cast himself
with a disarming confidence on their sympathy.
The single exception Horace made was in
favour of his brother, between whom and himself
there had existed a strong attachment —
cemented by the curious attraction of extremes
since the two young men were babies.

Harry saved his brother from utter isolation.
The silent saturnine lad, shut out by one
of the chief doors of the senses from joining
in much of human effort and enjoyment,
whether ' at kirk or market ' or by friends'
hearths, transferred his active share in the
struggle of life and in its joys and sorrows to
his brother, and vested and centred in Harry the

main part of Horace's ambition, pleasure, and
pain, apart from what was purely physical. He
elected to live as it were vicariously, to take
his experience by proxy. In accordance with
this choice, wherever Harry went, Horace followed
at his heels. Harry's friends — and he
was pre-eminently a young man of many comrades
— making them for good or for evil wherever
he went, Horace immediately adopted —
although they might be as unlike him as he was
unlike Harry — in Horace's silent, rather cantankerous
fashion, which caused his friendship to
prove somewhat of an infliction to Harry's congenial
associates. Whenever Horace shook
off the heavy fetters of his infirmity, and, instead
of being doggedly indifferent, showed
himself alert and interested, one might be sure
it was in something that concerned Harry.

The dedication of Horace's blighted life was
made mutely even with regard to himself, for
his was a nature as shy and reticent as it was

tenacious. And it was an undreamt of mystery
to Harry's transparent, unreflective disposition.
Harry had only an instinctive sense that poor
old Horry would be lost without him — Harry.
Why, his was the only voice which, while still
pitched in a natural key, Horry could distinguish
without difficulty — and did not that
point plainly to the conclusion, insisted the
sapient Harry, that the two were meant to
hang out together ? No, no, a wife, though she
were ten*times a beauty and an heiress, could
not induce him to cut the connection. And the
advantage was not all on one side, Harry went
on to argue — for lie was generous in his youthful
flush of manliness — he himself was like one
of those little fellows who are put out in repeating
their lessons, if the youngsters have not a
pet button to finger. Now, Horry was his button.
Harry was convinced he could not get
a single inning at cricket, or play billiards save
like a muff — horrible misadventure ! — if he

did not have Horry to look out, or mark for
him.

This was the pair whom Oliver Constable
brought to Fan's tea-table that summer afternoon.


Fan received the strangers with very formal
courtesy, until Oliver mentioned them more
particularly as fellow-Oxonians, when she suddenly
brightened all over and became gracious
to the tips of her fingers, and there was something
specially flattering in Fan Constable's
earnest abandonment of graciousness.

Oliver groaned a little privately — going off
as he did on a wrong cue. All women were
led captive by good looks and winning tongues,
and Harry Stanhope was a bonnie, pleasant
boy enough to serve for the pair, to extend his
passport to yellow-skinned, turned-tempered
Horace. But Oliver would have thought that
Fan had more sense than to be carried away by
the eyes — granted that in measuring Harry

from head to foot, they found a sop for their
individual weakness in the fact that his whole
air and every movement, no less than his clothes
rough and ill-used, from his battered wide-awake
to his muddy boots — belonged originally
to no farmer's ' cut,' but were the bearing and
dress of a better-born, better-bred man.

But all the same, Oliver comforted himself
with reckoning Fan would be thoroughly disgusted
when she learnt the young man's precious
scheme. For if Oliver had wounded her
sense of propriety by sticking to their father's
trade from worthy motives, must she not be
scandalised outright by the Stanhopess' mean-spirited
desertion of their post and voluntary
abasement simply to save themselves from the
trouble of shaping a career and securing a provision
for their wants in any other fashion ?

Oliver had not yet gauged the depths of
a woman's inconsistency. He found himself
twice deceived in his clever man's egregious

vol. i. s

simplicity. When Fan was told the news that
the Stanhopess had become the tenants of Copley
Grange Farm, she grew radiant, and threw
herself into Harry's mad project with positive
enthusiasm.

Oliver looked on and listened with open-eyed
wonder. He had not objected altogether
to his sister's being won over to cordiality
towards the Stanhopess as his former associates.
He had noticed with ready approval how she
had set herself to entertain Horace — as most in
need of entertainment, taking pains to raise and
modulate her clear voice to suit his deafness,
and striving to find subjects which he might
care to discuss. It was the innate gentlewoman
showing itself in Fan as in all true
women of whatever rank, which caused her, in
the office of hostess, to select the guest who waa
least attractive and most apt to he neglected,
and to lavish on him her chief cares. Oliver
had admired the delicate consideration which

lay at the foundation of a lady's duty in this
respect. He had also appreciated the tact
which had helped Fan to discover soon that her
little attentions only bored Horace, since he
preferred to be let alone. The perception
caused Fan to turn and join in Oliver's conversation
with Harry. Then her brother was
amazed and certainly not edified to find that
Fan, in spite of her declared opinions, was
warmly applauding and even, as it seemed to
Oliver, proposing to back Harry Stanhope in
his enterprise. 4 Oliver will be so glad to have
you and your brother for neighbours ; ' she put
the sentiment quite gratuitously into Oliver's
mouth in his presence ; ' and if he or I — sometimes
a woman's ideas are of some value where
housekeeping is concerned — can be of the least
service to you, we shall be very much pleased.'
Oliver could not believe his ears. It
was not that there was the least suspicion
of forwardness or indecorum in Fan's sons

2

gaseous friendliness. The girl was perfectly-incapable
of such breaches of good taste. But
it was evident to anyone who knew her, that
Fan was interested and excited — to the extent of
being carried out of herself, in sheer sympathy
with an adventure, which any reasonable manor
woman might have held as certain to provoke
her contempt.

Sally Pope, coming in herself to remove the
tea-tray, in the accidental absence of another
servant, could not refrain from casting a questioning
glance at Oliver. That appeal of Sally's
eyes said, ' Do you see Miss Fan ? She is
coming out of her shell for once in her life.
What makes her, that is so ill to please, so
rarely taken with what the talkative young
gentleman is saying ? '

Indeed, Fan's ordinary quiet, reserved
manner in society was transformed as Oliver
had never seen it before to a stranger, though he
had always been aware that it masked an

ardent temperament. She was exclaiming
brightly, in answer to Harry's far from discriminating
praise of the mill-house parlour.
In fact the lad's satisfaction, though he was
guiltless of any intention to produce such an
impression, gave Oliver Constable the impression
that the family sitting-room reminded
Harry, in a confused not disagreeable way, of
the parlour of one of those rural alehouses
which his pursuits had led him to frequent a
good deal.

6 I am so happy to hear you like this room,'
said Fan, ' because the parlour at Copley Grange
Farm ' (which any impartial person would
have pronounced greatly inferior in Oliver's
judgment, and which Fan had been in the
habit of holding in very low estimation) ' is just
such another homely, old-fashioned place. I
must believe they have their merits, since they
strike you favourably. You have always been
fond of a country life, you tell me ; then I think

you will like being a farmer. Hay-making, of
course, is charming, and bean-hoeing is not bad
to watch, at least. And you will take a deep
interest in your cattle and poultry, won't you ? '

1 What has come over Fan,' was Oliver's
dumb protest. 'She never made hay in her
life. I did not suppose she condescended to
observe there was a species of pulse called
beans. As for ducks, she only considers them
in the light of furnishing dishes for the table. I
am convinced she has not looked into a duck's
nest, or fed the ducklings afterwards, since
she was herself a chick of five years old.'

In the meantime, in answer to Harrv Stanhope's
fervent assurance that he luxuriated in
all country work and adored every kind of livestock,
Fan was saying, almost wistfully, she
appeared so anxious that he should not be disappointed
in his ridiculous experiment, ' And
you will not mind that you arc tenant instead of
landlord ? '

Not a bit,' answered sanguine Harry, who
had not minded anything, save not getting his
play, since he was born.

Oliver was inclined to tax his sister with
insincerity and with indiscretion in pledging
them to support Harry Stanhope in his delusion,
the moment the visitors left. But before
he could begin, Fan, still in high spirits, took his
arm and walked him out to the garden. Half
of it was already in cold shadow, while in the
other half the long slanting rays of the sun were
kindling the low beds of pink saponaria into a
rosy red, shining through the blue cups of the
nemophila — warming them to the tone of the
summer sky, performing a fine process of silvering
on the white bells of the tall campanula.

c Isn't it jolly ? ' demanded Fan, taking the
first word, in her delight departing from her
correct Queen's English, which was generally
as perfect as Becky Sharp's French. ' To think
that two cf your old college friends should come

and settle in this way on the very next farm
to us ! '

Was it the simple rebound from the mortification
with which she had seen herself and
him turned back to the old vulgar, illiterate
circle of the tradespeople of Friarton, which
caused Fan to clutch at a straw, and induced
her to open her heart to the Stanhopess?

Nice ! ' growled Oliver. ' You are a nice
sensible young woman to think so. It will bethe
greatest nuisance going. In the first place,
the Stanhopess are not friends of mine — don't
run off with that big blunder at starting.
They were once in a reading-party under my
charge — a beastly drag they proved, and we
nodded and exchanged a word or two in the
meadows or on the water from that time.
That is the head and tail of our friendship.
Nobody but Harry Stanhope would have made
a claim upon it.'

But you acknowledged the claim at your

own door,' said Fan, quickly ; ' and are you not
gratified by his turning farmer ? ' she added,
innocently. ' It is quite in your own way, and
I admit that in him it is romantic'

1 In my way ! ' cried Oliver, losing breath
at the injustice of the assertion ; ' in my way
to intrude where I am not wanted ! And you
to welcome romance ! You, w T ho boast you are
the most matter-of-fact girl, who defend the
commonplace ambition to rise in life, to cut
trade, to go in for a profession — which requires
a smattering of Greek and Latin, or a speaking
acquaintance with civil or ecclesiastical law, or
with drill and musketry — to wear a wig, ora
cassock, or a red coat — the last strictly
on parade — without the smallest title to
put on either — to dine at seven or eight
instead of one o'clock, and look down, with the
intense snobbery of a deserter from his ranks,
on the class of shopkeepers ! You, Fan, who
scout any ambition which has a wider scope

and a less selfish aim, and call it either high-flown
or low-life, equally despicable in both
lights.'

4 But Mr. Stanhope is not proposing to bea
shopkeeper,' said Fan, with narrow literalness
; ' and don't you know a gentleman, a
dozen generations deep, can do anything ? '
she asserted, defiantly, gathering a cluster of
heliotrope and smelling it.

c It is the first time I ever heard such a
sublime dogma from the lips of anybody who
fell short of being an idiot or a scamp,' retorted
Oliver.

Oh ! my dear, dear boy, how can you be
so abominably rude? ' said Fan, driven to laugh
outright at his vehemence.

A gentleman's birthright must be worth
having,' snorted Oliver, still in towering indignation.
c It is a pity he does not improve the
advantage oftener by doing something which
deserves to be chronicled. And if he fails,

what can be expected from the canaille who
buy and sell ? '

Oliver, don't pretend to misunderstand
me,' remonstrated Fan, relapsing quickly after
her short flight into her customary earnestness
— even with her proneness to feel aggrieved,
getting angry on her own account ; ' you know
very well what I mean.'

1 I defy anybody to arrive at the meaning
of so contradictory a person,' said Oliver,,
growing cool as she waxed hot, picking up a
stone and aiming it at an audacious sparrow
on a neighbouring bough.

'You are perfectly aware,' explained poor
Fan, with laborious iteration, 4 that I consider a
man who has had the education of a gentleman,
and lived in the society of gentlemen, is
qualified to belong to their rank if he will.'

Thanks ; I quite agree with you there ;.
we only differ in what constitutes a gentleman.'

Then let us agree to differ,' said Fan,.

coming down from her stilts for the moment,
and making an overture towards reconciliation.
Don't quarrel any more this evening. I really
want you to tell me if you think Clarke is
right in this border, for I can never make up
my mind.'

Oliver's opinion was at her service, as his
hands and feet would have been if she had
cared to employ them. And he agreed with
her that the dispute had gone far enough,
when it was assuming too sharp a tone.

That evening impressed itself on Oliver
Constable's mind, as certain clays and nights
which, in themselves, at the time, have offered
uo elements of distinction to arrest and excite
us, stand out through all our subsequent
histories. He could recall each incident and
feature afterwards. The fact that he w r as the
person to introduce the two Stanhopess at Fan's
tea-table, the characteristics and doings of
the little incongruous group which gathered in

the mill-house parlour — fair-haired, broad-shouldered,
sanguine Harry trotting out his
chimera ; dark, narrow-chested, melancholia
Horace leaning forward in the shadow to catch
Harry's words, and his alone, content in the
middle of his natural scepticism to accept and
act on Harry's version of their prospects ; Fanes
conversion to Harry's views and the effect
his influence had on her ; with Oliver himself
playing the part of a critical and condemnatory
chorus to the others. — all remained legibly
written on Oliver's memory. And the second
act in the garden was preserved to his consciousness
in the same involuntary manner.
He did not forget its smallest accessories — the
low sunk sun touching the beds and borders
with a final glory, and shining dazzlingly in
his eyes and Fan's, while she was unwontedly
gay, and he quenched her gaiety by his savageness.
Yet the two had ' fallen out ' and made
it up again, as even the most affectionate

brothers and sisters will do, thousands of times
before, without the circumstances making the
smallest mark on his mind.

Harry Stanhope was well accustomed to
find himself a favourite with women; and he
was of an age and temperament which inclined
him to repay the obligation impartially and
liberally. But there was a fascination to Harry,
little as he was accustomed to analysis, in the
manner in which Fan Constable's dignified
reserve melted at his approach into a proportionate
depth and wealth of cordiality. He
had a perception that the conquest of her
formal coldness was not a common occurrence,
and was flattering to his bearing and address.
And somehow the lad, with his volatile disposition,
had a capacity which Oliver Constable
did not possess, of fathoming and rightly estimating
a woman's nature. Fan's brother, who
had known her all her life, might accuse her
most erroneously of changing like the wind ;

but the stranger, who had only known her an
hour, guessed, without being in fault, that steadfastness
was the key-note to her character.

A famous acquisition Constable's turning
up at Friarton Mill will be to us,' Harry announced
complacently, if brokenly, between
puffs of his pipe, when he and Horace trudged
over to such accommodation as had been improvised
for them at their farm. 'We have
fallen on our feet. There is not only Constable,
an old acquaintance and a man to be trusted —
all the more that he is apt to be as crusty as
any governor's port — there is Miss Constable,
an awfully nice girl and thundering ladylike to
boot. Upon my word, Horry, if millers'
daughters are like that, I don't wonder at fellows
getting spoony and spouting verses about them,
and I do wonder at fine ladies holding their own.
What a pair of eyes she has got ! as dark a
brown as those of " Pin Him," ' naming with fond
regret the supreme pet of the host of dogs

which had in their time called Harry master,
which, having passed away from earth to the
happy hunting ground of dogs, was farther
exalted in her late owner's fond imagination. It
was an immense compliment from Harry when he
compared Fan's eyes to the orbs of the departed
'Pin Him,' and when he added with pensive
meditativeness, ' I dare say she would prove
just such another little brick in standing by her
friends. How kind she was after the first ten
minutes ! '

c I think Constable might have had the
hospitality to offer to put us up for the night
till the rest of our traps turned up,' objected
Horace, querulously. The poor fellow had an
unfortunate constitutional instinct by which he
invariably laid hold first of all the flaws in an
encounter, or an individual. ' The sister ain't
a bouncing, barn-door specimen of a woman
such as one might have expected from the surroundings.
But it struck me there was rather

too much starch and buckram about her, to
begin with, for good form — not to say the real
thing.'

Oh, come along, old Diogenes,' cried
Harry.

VOL. I.

CHAPTEE X.
Oliver's notion of good citizenship.

Oliver got into a habit of standing in his
shop-door, leaning against one or other of the
door-posts. He stood there to keep his weaknesses
well in hand, as a declaration of war
against all promulgators of recognised theories
of gentility, and as a proclamation of fraternity
and equality to his brother-shopkeepers. If he
had known it, he was rather a striking figure
at the station he had chosen. He was a Saul
among the people. His shoulders were only
rounded by his own shrugs. His complexion
was fresh and slightly weather-beaten, neither
tanned into leather nor baked into paste, nor

faded into a girlish delicacy. His hands, when
he took them out of his pockets, were the un-broadened,
unfastened, well-kept hands of a
man who for a period of years has handled
books chiefly, and only plied an oar or a foil,
and carried a rod or a gun, by way of that
variety which has saved his fingers from becoming
either slender or plump. His feet
showed the effect of contact with the wares of a
higher order of boot maker than any known in
Friarton. The clothes Oliver had bought and
paid for from an Oxford tailor were not worn
out, and though he meant to replace them by
the work of a Friarton tailor in all its integrity,
it was not to be supposed that even then he
would be able to prevent an imitative townsman
doing his best to copy the University 'cut;*
so that Oliver, in spite of himself, would still
wear suits which were a faint reflection of the
coats of the disciples of Poole.

T 2

Oliver was standing in this guise at his
shop-door the next time he saw the Stanhopess ;
and Harry called out again in the same tone of
cheerful curiosity, 'I say, Constable, what are
you about there ? '

After his former experience, Oliver was
pleased to find that now he did not change
colour — by the ghost of a shade. He simply
moved a quarter of an inch to enable himself to
glance up at the sign above his head, and call
the Stanhopess' attention to it — especially to the
glittering spot where the Christian name 'Peter'
had been erased and replaced by ' Oliver.'
Was reading not included in your education ?'
he enquired, lazily.

It was Harry who grew red, gaped and
stopped short, while Horace looked sharply
from the sign to Harry to get his cue from his
prompter. ' Come, now,' stammered Harry,
taken aback as he was, and speaking out impulsively
according to his wont, 'this is too

much to make us cram. You don't mean to
say you're a '

'A baker as well as a miller,' suggested
Oliver, with a laugh ; 'just so. I wish I could
say I was keeping shop — I am hardly good for
so much — but I'm looking after the premises
and my business in a general way.'

Harry stared, and then he swallowed the
camel at a gulp, bursting out into a laugh on
his own account as he accomplished the feat.
c All right, old fellow,' he took it upon him to
assure Oliver ; ' I grow the corn and you complete
the process, not merely by grinding it, but
by going a step farther and converting it into
food for man as well as for beast — why should
the service to the beast be regarded as more
honourable than that to the man ? As well
keep a shop here as a store in Adelaide or Victoria.
Look here, Constable, invite us in and
give us a tip of tarts.'

No,' said Oliver, ' my customers are the

genuine article, and pay for what they get — all
save an exceptional small maid or man in rags,
who may be caught looking hungrily in at the
windows. Your coats are as good as mine, and
I'll swear you've had an excellent breakfast on
kidneys or mutton chops sufficient to spoil your
youthful appetite for tarts for some hours to
come. But I'll send one of my carts, in its
rounds, to call at the Farm and supply you with
bread, if you like to give me the order.'

And he expects us to say we are obliged
to him for proposing to furnish us with his
goods on his own terms, and on short credit, no
doubt! We'll see him hanged first, Horry. Is
there any other baker in the town, less of a
wretched screw, that we can favour with our
custom? though of course we shan't trust your
report. I'll tell you what, Constable, we'll run
handicaps — my corn against your bread.'

'You had better grow your crop first.'

8 Oh ! never fear.'

Oliver could not help being amused by
Harry Stanhope's manner of taking the discovery.
The older man was touched a little,
too, by the lad's staunchness to his new colours,
his honest if spasmodic efforts to accommodate
himself to a changed order of things, in direct
opposition to every standard and watchword of
the past, and to all the traditions of his youth.

Upon the whole the new-comers, Harry
Stanhope with Horace in his wake, behaved a
great deal better — Fan would have said in vindication
of their birth and breeding — than nearly
the entire upper ten long resident in Friar ton,
on Oliver Constable's declining to avail himself
of their permission and his own power to join
their order. Harry received the shock, made
up his mind to it, and went on as if nothing had
happened, and everything was the same as before.
If Constable chose to be a baker, of all
trades, let him. For that matter, who could
hinder him ? and what did it signify ? Harry

took it fully for granted that Constable might
still preserve all the claims he had ever had to
being a gentleman. Certainly Harry had not
been in the habit of reckoning bakers gentlemen,
though he had known great brewers who
were granted the ' Open sesame ' by his people.
But he had enough modesty left to own he and
his people might have been mistaken in their
partial and arbitrary estimate. Unquestionably
it helped Harry greatly in his judgment to be
sensible that he himself continued a gentleman,
in spite of his idle talk of going down in the
social scale and sinking his coat of arms and all
the humbug ' of his former station, in the plain
style and title of Harry Stanhope, yeoman.

The Wrights and Fremantles of Friarton
said among themselves that Oliver Constable
had disappointed, nay, cheated them, in permitting
them to extend to him the right hand
of fellowship on false premises. True, he had
taken University honour as had been predicted

of him, but he was about to degrade these
honours b} T sinking them in trade of the most
plebeian description. The fact was race, like
murder, would out. Young Constable came of
generations of millers and bakers, instead of
masters of grammar-schools and the like, and
he must perforce return to the hereditary
calling with its substantial profits. It had not
been in scholarship to save him from his natural
destiny.

Notwithstanding their just displeasure,
Oliver's old allies and patrons did not at once
give him the cut direct, to his face. As Mrs.
Hilliard had shrewdly defined the position, he
could not rid himself in a moment of the independent
fortune his father had left him, and of
his university training. His going into trade
might be a mere passing skit, like the freaks of
some other University men tinged with the
craze of doing something, at once out of the
common and communistic, which distinguished a

few of the young scholars and geniuses of the
era ; or it might be a simple step to winding up
the business and getting rid of it ; or it might be
feeling Oliver's way to popularity with some
dim notion of getting into Parliament at a later
date. If so, though the fellow might be a
dreaming scheming fool for his pains, it would
be a totally different kind of folly, which society
could not afford to condemn severely. And a
mistake might be awkward. The Fremantles
and Co. could not be altogether sure of the
motive at work, and, like politic people, they
were disposed to temporise and refrain tor a
while from compromising themselves strongly.
In addition the Friarton magnates wondered a
little how Constable would get on, how he
would manage to combine qualifications which
the Wrights and Fremantles were accustomed
to consider far apart. In the dearth of sour*
of social interest and excitement, Oliver's former
friends retained a great curiosity, in the

middle of their indignation and disgust, with
regard to his proceedings. Therefore ladies
and gentlemen greeted him in his new character
blandly at first, and even made half-jesting
allusions to his having become what the speakers
termed courteously a ' business man,' just
hinting that he would be a vara avis among
the common shopkeepers at Friarton. The
Wrights and Fremantles showed that it would
not be their fault if they did not drop young
Constable — supposing they were compelled to
drop him — by imperceptible degrees, and with
a gentle decorum and consideration both for
themselves and him.

But Oliver would not consent to be treated
as a spectacle for men and angels. When he
found he was to be smilingly stared at, pumped
dry, and rallied, he broke off, rashly perhaps,
his intercourse with his old masters, and Fan,
who had shown she was capable of bridling
her own pride and compelling it to go in

harness, could not, in the middle of her mortification,
conquer her sore pride for Oliver
so as to make any effectual resistance to the
renunciation of their connection with professional
and better-bred Friarton. Before Harry
Stanhope had appeared on the scene to change
the current of her ideas and inspirit her, she
had given in gloomily to Oliver's determination
to decline the few and wary invitations extended
jointly to the brother and sister after Oliver's
return home, by the heads of the best houses in
Friarton. The would-be hosts and hostesses
took the unsatisfactory couple at their word
with a rapidity that savoured of relief.

The Constables know their own place best,
after all,' said the high contending faction
among themselves, with admirable candour.
We are not going to force them to continue
to come to our houses, when they may have
felt themselves not at home all the time,

though we did what we could to put these
young persons at their ease.'

Constable has grown up an awkward
brutally abrupt fellow, full of angles and
crotchets. He has nothing conciliatory about
him,' said Mr. Fremantle, who was himself
eminently gliding in his progress through the
world. ' I don't believe now, that he would
ever get over his original disadvantages — clever
as he undoubtedly is — in a different sphere. Sono
doubt, he judges wisely in falling back into
the old track, where he may be as rude and
overbearing as he likes. Probably we erred
in tempting him from it, though it seemed a
pity that talents like his should be wasted in a
mill and bakehouse.'

And you know, my dear,' said Mrs. Fremantle,
who was by temperament caressing, and
in the absence of other channels for her social
affectionately, became necessarily the bosom

friend of Mrs. Wright, though the two were
only sympathetic on class grounds, ' good
schools have not done every tiling for Miss
Constable.'

1 Yes,' answered Mrs. Wright. But in spite
of her assent she was a tiresome woman, in
doubt about everything, given to argue the
conclusiveness of the plainest proposition. Thus
she immediately turned and contended. ' But
they were excellent schools. The plain old
father, and the brother with more ambitious
views in those days, made a good selection.
Miss Constable was at a school at Wormwood,
where my cousin Constantia's daughters went
afterwards, and she left it for Madame
Fletcher's in Brussels, where Miss Hilliard's
nieces the Cholmondeley girls finished their
education. By the by,' added Mrs. Wright, in
fresh helpless uncertainty, ' they count some
relationship with the Constables.'

In a slightly nearer degree than we all do

through Adam,' — Mrs. Fremantle put up her
chin impatiently. ' Tt is only a whim of
darling Mrs. Hilliard's to acknowledge it. As
for Miss Constable ' — the lady took up the
broken thread of her discourse — ' she is so cold
and stiff, she has got into such a habit of repressing
herself — I suppose from having been
compelled to hold the other shopkeepers at
arm's length, it is a positive effort to maintain
an acquaintance with her ; and where is the
use, when she will never let herself out so that
one has no chance of knowing her any better ?
It would be cruel to tease the Constables
further by going on — trying to draw them away
from their old set, which is quite respectable
in its way. They may really be happier in it,
education or no education. We have given them
the opportunity of coming among us, and if we
do not suit them, there is no more to be said.
Of course we shall still be on bowing and
speaking terms, which may be a little awkward

when it leads to nothing more — otherwise I
daresay it is all for the best.'

Fan writhed under what she guessed of this
result, and Oliver grinned at it. But neither of
the two did anything, after they had set the
ball moving, to prevent the catastrophe.

The single reservation in the sentence which
consigned the Constables once more to the
Coventry of vulgar allies, occurred in the case
of Mrs. Hilliard. Her house was, as in the
beginning, the neutral ground on which the
relapsed tradespeople could still encounter the
professional circle. Mrs. Hilliard had proclaimed
her blood-relationship with the Constables,
while it was a point of honour with
her to assert openly her interest in the most
distant of her kindred. She announced now
with the greatest sang froid, and with a
suspicion of gratified mischief, in the line she
adopted — including as she did the culprits
among the recipients of the announcement —

that she did not mean to give Oliver and Fan
Constable up, neither did she mean them to
give her up, since there were two at making a
bargain and picking a quarrel.

It is putting it mildly to say that Fan did
not like Louisa Hilliard and objected to being
taken up by her, either on the score of remote
relationship or anything else ; but the girl could
not bring herself, even with her strong dislikes,
to reject the last refuge against finding herself
reduced solely to the society of the Dadds and
the Polleys.

Oliver rather enjoyed the broad tolerance
of Mrs. Hilliard's self-indulgent bonhomie, and
he had a hankering still after having the
entrance to the Meadows, though he availed
himself of it to his own hurt, smarting as he
did under the total absence of sympathy there,
even more so than at home, from another
Hilliard than Louisa.

Between Fan's passiveness and Oliver's
vol. i. u

treacherous inclinations, the exception to the
social ban was admitted, and Mrs. Hilliard
carried her point triumphantly as usual.

The tradespeople of Friarton could not be
said to welcome with open arms Oliver Constable's
return to their shops and back parlours.
His old acquaintances had liked him better
than they had liked Fan, though he had been
of Fan's mind once on a day, and had looked
down from the giddy heights of juvenile
scholarship on the dull fat plains of trade,
vowing superciliously that he should never rest
in them. But, oddly enough, in proportion as
Oliver became a man and changed his mind,
his early friends learnt to distrust him more
and more. True, Oliver's recantation was
received with shouts from young Dadd,
chuckles from old Dadd, and giggles from the
Polley girls, as at a conquest won by their
class over that which pretended to be the
superior rank. But Oliver's outward adherence

did not flatter his fellows out of their
rooted conviction that he was not one of them,
and might prove no better than a traitor in the
camp. He was ' a shield ' preparing to come
among them, and take notes — not for the purpose
of printing the notes, which would have
been disloyal enough — but, what was far worse,
with the intention of gauging the moral and
intellectual condition of the shop people, and
with the conceited aspiration of elevating it.
And they had a strong objection to being
thus elevated by a wolf in sheep's clothing — old
Peter Constable's son spoilt by his own college
education. He was giving himself out as intending
to carry on his father's trade, which he
was safe to make a mess of, while he was
nourishing deep designs under the cloak of the
mill and the baker's shop. He to be a miller
and baker ! Old Dadd had heard Oliver could
read Greek like a parson, but he could no more
throw off a covering of pie crust than he could

TJ 2

fly. Why, it was only the other day he was
walking up the High Street with his arm linked
in Freeman tie's ! Fremantle might be as poor asa
church-mouse and only a better sort of school
usher, but he could read the lessons in his
white surplice on Sundays the same as the
Archbishop of Canterbury. Dadd went in for
chapel, not church, still even his minister
owned that Fremantle was a cut above him in
this world. And there was Mrs. Fremantle in
her shabby gown — that woman only acknowledged
the existence of such a female as Mrs,
Dadd in the shop. No doubt Mrs. Fremantle
was as gracious as could be over the counter,,
which was no less than her bounden duty,
seeing the length of time her bills stood in his
books, still, in the middle ofhergraciousness, she
managed to convey the impression that his —
Dadd's — better half was of a different order of
creation from that which had the honour of
claiming Mrs. Fremantle as its product. Well,

old Dadd, for his part, did not object. He was
aware that the Fremantles, for all their poverty
and shabbiness, dined at the squire's table when
he was at home, while Dadd and Mrs. Dadd
got no farther than the housekeeper's room ;
and neither did he wish to change places
with the schoolmaster and his lady in this
respect. But let fish be fish, and fowl fowl —
not ' 'als and 'als,' as Oliver Constable would
have them.

Mrs. Hilliard was not wrong? when she
judged from her own feelings the general disagreeableness
of being dragged up to breathe a
higher and purer atmosphere.

At the same time, as may have been seen,
the shop people, with their plain common sense
and shrewd wits — sharpened by jealousy, alarm,
and latent sluggish hostility — arrived more
quickly and surely at Oliver's eccentric, high-flying
views than the more cultivated portion
of the community puzzling over his meaning.

Oliver Constable laid himself out to gain
old Dadd and induce his senior to look upon
him as a man and a brother. Oliver had
patience with the draper's ways, including the
loud stale jokes he poked at Oliver as to his
getting a wife and Fan's finding a husband.
According to Dadd's ideas, courtship in some
form was the one engrossing concern of all
young people — after the attention which the
young man was bound to pay to his trade and
the pleasure the girl might take in her smart
clothes and her outings, which, to be sure, were
adjuncts to the main business of her life. Indeed
Dadd looked charitably to a suitable
marriage for Oliver Constable as the most likely
cure for the lad's folly. Certainly young Dadd,
who was several years Oliver's senior, remained
a bachelor. But his father explained the contradiction
by rubbing his hands and accusing
Jack of being ' a sad dog ' among the ladies.

Jack blustered out, 'What nonsense, gunner I

Anyone might tell I had not much to say to
the girls by the looks of me,' clearly regarding
the charge as made out and as a feather in hia
cap. Even his mother, in her sleek demureness,
seemed to agree with him.

Oliver manfully stood the ' heavy teas ' under
which the Dadds' table groaned. He ate
gallantly the fat bacon and pickled salmon in
order that his entertainers, like John Gilpin's
neighbours, might not say he was proud. He
did not faint at the sight, or smell, of the raw
onions, to which the whole Dadd family were
partial. He did not throw down his arms
and fly when gin-ands water succeeded tea, and
added its contribution to the already salient
odours of the back parlour. Luckily, Oliver
had a good digestion and a robust constitution ;
and though the details had not to him the
fascination of novelty which they might have
possessed for Harry Stanhope, neither were
they the exaggerated offences which they had

proved to Fan in her craving for outward
refinement. It goes without saying that Oliver
was free from the affected, effeminate horror of
the small pretender to gentility, the snob who,
having just cast his native coarse slough, has
wriggled himself into a new coat of superfine
delicacy and fastidiousness. Oliver rather respected
the Dadds for not altering their
ordinary style of hospitality out of compliment
to what they might imagine his changed habits
and tastes.

The Dadds' independence saved Oliver the
trouble — which worried him at the Polleys, of
having perpetually to rebut the attacks which
Mrs. Polley with her high spirit made on his
supposed conversion to fine living. Mrs.
Polley would not — any more than old Dadd —
deign to accommodate herself to Oliver Constable's
presumed new standard, but she would
persist in bringing it up in the form of testy
apologies for the deprivations he had to suffer.

4 Of course, our teas ain't like the meals you've
been accustomed to, Mr. Oliver,' she always
began, exasperatingly. 'French cooks and a
dozen courses, I dare say, no less will serve you
now — I am sure I pity your sister — and your
choice of wines every day. All I can say for
our poached eggs and fried mackerel is they are
new laid and I know the hens as laid them,
while the fish is fresh and done to a turn,
though I say it that should not. They are
honest English dishes honestly come by and
paid for.'

Then the girls would giggle and protest.
Oh ! mother ! ' in chorus. And 'Mily, the
youngest and most forward of the sisters, would
toss her elaborately dressed head and cry, ' I
hope you are not hard to please, Mr. Oliver ; I
should never put myself about to cosset any
man. There ! '

At last the poor creature the father, whose
wife had stood in the breach, and prevented

him from dragging down the family to ruin,
would edge in his word and declare solemnly
not without a timid attempt at pleasing his
mistress, who was not great enough to forget
what she had done for him — ' Missus Polley
never did go in for kickshaws or waste ; she
always was a one to prefer what was plain and
satisfying.'

In return for the tribute cast at her feet,
Mrs. Polley would look round with complacent
contempt, and charge her husband : ' You shut
up, Polley, and eat your victuals ; you know you
have a trick of keeping the table waiting. I
am glad none of the gals take after you, unless
it be Liza — soft thing ! Slow at meat is slow
at work. You may be thankful I never were a
dawdler, and that I went in — the greater fool I —
for looking after you.'

Whereupon poor Mr. Polley would subside
into silence and the munching of his food as
fast as his few teeth would go.

And the girls would titter afresh and cry
again, ' Oh ! mother ! ' in another round of family
applause. Only Liza would protest against the
accusation of procrastination — particularly where
her favourite 'beverage' was in question. They
all knew, Liza said — almost as solemnly and
pompously as her father spoke — that she could
sip tea morning, noon, and night. There was
no substitute for it — unless lemonade.

Or beer — especially when Jack Dadd is
having a glass suggested 'Mily, flippantly.

The result of the impertinence was that the
two sisters began to dispute together with painful
frankness and vigour as to which of them
paid least heed to Jack Dadd and his actions,,
till Mrs. Polley, who took and kept the high
constable tone in her family, called the noisy
pair to order, as it were, with a wave of her
truncheon, and an imperious, ' Be quiet, gals !
Don't be two sallies putting up your backs
before Mr. Oliver.'

But although Dadd the draper was brought
to discuss with Oliver, in the character of a
fellow-tradesman, the general principles of saL
profits, ready money discount, long credit, bad
debts, the danger of the co-operative system,
apprentices, journeymen, hours of closing and
holidays, the cautious veteran would no more
approach, in the course of conversation, his
individual practice in such debatable doings asa
percentage to the seller on each day's sales,
or with regard to so-called ' bankrupt storks,'
damaged goods,' ' clearing-off sales,' ' ready-made
work done on the premises,' than he would
have spoken of these trade mysteries to the
vicar, Mr. Houghton, or Dadd's own minister,
Mr. Holland.

Moreover, old Dadd would say ' sir ' in addressing
his young fellow-townsman. Mrs.
Dadd was quite as mannerly, with a certain
folding of the hands and falsetto tone of voice
which took the place of the twinkle in her husband's

eye and his sturdy accents, in their common
politeness ; and so long as that small term
of half-ironical respect came in with every alternate
sentence from the two, Oliver had scanty
hope of gaining ground with them.

Jack Dadd was not unwilling to be seen
walking along the High Street with Constable
of Friarton Mill, late of St. Rudolph's, Oxford
University, or standing with him at then respective
shop-doors. Jack went farther : he slapped
his old schoolfellow and brother-tradesman on
the shoulder at parting with a resounding
slap, which Oliver bore unflinchingly, though he
did not return it. The young draper addressed
the miller and baker as ' Noll,' in the hearing
of the Polley girls, and Oliver answered cheerfully
the free abbreviation of his Christian name ;
yet, though Oliver was anxiously wary in his
intercourse with Jack, and scrupulously avoided
the most distant reference to printed matter which
was not in the ' Friarton News,' all the same,

Jack had continually present to him his own
literary deficiencies, especially in the rudimentary
branches of grammar and spelling. What was
lacking in the last might have escaped detection
for the present, but the culprit had a guilty
conviction that Constable would somehow guess
that he — Jack — was never sure in writing a letter
when he ought or ought not to double his consonants,
or to introduce an e after a b or an
I or a t And Jack had an inward uncomfortable
impression that a college swell must look
down upon him for such a weakness ; even
though Constable might be a big enough
swell, or a sufficiently artic dodger, not to
brandish his superior advantages in Jack's

face.

It is by no means pleasant to be haunted
by a sense of inferiority even in so small a
matter. And Jack Dadd was not accustomed
to submit to such an experience.

Till Oliver came home, Jack had swaggered

and crowed a good deal over the young men
of his class in Friarton and the neighbourhood.

Old Dadd was well to do, and Jack was
an only child. Of course he was not like an
ordinary young man in the drapery line to
which he had been bred. He was the young
master and successor to a good business.

But now Jack Dadd began to fear that Oliver
Constable — queer fish and out of the water ashe
was — would cut Jack out with some of his
most ardent admirers. In taking up his father's
trade Oliver had still retained his reputation
for wonderful cleverness and learning, above
all for that swell's tone of consideration,
tolerance, and gentleness which qualified Constable's
bluntest ways, and of which none had
a keener perception than poor Jack, who
lacked it utterly. Girls were so foolish and
vain, always caught by novelty and gentility.
No doubt Oliver Constable was not a
gentleman born, any more than the rest of

them could boast of being lords' and squires'
sons. What was more, he had farther diminished
his claims to being a gentleman by
choosing to work — at least to have a mill and
a bakehouse and shop, instead of to live idle
and take his pleasure out of the fortune old
Constable had left, as Jack felt certain he would
have done in Oliver's place.

Still, when all was said, Constable was the
nearest thing to a gentleman that would cross
the path of girls in Jack's circle, and Jack reflected
the girls would make the most of Oliver,
and he would become the rage.

That goose Liza Polley, who pretended to
read collections of poetry, would be making a
hero of Constable, and that minx 'Mily would be
treating the fellow to some of her sauce.

Jack, on his part and speaking impartially,
was disappointed in Constable's abilities and
attainments. It was all very well to admit
that Oliver Constable had got a fine education
and had not become an insolent shaver on the

strength of it. Hang him ! he was too near
the real Mackay for that, But actually he did
not know anything worth caring about. He
could not put Jack up to a single wrinkle on
any point he was interested in, with regard to
which Constable had been in a position to have
become a valuable authority if he were not a
noodle in some respects.

Jack had sought to balance the effeminate
nature of his daily occupations in matching
skeins of silk and turning over gloves, by an
excess of manliness in his recreations. He went
in strongly for games and sport. He could not
often get away to attend a morning or an afternoon
cricket match, for his father had old-fashioned
strict notions of what was due to
business and business hours. Therefore Jack's
pink and white complexion lost the chance of
being tanned brown. But he played cricket
and bowls with a club of Friarton shopkeepers
every fine evening all the .summer. He took

VOL. I. X

in ' Bell's Life ; ' he kept a bull-terrier, and sometimes
managed to engage it in a ratting match.
And he betted as regularly on the Derby and
the Oxford and Cambridge boat-race as if he
had driven more than once in his life to Epsom
Downs, wearing a green veil and scattering
flour on the way, or as if he had a hereditary
association with either University.

Jack found Oliver Constable, for all his so-called
attainments, lamentably behind him in
the important matters referred to. Oliver could
play cricket decently indeed, but he could do so
when he was a boy. And it was only by dragging
what information there was to get, word
by word, out of him, that a Friarton cricketer
could ascertain how the nobs at the University
played their game. Constable did not read a
sporting paper. He had not been in the habit
of betting, though he did not preach a sermon
against the practice, possibly he meant his silent
example to serve a* a text, Altogether, and this

was a consolation, if he said as little to the girls
about the college spreads and blow-outs, he
might not take the wind out of Jack's sails to
the extent he had apprehended. But the deficiency
certainly rendered Oliver less of an
acquisition to his old acquaintances.

END OF THE FIRST VOLUME.

LONDON' : PRINTED R

SPOTTISWOODE AND CO., New-street SyCARQ

A> B PARLIAMENT STREET

•^^^.

3 0112 047688129

HI

■HI

ssSSSSS \m

Islillssiis

MnnHV

34V

NvJtSnn

WBmk

dfHi

M

IP

ttitl'

VOL. II.

MILLER AND BAKER

BY

SARAH Tatler

AUTHOR OF 'CITOTEXNE JACQUELINE' 'SCOTCH FIRS ' ETC.

IN THREE VOLUMES

VOL. II.

LONDON
SMITH, ELDER, & CO., 15 WATERLOO PLACE



[All rights r served]

CONTENTS

OF

THE SECOND VOLUME.

CHAPTER PAGE

XI. Oliver cultivates Jack Dadd . 1

XII. Harry Stanhope's Notion of being a

Yeoman 21

XIII. Oliver's Mission to the Women of his

Class 56

XIV. The First Attempt 76

XV. The Annual Excursion 101

XVI. The Middle and End of the Feast . . 127

XVII. Agneta Stanhope 147

XVIII. Oliver's Lecture on Wordsworth . . 160

XIX. An Illusion 11)4

XX. Oliver causes a Split in the Chapel

Connection because of his dogged
Opposition to Hartley, Norris, and

Co 221

XXI. Mutiny in the Mill and the Bakehouse . 253

XXII. A Reformer's Reward 272

Oliver CONSTABLE,

MILLER AND BAKER.

•+0+-

CHAPTEE XL

OLIVER CULTIVATES JACK Add.

Oliver was happy enough to discover, in the*
course of an evening call which Jack Dadd
paid at the mill-house, that Jack had turned his
mind a little in the direction of the rearing of
vegetables, and the training and bearing of
fruit trees. He had a voice in making the best
of his father's garden. His own name had appeared
in the list of successful competitors at
the Horticultural Show.

VOL. II. B

Your blockhead of a gardener is making a
mess of these artichokes, and your medlar don't
carry half the crop it ought to ; ' Jack found fault
in his free and easy style, as Oliver and he were
strolling in the garden, while Fan sat in solitary
dignity within doors.

Very likely,' Oliver answered, philosophically
at first ; and then he proposed quickly,
4 Give us a lesson, Dadd ? '

1 You ain't above taking it,' said Jack Dadd,
nodding, ' though your ass of a man may be.
But you don't suppose I'm going to put a spoke
in my own wheel, by telling you how to be
my successful rival at the show ? '

Jack was not in earnest in his refusal, for
he was naturally obliging and good-natured,
while dealing with customers who were mostly
women gave him a habit of civility. But he
considered it smart and out of shop to appear
knowing, selfish, and blustering, just as he
reckoned it spirited and dashing to use bad

language on occasions, without entering much
into the meaning of the words. Oliver had
fallen out of knowledge of the lad, and was not
certain either of his simplicity or his affectation,
so he changed a little in his tack.

c What would you say to setting up a field
naturalists' society in Friarton, and having occasional
excursions to furnish a correct catalogue
of the flora of this district of England — not a
bad district for the purpose ? ' suggested Oliver.

Oliver's mind had gone off to a version of
the pursuit of herbs in which there should be
only the mildest species of rivalry. ' If we
were to tramp whole days,' he said to himself
sanguinely, after what he half hoped was an
inspiration, ' over pastures, through woods, and
down the centre of ditches, crying " Eureka ! "
with one consent, when we came upon an outlying
specimen of nettle, we should assuredly
hob-nob together before we had gone out three
times.'

B 2

c Oh ! bother, no,' said Jack, throwing a
bucketful of cold water on the first spark of
the project. ' There is some sense in growing
vegetables and fruit, and even garden flowers

though the breakjaw names of the last is

enough to stop the business — I mean, of course,
the last things out in the flower line, for nobody
cares about the poor old things that had
no show along with their scent, like cottage
bonnets and short skirts, which mother will tell
you were so modest and tidy. But to take the
trouble to hunt up and nickname weeds, I call
sheer waste of body and mind, fit only for pottering
gentlefolks, schoolmasters, and fogies of
that kidney, or for your would-be geniuses
among the working-men. You would have a
pretty sprinkling of the lowest ruck wanting an
excuse to be off from a day's work, and expecting
you to pay them for joining your society.
I tell you, Constable, it don't pay — either him
or anyone else — to take a working-man from

his work and set him up as a genius. Just you
see how it would answer with your bakers.
Besides, I, for one, don't care for being mixed
up with every blacksmith and carter who takes
it into his conceited noddle that he has a turn
for gathering weeds and storing trash.' And
Jack strutted a little as he walked, and puffed
out his pink and white cheeks.

1 You are wrong,' maintained Oliver, ' and
more's the pity for the other ways in which a
working-man spends his holiday. But look
here, Jack, you meet him in the cricket-field ? '

Oh ! that is different,' said young Dadd,
carelessly. ' That is an understood thing. But
as for my club, we have only a young weaver
and a shoemaker or two able to bat and bowl
at our evening practice. The working-man
who lives by his cart-horse sinews is mostly
too tired for any place save the alehouse, after
.six o'clock.'

In spite of the slightness of the encouragement

he had received, Oliver did feel his way
sto originating a field naturalists' society. He
sounded his own millers and bakers, and discovered
no Eobert Dick among them ; none went
in for weeds. However, in his search, Oliver hit
on a stalwart journeyman in his service, who
had a small taste for butterflies. Oliver himself
had no elegant scientific bent in this direction,
but he introduced his baker to the ancient
keeper of an ancient, dusty, mouldy, and well-nigh
forgotten museum in the town. True,
the keeper, in the neglect and oblivion which
had fallen upon his charge, had lapsed into
hopeless indifference and absolute infidelity to
his trust : but he was sufficiently moved by the
strange event of a visitor — a pupil — however
humble, to the museum, not only to furbish up
the remains of what had once been a creditable
display of native and foreign butterflies, in the
entomological cases, he showed a salutary sense
of shame, by volunteering to make a report to

the survivors of the committee, who hud mismanaged
the affairs of the museum, for the
purpose of inducing them to employ a portion
of the small fund which still remained at their
disposal, to pay the young baker to replace the
native ' peacocks ' and ' emperors,' that had
dropped and crumbled frcm their pins.

Oliver fondly flattered himself that he had
done some good in this quarter. But unfortunately,
the big young baker was of a self-conscious,
sensitive disposition. He was abashed
by the sudden favourable notice of a pursuit,
which, though he had fallen into it, he had
always been accustomed to look upon as very
much the childish folly his companions held
it to be. He allowed himself to be overcome
by the half-jealous chaff which went on
in the shop at the result of the jeering information
which some of the men had volunteered to
give their master. The unfortunate admirer of
butterflies began to hate the mention even of a

beetle or a bumble-bee. He doggedly declined
to have anything to do with refilling the
cases in the museum. He showed Oliver, in a
nervous but unmistakable manner, that the
man would have none of the master's sympathy,
and took refuge in the skittle-ground
nearest to his lodgings, that he might not be
tempted into the fields, and betrayed into the
absurdity of butterfly-hunting, thus destroying
the esprit tie corps between him and his brother-bakers,
and alienating them from his side.
Oliver's small amount of good done effervesced
in harm. And when a letter in the 'Friarton
News ' only bore the fruit of several more or
less cordial and enthusiastic replies from those
pottering gentlefolks,' schoolmasters, and a
working-man or two, of whom Jack Dadd had
spoken, Oliver withdrew from the scheme,
leaving the members who had suggested themselves
to render it an accomplished fact and to
include in the society — if they had the wisdom

to extend their bounds in that direction, all the
idle young ladies in the neighbourhood — who
were not too fastidious, or too delicate, or too
lazy to enter the ranks, and to take to making
herbarium, in place of playing incessant games
of croquet, badminton, or lawn-tennis, whichever
happened to be in the ascendant, alternately
with district-visiting under the last
fascinating curate. They were very well qualified
to do this work without him. Oliver
was sensible that he might incur the reproach
of not knowing: his own mind. But he did
know it well enough not to be diverted, by a
specious and rather agreeable prospect, from
his proper purpose. If none of the Dadd and
Polley set could be drawn out to study botany,
he would let it alone for the present.

The next bright idea which struck Oliver
was to join Jack Dadd's company of volunteers
not that Jack was their captain, but he was
ail influential member of the corps. He was a

tolerably smart soldier, a fair shot, proud of
his uniform and of what he had learnt of drill
He might be a greater man in the volunteer
ball-room than at a sham fight, but he was
honestly possessed with the notion that he was
serving his country and forming part of her
martial bulwark. For that matter he occasionally
terrified his mother by swaggering
and threatening, after a tiff with his father,
to join any reserved force which should be
called abroad.

Oliver was perfectly aware that he could
never be what Jack called ' a dab ' of a soldier,
but he was not sure that Jack would not like
him the better for his defects. It would be a
great nuisance and fatigue to Oliver to walk
and hold himself straight and still, like other
men, and not to be perpetually in disgrace
but he might try what he could accomplish in
bodily self-restraint. It would be what moralists
would call ' good discipline ' for him, at any

rate. At the same time he remembered, and
even reminded Fan of what he had said to heron
the evening of his coming home, as to his
being out of place in a barrack yard.

Fan was not too generous to refrain from
assenting with grave irony, though she had no
particular objection to his joining the company
of volunteers, which included men of all ranks,,
if only Oliver had asserted his claims and got a
commission — not put himself on a level with
young Dadd. c Jack Dadd is odious,' Fan had
said with effusion to Oliver one day, as she
recalled the young draper's loud trousers, tight
boots, and ' light kids,' when he figured as a
8 Sunday swell.' Fan also cherished lively
recollections of what she had suffered from
Jack Dadd on the occasion of a party at the
Polleys, which she had been forced to attend
soon after leaving school. Jack would not be
kept at a distance by any effort of girlish
majesty, and when he had happened to sit next

her, he had presumed to administer sundry
nudges with his elbow to emphasise points in
his conversation, without regard to her stony
disregard of the signals.

Not a bit,' — Oliver denied the odiousness
stoutly ; ' Dadd is not half a bad fellow ; he is
manly in his way, and though that way may
not be good form,' reflected Oliver, falling
inadvertently into school slang, ' it is not
altogether his fault, poor beggar.'

Oliver paid heavy penalties for his ambition,
in the Masonic Hall — converted for the nonce
into a drill hall — and in the five-acre field,
where the volunteers went through their exercise.
Discipline alone prevented Jack Dadd and
his cronies from roaring and rolling about with
laughter at the recruit's disqualifications and
misdemeanours. After many evenings' enforced
attendance and irksome drudgery, at the hall
and in the field, and a journey along with
.some scores of excited men cooped up in the

insufficient accommodation of a limited number
of railway carriages, followed by a march of
several miles through clouds of dust in order to
perform a series of wildly entangled evolutions,
before a general officer, who smiled grimly at
the performance, and marked out Oliver for
particular reprobation, Oliver counted disconsolately
his gains from the extensive sacrifice
of his leisure. He was on easier terms with
Jack Dadd and the rest, since they had at least
one more subject in common. He was invited
as a matter of course, and had, indeed, a right,
to join the others in what Jack called their
watering,' and which might more appropriately
have been styled their ' bearing,' and their
occasional little suppers at the inns they affected
after drill. These young men of the people
were not dissipated fellows farther than what
was implied by the fact that certain members,
like Jack, were inclined to aspire to a flavour
of dissipation as an element in manliness.

Their gambling was to a very limited extent,
though it might reach to the bottom of their
slenderly lined purses, in stakes of small silver
at the billiard table, which an enterprising
Friarton innkeeper had provided for them, as
well as for their betters, in addition to cribbage
boards and packs of cards. The noise and riot
into which the high spirits of the company
broke out at times might be a little coarse,
but it was not more outrageous than the mad
nonsense which Oliver had witnessed, and,
sober-minded as he was for the most part, had
joined in, occasionally, when well-bred lads
met in each other's rooms on the banks of the
Isis. For that matter, its utterance served in
both cases as a safety-valve for the exuberance
of life, the joy in existence, which soon enough
expends itself and is replaced by a burden of
care, worry and weariness, even when men
stop short of bitterness of heart and despair
of spirit.

The pity was that though there were no
deans and proctors at Friarton, and though the
intervention of the rural Charlies or Bobbies
might not be called for, the public of the little
town was at once more lynx-eyed and sterner
in its judgments. There was far less allowance
made for the young plebeians than for the
young patricians. Unaccountably and inconsistently,
much more was expected from the
former than from the latter. Old heads on
young shoulders were unhesitatingly demanded
in many quarters in the case of the embryo
tradesmen, with their poor education, and their
slender resources by comparison for occupying
their leisure hours. It was hard to say why
this inequality of opinion existed, unless the
early call of these young shorten to earn
their bread by the sweat of their brow, and the
hand-to-hand struggle of some of them with poverty
and privation from their cradles upwards,
might be supposed, by an austere necessity, to

steady and dignify the lads betimes, not to
drive them desperate and impel them to snatch
greedily at any small indulgence, however base
and fatal, which came within their reach. If
this were the explanation, an exceptional though
perilous honour was conferred on 'the counter-bumpers
' when they were expected to be wiser
than their fellows.

For Oliver was certain of one thing, that if
any draper's assistant, or saddler or ironmongers
apprentice, in Friarton happened to be simply
intoxicated, not so much with strong drink as
with the restless energy and furious mirth of
youth in an ebullition that would be treated
with tolerant tenderness at a university, and
punished by nothing worse than the mild reproof
or the nominal fine, which was a trifle light
as air to the privileged undergraduate, the
young tradesman would be generally set down
as drunk with less ethereal liquor. If caught in
the act of creating a disturbance so heinous as

waking the silent night with hideous clamour,
giving chase to a surprised, surrounded, and
hustled guardian of the public peace, smashing
wantonly a street lamp, or wrenching off
maliciously ' a bell or knocker, he would be
hailed before a bench of magistrates, and
mulcted of a sum out of all proportion to his
exchequer. And that was not alL He would
have to pay what was for him a far heavier
penalty. His character, which was his capital,
his chief dependence for work and livelihood,
would suffer. His employer, though he had
been young himself once, would be so influenced
by the magisterial verdict as to begin to lose
confidence in his assistant. The inspector of
the Sunday or night school in which the lad
might have been religiously enough inclined,
and sufficiently benevolent to take an interest
and have a class, would sharply signify to the
offender that he was no credit to the institution,
and had better give up his connection with it.

VOL. II. c

7^

The clergyman, receiving the report of the
inspector, would not think himself justified in
interfering ; on the contrary, he, too, would
commence to look coldly on his young parishioner.
The lad, sunk in his own estimation by
the judgment of those he had respected and
who ought to know best, slinking away from
their condemnation to seek refuge with his
fellow-sinners, who could not at least set their
faultlessness against his errors, might become
the dog with a bad name in a fair way to be
hung.

Oliver Constable did not see how the unequal
dispensation of justice was to be made
even, but he smarted under the sense of it.
The smart tempted him to act very much after
the fashion of the great Dr. Johnson when the
young bucks for whom he had a kindly regard
invaded his room at midnight and summoned
him to a lark. In like manner and with Less
solicitation, Oliver remained ninny an evening

in the society of Jack Dadd, and of lads with
even fewer hostages to respectability than Jack,
and went with them — careless of what people
said of his, Oliver's, taste — in the young tradesmen's
senseless but harmless enough raids
through the town, because Oliver Constable
believed that his presence was a protection to
the others, even more than a check on their
erratic proceedings ; yet in return for the double
support, Oliver's proteges to a great extent
fought shy of him.

In these boyish demonstrations in which he
chose to bear a part, Oliver had not the relief
of cultured cleverness, some development of
which had usually been intermingled with the
great fun ' and ' awful silliness ' of a gathering
of university lads, whose rollicking propensities
had not been altogether toned down by blue
china and sage-green porters. If at a certain
stage of the entertainment, missiles would fly
about, howls be resorted to, and battering of

c2

the door indulged in, at another there would
occur lively mimicry of the Union speeches ;
parodies of old classic odes would carry the
mind back to Greek and Roman feasts ; viewless
of views — transcending the most extravagant
.speculations of ancient and modern philosophy
would be aired, and would serve at least to
show that the young revellers had inherited
thoughts and fancies, however crude, as well as
the rampant spirits of their years.

But here among the youth of Friarton,
which was not golden, or even gilded, a bad
style of practical joking and buffoonery — gone
out elsewhere save in the worst style of regiment ;
the boisterous rendering of the mock heroic
and still more excruciating comic songs of the
lower order of theatres ; and a good deal of rude
wrangling for lack of a better mode of argument,
traversing the horse-play and threatening
now and then to terminate in the rowdyism of
a free fight, formed the sole alternatives to

sheer noise. These young shorten, who were
very ordinary lads, were nearly a century behind
their social superiors in superficial civilisation.
Oliver used to compare his class sorrowfully
to those nations in Europe like the Poles
and Hungarians kept back to do the needful
work of repelling the hordes of Eastern barbarians,
and apparently never able to make up
for lost time.

Oliver Constable did not for a moment
imagine that the upper classes enjoyed a monopoly
or even a predominance of moral and intellectual
gifts. But tho truth was pressed home
upon him painfully, that while genius, which is
above all accident of circumstances, and which
is its own teacher, is rare, cultivation tells in
producing a higher average of second-rate
ability, or the specious appearance of it, in the
better educated grades of society. And where
the matter is not of the best, the manner always
plays an overweening part. There did not

happen to be a ' mute inglorious Milton ' in Friar-ton
in those days, so Oliver missed the intelligent
echoes of the Marvels and Butlers of the period,
which he had been accustomed to hear at
Oxford. Even with their aid he had been apt to
get tired of youthful gaieties, and to call them
intolerably flippant and shallow, but, in contrast
with his former experience, the clumsy gambols
of the Friarton lads were dull as ditch water.
Oliver could not have stood them long, had it
not been for the strength of his purpose and
that higher humanity which awoke in him such
sympathy with his kind, above all with the
class in which it seemed to Oliver his chief
responsibilities were to be found.

It was slow uphill work to win influence
and lull antagonism. Jack Dadd had made
use, more than once in Oliver's hearing, of
bad language. Happily for Jack himself, he
had no real relish for it ; he employed it as an
evidence of knowingness and spirit in the light

in which many swearers indulged in profane
swearing in the great swearing age. Some
melancholy prophets report there are ominous
symptoms, in high places, of the return of this
epoch, but we must humbly trust that the
blooming time of blasphemy was a century
ago.

At last Oliver interfered : ' Dadd, will you
do me the favour not to say that again in my
hearing?' Oliver requested, quietly.

8 Oh ! hang it, Constable, we are not to have
any preaching or dictating from you,' cried
young Dadd, colouring up and blustering. ' If
you don't like our ways, leave 'em alone. We
shan't cringe for your company, of which you
have made us a gift, without our asking for it, I
may say.'

8 1 have not preached or dictated ; I appeal
to the rest of you fellows,' said Oliver, without
much loss of temper ; while the fellows, who
had their share of the old English passion for

fair play, felt constrained to mumble an assent
to the appeal even though it was against the
deliverance of their comrade. ' I asked you to
drop that expression as a favour to me,' repeated
Oliver ; ' if you cannot grant the favour, at least
you may refuse civilly.'

'Oh ! if you choose to put it in that fashion,'
said Jack, a little sulkily, ' there is no more to
be said ; all I meant to object to was any fine
fellow's thinking to come it over us, which I
never heard he was invited to do, and taking it
upon him to bid us mince our words to suit his
delicate stomach.'

But Jack soon forgot his pique, and he
made the concession of not repeating the
ofFence within sound of Oliver's ears, whatever
he might utter beyond their reach. Possibly
the censure had sunk so far into Jack's
somewhat obtuse mind, that he was rather-shaken
in the conviction of the embellishment,
supplied to his conversation by his sporting the

grossest form of oath with which he was
acquainted. He might even fall into the innocent
delusion of supposing that ugly expletives
had ceased to be hurled right and left, in
moments of excitement, by choice specimens —
according to Jack Dadd's ideas — of young
swells at the universities.

And Jack, with all his pertness and swagger,
was not original. He secretly imitated
the social superiors he admired and envied in
his heart of hearts, while, on the one hand, he
was professing among his own set supreme
indifference to their claims, and on the other,
he knew his own interest too well not to solicit
their custom and attend to their needs with the
utmost civility.

For poor Jack played a double, nay, a quadruple
part. In place of simply regarding his
more aristocratic patrons with that combination
of proper official outward respect, and
individual inward contempt, which his father

-and mother entertained for them, Jack's mind
was farther divided between the two emotions
of loving and loathing equally smothered and
nearly equally balanced.

He appreciated keenly, he was impelled to
ape, the alluring practices of the very gentlefolks
who galled him by making use of him,
and, in the case of the younger generation,
regarding him with the easy carelessness and
laughing scorn, which had replaced the tyranny
and arrogance of one decade, and the stately
countenance and elaborate benevolence of another.
But in the middle of Jack's small
applause and the compliment of his taking his
antagonists for models, his good nature did
not keep him from grinding his teeth at their
disparaging treatment culminating in the
mocking epithet of ' counter-jumper.'

CHAPTEE XII.

HARRY STANHOPE'S NOTION OF BEING A YEOMAN.

Harry Stanhope was welcomed with open arms
by everybody in Friarton, and Horace was
more than tolerated for his brother's sake. Fan
Constable had struck the key-note of public
opinion in this England which some people call
democratic, when she said that a gentleman
'generations deep 'could do anything, always
supposing he did it with characteristic grace,
and win golden opinions on all sides. What
Oliver Constable was condemned and ostracised
for attempting to do, because he did it out of
loyalty to his class, a deep sense of duty to his
kind, and the most practical form of Christianity,

Harry Stanhope was universally applauded and
caressed for trying to accomplish in his burlesque
fashion in an idle whim, certainly with
no other motive, save that of serving himself
and Horry.

It was no matter that Harry far outdid
Oliver in the liberty he took with the world of
Friarton. Oliver only went to his mill and his
shop, seeking to revive his old familiarity with
business details, and planning how to bring to
bear upon them his version of trade principles.
He contented himself with reviving his acquaintance
with old friends of the family in a conventional
enough way, simply making it plain that
he acknowledged their obligations and was
content to take his place in their ranks.

But Harrv flaunted his descent from the
squirearchy to the yeomanry in the most outrageous
style. He 'went the whole hog as he
had said. He was like the stage misanthropes
who growl and gibe till men doubt their

sincerity, only Harry's blue eyes were too
round and limpid for one to suspect them of
depths of hypocrisy. He meant everything he
did while the fit was upon him. He was in
earnest so far as he knew, when, like hermits
in general, he went far beyond the original
professors in his actions.

Harry with his shadow, Horace, not only
dined at twelve, sometimes in the fields in close
proximity to his workers, and supped at seven,
he made his own hay, whether the sun shone or
the rain fell — not to the benefit of the hay in
the latter instance, drove his own carts, galloping
the cart-horses to the injury of these sober-minded
animals, and led the hoers among
beans and turnips with an impartial energy
which threatened to demolish alike crops and
weeds. He laid aside the civilised encumbrance
of a morning coat, as if he were
engaged in perpetual cricketing and rowing
matches. He walked with a pitchfork over

his shoulder as some squires carry a spud, when
the tool was quite unnecessary. And he did
what no yeoman within a radius of many miles
of Friar ton had thought of doing within the
memory of the oldest inhabitant — he came into
the town in character, in his shirt-sleeves,
riding a bare-backed horse, as he had been
taking it to water, when it had flashed across his
mind that he might be in time to intercept the
post letters — not that Harry's letters were of
any particular consequence, either to himself
or other people — or that he ought to look after
a job which was in progress for him at the
saddler's or the smith's. He actually astounded
the assembled Friarton market, he did not
scandalise it — nothing which Harry could do
did scandalise his neighbours — by entering it in
such primitive guise. He had made up his
mind, to begin with, that to be a yeoman at
Copley Grange Farm was the same as being a
colonist, and the more he brought his establishment

and personal practice to what Harry conceived
to be the colonial level, the more
refreshingly novel the play was, and the more
he enjoyed it.

Horace did not adopt all Harry's new customs,
for the sufficient reason that Horry was
a sickly fellow, unable to cope with Harry in
braving fatigue and exposure to the weather.
But Horace not only found no fault with his
chosen champion in his antics, the brother liked
the changed life, and was the better for it in
body and mind, because Harry, while he was still
tasting its essence, and skimming its cream,
enjoyed it with the lad's naturally huge omnivorous
appetite for enjoyment, and Harry's
enjoyment was always more or less infectious
where his nearest friend was concerned.

The infection spread to more than Horace
when Harry came into Friarton Town, in the
fancy dress which he had taken into his head to
wear, whistling or singing aloud in his fine

baritone, though the song was of no higher
musical or intellectual calibre than ' The Two
Obadiah,' with sheer lightness of heart and
gleefulness of spirit, the very pessimists, in the
habit of finding the foundations of the world
out of joint, and holding life to be stale, flat, and
unprofitable, were won to smile, as well as to
sigh. Harry Stanhope was such a goodly
spectacle in the flush of his youth and strength
and exuberant spirits, if one could but forget
that there came a term to these magnificent
animal gifts, and a just reckoning for the days
of their triumph. After all, the recollection
only lent a wistful charm to all that was fleeting
in Harry's glory.

It was not merely those who were closest to
his own class — the Wrights, Fremantles, and the
vicar's family — who delighted in Harry and
conspired to spoil him as the finest young fellow
in the world, perfectly charming, so delightfully
natural, frank and unpretending, so imperturbably

good-natured in accommodating himself
to the difference in his position — though, to
be sure, he could not forfeit his birthright. It
was not merely Fan Constable who beamed on
Harry as on a gay and gallant deliverer from
the social depths into which Oliver's extraordinary
recantation had consigned them afresh.
At the same time, Fan alone saw meeting in
Harry, in the strangest, most fascinating manner,
both the confirmation and the contradiction
of all her early predilections and aspirations,
until, in mingled conviction and reaction, she
was ready to honour gentle breeding more than
ever ; while she became in a way reconciled to
Oliver's flight, which appeared to coincide with
Harry Stanhope's course. She began to feel
dubious whether Oliver were so entirely wrong
as she had supposed, whether he were not
following, without guessing it, a veritably noble
and knightly impulse in his raid against modern
trade dragons, and his search for the San Graal

VOL. II. D

in the homeliest quarters. That dim undefined
notion, whether true or false, did much to restore
Fan's equanimity and cheerfulness. What did
it matter if the Wrights and Fremantles, who
were so frightened for hazarding their own
debatable footing, turned their backs, when
Harry Stanhope lent the Constables the far
greater weight of his support, and constantly
directed upon them his laughing face, coming to
Friarton Mill ten times oftener and on twenty
times more friendly terms, than Oliver with his
contradictory spirit authorised ?

Yet Oliver too, in spite of himself, liked the
lad for the very qualities which were the
furthest removed from Oliver's own — the boyish
thoughtlessness, sanguineness and absence of
any sense of responsibility, the half-kindly and
wholly confiding selfishness which impressed
on Harry the rooted belief that the whole
world revolved, somehow, round him and Horry,
and was in a maimer made for their gain or

loss ; the half-audacious goodwill which made
Harry claim, so unhesitatingly and in such a
large measure, the goodwill of his fellows.
Harry was as free from self-consciousness as he
was mercurial, and the summer sun warmed
him through and through, without his being
ever troubled with a shiver of repulsion, or a
groan of obligation, in the view of wrongdoing
and retribution on every side. Oliver was
tempted to admire as well as to despise, to
covet while he condemned, Harry's monstrous
exulting egotism.

After the first shock of his sister Fan's
inconsistent secession to Harry Stanhope's side
of the question, Oliver looked on, without
surprise, if a little sardonically, and witnessed
Harry's unbounded success in Friarton.

For the very Dadds and Polleys, who
cherished a deadly distrust to one of themselves
that had penetrated to a higher sphere and
professed to return to his own, fraternised in a

D 2

manner with the intruder, called him ' the right
kidney,' a pleasant young gentleman as ever
lived, taking his frolic as he was free to do.
Bless you, he could not really let himself down,
be he ever so willing. His people and his
class would see to that. It was only his way
of making fun. He was a gentleman-farmer,
like the lord-lieutenant, or as the late Prince
Consort had been, though he amused himself
with aping the old yeomen. And he had no
fad of raising up the middle-class, any more
than he had of leaping over the moon. He
gave himself no airs of superior wisdom and
virtue. It was only that he could make himself
happy anywhere, and had an agreeable word
to say to everybody ; while nobody was such a
donkey as to mistake Mr. Stanhope's manner or
presume upon it.

OldDadd laughed loudly at Harry's pranks,
recalling old members of the gentlefolks he had
known who drove coaches and made walking

tours in sorry disguises for bets. He entertained
Harry himself with these reminiscences,
to which the lad listened with his usual affability,
old Dadd standing hat in hand the while and
Harry forgetting to bid the draper cover his
head in the mock yeoman's presence.

Jack Dadd was enchanted when Harry not
only enrolled himself a member of the cricket
club, but presided over its entertainments in the
4 Admiral Repel ' afterwards. Here was an
adherent worth having, an authority as ready ashe
was great, from his unimpeachable advantages,
on sport and horseflesh. It was rather
in pure enthusiastic homage to his gifts and
attainments, than in lurking sycophancy, that,
though Harry was fain to render himself 
to his new associates, Jack
began by deferring to him unfeignedly, and
headed the other members in cheerfully acknowledging
Harry's born supremacy. The
would-be man of the people accepted the

unsolicited tribute as a matter of course, and
not at all as if he disliked it. On the contrary,
he showed a very fair capacity for playing the
cock of the roost in addition to his other performances.


And only Oliver Constable groaned over
these indications of what would be the sort of
alliance formed between Harry Stanhope and
his adopted class ; how the members of widely
severed sets in society brought together through
self-interest and for self-indulgence, would play
into each other's weaknesses, and simply work
out their mutual lapse and loss.

Strict disciplinarian as Mrs. Polley was, she
did not object to her girls giggling at Harry
Stanhope's exuberant chaff, and exultingly accepting
bets of gloves and ribands with him, in
which the Miss Polleys were always the winners.
Mrs. Polley did not exactly understand
that Harry Stanhope, who at his present stage
was incapable of being anything else than boyishly

friendly and merry with all women, had
chaffed in precisely the same manner the bar-maids
of his earlier acquaintance. Mrs. Policy
herself smiled broadly on Harry's jokes, and
called him ' a good sort,' a perfect gentleman,
none of your stuck-up pretenders — unquestionably
Harry was not a stuck-up pretender.

The one dissentient voice in Friarton was
that of Catherine Hilliard. When her cousin
Louisa took the brothers under her wing, as if
Harry needed the protection, and doted on the
youngest, she would have had Catherine dote on
him also. Mrs. Hilliard was too good-naturedly
selfish, too hilariously cynical, too well occupied
on her own account, to be a regular
match-maker, supposing there had been scope
for anything save sick match-making in Friar-ton
and the neighbourhood. But she would
not have objected, from the first hour she spent
in the company of the would-be yeoman, to
making up a match between Harry Stanhope

and Catherine. Mrs. Hilliard would have lost
her cousin as a constant companion, but she
would have found a jovial ally to her heart's
content in Harry. And if the attractive young
man's worldly wisdom was not his strong point,
that was Catherine's look-out, not Mrs. Hilliard's.
He would form the most hospitable
and genial of kinsmen and neighbours, if he
might not have all the qualifications for a safe
husband. On the other hand, the contrast
between Catherine and him was all that could
be wished. It would do Catherine a world of
good to have her bookishness — detestable in a
woman — her untenable notions, her dullness
and asperity, routed out of her by a gay-tempered,
easy-minded husband, whose easy-mindedness
might not preclude the wholesome
discipline of any amount of obtuseness and stubbornness,
when interference with his masculine
prerogatives was in question.

But unfortunately, Catherine could not seethe

beauty of the contrast between herself and
Harry Stanhope, as establishing an incontestable
point of union where the two were concerned.
4 He is no better than an overgrown boy,' she
said, with a half weary scorn. ' He has not a
thought or care beyond his pleasure.'

'My dear, that is what is so particularly
nice about the boy,' remonstrated Louisa
Hilliard. ' You and many other people are
weighed down with care, and the consciousness
of care, to no purpose. What we specially
want at this epoch in human history, is a robust
faculty of enjoyment.'

I think I prefer the poor deaf fellow,' said
Catherine, in her spirit of contradiction. ' He
loses his identity in that of his brother.'

Is that such a boon to the world, to lose
one's self and live in one's neighbour's life ? '
asked Mrs. Hilliard, shaking her head in
merry incredulity. 'I am not sure that it
might not prove easier and more comfortable,

on the whole, to be another than to be myself.
I should feel so deliriously neutral, you may be
sure — nothing could touch me very nearly.
Your toothache would tingle quite bearably,
suffered by reflection through my nerves

6 I don't think it is quite so with Mr. Horace
Stanhope,' said Catherine coldly. ' I don't suppose
you understand, Louisa.'

Not I, farther than that it is not in you to
go with the multitude, either for good or evil.
Child, I am certain it is for good, and to our
credit, when the rest of us heartily admire
and like a fine, manly, friendly fellow like
young Stanhope, and I should have thought —
though I am not super-subtle in my intuitions
that you would have valued him for standing
by the poor creature his brother ; whom, with
what I must call a morbid taste, you set yourself
to prefer to the fairy prince in his own
person.'

What ! ' exclaimed Catherine, * value a

man for caring for the dog which is fonder
of him than of anything else in the world ? '

Well, there is a proverbial estimate of " a
dog's life," while there are many good sorts of
men that kick their dogs occasionally, when
they need chastisement,' speculated Louisa*
maliciously treading on one of Catherine's
hobbies.

Yes ; and the Society for the Prevention
of Cruelty to Animals exists for the punishment
of men's brutality,' said Catherine, with her
pale cheeks flushing.

c My love, the Society has to do with ruffians
— let us trust they are comparatively rare.
You are speaking like a girl who has been
brought up by maiden hands, who expects a
man to behave like another girl such as herself,
not to say like an angel. She does not
take into account his different nature and rearing,
together with his greater temptations ; she
shrieks hysterically, and calls his least faults

by preposterously exaggerated names. Men
who have nothing to do with her either laugh
at her, or fall into ecstasies over her baby
innocence. But woe betide her and her husband
— should she consent to take such a necessary
appendage — if she will not open her
eyes, and submit to know a little more of the
world. You must accept an older woman's
word for it, Catherine, that a man may kick
his dog when the animal is troublesome ; he
may even swear a little at his wife, under great
provocation, and yet neither be absolutely barbarous
nor profane.'

1 There may be something in what you say
with regard to the wife ' — began Catherine, in
perfect sincerity, but was stopped by the
laughter of Mrs. Hilliard.

1 For shame, Catherine, to prefer a dog to a
man — or rather to a woman. Never mind,
there is another respectable old saw to draw
inferences from, in this case : " Love me, love

my dog." No doubt you are paying Harry
Stanhope the most delicate of compliments in
your favour for Horace.'

Catherine disdained to reply to the insinuation.


But though Catherine declined to add to
the number of Harry Stanhope's worshippers,
she appeared, like the other women, to be drawn
into Ins court where he stood the centre, next
to Mrs. Hilliard herself, of the bright stirring
drawing-room at the Meadows. Catherine's
imagination tempted her to speculate, with
however little hope, on the diversities and
vagaries of human character. A new type
arrested her, as an unknown specimen stops and
holds fast the naturalist. Harry was strange to
her in the sparkle of his bold thoughtlessness
and inconsiderateness and pure and simple
egotism. The qualities were all naturally repugnant
to her, still they attracted her curiosity
for a time, as qualities which she had never

met before, and might never meet again, in the
same degree or combination. Catherine, too,
looked and listened as if carried away with the
charm when Harry, nothing loth, figured as the
hero of the hour, recounted his youthful exploits
by flood and field, volunteered, without a grain
of shyness or scruple as to the acceptableness of
his service, to be at the beck of any and every
woman present — for Harry was no languid,
supercilious, fine gentleman. He was a gallant
cavalier to the heart's core. He only asked to
be allowed to help every woman, while he
helped himself liberally to the first place in her
regard. But he was the reverse of the odious
cowardly personage — we may trust he figures
more largely in fiction than in real life — the lady-killer,
professed or professed. All was open
and above board with Harry ; and upon the
whole his attentions were too impartial to have
much individuality or to be invested with
special danger. It seemed as if lie consented

to be heard or seen for the entire sex's
benefit, as he span his yarns — not particularly
original, wise or witty, but with an indescribable
charm in them, due to their fresh lightheadedness
— of his school and college frolics : his
prowess at ; hare and hounds ; ' how he was a
bogie to his dame ; his surreptitious introduction
of ' Pin Him ' into his quad ; the row he had
been in when town fought gown ; the wrinkle
he had been able to give such an awfully clever
fellow as Tyler in making up for the private
theatricals at the West — whose place was near
Harry's cousins. Then he sang his songs
whenever they were wanted ; songs less aggressively
warlike and sportsmanlike than the
songs of Jack Dadd and the other peaceful
counter-jumpers — sometimes love songs, or
songs expressing passionate memories, and
tender yearnings, with fiery depths, and pathetic
echoes which Harry Stanhope had never
fathomed, but which yet thrilled the listeners as

the words and airs were given by the full
flexible young voice.

It looked as if Harry were carrying all before
him, and winning each heart — including
that of dreamy, dissatisfied Catherine Hilliard.

Oliver Constable judged so, as he lounged
and contorted himself unnoticed in the background,
and said it was the way of the world
and that young beggar's luck, of which he was
not worthy, which he could not be expected to
prize at its proper value.

Two people knew better. Catherine Hilliard
could not be called one of the two, for she
never took the question into consideration. It
would have felt too preposterous to her to
enquire beforehand, what her feelings might
or might not become, for any hero of flesh
and blood. Besides, Harry Stanhope was nota
man to her, only a boy, a big, merry boy, who
formed a momentary study for the thoughtful
woman.

Mrs. Hilliard, while she was perfectly conscious
of the latent antagonism between
Catherine and Harry Stanhope, still threw them
somewhat ostentatiously together, making
Catherine play the accompaniments to his
songs, and causing him — which was a little of
a trial to Harry's good temper, to be always on
the side of Catherine — an incorrigible bungler,
almost as bad as Oliver himself — in the lawn
games in which Harry Stanhope and Fan
Constable were adepts, a pleasure for game
lovers to look upon. Mrs. Hilliard elected
Harry to take down Catherine to the improvised
suppers which were apt to follow the improvised
parties at the Meadows. Mrs. Hilliard could
manage these manoeuvres with so much ease that
it robbed them of half their attractiveness to
the manoeuvrer, she was wont to complain
privately, since Catherine was as blind as a baby
to any premeditation in such arrangements,
and was only more or less bored by the con-vol.

II. E

sequences. All the same, it was her, Louisa
Hilliard's, duty to do what she could as a
hostess in the judicious assortment of her guests,
and to show her cousinly regard by doing what
she could also to prevent Catherine's missing, by
anything save her own folly, the chance of what
would never be a great and yet might prove a
suitable establishment, in days when girls, far
more attractive to the generality of men than
Catherine was, could not pick and choose in
making a match.

If the hostess baffled and plagued any rival
pretender — say Fan Constable — to a lion's share
of Harry Stanhope's universal attentions, so
much the better for Mrs. Hilliard's entertainment,
and if it were so much the worse for the
rival pretender, whose fault was it save her
own?

Harry Stanhope was not so egregiously
foolish in his vanity as to fail to penetrate the
fashion in which Catherine Hilliard was taking

stock of him, weighing him in the balance, and
finding him hugely wanting. ' Look here,
Horry,' he protested, thrusting his fingers
through his fair hair in comical discomfiture,,
after an hour's compulsory companionship with
Catherine, ' that girl has been looking at me
through a microscope, and picking holes in my
credit all the evening ; she knows not only how
I was ploughed in my small, but all about that
time I was rusticated for the beastly row at
Walsh's, though I never told her a word of the
mess. I say, I wish the old woman ' (an irreverent
reference to Mrs. Hilliard, to which the
lady would not have objected in the least)
6 would not persist in pairing us off together.
It is no go ; though no doubt Miss Hilliard's
tin might be of use in the farm, she would not
have a gift of me, and unfortunately I could not
get the tin without offering my precious self in
exchange.'

Ain't she more the style we've been ace

2

U. OF ILL LIB.

customer to — I mean among our people — than
Miss Constable, for instance ? ' enquired Horry,
doubtfully, of his oracle. c I think Miss Hilliard
is rather a fine girl ; looks like a lady without
making a fuss about it.'

True, oh king ! She is stately in her stiffness
as a stage duchess. And she is a sap as
well as a swell. I bet you she reads as
hard as old Herculaneum, not that she ever
alluded to a book to me, except to one of
Lever's stories, which she just mentioned tentatively,
with great scrutinising eyes fixed upon
me, the better to assure herself that it was
something in my line But I have glimpses of
the old beggars the English poets, and so
forth, if not of the Greek and Latin humbugs,
in the turn of her neck and the wave of her
hair ; I am in constant horror lest she should sofar
forget herself as put me through my exam
again — which line in " Paradise Lost ' I prefer,
or whether 1 agree with Bacon that gunpowder

ought to have been invented before lucifer. I
don't think I can stand it much longer if Mrs.
Hilliard will go on acting as if we were made
for each other, though I am prepared to own
that Miss Hilliard is innocent of any pretence
in the matter. How could it be otherwise
when she is so stunningly wise and learned, and
the rest of it ? Oh ! I say, when you see all that,
and the knowledge don't crush you, suppose
you go in for the lady and the tin, to be
ploughed and harrowed into the dirty acres of
Copley Grange Farm, and so relieve your
brother-officer of the obligation, Horatio ? '

Horry laughed the discordant laugh of the
deaf, and mumbled a disclaimer of the honour
and the implied preference on the part of
Catherine, while Harry went on speaking out
his thoughts to his second self with yet greater
zest. ' Now, Miss Constable believes in me —
fact, I assure you. That plucky, go-ahead little
woman is, not to say swindled, by me, for to do

myself the justice, I never sought to take her
in ; but she gives me credit liberally for a thousand
manly virtues I don't possess. She half
tempts me to believe in them myself,' protested
Harry, with an excited laugh. ' It is not like
you, old fellow, who have rowed in the same
boat with me ever since we two came into this
blessed world, and have naturally grown rather
blind to my weaknesses and besotted about me
altogether. She who never saw me till this
season, with all her cleverness, and she is
uncommonly clever, which is better by a long
chalk than being bookish — not that she is not an
educated woman also — does more than take me
on trust. She endows me with all the energy and
endurance which are hers, not mine. She speaks
as if I were going, single-handed, to bring in the
waste places of the earth, and found a family.
Confound it, Horry, it's rather nice, and generally
improving to be believed in like that by a
handsome, good woman, as true as steel, I'll

wager my head, and as proud as Lucifer in her
own way, while she is 'cute enough in anything
else to see through a millstone,' finished Harry,
complacently stroking his beard, as if he were
beginning to suspect that he was really a finer
fellow than he himself, or any other person,
save the faithful follower by his side, had
given him credit for.

CHAPTEE XIII.
Oliver's mission to the women of his class.

Oliver nourished the forlorn hope that he
might do something with the girls of his rankin
raising their aspirations and refining their
habits. They at least belonged to the gentler
sex, and ought to be by constitution more
tractable and altogether of finer clay. He took
to dropping in of an evening at the Polleys,
where the male element in the back parlour
was but feebly represented by superseded Mr.
Polley.

Oliver turned with disdain from Fan's
despairing warning : ' Oliver, if you don't take
care, Mrs. Polley will think you are proposing

to " keep company " with one of her girls, and
if you don't fulfil her expectations, she will set
you down unhesitatingly and proclaim you
openly to be " a flirty, shillyshallying fellow, who
don't know your own mind." Are you such a
greenhorn that you require to be told you
cannot look twice at a girl of this stamp,
or exchange three sentences with her, without
the girl, or her parents for her, concluding
that you mean something in the matrimonial
line, and going on to class you as her admirer
and suitor, and to calculate what sort of match
you will make for her ? As you are, undoubtedly,
a great match in the Polleys' eyes, you
ought to behave with common prudence.'

No, no ! ' denied Oliver vehemently,
blushing hotly with chivalrous pain. ' You are
aspersing your whole sex, Fan, in the persons
tradesmen's daughters ; and if there were
any ground for the aspersion, it would be
high time that it should be done away with,.

by the introduction of wider, simpler, more
friendly intercourse between young men and
women.'

Perhaps you really mean to ally yourself
with the family,' said Fan in her vexation,
falling into the offence which was unusual with
her, of employing almost as tall language as
'Liza Polley might have adopted on a similar
occasion. ' To be perfectly consistent, you
ought. All I ask is that you will tell me intime.'


That you may carry off your goods and
chattels before they are contaminated by
coming in contact with Miss 'Liza's or Miss
'Mily's bridal finery, and renounce me as a
brother before you are forced to own her as a
sister,' said Oliver, beginning to laugh. 'All
right. But I don't own to the soft impeachment
yet, though, if ever my time should come,
why not a Miss Polley — I beg her pardon for
the liberty taken with her name, but I did

not begin the impertinence — why not a Miss
Polley, I say, as well as another ? '

Oliver spoke with light defiance but with
some bitterness underlying his challenge, for his
thoughts had gone back to an encounter that
morning, when Catherine Hilliard, driving with
her cousin, had passed him and his baker's
shop, literally with unseeing eyes. She had
looked more delicate and tired out than ever.
No wonder, when she was being not merely
morally starved, but slowly poisoned in her
Palace of Art, her fantastic ideal world.

Oliver was too manly, with a higher manliness
than Jack Dadd's or than that of many
persons of far greater pretensions than Jack,
to experience the particular dread of misconception
which Fan had sought to instil into her
brother. He was shy enough in his way, and
he fought tough battles with his shyness everyday
he lived, but his self consciousness did not
take this form. He had revolted at it every

time he met it, not only when young Dadd
boasted of girls making dead sets at him, and
showing themselves, poor little souls, spoony on
his account, but when fellows, who might have
known better, expressed their alarm for the
lasting consequences of the temporary associations
of Commemoration Week, or talked of
running the gauntlet of the dowagers and
damsels of the London season. Oliver had
felt still more aggrieved when he found the
same gratuitous insinuations in books of
1 unexceptionable tone,' where men — bachelors
and widowers, of mature years and sane minds,
masters of the situation in every other respect —
were represented as timidly putting themselves
under the wings of female relations that the heads
of the houses might be protected from the wary
advances or bold attacks of the single women
in their neighbourhood who cherished designs
on their freedom. Well, no doubt, there were
women of all kinds, like men ; but was it honest

women, modest women, women with souls,
women like the men's mothers, sisters, future
and past wives, whom brother-men thus
insulted, while sister-women handed on the
insult ?

Oliver's company certainly induced the
Polley girls to forego, for the evenings on which
he called, their wanderings abroad in search of
gossip and amusement, which their mother
tolerated because young folks must have their
day, and the girls had their markets (matrimonial)
to make, being bound, in a measure, to
keep on the outlook for settlements in life.

But the young Polleys' gadding were
restrained within certain well-defined and not
to be subverted bounds of time and circumstance.
The Miss Polleys, collectively or singly,
might frequent their neighbours' houses or such
promenades as Friarton afforded, till three quarters
past nine, but they must be safe at home, if not
at supper, at the latest by ten o'clock, when the

house-door was formally locked by Mrs. Polley
in person. No Miss Polley was at liberty to
stray into companionship not approved of by
her mother, not even 'Mily — ' the most audacious
of the set,' as Mrs. Polley was sometimes
moved to term her favourite daughter, in referring
to 'Mily's flights of wild spirits and self-will
dared to transgress in these respects.

Oliver took it as no particular compliment
to him that the Miss Polleys should be induced
to stay at home when he was a visitor. Common
hospitality — of which their class was by
no means deficient, required it of all or some of
them. And it seemed to the young man that
any variety must be welcome in the atmosphere
the intellectual stagnation of which was equal
to its literal oppressiveness — laden as it was
with the odours, from the shop, of cheese, sugar,
and coffee.

Mrs. Polley — the presiding genius — when
she was to be seen in private life, for she was

sometimes detained at the close of a busy day in
the shop, suffered from the fatigue consequent on
the day's labours, and although she was always
equal to an exertion, and roused herself to
brandish and snap her fingers figuratively and ina
friendly — well-nigh a playful fashion in Oliver's
face, he felt convinced when he or any other
stranger was not there, must give herself up to
cross-tiredness, to nagging her daughters, and
snubbing her husband between fits of the gapes
over her knitting, or coarse hemming, and
rough and ready darning of household linen.

Mr. Polley, who was not regarded as company
worth counting, by his own children anymore
than by the rest of the world, did no more
than contribute the dreariest platitudes and
the stalest incidents from his second day's newspaper,
to the feast of reason and the flow of
soul. There grew to be a merit in the girls'
persistent giggles and in the light-hearted empty
chatter and idle gossip, pointed by personalities

and spiced by scandal, with which they stirred
the heaviness, and the absence of all dignity and
beauty, from which Oliver was not astonished
that they made their escape, when they had the
opportunity.

The Polleys had another sitting-room
besides that behind the shop, a best parlour or
drawing-room as the girls liked to call it, in which
they sometimes sat with their hands crossed
in their laps, or engaged in fancy-work, entertaining
company. But as Oliver chose to come
to them in the character of a family friend, a
distinction which they appreciated, Mrs. Polley
overruled her daughters' objections and elected
that he should be received in the ordinary
family room.

4 He shall see us as we are,' said the matron
when the Polleys were all together in the back
parlour one evening before supper. ' He shan't
have to say we were honey to his face and
molasses behind his back. Besides, we don't do

nothing we are ashamed of. I tell yon what,
gals, if he has got any one of you in his eye
already, he's that kind of chap, if I'm not mistaken,
he'll think a deal more of you, and be
more likely to grow sweet on you, if he finds you
with me and father, in your house-gowns, working
at your needles in the parlour here, than
if he were supposed to catch you sitting like
dressed-up dolls, at your fine-lady nonsense of
crochet and bead-work, in the other room, as, I
dare say — for I have not been out at the millhouse
for years now — I'm a stay-at-home, even
if Fan Constable were readier with her invitations
— his sister sits from morning till
night.'

It's all you know, mother,' said 'Mily, a
well-grown buxom girl of eighteen ; ' but at least
it shows you have not made yourself cheap at
Friarton Mill. Fan sees callers in her bare cold
hole of a drawing-room certainly ; but when I
go there, which is precious seldom as I know

VOL. II. F

she would rather have my room than my company,
she is always pretending to be notable
over a heap of such common hemming and
back-stitching as even you can do. Fancy ! she
was making bed curtains, and not keeping them
out of the way either, the last time I was there.
She is as busy as any sewing girl over the vicarage
old women's flannel petticoats and children's
cotton frocks. Bather she than I slave for
such cattle. We give a good subscription to
Mr. Holland's poor-box, and that's enough, I
should think. But Fan curries favour with the
vicarage people, who have taken her up, though
Peter Constable was an old chapel-goer like weare,
and Oliver goes to chapel still. I am at a
loss to tell what gentility she has more than us,
except that she's that proud and stuck up,' and
'Mily sat up in her chair with Fan's most frigid
air, amidst the loud applause of her sisters.

1 Now mind what you're about, 'Mily,' her
mother reproved the actress : ' you may not be

far wrong, and you're smart at taking people off
there's no denying it, but you may do it once
too often. What would Oliver Constable think
if he saw you ? He may not have any nonsense
about him, but he won't care to have his sister
turned into a laughing-stock.'

I'm sure I don't mind a fiddle-stick what
he cares,' protested 'Mily, taking high ground.

Hold your tongue, and don't speak again
to me, Miss,' insisted Mrs. Polley. ' You get too
much of your head as it is ; but you shan't spoil
your chances by your folly before my very
eyes.'

1 It ain't likely to be me, mother,' cried 'Mily,
rather enjoying the implication. 'It will be
'Liza if it's to be any of us. She is fitter to
tackle him with her rubbish of poetry, which
ought to suit a college man.'

Me ! ' ejaculated 'Liza, a delicate, rather
indolent girl, in injured innocence. ' I never spoke
about poetry to Oliver Constable.'

F 2

4 And I should just like to hear you try it,'
Mrs. Polley gave her literary daughter fair
warning ; ' though a song is all very well at a
proper time and place, at a party or after supper.
I was a good singer myself in my day —
you need not make faces, 'Mily — and I can raise
the tune yet in chapel a deal truer than a pack
of set-up madams with money wasted on them
in an instrument and in piano-forty lessons.'
The last cut bore reference to the superannuated
piano in the Polley s' drawing-room, and the two
quarters' fees for instruction in playing on it,
vouchsafed by Mrs. Polley to her daughters,
being what they might claim as their due in
education according to the growing requirements
of their station. i But to sing my Maker's
praises is one thing,' went on Mrs. Polley severely,
1 or even to be able to manage a song or two in
addition to a hymn, and to have any traffic with
play or poetry books is another. To my mind,
they're worse than novels and romances, and

you all know what your deacons think of them.
You gals may read them on the sly sometimes,
but it had need to be on the sly, for if I get my
hands on such devil's books, into the fire or out
of the window they go. Them's myfopinions,
and if you think to defy them you know the
consequences.'

Compose yourself, my dear,' ventured Mr.
Polley, looking up from his newspaper. ' I apprehend
you're going just a little too far. I
remember the old minister gave in to recommend
Uncle Tom's '

1 Uncle Tom's cat ! ' interrupted Mrs. Polley,
disrespectfully. 'A good turn of honest work is
a far better employment than snivelling over any
made-up story — though it were Mr. Holland or
the old minister himself as made it up. You
can tell him I said so, if you like. I wonder
anybody can be so silly — not to say so unprincipled,
for I call it downright want of
principle, to be taken in by printed lies.

Beading trash of stories and verses never
paid a debt, or filled a hungry stomach , that I
ever heard tell of. But I'll tell you what
they've done,' speaking triumphantly in vindication
of her theory, ' they've brought an idiot
like Poet Dymott,' alluding to a local poet of
humble vocation, ' as low as the union. Luckily
his silly of a wife who encouraged him died
early, and they had no children to suffer from
his not sticking to his last and shoe-leather.
Fools' tales sent a light-headed gipsy like
Mrs. Dadd's last servant into the county asylum,
after she was pulled out of Buller's Brook,
where she might have stopped still for all the
washing her character had got. We should bea
deal better off for maids-of-all-work, when
we've the misfortune to need 'em, if it were not for
the trumpery " Family Heralds " and " People's
Journals " as the girls have the impudence to
take out, throwing away their pence, and
sitting up at nights by the help of rigged

candle-lends, at the risk of setting houses on
fire, and creeping and dawdling about their
work next day. I don't hold against a book as
is an improving book, and deals with our latter
lends,' Mrs. Polley granted, showing herself a
little more liberal and capable of making a concession,
' at a proper time, on a Sunday evening,
when it rains cats and dogs, so as to make
chapel out of the question, and there's nothing
else to do at home. But I'd like to see any of you
gals settle to a volume of sermons, if there was
a glistening chimneypot hat or a draggled tail
of a skirt to watch passing the door. I don't
make any stand against Polley muddling forever
amongst his newspapers, since he's no good
at any better job.'

Missus Polley ! ' objected the gentleman,
looking up again from his newspaper, with his
hat still on his head. Though he rarely
stirred beyond the parlour, he wore his hat,
except when he was at meals or in bed, as

if to give him the help of a few inches added
to his masculine height. He spoke half under
his breath in subdued displeasure.

I don't deny I like myself to know what's
a-going on, when I've time to listen, which ain't
often, and Polley's reading out saves me the
trouble of looking over the news,' confessed the
matron candidly, taking not the smallest notice
of her husband's appeal unless by speaking, if
anything, in a louder key. 'Besides, it helps to
keep him out of harm's way.'

Missus Polley ! ' groaned the defaulter
more clamorously.

1 What are you Missus Parleying me for ? '
his helpmeet turned on him briskly. ■ You ain't
going to deny the tricks you played me when first
we went together, Polley ? It is as well to keep
you out of temptation, though I should just like
to see you trying on that trade again, now that I've
got the upper hand, and you've got some notion
of the value of a good wife, as has kept a roof

over your and the gals' heads, and a full table,
and the shop flourishing more than it ever did
in your day. You ought to bless your stars,
Polley, that you ever set eyes on my face, or
that I consented to have a bad bargain in you

'Mily Polley was a little tired of hearing the
chronicle of her father's delinquencies and her
mother's virtues ; she broke in upon the monologue,
reminding her mother of an instance of
inconsistency in her conduct. 'I wonder, mother,
you ever let poetry books He in the house or
suffer 'Liza to look into them.'

c You know as well as I do, 'Mily,' Mrs.
Polley explained, shortly, 'that 'Liza has not
been so strong as the rest of you gals, and
when she has not been able to sit up with her
colds and influenza, there was no great wrong
done in her diverting herself with a book,
though I could have wished it had been of a
more sensible and serious kind. I did try to
set Mr. Holland upon her about that.'

I was dumpish enough, I can tell you,
without reading mouldy sermons,' grumbled
'Liza. ' I wonder how any of you would have
liked to be condemned either to do that or
count your fingers, for my strength was that
gone I was not able so much as to hold a
crochet-hook, and Mr. Holland said there was
no harm in my pieces, some of them were most
elegant.'

Then 'Liza's books said Ann Polley, who
was commonplace and practical to excess, ' are
not 'Liza's any more than ours, only that she
looks into them sometimes. They are school
prizes and Christmas gifts, and keepsakes from
friends, though I think they might hit on better
presents. It would be a great pity if you were
so far left to yourself as to burn them, mother,
since some of them are quite handsome " table
books," which I should be sorry to handle
except to dust, for fear of spoiling their red

and green and gold backs. They are a great
ornament laid round the drawing-room table.'
Yes said Mrs. Polley, decidedly, ' that is
the right place for them. They will turn nobody's
feather head, and waste nobody's time
save in the dusting, lying there.'

CHAPTER XIV.

THE FIRST ATTEMPT.

After all, if Oliver had always been ushered
into the drawing-room which these closed books
were supposed to embellish, he would not have
found many traces of higher aspirations in its
gaudy carpet, and chairs and tables of one ponderous
monotonous style, since Mrs. Polley's influence
had at least saved them from being slim
and gimcrack, with its samples of meretricious
fancy work, in which there was as little fancy
as there was use, than he could discover in the
back parlour. The family room was furnished
with the darkest drugget and coarsest mahogany
and hair cloth. It did not, according to the

Polleys' ideas, admit of any attempt at ornament.
It was reserved to fulfil their notions of
ease and comfort, the table being often covered
and littered with the materials employed in the
girls' home dressmaking, and the chimney-piece
given over to Mr. Polley's tobacco-pouch
and pipes, and Mrs. Polley's thimble and reels of
cotton.

'Mily Polley was not a bad mimic in that
lowest development of art which is contented to
grasp and caricature such salient details and
absurdities of human nature as come within the
artist's limited observation. And though there
was a horrible absence of reverence and tenderness
in the girl's rendering of some old woman's
palsied utterance, or some half-imbecile boy's
stutter, in her cool giving of her own father's
stock phrases, even in her close copies of Mr.
Holland — the Polleys' clergyman's — stiff or
strained gestures in the most solemn part 01
his services, the representation was the only

version of the drama which ever reached the
Polleys, while it was as good as a play in forcing
Mrs. Polley to relax into a grim smile and to
forget for a moment her rare achievements, and
in stimulating Mr. Polley to clap his hands
magnanimously at the mocking echo of himself.

There was no theatre in Friarton, and if
there had been, the Polleys belonged to a branch
of the Christian Church which condemns
theatres without reservation, nay, sometimes, as
in the case of Mrs. Polley, extends the condemnation
to play-books as well as players.

Yet it struck Oliver Constable that the
Polleys were at the level of civilisation when
the theatre, if not abused and tabooed, would
have naturally come in as an effective instrument
in their training. He arrived at the conclusion
as he formed one ot the audience to
the mimicry which 'Mily Polley, who was
proud of her gift, was sometimes tempted to
practise before her friends and acquaintances,

in addition to her family ; as he took notice of
the nicknames which abounded in her vocabulary
in about an equal degree to that in which they
flourished in Jack Dadd's speech ; and as Oliver
observed the glee with which the girl utilised
any exceptionally silly or stupid person who
had the misfortune to enter her circle, making
him or her serve for a temporary butt. The
last was grievously disloyal, and the worst thing
was that nobody — neither the mistress nor the
master of the house, not even 'Liza, who was
certainly gentler than the others, who sometimes
read a little from choice, and who was
therefore under the impression that she had
culture — recognised the disloyalty.

But the mimicry was an intellectual effort
a shade in advance of the bald individual experiences,
the tittle-tattle purely peddling, or
more or less mischievous, which constituted the
staple of the Polleys' conversation, and was
just such an effort as the theatre might have

spurred on and supplemented. Oliver imagined
the Polleys might have liked to go to a
respectable theatre which was not under an
ecclesiastical ban, might have enjoyed a broad
farce, and relished and profited so far by one
of the homelier order of tragedies.

What he could not imagine was, that till
they had gone a little farther in elementary
knowledge, and without the theatre, which
comes in to meet the intellectual law that perception
and imitation are among the first acts
of the mental powers of a child, or an undeveloped
man or woman, any of the Polleys,
with the exception of 'Liza, could derive the
smallest benefit or satisfaction from the mass of
books, which, to be sure, they left untouched.
He ceased also to be surprised that the
Polley family should be in the section of Mr.
Holland's congregation, the members of which
composed themselves, after the prayers and
hymns, to look round on their neighbours and

manifestly take stock of their presence, looks
and clothes, or who openly nodded and audibly
snored throughout their clergyman's finest
peroration, with which, however, they would
not have consented to dispense, since they took
a reflected pride in his fervid eloquence as contrasted
with the vicar's well-bred conversation
in the pulpit. Oliver had ceased to get impatient
with what he had been accustomed to
consider Holland's violent transitions in a
variety of bad styles — from the strongly sensational
to the familiarly anecdotal — bordering
on the facetious, when the critic was better
able to estimate the order of intelligence with
which, to a large extent, the preacher had to
deal. Oliver began to pity the poor teacher,
who was bound alike by his calling and his
conscience to impart the highest truths which
could be addressed to humanity, to these dense
minds and stolid hearts.

Oliver found the girls by fits and starts

G

furiously busy, or, in spite of their mother,
absolutely idle. It was clear that notwithstanding,
or because of, their mental vacuity,
they luxuriated in idleness a little after the
fashion of the dwellers in Eastern zenanas.
The Polleys still regarded idleness much as
their poor young drudge of a maid-of-all-work,
taken from the workhouse school, looked upon
it, with more reason, as one of the great gains
of having risen and prospered in business and
the world. To do nothing save gabble idle
gossip was next best to wearing fine clothes
every day of the week and every hour of the
day, and eating at every meal early lamb and
salmon, pastry, plum-cake, and strawberry
ices, which the Polleys' class are now in circumstances
to add to their more primitive dainties
of pork-pies, muffins, and shrimps. Idleness
was one of the established privileges of ladies
to which the girls gave full credit, and of which
they were not slow to avail themselves when

they had the opportunity. It might pall intime,
and so might the fine clothes and fine
food in unlimited quantities, but such satiety
the Polley girls were not likely to attain so long
as they lived under their mother's rule. And
they prized their advantages the more because
they were still reduced to snatch at and make
the most of them when these only came in
their way occasionally, by the arbitrary will of
Mrs. Polley.

Oliver observed that the girls had none of
the sustained industry of Fan, and that they
were constantly seeking to shirk the share of
work in the shop and house which their mother
laid upon them. 'Mily was particularly adroit
in slipping off her burdens, and her active
mother made more allowance for 'Mily's adroitness
than for 'Liza's laziness or Ann's slowness,
showing that she considered rebellion incidental
to youth, and admired in this case the
cleverness with which it was carried out. Mrs.

G 2

Polley said her youngest was ' a sad pickle
but she admitted she had been thoughtless and
fond of her pleasure beyond everything in her
own girlhood. She daresay a house and
family on 'Mily's refractory shoulders would
steady her in time. She would rather have a
girl smart for her own ends than a silly or a
dawdle, any day; so far from regarding the
smartness thus exercised as dishonourable to
the culprit, Mrs. Polley saw in it a proof that
'Mily would be worth something in the end.

The household needlework, which is still
done at home in houses like the Polleys', was
another task which the girls evaded, or discharged,
with a grudge, in the most slovenly
fashion. Such disgraceful needlework, to be
worn in private, as the Polleys passed through
their clumsy, careless fingers, Fan Constable
would not have accepted from the least
scholar in the vicar's wife's school.

It puzzled Oliver that Mrs. Polley, who

insisted so strongly on the merits of energy and
enterprise in her own case, could, as a matter
of principle, permit the comparatively useless,
frivolous lives her daughters led. But when
he sounded her one day on whether she did
not approve of training girls to self-help, as fit
successors to their fathers and mothers in such
a shop as she herself conducted successfully, he
found, strange as it seemed to him, that she
too, was tinged with the girls' views of gentility.
Oliver, who had thought to have pleased his
father's old friend by the suggestion, had never
gone so near to sending her off in a huff — and
Mrs. Polley in a huff was a formidable person
to have to do with.

4 Well, to tell you the truth, Mr. Oliver,'
said Mrs. Polley, with a dry cough, ' my gals
don't ought to look forward to going into the
shop. I haven't toiled my shoulders and my
'eat, and stood there till I was fit to drop on
market-days, for my gals to have to follow in

my shoes. If business goes with us as it has
done, I'm 'happy to say, ever since I took it in
hand, I expect I shall put enough by to enable
the gals, if they ain't provided with husbands
in the meantime, to live on their means, and
do nothing, like the best in the place.'

Oliver was silenced.

The one employment which entirely overcame
the Polleys' taste for idleness, and on
which they entered with a will and the utmost
zest, was what Oliver reckoned their unfortunate
blunder in making objects of themselves
in the line of dress. They could always be
eagerly interested in frilling themselves from
top to toe, in pulling down their old flounces,
and furbelows, and bunches of skirts, and reconstructing
them, if possible, in an uglier
shape than before. They were never wearied
of manufacturing the most grotesque apologies
for hats and bonnets. Oliver thought, in contrast,
of Fan and Catherine Hilliard's simple

gowns and quiet hats, which, if he had known
it, 'Mily Polley classed as the lowliest things
out, and farther stated that it was her deliberate
opinion, only a learned young lady with her
head in the clouds, like Miss Hilliard, or a
girl with the cool assurance of Fan Constable,
would take it upon her to be so plain in her
dress, and would not at least try to be wearing
what was stylish.

Oliver, poor benighted man, only marvelled,
on the contrary, how even girls in their vagaries
could accomplish such tremendous mistakes in
what one might have imagined would have
been the congenial art of adorning their own
bodies.

Nobody could call the Polleys' lives gloomy
or austere, yet to Oliver their enjoyments
appeared grievously ignoble, even when they
were not of an animal character. He was very
sorry for those girls, whom no man had hired
to worthy work and wages. He thought of

the innumerable missions to the poor, and of
the ladies who, to their unending credit, devoted
much time and attention to raising the women
of the lower ranks. He recalled the superior
advantages which may be held at least to
balance the increased temptations of the upper
classes. And he reflected, with deep regret
and shame, how Fan withdrew, and Catherine
Hilliard recoiled, from all association with girls
like the Polleys. What chance had they of
escaping from irredeemable materialism and
innate vulgarity — those deadly foes to all that
is spiritual and really noble ? What help was
extended to them beyond the Sunday sermon
which flew over their heads, and the verses in
the Bible — which they read as a lesson, that had
little or nothing to do with their past or present,
but belonged, as Mrs. Polley would have said,
to their ' latter lends ' — to rise above gross self-indulgence
— so long as it was not what the
world called vicious? For the Polleys were

not merely respectable, but even inclined to
be Pharisees in their loud boasting of their
respectability. Yet self-indulgence, which was
not absolutely vicious, was in their eyes perfectly
admissible and actually laudable. A
man or a woman who would not gratify himself
or herself by well-nigh wallowing in the outward
fruits of success, was either a screw or a
minx. Heroes and saints had very little that
was heroic and saintly in them to the Polleys*
mind. All were dragged down to the same
low level.

The Polleys , standard was very little above
that of the most rudimentary Christians, whether
in high places, in courts and alleys, or in
the bush and the jungle. The Polleys would
do no murder, would not pick or steal — unless
in those adaptations and adulteration of
groceries, which had become part of a widespread
system, with which all trades complied,
and which nobody, save a fanatic, dreamt of

defining as stealing, would prove chaste maids
and matrons, would not literally fall down
and worship golden images, and for anything
farther would regularly attend chapel — of
which the heads of the house were members,
and would contribute liberally and with great
esprit de corps to the minister's salary.

It did not strike Oliver that the Polleys
were much exposed to the temptation to break
those commandments which they respected, and
for the rest, with regard to the grand spiritual
lives beyond, these were simply ignored and
uncomprehended. Oliver feared there was a
more impassable miserable chasm between the
Polleys' mode of existence and all that belongs
to a higher life, than even the ghastly gulf
which cuts off the outcast in his crimes and
wretchedness from purity and peace, just as it
was said of old that the publicans and harlots
were nearer the kingdom of heaven than their
extremely respectable, outwardly moral, nay,

ostentatiously religious brethren. To do the
Polleys justice, they made no great barren profession
of religion ; they contented themselves
with being by inheritance and social politics
chapel people, and despising the members of a
state and priest-ridden church.

Oliver, in his arguments with Fan, had
given all honour to the essential virtues of his
class ; now it pained him intensely to be forced
to recognise wherein it fell short, even in
precedent and tradition, not to say in word
and deed, of the standards and practices of
the more highly cultured and better educated
classes.

Certainly truth was not confined to any
rank, and flagrant deception was confessedly
committed by ladies and gentlemen. But
these ladies and gentlemen were not respectable
members of their class and, unless in outrageous
instances, counted falsehood brought
home to them worldly dishonour, and concealed

their lapses from truth with all their
might.

But a certain amount of lying did not involve
the same disgrace when it came to light
in Oliver's class. Jack Dadd was singularly
obtuse in perceiving that the twists and turns
which he gave to his words and actions, in
order to serve himself, and of which he actually
boasted to Oliver, in the sense of what some
Americans would call ' smart practice ' or as
capital jokes, were neither more nor less than
cunningly veiled lies. As for the Polley girls,
they indulged with the utmost freedom in
wild exaggerations, horribly prejudiced statements,
and barefaced fibbing when it suited
their purpose, until Oliver hung his head and
almost groaned aloud.

Of course, as Oliver was thankful to think,
there were many much better representatives of
the small shopkeeping class than any he encountered
in Friarton — young men whose publie

spirit and intelligence, if not their culture, far
exceeded his own ; girls as dutiful as Fan had
been to her father, and with a still higher and
truer idea of what made perfect womanliness,
and of a necessity perfect ladyhood, in any
rank. But he feared these formed the exceptions,
more or less rare, to the ordinary rule.
They were the salt of the earth, no doubt, but
bore no greater proportion to the social body
they preserved from corruption, than salt to the
physical world with which it is incorporated.
Oliver was compelled to suspect that the Dadds
and Polleys presented an average specimen of
their class.

Oliver sought to prove a friend and brother
to the young Polleys and their girl companions
as well as to Jack Dadd and his associates. In
order to be so he struggled to show himself
patient and judicious with the girls. He
answered all their questions about his former
college experience and present volunteer movement,

as fully as he knew how. And then
he tried to carry the inquisitors to something
in earth or heaven beyond their small
personalities and their life in Friarton, with
so poor a result that he fell back in despair
to asking 'Liza Polley about the poetry — of
which she was said to be fond. She did not
impress him as the most intelligent of the
sisters, but he fancied if she had the shadow
of a taste for poetry, he had a hold
upon her.

Oliver was in blissful ignorance of Mrs.
Polley 's objection to such a subject of conversation,
as not merely trifling in the extreme, but
verging on impropriety.

For that matter, Mrs. Polley was not quite
so good as her word where a well-to-do young
fellow, who might be looking after one or
other of her daughters, was concerned. She
gave Oliver considerable license in his attempts
to entertain the girls, leaving him to ' get thick ?

with them in his own way, refraining, to a
remarkable extent and with some disinterestedness,
from her usual custom of engrossing
the conversation. She only dropped one little
hint which, notwithstanding Fan's warning,
Oliver failed to appropriate. ' If you encourage
'Liza in her liking for such nonsense, you must
be prepared to take the responsibility upon
yourself, Mr. Oliver,' said Mrs. Polley, with
something like a simper which might have been
alarming in so downright, plain-spoken a
woman, had it been addressed to a less single-hearted,
self-forgetful man.

But Oliver undertook the responsibility with
a frankness and fearlessness which were their
own defence. He assured Mrs. Polley that
Miss 'Liza need take no harm from the perusal
of good poetry, and pledged himself that, so far
from causing her to neglect any duty, it ought
rather to spur her on and brace her to its
better performance. He smiled to himself after

the utterance of so great a platitude, while the
hint evaporated in empty air.

It was poor Miss 'Liza who felt embarrassed.
She had been accustomed to hear herself
accused of literary tastes with an admixture of
very mild vanity and rather more energetic deprecation.
She was by no means sure that the
tastes were sufficiently pronounced to stand the
investigation of a university man. She fidgeted
and hesitated, and caused 'Mily to mock her
more than ever, when Oliver broached the
word poetry to her. In addition, by common
consent, in the light of compatibility of taste,
'Liza found Oliver Constable likely to be set
aside by her family and friends as her ' beau.'
He was in all probability coming after one of
the sisters in his regular visits to the back parlour,
and 'Liza was the one who struck her own
set, at the first glance, as cut out for him.

'Liza was quite the girl to believe what
everybody told her. And she was not without

a sense of obligation to the world in general
and to her sisters in particular, for handing
over Oliver to her. She was struck by the
disinterestedness of Ann and 'Mily, and she
was flattered with the notion of a distinguished
conquest on her own part.

On the other hand, 'Liza Polley was not
so simple as to suppose that her sisters were
actuated entirely by generosity in their early
withdrawal from any rivalry in her pretensions
to Oliver Constable. Indeed, in spite of
her literary bent, 'Liza was ready to agree with
'Mily in her sweeping assertion that Oliver
was ' a handsome gorilla of a duffer,' who was
always talking sense, or nonsense which was
no better than sense, since it was past their
comprehension, and who was constantly on the
verge of lecturing them. 'Liza did not relish
the imminent prospect of a lecture, however
delicately administered, any more than 'Mily or
Ann relished it. She had an uneasy conscious-vol.

II. H

ness that Oliver would consider her a humbug,
since she had really hardly any more topics to
talk over with him than her sisters could find.

Above all, 'Liza knew in her inmost heart
there were persons — young men — a young
man whom, whoever the world might regard
as well matched with her, she liked infinitely
better than she could ever like Oliver Constable.

Oliver was a great scholar, and she was not
nearly scholarly enough to be at home with
him as she was with that other person, who
chaffed her unmercifully about being a blue-stocking,
but who, she was sure, nevertheless,
looked up to her a little for her slender bookish
attainments.

'Liza dreaded that 'the word of Oliver
would separate her from this more favoured
aspirant to her regard.

On all these counts 'Liza was so reluctant
and retiring when Oliver tried to ' tackle ' her,
as he called the process, on her reading, that

he felt — even in being foiled anew — at least
he could triumphantly refute Fan's unwomanly
assertion that the Polley girls would be eager
and un maidenly in receiving and misinterpreting
his advances.

Oliver never got beyond the discovery that
'Liza's theory of poetry was decidedly that of
rhyme ; and she inclined strongly to what was
meretriciously sentimental, especially when the
sentiment was that of pairs of lovers meeting
by sunset or moonlight, under oak trees, or in
bowers of roses, or amidst ruins in churchyards.
These persons swore eternal fidelity and incontinently
died by violent deaths, or one of them
proved false, as it were for the purpose of
breaking the heart of the other, who continued,
to Oliver's mind, wrongheadedly faithful to a
creature who was not worth a moment's regret.
When 'Liza strayed slightly from these stock
scenes, it was into the superficial splendour of
palaces, or at least into the height of hackneyed

FI 2

picturesqueness as displayed in the castles and
fortified towns, the crusades, sieges and battlefields
of mediaeval times. Followers at a humble
distance of Moore, L. E. L., and Mrs. Hemans,
constituted her antiquated school of poets.

It saddened Oliver to see that 'Liza's faint
poetic fancy could find no resting-place nearer
home, and remained on that account utterly divorced
from her daily life. It was like a wistful
groping for better things far a-field. It reminded
him of the manlier sort of songs with
which Jack Dadd and his comrades diversified
their ' If ever I cease to love ' and ' Not for
Joe.' How the shop lads, who had not the
remotest chance of being active participators in
the open-air stir and joy of a hunting field, or
who were in no danger of knowing any voyage
more exciting than a holiday trip in a river
steamer, would give the full force of their
young lungs and hearts to the vigorous refrain
of ■ John Peel ' or « The Bay of Biscay— 0.'

CHAPTER XV.

THE ANNUAL EXCURSION.

Every year the shop people of Friarton showed
themselves so united and independent as to
have an excursion and picnic of their own, on
one of their summer holidays.

It was something quite different from the
day with their employers, which is such a
popular piece of patronage on the part of large
firms. The employed had nothing to do with
this, they had their own day apart. It was
the employers themselves, with their wives and
families, who met and agreed to disport themselves
together. It was as if — supposing the

example could be followed on a large scale —
all the linen drapers and all the Italian warehousemen
in London arranged to assemble with
their households at some spot, as much more
distant and more select than Epping Forest and
Brighton as the masters' claims to potentiality
and dignity are beyond those of their young
men and women.

Oliver Constable was prompt in supporting
the usual celebration of the day, and in proposing
to make one of the company in either
of the two omnibuses engaged to carry the
pleasure-seekers to their place of entertainment.
He discovered to his chagrin that the party
consisted chiefly of young people. An American
fashion was setting in, which caused Mr.
and Mrs. Dadd, and Mrs. Polley, with their
contemporaries, not to refuse their countenance
altogether, but to withdraw to a considerable'
extent their presence from the gala. They
found the annual excursion, on the whole, a

little trying to people of mature years, and they
were not impelled to make the sacrifice on
their children's account, since these worthy
fathers and mothers were persuaded that their
young people were perfectly able to take care
of themselves at a picnic, and that to have their
seniors looking on proved a restraint on the
enjoyment of the juniors. Let the elderly
people have their outing also, but let it be
distinct and apart from that of the young
people, whose limbs, wind, and hilarity were
naturally so much more rampant.

But Oliver made so great a stand against
this innovation on the part of his fellow townsmen,
and so set his heart on the fathers and
mothers accompanying their sons and daughters,
that though old Dadd and Mrs. Polley
did not know what to think of the young fellow's
urgency, they yielded, and even pressed
Mr. Holland, the minister of four-fifths of the
shopkeepers of Friarton, into the service, to

accompany the excursionists and say grace at
the picnic.

It was much more difficult to convince
Jack Dadd and 'Mily Polley that the revival of
the presence of the elders was an advantage.

The guv'nor and his missus will only be in
the way, and spoil sport ; and what do we want
with a feller in a white choker out of chapel ?
In fact, we have two of 'em ; for Constable,
though he means to be friendly, is a bit of a
stick — all the worse, sometimes, that he don't
show his colours in his coat or his tie, or his
hat,' Jack grumbled and blustered ; while
'Mily complained there would be no fun, and
threatened not to go, but soon withdrew her
threat.

For the first time in a number of summers,
Fan Constable announced her intention of
being one of the pleasure party. It was a
solemn concession to sisterly duty. Oliver was
such a fool (with a folly akin to that of Henry,

Earl of Morland, and not altogether removed
from the madness of the Apostle Paul, when he
became all things to all men,) that she could
not trust him to spend a whole day in the
fields with those riotous lads, and, above all,
those bouncing or languishing girls, without the
protection of her eye upon him and them.

Ungrateful Oliver had some words with
Fan on her going in the spirit in which she
went. ' If you can't make yourself agreeable,
Fan, and do as others do, but must stand aloof
with what they call fine-lady airs, you had
better stay away,' said Oliver, with a man's
brutal frankness.

8 1 hope my manners will pass muster,'
retorted Fan loftily. ' As to doing what others
do, perhaps you will not object to my forming
an exception, if the company begin to pelt each
other with gooseberries, or to play at kiss in
the ring.'

There might have been another recruit, or

couple of recruits, added to the forces, if Oliver
had not rejected the suggestion peremptorily.

Harry Stanhope was beginning to find that
yeoman work was not so entirely a manly pastime
— like hunting and shooting — that it did
not require all the play he could obtain to
diversify it and prevent it from sinking into
dull drudgery. He was not particular in his
associates, but showed himself ready to knock
up acquaintances in any class, and have a jolly
lark with them at any time.

Won't you take me with you to the turnout
? ' Harry put it insinuatingly to Fan. ' You
may fancy I should be in the way, but if they
will let me drive one of the shan dry dans, 111
pledge myself you shan't be spilt. Constable
knows I'm good to handle the ribbons without an
accident. It's a thundering shame of Constable
not to speak to my merits and Horry's in this
and in other respects, to leave us out in the
cold, and go and enjoy himself like a selfish

beast. I'm convinced it ain't your blame, Miss
Constable, that we have not got a bit of pasteboard,
or whatever is necessary.

It was not Fan's blame, for when Oliver
said ' No, a hundred times, no,' doggedly, and
with nothing save a stern satisfaction in the
consideration that he was robbing Jack Dadd
and 'Mily Polley of the delight of such an acquisition,
Fan remonstrated with him privately.
Why can't Mr. Stanhope go if we go, Oliver ? '
she asked.

Good heavens, Fan ! can't you see the
difference ? ' demanded Oliver, out of all patience
with the suggestion. 'What business
has Harry Stanhope with the Friarton tradespeople?
Do you think he would go among
them as his equals ? He would go as he
would intrude on a brewers' bean-feast, or a
bargemen's saturnalia, or a meeting of thieves,
or a pilgrimage to Mecca, without doubt or
compunction, to see what he could see, and to

take his fun out of the proceedings, while some
of the idiots engaged in them might imagine he
was there in good faith, as one of themselves.
Am I to be an accomplice in such treachery ? '
Oliver's broad shoulders went up to his ears,
as he imagined Stanhope letting Jack Dadd
suppose he was pumping him, or drawing 'Mily
Polley out, and astounding her ignorant
audacity.

It is a relief to hear that there are idiots
who cannot be mistaken for gentlemen and
ladies was Fan's parting shot. After all, she
was not sorry that Harry Stanhope would not
be present when she resumed her place in her
father's circle.

It will occur to every experienced person
that the planning and carrying out of a large
picnic, where the details are not confided to a
public purveyor, or left to qualified servants,
must be a little troublesome. But the amount
of business in hurrying to and fro, consulting,

fussing and wrangling, which the annual excursion
caused in Friarton, among business-people,
too, who ought to have known how to supply
the provisions required with the greatest despatch
and the least difficulty, offered a curious
speculation to Oliver. He found it the simplest
matter in the world, by a single reference
to Jim Hull, and to former estimates of contributions
to the entertainment, to order and send
to the managing committee the quota of pies,
tarts, and what Jim generalised as ' flummery,'
with which Constable's bakehouse had always
furnished the excursionists. Why could not all
the entrusted butchers, fishmongers, and
grocers do the same ? He must conclude that
they, or their wives and daughters for them,
took pleasure in first creating, and then overcoming,
obstacles and objections, though Mrs.
Polley asserted she was c that wore out ' withall
she had undergone in conducting the preparations
and putting down the senseless proposals

of some people, that she would a deal
rather have three market-days on end.

The young women did not give much help,
though they ran backwards and forwards incessantly
between the houses of the chief managers,
for three days preceding the excursion.
The girls' principal interest was absorbed by
their costumes for the occasion. As they had
imparted every detail to each other long before,
and as they saw each other every day — both in
slovenly dishabille and what might be called
smart toilettes — Oliver stupidly failed to see
how the dresses could be of much consequence
to anybody.

What attention the young people had to
spare was bestowed more on the style of
the feast, and the good things which were to
figure at it, than on the locality of the picnic.
Oliver imagined this lack of concern in what
was, in a measure, the object of the ten miles'
drive — the visit to a well-known ' hanger,' or

high wooded bank, which sloped down to
Buller's Brook — might arise from the circumstance
that the same bourn had formed the
termination of the expedition ever since he
could remember. The place was pretty and
suitable enough, but there were other places, a
little nearer, or a little farther off — an old
deserted mansion, with a park open on certain
conditions to the public ; an ancient church, a
treasure to archaeologists ; a bend of the Brook,
famous for water-lilies ; while variety was
charming. He ventured to name a different
halting-place, and was put down for a reason
which proved unanswerable to his audience, and
which he could not set aside. There was a
rarely used barn near Finchhanger, and the
owner placed it at the disposal of the company
in case of rain. In a climate like ours, such a
retreat with its possibilities of indoor games
and dancing — even to no better music than
impromptu whistling and singing — to while

away the lagging hours, was what no wise man
could ask his neighbours to despise. And the
probability of seeking refuge in the barn was
rather in the ascendancy this year ; not because
the skies were more inclined to weep than usual,
but because Jack Dadd had struck out the
brilliant improvement of taking down a detachment
of the volunteer band on the top of his
omnibus, and, as everybody knew, dancing on
the grass was better in theory than practice.

Oliver ended by being sceptical whether a
change of place, even if he could have answered
for the weather, would have gained his end or
proved acceptable to anybody save himself perhaps.
That was after he had spoken on the
rival merits of the old park and church before
'Mily Policy. ' Oh ! bother the place ! ' cried
'Mily frankly ; ' who cares for the place ? One
is as good as another, and then there is the
barn. I rather hope the rain will only stop off
till we've got there, and after that come down

in a pelt this year, so as to send us all in where
we can eat comfortable, without old Bales ' (to
wit the senior Mr. Dadd, with his rotund figure
and his linen drapery business) 'keeping us
waiting till he has poked about and hunted out
the least damp spot for his lumbago, and mother
has made a fright of herself by tying her pocket-handkerchief
round her throat to guard against
a crick in the neck. And have you heard of
young Scissors being so sharp as to secure ever
so many of your band with their instruments,
in case we should have nothing else to do but
take a hop ? I'm sure I don't know that we
could do anything better. Oh, I say, Mr.
Oliver, I'll tell you what is of a great deal more
consequence than a park when we ain't proposing
to pick cowslips, or a church when none
of us means to get married just at present. Will
you see — a word at headquarters mayn't be
amiss — that Jim Hull of yours lets us have
oyster and lobster patties this year instead of

VOL. II. I

cherry pies ? " I'm so partial," as 'Liza says, I
would give my ears for oyster patties. And
oh ! fancy Jack Dadd has got his father to fork
out two bottles of sherry and two of champagne
the real, not the gooseberry thing, instead of
the lemonade, which was all we used to have.

I don't care for sherry, but "I adore champagne,"
that's 'Liza again. I should like to swig it like
beer — that's me. But shan't we have a
guzzle ? '

'Mily called a spade a spade. Oliver was
reminded of a market-day when he had seen a
stout country lass gazing longingly into the
window of the shop which Jim Hull had caused
to be filled with tarts and cakes for the occasion.
The rustic damsel had great difficulty in tearing
herself away from the contemplation ; as she did
so she exclaimed with effusion to a companion,

I I could eat the whole window full.'

Oliver sought to make atonement for his
recoil from 'Mily's speech, by honestly weighing
the comparative demerits of what might be

classed as gluttony and gourmandism. It
was the fashion for some ' great swells,' as 'Mily
would have called them, not only to indulge
in the last, but to boast of the practice, and
hold it up to admiration as an elegant accomplishment
— an essential element of high civilisation.
• Plain living and high thinking ' were
exploded with them also.

If you will allow me,' said Oliver meekly,
1 I'll mix claret cup for you.'

c Thank you for nothing.' 'Mily rejected
the proposal flippantly. ' Nasty flat trash. I'm
for as much champagne as I can get for my
share, without mother interfering. There ! '

Had ' the girl of the period,' with the fine
fast tone which was found to have such a
rousing effect on the jaded languor and formal
worldly propriety of Mayfair, come down to
dwell among the shopkeepers of Friarton ?

Oliver showed himself so far amenable to
domestic and feminine influence as to make

i 2

the concession to Fan's having vouchsafed her
company, and as it were pledged herself to
civility, of taking his plate with her in the
omnibus of her choice — that which did not contain
Jack Dadd and his detachment from the
volunteer band. But even without Jack and
his musical performers — who took time by the
forelock, and were guilty of such enthusiasm
in their duties as to seize their instruments
at the very moment of starting, and fill the air
with a truly military combination of fife and
drum, serving as a summons to the rest of the
townspeople to contemplate the setting forth
of the shopkeepers on their great holiday — the
other omnibus, filled with a company of girls
dressed in all the colours of the rainbow, with
rivulets of curls running in every direction ;
matrons with bonnets which supported thickets
of flowers among cascades of lace ; and men in
their Sunday suits, was in itself so hilarious and
so unconscious of any just cause for moderating

its hilarity, that the girls' giggles rose into
screams of laughter, the matrons shouted through
the din to each other, and the men outshone
their womankind, until the one vehicle was as
noisy in a different way as the other.

c Ain't you a glum sort ? ' a brother volunteer
said, in the freedom of the moment, to Oliver.

No,' Oliver denied, ' but I don't see why I
should disturb my neighbours with my
pleasure.'

Oh ! as to that,' the other merrymaking
turned off the implied censure, ' though we ain't
work people, we don't take our pleasures so often
that we should hold ourselves in when we do,
lest we should disturb them as has no business
save pleasure.'

It was true enough, and it was also true
that here was an instance of Englishmen's not
taking their pleasure sadly. After all, it was a
mere ebullition of excitement at starting, so far
as the seniors were concerned. Very soon such

members of the party as old Dadd and Mrs.
Pol ley subsided into sobriety, verging on drowsiness
and tartness, although their manners might
not have the repose

Which stamps the class of Vere de Vere.

But it was in the very height of the outburst,
when Fan looked as if she could have crept
beneath her seat to hide her diminished head,
and Oliver drew down on himself the accusation
of being ' a glum sort,' that the omnibus rattled
past the Meadows, and revealed near the gate,
through the vista of thick shrubs, Mrs. Hilliard
throwing up her plump white hands in comic
protest at the glare and blare of the cavalcade,
with the share taken in it by her cousins — half
a dozen times removed. For of course as
Louisa Hilliard knew everything, she had been
made aware beforehand that Fan and Oliver
were to be there. She was stationed at the
best point to get a passing glimpse of them.
She meant them to see her also, and she indulged

in that gesture with the mischievous intention
of conveying to the brother and sister
her pretended opinion that they two were at the
bottom of all that blazing colour and deafening
noise.

Catherine Hilliard with her dogs stood just
behind her cousin. She had been lured to
the spot without guessing what was to happen.
She was in the act of turning away with fretful
impatience to avoid the disagreeable shock of
the spectacle. It was in violent antagonism to
the shadowy, stately world in which she lived,
much as a group from the crowded sands at
Margate in the season is in opposition to a trio
from a Greek play. If she never interfered
with the employments and enjoyments of those
human beings who had nothing in common with
her — save the same origin in the first, and, it was
to be hoped, the same interest in the second,
Adam — why should they roughly intrude on her
notice, compelling her attention and summarily

dissolving the spell of memories and fancies
which formed her refuge ?

When Finchhanger was reached, there was
no time wasted in walking about, though the
day, which had begun by being doubtful, was
turning out fine. The dinner was the great
event of the day, and till it was accomplished
successfully — nay, triumphantly, it was not to
be thought that any of the picnic party could
care for anything else. Oliver, while he casta
regretful glance on the fleeting lights and
shades on wood and water which his companions
were overlooking, admitted the reasonableness
of the principle when a picnic without
servants was in question. He was thankful at
least for the absence of false assumption. He
laboured to fall in with the requirements of the
moment. He put himself in the experienced
hands of Jackdaw, with the intention of acting
under him in the capacity of an amateur
waiter, in spite of Oliver's peculiar disqualifications

for that onerous office, and though he had
the mortification to receive regularly, after the
discharge of every two out of three commissions
entrusted to him, a plain dismissal, though it
was couched in tones of jovial mockery and recalled
the next moment. ' Get along with you,
Constable, you are only in a man's way. Was
that the style in which you handled plates and
knives at your University spreads ? You must
have been a rare blessing to the crockery shops.
I'm blowed if I know how you escaped losing
half your cutlery, or carving your own hands and
feet. You had better attempt to carry them
with your toes, or in your teeth at once. My
good feller, you ought to have stuck to your
books. You ain't fit for the ordinary business
of life.'

No fault could be found either with Fan's
qualifications or behaviour — in so far as rendering
every assistance with a fine capacity
and expertness which were in broad contrast to

Oliver's helpless, hopeless gaucheries. If she
had only not been so much in earnest in her
work !

Drat it ! ' Jack Dadd broke out aside to
'Liza and 'Mily Polley, who were languishing and
romping over the tasks assigned them, not
showing a tithe of the power to become excellent
table-maids which Fan displayed. ' I
can't stand Fan Constable, though she'll have
everything put out in apple-pie order before
we can say Jack Robinson. I wish she would
sit down. Ain't she going about setting us an
example how to mind our businesses, as if we
were all in shop or at Sunday school? I'll
throw a dish at her head before I've done,' — an
extreme expression of feeling which delighted
his hearers immensely.

But as Fan was very much in earnest at all
times, Oliver could hardly complain of her conduct
in this instance, and certainly he could not
call her aside and reproach her for devoting

herself for the rest of the day to a girl far more
delicate than 'Liza Polley, who had come out in
her anxiety not to lose the excursion when she
was quite unfit for the fatigue.

Oliver had already made more than one
private note to study at leisure the amount of
sickliness among the girls of his class in Friarton.
He was reluctant to ascribe any proportion of
it worth mentioning to those Christmas, Easter,
and Whitsun illnesses which Mrs. Polley attributed
unhesitatingly to the sufferers having
tucked into ' stuffed goose and plum pudding,
ducklings and pancakes, the first pickled
walnuts, sliced cucumbers and green gage tarts,
according to the season. ' Girls — and boys too
for that matter — will take their treats without
any thought of the consequences,' she said, referring
to the mode in which dissenters still
emulate good church people in keeping those
festivals which their chapel ignores otherwise.
But Oliver preferred to believe the unsatisfactory

bill of health was the result of a wilful and
wonderful ignorance of God's laws of physical
life in such elementary obligations as have to do
with fresh air, regular exercise, scrupulous
cleanliness, enough and suitable clothing, not too
much food, together with a sustaining interest
and object in existence — even that subject to
the injunction to be temperate in all things.

The evil effects of these neglected and outraged
laws must be intensified in the case of
girls, whose indolent and self-indulgent practices
alternating with spasmodic exertions in any
occupation they could not possibly avoid or
really cared about, and in the pursuit of such
pleasure as came in their way, exposed them
to grave harm, which men, by their established
tasks and better balanced habits, avoided. The
aimlessness, with a single signal reservation,
of these girls' lives tended also to mental vacuity
and its train of disorders.

There was only one disadvantage from

which the average tradesmen's daughters of
Friarton were happily exempted : that was the
unsatisfied craving, the wearing away and eating
into itself, of such a nature as Catherine Hilliard's,
over-stimulated and cultivated to the utmost,
but finding no essentially human food for its
support, or field for its exercise.

Oliver could not blame Fan, though he
could have wished her less grave and absorbed
in her philanthropy. At the same time he
was sensible that everybody, except Celia Reid,
whom Fan was waiting upon, looked askance
at her present benevolence as at her previous
diligence. ' It ain't natural in a girl to come
out for a day's pleasure and shelve herself at a
moment's notice, that she may nurse the first
person as has a headache or is signified. She
might have left that to one of the older people.
It is just like Fan Constable with her airs. We
ain't good enough for her to enjoy herself with
us, but she will play the Good Samaritan for

our benefit — set her up ! Celia Reid is a mean-spirited
thing to give in and allow it. Could
not she have stopped at home rather than afford
Miss Fan a back-door to get out of, that she
might not feel obliged to be free and pleasant
like the other girls ? '

Oliver clearly comprehended the judgment
that was passed on Fan's sister-of-mercy performance
; but he had no idea that he, with
his eyes open and a very different disposition
towards the company, ran any risk of being
indicted for a similar offence.

CHAPTEE XVI.

THE MIDDLE AND END OF THE FEAST.

It was Oliver Constable's misfortune that he
could no more make a speech, unless under high
pressure, than he could dance a minuet ; so that
when there was toast-giving chiefly to thank old
Dadd, who sat at the foot of the table-cloth,
and the matron who presided at the head,
Oliver went through a halting, stuttering formula,
at the expense of a good deal of colloquial
Saxon, common-sense, and mother wit, thus failing
again ignominiously — this time in the very
help which his companions considered they had
a right to expect at his hand, or rather mouth.
A fluent speech, well garnished with Latin quotations

which nobody would have understood,
might have lent an eclat to this part of the
day's programme, and carried off some of the
tedium. If a young man who had received
Oliver's education, could not deliver such a
speech, his friends had a right to be disappointed,
aggrieved and disgusted — especially as
Oliver, by moving to secure the attendance of
the old fogies at the picnic, had brought down
upon the more juvenile members of the company
the revival of an obsolete rite, which nobody
relished save old Dadd, who entertained
the delusion that he was good at a funny speech.
The result of Oliver's incompetency here, was
as if he had got his associates into a trap and
left them in the lurch.

There Constable sat, after his disgraceful
break-down, with his long legs very much in
their owner's, as well as in everybody else's
way, as mute as a fish. When Mr. Dadd
succeeded in introducing, in a sentence of

his reply to the sorry compliment which had
been paid to him, a handsome reference to a
pair of young friends as had not always been
present at their blow-outs — but better late than
never — and he could wish no happier thing to
the young gentleman and lady than that they
might be speedily provided with partners both
at home and abroad, Oliver, carefully refraining
from a glance at Fan and with all eyes fixed on
himself, was content to utter a curt ' Thank you,'
while he held up his glass before his reddened
face so clumsily that he occasioned a diversion
by pouring half the wine down Mrs. Dadd's
silk sleeve. She was so humble that she would
not allow him to do what he could to remedy
the accident, but of course there was a stain just
above the elbow. Anyone with half an eye
might see how much she was annoyed, from the
way in which her husband, who could read her
looks, interrupted his speech, by pulling out his
handkerchief and offering it to her to rub the

VOL. II. k

spot, while he remarked in a half-audible aside
to his next neighbours that he and Jack would
not hear the end of that 'ere stupid accident of
Constable's, till they forked out another silk
gown to mother, when by rights Constable the
villain ought to pay the piper.

Constable would willingly have paid the
piper if he had known how to do it, without
implying patronage and offence. It was the
last of his thoughts to act as a killjoy at the
picnic. He strove with the usual failure of such
striving to be social. He could not make a
speech fit for the occasion, but to Fan's disdain
he was one of the first to consent to sing in his
fairly tuneful voice. He chose advisedly the
pretty old people's-song, ' The Lass of Richmond
Hill.' But his choice of a song proved one of
Oliver's many failures with the best intentions.
If the lass were ever meant for such an audience,
all its younger members at least had grown away
from her influence. They had as little appreciation

of her attractions as of her designation. The
young ladies ' present would not have relished
the word ' lass ' applied to any of them, and would
not have cared to be admired for such hum-drum
and homely qualities as those which had inspired
the poet. The greater portion of the listeners
barely freed Oliver Constable from the injurious
suspicion of singing down to their standard, while
they took care to express a little supercilious
surprise at his taste in songs, and to talk of this
particular specimen as ' an old-fashioned thing '
with no c go ' in it. He would have done a
great deal better if he had made fools of them by
offering them the old doggrel of the mad scholar,
which Jack Dadd had somehow picked up, and
which he flung at Oliver with a mocking ' Look
here, Constable, I'll tip you a college stave.'

Amo, amas,

I love a lass,
And she's both tall and slender :
In the nominative case, with a cowslip's grace,
And she's in the feminine gender.

k 2

That rant brought down a round of applause,
while the gentle charm of the ' Lass of
Richmond Hill ' fell flat.

There was a little of the freedom of manner
which Fan had indicated at the close of the
meal, either because the serious business of the
day being well over, there was a reactionary
tendency to frolicking, or for the alarming reason
that old Dadd's champagne had proved exceptionally
heady and had taken extraordinary
effect on heads not accustomed to the potation.
'Mily Polley had kept the ' merry thought '
of her wing of a fowl to pull with Jack Dadd,
and when she failed to secure the longer half
of the bone, she was so left to herself as to toss
her share into Jack's waistcoat. Jack was still
farther left to himself, though it was only a rose
which he plucked from his button-hole and
aimed at her ducked head. However, the precedent
was ominous and the selection of missiles
might not have continued so judicious.

Fortunately Mr. Holland succeeded in
establishing a humorous clerical veto. ' Come,
come, you young people,' he protested affably,
you must not take to throwing about things.
It ain't safe. How do you know but you might
catch me in the eye ? It would be a pretty
job if I had to appear with a black eye in your
chapel pulpit on Sunday. I ain't sure, though
all my deacons are here, that I should escape
censure.'

Hang it,' muttered the dissentient voice of
Jack Dadd amidst the clamorous approval of
the joke, 'what though we bunged up both
his eyes, if he means to sit upon us now. We
ain't priest-ridden Hussites.'

In reality Jack cherished no evil feeling towards
his pastor, only the young fellow looked
upon it as manly and selfish to express a certain
amount of defiance of clergymen and contempt
for their order. He liked to shock those of his
fair companions who regarded sacerdotal pretensions

more respectfully, but who had no
objections to being shocked into crying out at
such a culprit as Jack Dadd.

Oliver valiantly fought against pronouncing
a judgment on the little interlude, by comparing
it in his own^mind to what Horace Walpole
has described of a scrimmage he witnessed ina
box atWauxhall or Eanelagh between the
members of Lady Petersham's party, after
supper. Only a hundred years ago such incidents
occurred in public among the leaders of
the great world, and, at the worst, 'Mily Polley
was a thousand times less objectionable than
the disreputable fine lady, and Jack Dadd than
her drunken profligate squires. Oliver would
certainly point out to Fan the analogy between
the scenes, emphasising the fact that a certain
Bohemian picturesqueness — and blackguardism
belonging to the first, were lacking in the second.

As the afternoon sun still shone, and only a
light south-western breeze tempered the heat

gratefully, even the greatest devotees to dancing
and the barn among the company found themselves
reluctantly compelled to take advantage
of the unwonted favour shown to them by
the weather, and to forego still their favourite
resource. The party was a picnic, ostensibly an
out-of-doors party when the state of the sky
would permit, and there remained so much initiated
simplicity and matter of-fatness among
its members as to deter them from behaviour
out of keeping with their professed purpose.

There might be considerable inconvenience
in carrying it out, such as was involved in the
obligation of the presence of the volunteer
band, Mr. Dadd's tendency to lumbago, Mrs.
Polley's fears of cricks in the neck, and the
common lively irrational horror of the whole
insect world with the exception of butterflies,
another relic of the prejudices of the company's
betters in the past ; but since the clouds would
not collect — strange reluctance — or the fine

weather break down, these men and women
were prepared to go manfully and manfully
through their parts, with a kind of heavy
loyalty.

The seniors sauntered aimlessly here and
there, sat uncomfortably on the tree stumps, staring
at nothing, and only waxed animated when
everyday interests came to the surface in their
desultory conversation. Oliver caught snatches
of old Dadd's harangue on the fall in calicoes
and Mrs. Polley's animadversion on the rise in
lemons — together with the complaints of all
the men of the sauciness of apprentices, and
of all the women of the incompetency of ,
between stray notes of robins, the
rustle of falling leaves, and the trickle of water.
Oliver wished with all his heart that the undertones
of nature which her guests had come out
to hear, had been more attended to, and had
risen loud enough to drown the clatter of trade.
As it was, he rather admired the elderly people's

politeness in veiling their impatience for
tea, the second gipsy meal of those who were so
unlike gipsies, and concealing the alacrity with
which they should start on the homeward drive.

The juniors played games and danced
under difficulties on the uneven ground, among
the long grass, to the fife and drum band.
Oliver could not screw up his courage to the
point of attempting such precarious polling,
while Fan continued engrossed with her opportune
patient. But Fan's brother exerted himself
to play for two in blind-man's-buff, till the
players, tired of the sport, found more scope for
amusement in perpetrating audacious thefts on
the articles of apparel their companions had laid
aside in order to join in the dance or the game
with comfort and spirit — the victims making
frantic efforts to recover their lost property.

Oliver could not be guilty of the liberty
Jack Dadd took in possessing himself of a girl's
hat and veil, sticking it on his own head and

proving what a vagabond-looking young woman
he would have made, as he rushed here
and there, through the wood, pursued by the
owner of the hat. When another girl ventured
to pull out a glove which had been dangling
from Oliver's pocket, he suffered her to keep it,
possibly more to her surprise than her satisfaction.
It was pure child's play, but Oliver had
grown too old and modest in his civilisation to
be able for child's play, at which both players
and lookers on, to his discomfiture, ' laughed
consumedly.'

Poor Oliver! his was an anxious and thankless
office which he had assumed at his own
charges, and Fan's earnestness, threatening to
become a family quality, infected him in its
discharge. Harry Stanhope, who was no reformer
would have impartially scattered merry-thoughts
and posies, purloined girls' attire and
pranked himself in it, when he saw it was the
humour of his neighbours, without a scruple and

with considerable diversion to himself in the
process.

To cover his shy withdrawal Oliver was
betrayed into committing his cardinal mistake
at the picnic. He stumbled unconsciously into
what all those present regarded as Fan's track.
There were two plain retiring elderly women of
the party whom the majority of its members
reckoned decidedly beneath their rank. But
the Miss Bars were respectably connected, they
had always been at the excursion, and they
were undoubtedly proprietaries of a green-grocer's
shop, not merely grey-headed shop
girls. Oliver was first attracted to them by
their comparative isolation in the crowd, and
then by the circumstance that one of the sisters
was quietly searching for, and gathering, a nosegay
of such aromatic wild flowers as summer
spares, not merely picking a few at random and
dropping them carelessly the next moment,
while she was far past the age of coquettishly

disposing of the last stray rose, or plume of the
queen of the meadow, in the demure bonnet
which she wore instead of a smart hat.

Oliver was reminded of his baker who had
the sneaking kindness for butterflies. He actually
introduced himself to Miss Nancy Barr,
and it compensated for a good deal which had
jarred upon him in the course of the day, when
he made the agreeable discovery that Miss
Nancy really had considerable knowledge of
wild flowers and a genuine regard for them.
She had once lived with an uncle who had been
a schoolmaster endowed with a love of nature
and botany, she was tolerably well acquainted
not only with the general appearance and properties
of plants, but with old superstitions and
lingering traditional virtues attached to them.
She was a fairly intelligent woman, especially
on this subject, which was akin to her walk in
trade, and when Oliver made use of the old
poet's words,

These flower white and red
Such that men called Daisies in our town

she brightened up and said she had heard her
uncle read those lines. He found she was
further familiar with the flowers summoned to
lament the friend of John Milton who bade the
'daffodillies' fill their cups with tears; and
she could herself repeat part of the catalogue of
herbs in Whetstone's Schoolmistress's garden : —

The tufted basil, pun-provoking thyme,
Fresh balm and mary-gold of cheerful hue,
The lowly gill that never dares to climb.

Oliver was as much amazed and elated as if
he had encountered one of the ' mute inglorious
Milton ' so often referred to. In the innocence
of his heart he proceeded to cultivate the acquaintance
of ' a rational human being,' as he
called her, rendering the process conspicuous
by sundry darts into the wood, and dives down
to the brink of the Brook, as his eye was caught
by a specimen of winter-green or horehound

which he could procure for her. She was a
plain elderly woman, quite old enough to be his
mother. She and her sister had appeared
neglected at the picnic, a circumstance which
was in itself a patent reason for such small
atonement as lay in the power of Oliver or any
other promoter of the feast. But if he could
only have realised it, the social reformer had
placed himself under a tyranny as great as any he
could encounter in this world. A glare of light
like that on a throne was cast on all he did.
A score of eyes, which did not seem to be seeing
him, were, in fact, recording his every action
and commenting on it, weighing him in the
balance and finding him wanting.

4 1 do believe Constable is low-life,' said
'Mily Polley to Jack Dadd, borrowing Jack's
masculine use of the surname where his friend
was concerned ; ' or is he stuck up, after all, like
Fan ? Is this to show us he is condescending
from the highest to the lowest, and it may as

well be the lowest' to prove the depth of his
condescension ? Good gracious ! to think of
his paying attention to an old frump like
Turnips.'

6 It is a queer taste,' said Jack lazily, while
he lolled on the bank by the lady's side.

6 I can tell you,' said 'Mily in confidence,
I don't think it's the best of usage to our 'Liza,
whom he's letting walk about with only Bella
Willet, after he has given us some cause to
think he was making up to 'Liza.'

'Serve 'Liza right for jumping at a newcomer
because of his college education, as has
only made a donkey of him to begin with, and
because he has got hold of his father's business
and tin, which, as sure as I live, he'll make
ducks and drakes of before he dies,' said Jack
sardonically.

But after Jack had gloated a little longer on
the edifying spectacle of 'Liza's discomfiture in
being reduced to the company of one of her

own sex, while she underwent the double humiliation
of seeing ' Turnips ' preferred to her,
his good-nature led him to qui! 'Mily, who was
at no loss to find a substitute for her attendant,
and go. to 'Liza, though his sympathy took the
doubtful form of teasing her with chaff about
her rival. Still, 'Liza had the comfort of being
quits in the end with Oliver, who remained
profoundly ignorant of the whole by-play.

It was one of the established customs of the
day at Finchhanger that those girls — not tomboys
and pickles, or humbler cynics like 'Mily
Polley, who held the practice in strong contempt
as strictly belonging to idiots of shop girls and
low lads of Sunday-school teachers — should
bring back rural trophies from the picnic, in
fast-withering, limply-dangling wreaths of oak
leaves and ferns, obscuring and imperilling the
real gum flowers in the girls' hats. Sometimes
an obliging young man consented to have his
hat or cap — in the band of which he would on

other occasions rollickingly stick his pipe or
railway ticket — similarly decorated by willing
if bungling fingers, with such spoils as Ophelia
gave her life for. And it was Oliver who, at
this picnic, under the severe eyes of Fan — supporting
Celia Reid's head on her shoulder to
prevent her patient from fainting away — weakly
submitted to 'Liza Polley, with recovered spirits,
decking his miller's hat with briony. He was
thinking of the summer roses round his millhouse
window, and of what he had counted his
only opportunity of being crowned like an
ancient Greek. But Mrs. Polley began pursing
up her mouth, and even Polley looked knowing
and important.

As for 'Mily, she asked Jack Dadd if it was
to be his turn next, and Jack answered with
more plainness than politeness that he would
not make such an ass of himself.

4 Like Bottom the weaver said Oliver, with
reckless waste of simile.

VOL. II. L

Well, it is more in the way of rubbish of
weavers than of any fellers that I have been
accustomed to keep company with,' said Jack
loftily, giving Oliver a lesson in good manners.
In spite of it, and of his self-consciousness,
Oliver wore the hat and its ill-arranged garniture
with an excellent assumption of composure
on the return to Friarton.

CHAPTEE XVII.

AGNETA STANHOPE.

Before the autumn had well begun, while the
Stanhopess flattered themselves they were like
the other farmers in the heat of harvest work,
their only sister was permitted to come on a
visit to them at Copley Grange Farm, and she
entered into the situation with girlish relish
equal to, though different from, Harry's.

Agneta Stanhope's seventeen years of life
had been dull and monotonous, and apart from
the ordinary experiences of girlhood, though
she had suffered no outward privations during
their progress. The childless aunt who had
volunteered to take the little girl in charge, had

L 2

been faithful according to Mrs. Stanhope's light.
She had taken care to provide Age — that her
own expense certainly — with a good governess
and skilled masters. Mrs. Stanhope had been
conscientious in making it a point that the child
should have every material comfort, and she
and her governess had shared all the advantages,
which Mrs. Stanhope held fit for them, that
could be derived from General Stanhope's position
and income. Agneta had always been duly
recognised as the niece and adopted daughter
of the house, whether in town or country. She
had even found a little establishment formed
for her own especial well-being at the seaside,
when other children were sent there. In short,
Agneta had been treated with perfect humanity
and consideration, and could lay no claim to
being the persecuted, neglected orphan child of
romance. But the General and his wife were
neither of them particularly fond of children,
though they did not call the grapes which had

not been given to them sour. Accepting with
philosophic adaptability the lot which they
regarded as assigned to them, they replaced
private by public interests. The couple went
much into society and travelled a great deal.
They were spirited, intelligent, liberal-minded
in a conventional way, decidedly popular, and
overwhelmed with engagements.

To such a pair, though they fulfilled their
obligations to Agneta in a perfectly honourable
well-bred manner, the child and girl was of
small account — at least till she was old enough
to come out formally, go into company with her
guardians, and obtain the establishment which
Mrs. Stanhope felt bound to put in her way.

Indeed, Agneta had seen as little of her
uncle and aunt as was compatible with their
relations. She had spent nearly the whole of
her short life in schoolrooms, within the confines
of a park and a few neighbouring lanes,
or in the narrower bounds of West-end squares

and gardens — on marine parades, or occasionally
for a change on the promenades of foreign
watering places. She had been largely consigned
to the companionship of an unexceptionable
elderly governess, who had become a martinet,
with the most of any originality or spirit
she had ever possessed pressed out of her by
the exigencies of a long and toilsome professional
career. It was little wonder that Miss
Dennisonon, though she was all that her certificates
proclaimed her and Mrs. Stanhope's fancy
painted her, as a well-born, well-bred, well-principled
woman, whose solid education had
not been entirely neglected, while her French
accent was that of a native, and her music and
drawing those of an accomplished amateur,
proved still not a congenial companion for a
girl whose heart was stirring and fluttering with
the ardent impulses of that spring-time, which
when repressed into a walk is all the readier the
next moment to break out in a gallop. Indeed

Miss Dennisonon was chiefly concerned — so far
as the duties of her office would allow — with
securing the ease and rest which she had
laboriously earned.

It happened also that there were few contemporary
young people among those branches
of Agneta Stanhope's father's and mother's
families, the heads of which troubled themselves,
amidst the distractions of modern life, to remember
her existence and send her invitations to
spend some of her holidays in their circles.

Beyond her family connections, there was
an embargo laid by Mrs. Stanhope, and especially
by Miss Dennisonon, in her increasing scrupulousness
and dislike to interruptions of her routine,
on juvenile friends for Agneta, beyond a very
select few, until the girl grew up with hardly a
playfellow or intimate companion save her
brothers, who had only been with her at brief
intervals, separated by long spaces of time.

The visits of Harry and Horry at the

General's had been the bright spots in Agneta's
life which had aroused the young humanity in
her and kept it from stagnation. To Harry
especially she had owed the greatest enjoyments
in keeping with her years which she had ever
known. Harry, a manly little fellow from childhood,
had always been rather fond and proud
of his younger sister, and had shown himself as
careful of her, and indulgent to her, as could
be expected from his habitual thoughtlessness,
though he had never dreamt of ranking her with
Horry in his regard, or supposing that he owed
to her the same allegiance. He and Horry had
never been sundered. Horry was in a measure
necessary to Harry, as Harry was to Horry,
while Agneta had merely "proved a pet and plaything
now and then, and, after all, was but a
girl, who belonged by rights to Aunt Julia and
the General — not to the lads.

Horace, in his infirmity with its attendant
jealousy, had been tempted to look upon Agneta

as an interloper between him and his brother,
and it had only been Harry's staunchness to
both which had preserved the fraternal bond
intact in either case. Harry was the medium,
not only of communication — seeing that Horry
peevishly complained he could never hear his
sister's soft treble voice — but of such mild family
affection as subsisted between the other two.

Most girls in Agneta Stanhope's class would
find it difficult to conceive that a fortnight's stay
with her brothers, in the rusticity of their new
estate, could be a treat of treats to Agneta, having
all that was wanting to render it ' perfectly exquisite,'
in the extravagance of her girlish speech,
supplied by the misfortune of Miss Dennisonon's
being attacked by influenza on the eve of their
setting out, and so prevented from accompanying
her pupil. ' Poor dear old Madam Punctilio,
as Harry wickedly nicknames her,' reflected
Agneta gleefully ; ' she would undoubtedly have
been in the way and spoiled so much. Since

she is in no danger and is not suffering particularly,
while she misses nothing by being detained
in her comfortable quarters at Thorny Lodge
and escaping the worse than bachelors' housekeeping
at the Farm, it is not cruel, is it? to bea
little glad that she has become so opportunely

air

Unfortunately Mrs. Stanhope had not anticipated
the possibility of the accident, when
she consented, with considerable hesitation and
reluctance, to allow Agneta to go to her
brothers for a couple of weeks.

But Mrs. Stanhope could not bring herself
to separate entirely the members of the same
family, though Harry and Horace had been
disappointing in failing to develop any faculties
their friends could lay hold of, to push them on
in the world, and in the stupid lads' obstinately
sticking to each other, so as to make matters
worse, until this miserable dernier ressort of a
farm had to be tolerated for them, still the

young men had not done anything which could
warrant their aunt in forbidding their sister to
visit them. As an habitual practice, of course,
living with her brothers in their primitive
establishment, was not to be thought of for
Agneta. Her prospects must be considered in
the first place ; her time was not to be wasted.
But she had not yet come out, she had not
gone far beyond the point when childhood and
girlhood meet. If ever the liberty were to be
permitted, here was the opportunity when she
would incur the least observation, and run the
slightest risk. For Miss Dennisonon would still
be responsible, since it would be as her pupil,
in her charge, that Agneta should go to Copley
Grange Farm. And very likely a single trial
of the life on which her brothers had resolved
a species of Robinson Crusoe isolation — rather
than any steep decline into a lower stratum of
society, in Mrs. Stanhope's mind, would rob the
girl of any farther inclination to go to them.

When the expedition was about to start
into the wilds, and Miss Dennisonon broke down
against all calculation, Mrs. Stanhope was
heavily hampered by the nature of her own
engagements. It was an impossibility for her
to sacrifice herself and them, so far as to undertake
to chaperon Agneta and countenance Harry
and Horace, even for the matter of a couple of
days, in their yeoman establishment, where she
knew her presence must create the greatest
disturbance. She could not attempt another
compensating alteration in the programme.
She did not see herself warranted in anticipating
Agneta's entrance on the great world,
and her career, by carrying her niece with
her for the gaieties of a race week, to
which Mrs. Stanhope and the General were
pledged.

Mrs. Stanhope, in the hurry of the dilemma,
seemed to see herself compelled to send Agneta,
to the girl's unbounded delight, to Copley

Grange Farm, under no more qualified escort
than that of a steady old waiting-maid.

Mrs. Stanhope's chief dependence was on the
brothers' having sufficient esprit de corps, where
their sister was concerned, to look after her
when she was with them. Then Agneta, in
her own person, was not so destitute of dawning
discretion as to run straightway into
mischief for the short interval of time during
which she was to be Harry and Horace's guest.

The very first use which Harry made of his
guardianship was to carry Agneta to Friarton
Mill. c I have brought over my sister Aggie to
you, Miss Constable, that you may be a friend
to her also,' said Harry in his winning way,
which was not so much graciously affable as
frankly confiding in the friendliness of his
kind.

Fan was more than proud and pleased, she
was deeply gratified by the trust, and grateful
for it. It raised her in her own estimation, and

she was satisfied it would elevate her in that of
others. If Harry Stanhope chose to commit
his young sister to the care of Fan — of all
people — during Agneta Stanhope's stay at the
Farm, it showed not only his conviction of Fan's
claims to be a gentlewoman, it proved to Fan
that her own instincts of ladyhood had been
correct and genuine.

As for Agneta, she went into still greater
raptures over lovely old Friarton Mill than over
the quaint antiquated farmhouse. She privately
included Miss Constable, who had been so good
to Agneta's ' boys,' who was such a nice, pretty,
quiet-looking little woman in her mourning, in
her enthusiastic admiration. Miss Constable
was quick to guess her — Agneta's — wishes, and
was evidently going to be very kind to her.
With regard to the big, awkward, but gentlemanlike
— Agneta knew a gentleman when she
saw him — master of the house, whom Harry
was so impertinent as to call to his face ' the

Miller,' he was even a more wonderful novelty
than his sister.

Agneta prized all the enchanting wonder,
strangeness, and freedom of the new world she
had entered, with the vivid appreciation of a girl
who had been kept strictly in leading-strings all
her days, who had followed one narrow, worn
path till it was direly commonplace and stale
to her, who, in the middle of a continual round
of book-teaching, was as profoundly ignorant
of the work-a-day world, and the struggling,
suffering, rejoicing, sorrowing life lived on every
side of her, as if she were a novice in a convent
parlour.

To rise two or three hours before her accustomed
time the one dav, to have breakfast
standing on the parlour table till noon the next
since Harry was fitful, to say the least, in his
practices of getting up and taking his meals —
formed an agreeable variety on Miss Dennisonon's
petrified virtues of punctuality and method.

To be invested with the important functions
involved in pouring out coffee for Harry and
Horry was flattering to Agneta's still starved
vanity. To have no tasks in Ariosto, Corneille,
and Schiller — which, though custom enabled
her to get through them glibly, the absence of
all student affinities rendered irksome — was a
sensible relief to her. Instead, Agneta could
dawdle in the porch or in the shadow of the
great pear-tree in the paddock, and read one of
Harry's red and yellow railway-stall volumes.
She could not dip far into it, certainly, without
noticing that it was as horribly ' loud ' inside
as out. But it was also new and exciting like
everything else on this untrodden ground. Its
characters bounced and struggled after a robust
fashion, did not trip or stalk in a shadowy
manner, as the heroes and heroines of her classics
had tripped and stalked to Agneta.

To be exonerated from practising was
another huge boon to a girl who was not intensely

musical, and to whom the news that
there was no piano in the house sounded the
best of jokes.

The small, austerely plain farm-house, with
the ' lean-to ' preserving a venerable houseleek
which flaunted over the greater portion of the
sloping roof, was out of all proportion to its
large offices where they stood massed together,

1 Warm with the breath of kine.'

The voices of poultry resounded through
the shaggy paddock. Cowslips and primroses,,
as well as daisies, flourished in their season r
among the uncut grass, and the white buttons
of mushrooms showed themselves conspicuously
among the seeded flowers and withered leaves
of autumn.

The dairy and kitchen were by far the
largest rooms in the farmhouse, so that Agneta
felt justified in haunting them, even without the
inducement of playing at making butter and
cheese, and baking home-made bread, much as

VOL. II. M

Harry and Horry played at cutting down and
gathering in sheaves, and driving home and
stacking the corn. Agneta found another excuse
in hopeless endeavours to sketch the great
open chimney-place, and its clumsy oven piled
round with billets of wood ; or a section of
the dark beams of the low roof which Harry's
middle-aged housekeeper had already hung
again thickly, as of old, with red and white
beef and bacon, brown nets full of pale green
onions, and bunches of olive and sage-coloured
pot-herbs ; or the wooden trap stair which
ascended to a room above, that Harry, like
a true farmer, had immediately appropriated
to himself because it lacked a partition on the
kitchen side, and from the narrow elevated
platform, looking down into the yawning gulf
beneath, Harry was supposed to inspect and
address his farm servants assembled of a morning,
to give in their reports and receive his orders.
Of course there was no accommodation in

either of the two tiny parlours for morning
callers, or dinner guests — who must have come
to dine before they came to call, or so much as
had lunch — a topsy-turvy reversal of all household
arrangements hitherto known to Agneta,
which fascinated her like every other apprehended
possibility of primitive housekeeping.
As to an evening party, with hired music,
dancing, ices and supper anywhere else save
spread like a gipsy tea on the rough grass of
the paddock, Agneta laughed the low tuneful
laugh which was almost as purely gleeful as
Harry's, at the mere absurdity of the picture
conjured up by the imagination.

But who wanted morning callers, or the
wittiest diners-out, such as Agneta had heard
her Aunt Julia talk of, or even the best waltzer
in London — whom anybody could have, so soon
as she was presented and came out — down hereat
Copley Grange Farm with the boys in their
retreat? Harry hunted for hens' and ducks'

M 2

eggs with Agneta in the poultry and straw
yards and by the pond, just as he had formerly
hunted with her for blackbirds' and chaffinches ,
nests in the shrubberies at Thorny Lodge.
He took her, too, every day to his stables and
townhouse, and he had promised she should
milk a cow before she left. He let her accompany
him and Horry when the weather was
fine to the fields, and when it was bad to the
barn, to watch the operations of the thrashing-mill
and fanners. He had helped her to climb
up once beside him, to a throne of sheaves in a
corn-cart, and driven her in triumph into the
yard, which Agneta held for the moment to be
much better than occupying the box-seat on a
drag, as most girls had an opportunity of doing
on some occasion in their lives.

CHAPTEE XVIII.
Oliver's lecture on wordsworth.

The next public appearance which Oliver made
was in delivering a lecture on Wordsworth in
the town-hall, which was readily lent to any
respectable lecturer, native or foreign, who
undertook to enlighten or please the townspeople.
Courses of lectures were not uncommon
in Friarton, though more frequently delivered
in winter than at any other season, but no
tradesman had ever before stood at the
lecturer's desk improvised for the occasion.

Oliver could bring himself to read a
lecture as he could sing a song. He had read
prize essays before an audience at once more

critical and a good deal more aggressive.
Though Friarton did not form an exception to
the great rule of a man's not being a prophet in
his own country, he was not likely to be bidden
speak out and turn over his leaf by the most
sarcastic of his fellow-citizens.

After much reflection, Oliver had come to
the conclusion that a lecture from him might
be useful and acceptable, and he had wished
to give it at once that he might not interfere
with the courses of lectures which Mr. Fremantle
and others were wont to read to select
circles, generally with some distinctly charitable
or purely intellectual object in view,
from November to February.

Besides, Oliver was reluctant to let the
autumn pass without an attempt to rouse
those of his neighbours with whom he had cast
in his lot to take their share of the wealth
which was free to them. After his experiem v
at the annual excursion, and at the Friarton

floricultural and horticultural show, where it was
evident so much energy was spent on raising
Brobdingnag cabbages and roses, he suspected
that the book of nature, with all its higher
teaching, was closed to his class even beyond
other classes. He wished to do what he could
to show how much good as well as beauty
existed in the world simply for the taking, and
how deeply and vitally humanity was interested
in the grand and terrible, and fair and sweet
framework around it. The pleasant little
episode of the discovery he had made in Miss
Nancy Barr had influenced him to a certain
extent, but there must have been another less
purely public-spirited inducement muddling
Oliver's brains, or else, young man of dreams
and aspirations as he was — and to such an
individual it is hard to say what misconception
is too grotesque and outrageous — he could
not have gone so wide of the mark as to
choose Wordsworth of all writers to lire

over the heads of his fellow-tradesmen.
He might more judiciously have selected the
most difficult question of the most difficult
play of Shakespeare, the problem of the
madness or non-madness of Hamlet, the theory
of the morality of Timon of Athens, and offered
it to those excellent people as a nut to crack.
And Oliver ought to have known, and did
know, in a form of knowledge undigested and
unapplied — as it appeared in this instance — tat
while ballad literature is the first conscious
intellectual effort of a people, in genuine old
ballads the references to nature are few and
simple. It is only when man is unconsciously
in a state of nature, or when he is in mi
advanced stage of culture, that he looks into
nature as into a mirror, and sees all humanity
and the God of humanity reflected in it.

The truth was, Oliver happened to be a
young man in more than in reforming zeal, and
when he used Wordsworth as a weapon, he

had, whether he knew it or not, a private as
well as a public end in his mind, for which he
burned to* employ the philosophy of the chief of
the Lake school.

When Oliver offered himself as lecturer,
he was well enough received. Mr. Fremantle
and the rest of Oliver's old patrons were
positively gracious in volunteering their support.
Possibly, the manner in which they had first
taken up and then dropped their former protege
for his fidelity to trade, had left a little compunction
in their minds which rendered them all the
blander when an opportunity presented itself
for patronising him again without compromising
their own principles ; though such jars occurred,
as when Mr. Wright, intending to be complimentary,
suggested that Oliver might lecture
in his university hood and gown, to which the
future lecturer answered bluntly, he saw no good
in that, he would as soon show himself in a cap
and apron.

The tradespeople, for once, were not
offended that one of themselves should do
something which all the others could not do,
and which they were, therefore, generally
pleased to taboo as out of their way. Happily,
they regarded Oliver's purpose as a vindication
of their right to do as their customers did, to
be as good as they were, nay, a deal better.
Because they were the great shopkeeping class
with its distinguishing virtues. The tradespeople
were at once the thews and sinews and
the salt of the nation. They supplied alike its
necessaries and luxuries. There was ten times
more capital spread over their tills and banking
accounts than was to be found in the pockets
and cheque-books of their professional brethren.

The shopkeepers were the pillars of the
pure dissenting churches. It was largely by
the votes of the lower middle class that members
got into Parliament, so that it was by the
shopkeepers — as they were tempted to boast,

without any idea of being profane — that
Kings reigned, and princes dispensed justice
The shopkeeping ranks of England, with
their vigour, their substance, their stake in
the prosperity of the country, their stolid but
supreme self-assertion, far excelled in power (let
the world be thankful) the brute force of the
great unwashed.

The tradespeople of Friarton accepted Oliver
as their champion for the time being, and
prepared to go en masse to hear him, in order
to show he was their lecturer. He was not to
have a mere handful of an audience, not even
of the out-and-out gentry, but of the shabby-genteel,
such as Mr. Freemantle was content to
address. Oliver was to air his abilities and their
college training, demonstrating that he was as
far before a schoolmaster-parson like Fremantle
in profane scholarship, as the shopkeepers'
pastor, Mr. Holland, was in advance of the clerk
in holy orders in spiritual gifts.

Old Dadd proved nearly the solitary defaulter.
' I make a point, Mr. Oliver, of
attending no lectures save those in the chapel
on Sunday evenings,' he explained. ' Yes, yes,
I understand you perfectly, sir, that you are to
speak after shop hours, but that is the very
time when I compare my invoices, make myself
acquainted with the prices and read anything
ease I care to see in the papers. Lectures ain't
in my line, and I am too old a boy to take up
with new courses, I leave 'em to the young
people. Mrs. Dadd — not that she is so much
younger, as, like the rest of the ladies, she
would have us believe — and my son Jack
will represent the family for its credit and
yours.'

1 If you care to see me, Mr. Oliver,' said
Mrs. Dadd, with her propensity to make herself
scarce.

Of course he does,' interrupted Jack ; 'even
an old woman counts. You can thump with

your umbrella at the applause. Trust us for
crying you up to the skies, Constable,' was the
cheerful assurance of Jack, who had never
heard the verb chequer, or guessed its effect in
metropolitan theatres.

If you'll listen to me — that is all I want,'
said Oliver.

Oh ! if it's the independent dodge, and
standing on your own merits, you're after, we
can be as quiet as mice,' said Jack, a little
offended at the indifferent reception of his
pledge.

My dear, we are the most highly favoured
of mortals,' Mrs. Hilliard told Catherine at
dinner.

4 Are we ? ' asked Catherine, sceptically,
looking at the partridge on her plate, as if she
lamented its early, piteous fate, and did not
know how to eat it.

'My great-cousin Oliver — his surname should
have been Cromwell, not Constable — will deign

to hold forth for our benefit in the town-hall
on Tuesday evening.'

What about ? ' enquired Catherine without
much interest, still picking at her partridge as
if she saw it flying over the stubble.

c How should I know ? On the duty of
girls taking bread-sauce and pegging — not
picking — at the food on their plates. I don't
know what will become of you, child ; you
despise bread-sauce, you are too fine for mint-sauce,
and as for onion-sauce — to which I am
base enough to incline, though I do it in strict
privacy, as you will bear me witness, and avoid
all respectable company for the rest of the day
I wonder you can sit in the same room with
it and me.'

I am not fine,' denied Catherine ; then,
returning to the charge with a gleam of animation,
' I should like to know what Oliver
Constable is going to lecture upon.'

'I should say on the model trader, whose

biography has been so often written ; the poor
boy who finds a rusty horse-shoe, sells it for
old iron, and dies the possessor of the most
perfect racing stud in the kingdom.'

1 That would not suit his views,' objected
Catherine.

I dare say I have spoilt the example,' said
Mrs. Hilliard innocently; 'and when one thinks
of it, Oliver would have the boy gathering
horse-shoes till he was grey-headed, though in
the interval he should find time and opportunity
to learn to read, clean himself, and use a knife
and fork. Of course he must take to moralising
on the first artificer in brass and iron, and
find illustrations of the work of his successors
in the sword, the plough, and the pen — steel
pens would come in so nicely to finish the
peroration. I should not be surprised, after all,
if the lecturer were to let the model trader
alone — I am sure lie deserves a little rest — and
give us the natural history of a bit of bread,

beginning with seed corn, and ending with - it
ought not to be a slice of loaf, a macaroon is a
much higher and more artistic product of the
oven,' said Mrs. Hilliard gravely, while she
inspected carefully through her eye-glass a
plate of macaroons on the sideboard. ' It
will be a revelation to Fan, who is said to live
under the impression that loaves grow somewhere,
out of sight, behind the shop, doubtless,
as the bread-fruit tree flourishes in the South
Sea Islands. You know she is too good a
Christian to fail to be aware that manna only
fell from the skies for a time, to the Jews,
when Moses was leading them through the
wilderness.'

1 1 don't need such enlightenment, and I
shall not go,' said Catherine.

What, not to hear Oliver exalt his vocation,
and establish satisfactorily that, without
bread, we should all be cannibals again soon, I
suppose ; for what with pleura-pneumonia and

rinderpest there would not be nearly enough
animals left for us, and of those which were
left, we could not depend upon their wholesomeness
and appetising attractions. I should
not like to try dogs and rats and mice — not
if I went to China to acquire the proper
taste.'

1 I don't care for exaggeration,' said Catherine,
with her customary candour.

Neither in sense, nor in nonsense, which
means neither in the master baker, nor in me.
Well, I did hear Oliver was going to be quite
commonplace, and serve up some poet.'

c Which ? ' enquired Catherine, with more
curiosity than she had yet displayed.

6 Wordsworth. He is going to let us see
what a primrose is when it is more than a yellow
primrose by the river's brim and at the
cottage door, when it is in a spring bonnet.
Why did Wordsworth not give the last important
position ? It must have existed in his

VOL. II. N

day, though crewel work had not yet been
revived. At present, I am certain our principal
considerations in reference to primroses,
are how they will look on the borders of
table-covers, or on the pockets and bibs of
aprons.'

8 Speak for yourself, Louisa,' said Catherine,
roused to indignation as her cousin had meant
her to be. ' Some of us have still the grace
to think of primroses wet with dew, beneath
green hedgerows, under April skies. But I
wish he had not chosen Wordsworth ; I think
he is a mistake.'

The greatest mistake possible, my dear.'
Mrs. Hilliard confirmed the opinion with alacrity.
'Quite an anachronism. He ought to
have been a typical burgher, like those Flemish
cloth workers in the middle ages.'

Catherine stared for a second with wide-open
blue eyes. ' Oh ! ' she drew a long
breath ; ' I did not mean Oliver Constable, I

was speaking of Wordsworth. Of course he
wrote some very beautiful things,' she continued
gravely. ' Surely his greatest opponent
would not willingly lose his * Ode to Immortality


1 cannot dignify myself by calling myself
a poet's greatest opponent, I am such a mere
mortal. And I confess I never read the
ode ; the less loss to me, that I am sure I
should not understand a word of it,' said Mrs.
Hilliard, with undisturbed complacency, as she
helped herself to grapes.

Catherine was not listening. She was getting
more and more into the habit of not
attending to a great deal of the conversation
around her, and looking as if she were speaking
to invisible hearers. ' I could never speak of
Wordsworth as Macaulay and Madame Bunsen
wrote,' she went on in answer to her own
thoughts, as if they had been audible remarks.
Indeed, I cannot forgive them for it.'

N 2

Catherine, have you forgotten your catechism
? ' remonstrated Mrs. Hilliard ; ' and I
dare say poor Macaulay and Madame Bunsen
did not understand Wordsworth any more than
I should have done.'

Catherine paid no heed to the interruption,
and showed that spoken soliloquy is still natural
to some people. ' Yet I believe there is a
great deal of truth in the criticism that Wordsworth
sacrificed his powers to an intellectual
hobby, and brought down poetry to tedious, if
rather fine prose, by insisting on idealising the
tritest, most wretchedly dull subjects, though I
suppose he would have said nothing is either
trite or dull when rightly looked at. Upon
the whole I prefer Crabbe. There was method
in his madness. He was more dramatic, if he
idealised less.'

4 1 wish there was method in your madness,
and that you idealised less. Do you hoar,
Catherine ? Will you have grapes i '

1 Yes, thanks. I am going to take back my
word, Louisa ; I should like to hear Oliver
Constable's lecture.'

Of course you would. All the world,
including the great shopkeepers, will be there.
I, for one, would not miss the lecture on any
account, though I expect no more edification
than I shall get from observing Mrs. Fremantle
looking suavely over the heads of the Polleys
and Dadds, while every rustle of Mrs. Polley's
Sunday gown will deliver the challenge, " I pay
my way. I have as good a right to be here as
any of you. I can do without your custom if
you like to take it away ; my word ! you will
miss me more than I shall miss you. Besides,
Oliver Constable is our man." I say, Catherine,
it cannot be that Oliver Constable is flirting
with one of those Polley girls ? People say so,
you know. Now, I can stand a good deal, but
one must stop somewhere, and I really could
not swallow that. The Constables are my own

relations, and Oliver and Fan have been educated
like other people. Though they are
eccentric, they are presentable, and don't take
advantage of kinship. But imagine what it
would be to have Mrs. Polley claiming me fora
family connection, when, of course, I should
have to admit the claim, while her daughter
addressed me as ' cousin.' That would try
my liberal-mindedness.'

Catherine showed herself a little startled
when this suggestion was deliberately made to
her, but she looked it steadily in the face.
Why not,' she asked quietly a moment afterwards,
' if the couple suit each other ? Oliver
Constable must know, so far as it refers to
himself. Perhaps the Polleys are not so much
worse than other girls.'

In making the last despondent reflection,
she was influenced by the recollection of
nieces of Mrs. Wright's, whom Catherine Hilliard
had encountered lately, and whom she

was accustomed to style to herself ' low-minded
girls,' after she found that they divided their
time pretty equally between dressing, taking
their meals, and playing lawn-tennis. ' Are
you liberal-minded, Louisa ? ' Catherine began
to speculate next.

'Don't cross-question me,' cried Mrs.
Hilliard ; ' I won't have one of my own diningroom
chairs converted into a witness-box.
There are liberal-mindedness and liberal-mindedness.
The French, the wittiest nation in
Europe, invented that splendid definition. I
am ready to depose solemnly that I never
professed to be a chartist or a communist or a
red republican — nothing of the kind. I only
call myself a friendly easy-going sort of woman,
who would not condescend to turn her back
on her kindred, and who could not do without
her neighbours to laugh with and laugh at.
Therefore she was not disposed to weed out her
visiting list at Friarton to a few straggling

aspirants to gentility. But if Oliver Constable
commit a marriage with one of the Miss Polleys,
I shall turn my coat and become as exclusive
as Mrs. Wright. Her father was actually
a fashionable London physician, who drove
about in a pill-box and attended peers and
aldermen for their gout and fine ladies and
citizen's* for their nerves. Think how his
daughter has to condescend to us country clodhoppers
! By the way, I may as well turn my
coat as you take back your word. I am glad r
my love, that you do anything so nineteenth
century and fallible — so unlike a vestal virgin
or a precious ridicule.'

Oliver was taking one step to which Fan
had no objection.

Harry Stanhope, with a curious echo of old
and young Dadtl, told Oliver : ' I say, old man,
lectures ain't in my way, as you know, but I'll
see you through yours.' Agneta also expressed
her full intention of being present. But as it

happened, when the evening came, no Stanhope
put in an appearance. They had been decoyed
away by some prospect of greater entertainment
elsewhere. Agneta admitted afterwards
that she had left the schoolroom too lately
to relish lectures, any more than Harry cared
for them.

But in spite of the Stanhopess' desertion,
if Oliver's sole or even principal intention had
been to bring together the upper and lower
middle classes of Friarton, and unite them
superficially, by a common bond of interest for
one evening, he might have been satisfied
But unfortunately, his aspirations went far beyond
these modest results.

The lecturer began stiffly with involuntary
bodily contortions which monopolised much of
the attention, and were fruitful in small titters
and grins from the 'Mily Polleys and Jack
Dadds among the audience. Mrs. Hilliard
neither tittered nor grinned. She looked preternaturally

sedate, but her grey eyes danced
under the great flat expanse of her forehead.

Catherine Hilliard leant back in her chair
perfectly stirred to mirth. Her hands were
loosely clasped in her lap. A shade of expectation
kindled a little light in the face,
which under its warmly tinted hair looked like

That orbed maiden,

White — fire laden,

Whom mortals call the moon,

walking in the night, or a flower blossoming
in the shade. Yet Catherine was not without a
perception of comedy. She could laugh when
she could find anything laughable to her ; the
misfortune was, this occurred seldom. For her
sense of the ridiculous had not, by any means,
outgrown and dwarfed all her other faculties
a result which may be found not only in
old court fools and in many of the village
imbeciles of every generation, but also in a large
number of men and women who have special
pretensions to wisdom and wit.

When Oliver warmed with his subject, his
gestures grew less and less awkward, the
tendency to grimace disappeared, and something
of the natural dignity of the man shone
forth from his goodly physique.

But alas ! his audience did not warm with
him, though the want of sympathy, while it
went to his heart, had not the power to damp
his enthusiasm so as to rob him of the advantage
he derived from it. As Oliver discoursed
on the nobility and beauty which underlie
all God's creation and are never utterly absent,
however foully or meanly marred in
his fearful and wonderful handiwork man ;
as he bade his listeners recognise the high
heroism of a rude old Westmoreland shepherd
; the essential refinement of a bareheaded,
barefooted, Highland girl ; as he urged
them to examine and ascertain for themselves
the exquisite perfection of much they
might be tempted to overlook, or undervalue

as trifles light as air, or as possessions too
universal to be of the slightest value, gaping
impatience and scorn took the place of titters
and grins, with few exceptions.

8 Did you ever hear such radical rant —
praising them pedlars and leech gatherers and
the whole band of wandering vagabonds?' Mrs.
Policy was moved to whisper to the daughter
next her, during a pause in the selection of
some of the quotations with which the lecture
was graced. c I would not buy a reel of cotton
from the one, or trust a silver spoon within a
mile of t'other of them tramps. I would never
have event Oliver Constable to be guilty of
this. I declare I begin to be frightened of
this here young man. Mark my words, Ann,
he'll not stop where he has begun. It is fair
impudence to deliver such a lecture to well-to-do,
respectable people. As for his trash about
birds' eggs and daisies, why it is fit only for a
parcel of children ! He'll be proposing Polley

and me to go a bird-nesting and threading of
daisy-chains next.'

I would not say it to everybody, because
Constable is a personal friend,' said Jack Dadd
with ostentatious loyalty, ' but I must say I
prefer a lecture in the chapel from the Dutchman
when he's sending us all to pot. We
mayn't take the whole in, and it ain't agreeable
exactly, to be called bad names, though it's
what we bargain for from a parson, but when
he comes it strong and hot it is more rousing.
If this is what you call poetry, 'Liza, you and
Constable may keep it to yourselves and welcome.'


'But this ain't what I call poetry,' protested
'Liza, doubly wounded ; ' I never read
anything like it. No poetry I ever heard of, or
cared for, could be about common old women
and idiot boys. I have read about outlaws and
brigands, but they are out of the common as
well as knights and troubadours ; I must-say

for myself, I always preferred lords and ladies.
As for lovers — and everybody knows most
poetry is on the tender passion — ' simpered
'Liza, ' who would stop to hear how an old married
couple — like father and mother for instance,
only a great deal worse when you come to low
clanjamphrey of weavers and shepherds, get
on or fall out? They are married for better,
for worse, and must pull together, and there's
an end of them.'

'Don't object to father just now,' said 'Mily,
6 for if he had not fallen asleep — small blame to
him — and snored so that I had to stuff my
handkerchief into my mouth to keep myself
from laughing right out every time he struck
in, I should either have fallen asleep myself, or
I could not have sat to the end of the drone.
Call this cleverness and the good of a university
education ! Then I am glad I ain't clever in
the same way and that I have not even been
away at a boarding-school, though I used to

tease mother to send me from home — just for
the name of the thing. I should have hated
the learning and snapped my fingers in the
schoolmistress's face, I dare say, before I was
done.'

These open objections were the echo of the
prevailing sentiments of a large proportion of
the audience. With regard to another section
there was decorous respect for Wordsworth.
Public opinion has changed since the criticism
in the c Edinburgh Review ' was penned. Mrs.
Hilliard was singular in her freedom of speech
most people pretended or tried hard to
admire the poet, at least, while they strangled
their tell-tale yawns and came to the conclusion
that Oliver Constable was casting pearls before
swine, the swine being the herd of tradespeople.
Such hearers sat through Oliver's lecture with
a commendable appearance of attention. They
knew what was due both to him and themselves,
not to say to Wordsworth, in their relative

positions. Only a fine sprinkling of choice
sympathisers — turning up sometimes, like Miss
Nancy Barr, when least expected — responded to
the lecturer with all their hearts.

But Catherine Hilliard was not in the last
slender detachment any more than in the
others. She did not go with the multitude.
Neither could she be converted in an hour,
though she realised that Oliver woke up to his
office, burst some of his bonds, and ended by
lecturing and speaking well. Certainly her
lips fell a little apart in wistful appreciation,
and delicate light and colour came into the
subdued pallor of her face when he quoted

Lo ! five blue eggs lie gleaming there,

and called the daisy

A queen in crown of rubies drest ;

but she lacked full humanity, and could not
follow him in his fellow-feeling with Betty Foy
and Peter Bell. She still thought Wordsworth

had made a huge mistake in his vocation, and
that Oliver Constable had capped him with a
blunder as gross. Even if he would choose
Wordsworth, why did he not read from ' The
Horn of Egmont Castle,' or c The White Doe
of Keystone,' as more fit for a popular assembly
than the c Ode to Immortality ' could be ? No ;
Macaulay might be deplorably intolerant in recording
— were it for his private satisfaction — the
judgment he had formed, and Madame Bunsen
might be singularly inappreciative where such a
woman was concerned, but there was ground for
their censure though none for their contempt.
And Oliver Constable would have done far
better to have selected one of the 'Lays of
Ancient Some ' — even with its classic story and
unfamiliar names — for Friarton ears.

VOL. II. o

CHAPTER XIX.

AN ILLUSION.

Oliver Constable, watching the young aristocratic
beauty Agneta Stanhope masquerading
with her brothers, thought of Marie Antoinette
essaying a Dresden china shepherdess's life at
Little Trianon. He judged that Marie Theresa's
high spirited, frolicsome daughter, whose fair-haired
beauty, in its flower, was not without
its buxomness, princess and queen though she
was, had less refined traits, so far as he could
make out from her early pictures, till terrible
misfortune lent the face tragic majesty, than
were to be found in the pale, delicately cut
little features of this simply well-born English

girl who had been brought up in the calculated
shade, seclusion, and exclusive, of an aristocratic
schoolroom, with only a formal walk, or
ride or drive for exercise, while she had remained
totally uninitiated in the swimming,
rowing, and skating exercises which are beginning
at last to be allowed to diversify more
elderly forms of ' constitutional ' for the girls
of the upper ten thousand. Agneta's lawn
games even had been generally affairs of two,
with one of the two what Harry would have
called ' a confirmed duffer and fogy,' while the
girl's early romps with her schoolboy brothers
had been few and far between.

Agneta Stanhope was in perfect health of
body and mind, yet she appeared at Copley
Grange Farm like a hothouse flower which
had never been exposed to sun or wind, while
welcoming them with such a sweet exultant
wooing of their tanning, hardening influences,
as added to the grace of her ignorance and help

2

lessens — such ignorance and helplessness ns
charm in a gentle young foreigner who is all
frankness and guilelessness, and willingly makes
herself at home in a hitherto unexplored region,
of which the rude simplicity alone is perceptible
to her. In such a role Agneta Stanhope was
still more engaging and interesting than beautiful.
Indeed her greatest claim to beauty lay in
the air of exquisite tender fragility — which had
to do with her rearing, but not with her character,
not even with her constitution, in spite of
her slight figure, which, however, was elastic
and wiry enough — and the sky-blueness of her
eyes — like Harry's, very unlike Catherine
Hilliard's — set in a miniature face, the colour
of which inclined to that of a lily rather than
of a rose, when she came first, though a single
week's life with her brothers brought into the
soft cheeks a tinge of the red which qualifies
the whiteness of apple-blossom.

It was really in all respects as if Agm

Stanhope were visiting her brothers in one of
the distant colonies to which they had been
originally destined, though she was not reduced
to washing her clothes or baking her bread ;
certainly she would not have objected to these
sports in her ignorance of what they led to.
On the one hand, she was childishly ignorant,
a creature who had never stood alone or thought
for herself, or been conscious of a single responsibility
to her fellow-creatures since she was
born, while — like Catherine Hilliard here —
neither had she been of vital consequence to anybody,
or been cherished and petted, as might well
have been the lot of such a girl in different circumstances.
She had suffered a curiously crippling
experience of life on two sides of her
nature. On another, she was precocious, and
early instructed in obligations, necessities, and
experiences ; but this element in her education
and second nature was not on the surface or
readily perceived.

Agneta was not likely, even if fortune in the
person of her Aunt Julia favoured her present
wishes, to stay long enough at Copley Grange
Farm for yeoman life to pall upon her. And
when she was wearied in the least, she took
refuge — the power of changing her place
when and how she liked was another allurement
to her — with her own and her brothers'
friends at Friarton Mill. Agneta could not
draw the nice lines of distinction which were so
skilfully defined by the magnates of Friarton.
She was blind enough in her youthful obtuseness
not to see magnates in the town. What
was the great difference between the master of
a grammar school who taught Latin or mathematics,
the doctor who felt pulses, the old
established family solicitor and banker who
drew out wills and leases and counted sovereigns,
even the vicar, who wrote sermons and took a
class in the Sunday school, and Oliver Constable,
who ruled over working men indeed,

instead of boys, clerks, and curates, but who
had been at Oxford with her brothers and who
lived in such a perfect old place as Friarton
Mill?

In what respect was Oliver Constable's
sister, who had been educated in good schools
at home and abroad, very inferior to the
other ladies in the neighbourhood, whom,
in her heart of hearts, Agneta Stanhope appearing
so humble in that innocent youth —
of which at the same time arrogance is
perhaps the commoner immature accompaniment
— never dreamt of reckoning her own
equals ?

Agneta was actually disposed to put more
weight on the line of yeomen, from which the
Constables had sprung, than on the fashionable
London doctor, who was the father of one of
the master's wives, or on the gallant major in
the line from whom another lady claimed
descent.

Agneta showed herself extremely perverse
where the best houses in Friarton were concerned.
To her there was no particular goodness
about them ; and they had not the glamour
of the farm and mill-houses. The Friarton
drawing-rooms, from Mrs. Hilliard's downwards,
were only more or less sorry reflections of the
drawing-room at home, they were not at all
like the delicious little parlours — all chimney-corners
and cupboards, at Copley Grand c
Farm and Friarton Mill.

Agneta was just a trifle haughty and reserved
when Harry took her among the professional
people in Friarton, and all the time she was as
gay as a lark, and as playful as a kitten, at
Friarton Mill. She did not emulate Harry in
winning every heart. She piqued the Friarton
ladies by her neglect and incapacity for measuring
their titles to respect. Mrs. Hilliard and
her cousin Catherine formed the only exceptions.
Mrs. Hilliard laughed at Agneta's preferences,

and Catherine simply held Agneta as a big baby
fit to rank with the overgrown school boy her
brother.

Truth to tell, Agneta Stanhope, who was assured
of her position, while she did not approve
from principle and instinct of debatable middle
ground, still never so much as imagined that
she could compromise herself by temporary
association with people like the Wrights and
Fremantles. It was as a pure matter of taste
that she chose to disport herself among pronounced
yeomen and tradespeople, whose habits
and tastes, from an accident of education and a
piquancy of flavour, were the opposite of oppressive
to her.

Fan Constable repaid Harry Stanhope's
confidence. She was very good to Agneta, devoting
herself to the girl's gratification with an
abstract devotion — disinterested, guiltless of
ulterior motives, peculiar to the young woman.
It was no matter that Agneta's pleasures, when

they took the form of seeking for hens' nest - .
and carrying the eggs home in the skirt of her
gown, or wishing to milk cows, were not only
startling but wholly antagonistic to Fan's frame
of mind and sense of fitness. It was rather the
old story of the roc's egg which Fan would have
got at any price for her visitor. Fan hi her
solemn earnestness and absolute matter-exactness,
masqueraded too to please Agneta,
played at the ideal miller's daughter for
whom the real miller's daughter had been wont
to entertain a great contempt, dawdling
among the sedges by Buller's Brook, sitting
among the sacks in the mill gallery, munching
groats with her white teeth, roasting
them in the kiln, having herself weighed in the
scales. And when Agneta requested, with
fearless directness and insistance, to be taken to
Friarton to see what she called ' the ancestral
shop,' and be shown all over the premises in
order to have the complicated processes of

making bread rendered clear to her understanding,
Fan went with the young lady without
a demur. It was on this occasion that Fan
heard Agneta beg for an unbaked cake, and
pray that Oliver would carve her initials with
his penknife on the soft crust, as if it were the
bark of a tree, and he were another Orlando to
her Rosalind, and then entreat that she might
put it with her own hand into the oven, concluding
by calling everybody to promise faithfully
that when it came out, her cake should be
duly forwarded with the rest of the bread to
Copley Grange Farm.

Fan witnessed the ridiculous performance
without more than a fleeting pang. And if Agneta
Stanhope had further taken it into her head —
full of fantastic whims — during the intoxication
of these weeks which formed her first holidays,
that she and Fan should fill baskets with
floury loaves and carry them with their own
hands to feed the poor, there would have been

some danger of Fan's complying with the absurd
suggestion, in the height of her infatuation to
please Harry Stanhope's sister.

Shrewd as Fan was, she became thoroughly
taken in by the stranger. Fan learnt to believe
in Agneta, and there was relief and joy in the
belief, as entirely as Fan believed, with more
reason where single-heartiness was concerned,
in Harry.

After all, Agneta, though she was fond of
Fan, liked Oliver still better. He was neither
her victim nor her slave, though he could not
help admiring what was admirable in her high
breeding, and natural sweetness and affectionately,
and being tolerant and kind to her.
He was not a son of the soil, neither had he
been brought up in such total unfamiliarity with
girls of Agneta Stanhope's stamp that he should
fall down and worship her, caught chiefly by
the charm of her conventional grace and refinement
in their contrast with the conventional

uncouthness and vulgarity of the girls he had
previously known.

To Oliver Constable's mind there was a considerable
amount of snobbery and caithness
an absolute disloyalty to all which lies below
the immediate surface — in this ready subserviency
of the self-made man to the material
advantages of the first conventional lady with
whom he comes in close contact. And as fine
feathers did not necessarily make fine birds to
Oliver, he had been tempted to feel a grim
satisfaction when he read of such men's being
played with and fooled by exquisite triflers who
had subdued their captives, almost without
an effort, by trifles light as air. ' Serve the
duffers right,' Oliver had growled. He had
imagined that if he were to love a woman with
his whole heart and soul, it would be the
woman independent of the attributes of any
station, the noble woman, who, if she were
technically as well as ideally a lady, would be

as indifferent to mere technicalities, perhaps
as weary of them, as Catherine Hilliard often
looked.

Oliver Constable stood in no danger of
being bound in thrall by Agneta Stanhope, and
his insensibility formed another racy distinction
in her eyes. No doubt in her cloistered schoolroom
days, she had not yet begun her career of
conquest. But she had moved in circles where
it is the business of many men's lives to please
women, where it becomes a trick of habit which
keeps the hand in play, even when it is not
pursued for the sake of any individual woman.
She had been accustomed, during her passing
glimpses of the world she was to live in, to
be outwardly deferred to, flattered and complimented.
Now Mr. Constable, while she was
sure he was incapable of being anything save
chivalrously good to any woman, did not flatter
her a bit. He had a strong propensity to speak
the truth always. Sometimes he forgot himself

so far as to take her off almost as he took off
his sister, or, worse still, to lose sight of her
existence for the moment, as he lost sight of
Fan's. Withal, in spite of the brotherly obliviousness,
and the difference of opinion on
many points between Oliver and Fan, Agneta
could not fail to see that in the middle of his
dry jokes and bitter enough sarcasms, Oliver
Constable regarded his sister far more as his
equal than Harry regarded his sister whom he
habitually petted. Mr. Constable consulted
Miss Constable seriously, even when he did not
take her advice. But Harry, though he was
sufficiently interested to notice Agneta's mode
of doing her hair, her changes of dress, her
adopted occupations, and would even, as she
was gratefully persuaded few brothers would,
put himself about to contribute to her occupations
and render them agreeable, never talked
to her even as he talked to Horry, never made
her the confidante of his schemes and plans,

never asked her opinion on any subject of more
consequence than a neck-tie or the cutting of his
hair. Harry would never think of behaving in
any other manner to a girl like Agneta.

Agneta Stanhope was not a born coquette,
but she had been taught to estimate at their
proper value all her advantages, whether
natural or acquired. She was well aware, in
this her girlhood, that they were the weapons
with which she was to cut her way to fortune
the only fortune which could possibly await a
well-born, fairly attractive girl of her rank, who
had no portion beyond what served for her
slender allowance of pocket-money, though she
had influential friends, who could at least lead
her into the arena where she was to secure a
creditable establishment, or prove a failure and
remain a poor relation to the end of her days.
There was an obligation on Agneta's part, to
herself as well as to her kindred, for the futmv
in addition to the present, to be agreeable, to

charm men — that she might grow skilful in the
art of war, that she might not only smite down
one antagonist, but overthrow the foe by sixes
and tens, so as to have several suitors to pick
and choose from, with the greater chance of
escaping the collapse of a mauvais parti for a
husband.

Certainly, the prevailing burden of her first,
and all her succeeding unmarried seasons, still
sat lightly on Agneta Stanhope, yet she was not
without a latent, pervading sense of it, which
caused her, in very sport, to polish and poise
her spear, and essay it against any natural
enemy, let him be ever so far beyond the pale
of her claims and requirements.

Thus, Agneta, out of a kind of womanly
instinct, though one not known to the higher
order of women, set herself, with her eyes open,
to please Oliver Constable, to beguile him into
making it his main object to please her, and
into sliding imperceptibly into platonically

VOL. II. P

romantic and tender relations with her.
Undoubtedly, Agneta was not so well acquainted
with human nature as to anticipate
any danger of scorching her own wings in the
process of consuming the heart of another, far
less to measure the degree of injury and suffering
which might be involved in that same
casual scorching of her fairy queen and butterfly
attributes. But though she had been wise
beyond her years and before her time, such
wisdom would-not have sufficed to arrest her
in her course. Her latent high spirits, which
became her antecedents, had survived her lifetime
of discipline.

In the dire necessity of subjugating men till
they became her open or secret lovers, she
would have said, laughing with good-natured
mockery, at the most distant suspicion of such
a peril, ' if my wings are to be scorched, let
them. I shall survive to flutter them as bravely
as ever, till they are confined by a marriage

ring. I must have Mr. Constable think me
nice — the nicest girl he has ever known.'

When Agneta Stanhope turned back her
hair, or made it into a silken fringe for Oliver,
as Alice Grey braided her hair for another ;
when Agneta set her gipsy hat in the most
bewitching fashion at Oliver, and gathered
blackberries in the company of the miller of
Friarton Mill and his sister, the blackberries
not being by any means Agneta's chief object ;
when she turned a demure little dissenter,
in the teeth of Fan Constable's being a loyal
church woman in right of the Constables '
mother, the curate's daughter, and drew away
the said church woman, to the great edification
of Jack Dadd and 'Mily Polley, to evening
attendance at the chapel favoured by the shopkeepers,
where Oliver continued to worship as
his fathers had worshipped before him ; when
Agneta sang her ballads, which, like homely
Christian names, had begun to reappear in her

p 2

set in proportion as they had died out in lower
circles, her ' Sweet Homes,' and ' Maids of
Allanwater,' — the maid having been a miller's
daughter, let us observe in passing — her
'Brooks' and 'Rosebuds,' and told her naive
stories of the mild maidenly adventures she and
Miss Dennisonon had met with in their quiet life,
to Oliver, he showed no sign of perceiving her
delicate manoeuvres. He offered only a passive
resistance. He stood like a rock assailed by
summer waves rippling back from it with an
incessant murmur, or like a giant Tulliver submitting
with a patient, hardly perceptible shrug
of his shoulders, awkward man as he was in his
invulnerability, because he could not avoid the
assault, to the airy overtures of a fair Lilliputian,
who, reaching up on tiptoe, did not
attain to the height of his knee.

Harry Stanhope opened his eyes wide, and
laughed aloud at the fine, and, of course,
perfectly decorous little farce. 'What a desperate

flirt that monkey Aggie is going to prove,
to be sure,' he remarked to his gossip Horace ;
barely out of the nursery, yet ready to fly at
game like Constable ! What would the child
do with him if she did succeed in bringing him
down ? He would cumber her bag at starting,
with a vengeance. Not Aunt Julia's game, eh,
Horry ? But the old man can take care of
himself, though he is as much in earnest in his
way as his sister is in hers, and would be fit todo
something outrageous if he were winged.
The chit knows what sh is about also, and,
as no harm can come of it, she may be left to
amuse herself, after the fashion of her kind.'

If Harry had not given carte blanche
Horry might have called it a positive disgrace
for Aggie to attempt a flirtation with a man in
Constable's position, forgetting for the moment
that he and Harry had elected to be yeomen,
and that Agneta could therefore be
viewed as the sister of two yeomen. But

the oracle had spoken, and silenced any voice
Horry might have exercised in the matter.

It was sensible, severe Fan Constable who
looked on at the play which sometimes provoked,
and sometimes amused Oliver — for he
was a young man and so susceptible to various
influences — with glistening eyes and a throbbing
heart. Was there more than one, true
aristocrat, forgetful, not simply of self, but of
the world? Might the friendship between
Copley Grange Farm and Friarton Mill be
cemented by a double alliance ?

Fan was the last girl in the world to stoop,
even for the purpose of conquering. If she did
not receive allegiance unsought, she would
never, by premeditation and with design, seek
it. But she could find no condemnation for the
doings of her new friend. All Fan's blame was
for Oliver, who continued, or pretended to continue,
utterly insensible to the wonderful irresistible
honour conferred upon him. Fan

discovered springs of sympathy with Agneta,
while she had no patience with Oliver. She
was impelled to say something to him one
evening when brother and sister had just parted
from the Stanhopess and seen them go on their
way through Copley Grange Park to the Farm.
The group lingered on the road, in order to go
up close to the half shut-up house, examine the
objectionable facade, and stand — figures in
keeping — in the portico, while they ascertained
for themselves how Friarton Mill looked from
the great house in whose prospect it was understood
to form such an ornament. The two
Constables, on their part, stood on their own
side of the Brook in the mill-house court.

4 1 am not fond of gushing, I believe,' said
Fan, slowly and deliberately, as if she were
making a searching analysis of her private
propensities. ' As a rule, I am convinced I am
not fond of superlatives or caressing expressions
' — speaking with studied moderation —

but I will say ' — becoming ardent at a bound
' Miss Stanhope, Agneta — I may call her
behind her back as well as before her face, since
she has asked me to call her by her Christian
name,' proclaimed Fan, with honest, affectionate
pride in the permission — ' is the most lovable,
darling girl I ever met.'

4 She is not a bad specimen of her class, I
dare say,' said Oliver with provoking impartiality.


Oh ! Oliver,' protested Fan, hot and indignant
as at an unfeeling slight to her idol,
1 1 am sure her testimony to your merits would
be very different, and — and much warmer.
She thinks so much of your good opinion, too.
Oh ! Oliver, I am tempted to think you without
eyes, or ears, or heart, and you a young man
seeing nobody — here, at least — who is fit to be
mentioned in the same breath with Agneta
Stanhope, while it will be your own fault
if ' Fan stopped in time, she was the last

woman to betray what looked to her upright,
unsophisticated eyes, another woman's weakness,
however transparently that woman might
herself reveal it. Fan had also become aware,
in the case of the Polley girls, who, whatever
their offences, had not lost their claim to modest
womanhood, that she could not go nearer to
mortally offending her brother than to hint at
an unsolicited preference for him.

Even at the mere implication he grew red
again with a manly, modest man's shame,
mingled now with a strong dash of impatience
and scorn. 'You are grossly mistaken, Fan,'
he said, in the first impulse of anger ; then he
recovered himself and went on with a laugh
not altogether forced, 'Miss Stanhope (Oliver
no more called her Agneta behind her back
than to her face) is a little goose — save her
young ladyship's pretensions ; but you are a
greater fool than I took you for, Fannikin, if you
imagine for a moment that she is sincere in

more than in making the most of her holiday
rustication — this is life in villeggiatura to her —
and in compelling us all to like her. She and
Harry are extravagantly fond of being liked.
I am afraid it don't answer in his case, but in
hers it will cause her to be a very popular great
lady some day, I have no question. She has
exceedingly pretty, gracious, high-bred ways
you hear I grant they are pretty, the prettier
that they are second nature rather than affectation.
But she is also as thorough a woman of
the world as if she were ten — twenty years
older, ready to counsel her daughter as Tennyson's
aristocratic matron instructed her child.'

Fan was utterly incredulous and gravely
offended. She would not give up Agneta
Stanhope's looking upon Fan and her brother
as perfect equals, even if she were not suffered
to add that, so far as Agneta's personal choice
went, she would not have objected to casting
in her lot with them.

Fan was only a little staggered by some
words which Harry let fall when he came over
unexpectedly one morning to offer his sister's
excuses for having been hurried away sooner
than she had counted on from the Farm,
without being able to bid good-bye to Miss
Constable. For, in truth, like the sweet,
graceful vision that she had flashed upon them,
Agneta Stanhope vanished in a moment, vision-like,
out of the Constables' sphere.

Aunt Julia found out that she could send
old Jennings and meet Aggie in time for
them to join her and the General at Crewe
station and go on with them to Blackmore,
where the Hervey are to have some special
affair for Adolph's coming of age. They are
old friends and connections of ours, you know,
so it don't matter that Aggie should be out at
their ball before she has regularly come out of
her shell. Ungrateful little wretch ! — she professed
to be bitten with our farm life, but

wasn't she quickly cured when she heard what
was in store for her ? All the same,' Harry
corrected himself, remembering to whom he
was speaking, and prompted by his natural
kindly feeling, c she was very sorry that she
-could not get over to see and thank you.'

Still in the face of this shock, which Oliver
was too magnanimous to enlarge upon, Fan
clung to her faith in Agneta's eternal friendship
— nay, sisterly affection. Fan was only
confirmed in her tenacious belief by getting an
inkling of the fact that not only Mrs. Hilliard,
but all Friarton, not possessing a grain of
Oliver's tender consideration and unbounded
generosity, were laughing at the end of the
temporary alliance between the girls with more
exuberant mirth than charitable sympathy.

CHAPTER XX.

OLIVER CAUSES A SPLIT IN THE CHAPEL Connection
BECAUSE OF HIS DOGGED OPPOSITION
TO HARTLEY, NORRIS, AND CO.

There was one man of Friarton descent whose
distinguished fortunes occurred not once only
to Fan Constable's mind as presenting a marked
contrast to her brother's perverse crotchet of
self-destruction, where his social position and
even his material prosperity were concerned.
For any tyro might crave leave to doubt
whether Oliver Constable would increase or
even retain the amount of fortune which his
father had bequeathed to him by becoming a
tradesman in his own person. As for Fan,

she had been fully persuaded from the first
that Oliver would ruin himself commercially
no less than socially. Oliver denied tin-necessity
stoutly, and when it was thrust
upon him, quoted, as Fan considered, irrelevantly,
if not irreverently, the Divine assertion
that a man's life does not consist of the
things which at the best he only seems to
possess.

Hartley, of the now renowned firm of
Hartley, Norris, & Co., had stuck to trade
down to the present generation. But then
trade had made of the representative Hartley
not simply a man, but a gentleman so far
beyond challenge that he had not merely been
spared from the counting-house and warehouses
to Oxford, he had been permitted to become a
sleeping partner, enjoying the funds without
undergoing any of the toils of the huge, opulent
concern which his immediate predecessors had
founded, pushed, and fostered by unremitting

exertions, giving themselves heart and soul to
the business.

John Hartley, in his character of pure gainer
by the struggles and victories of his father and
partners in their branch of trade, had developed
very much into a cultivated dilettante. The
chief sign he gave of having inherited any of
the individual vigour and ambition of his
stock, was in the zeal and determination
with which he avoided the slightest association
save by name and the receipt of the lion's
share of the profits — with the business. Yet,
according to Oliver Constable's principles, John
Hartley stood morally responsible for it in its
every detail, down to its pettiest customer and
its meanest workman, while his responsibility
was not confined to his own business and his
conduct in its discharge, but extended to his influence
over the whole trading class, to which,
in spite of every protest, he distinctly belonged.

Oliver said lie would not judge John

Hartley. No doubt the man had an aesthetic
bent, and he was squeamish where one kind of
vulgarity was concerned. These idiosyncrasies
led him almost perforce to dedicate himself to
the refining of his tastes and the beautifying of
his estate and house — well-nigh to the same
extent as the squire of Copley Grange dedicated
himself to a like evangel. And naturally
the sleeping partner and the squire took to
each other's society, silently agreeing to sink
into oblivion the gulf between the gentle forefathers
of the one and the rude progenitors of
the other.

John Hartley hit on an earl's daughter with
an equally accommodating memory to consent
to be his wife, and never afterwards to allude,
except by a calm, smiling, cleverly timed jest,
which disarmed criticism and took the censorious
world by storm, to the source of the
excess of luxuries with which her husband was
able to surround her.

It was no business of Oliver Constable's,
whatever he might think ; he was not called
upon to proclaim John Hartley a cowardly
shirker and slurred over of his obligations, an
absentee from his post of duty, a deserter of
his class. Certainly Hartley was not singular
in his interpretation of the rights and privileges
of the inheritor of a great firm and its wealth.
He went with the multitude in his use or abuse
of the choice of occupations and interests which
he commanded. Even an earnest, enthusiastic
commentator on the ' grand old name of gentleman,'
who has proved to the gaping world's
edification that it may be borne by a tradesman
of the most unsavoury sort, has been forced
by the clamorous exigencies of public opinion
to allow her hero a problematical title to gentle
birth and to wed him to the noble daughter
of a sorry gentleman ; above all — strange
incongruity to promote the .
n. Q

man to the rank of a squire, and the society
of the country squirearchy, before he dies.

But Oliver was roused from his equanimity
when he shared the sensation felt by all Friar-ton
at the news that John Hartley had comedown
with Lady Cicely and their household
to be even nearer neighbours to the Constables
than the Stanhopess were, by occupying Copley
Grange, lent to them by the squire, while the
sleeping partner showed himself wide awake in
contesting the representation of the county,
just left vacant by the death of the late member.

Hartleyss to right of him, Stanhopess to left
of him, how could Oliver resist the admission,
for the moment at least, that he was with them
and not with the Dadd and Polley set, to which
he had sent in his adherence? For John
Hartley made his first canvassing call on his
next neighbour the miller and baker, and though
he did not conceal that he was at Friarton
Mill to solicit political support, he acknowledged

there, as he was prepared to announce on the
hustings, that he was a tradesman, and frankly
claimed the vote of a brother tradesman, who
understood John Hartley's circumstances and
the advantage of returning him to Parliament.

John Hartley was a quiet agreeable man,
handsome, with a slightly affected assumption
of Bohemian fashions in his ferocious beard,
semi-artistic slouched sombrero, and colossal
meerschaum. In reality he had not the
slightest taint of the Bohemian about him,
being pacific, prudent, and somewhat obstinate.
He had only adopted the gentlemanlike Bohemian
as being the reverse of the gentlemanlike
tradesman.

Lady Cicely called on Miss Constable.
Lady Cicely was not childish or girlish, like
Agneta Stanhope. The sleeping partner's
partner admired Friarton Mill in a well-bred
way, but she never made the smallest pretence
of going mad for rusticity or of playing at

Q 2

being a rustic. Neither did she mistake Fan
for the typical Miller's daughter. The visitor
took care, notwithstanding, to infer with perfect
tact, all the while, that she was a little struck
by finding Miss Constable a different person
from what might have been expected. Not
that Lady Cicely implied Fan was her equal.
Lady Cicely was a stout, commonplace,
slightly stolid young woman — the least gratifying,
to a highly-trained eye, of all John Hartley's
surroundings, so that one had to consider there
was that in her origin which indemnified the
mind for the loss — bordering on an offence — to
the eye. Still she was not without dignity in
her double chin, and certainly not without
mind ; she never lost sight of the fact, or suffered
Fan to lose sight of it for a moment,
though it was by no means insisted on with unladylike
self-assertion, it was quietly taken for
granted, that an earl's daughter and a tradesman's
daughter belonged to opposite poles of

society which no two people in their senses
could confuse. But she administered the same
subtle compensation bestowed by Agneta Stanhope,
when the couple of aristocrats agreed in
placing Fan quite on a level with her former
Friarton patronesses.

In addition, Lady Cicely civilly and sensibly
recognised the points in common between her
husband and Oliver Constable, and connected
the men together by the safe general term
6 business men.' ' Mr. Hartley has never taken
an active part in the affairs of his firm, he leaves
everything to his partners,' she was so good as
to explain to Fan ; ' but of course the interests
of trade are his interests, and he will look
after them in the House if he is returned for
the county. He and Mr. Constable ought to
have a great deal to say to each other, so that
we depend on your brother's dining with us
next week at the Grange. He must reserve a
day for us when we are quite by ourselves

you will keep horn in mind — won't you ? '
Lady Cicely almost pled with Fan, though she
never dreamt of including the sister, who
smiled a little grimly at the significant omission,
in the invitation to the brother.

Lady Cicely was too comfortably resigned
and independent on her own account to care
much for public favour, but, like a dutiful
wife, she coveted it, so far as she saw her
way to it, for her husband. She desired
to see him in Parliament because so many of
her set were there. She did not trouble herself
much about Mr. Hartley's being in trade — so
many people whom she knew had something
to do with trade now-a-days — still it was advisable
that he should be pointed out as M. P. for
his native county, as well as sleeping partner in
Hartley, Norris, & Co.

After all, Fan did not find fault altogether
with the Hartleyss' self-interested notice. It was
fully understood to be a give-and-take connection.

It had none of that sole prerogative of bestowing
honour — to which Fan had so bitterly-objected
in former days. To be sure, the
Hartleyss were not like the royally frank and
free Stanhopess. Oh, no. Mr. Hartley and Lady
Cicely would never raise their social inferiors
by generous adoption into the upper ranks,
or even stoop magnanimously to the lower.
Though indeed, had Oliver Constable so chosen,
it was in his power to be, in his degree, the
man of university training and wide travel, the
polished man of civilised society, who had
shaken himself loose from all save the money
earned by trade, which John Hartley showed
himself with the approbation of everybody, save
a few fanatics.

But Oliver might make use of the Hartleyss, as
the Hartleyss were plainly disposed to make use of
him. Fan was ready in this silent, mutual compact,
to be of benefit to the Hartleyss ; she returned
Lady Cicely's call, though Fan was not to dine

at Copley Grange — since it was necessary to
draw the line somewhere — and in the course of
the call consented to the hostess's extracting a
considerable amount of available information
about the place and people from the guest. Fan
spoke to her acquaintances down to the Polleys
and Dadds of Lady Cicely's neighbourliness
and willingness to confer her countenance on
Friarton, in return for Friarton's votes to her
husband.

When Lady Cicely easily succeeded, late
in the day, in securing the distinction of being
appointed one of the stall-keepers at a bazaar,
and the chief patroness of a conversazione in
the neglected museum, in the course of enterprises
undertaken by an indefatigable eleemosynary
committee in the behalf of the local
charities, Fan cheerfully worked and catered
for her ladyship's stall, and for the sale of her
packets of tickets.

It seemed as if Oliver must be on John

Hartley's committee, the list of whose members
soon bore the bold scrawl of Harry Stanhope's
name. The young fellow chose to write himself,
with his most unyeomanlike fist, ' Harry
Stanhope, yeoman.' It appeared as if the
Oxford-bred miller must be dragged forward,
in his own despite, to take the place which fortune
and education had given him, to ride and
drive, and lunch and speechify, here and therein
the heat of faction, with those to whom he
was really allied, so as to forget the mill and
the baker's shop with their drudgery, and to
forget along with them other shops and their
drudgeries, other shopkeepers with their aims
and rewards— high or low — of which Oliver
Constable's mind had lately been full.

It looked as if Oliver were going to comply
with the irresistible demands made upon him
as a man and a citizen. He received John
Hartley with tolerable cordiality. The one
man listened to the other's private explanations

as well as to his public speeches, and, in order
to do both fairly, Oliver not only attended the
meetings the candidate was calling, but accepted
his invitations to dine en famille with him and
Lady Cicely. The result, which Oliver could
not well avoid, was that a considerable amount
of familiarity was established between him and
the Hartleyss. He was hailed as an ally by
John Hartley on all occasions ; and it was
Oliver's arm which Lady Cicely took when
she left her stall at the bazaar to go to the
refreshment table, and when she walked the
whole length and breadth of the town-hall in
order to make her purchases from her .


Fan was growing elated at the turn events
were taking, and the precedence thrust on
Oliver which he could no longer escape accepting.
And if he accepted it, he must needs lose
sight of his hobby and step involuntarily, as it
were, to a vantage ground from which it would

hardly be possible for him to retreat afterwards.
Mr. Hartley was the Liberal member largely
upheld by the tradespeople, who not merely
approved of his principles — which, though they
had never come to the front before, were unlike
his practice, and belonged to his trade descent
and trade interests — but were proud of him
as a tradesman himself. Still no doubt it was
on so gigantic a scale and with such advantages
that the ordinary lineaments of his class were
a good deal effaced, and that it was out of the
question for him to fraternise with the smaller
fry. He was also, through his personal antecedents,
habits and predilections, and notably
through his marriage with Lady Cicely, at one
with the opposite side — supported by the great
bulk of the professional men who were apt to be
more Conservative than the Conservative county
gentry and Conservative nobility to whose skirts
the professional men clung. It was no matter
that John Hartley was fighting in a political

battle against Colonel Hastings, the head of the
ancient house of Hastings of Westmote and the
nephew of the Marquis of Saltmarsh.

The strife in its greatest keenness was conducted
with the courtesy of gentlemen. Between
their electioneering bouts, the men met
not merely as amicable foes, but as social allies
in the houses of their common acquaintances.
John Hartley and Colonel Hastings agreed to
differ. They were more than familiar with
each other's faces. They were members of the
same clubs — if not of the Reform and Carlton
— of the Alpine and Travellers' Clubs, and
Colonel Hastings was married to an old neighbour
and early friend of Lady Cicely Hartley V.

Therefore it could not be held that Oliver
Constable was necessarily consigning himself to
farther fraternity with the lower orders when
he espoused the cause of John Hartley.

But had he espoused the cause ? All at
once, with the thrill of a shock — not only to

Fan and the Hartleyss, but to the whole Liberal
party — including the defaulter's fellow tradesmen,
nay, to the very Conservatives, who gave
the newcomer only a half-hearted gibing welcome,
as to an erratic wavering adherent, who
was not at all to be depended upon — Oliver
marched over with his single vote to the
enemy.

It sounded as if he were a turncoat, it
brought down upon Oliver the indignant accusation
and ugly name, though there was nothing
on earth to be gained by it, as Fan
protested piteously. Oliver achieved the climax
of inconsistency by figuring as a Conservative.
6 I am not a Conservative'' he denied, and then
added hastily, 'but what's in a name? I never
was and never will be a party man,' he cried ;
and I am going to stand by Hastings because
I think he is less of a party man than Hartley.
I don't say that both are not honest men according
to their lights, but Hastings is either

better qualified to judge for himself, or he is
more bent on acting in obedience to his judgment
and conscience. He has pledged himself
to do what he can for more than one or two
measures which carry justice and righteousness
on their face, that I would to God Englishmen
of all parties were manly and true enough to
unite and carry through, but which are not in
the role of Hastings' party any more than they
are on the cards of the Liberals. Hartley will
not bring forward or second one of these
bills ; on the contrary, he will throw what
weight he possesses in the opposite scale. He
has said as much. He is too cautious, too Conservative
at heart — under his Liberal cloak if
you will — too selfish in grasping and not scattering
— not even risking his gains, too bound t< \
a clique to do anything else. I don't go in for
Hastings in everything, not by a long chalk ; I
am not a Conservative, but since there is only
the choice between these two, on the whole I

prefer Hastings and his individual politics, let
us say, to Hartley and his general creed.'

Oliver might prefer whom he liked. He
was a freeborn subject of her Majesty, and
undoubtedly he was at liberty to make his
selection, but he received little toleration and
less sympathy in his withdrawal from his party.
His secession was met with a burst of reprobation.
Old Dadd called him ' that hair-splitting
fool.' Mrs. Polley argued it was all very well
to have a mind of one's own, but sheer refractoriness
would not sell loaves. See if
Oliver Constable had not managed with his
college learning to anger his customers all
round. She went in for her own opinions, as
most of her hearers knew, but for men and
women in business not to be able to keep their
minds to themselves on occasions, and behave
as their best friends had a right to expect of
them, which was not to be weathercocks, and
fly in the face of their associates and supporters,

was rank conceit and impertinence, little short
of madness.

Not even Mr. Holland with the deacons
of the chapel could pass by Oliver's conduct
without remonstrance, seeing that it threatened
serious damage to the brilliant prosperity just
dawning on the congregation.

The chapel had been almost to a man for
John Hartley. Not that he was himself a
chapel-man. As might have been supposed,
the plain and pithy, bald and homely Nonconformist
worship was extremely repugnant to
him. But he had shown that he retained a
reserve of his father's and grandfather's sharpness
in seizing an advantage, when he renewed,
in a manner, his alliance with the chapel, in
anticipation of Ins election. He recalled to his
recollection, what he had apparently long
forgotten, that his father had been brought up
a dissenter, and had lived and died a maintainer
of dissent in his own person. John Hartley

proved satisfactorily his powers of memory, by
all at once bringing out a hidden store of knowledge
of dissenting annals — exceedingly acceptable
to a religious body accustomed to be, not
to say slighted, but ignored, by their brethren
of the church. He betrayed a sentimental
inclination to linger over and dally with these
old associations, which served to propitiate the
chapel members for his desertion of their communion.
He was not guilty of absolute misstatement
when he suffered it to be inferred
that circumstances had been against him. The
difficulties of his position, the entanglements of
the circle in which he moved, especially the
natural influence of Lady Cicely, had drawn
him back into the bosom of a church which
was at last bestirring itself, and testifying to
the good it had got from the noble protests of
the early Puritans and the later Methodists
against its periods of latitudinarianism.

John Hartley did not pretend that he would

VOL. II. R

return to the ranks of the nonconformists, and
the chapel people. of Friarton were too reasonable
to expect it of a man like him. But he
treated them with great respect, almost with
pensive tenderness. He called upon Mr. Holland
and mentioned in conversation that his father
had sat under the profitable ministry of an able
and pious grand-uncle of the Friarton pastor's.
John Hartley requested to be taken into the
chapel on a week-day, though it did not seem
to occur to him to attend the Wednesday lecture
or the Friday prayer-meeting, and then
asked humbly if he might be permitted to present
new, more efficient, and ornamental chandeliers,
to help to shed material light on the
congregation — a request which was handsomely
granted.

Lady Cicely called on Mrs. Holland, and
begged the shape of her baby's pinafore, thus
showing that, though Lady Cicely was by every
inherited affinity a church-woman, she was,

nevertheless, so far leavened by her husbands
purer ecclesiastical origin, as not to suspect
contamination lurking in a dissenting baby's
bib and frills. The result was that the chapel
people — from Mr. Holland to Jack Dadd —
were strongly in favour of John Hartley, to the
extent of considering him in part their own
property and candidate. For though he had
not promised to procure the disestablishment
of the church, he had engaged to remain neutral
on the Burials Bill, while Colonel Hastings
was openly antagonistic to dissenting prayers
prayed by a dissenting clergyman, over a dissenter's
corpse in a parish churchyard. And
the chapel constituents were assured they
would procure yet better terms from their
member. They began to grow rashly secure
of his good offices and to plume themselves
beforehand on the distinction that was awaiting
them.

Oliver's fresh secession was therefore not

R 2

only an affront to his co-religionists, they were
driven to reckon him guilty of uncalled-for
schism and lukewarm treachery, where the
interests of the chapel were concerned. For
unluckily, his example affected others — only a
contemptible few, no doubt — malcontents, jealous
of the leading deacons and the larger
contributors, such as were to be found in every
congregation, discontented Adullamites, the
breath of whose nostrils was mischief. These
were mostly men among the poorer members
of no repute, who had failed in business, who
had erred in their religious profession and
moral practice, persons who did little credit to
Oliver Constable as his followers, on whom he
probably did not count, as he did not encourage
their adherence. But he made them
prominent to the disgust of the rest of the congregation.
He instigated them, whether lie
meant it or not, when they would otherwise
have wrangled aimlessly, to show that ' the

connection ' was divided, to make a definite
demonstration, which, however small, was a
scandal in the eyes of the magnates of the
chapel, for Colonel Hastings.

There were meetings official and unofficial
in the chapel vestry and in members' houses,
that the congregation might discuss among
themselves the question of Oliver Constable's
delinquency. There were loud and long
whisperings about him as not only disaffected,
but as a young fellow of dangerous license of
opinion, who would in all likelihood end in
rationalism and free-thinking. 'Liza Polley regarded
him, in horrified fascination, as a dreadful
young genius, who, in his pride of unsanctified
intellect, dared to defy Mr. Holland and
Mr. Dadd. Yet she had never heard such
naughty words as Jack Dadd would let fall
sometimes, drop from Oliver's mouth. He
was a regular and reverent worshipper at the
chapel Nobody had ever seen him c screwed '

or so much as half screwed, though he kept
company on occasions with the young shopkeepers
of the town. He was understood to be
domestic in his habits. He was known to consider
the poor with even an excess of liberality,
while he sought to do it without observation.
'Liza had heard him laughed at for the absurd
rigidity of his scruples in the conduct of his
business. But she feared it would be all the
worse for Oliver, if he turned out, after all, to belittle
better than an atheist, and a wolf in sheep's
clothing. Surely nobody would think him ' a
great catch' now. The fact that his suit to her
had come to nothing, was like one of those deliverance
— of which one reads in good books.

Oliver was not left in partial ignorance of
the ordeal through which he was passing.
Notably the minister, and next to him one
qualified member after another, were appointed
to deal with the offender. Oliver found the
minister the least arrogant and intolerant of his

inquisitors. But even Mr. Holland could not
see what Oliver thought he saw of the comparative
insignificance of the burial of the dead
to the welfare of the living. Mr. Holland
looked as if he too considered Oliver's citation
of the injunction, ' let the dead bury their dead,'
misapplied, as Fan had judged his quotation
of other maxims which she did not propose
to treat as of no weight in themselves. Mr.
Holland talked of institutions aixTorganisations,
signs and precedents, of the urgent necessity for
unity among brethren, of preserving the peace
of the congregation, of making everything give
place to the great interests of nonconformity in
England, of the compulsion laid upon men that
they should work with the tools which Providence
had put into their hands.

But here Oliver was as obdurate and slow
of comprehension as his pastor could be on the
respective claims of the dead and the living.

Eight and wrong can never undergo change

or modification,' protested Oliver hotly. 4 1
was a man before I was a Christian. I am a
Christian just because I am convinced Christianity
is the one sheet anchor and lever for
humanity. I was and am a Christian before I
ever will be a Nonconformist.

The result was that Oliver found himself
isolated and ostracised, viewed as a contumacious
chapel member, suffered of course to continue
among the loyal members, because there
was no formula by which he could be expelled
on such grounds, but no longer trusted and
approved of; so far from it, he was in the
meantime an object of reprobation to the
greater number of his brethren.

Perhaps it could not be helped, perhaps he
partly deserved his condemnation. For Oliver
was not altogether clear in his judgment and
conscience where nonconformity was concerned.
He was by constitution a many-sided man,
prone to eclecticism on most subjects, except,

indeed, on what were to him the eternal verities
of right and wrong in life, and in a divinely
ordained religion. He must always be more
or less at variance with men who were never
divided in their minds on the merits of all
other questions which, to Oliver Constable,,
were, to say the least, open to discussion.

He had read and seen a good deal on both
sides of English ecclesiastical history. He had
sympathies with both. His heroes stood ranked
under opposing banners. He gave in his adherence
to Jeremy Taylor and Bishop Butler
and Samuel Wilberforce, as well as to Richard
Baxter and John Wesley and Eobert Hall.

But Oliver had been brought up a nonconformist.
He had gone with his father to the
chapel, while Fan had gone with her mother to
the church.

There had been no necessary strife in the
family on this account. Peter Constable,,
though a man of inferior abilities to his son,

had possessed some mental features in common
with Oliver. Peter had respected hia wife's
form of faith as she had respected hia. Occasionally
he had joined in her service and she
had joined in his, but in proportion as there
was no rancorous war of creeds, there had been
no proselytism. To Oliver the chapel was the
church of his fathers, and of his section of the
community. He was perfectly sensible of the
defects of its system, but he was far from prepared
to grant that the merits did not exceed
the defects, and still less that the defects of dissenters
were more ruinous than the shortcomings
of churchmen.

Under this impression, Oliver held it disloyal
to abandon the chapel, any more than the
class to which he belonged. At the same time
he had his doubts and scruples. But just as he
was a man of much stronger imagination and
capacity for idealisation than John Hartley was,
Oliver did not feel offended by the bareness and

ruggedness of the ecclesiastical ways he trod.
He saw beyond them, even as he saw beyond
the modern smoothness and smartness of the
chapel building, back into what struck him as
the less objectionable gauntness and grimness
of its predecessor in which earnest and fervent
men had worshipped, often to the peril and loss
of their earthly joys and worldly goods. There
were records in existence which proved that the
chapel had been among the earliest of its kind
in England. When Oliver thought that contemporaries
and allies of John Milton and John
Bunyan, Oliver Cromwell, Blake and Daniel
Defoe — who, it seems, has been convicted of timeserving
and double-dealing, but who was so stout
and unflinching a patriot withal, that one may be
tempted to prefer Defoe's shuffling to some later
men's consistency — Oliver Constable laughed at
the idea of men of narrow and uncultured
intellect and vulgar bumptiousness being the
sole figures that peopled the region in which he

had come to sit apart, conscious that he was
looked upon as an interloper and false friend,
unworthy of the right hand of fellowship, or of
the confidence of his companions.

John Hartley won the election mainly by
the support of the dissenters — whom, however,
success did not at once soften to the renegade.

CHAPTEE XXI.

MUTINY IN THE MILL AND THE BAKEHOUSE.

Oliver was a little liable to look over the heads
of his subordinates as well as his equals, to be
possessed by his purpose instead of possessing
it, and to follow it out — having no attention to
spare for the signs of the times, though he was
particularly calculated to call them forth in hostile
array, and they were certain to count largely
in the result. It took Oliver by surprise when he
was met by the ' poser ' which he might reasonably
have expected, of resistance and anarchy
in his own dominions, where he had been seeking
to enact transcendental laws and attempting
to carry out, not political or social, but moral

economy — not every man for himself alone, but
every man for his neighbour still more, ' in
honour preferring one another,' which Oliver
persisted in regarding as the only worthy and
enduring trade principles.

There had been growls of dissatisfaction,
sneers of scepticism, tacit defiance in the mill
and the bakehouse, which had all passed unheeded
by Oliver, before the storm broke forth.
It began with a comparatively trifling emeute in
the mill after the miller's men had been comparing
notes with the journeymen bakers who
went far before the grinders of the raw grain in
crude, shallow quickness of reasoning and onesided,
undigested knowledge. The journeymen
bakers first crammed the young millers with the
rank growth of their supposed grievances, and
then adroitly pushed the crammed men before
them, into the breach, to open the battle with
Oliver their common enemy.

There were long-standing usages and privileges

in the miller and baker trades which
Oliver had thought fit to abolish without asking
the consent of his servants farther than in the
address which he delivered on entering into
possession of the mill and the shop, and that
lay beyond the comprehension of the cleverest
man among them, who immediately made up
his mind that it was all ' soft sawder ' and ' book-learning
bosh.' The men chose to regard these
time-out-of-mind customs and liberties, though
they had no direct bearing on any miller's or
baker's prosperity, and were even sometimes
prejudicial to fair play among the men themselves,
as their rules to which they had agreed
on entering their trades. No master had any
right to interfere with and overturn these rules
without the men's concurrence ; above all, they
were not such fools as to be defrauded of them
by a fine assumption of philanthropy on the
part of their antagonist.

Oliver discovered that there had been disobedience

and evasion of a regulation which he
had laid down at the Mill, that two different
qualities of grain, whether coming from the
same or different owners, should not from that
time forward be so taken and ground together
as to produce a spurious average of quality,
even when that average might be accepted with
ignorant or indifferent acquiescence in the case
of the better as well as the worse wheat.

'Why did you not attend to what I said.
Green ?' enquired Oliver angrily. 'Mind that
this lumping together does not occur again.
At the best it is a slovenly, inaccurate makeshift
for clean, correct work, which prevent 8 a
proper estimate of each quality of grain and
adulterates flour at the mill ; at the worst it is
an imposition and a cheat, hiding careless negligence
on our part, or consenting to withdraw
the surplus fineness and cleanness of one man's
growth of corn in order to add it to the deficient
worth of another man's crop. I will not
have it.'

It were a saving of trouble as nobody objected
to, instead of a waxing particularity,' said
Ned, startling Oliver by speaking again, and
that with such fluency as to render it suspicious
whether the fluency, together with the bluster,
could proceed originally from monosyllabic,
stolid Ned. c It were always done afore my
day, and I dunno see why it shouldn't be done
no longer. I can tell you Maine, as owns the
best stuff, wunnot thank you for turning it out
bolted that white it might be furrin flour. Nobody
will believe it native, though he take his
Bible oath on it. Every customer will swear
it's 'American and has come over in casks, and
will sour afore you can say " Jack Robinson""
And Wade, he wunnot own his stuff, as you'd
make it come out, in the course of nature and
machinery. He'll swear it's been tampered with r
and no wonder, since he'll not find a buyer for
it on this side of Lon'on. He'll be forced to
mix what might have been food for men in his

VOL. II. s

horse and cattle's mashes, or to fling it to his
cocks and hens. Friarton Mill will have seen
the last of his custom,' ended Ned sardonically.

1 Never mind that, it is my business ; do
what I bid you.'

'And the trouble of stowing away the
emptying of the sacks separate, and of setting
and keeping the mill a-going for two bouts,
which need only have been one, will be your
business too?' said Ned, like all willing learners
going considerably beyond the bounds of his
lesson and converting bluster into insolence.
4 It is a fine gentleman scholar's nonsense,
which is downright unreasonable as well.
Dang it, I'll have nowt to do with it,' protested
Ned, flinging down a spade which he had in his
hand with a noisy clatter.

4 Leave it alone then, my man, and come tome
at the office for your wages,' said Oliver,
walking away.

Green did not resume his work that afternoon,

neither did the other men and lads. The
mill stood, without anything wrong about the
gear which had in these modern times rendered
a lack of water a deficiency to be coped with.
Oliver missed its accustomed hum and splash,
while ■ the merry millers,' merry no longer,
hung about and consulted together, sulky and
stubborn-looking.

But next day the premature shabby strike
somehow collapsed. Its promoters, including
Green, chop fallen and taciturn as of old, were
ant their duties again, to which Oliver suffered
them to return without farther words.

It was otherwise in the bake-shop. There
the mutiny was systematised and ripe, and
though it did not carry the whole establishment
with it, it cost Oliver his manager, some of his
best hands, and more than it seemed possible
for him to recover from.

Jim Hull came to Oliver one day in the back
parlour. Speak of the great Napoleon's features

8 2

resembling a finely cut cameo, Jim Hull's nose T
mouth, and chin were quite as hard, clear and
set when he refused every parley or overture
of good-fellowship in the shape of refreshment,
and put it to his master point-blank : ' Do you
continue of the same mind, Master Oliver, that
no alum, nor no other harmless stuff for whitening
the bread, be used in the bakehouse, and that
all sorts of fancy bread, down to them rolls, be
weighed and sold by the pound, like the regular
loaf?'

I do, Jim,' said Oliver concisely.

c Have you taken it into consideration, sir'"
went on Jim solemnly, ' that customers as are
used to white bread and don't want brown won't
buy bread which, though it may be made of
first-rate flour, looks as if it were compounded of
'als and 'als. There's a deal in the look of a
thing in all trades,' said Jim almost wistfully,
c and folk is fanciful, and is guided by the look
as well as by the taste. Nay, the taste gets

trained to prefer what it has been accustomed
to. There's a many will have pepper dust
rather than pepper, and chicory before coffee.'

1 And bread either flavourless or with a suspicion
of sourness or bitterness instead of sweetbread,
eh, Jim ? ' chimed in Oliver. ' Then tastes
must be reclaimed from their vitiated state for
the sake of the tasters, that's all. I have not
become a baker to sell adulterated bread of
dubious weight, even if the adulteration were
innocent and the weight in favour of the buyer.
I mean to sell pure bread, by an exact measure.'

1 Bread has always been divided into two
classes,' remonstrated Jim, growing stiff and
stern again : ' the plain and the fancy. The
plain has been measured by weight, the
fancy '

'By fancy,' interrupted Oliver. 'But you
are aware, Jim, that if any buyer choose to buy,
by the pound, cottage loaves which, no less than
rolls, go under the head of fancy bread, the

baker is bound to sell them by weight, though
I do not suppose he can be fined for apportioning
them according to fancy if there is no
demand to the contrary.'

1 It ain't the custom,' said Jim testily. ■ I
crave your pardon, sir, but to put it in that way
is to insult an honest man as would not offer
less than the bulk of an article for its money's-worth,
not though you paid him for doing it in
golden guineas. Have you ever thought of that.
Master Oliver, of the slur you are ready to cast
on other bakers — on your own father, for instance,
that always did as he would be done
by, and on all as worked under him in responsible
situations ? '

Oliver flushed. ' There is no reason to look
at the change in that light, Jim,' he said
earnestly. ' I know my father was an honest
man. There is no piece of knowledge I possess
which I would be more unwilling to give up.
I have never for a moment suspected your

integrity — I would as soon question my own.
But every man must act accoi cling to his individual
light These practices we are talking
about are objectionable and can easily be rendered
dishonest. At least everybody should
know the nature and amount of bread stuff, like
any other stuff, that he gets for his money,
though I don't say he is cheated if he knowingly
and willingly takes an artificially bleached,
roughly calculated purchase, several ounces
under or over the mark, for the look or the
fashion of it. The worst is that few people
know what they are about in such transactions


4 Well, all I have to say, Master Oliver,' said
Jim doggedly, ' these are a deal too fine distinctions
for me. I cannot consent to be treated
like a man as has long been a party, in the
capacity of foreman, to defrauding the public of
their due — me as never tampered with light
weights, which your father would have been the

last to even either me or himself to — not in our
whole lives. I tell you, sir, it is putting shame
on us both, and on a respectable trade, for you
to sport them whims and fads in carrying it on
at this time of day. Nobody will thank you
for it, and as for your dark-coloured, home-tasted
bread, nobody will like it or buy it.
You'll soon throw to the dogs as fine a baking
business as was ever worked up in more than
one generation.'

I can't help that,' said Oliver inflexibly.
4 If the townspeople are fools and pin their faith
to mock instead of to real merits, it shall be in
spite of me and not because of me.'

4 Then, Master Oliver, it's right I should
speak out. My nephew ' Arry, as was ready, w i t h
a little help, to buy the old business if it had
come into the market, will begin in Friarton,
on his own account, this here Michaelmas.
He has axed me to pine him. And why shouldn't
I ? I would not have deserted the old concern

if I could have been of any use. But it seems
my experience was all wrong. I'm too old a
cock to begin afresh. Besides, I'm free to tell
you the mode followed by a young gentleman
as knows nothing of trade save out of books,
and is, if he will pardon me for mentioning ita
rank enthusiast, will be all downhill and no
mistake. I cannot stop you, Master Oliver ;
you refuse to be guided by me, so I must wash
my hands of you, and pine my nephew 'Arry, to
whom I can do a good turn, though it goes sore
against the grain if you'll believe me, sir, to
start an opposition to Constable's business, as I
helped to make nourish, and which was the
pride of my 'part, years before you came into the
world, Master Oliver.' As Jim ended a slight
quiver passed over his compact features.

'I believe you, Jim,' said Oliver gravely,
and I, for my part, am so sorry to lose you
that you may guess how much the principles
are to me which compel such a sacrifice.'

Jim shrugged his shoulders and turned
away.

Constable's baking business without Jim
Hull was sure to be crippled for a time, but
there were other kinds of crippling going on,
and a worse mess for Oliver to get into.

Oliver, in his consciousness of his own shortcomings,
and his passion for independence and
individuality, was not so much inclined to insist
on punctuality and method in his subordinates
as most new brooms show themselves. But he
happened to remark that what rules and penalties
were imposed, had gradually come to be
inflicted chiefly on the younger journeymen and
apprentices. The elder and more skilled bakers
took upon them, in the right of their value to
Oliver and the difficulty of replacing them on an
emergency, to infringe the orders and do their
work earlier or later, faster or slower, according
to their convenience and inclination, putting
about and causing some slight injury to the sub-originates,

and creating a certain amount of disorder
in the establishment. In place of these
experts presenting a good example to their
juniors, the latter were stimulated in the reverse
direction, and prompted to acquire such
qualities as might enable them in their turn to
shirk obligations and throw the weight of
drudgery and discipline on their weaker, more
untrained fellows.

Oliver was determined this should not be.
He heard that the baker Webster was conspicuous
at this game, that he rarely kept his
time, that he compressed his kneading into the
briefest operation compatible with success, that
he set his sponge at the latest date, and was
guilty of the same recklessness in placing his
batch in the oven, so that he imperilled his
whole night and morning's work, though he
might escape by the skin of the teeth from
reducing it — either to a sodden mass or a cinder,
as the oven fire served.

Webster was a man given over to a variety
of conflicting interests and distractions, rather
than the victim of one vice ; he was unsettled
more than dissipated, still he appeared in the
bakehouse occasionally the worse for drink.

Oliver set himself to convict his servant — in
name, in one of his misdemeanours, and going
into the bakehouse early one morning when
the bakers were about to subject the risen
dough to the second kneading, lie found
Webster's place vacant ; a friend had contrived
to go through the first process for Webster's
batch as well as for his own, but was halting
ere he proceeded to complete the performance.
Oliver remarked aloud that Webster was absent
from his work, and ordered that his batch should
be worked up and put into the oven, without
waiting for his arrival or asking his permission,
while Jim Hull, who was still in office, should
challenge the defender for non-attendance.

But this quick catching up of Webster for

neglect of duty was quite another affair from
the neighbourly help which connived at and
concealed his delinquencies. And Jim Hull
looked aggrieved in his own person and worried
by Oliver's interference. 6 It ain't any good,'
he said in an undertone to Oliver. c Webster
won't be put upon, he'll take his way, but it's a
fact he'll get more dough through his hands, to
better purpose, in ten minutes than the other
lads will in twenty.'

c All the same he'll not put upon me and
the rest of the men, as I take it he does. Who
made him an exception to the rest ? Put upon
indeed ! I should like to know who is in danger
of being put upon. Jim Hull, you are getting
soft in your old age. Let some of these fellows
do Webster's job,' said Oliver angrily.

'They've got their own jobs, and some of
them is hard enough pushed to turn out presentable
batches for themselves. I tell you it
ain't every man can take Webster's place.

That there batch of his is for Dr. Riley's
family. The doctor is difficult to please in his
bread, and he sets on some of his patients to
be as cranky as himself,' grumbled Jim.

I'm sorry for Riley and his patients then,'
said Oliver shortly. ' Is there no baker here,'
Oliver raised his voice slightly so as to be heard
by more than Jim, ' who can knead Webster's
stuff in addition to his own ? '

No man spoke. Each felt scrupulous us to
the kneading which was necessary for his batch
this morning. Clearly the movement to call
Webster to order was not popular, even though
it arose from his own fault, and that a fault
which only a sprinkling of the men present
would have presumed to commit.

Jim Hull began slowly to strip the jacket
from his rheumatic shoulders in the hot steaming
air. As he did so he repeated still more
surlily, ' It ain't every man can take Webster's
place. Baking itself ain't a trade which a young

fellow can pick up at his feet any day, anyhow,
and read the rights and wrongs of it straight off —
by heart, like a printed page, then give his orders
conformable.'

1 Hold on, Jim.' Oliver stopped his foreman's
preparations. ' I suppose you think I've
forgotten any lessons I ever learnt. And as for
those fellows yonder,' pointing to the row of
figures at the baking-boards, ' who are grinning
behind their shirt sleeves and their heads powdered
like flunkeys — they are a set of flunkeys
to Webster or any ringleader who chooses to
hold the asses by the ears of their class prejudices
and petty vices - they believe I'm speaking
of what I know nothing about, or that I set them
to do a task which I hold to be a degradation,
therefore I am dependent on their skill and
fidelity — Heaven help me ! and if I were famishing
I should perish for lack of bread without
their assistance. You and they are mightily
mistaken though, Jim.'

CHAPTER XXII.
a reformer's reward.

Oliver suited the action to the word, flung off
his coat, bared his long sinewy arms to the
shoulders, advanced to the vacant board, and
laid hold of the dough fast becoming flat and
unprofitable. In spite of his passion he felt
shy and awkward under the consciousness of
the adverse, critical eyes glancing at him, some
of them in sheer amazement, some of them in
jealous resentment, some of them in sly amusement,
and only a very few of them in dubious
generous approbation. He distrusted his
qualifications with reason. But when was he
not awkward ? and it was surely possible for a

man of his muscle and modicum of experience
to knead dough into a passable condition and
dispose of it in an oven.

As Oliver solemnly pounded at his lump of
dough, he was assailed mentally by successive
trains of thought, contradictory, sympathetic,
purely humorous.

In the first place he was angrily sensible of
the same momentary rush of shamefacedness, in
trying to bake before his bakers, that he had
felt in first standing in his shop-door before
his fellow-townsmen — yet what was there in
this fine, white flour, powdering him and his
companions alike, to stain a man with so disgraceful
a stain that in the case of poor Neaves,
the very reflection of it caused the weak undergraduate
to leap into the Isis in order to wash
out the blot and his miserable life with it?
Was the mark so much more invidious than the
soil which Neaves's quondam companions had
been fain enough to contract from the earth of

VOL. II. T

hunting fields, or the soil of stables and kennels r
or the mire of race-courses, or even the smoke
and blood of a battle-field — to pass through
which without ' falling into a funk,' if the
chance came his way, without any deed of
his, constituted every young man a hero?

Why should the mere inference of having
to do with wheat as it was made into bread
to feed the multitudes, operate more violently
upon men's stupid, snobbish prejudices than
the report of being mixed up with barley in
the course of becoming malt, or with hops as
they passed into ale — to form refreshment for
the thirsty, no doubt ? But the refreshment was
decidedly open to abuse when the great distillers
and brewers might also be the great licensed
victuallers, the invisible, irresponsible landlords
of scores and hundreds of gin-palaces and alehouses,
as well as the builders of churches and
founders of schools,

Oliver had a fleeting vision of Mrs. Hilliard's

cool, fresh drawing-room in contrast to the
hot vapour-laden bakehouse, with Catherine
Hilliard bidding men fight or die, or speak and
witness for the truth — but never mix flour,
yeast and salt, and convert leaven into wholesome
bread, to fill the mouths and recruit the
strength of hungry, fainting creatures.

Oliver saw Harry Stanhope standing without
his coat, bare-headed, on his half-laden cart,
1 forking ' his sheaves of corn, and knew that
was one thing in the estimation of the world
and kneading dough was quite another. There
was as great a difference between them as that
between a bar of iron and a twopenny naiL
Yet Oliver remembered the American philosopher
Thoreau, and his delight in the sign
of self-sufficing independence which he recognised
in the act of baking his own bread.
What a manly, ay, a kingly work Thoreau
had made of it, as historians and poets had
dealt with the picturesque initiatory steps taken

T 2

by Cincinnatus when the patriot returned from
saving his country in the ranks of war, to
plough, and reap, and gather in the fruits of
his own peaceful fields.

Thoreau baked for his own hand, at his
own will and pleasure. He was a republican
of republicans — to whom not only courts
and thrones were repugnant, but who, while
he had no quarrel with his kind, sought to
know the feelings of a wild man — alone with the
marvellous hordes of lower animals whom he
understood and loved, and who repaid him
with their trust — alone with Nature as she came
from the hands of her Maker. Thus Thoreau
had steeped his rough bread-making in reflections
which had lent it a hue at once
primitive and solemn.

There was another man dubbed a baker,
whether he would or not, nicknamed in wanton
mockery because he could not furnish bread
for his famished people; a shy, shrinking man.

not altogether without the dignity of the line
of a hundred kings — of St. Louis himself,
blended with the native dignity of innocent
intentions in the midst of his weakness, and
with the pathos of a martyr for the sins of his
fathers and evil advisers, as he stood forward
in the window of his palace, wearing the redcap
of anarchy for the crown of sovereignty,
while France heard him hailed, not as the
monarch — not as 'Louis le Desire,' but as
4 Louis Capet, the Baker.'

There was still another figure engaged in
the homely occupation that rose up then in the
Friarton bakehouse. He had been introduced
to Oliver and to thousands more in the
president's speech at the close of one of the
Royal Society's meetings. Oliver was not
intimately acquainted with the man, as the
hero when he had passed from this world was
happily to be rendered familiar to the whole
reading public. But the miller and baker of

Friarton — a distinct specimen of his kind — had
got from the president's speech a general idea
of that other master baker, and rejoiced and
gloried in him.

Oliver did not himself possess genius, yet
he had some of its wide sympathies, keen
intuitions and susceptibilities, and strong beliefs.
Had the less gifted man known the greater
Oliver would have prized highly the mania
self-respect and modesty, even the odd gruff
bearing, which was only the prickly husk to
the sweet kernel with its milk of human kindness
and juice of a fine, genial humour, which
no general misconception, no bitter adversity,
could sour. Oliver would have gone a pilgrimage
— for he, too, had his boundless
enthusiasm — to that obscure little northern
bakehouse, where an intellectual and moral
giant toiled single-handed and fared frugally
amidst his inspired drawings of cherubim
and seraphim, ape and Greek boy. Oliver

'Constable could not have pretended to match
his brother tradesman's profound, patient studies
in natural science, or the royal bounty
which disposed of the geological and botanical
specimens — so painfully, and yet with such
deep satisfaction and noble exaltation, chiselled
from the rock and plucked from the moor.
After they had been laboriously and lovingly
assorted and preserved, these specimens, together
with the deductions carefully and w r drily
drawn from them, were lavished with princely
liberality on men of science, for whom they
might win name and fame, while the real
conqueror of the spoils was content to remain
'Dick the Baker,' drudging at a trade which
was unremunerative to him, unknown and
unhonoured, so far as the mere tinsel of worldly
distinction and applause was concerned. And
through it all Dick, who was the reverse of a
morbid, fantastic misanthropist, w T ould have
preferred a certain amount of material prosperity

to the slow poverty which ground him
to death at last, with the honest human fear of
debt and starvation. He would have liked in
his early manhood to have met with such a
degree of comprehension and fellow-feeling
from his neighbours as might have saved him
from being quickly driven back on his natural
reserve, with his huge stores of kindliness,,
cheeriness, and wit, confined to the kindred at
a distance from him, his one or two rarely
endowed, occasional cronies, his simple old
housekeeper, the young students who were
welcome to his priceless instructions without a
thought of a professor's fee. But in the man's
lofty soul and poetic idealisation, which could
exist along with exact knowledge, he was content,
with something like scorn of being pointed
out for any other distinction, to be known only
apart from a queer fish, and a half-cracked
dour sinner — for what he still was, without prejudice
or false shame, ' Dick the Baker.'

There would have been a greater charm
in the man for Oliver than what belonged to
the simplicity and gladness which took every
circumstance of his lot bravely and thankfully,
singing over his baking trough, singing back to
the roar of the waves of the Northern sea.
His heartily admiring biographer has recorded
Dick's honest practice as a tradesman : — ; His
quarter loaf always contained four pounds full,,
while the two-pound loaves of many of the
other bakers were short by about four ounces .
Cheating had the advantage over honesty of
six per cent, on every loaf — a profit in itself,
few weighing their bread and deducting the

deficiency.'

At last Oliver's mind rambled off to a
comical recollection of his grandfather, the first
Oliver Constable, miller and baker, of whom
his grandson had very authentic information, in
addition to a faint personal recollection. This
Oliver had been enterprising and ambitious as

any founder of a race. He had gone from a
country bakehouse to London, and served fora
term there, in order to be taught what might
be the metropolitan mysteries and perfections
of the trade. He had certainly attained the
power of concocting a certain pudding, which
was long held in high estimation in Friarton.
The old Oliver, his wife, children, and kindred
a little farther removed, had piqued themselves
on this acquirement, and in order to keep
it a private inheritance, had shrouded it in a
captivating secresy. Even in family conclave,
when there was an annual friendly gathering
and festival in the baker's house each Christmas,
and when the supper was crowned with this very
London pudding, as a fitting compliment from
the host to his guests, the rites of the piece of
cookery were conducted not only with peculiar
ceremony, but with closed doors. In the course
of the evening, the hostess, having retired and
seen that a collection of the necessary materials

eggs, butter, milk, flour, fruit, and spices,
was complete, and without flaw, ranged in her
own back kitchen, returned to the company,
and asked her husband with brief significance,
Goodman, are you ready ? '

The head of the house — a man of solid
gravity both of body and mind — then withdrew
with quiet importance from the circle of
his friends for the space of half-an-hour. The
prevailing standard of manners exacted that
nobody should remark on the retirement of
the entertainer for the good of the entertained,
though it was fully comprehended that he had
thrown off his company coat, donned his professional
apron, and was then whisking eggs
and beating butter in solitude, as the highest
proof of his hospitality. The result figured at
the banquet, and then all tongues were loosed
in praise of the dish and its maker.

Why not ? Perhaps old Oliver Constable's
exercise of his professional skill in the middle

of his season of recreation, was a greater
sacrifice to friendship, and not more of an act of
vanity, than is the preparation of a salad or a
sauce by the amateur hands of a modern host
or hostess.

As Oliver shook off the flour, and put on
his coat again, Webster lounged into the bakehouse,
and stopped short, bewildered, staring
hard at the empty board and the baker who
had just quitted it.

4 Webster, it is not in the fitting order of
things that I should be under the necessity of
doing your work said Oliver, whose temper

i

had got time to cool ; ' I have warned you
before, and you have paid no heed. The connection
between us had better come to an end.
I give you your leave.'

As you please, sir ; from this moment if
you like,' said Webster jauntily.

1 Very well. I take you at your word,' said
his master.

Oliver was inclined to make an example —
if it can be called an example among servants,
whose turn has come to carry matters with a
high hand, and dictate terms to their masters.
Let us hope that the new masters will be
magnanimous, and not abuse their power, to
a still greater extent than was done by the old,
else the present dead-lock would never have
arisen.

But Oliver was not aware — whether or not
the knowledge might have swayed him — of the
combination of circumstances which rendered
Webster's dismissal a severe blow to the man,
in spite of his bravado, at a crisis in his affairs.
The restless, factious baker had been keeping
company with a girl slightly above him in

station, whose relations, especially her father a

thriving master-builder, of punctilious and conservative
views — did not by any means admire
in his prospective son-in-law the hectoring
tone, and the free and easy ways, which, along

with considerable force of will and cleverness
at his trade, as at other things, had secured for
Webster an ascendency among the other journeymen
bakers, who were characterised for the
most part by greater pliability and less ability.
The principal score in Webster's favour was his
remaining in Mr. Constable's service. It was
this which kept Webster from being rejected
with unhesitating severity by Keys the builder,
and as an inevitable consequence of the summary
dismissal, with tender regret, by pretty,
gentle, Nelly Keys. For though Nelly had
been greatly taken with her lover's lordly
swagger, she was too good a girl, and too
dutiful a daughter, to act in direct disobedience
to her father.

When Webster got his leave from Oliver,
he knew it was all up with him and Nelly, to
whom he was attached with the peculiar vehemence
and self-assertion of his nature, though
he put the best face on what he regarded as a

misfortune, if not a wrong, and braved it out
at the first brush in the bakehouse.

And sure enough, Keys told Webster on
the afternoon of the same day to keep the
outside of the master-builder's door for the
rest of the journeyman baker's stay at Friarton.
The said master-builder had seized the
opportunity of the first rumour of Webster's
quarrel with Mr. Constable to rescue his
daughter from a future husband who had
shown himself a breeder of mischief and instigator
to rebellion, and was likely to end a noisy
idle demagogue, a rolling stone that would
gather no moss.

After trying in vain to soften the father,
and next to obtain a private interview with the
weeping Nelly, in order to drag from her a
promise to stand by her lover, against her
father and the whole world, Webster took
refuge in a Friarton gin-palace, and continued
there so long as to do still more deadly injury

to his cause. He was seen towards nightfall,
in Friarton streets, drunk and disorderly, a
long step for a tradesman who has hitherto
been decorous in his cups, and who has not
4 gone on the spree ' like any shameless reprobate.


Another day intervened, during which
Webster went here and there, unable, in spite
of his boasted powers, to secure a second engagement
in Friarton or its neighbourhood.
Instead of getting rid of the fumes of rage and
drink, he contracted still denser fumes of a
similar description. As ill luck would have it,
on the evening of the second day, when the
man, always headstrong and violent, and now
half-beside himself with disappointment, mortification,
and Dutch courage, was on his way to
the village at which Jim Hull's nephew still
kept together his country connection, Webster's
pati took him past Friarton Mill, and at Bomti
hundred yards' distance from the house, he

encountered his late master, taking a stroll in
the autumn dusk, with his hands in his pockets
and his pipe in his mouth.

Oliver was about to pass by his discarded
baker with a brief ' Good evening,' when
Webster brushed up against him, and delivered
himself of a sneering, stammering proposal :
Let us have a little of your company, Mister
Constable — take a walk together — not out of
the way when you don't object to fill my place
in the bakehouse.'

Oliver saw the state the man was in, and
sought to be quit of him without an unpleasant
scene. ' No ; the arrangement would be rather
different,' he said coolly ; c but I have no mind
to discuss it. Get out of my road, man, or it
will be the worse for you.'

The last sentence was provoked by Webster's
stumbling right across Oliver's path, and
standing unsteadily barring his farther progress.


VOL. II. u

So, Mister Constable, it was enough to
meddle with my baking, and bully, and make
short work of me, though you have not a word
to say to me for the wrong done me — not a
word as from man to man, when we meet like
equals. Anyhow, the meeting-place is on a
road as is free to both of us, and under the
dark night which is going to come down, and
cover both of us — and what one of us may
choose to do to settle the question between
us,' said Webster incoherently and grandiloquently.


What should I have to say to you ? ' demanded
Oliver. ' You broke faith as a servant,
you were not in the bakehouse when it was
your duty to me and the other men that you
should be there. I simply did my duty as a
master in turning you adrift, not without repeated
notice beforehand of what must happen.'

Webster was not open to reason. He was
brutal with unrestrained passion and distraught

with strong drink. He shouted the lie direct
to Oliver, following the accusation of falsehood
with a fierce curse and a furious blow.

Such things happen still, occasionally, in
England, in spite of civilisation, propriety, and
the rural police.

Oliver could have best parried the blow by
a counter-blow, which, directed by a strong,
steady, not untrained hand, would have laid the
reeling assailant at the assailed man's feet. But
he had an objection to this aggressive mode of
self-defence in which he was certain to come off
conqueror, and in trying merely to parry the
violent lunge made at him, Oliver entangled
his long legs with those of his enemy, swerved,
swayed, and fell, somewhat ignominiously,
to the ground.

Webster, notwithstanding his half-furious,
half-dazed malice, was still so much the
creature of order, and of a peaceful if bragging
past, as to take no advantage of Oliver's lying

u 2

prone at the man's feet and at his mercy for
sone decisive minute — the next, Webster uttered
a crow of triumph, administered a not unnatural,
but most unchivalrous kick to the shins
•of the antagonist struggling on his feet again,
and meandered away in the gathering darkness.

Oliver stood wincing with pain, pulling
himself together, and not believing his senses
still he was forced to laugh at his own incredulity.
He might have given chase to the
fellow in the heat of the fray, since Oliver
imagined any damage which he had received
would have yielded, for the moment, to the
fighting cock in him, while it ought to have been
about matched by the enemy which Webster
had put into his mouth, to steal away his brains
and the right use of his legs.

Oliver could, with still greater ease, have
called aloud, and reckoned with security on his
call being heard as far as Ned Green's and the
other millers' cottages, bringing him instant

assistance, which Oliver did not believe would
have been withheld because of the disaffection
common both to the mill and the bakehouse.
Webster's outrage had been too gross and
included the chance of turning the tables, and
effectually scaring many of the conspirators.

As it was, Oliver did neither. He laughed
again, a little constrainedly, for that kick on his
shins, though he had been accustomed to be
mauled at football, and though this was almost
a playful kick administered in the delirious
inconstancy of Webster's mind, had done its
work with considerable effect.

After his short laugh Oliver began to reflect.
1 must have hurt the rascal on some tender
spot to reduce him to such excess of drink and
madness in a couple of days. I gave credit to
his pretensions and to Jim Hull's dogmatic
assurance that Webster would find another
master sooner than I should another servant.
Well, there's nothing to be done at this time of

the day. It is utterly impossible now for him to
make submission and agree to my terms, or forme
to reinstate him in the bakehouse, but we
may be no more than quits, although he should
have contrived to crack my ankle-bone. How
shall I manage to hop home, though Fan
accuses me of a propensity to stand on one leg?
And what am I to say to Fan and the world at
large? A fall? It was a fall, but a jolly
rum fall to produce such consequences.'

Yet Oliver had no further account to give
of the accident, whether it were pride or
magnanimity, or a mixture of both, which
kept him silent. He would not condescend to
a more particular explanation, though it was
discovered in time that some of the smaller
bones of his ankle had been fractured, and that
because the injury had not been properly
attended to at first — on account of his having
choked down his suffering, and slurred over the
amount of damage he had received — there

followed a protracted" and painful imprisonment
to the mill-house. And Oliver came out of it,
and the accompanying illness, even though he
had allowed a pair of learned physicians to be
summoned to his aid, limping slightly for life
on one ankle — if not on one knee like Horatius
Cockles, as the culminating touch to his awkwardness.


The accident and its result, when the latter
came to be fully known, excited some stir and
talk in Friarton. Of course no ordinary fall on
a level country road as smooth as a bowling-green,
to a man in full possession of his wits
and limbs, could have occasioned such a disaster.
The marvel was, how Oliver Constable had
fallen at all on the familiar and sure ground
even in the uncertain light of gathering night,
people commented with raised eyebrows. But
doubtless it was his best policy to vouchsafe no
details of this unaccountable fall. There could
be hardly any question that it had occurred in

some discreditable scuffle or brawl with low
companions. The speakers recalled the moonlight
frolics of the young tradesmen, the time
out of mind removal of lamps from honoured,
doors, the letting loose of a pig or two from
their styes, with the wild attempt at inaugurating
a boar-hunt in the streets of Friarton.
Oliver Constable had been known to be present
at these disgraceful performances, though he
might have been charitably supposed beyond
taking an active part in the idiotic riotous
amusements. But innate low tastes, possibly a
secret, wretched, craving for what was generally
the stimulant to such uproarious behaviour, had
certainly prevailed over the superficial refinement
wrought by education.

Oliver Constable was likely to prove a dangerous
tempter and corrupter in place of a fine
model for his class to follow, and a bracing
encouragement by way of example to the young
men of the lower middle rank. He was a

proper fellow to mask his self-indulgence and
license under the guise of philanthropy and unworldliness,
to pose as a reformer ! Here was a
crying instance of a wolf in sheep's clothing !

Mrs. Hilliard repeated the essence of the
scandal to her cousin Catherine over their
afternoon tea. Oliver Constable was coming
out in the colours which might, perhaps, have
been detected from the first, through the daubing
done over them, by a man of the* world.
The accident which had fixed a permanent
shamble on his gait, was said to have happened
in a shocking drunken row.

It was symptomatic that there had been sometime
ago a split among the chapel people, with
which Oliver Constable was mixed up. In
general these splits were tokens of a disease
peculiar to dissenting bodies, in which nobody
outside dreamt of taking any interest. For
that matter, nobody was likely to hear of the
divisions unless from servants and tradespeople.

But for Oliver Constable, who ought to have
been the chief pillar of the chapel, to be in bad
odour with the members was too ominous to
be passed over. Here was the end of foolish
aspirations, of eccentricity, and not doing at Rome
as the Romans did, but aiming at being hero or
saint or a mixture of both. So Apollo and
Caliban by turns had merged into Vulcan, who
had been stealing very vulgar and unhallowed
fire indeed when he met his fit punishment.
Mrs. Hilliard was sorry for Fan — yes, she
could spare sincere pity for Fan Constable at
last.

Mrs. Hilliard told her tale with a curious
mixture of regret and annoyance — since she
had chosen to count kindred with the Constables
— and of lurking satisfaction, because what
she had said of Oliver's high saluting, what she
had prophesied as sure to follow transcendental
ambition, had been borne out. She had called
Oliver half Apollo half Caliban, she herself was

half a good-natured woman, half a mocking-cynic.


Mrs. Hilliard was stopped by Catherine.
The cold statue became strangely warm, and instinct
with life and emotion — red hot, actually
gasping for breath in her indignation. *I
wonder at you, Louisa,' panted Catherine, ' to
listen to such wicked slander, to give credence
to it for a moment, to put yourself on an
equality with its fabricators, helping in its circulation.
Oliver Constable is a good man, true
as steel, pure as honesty itself, kind as a brother,
though he may waste his fine qualities. I will
pledge myself for his perfect innocence of anything
so despicable and loathsome as hypocrisy —
even if he were weak enough to be vicious and
not as he is. too strong in his virtue to care for
appearances.'

c He does not lack an enthusiastic champion,'
observed Mrs. Hilliard, letting the corners of
her mouth droop. c Take care, my dear, you are

not infallible in your convictions any more than
the gentleman is in his conduct. The passion
for being outre seems infectious. Ah ! blessed
are they who expect nothing, for they shall not
be disappointed. I have not been so wise as to
be without expectation, though J. have had my
misgivings. Now I must confess, in spite of
your looking daggers at me, I am disappointed
in Oliver Constable. The sequel threatens to
exceed so tremendously what I bargained for.
I only anticipated a ludicrous collapse ; I did
not go in for a dismal wreck — at which I shall
not be able to laugh, therefore you need not be
angry with me,' complained Mrs. Hilliard with
a half-comical air of injury.

But Catherine was angry, in season and out
of season, with the wrong as well as the right
person. For how did this staunch champion
treat Oliver the next time she met him, limping
slowly down Friarton High Street ? She passed
him quickly with the slightest and coldest bow

that any of his defamers had yet administered
to him. Mrs. Hilliard could no more have
bowed in that fashion than she could have
taken up a stone and thrown it at the culprit.
It was the next thing to a cut direct, and it
did cut Oliver to the heart, with the lively
impression that Catherine Hilliard had listened
to and believed the worst of the idle, senseless,
shameful lies told of him.

As for Catherine, she was saying to herself
in a fever of perverse, reproachful wrath and
mortification. ' What right had he who was so
manly, courageous and steadfast to cast his
pearls before swine till they turned and rent
him : to spend himself in a manner and for a
cause unworthy of the gift : to act so recklessly
that he could be thus monstrously misjudged
and maligned ? '

END OF THE SECOND VOLUME.

Spottitwoode <k Co., J'/iniem, Netc-ttreet Square, London,

OF

POPULAR WORKS

Handsomely bound in cloth gilt, each volume containing
Four Illustrations. Crown 8vo. 3-r. 6d.

-»c*-

THE SMALL HOUSE AT Arlington. By Anthony
Trollope.

Frame PARSONAGE. By Anthony Trollope.

THE Clavering. By Anthony Trollope.

TRANSFORMATION: a Romance. By Nathaniel
Hawthorne.

ROMANTIC TALES. By the Author of < John Halifax.'

DOMESTIC STORIES. By the Author of 'John Halifax

NO NAME. By Wilkie Collins.

ARMADALE. By Wilkie Collins.

AFTER DARK. By Wilkie Collins.

MAUD TALBOT. By Holme Lee.

THE MOORS AND THE FENS. By Mrs. J. H.

RlDDELL.

PUT YOURSELF IN HIS PLACE. By Charles Reade.

WIVES AND DAUGHTERS. By Mrs. Gaskell.

NORTH AND SOUTH. By Mrs. Gaskell.

Sylvia LOVERS. By Mrs. Gaskell.

CRANFORD ; and other Stories. By Mrs. Gaskell.

MARY BARTON ; and other Stories. By Mrs. Gaskell.

RUTH— THE GREY WOMAN; and other Stories. By
Mrs. Gaskell.

LIZZIE LEIGH— A DARK NIGHT'S WORK; and

other Stories. By Mrs. Gaskell.

London : SMITH, ELDER, & CO., 15 Waterloo Place.

Each Work complete in One Volume, price Six Shillings.
FAR FROM THE MADDING CROWD. By

Thomas Hardy. With 6 Illustrations. Crown 8vo. 6s.
THE HAND OF Ethelbert. By Thomas

Hardy. With 6 Illustrations. Crown 8vo. 6s.

WITHIN THE PRECINCTS. By Mrs. Oliphant,

Author of ' Chronicles of Carlingford ' &c. With Eight Illustrations.
Crown 8vo. 6s.

Carta. By Mrs. Oliphant, Author of ' Chronicles of

Carlingford ' &c. 8 Illustrations. Crown 8vo. 6s.

FOR PERCIVAL. By Margaret Veley. With

8 Illustrations. Crown 8vo. 6s.

OLD KENSINGTON. By Miss Thackeray. Crown
8vo. 6s.

THE VILLAGE ON THE CLIFF. By Miss

Thackeray. Crown 8vo. 6s.

FIVE OLD FRIENDS AND A YOUNG

PRINCE. By Miss Thackeray. Crown 8vo. 6s.

TO ESTHER, and other Sketches. By Miss

Thackeray. Crown 8vo. 6s.

BLUE BEARD'S KEYS, and other Stories.

By Miss Thackeray. Crown 8vo. 6s.

THE STORY OF ELIZABETH; TWO HOURS ;

FROM AN ISLAND. By Miss Thackeray. Crown 8yo.fr.

TOILERS AND SPINSTERS, and other Essays.

By Miss Thackeray. Crown 8vo. 6s.

MISS ANGEL; FULHAM LAWN. By Miss

Thackeray. Crown Svo. 6s.

Blandly REEFS. By Lady Verney, Author of
1 Stone Edge ' &c. Crown Svo. 6s.

Lattice LISLE. By Lady Verney. With 3 Illustrations.

Crown Svo. 6s.

STONE EDGE. By Lady Verney. With 4 Illustrations.
Crown 8vo. 6s.

London : SMITH, ELDER, ft CO., 15 Waterloo Place.

li

5^l^■^:^':';^;^

^^.<

i>S*^S^-N

^5sv

#i!s#

.■ii***-

'^^;-

■it.i^v.'iw ;

MILLER AND BAKER

BY

SARAH Tatler

AUTHOR OF ' CITOTENNE JACQUELINE ' ' SCOTCH FIBS ' ETC.

IN THREE VOLUMES

VOL. III.

LONDON
SMITH, ELDER, & CO., 15 WATERLOO PLACE



[All rights reserved']

^^^3-
discontents



OF

THE Tried VOLUME.

»o«

CHAPTER PAGE

XXIII. Hart Stanhope's Want . . . .1

XXIV. Fan's Triumph 22

XXV. * The Devil shall not hate Harry ' . 25

XXVI. The Price at which Harry Stanhope

WAS Rescued 96

XXVII. The Last Penny paid . . . .120

XXVIII. Oliver's Return 140

XXIX. Fresh Service 175

XXX. Stumbled Across, Interviewed, Taken

at his Word 197

XXXI. Life — and Death 214

XXXII. ' Do they believe in me now ? ' . . . 240

MILLER AND BAKER.

-•o*-

CHAPTEE XXm.

HARRY stanhope's WANT.

Olivier had liberally allowed Harry Stanhope
six months in which to ride his hobby and
grow sick beyond endurance of his role of
yeoman.

But whereas Harry had entered on the
character, on a fine summer afternoon, in the
attractive prospect of hay-making, corn-cutting,
and hop-picking, it was midwinter, with no
more agreeable occupations in view than thrash-vol.

III. B

ing corn, pulling turnips, turning over potatoes
in the pits, and ploughing a stiff clay soil under
the murky sky of a short day in muggy
weather, still he showed no signs of throwing
up the part in satiety and disgust.

True, he had sufficient leisure to join the
other farmers in presenting himself in the
hunting field, and enjoying as good mounts
and glorious runs as the squires or the M.F.H.
himself.

It did not come under the head of sport.
Harry was persuaded it lay at the core of his
business, that he should attend — not only the
Friarton Market, but every market within a
day's journey. He went to them no longer in
his shirt sleeves, or riding a bare-backed horse
as it had been taken to the watering, not even
in the market cart in which he had prefigured
Horry and himself crossing country — out of
sight, and therefore out of danger of wounding
the feelings of their aristocratic relations.

Harry had modified so far his Robinson Crusoe
and Vicar of Wakefield notions, as to have set
lip a trap handsome enough to have been
driven by any of his cousins. The trap was
matched by an equally well-bred, delicate,
costly horse, which Harry candidly admitted
was not quite ' the cheese ' for a yeoman.
Yet why not, if he rented and paid the rent of
the paddock in which it ran, afforded the corn
for its feeds, and took care that it should do his
work in running like the wind with him and
Horry to the innumerable markets and sales
which the brothers found themselves forced to
attend. Harry's pride ended with his equipage.
He was not to say guilty of affability ; he was
every man's man, in the streets, or corn
exchanges, or commercial inns where the
farmers congregated. He was as ready to sit
with the last man in the bar-parlour, and try
return races against his trap, as to compare
samples of grain in legitimate business. Harry

B 2 s

was all things to all men — not to gain some for
what he fervently believed their good, but in
sheer sociality — with a vain, light-hearted, lightheaded
love of popularity, which was at this
time his ruling passion. Horace never thwarted
his brother in this or any other inclination.
He remained the abiding shadow inseparable
from Hairy 's sunshine, and in some respects a
relief from its glare.

Harry was also able to derive no small
amount of animation and amusement from such
Avind falls in the day's routine, as brisk bouts of
ratting Avhen a stack was being pulled down, orin
the granary after it was left empty ; and he
waited religiously every evening on the feeding
of the cattle and horses in the sheds and stables.

Harry was an extremely indulgent, if totally
inconsiderate, and occasionally capricious,,
master, whose lavish tolerance was only now and
then broken, like the abounding calm of tropical
seas, by a storm violent as it was brief.

That Harry spoilt this retainers horribly was
not an objection which his servants were likely
to take into account in the first flush of ' the
young squire's ' popularity. For in spite of
Harry Stanhope's well-nigh nettled protests
and vigorous acting of his part, probably because
of his over-acting, the would-be yeoman
was the young squire to his labourers, who in
the middle of their stolidity were not altogether
without shrewd observation and sound deduction.


Harry not only continued unexpectedly
constant to his vocation as he believed it, he
remained faithful to the earliest friendship he
had claimed on his arrival at Copley Grange
Farm. He went more frequently to Friarton
Mill than to any other house where he was
made welcome, which was saying a good deal,
seeing that Harry's life, whether in the way of
his business requirements, or when he might be
supposed clear of their urgent obligations, was a

constant round of varied visiting. Indeed, it
struck Oliver that Harry grossly abused his-privilege,
and came intolerably often, and at
absurdly unconventional seasons, from ' early
morn to dewy eve ' — sometimes in the raw air
before breakfast, sometimes through a setting-in
snowstorm after supper — to the mill-houses
diu-king this winter.

But what could Oliver do? not turn out
the thoughtless lad for whom the elder man
had a sneaking kindness, or close the doors-against
the soullessly jolly young face, which,,
however provocative of censure, always brought
with it, when it flashed upon the man, a
reflection of unimpaired freshness, and unburdened
lightness of heart.

Since Fan allowed these intrusions, and
even seemed to enjoy them, what was left for
Oliver save to shrug his shoulders, grumble to
himself, or deliver the silent hint of turning his
back, after the first greeting, on his visitors ?

For, of course, Harry dragged over Horry in
his train. And Oliver often left Fan to entertain
the two in one, while he read on unceremoniously
at the newspaper or book with
which he had been engaged on their entrance.

Alas ! Harry only took the cavalier rudeness
for friendliest encouragement. ' Don't
apologise to me, old fellow,' he would enjoin
the master of the house, cheerfully. ' It is not
you I have come to see, it is Miss Constable,'
Harry would say audaciously. ' I have come
to report myself to Miss Constable. She has
been so good as to take me in hand. She is
making a man — that is a veritable yeoman,
of me.'

And Fan lent herself to this eo^reo^ious
fiction. Fan, who had never interested herself
in a single detail of her father and brother's
trades, who had not so much as made an
exception in favour of the chicks, directed a
charmed ear to all Harry Stanhope's chatter of

the prices in the market, the field which was
sown that day, the ox which had choked itself
and been brought round in its stall the night
before, the first long-legged, big-headed calf
which he had bought for a song.

Sally Pope grinned at Oliver behind the
backs of this most practical young couple.

Horace Stanhope began to fidget and glance
jealously at the master of the house in his
obliviousness. But not even the phenomena of
Harry's coming at last, once or twice, without
his brother, and showing some slight self-consciousness
when the unusual omission was remarked
upon, roused the suspicions of the too
secure and single-minded host.

One fine frosty night Harry had walked in
alone, uninvited and unannounced. For Fan's
carefully-trained housemaid had become weary
of announcing the perpetual visitor, and, without
any rebuke from her mistress, had proceeded
to treat the special duty as a work of



supererogation where Mr. Harry Stanhope was
concerned.

OHver had nodded and sat still in the shade
at his father's desk, turning over some papers,
keeping his post mainly to preserve the liberty
of pursuing his own train of reflections ; while
Harry Stanhope and Fan had put their heads
together over the lamp on Fan's little table
in the chimney-corner, and were, according to
Over's conception of the situation, going over
the best plans for growing corn and rearing
stock, and — what was adding insult to injury
in reference to Oliver's pets, the ducks — the
latest contrivances for a high development of
poultry. Not satisfied with the solution of
these momentous problems by lamplight,
when the pair went to the window to predict
from the purple-blue sky and the glitter of the
stars hung like lamps of heaven in the dark
branches of the trees of Copley Grange Park,
the weather tomorrow — whether skating on the

mill-pond would be the order of the day, or
whether the frost would give way and the
scent hold, so that Harry might join the hunt
ten miles off — it seemed to Oliver as if they
must have started afresh to answer the whole
code of agricultural questions over again, by
starlight, till his patience was reduced to a
shred.

At last Harry took his departure somewhat
abruptly in the end.

Oliver stretched himself with vicious emphasis,
and growled, this was insufferable, he
did not think he could stand it much longer.

Fan, generally so quick in retort, said
nothing, but she appeared to have appropriated
the observation and taken it to heart ; for a
moment later, when she came to bid Oliver goodnight,
she suddenly put her hands upon his
shoulders and looked wistfully in his face with
tears in her dark eyes, and her colour wavering
as he remarked with surprise. ' You are not

angry, Oliver, dear? ' she said, with one of her
rare caressing gestures and phrases, which
coming as they did unlooked for, from a high-spirited
almost hard little woman like Fan,
were apt to sap a man's defences, and melt his
heart like wax on the spot. 'You are not
angry, Oliver ? ' repeated Fan with a slight
quaver in the wistful earnestness, of her voice.

Of course I am not angry with you you
goose of a Fancied ? ' said Oliver with affectionate
bluster. ' How can you help Stanhope's
unconscionable coolness, which begins to be
rank impudence ? But why. in the name of
justice, should I blame you for his faults?'
enquired Oliver in all simplicity. ' You are;
compelled to listen to his rigmarole in your
own house, when I turn him over to you. I
own I ought not to do it, to such an extent, '^
admitted Oliver, contritely ; ' but the young
wretch is so indefatigable in preying on our
hospitality, and has acquired such a fatal

fluency in airing his farming bosh, that I
must have some relief, or knock him down.
I often admire your powers of endurance, but
don't give the beggar too much hue, Fan, if
you love me. I am not sure, whether, after
all, his class are the finest judges of courtesy.'

Fan had flushed crimson at her brother's
words. She knitted her delicate brows —
black brows at the same time, and then as
if she had thought better of it, her lips parted
in a half-smile. ' No, no ; don't speak treason
either of me, or of another,' she said ; and
then she added, a little incoherently, ' I believe
there is nobody so good and kind as you are,
yourself, Oliver, in the whole world, remember
I have said so, though we quarrelled
some time ago, and may quarrel again, remember
I have told you that you are always
my own dear good boy, whom I have loved
all through oui lives, whom I love with all my
heart at this moment, whom I could have

served, if you would have let me and Fan
fairly hugged Oliver, who resisted stoutly in
his mystification, with a dim apprehension that
he might otherwise pledge himself to something
he did not in the least understand.

What do you mean ? ' cried Oliver. ' Is
Fan also among the wheedle ? For what
mighty boon can she deign to wheedle ? '

Never mind, it is too late to ask me now
opood niojht.'

Fan succeeded in making her retreat, and
in the act of doing so, Oliver might have seen
if he had been quick at reading women's faces,
that all the soft relenting and indescribable
yearning which had been in hers a moment
ago, had vanished and was replaced by
such unmingled exultation that the girl looked
radiant.

It was the last loving altercation which
passed between the brother and sister for many
a day.

The next morning, Harry Stanhope wound
up his offences against domestic privacy by
re-appearing at Friarton Mill, as if he had
slept at the gate, seeking admission to Oliver
before the latter had completed his toilet. Only
the most urgent business could warrant such
pressing attendance. Harry himself, in his
superb self-complacency and confidence, betrayed,
nevertheless, a shadow of a doubt of
his reception.

'You will think I am always here,
Constable ? ' he said with a confused laugh.

Well, you are here pretty often,' the
aggrieved Oliver put it mildly. ' I am afraid
your other engagements must suffer from your
paying us the compliment of being so much at
Friarton Mill; and your brother — he is not
with you this morning — will miss you.'

Oh ! hang Horry ! ' exclaimed Harry
hastily ; ' no, I don't mean that, of course, and
old Horry won't stand in the way. He's all

right. Besides, if one's father and mother, when
a fellow possesses them, an't counted, a brother
can't have much to say either way, can he ? *

'I don't know what you're after,' said
Oliver in perfect sincerity. ' If I were a
supernumerary in an old play, I ought to
exclaim, " Ann," to that last enigmatical
sentence of yours.'

'Well, it ain't easy to come out with it,'

protested Harry, struggling with what was, for
him, the most extraordinary hesitation. ' Your
sister, Constable — you must have seen she has
been goodness itself to me. I know she will
have to furnish the brains and backbone, for
my head-piece ain't worth much, and my
pluck is of the rough and ready sort, but
since she graciously consents to do for me and
Horry — to make a true farmer's wife, which
will be an inestimable advantage to us — I may
take it that you will not have any great objection
to accepting me for a brother-in-law ? '

Stanhope, have you lost your wits ? ' burst
out Oliver. ' Come, there must be no more of
this absurd nonsense. I tell you I will have no
such foolish jesting where my sister is concerned.'


'Never was farther from jesting in my
life ! ' declared poor Harry indignantly.

Then let me say, once for all. you must
get rid of this idiotic idea. It won't do. My
sister is not for a fellow like you. I don't
want to hurt your feelings, but you have somehow
tumbled into the hugest blunder, and I
must speak out. I can answer for Fan : she did
not dream of encouraging such a vain delusion,
she will be terribly vexed and annoyed. This
comes of masquerading and making-believe.
It seems to me you don't want a wife for twenty
years to come : when you do, take my advice
if you will excuse me for offering it, after
what I have said — marry strictly within your
own class ; you of all fellows require such a

safeguard, and the more influential your wife's
people, the better both for her and you ! '
muttered Oliver sotto voce. Then he resumed
aloud, ' Wait till you can persuade a lady to
share your lot — if you will cultivate prudence,
you may make it not a bad one — as a .'


Harry was looking at OHver with such a

strong sense of superior knowledge and wisdom

that it disarmed any rising resentment on the

lad's part, at the tone of provoked disdainful

repudiation of the proposal which Oliver could

not help betraying. The contrast between the

truth as Harry realised it and Oliver's undoubting

convictions, brought out the comic

element in the affair so dear to Harry's boyish

heart, even in the serious mood which had been

on him, when he ' declared his intentions.'
Make-believe, indeed ! ' cried Harry,

lightly; 'who plays at being miller and

baker ? '

VOL. III. c



Not I ! ' denied Oliver hotly. ' I have taken
up my father's business, which is no unusual
thing for a tradesman's son to do, and I have
not adopted it as a mere makeshift, or as the
last resource for a man who would otherwise
be idle ; I desire to make it the object of my
life ; I do not think any honest trade is unworthy
of the dedication of the trader's talents
to render it as good in every respect as
possible. I trust to do no discredit to my
father's business.'

At least you need not be so cocky over
other people whose fathers had not the luck to
be in trade,' remonstrated Harry. ' As to not
wanting a wife — I being a farmer, and having
no competent young woman with my interest
at heart,' went on Harry, his ]blue eyes twinkling,
' to look after the butter and cheese, the
feeding of the calves, the fattening of the geese,
and the multiplying of the eggs and chickens,
when I find I have quite enough to do, even

with Horry for my aide, to manage the labourer
fellows in the fields and offices, and
attend the markets — if you think I don't want
a Avise dreadfully, it is little you know of a
yeoman's difficulties. As to consenting to
try for an imitation farmer's wife, why you
you-self politely hinted a minute ago that there
was quite enough of the mock article at Copley
Grange Farm already. No, thanks. I knew
exactly what the position was when Aggie
spent her holiday weeks at the Farm. The
babe could not have told barley from oats if
they had not been in the ear ; and though
that did not matter much, I am morally certain
she was shaky on the important question of
hens' nests — whether they were not to be found
in bushes, if not on tree-tops. She spoilt all
the dairy produce while she was here, by insisting
on dabbling in it in her ignorance, my
housekeeper complained. And the child was
always begging to be amused, and seeking toc

2

go and look at the horses and cattle when it
was not convenient and I ought to have been
hard at work elsewhere. She would not be
put off with Horry's escort ; fact was, all my
energies were employed in keeping the peace
between the Httle girl and the cantankerous
old man.'

Oliver was forced to laugh, but he laughed
harshly. ' Stanhope, you're a donkey if you
propose to marry my sister, that she may act
as your head dairymaid and principal hen wife.
That is not her Fortes' he said.

Do you mean to insult me ? ' cried Harry,
firing up in spite of his easy temper. ' By
Jove, you may thank Fan if I bear it. I may
have cracked an ill-timed joke, but it was
you who tempted me to it. Fan believes me ;
she understands how I love and honour her,
and choose her before all other women ; and
if she does me the honour to choose me in
return, I suppose she is at liberty to make

her choice? Not even a Turk of a brother >
since he is not her father, and she is of age,
can prevent it,' ended Harry defiantly.

This preposterous stuff must be put an
end to. I will see my sister.' Oliver flung
out of his room, and encountered Fan hovering
over the breakfast-table, and looking fresh yet
pale, like a solitary daisy blooming in a sheltered
corner.

CHAPTEE XXIV.

fan's triumph.

Come along, Fan, to the front door, where
the fellow has retreated. Here is a fluke, but
the sooner you deal with it the better; you
must spoil your breakfast, and have done with
it. Harry Stanhope is as mad as a hatter this
morning, and nothing will bring him back to
soberness of rain save your giving him his
cone in so many words. This is speaking
plainly. Are you not amazed ? I imagine you
never apprehended such a desperately moonshine
business from Stanhope, who's in a
general way commonplace and matter-of-fact
in his greenness. But come along, it will not
do to keep the young idiot waiting.'

But what if there are two of 'us as mad
:as hatters ? ' said Fan, blushing and brightening
up like the white daisy when the red
tips of its petals catch the beams of the
sun.

'Fan, you cannot be so crazy, so weak
to imbecility ! ' cried Oliver, incredulously ;
and then, as his unbelief began to be shaken
by her looks, still more than her words, he
protested passionately on her account : ' A boy
like Harry Stanhope ! the merest boy in his
fancies, as you have had abundant proof;
hardly responsible for his actions, not fit to
know his own mind, as sure to change as the
wind.'

'He is not so much younger a boy than
you are, Oliver,' said Fan, with restrained
spirit. ' He is a little older than I am in years,
and I don't feel so very youthful in spirit. I
should be inclined to think I was capable of
knowing my own mind, and being held responsible

for my actions. But, no doubt,
women are a great deal older, in proportion,
than men. You are all boys to us,' said Fan,
with demure motherliness. ' I have even
ventured to call a sage like you a boy.'

Fan,' said Oliver, ' don't drive me beside
myself. This is no occasion for teasing, and I
could not have believed you the woman to
beirin to tease in such circumstances. I have
been accustomed to think you sensible, capable
of self-respect, rather proud than meek.
Have you considered what sort of beggar
Stanhope is, apart from his birth and breeding,
and the grace which they have given him.
He is feather-headed and an empty canister —
if ever there were one. He has never thought
of anything save his own pleasure since he was
born. He is incapable of self-restraint, even if
he knew the thing by name. He is the incarnation
of selfishness — genial and jolly now,
I grant you, but which will without fail grow

coarser and harder with years. At forty
Harry Stanhope's stupidity and self-indulgence
will be palpable to the shallowest intellect, and
so may his gross ness — even his brutality — if
his ojood annuel do not interfere

His good angel will interfere. How dare
you accuse and prophecy evil of a better man
than yourself — if humility and kindliness are
better than arrogance and harshness, as the
Bible teaches ? '

Fan stood at bay for her lover. ' Harry is
not a student or a scholar, any more than I am
by nature,' she said more quietly ; ' but that
does not make him and me less of a man and
a woman than if we were a fantastic theorist
and an abstracted visionary. If he thinks
of his pleasure, why not ? when his pleasure
has always been manly and honest — and is not
that to his credit, left to himself, to all intents
and purposes, as he has been ? And it is not
true that he cares only for himself; he ha

been a good and true brother, as he will be
good and true in all the relations of life.'

Oliver groaned. ' Do you know what the
farmers, with whom he classes himself, say
•of his conceited, childish enterprise ? They
lighten their own troubles by gufiawing over Its
muddles and messes. They say, " The plough
would need to turn up gold for Mr. Stanhope
to reap a harvest, even if times were as good
^s they are bad for agriculture." They calculate
confidently he will have succeeded in
making such a mull of the business into which
he has rushed, without a particle of knowledge
or experience, that he will be sold out and
polished off in three or four years at the
farthest.'

The more need of the nearest and dearest
of his friends to stand by him,' said Fan, with
steadfast eyes.

His best friend will not be able to stand
by him and defend him from the ruinous consequences

of the new habits he is grafting on
the old,' maintained OHver doggedly. ' Harry-stanhope
was known at Oxford as one of the
most careless and reckless of the undergraduates
who were his contemporaries. He was so
unboundedly social that he was never missing
where company of any kind congregated. If
he could not get good, he could put up with
bad. He was a regular frequenter of village
alehouses, as well as a conspicuous figure at
every " wine " within his reach. Now — country-town
markets and the farmers' circles in commercial
inns are his great resorts. To a man
of Harry Stanhope's accommodating temperament,
every company in which swallowing
strong drink is inseparably associated with
friendly intercourse, must prove playing with
fire. God forbid that I should say the lad is
cursed by a fatal taint, but it will be next to a
miracle in his case if the demon is disappointed
in getting possession of his victim.'

Oliver,' said Fan, with bated breath in her
anger, as she stood on the hearthrng, confronting
him, ' who is it that did not care though
he were mixed up with the low larks of the
shop lads of Friarton, so that even respectable
people could grow common liars and * slanderers,
taking it upon them to say that he was
sentenced to carry about in his person, to his
dying day, the mark of his degrading excesses
? '

Let them say it,' retorted Oliver, raising
his head, quickly, and without flinching ; ' that
is another affair. The end may justify the
means, if some small love of fair play and poor
humanity keep a man true to his colours,
through evil as well as good report ; if his
conscience clear him, and they who ought to
know, are satisfied he is falsely accused. But
only charity on the brain can regard Harry
Stanhope as bitten by a rabid regard for his
kind, or for anybody save himself, and perhaps
his second self Horny.'

He tried her on other grounds. ' How can
you take it upon you to be a farmer's wife,
Fan? How can you pretend to acquirements
which you never possessed, which you have
never so much as tried to gain? You have
always had the strongest prejudice against the
position of a tradesman, and I take it you
cannot put a yeoman on a much higher level.
Your ambition, which you did not conceal, was
to lead the life of a conventional lady.'

I was silly,' said Fan, composedly. ' I
did not know what a gentleman could do,
and yet retain his gentle bearing unimpaired.
I never met a true gentleman — forgive me,
Oliver — till I saw Harry Stanhope. I will learn
all farmhouse work that a farmer's wife can
do, for the sake of my farmer, to help him to
conquer fortune, more quickly than I learned
lessons at school to fit me to be your companion.
I am not afraid to say that I will bea
good farmer's wife — behind none in the

country.' Fan pledged herself proudly, and
Oliver knew the pledge would be redeemed,
though Fan died for it.

Are you willing to enter a family, every
member of which will look down on you, if
one of them own you at all, which I very
much doubt ? Can you not open your wilfully
closed eyes enough to see that Horace Stanhope
has not come here of late with his brother ? '

Oliver ! ' said Fan with flashing eyes, ' you
are seeking to pique me by an objection
which you must know does not exist in connection
with Harry. He has no people with
claims on him. He has no friends who would
consider his welfare before any good to themselves,
save me and his brother — who has not
gone against him, and surely the more reason
we should not forsake him. Did not Harry
break off from his uncles and aunts when he
became a farmer ? They allowed him to follow
his own course, and they must accept the consequences.

" If they cut it up rough," as he
says, " they have themselves to blame for it""
when they consented to what was likely ta
happen, if he and Horry became yeomen.
Poor Horry, he would be as jealous as a
woman of any other woman's coming between
him and Harry ! ' said Fan, with a little laugh
and blush ; ' but I will help him to get over it
for Harry's sake : he is waiving his objections
already. The worst of it is, I am not just such
a girl as Agneta, with whom the poor dear
fellow was always sparring, so that Harry had
to come in with his sweet temper, and reconcile
the two. But do you imagine that I find fault
with Horace Stanhope because he would not
count any woman beneath the rank of a duke's
daughter, who was not beautiful as the day,
and an angel of virtue, deserving of Harry p
There would have been the old search over
again, if the devoted soul had been consulted :

Where is the maiden of mortal strain
May match with the Baron of Triermain ?

It is little you know of things, Oliver, though
you are a philosopher, if you think that would
have made me angry with Horry, who will soon
forgive me, because of the sympathy between
us. Besides Horry, there is only Agneta who
is really interested,' said Fan, after an instant's
pause, ' and she is my friend.'

It remains to be seen how far the friendship
will stand this test ! ' said Oliver with
gloomy scepticism. He was so exasperated as
to add a taunt, for which he was sorry the
moment after he had uttered it. ' Why don't
you admit frankly that you are besotted enough
to believe the whole race of Vere de Vere will
open their arms to receive you into their castles ?
That must be the real inducement to form
such an insane connection — not the cheap) merits
of a lad like Harry Stanhope.'

If you think so badly of me, Oliver, even
though I may have given you some cause by
beini;- foolish and worldly-minded, I cannot

help it ! ' said Fan, deeply wounded and
offended.

There was no more to be said. Harry
Stanhope must not be kept kicking his heels,
in the mill-house court a moment longer. As
Harry had calmly stated at an early stage of
the contest, Oliver could not prevent his sister
from making her own choice of a husband : she
was of age, she was mistress of herself in every
way, including the disposal of her little fortune.
With respect to that, Oliver had been more
just to Harry Stanhope than her brother had
shown himself to Fan. Oliver had not attributed
mercenary motives to the lad, as the
person who ought to have known her best
had fastened upon Fan the all-powerful
promptings of a vain and small ambition.
Oliver was quite aware that men of the class
to which Harry belonged are often as good
arithmeticians as the loiterers whom the
gentlemen despise. The sons of the most

VOL. III. D

ancient and noble families, having the bluest
blood in their veins, will look out for ' tin ' with
their wives, even though the suitors have to
descend into mercantile walks and put up with
plebeian antecedents, in order to secure the
indispensable metal, as unblushingly as the
northern farmer sought ' prupitty ' with his
daughter-in-law. Perhaps the young patricians
may plead the obligation of necessity in the
cases of all save the heads of their houses.
The eldest son has his future secured ; but if
he has unfortunate younger brothers, it may
reasonably be said — in spite of the gentlemanly
professions provided for them, which, when it
comes to that, for the most part imply the
spending rather than the earning of money —
they cannot dig, and to beg they are ashamed.
But Harry was not of this stamp, though he
may have used their slang in conversation.
His mortal enemy could not accuse him of
being calculating. His defects, however
flagrant, were free from mercenary meanness.

Oliver looked upon himself as compelled
to yield a formal outward assent, in contradiction
to the inward protest, to Fan's right in the
selection of a mate.

Therefore, there was no open rupture in the
little family. Harry Stanhope, after his momentary
spurt of anger, only laughed at his future
brother-in-law's manner of receiving his first
overtures, and at Oliver's way of conducting
himself in the later arrangements. In Harry's
-eyes, Oliver's behaviour* was in keeping with the
grumpiness which the young aristocrat had
always imputed to his democratic senior. It
was part of the role of a radical, which Harry
conceived Oliver to be.

Harry could afford to treat the matter
lightly ; neither did Oliver, after the first pang
of painful surprise and bitter disappointment,
wish to quarrel outright with Fan's bridegroom.
Thus the two preserved a truce ; though they
fell off. rather than drew closer, in whatever

B 2

friendship had hitherto existed between them,
in the prospect of their nearer alliance. Oliver
turned over Harry entirely to Fan, as, no doubt,
he might have done in any circumstances,
unless the young fellow had been Oliver's
chosen chum and mate as well as Fan's.

Fan smothered the keen regret called forth
by her brother's unshaken, inveterate hostility
to the marriage he could not hinder, and to
the gulf deepening between them, as best she
might.

In every other light Fan's lot was a
triumph. For she had never been mercenary,
any more than Harry had been. She had
been aspiring in a sense, with a craving for
superficial refinement, as somehow representing
to Fan the far deeper refinement and nobility
of nature, of which the surface polish — however
becoming in itself and pleasant to encounter
— is by no means the inseparable accompaniment;
and for pure love of Harry

Stanhope, Fan was prepared to crush her
individual tastes. Lie was willing to be a
poor man's partner, to drudge as a practical
housekeeper, to toil after another fashion as
the notable wife of a lucky farmer, to forget
her girlish dreams of bountiful ease, culture,
and elegance.

Fan had her bright, brief day both in a
higher and a lower sense. She enjoyed that
short interval in which a woman is beside
herself and counts herself — not merely the
happiest of women, but the only happy woman
in the world deserving of the name, because she
Lias not only won a heart in exchange for her
own, but because this heart, subdued by her
power, is the heart of hearts to her, compared
to which all other hearts are little better than
dross.

Fan had also the lower, but what was to
her the genuine and natural gratification of
being conscious that those of her neighbours on

whose opinions she had been wont to set store,
having arrived at the unanimous conclusion
that Fan Constable had done well for herself,
became suddenly moved to change their chorus
of condemnation to a chant of glorification.
The Fremantles and Wrights proved themselves
more mercenary than Fan and Harry. The
magnates of Friar ton had not worshipped in
fear and trembling a big burly image of mammon,
but a shadowy fetish of gentility. Fan
Constable, whom the ladies and the professional
set now acknowledged to be the most
charming ladylike girl in the neighbourhood,,
would not be a farmer's wife to them. She
would — since the inferior distinction merged and
was lost in the superior — be the wife of Harry
Stanhope, grandson of Lord St. Ives, nephew
by marriage of Lord Mount Mallow. Accordingly
these authorities renewed their withdrawn
attentions with an eager lavishness, in
striking contrast to the donors' former cautious

stinted dole of recognition. They betrayed
the knowledge, which Fan shared, that it would
soon be her turn to pay them attention.

When Fan's honours were fitly fledged, she
might have a share of the liberty which was
vouchsafed to her husband, granted to her.
She might skim the milk in her dairy, and
gather the eggs in her poultry-yard, even carry
them in the skirt of her gown, as Agneta Stanhope
had carried them, without challenge. And
if Harry had been the son and not the grandson
of a viscount, and thus only one degree instead
of two removed from a peerage, or if his father's
father had been a marquis or a duke, who
knows but that Fan might have been allowed
to go on to milk her cows and feed her calves
not in frolic ?

Mrs. Hilliard was impressed by Fan's promotion.
' That girl Fan Constable has proved
her mettle with perfectly lawful weapons, for
she is too true a little Philistine to stoop to

employ any other.' Mrs. Hilliard ate her leek
before her cousin, and it was no small comfort
to Louisa Hilliard, in her state of mind at the
moment, that Catherine was next to nobody
when eating a leek was in question.

Both of these Constables have used me ill,
Lave got the better of me — of us all.' Mrs.
Hilhard spoke ruefLiUy for her. ' Fan, with
lier negative drawing-room and positive attitude,
has been and gone and done it under
our very noses.'

Done what ? ' enquired the only half-awake
Catherine.

Distanced her competitors — the Houghton,
the head-master's nieces ; how do I know how
many ? all who had entered for the prize.
She has overcome and trampled upon her foes,
and carried off the chance which might have
been yours, my dear, only you sat still and
missed it.'

Was Harry Stanhope my chance in life ? *

enquired Catherine, opening her weary eyes.
Have I missed my all in losing him ? Well, I
did not flatter myself there was any great thing
to look forward to in my career, if a woman
can be said to have a career, but I have been
guilty of the presumption of dreading (and do
you know the dread gave a kind of trembling
interest to life ?) that there might be greater
losses to encounter than that of Harry Stanhope's
handkerchief — not that there was ever
the remotest prospect of its being thrown at
me.'

Catherine ! ' and with the exclamation
Mrs. Hilliard looked at her cousin gravely for
once, though her lively mind soon reverted to
its ordinary track. ' You frighten me, and that
is treating me still worse than the Constables
have treated me. My cousins, whom I owned,
have eluded my grasp, and got beyond me, the
one floored and the other crowned — alike disqualified
for serving as food for my entertainment.

But I never asked you to entertain me ' —
Mrs. Hilliard assailed Catherine, growing serious
again — ' only to entertain yourself. And if
you cannot do it in any other way, I am
tempted to wish I could approve of a Protestant
sisterhood for you. It might afford you a
refuge when the world makes you so tired
that you seem in danger of falling down under
the load. I can lift it off myself with my little
finger, but I cannot with my two hands, and
all my might, remove the burden from you,
poor child.' The clear ring of Mrs. Hilliard's
voice had softened, and there was moisture in
the eyes usually so dry in their sparkle.

'Never mind me, Louisa,* said Catherine,
roused to faint surprise and reluctance to cause
trouble. ' I am only too well off, you know.
I am sickening — that is, if I am sickening — " of
a vague disease ; " I ought to have to work for
my bread — supposing bread is worth working
for — yet starvation must really be an unpleasant

process to stimulate so many people to frantic
exertions in order to avert the catastrophe.
Protestant sisterhoods would not suit me, nor
would Catholic nunneries, though I think, of
the two, I should prefer the last, as possessing
a respectable antiquity and consistency. But
to enter either would be a sham in me, since I
really believe that the Son of God could help
me staying with you, as well as with any lady
superior or abbess — that we are as near heaven
living in the world in which He lived, as when
we try in vain to get out of it. It would only
be a change of yoke, and my shoulders seem
to be slimmer than other women's,' remarked
Catherine with a forlorn smile. ' Besides, no
sisterhood would receive a menagerie with me
and whatever else I might be brought ta
resign, I do not see how I could get on without
a large small family of beasts and birds.'

Thank you for the implied compliments
said Mrs. Hilliard, recovering herself with a

laugh. ' Catherine, you administer tonics,
though you won't swallow them.'

When the time came for Mrs. Hilliard to
offer the usual congratulations, her hearty
admiration of Fan's prowess so influenced the
lady, that she presented the tribute cordially,
and was entitled to complain that Fan had no
reason to receive it superciliously.

But Catherine was not merely languid in
her felicitations, she stopped short in them, and
substituted an uncalled-for piece of condolence :
^ How dull it will be for you with Mr. Stanhope
and his brother at Copley Grange Farm, when
you have been accustomed to solitude with
your own brother ! ' looking at amazed, indignant
Fan, with great comprehending, commiserating
eyes. ' I hope you will not die of
ennui after the first week. No, I don't forget
that Mr. Stanhope is very fond of visiting, and
you will have to visit a great deal with him,
but won't that also be dreadfully fatiguing ? '

The Polleys and Dadds were not behind the
others with their ovation ; but, to Fan's immense
relief, she found she had established by
this last step such a distance between herself
and her early associates that they no longer even
attempted to bridge it over. Fan Constable
had succeeded in passing out of their sphere.
They wished her joy as it were through Harry
Stanhope, and they were as respectful in the
expression of their good wishes, as if the rank
which she was so soon to borrow from him
already belonged to her.

Old Dadd refrained from a single joke, and
was almost solemn in alluding to the subject.

Mrs. Policy only bristled up to Oliver, and
represented to him that he would no longer be
content to sit down in her back parlour*, since he
might be making the round of all the castles in the
kingdom in company with his brother-in-law.

Jack Dadd actually called Fan ' Miss Constable,'
unless in the strictest privacy, amon^*-

Lis most intimate cronies, or as a means of
teasing the Poney girls.

'Mily Policy did not propose to call on
Mrs. Stanhope. ' She is a cut above us, now,
find no mistake, when she'll be going among
his grand relations — generals and admirals,
and Lady This and Lady That, every time he
takes her up to town. I dare say the fine people
will snub her, but Fan Constable won't mind
that, since they can't close their doors against
her, and she married to their nephew and first
cousin ; and she'll give as good as she'll take,
I'll say that for her. She's never behind.
But I tell you what, 'Liza, we'll ]put our
pride in our pockets — what's the good of
letting it stand in our way ? and come round
mother, and go to church instead of to chapel,
the first Sunday after Mrs. Stanhope has returned
from her wedding jaunt. We'll try if
we can't get a wrinkle — as Jack Dadd says —
.out of her new bonnet. Only Fan Constable

does not know how to dress herself. Yet she
has caught a duck of a real gentleman, like
Mr. Stanhope is, with her dowdy clothes, and
her plain sewing, and her white-brown face,*
cried 'Mily, in exasperation at the contradiction.


She had been his fate,' said 'Liza, mysteriously.


You shut up, 'Liza, and don't talk as if
you believed in fortune-telling — not that I
should mind a bit getting my fortune told by a
right old woman, in a red cloak, with a pack
of cards. It would be lovely. And, oh my !
wouldn't mother be down on me, if she found
me out ! ' cried 'Mily, in high glee at the bare
idea of the servant girl's escapade.

It is an instinct of self-preservation on the
fellow's part, and on Fan's it is the old infatuation
and the recent reaction working
their worst together. There is no help for it,'
said Oliver to himself, slowly and sadly.

Beyond the area of Copley Grange Farm
every voice of every Stanhope was dumb on
the announcement of Harry's marriage. The
members of the Stanhope family certainly
agreed with Oliver, that it was useless to interpose
from any hope of dealing effectually nth
the consummation of Harry's descent in life, to
which his friends had formerly been provoked
ito giving a reluctant consent.

At last Agneta wrote to Fan, very prettily,
within certain limits. Agneta was glad that
her dear old Harry should be happy. She
thanked Fan for making his happiness. She
trusted that she and Fan would always remain
friends. But there was not a word of
Agneta's coming down to Copley Grange Farm
to grace the marriage ; not a hint of any future
visit ; not a syllable of meeting Fan again in
the whole course of their respective lives.

Fan read the letter without any remark.
As she read she grew still more colourless in

lier olive paleness, which 'Mily Polley called
'' white-brownness,' but there was also a more
steadfast set of her well-cut mouth, a more
indomitable expression in her brown eyes.

She did not give Oliver the letter to read ;
indeed, the brother and sister were no longer
on such terms as to volunteer an exchange of
confidences. She only surrendered the dainty
epistle to Harry at his special request.

Harry reddened and bit his lip as he took
in, at a couple of glances, the familiar writing
on the page and a half of note-paper. ' Dash
it ! I did not think Aggie could have been
such a cold-hearted chit,' he muttered ; ' I did
think she was more of a lady than to be a
stuck-up snob.'

Never mind,' said Fan, with determined
magnanimity ; ' I dare say it is hard for her to
have you stoop for a wife.'

Stoop ! ' protested Harry, who was loyal in
his attachments, if he was anything ; ' it is my

VOL. III. B

first regular attempt at climbing since I got out
of the garret window at one of our tutors. I
nearly broke my neck then, but I have fallen
on my feet this time. I have done the best
stroke of business I can ever hope to accomplish,
though I should live to head all the
markets round with my heifers and south
downs, and win the prizes from the Prince and
all the agricultural nobs in the country at the
show at Islington. Ask your brother who has
the best of the bargain in our blessed contract.
It is all Aunt Julia's doing. In her aping of
liberality and angling for popularity she is at
heart the most time-serving and intolerant old
woman under the sun.'

Then it will be a victory indeed, if we can
force her, and everybody else with her, to come
round to our side at last,' said Fan, fired by
her dauntless courage.

There was not more than a grain of truth
in Oliver's cruel accusation of what had led

Fan to listen to Harry Stanhope. But that
fructifying grain, together with the passion of
her love for Harry, helped the unimaginative,
rational young woman to rear an airy structure
representing her ultimate relations with the
Stanhopess and the great world. There was
Harry encouraged, aided, 'kept up to the
scratch,' by his wife's proud and loving support
in all manly energy and perseverance in his profession.
There were his name, fame, and fortune
established, as the most enterprising and successful
gentleman-farmer in the country. (Fan
paid no heed to the signs of the times or to
impending agricultural distress, in her dream).
There was the reappearance of the Hartleyss on
every rumour of a fresh election, with John
Hartley, thankful to accept Harry Stanhope as
an ally on equal terms, with Lady Cicely, who
had once demurred at the possibility of Fan's
accompanying her brother to dine at Copley
Grange, pleased to drive over with her hush.

OF ILL LIB.

I

band, and dine herself at Copley Grange
Farm. Of course, that must be after the old
farmhouse was added to and improved, so as
not to be altogether ill-matched with the
manor-house. If the entree to the manor-house
were secured during the Hartleyss' temporary
occupation of Copley Grange, it would
almost certainly remain free to the Stanhopess
when Mr. Amyott resumed his permanent
reign. The example of the Stanhopess' landlord
would be followed by other squires whose
houses were within visiting distance of the
Farm.

Fan, in her chrysalis state, had often looked
from the mill side of the Brook across to the
park and great house, with its dignified blot of
an Italian facade. She had fancied how bountiful
and gracious life must be there, contrasted
with life in the back shops and parlours of the
PoUeys and Dadds. But she had felt then that
if by virtue of Oliver's genius and scholarship

she ever rose to cross the threshold of such an
Eden of refinement and culture, its roses would
be full of thorns for her, simply because she
would not be, like the daughters of that privileged
region, to the manner born. Innately
she was a lady, but outwardly she would
blunder and flounder in the labyrinths of
precedence and etiquette, or amidst the appalling
topics of sport, horses and wines, from all
acquaintance with which her sex, alas ! did
not exempt a woman of the higher orders.
Fan would cause flippant waiting-maids to
titter, and staid butlers to frown, at her
mistakes

Now all this was changed. When Fan
should procure the ' Open, Sesame ! ' to the
charmed houses by so strange a process as that
of becoming a yeoman's wife and doing a
yeoman's wife's work, all her troubles would
be at an end. Harry had been born to the
purple, and he would always be at hand to

give involuntarily the cue which she would
take as quickly as ever King Cophetua's beggar-maid
borrowed lustre from her royal husband,
and developed without loss of time into a right
queenly lady. Fan would not wear sparkling
diamonds or sumptuous velvet, indeed, but
she had never cared for jewels or fine clothes
or luxury. What she had cared for she would
attain, the simple elegance of bearing and behaviour
of a gentlewoman, by art as well as by
nature.

In the meantime, while these chickens were
unhatched, Friarton took it as a matter of
course that Harry Stanhope's kindred should
begin by looking coldly on the projected
alliance between Copley Grange Farm and
Friarton Mill, and did not think of deposing
Fan fi*om her pedestal as a bride because she
was subjected to this ordeal.

One relative came forward before the knot
was tied, and accepted Fan — not simply as an

inevitable misfortune, but as a member of the
illustrious family of Stanhope. The next time
Harry came to the Mill, after Agneta's note
had been received there, he was not only
attended by his second shadow ; a voice, which
had been hitherto dumb, spoke.

Horace managed, with his surly awkwardness
— which was something quite different
:from Oliver Constable's awkwardness — and his
bilious ungraciousness, even in conferring a
compliment, which made it seem as if a good-natured
impulse went entirely against the grain
with him, to propose himself as Harry's groomsman.
' If you don't mind, if no other body
will serve Harry's purpose, and help to turn
him off,' he said to Fan in the voice, the tone
•of which was out of tune and grating, unless
sometimes when he addressed his brother.

Fan had never smiled so sweetly on Harry
in the whole course of his wooing, as she now
smiled on the grudging, joyous groomsman,

who, sure enough, was to be Harry's servant,
not hers. • Oh ! I am glad and grateful that
Harry's oldest and best friend is to stand by
him on his marriage day,' she said audibly to-the
dull ears. ' I know you are not thinking
of me, and I do not wish you to think of me —
I only say this to express, though you may not
care to hear, what an obligation and honour
you are conferring on me by acting as Harry's-brother
still. But it is so, Mr. Horace ' (she
had not begun to call him by his Christian
name, just as he had never called her anything
save ' Miss Constable.' She was in some apprehension
that ' Miss Constable ' would not even
pass into ' Mrs. Stanhope ' with Horace). ' I
will never forget your kindness to Harry,' she
finished.

He looked at her for a moment with an
impulse of furious displeasure added to his
ordinary gruff, sardonic mood, as if he questioned
her right to thank him for Harry, and

bade her be wary of taking so much upon her.
Then her tender tact penetrated the thick skin
of his jaundiced, warped nature. 'All right,
Fan,' he said, touching her hand and dropping.
it again, and giving what exacting, fastidious
people might have classed as a ghastly grin.
But from that date Fan was happily convinced
that though she was a very small person compared
to Harry in his brother's eyes, Horace
had forgiven her on the spot, and taken her, for
all time to come, into a humble corner of the
chamber of his affections, since she had shown
herself capable of comprehending, in a degree,
what the brothers were to each other, and
would never seek to separate them. Thus-harry
Stanhope's lovers and slaves became
sworn allies, and not vowed adversaries.

The hard hues were for Oliver. It was all
very well for Sally Pope to cackle that now
Miss Fan had got her will, and she wished the
young mistress well, neither was it any harm

to speed her going, for marriage was the best
lot that could befall most young women, and she
would ' fettle ' Master Oliver — see how comfortable
she would make him, in all the old homely-ways,
like a king with his faithful housekeeper.
Oliver had no doubt Sally would make his
body comfortable, but what of the refreshment
of his mind and heart now that his father was
dead, when his only sister — the little Fan of
other days — alienated from him already, should
have left him in order to make a foolish mesalliance
of which no good could come?
IViarton Mill in its sweet domestic beauty
would be robbed of its chief attraction soi
soon as Fan was gone.

CHAPTEE XXV.

THE DEVIL SHALL NOT HAVE HARRY.'

The three years allotted by his brother farmers
for Harry Stanhope to run through what small
patrimony he had invested in Copley Grange
Earn, and what credit he had begun upon, did
their work more effectually than the months
given by Oliver Constable for Harry to tire of
his part as a yeoman.

Fan had held her husband back with a
little hand which was Hke a vice for staunchness,
but which had, at last, loosened its grip
under overwhelming pressure.

Horace had thrown his passive dead weight
in the way, to impede Harry's swift progress
to ruin.

Oliver Constable had not stood aside in
sulky neutrality, or hard inflexibility flavoured
with vindictiveness, to witness the fulfilment of
his predictions. He would have given much
for them to prove false. He did all he could
to prevent their realisation. He had little in
common with his brother-in-law, and it was in
the characters of the two men to grow always
more apart instead of nearer to each other.
Still Oliver, though he was not much in Harry
Stanhope's company, and though Harry showed
himself constantly more restive, under any
influence which Oliver had ever possessed over
him, tried his best in the thankless office of
looking after Harry, when he was beyond his
wife's scope, and of interposing to save him —
not merely from the consequences of his own
folly, but from falling a victim to his neighbours*
weaknesses. As a result of this knight-errantry
on Oliver's part, there was an entire rupture
between him and Jack Dadd on Harry's accounts

Harry Stanhope's incapacity for drawing distinctions
— moral as well as social — his vanity
and passion for popularity, had all pointed
with tolerable clearness to one conclusion from
the first. He had no notion of what was expedient.
He was not particular in his easygoing
fashion. He was bound to turn soon
from his self-imposed obligations, selected very
much at haphazard, and sitting with the greatest
lightness upon him. He must have excitement
of some kind, at any cost.

The upper, and, to be fair, the more decorous,
set in Friarton, which had commenced by being
delighted with their opposite in Harry Stanhope's
abandon, matched as it was with his gentle
birth and breeding, ceased to prize his company
when they found it was bestowed on their social
inferiors with a thousand times the lavishness
and indiscriminately which they had severely
censured in Oliver Constable. And all the
time Oliver had claimed a right to act as he

did, and asserted a principle in it, while he had
shown a method in his madness. In the course
of the last three years, he had brought his
accusers to acknowledge that, though he had
lost himself in the matter of his money, talents,
and education, with the desirable position which
they might have commanded, he was not a
reprobate, and he had known when to stop long
before the climax of individual degradation.

As Harry Stanhope ceased to be the idol of
the gentlemen and ladies, he became also less
of the pet and more of the butt of the lower
grade into which he was increasingly thrown.
The young farmers and tradesmen with whom
he fraternised, not only at market and in cricket-matches
and games of bowls, but on every
occasion, public and private, still looked up to
him in many things, and copied him — not
always to their benefit, but a stronger tincture
of contempt was getting infused into their
liking.

This was especially true of Jack Dadd, wlio>
while he continued proud of being hand-glove
with Harry Stanhope, did not scruple to
make a cat's-paw of his friend, and rather enjoyed
leading him into a scrape and leaving him
there. This disloyalty and shade of baseness
did not spring necessarily from Jack's class or
calling, and they had still less to do with his
natural good temper. They belonged to long •
standing class feuds and the lingering spite
thus engendered. It was almost inevitably
wreaked on a person who, however ready to
forget social prejudices, sprang still from the
privileged order.

Oliver humbled himself in the room of
Harry Stanhope, and through Harry in the
place of Fan, to remonstrate with Jack
Dadd.

You are older than Stanhope, Jack,'
Oliver reminded his quondam friend, who had
bragged earlier of their friendship, ' and you

were not brought up in the very odour of
-thoughtlessness.'

So I suppose I ain't fit to go about with
your gentleman brother-in-law, unless as his
keeper. " Not if I know it ; " " Not for Joe," '
interrupted Jack, rudely and flippantly. ' I ain't
so fond of being a fellow's keeper, as you are,
"Constable, though you don't seem to like to
try it on Harry Stanhope. I thought you
had got a lesson and rid yourself of such priggishness,
long ago. It ain't a compliment to
Stanhope to make out he's not fit to take care
of himself, or to choose his company and be on
equal terms with them. Lord ! it was a finny
sort of equality last night when I cut my stick,
just as he was challenging the stableman at the
*' Wheat Ears " to box with him, Dummy being
to hold their jackets, I take it. Stanhope ain't
proud ; I'll say that for him, neither when he's
as tight as a lord, nor when he's as sober as a
judge — which don't often happen now-a-^ays.
It comes to this. Constable, I've had enough of

yoiir sauce of dictation. There was not so
much difference between that and your sister's
airs, and a fine pass they've brought her to : got
her a gentleman for a husband, no doubt — and,
what is more, he's worth the two of you ; but
he's made her work for him so as keeping a
shop would have been a joke by comparison
and he'll kick the causeway all the same.'

After that conversation there was an end to
friendly intercourse between Oliver and Jack,
and to any fond hope which the former had
once been so conceited as to entertain, of swaying
his brother-tradesman to higher aims.

Harry Stanhope's deterioration in every
respect included his inveterate idleness in all
pursuits which did not take the form of sport or
froHc, while ploughing, sowing, cattle-feeding,
even hay making and reaping, when they
ceased to be novelties, ceased also to be sport
or frolic, lost every element of interest and
amusement, and became positively repugnant

VOL. III. P

to the man who remained always a boy. He
neglected his farming utterly, or made wild
havoc with it in his fitful, reckless operations,
forced sales, and consequent desperate losses.

With all this wanton waste Fan had nothing
to do. She had accomplished wonders in the
role she had undertaken. Her dairy produce
and poultry were from the first among the best
in the neighbourhood. She competed successfully
with those farmers' wives who were either
nothing save dairymaid and henries, or who
employed experienced servants to do their mistresses'
work by proxy. Any prizes which
agricultural societies awarded to the tenants of
Copley Grange Farm were for its mistress's
butter and cheese, goslings and turkey poults.

And all the time Fan was not a dairymaid
alone, she was a gentleman's wife deserving of
the name. In order to unite the contrast! n^r
attributes, she rose up early and lay down late,
and ate the bread of carefulness. She chanizcd

her dress as often as any fine lady who has nothing
to do, no occupation or pleasure in life
save dressing herself by the help of a maid.
Pan was rewarded when Harry noticed the
freshness of her calicut morning gown, the
daintiness of her afternoon pique, the good
taste of her evening grenadine.

Neither Harry nor Horace had an idea of
gardening beyond sticking a spade into the
ground once in the course of the spring and
leaving it there after a quarter of an hour, or
gathering an occasional handful of strawberries,
while the cook demanded a regular supply of
vegetables, and the masters missed seasonable
fruit when it was not forthcoming, appearing to
expect cherries, peaches, and pears to drop from
the skies like manna. Fan read garden chronicles
alternately with dairy manuals, and spent
many a fatiguing hour of her early married life
striving to direct the labours of an improvised

F 2

gardener drawn from the ranks of the field
workers. It was as much out of the question
for Harry to keep a skilled gardener as it
was for Fan to set up a qualified housekeeper
and an experienced dairymaid, though Harry
would have attempted it without a doubt if he
had been suffered. But Fan stinted herself of
all other worthy assistants, because a good cook
and a trained table-boy who could cater for the
two young men and wait upon them as they
had been used to be waited upon, became absolutely
necessary to the Stanhopess, as soon as
their establishment at Copley Grange Farm acquired
a settled character, and ceased to partake
of the nature of living for a time fresco, or in
villeggiatura.

When Fan became painfully conscious that
she had not only her own arduous double and
treble duties to attend to, she must also supply
deficiencies on Harry's part, she rose to the
occasion gallantly. She added agricultural

journals, treatises on husbandry, essays on farm
stock, to lier other diligent studies. She
crammed herself ; she sought to coach Harry.
She tired herself to death and exposed herself
to innumerable catarrh and coughs wandering
over the fields in all kinds of weather, to win
jim, by her close sympathetic companionship,
to go among his men, or else to show them, in
his interest, that there was the eye of a mistress,
if not a master, on their work. She drove with
Harry and Horace to the markets, and if it had
not been to spare Harry's dignity as a yeoman
and his credit as a man — since poor Fan had
a double object and a double terror in accompanying
her husband to the towns — she would
willingly have stood with him in the streets and
.the corn exchanges and sat with him at the inn
tables. And if Fan could have been ten
women instead of one, she might have saved
Harry Stanhope from worldly destruction, as
Mrs. Policy had rescued her husband and

children. The two women did not resemble
each other much in other respects, and there
was little love lost between them. But they
shared at least the helpfulness, command of resources,
and capacity for brave effort and endurance,
of the women of the trading classes —
the women who have not been spoilt, and have
not lost the instincts of energy and enterprise,
and with it the most distant resemblance to the
virtuous woman in Proverbs. This was part of
Fan's inheritance as a tradesman's daughter,
which she had neither guessed nor valued as it
deserved.

It is a fact established by experience that
many women, both widows and spinsters, have
made, when the opportunities offered themselves,
good and successful farmers. Fan was a clever
woman apart from book-learning ; she was a
woman of strong resolution, and she was stimulated
and braced by every motive which she
held dear. If a single mortal woman could

have redeemed Harry Stanhope's fortunes, she
would have redeemed them.

But the one woman must certainly have
been ten, and Fan could not multiply her
identity or render herself ubiquitous. She was
tremendously over weighted — not only by the
whole burden and anxiety of the farm's being
cast upon her, who ought to have been treated
as the weaker vessel, but by the unnerving,
despairing suspicion — deepening every day into
hopeless conviction, that an impending wreck of
other than worldly goods was to be faced and
wrestled with. Harry was — in what became
always more imminent and hideous danger — of
being as speedily and utterly swamped in tastes,
opinions, habits — all that constitute moral
character, as in income and capital. In the
dread and horror of that final downfall, all
other falls began to look light.

Fan ceased to pay the smallest heed to the
fact that still there came no recognition of her

entrance into the Stanhope family save from
pretty, temporising, meaningless letters written
by Agneta. The other members coolly ignored
the intruder. Mrs. Harry Stanhope had
no concern to spare for the consciousness that
the little household at Copley Grange Farm
vere not keeping their first footing, which had
seemed to be their birthright, among the upper
ten of Friarton.

She did not even mind that the Polleys
and Dadds grew loud in amazed pity — in
which, at the same time, she believed they
revelled, over her altered circumstances. Mrs.
Harry Stanhope was not only reduced to sending
butter, cheese and eggs into the town for
sale, she came herself to the Polleys' shop and
the cheese shop, to square the accounts which
no one else at the farm could make out.
Everybody knew Harry Stanhope had turned
out a gentle beggar and purely ornamental.
He could not afford to keep a bailiff to give the

orders for which he was so little prepared that
his men continually laughed in their sleeves at
the instructions they received. The mistress of
Copley Grange Farm commanded no more help
than she could get from a girl under twenty in
addition to the dairyman to manage the dairy
and poultry yard, on which it was evident the
principal dependence of the farmer must rest.
And did not the old Fan Constable look worn
and pulled down, though she might be proud
-and 'game' to the last, as Mrs. Harry Stanhope?
The truth was that when Fan was from home orin
society without Harry, her eyes had already
acquired the fixed, abstracted look of eyes
which are looking beyond their present surroundings,
and seeing in the distance things
invisible to her companions. Her ears were
constantly on the alert, strained to catch sounds
inaudible to the rest of the party. While she
was taking her share in the conversation or
the business going on about her, there was a

perpetual undercurrent of thought and care in
her mind which had no reference to the topics
discussed. She had great self-command, so that
she could preserve a double consciousness, but
she vas never at ease, never without trouble ;
and the resting worry beneath the calm and
smiling surface, showed itself in a haggard,
aging look which was rapidly robbing Fan of
all traces of her youth.

One evening in spring, when the thrushes
and blackbirds were anticipating the nightingales
and tuning their 'prentice notes in the
hedges — which had gained the purplish-red
bloom, the herald of a flush of green — over the
primroses looking pale and cold in the raw wind
of the March twilight, after the golden shields of
the celandines, which had kept their neighbours
company with quite an exuberance of jollity in
the morning sunshine, had collapsed, as early as
the afternoon, into small tightly wrapped-up
balls, encased in dim green envelopes, Oliver

was startled by Fan's walking like a ghost
unexpected, unannounced, and all alone, into
the mill-house parlour.

It was too early in the season for evening
strolls, and lately Fan had never been seen
abroad without her husband. The same could
not be said of Harry, who was often enough
from home without his wife, and not quite so
frequently, but still with tolerably constant
recurrence during the winter, without his
brother, whom he had learnt at last to shake
off imperiously. There had come to be an unnatural
divorce between light and shade, and
day and night, neither faring well in the separation.
For Harry, all by himself, drove his
chariot of the sun, like another Phaeton, madly,
and if he did not set the world on fire, his own
eyes grew scorched and bloodshot, his lip
parched, his hands palsied ; the whole goodly
springs of his manliness and kindliness were
dried up and polluted with ashes, because of

the burden of consuming fire he had laid hold
of and would thenceforth try in vain to guide
and control.

As for Horace, he would sink away like
a dog summarily dismissed by his master,
withdraw into his corner to sit moodily there,
.and only start up on the distant sound of
Harry's clogged instead of winged footsteps.
Oliver had seen Horace and Fan exchange
furtive, miserable glances when Horace returned
thus alone, and drew back into the greatest
gloom which the little drawing-room afforded
him. Then the pair would sedulously pretend
to read and work while in reality their ears
were on the stretch, and their hearts on the
rack, till far on into the night. These two
knew and trusted each other thoroughly by
this time, though Oliver was certain the looks
never passed into words. Wife and brother
remained too loyal in their allegiance.

As Oliver rose hastily to bid Fan welcome,

lie saw more plainly than he had yet seen it,
and with a sharp pang at the sight, the change
in her looks. A small woman to begin with, she
was now little more than skin and bone. Her
brown eyes appeared a sombre black, set in
great shadowy hollows in her white face. The
straight firm line of her lips was drooping and
quivering. She put her thin hand in Oliver's
and held up her face to be kissed, and spoke
without any preamble. ' I am beaten, Oliver.
They say an Englishman never knows when
he is beaten, but that is a man, not a woman.
Yet did you ever think I would give in with
life ? and I have given in. I have come to you,
not to save me — you tried that once and failed.
What did it matter if I might have saved
another ? only I have not — there's the rub. I
don't mind myself, and you need not mind me.
But you must do something. I tell you, OHver,.
you must move heaven and earth to save
Harry.' Her voice rose into a little weak cry

She was like a creature who had lost all command
over herself.

But it was not so much this reversal of
natural law in a woman — by organisation and
courage, self-sufficing, self-restrained, rational
and resolute — which smote Oliver Constable with
dismay and compunction, as if he had been
the sinner whose sin was at the bottom of this
spectacle, the most pitiable he had ever beheld.
It was some comprehension of what Fan must
have suffered, of what it had cost this woman —
ardent and steadfast as women even more than
men can prove themselves — to own herself
beaten, to grovel as it were at his knees, and
fling herself for help on him of all men, who,
though he had been a brother in more than
name, had interposed with all his might, without
effect, as both of them were well aware, to
turn her from the step which had brought her
to this pass.

He remembered having, more than once in

their lives, angrily accused her of being incapable
of changing her mind ; and — knowing
as he had seemed to know her high spirit,
unquenchable energy, and unswerving determination
— he had been tempted to believe,
against right reason, that however mistaken and
misplaced her aspirations, or foolish and baseless
her dreams. Fan could not be baffled, and
would not be vanquished.

The end of all was, that she was more
thoroughly subdued, presenting a more deplorable
object of contemplation, than if she
had been a far feebler woman.

My God ! ' cried Oliver in his heart —
moved as he was to its depths when a
believing man can but appeal to the Father of
his spirit ; ' what must she not have borne to
crush her whole being, lay her pride in the
dust, extinguish the last spark of hope, and
break her heart ? '

The next moment Oliver was briskly

administering to Fan, as most people in his
position, at their wits' end what to do for the
best, would have administered it, a cold douche
first on the suppliant, whom he would fain
have taken into his arms and sheltered from
every farther blast of the stormy wind which
had cast her down bleeding and powerless, to
implore mercy for another and not herself —
and next on her agonised petition.

Nonsense, Fan, you are over-wrought, my
dear ; your nerves are unstrung ; you do not
know what you are saying.'

But the time for puling herself together,
struggling to her feet, and staggering on with
the veil drawn decently down again over her
torture and her faintness, was over for Fan,
I do know what I am saying, Oliver,' she
insisted with ashy lips, while the hand which
clutched his arm was trembling like a leaf.
You think a wife should not drop the slightest
hint of the skeleton in her closet. I will agree

with you here. And I have not breathed a
word to any other human being — not to Horry,
who is his second self — only to you ; and do you
suppose I could have spoken to you unless in
the last extremity, which has come ? '

'Then rest satisfied with what you have
done, Fan ; say no more about it,' Oliver
conjured her, as if he would have put his
hand upon her mouth to keep her from further
utterance, or brought down the creeping dusk
to hide their faces from each other. He got up,
took several turns up and down the room, so
that he might have his back to her when he
promised solemnly ; ' The devil shall not have
Harry, so far as I can help it.'

That Fan should have come to her brother
with such a prayer on her lips, was only less
bad for him than for Fan herself.

Oliver Constable had not the most distant
thought that Harry Stanhope could have
grossly ill-treated his wife. Oliver would as

VOL. III. G

soon have suspected Harry of lifting up hi
strong right arm to strike down Horace unresisting
under the pacific influence of his
devotion. It is your poor half-brutal coal-heaver
who ordinarily adds kicks to curses,
where his wife is concerned. As a rule, though
certainly not without exceptions, centuries of
refining civilisation and liberal education remove
Harry's whole class from committing such
outrages. Harry Stanhope, with his graciousness
in an entirely muddled condition, might
challenge a muscular ostler to a round in the
noble art of self-defence. He was known to
have taken the law into his own hands and
knocked down a ruffian who was belabouring
a child and insulting an old woman. But he
had probably hardly ever spoken a rough
word to Fan, whom he had held in the greatest
respect ever since he had known her, though
she had become powerless to make a man of
him, as he had proposed. She was not silly,
or bumptious, or trying in any way so as to

provoke the wrath which had originally been
a rare experience with Harry. But not the
less he had slain her faith in him, by his hopeless
levity and folly, which were tending
unmistakably to animal indulgence and besotted
excess. He had not destroyed one atom
of her love — else Fan's heart too might have
died thin her in its cold emptiness, but, at
least, it would not have been wrung with the
intolerable pang of loving him to death and
beyond death, yet seeing him go down, in
spite of her, to the place of dragons.

There are students of humanity who
positively state that a good man or woman's
love must inevitably perish with the loss of
esteem. If so, the best human love must be
singularly unlike Divine love as it is revealed
to us. And it is one thing voluntarily to give
love to a creature whose repulsive moral disease
is evident and undeniable, and has already
penetrated and poisoned the nature through and

G 2

through — and quite another to have loved the
same creature in the beauty and glory of
sound mortal health, with but the seeds of
fatal disease, only to be detected by the wise
physician, lurking in the system, and having
once loved to turn with loathing abhorrence and
absolute rejection, from the sick man, when his
weakness has found him out, his sore ancestral
malady has laid fast hold of him, and he is
fighting a desperate battle for life or death.

Not only did Fan's love elinor to Harrv in
his social and moral decline still more closely
than when she had learned to love him in the
hevdav of his natural shifts ; even Oliver —
who had early taken Harry for what he was
worth, and condemned him to his destiny, now
in the teeth of what he had done to Fan, felt
the man's heart within him turn and soften
with veamincr and commiseration for the
stripling who was so unequally matched, and
was standing foot to foot, reeling under the

shocks inflicted by a giant adversary and
ghastly foe.

Oliver needed this compensation of human
tenderness revived and called forth in the heart
of a benevolent man, by human weakness and
peril in its sorriest guise and direst strait, to
help to make up to him for the sacrifice he was
called on to offer ; since the world had not gone
well with Oliver Constable during these last
years, and his own affaires required the unremitting
attention which he saw himself
compelled, and had pledged himself to Fan, to
give to those of another.

Oliver had started on his mission impressed
with the conviction that it behoved him especially
to make his business prosper, or, if he
could not do that, to prevent its becoming
disastrous, in order to remove the slur thrown
liberally on Jacks-of-all-trades, geniuses, and
enthusiasts. He had not the slightest inclination
to the modified martyrdom of commercial

losses for their own sake. He decidedly objected
to wasting the money which his father
had carefully gathered that Oliver's career as a
gentleman and scholar might be untrammelled,
even for a good object, if he could prevent it.

On the contrary, it was part of OHver
Constable's duty, as he conceived it, to vindicate
the truth that the best citizenship and the
best Christianity did not, as a matter of course,
conduct a diligent, prudent, and self-denying
tradesman straight into the Bankruptcy Court.

But OHver was fated to share the lot of
most real reformers and pioneers of the highest
civilisation — the only civilisation which is not
merely skin-deep, but which, penetrating to the
core, pervades the whole man, and by the
grace of God never leaves him, only departing
when he himself departs, to dwell with him in
heavenly habitations — and of the righteous
Gospel which the Lord of Righteousness delivered
to be worked out — not in church or

chapel wholly or even principally, but on such
fields as the Rialto of Venice or the London
Exchange, the shops of common tradesmen,
the tables where feasts, great and small,
are held, the hearths round which men and
women meet to rest from the work of the day,
and cheer their souls.

But Oliver had to discover for himself, in
more ways than one, the pithiness of the
proverb that to give a dog 'an ' ill name ' is to
hang him, that to run a-muck against popular
prejudices is to suffer injury more or less
severe, and wait long for any shadow of a
reward.

He had no manner of doubt that the reward
of disarming distrust and establishing a
right to success would come in time, if the
worker could but possess his soul in patience,
and exercise sufficient faith, endurance, and
bountiful liberality, if he could tarry and layout,
nothing doubting, fresh materials and pains.

Oliver's fortitude was not exhausted, but he
was sensible he had spent some of his finds
freely, and would soon be living on the verge
of his income, if he did not economise every
fraction and dedicate it to its proper use.

The secession of Jim Hull, with the establishment
of his nephew in fine new baking
premises and a fine new business in the town,
had diverted a large slice of the public confidence
and custom from what were now held the old
Constable premises and business. The shoe
was always increasing in size, and diminishing,
the original piece de resistance from which it
had been taken by the shrewdness which proved
quite justified in the anticipation that the
public would prefer apparent purity and actual
adulteration, both in the produce of the mill
and the bakehouse, to the uncorrupted but
unbleached article.

There was the additional stimulus to the
withdrawal of patronage of a strong spice of

malicious satisfaction, not enough to form a
conspiracy, but existing in sufficient abundance
for lending countenance and support, whether
sly or bold, to a rival business conducted on
good old-fashioned, rational, give-and-take
principles. Oliver Constable had come among
the Friarton shopkeepers uttering high-flown
heresy, witnessing in his conduct against time-honoured
liberties of trade, and stirring up
doubts in the bosoms of the very tradesmen —
not to say of their customers. So the Dadd
and Policy part of the community had no-objection
that Oliver should bear in his own
person the brunt of his Quixotic ideas. Perhaps
that would teach him to pay greater
respect to their superior age and experience.

In short, Oliver's business profits were
diminishing so steadily as to threaten to make
his mill and bakehouse eat their own heads,' if
he did not diminish in proportion the stasis of
millers and bakers — a step which he objected

to take so long as he could afford to hold out,
since it would not only be tantamount to an
admission that he was outmatched, he argued
with himself, it would be hard upon the men
who had submitted to his rules and consented
to work on his terms — not that he had altogether
overcome the workmen's opposition.
His reputation had gone abroad as a master
Ml of new-fangled fancies and hobbies, therefore
he had been exposed to the further disadvantage
of possessing a succession of restless,
suspicious servants, flighty on their own account,
and inclined to perpetual experiments
on, and changes of, employers.

Then Oliver had been of a mind to show
that he would not neglect any lawful means of
improving his flour and bread, so he had set
about introducing expensive new machinery into
the mill and bakehouse. But being, after all, a
green hand, without his whither's practical experience
in his double trade, the young man

committed several astounding blunders in the
adoption of the machinery, and was much out
of pocket as a punishment for the errors of his
ignorance. The result awoke no small amount
of jeering, crowing, and laughter at the leading
tea and supper tables of Friarton.

Oliver's inner man had not fared better
during these three harassing years. Fan's
house was not a second home to him. The
sole effect, so far as he could see, of his striving
to fraternise in the true sense with the Dadds
and the PoUeys was that he had succeeded in
arousing in his father's old ales a hostile and
mocking temper, not pleasant to encounter.
Since his quarrel with Jack Dadd, the old
Dadds, who naturally took their son's part, had
fought shy of OHver Constable; and he had
also, in some manner, he could not for the life
of him tell how, given serious offence to the
whole Policy family. He supposed they were
enlisted, with hot, resentful party spirit, or

what they mistook for party spirit, on Jack
Dadd's side. Oliver was half right, half
wrong. For he was incapable of perceiving
the other and major ground of complaint which
the PoUeys had against him — because, after
raising false expectations, he had stopped short
of seeking to keep company either with 'Liza
or one of her sisters, in the prospect of matrimony.


Mrs. Hilliard had never gone so far as to
shut her door against Oliver Constable. Nay,
she had been so candid as to admit with pleasure
that her later prognostications with regard to
him had been premature, and in the main
erroneous. But Oliver's chief inducement — ashe
had come to acknowledge to himself after
there was no further need of crushing it down
for availing himself of the privilege of visiting
at the Meadows, had vanished from the
date of the terrible illness which had seized on
Catherine Hilhard. It was one of the worst of

o

those indefinite, incalculable, nervous illnesses,
iDred of the conditions of modern life, which
have no beginning and no end, which baffle by
their very insensibility and paralyse by their
relaxing clutch, and one of whose horrors is
that in their abnormal character they may
develop symptoms piteously fantastic and grotesque,
like the antics of madness. Such illnesses,
dreaded not without cause, are apt,
isihen they spare the wasted life, to reduce the
patient to a state of unrelieved, permanent
prostration and chronic invalidism, which is
death in life.

Catherine Hilliard had drifted away from
her friends on the misty, dreary sea of illness
which had no shore, till she seemed lost to
them here, till even to Oliver Constable — who
now owned to himself, like the Burscli in the
famous Burschenlied, that he had loved her
always and would love her throughout eternity
she survived chiefly as the aching, melancholy

thoiiglit of the girl who had been capable of
dreaming noble things, but who had not been
able to grasp the truth that behind the commonest,
even the most sordid, absolutely repulsive
details of human life, there exist nobler
things still than man or woman ever dreamt
of in their highest philosophy.

And the brute creation, which Catherine
Hilhard had so loved, preferring it to the
human, drew dumbly and wistfully away from
the decline of her humanity ; while the book
world in which she had elected to dwell,
crumbled into dust around her. She had left
books too behind her, and the beings that
peopled her present existence were more
visionary than the ghosts she had formerly
chosen for her company.

Oliver could only look forward to her
deliverance from this last bondage to the
unreal, by her entrance on unsealed and everlasting
verities.

Then it was when Oliver was most tempted
to regard his enterprise as a wretched disappointment,
he was called on to take up the
burden of another man's failure.

CHAPTER XXVI.

THE PRICE AT WHICH HARRY STANHOPE
WAS RESCUED.

The first thing to be done for Harry Stanhope
was to get him out of the situation for which
he was utterly unfit, into which he had thrust
himself — to extricate him from the network of
idleness, false activity, unsuitable companionship,
debt, and dissipation in which he was
entangled. In some respects the feat was not
only practicable, it was comparatively easy.
Harry had proved himself so thoroughly incapable
a farmer, that it was not likely any
sane landlord would be urgent to keep this
tenant, particularly as his slender funds and a

part of this wife's portion were already flung to
the winds, or rather sunk in the soil, and he
had no more left to deposit in the land even
if that had been his sole mode of spending
money.

Old Peter Constable had believed in
Avoient's power of standing alone, and had left
Fan absolutely mistress of her portion. Oliver
had braved her indignation by asking her to
have it settled on herself before her marriage.
And certainly Harry Stanhope had not opposed
the arrangement, for Harry was truly convinced
of the treasure Fan was in herself, as
well as habitually careless of pounds, shillings,
and pence. Therefore, though he talked the
jargon of his set — to Horace and others, and
professed, as a claim to being a man of the
world, not to be indifferent to tin — to the
decree of counting on a woman's o;oods to eke
out his resources, he did not really put much
Weight on Fan's bank-book and coupons, or

VOL. III. H

mind whether she kept them iii her own
hands or put them into his.

In the end, Fan, more as a means of vindicating
Harry's disinterestedness than as a precaution
for her own independence in days to
come, allowed half of her portion to be tied up
for her personal use if she should so ordain it.
She would gladly have given up to Harry every
.shilling of this reserve, after he had disposed of
the rest, had it not been that her foresight for
him was not to say infinitely greater than his
for himself or for her, but for any she could
have exercised on her OAvn account. Harry
Jiad become to his wife, in all worldly respects,
like one of those minors or infants in the eyes
of the law, with regard to whom it is his protector
s duty to defend him from the dangers
of his own helplessness and to hedge him round
with artificial barriers. Still Fan was eminently
an upright woman, and she would have fought
against her despair and nerved herself to strip

not herself alone but Harry, of lier remaining
possessions, in order to discharge the debts
which he had contrived to incur in spite of her,
rather than let them fall upon her brother, if
she had not known that even supposing she could
aet Oliver to forego what all concerned in it
called his ' loans,' it would only be a form. It
could not prevent him from beuig impoverished
in the lonix run, because it must be on Oliver
the little family at Copley Grange Farm would
have to depend, till its mistress was strong
enough, if she ever were strong again, to
struggle to secure independence — not merely
for herself and Harry, but for Horace whose
oars were shipped in Harry's boat.

There was no difficulty on Harry's side ; he
had never been overburdened with scruples,
and he hardly suffered from any in accepting
Oliver Constable's interposition to free him —
Harry, from his mess at Oliver's cost. For
indubitably there were money penalties, then

2

extent of which even Fan did not guess, to pay
all round, before the vohmteer yeoman farmer
could be withdrawn from the ranks of the
yeomen, released from the obligations of his
lease, and granted a discharge by his creditors,
while it was Over who, in each instance, paid
the defalcation.

Oliver did not ^xrudc^e it so much when he
found that Harry, sick of the whole concern,
readily consented to go abroad at once with his
wife, brother, and brother-inlaw — dio appreciated
the concession and was conscious of a
lurking sweetness and graciousness in his unstable
prodigal's freedom from resentment at
the old sap and grinder Constable's interference
and assumption, however carefully masked, or
however dearly bought, of the reins of government.


Yet, after all, paradoxical as it may sound,
touched resistance would most assuredly have
promised better than unconditional submission

for Harry's ultimate attainment of moral manhood.


Charity begins at home,' Oliver told himself,
using the proverb in a sense which satisfied
him, when he reckoned up the damage to
his own prospects, of leaving the mill and bakehouse
in the charge of a dolt like Ned Green,
and a foreman thirty years younger and a
whole century less acute and discreet than Jim
Hull. ' I have always desired to be kept from
developing into a monster, made up of theories
like Maximilian Robespierre,' he assured himself
farther, with a faint smile ; ' and no doubt it is
the finest thing which can happen to me — •
myself, to be forced to skedaddle across the
Channel, and potter about foreign towns with
Fan and her small family. It will knock the
starch out of me in no time, and take me down
ever so many pegs in my priggishness.'

The sum of Oliver's project for the Stan-hopes,
in the meantime, was to cut off Harry

from his inooriHgs and their tendencies, to
furnish him with the substitutes of movement
and variety, to afford Fan the change, rest, and
recruiting of which she was sorely in need, till
something more effectual shoidd be devised to
rebuild the ruined home, and replace the lost
opportunities. It was. a humble enough programme,
not very interesting and exciting, save
for the main thread of the drama, on which all
the rest hung, and on which the performers
were shamefacedly silent.

Most people have experienced the peculiar
fascination and absorption which is caused by
dangerous illness in a family, when the whole
interests of life centre in the sick-room and its
bulletins. All outside matters, though they
might formerly have been regarded as of vital
moment, dwindle into insignificance, until the
wide world with its empires and peoples, tottering
republics and sidling thrones, and nations
wresting their liberties at the expense of bloody

bottles in which men by thousands perish
uncounted, scarcely noticed — are blotted out
for the time by a few feet of flooring and
ceiling, a single bed, one figure lying still with
half-closed eyes and half-parted lips, faintly
beating heart and fluttering breath.

Harry Stanhope had acquired, as his companions
knew, the taint of a grievous disease,
half physical, half spiritual, which may rank
with the plague and cholera among moral
maladies. So to watch stealthily his symptoms,
note the changes in his state, chronicle with
trembling hope his progress in throwing off the
deeply injected poison, or to recognise with
sinking heart its fresh outbreak and farther
spread through the system, laid hold upon and
monopolised the thoughts of the little party
of which Harry was the half-unconscious sick
man, till he engrossed them more and more, as
the combat thickened, and final victory or
defeat drew nearer and nearer.

Sometimes Larry' would rise so far above
this ailment as to lose the worst of the disfiguring
traces which it was stamping on his
outer man. He would be for days and wrecks
together the easily entertained, contented,
manly lad of the past. He would be as simple
and pleasant as an unspoilt schoolboy, as
charmed to go or stay with Fan as in the days
of their courtship, as united to Horry as when
the brothers were loving children, as satisfied
with chaffing Constable, and proving the life of
his own circle, where animal spirits were in
request, as if there did not exist for him more
hi<jfhlv-flavoured attractions, more enthralling
society — a coarse and powerful supplementary
source of excitement.

In these moods, when Harry was restored
to his rii^lit mind, he was — without a rain of
hypocrisy, so frank and free, so irresistibly
helpful to children and old people, so easily
served by servants, that he won, without fail,

the heart of every stranger with whom he
came in contact. He was the charming fellow-traveller,
at each table-chute and in every
steamboat and railway carriage, of hosts of
unknown travellers, native and foreign. Harry
was the great social conductor and bond of
union between the whirling world around him
and the rest of his party, who smiled cheerfully,
and accepted with gay grumbling their
share of the plague of this popularity.

Then such a transformation came over the
patient that clear brow and eyes, broad shoulders,
active hands and feet and tongue grew as
if they belonged to an entirely different person.
Here was a man in the toils of racrin'jj fever, and
possessed by its delusions, with the load of a
nameless unbearable oppression on his lowering
forehead, the gleam of a strange fire in his
burning eyes, having his head bent, and his
back slouched with the gait of an incorrigible
vagabond, who must escape from the most

sacred bonds and solemn obligations, and carry
a distracted spirit ill at ease, and which cannot
rest, into kindred storm and darkness. Why,
the very muscular hands were straining and
quivering to clutch the deadly foe, bound to
overthrow the victim in the hateful encounter,
the swift feet were stumbling in their frenzied
haste to reach the goal from which there
is seldom a return ; the tongue spoke winning
words no more, but stammered with the
language of unreasoning fury and aimless
invective.

When the demon of his cravings for strong::
drink leaped upon Harry and held him, he
broke from every other detaining grasp. It was
to no purpose that Fan, Horace, and Oliver put
force on their inclinations in order to go with
desperate perseverance on the endless round of
theatres, public gardens, and concerts, as if the
travellers had been so many schoolboys abroad
for their holidays, or as if individual tastes and

domestic habits were unknown to the party.
Harry would not suffer Fan by his side ; lie
shook off his brother and OHver. He quitted
them, and defied them to follow him, or he fled
from them and outset them by the terrible
strength and subtlety of his madness. They
lost him for intervals of hours, increasing to
days and even weeks. The journeyings of the
party came to an abrupt stop ; all their previous
arrangements were upset.

Fan and Horry, with Oliver added as a
third to the group, looked at each other, on the
first sign of the repetition of the miserable
scenes, as the two had looked in the familiar
farmhouse at home.

Sometimes Fan sat alone in the strange
hotel room listening to the careless coming
and going of the other travellers ; through the
long hours from sunset to darkness and the
white glimmering dawn, while Horace and
Oliver, going different ways, hunted through

all the places and markets ; the hotels and cafes
conspicuous or obscure — the houses of entertainment
where questionable hosts received
strangers more likely to prove thieves than
angels taken in unawares — the hunters studiously
keeping themselves, as far as they might,
unseen, till they stalked their prey. Thrice
happy for all if it had been the beast of the
field, and not merely a creature made in the
ima^ze of God, degraded into a condition lower
than that of the brutes, over which he had
been ordained lord and king. A horse or a
dog would have been wiser than Harry Stanhope,
and would have guided him with advantage,
in the circumstances. Or it might bethe
man-stalkers returned, with reluctant feet,
empty hands, and hanging heads, to the hapless
woman condemned to sit and wait in vain.

In these altered times, Harry, who was so
fond of his kind, constituted the great insurmountable
obstacle to any genial fraternisation

between his family and other travelling parties
who were in the wholesome odour of unsullied
respectability and the vigour and gladness of
moral health and strength. He condemned his
companions — not simply to a tedious and irritating
quarantine, but to a sad and chilling
isolation, as they drew away from their neighbours
to hide their wound and its humiliating
cause under a tightly grasped mantle, which
must never be thrown open.

The isolation served only to draw the group
more closely together, and to engage them, with
still greater usurpation of their faculties, in their
deeply human office, till Oliver became well-nigh
as wrapped up as Fan and Horace were,
in that vocation of nurse and brother's keeper,
which — whether it be of the body or the soul
passes with practice into the most enticing
and devouring of pursuits. Witness how it
lures its recruits from the brightest and most
peaceful quarters, and holds its brave soldiers

fast, resisting all remonstrance, till they drop
at their posts in dens of squalor and misery.

Time and place ceased largely to exert their
power over persons bound up in one man's
fortunes in a prolonged and terrible single
combat.

- What difference did the varying seasons
make, when spring stole on to summer, and
summer glided into autumn, and autumn stiffened
and froze into winter, if yet there was no
sure amendment or certain decline in Harry
Stanhope's condition? What did it matter
Whether the battle-ground were the heaths of
Brittany, the stony vineyards of Burgundy, the
fat pastures of Guelderland, the forests of
Flanders, the olive and orange gardens wet
With the spray of the Mediterranean in the
Elvira ; or whether the towiis offered to the
visitors the picturesque gables and roofs of
Bruges or Nuremberg, the palaces of Genoa, or
the churches of Venice, when the question still

was Harry and Harry only ? How long was it
since there lead been an outbreak of his mania ?
Was he steadier this month than last? Was
there any hope left ?

It is not merely religious, or what many
would call fanatical, people who are brought
to comprehend the sorrowful wonder of the
demand, 'What shall it profit a man if he
shall gain the whole world and lose his own
soul ? ' For the fate of a soul even here in the
light of goodness and loyal obedience to God's
laws, or of turbulent rebellion against them, withall
future honour and happiness, or all future disgrace
and misery at stake — be it in the case of a
not overwise lad like Harry Stanhope — is really
of greater moment and of more intense interest to
kindred humanity, than all the natural beauties
and all the acted out history of the universe.
Place a drowning man in juxtaposition with the
finest, most suggestive landscape in the world,
and what spectator — not to speak of the unhappy

mortal's familiar friends, would not — conscious
of his fellow-creature's strait — turn his
back ou senseless matter and the dead past?
Unless, indeed, the looker-on were morally
dwarfed, distorted, and hardened almost beyond
recognition by his kind crying shame on him,
with honest disgust for his unnatural conduct,
he would watch, if he could do no more, with
a sympathetic agony of eagerness, the hard
fight for life of his perishing brother — how he
clutched desperately each bough and every twig
in his path, — how he struck out gallantly fora
space till he was well-nigh beyond the en-gulping
wave, — how he faltered and gave
way, and was sucked back into the insatiable
jaws of the overmastering tide.

The Stanhopess, with Oliver in their company,
went on like the wandering Jew, as if there
were no end to their wandering, no rest for
the soles of their feet. They lived their own
throbbing, high-strung family life, till other lives

beyond theirs looked distant, pale, and dim, like
lives in dreams. Tidiness from the old home
came to the wayfarers, and did not move them,
or only awoke in them dull or fitful responses.
A bachelor uncle of Harry and Horace Stanhope's
died, and, with some dawning suspicion
in his last days that he had left his brother's
orphan boys very much to sink or swim as
they could, sought to anticipate the moment of
reckoning by an act of atonement. He chose
to bequeath the sum of eight thousand pounds —
the bulk of his savings in a colonial office — to
the poor relations whom he had shunned and
i<]jnored as much as he could, in the course of
their previous existence, instead of to the well-to-do
flesh and blood whom he had hitherto
exclusively cultivated.

The timely legacy — together with what was
left of Fan's means, would form a little competence
for the Stanhopess, if they made up
their minds to settle in some quiet way abroad.
VOL. in. I

The subject scarcely struck any of the pilgrims
in this limit. Would it not rather deal
the death-stroke to Harry by supplying him
with independent funds, other than his wife's,
for squandering and riot ?

Poor old uncle Gcof ! ' said the man on his
trial, with an impulse of his native kindliness ;
to think he should be gone, and to cut up well
for us, after all ! For at least this legacy, though
it ain't much,' continued Harry with a mixture
of earnestness and candour, condescension and
defiance peculiar to him, ' ain't too little for
some enjoyment, without Fan and the rest of
you looking glum. Come on, Horry ; we'll
pay all respect to the old boy and his tin, by
drinking to his memory to begin with, and
then we'll do whatever else enters our heads,
to drive dull care away. Nobody can reasonably
expect two fellows who have succeeded to
a small fortune — and the smaller it is the less
self-denial is to be looked for — to abstain firma

glorification or two. But we'll save enough
to make you a handsome present, Fan, never
fear. As for Constable, he's hive the man in
history, beyond being bought.'

Ago eta wrote — to her brothers this time,
to tell them of her approaching marriage, with
the full approbation of her guardians, to Mr.
Amyott of Copley Grange — of all men, the
widower approaching middle age, the father of
two or three girls, the biggest already higher
than the writer's elbow.

Aggie a stepmother ! Why doesn't she go
in for hem<j: a grandmother at once?' cried
Harry, as his single derisive comment on an
incident which, since it barely touched him,
did not deserve more serious consideration.

Ah ! she was always fond of Copley
Grange,' said Fan, with quick, womanly extenuation,
as if it had been the manor-house and
the squire that Agneta had known and prized.

T ^

But she is taking a great many duties and
cares upon lier at once, ^vllich seems a pity,
when one thinks how many more must come
in the course of nature,' ended Fan in assumed
matter-of-factness, and in the hmguor which
had replaced her okl fire. But she began again
a moment afterwards. ' It is not fair to herself
and to what ought to have been lier natural
obligations.' Fan spoke now with something
of her former suppressed ardour and inextinguishable
passion for justice; but tears of
weakness gathered in her eyes at the same
time. She was not thinking of Agneta's future
alone, but of the future of others with claims
on their sister, which Fan, in the days of her
strength, would have been the last to urge, and
which Agneta appeared deliberately disqualifying
herself from ever fulfilling.

Heaven help us I I think we are not very
cordial in our congratulations,' exclaimed Oliver
impatiently. He was pricked by the troubled

consciousness that the cares as well as the
pleasures of this life — the cares which are not
of our seeking and which certainly do not
contribute to our ease and satisfaction, are in
danger of chokinj]^ the crowd seed of generous
thoughts and magnanimous judgments. ' Can't
we wish Miss Stanhope and Mr. Amyott joy,
without spotting all the real or imaginary disadvantages
in their connection, and collating
the couple with the double chains of fulfilled
and neglected requirements ? '

A new idea was tickling Harrv. ' Look
here, Horry ; if we had stayed in the Farm we
should have been Air^ie's tenants — bound to take

CD

off our hats to her. We might even have yoked
ourselves into the carriage which brought her
and her blooming bridegroom home from their
amaze-tour. I wonder if she would have
had an extra barrel of beer broached for my
benefit? She has some small notion of the
depth of m J thirst. Wouldn't it have been jolly ?

By Jove ! we've spoilt an interesting episode
for the county paper. " Charming tableau of
attached relations forgetting: the accidental
diversities of rank and fortune and rushing
into each other's arms." Don't frown, Fan,
my love ; you would not have been called onto
drag Aggie up the drive liberating for our
master and mistress. You would have sat at
ease, over the way, and witnessed the gala from
a respectful distance.'

'If it is any gratification to you to talk
nonsense, Harry, wliy then, do it,' said Fan,
with a lino'erini]!: reflection of her old girlish
dignity, in the middle of lier Womanly pain
at his want of comprehension and feeling, and
yet with the pathetic indulgence to every defect
in the man she loved, which far transcended
both dignity and pain.

Oliver knew he was still capable of quite
another form of selfishness, when a letter
from Mrs. hilyard reached Fan. Mrs. Ililliard

would not consent to lose shalt of her kindred
in exile, any more than when settled in a
mill and bakehouse at her door. She had no
further occasion, indeed, to acknowledge Pan's
triumph and pay it homage, but the eventual
defeat of Mrs. Hilhard's enemy was disarming
in another way. Mrs. Hilliard was interested
to learn what farther reversal of parts might
occur among her cousins ; and whether poor
dear Harry Stanhope was to prove the reprobate
out and out, as she rather feared would bethe
end. But nobody could help it save himself,
he was the sole person to blame. It was
Philistines of the Constables to throw themselves
into the breach, and make such a fuss
about what was so likely to happen. It
would have been far better for everybody to
have hushed it up, to have put poor Harry and
his drag of a brother quietly out of the way —
not by murder, which might have had unpleasant
consequences, but by banishment for life, while

Fan came home to her brother. But these
cousins of Mrs. Hilliard's were not like anybody
else, and would not behave like rational people
in the common lot of having a prodigal among
them.

Mrs. Hilliard's letter was not purely inquisitive;
she was really softened by the news she
had to tell, though she told it in her own
manner. Her cousin Catherine was better.
She had surmounted the crisis of her illness,
and she was not only to live and be well again,
she vas about to turn over a new leaf — in
short, to go allied and look alive for the rest
of her days. Mrs. Hilliard flattered herself
that would astonish her readers. The miracle
had been worked l3y the new order of nurse
whom the London physician had brought
down just in time to their assistance. It had
been during the very smallest part of Catherine's
illness, when Mrs. Hilliard's sole refuge
from the blues on her own account, had been

in the anticipation of the inconsistencies and
incongruities lie was to encounter in the latest
specimen of nurse — who is no longer a Sairey
Gamp but a beneficent princess in disguise.
Now beneficent princesses are charming to
think of, but naturally one would suppose they
are not the easiest persons to accommodate and
entertain. Mrs. Hilliard had, therefore, proposed
to lay all the house under contribution
for the Sister's benefit. She had told off her
own maid in the stranger's service. The maid's
mistress had even had some idea of converting
herself into an abigail, that lie might more
fittingly hold pins for her social superior, who
was condescending to attend on Catherine.
Mrs. Hilliard had arranged levees of all the
ladies in Friarton to be held in the Meadows'
drawing-room in honour of the Sister when
she was off duty and open to recreation ; and
sure enough the Sister had turned out to be a
daughter of the old lord-lieutenant's, the county

belle of ten years ago ; but she had laughed to
scorn the words ' accommodation,' ' entertainment,'
and 'homage.'

She had perversely chosen and doggedly
stuck to a housemaid's bedroom, because it
was nearest to Catherine's room. She had
insisted on putting in for herself the few pins
which her holland gown required. She was so
enlivened by her work in the sick-room that
she came out of it looking as fresh as a daisy
and as gay as a lark. When she had an hour
to spare, or wanted a little variety, she took it
in running about the town to rout out sickness
among the miserable wretches who could not
afford a nurse of any kind, and then in seeking
to trace the mischief to its origin and destroy
its sheet anchors of poverty and dirt. She
had caused the two doctors' hair to stand on
end, forced the vicar to tear what hair was
left on his head, and all but driven the
youngest and most enthusiastic of the curates

to hang himself. In fine, the Sister had
imparted to Mrs. Hilhard the remarkable
information that she looked on this apparently
lowest department of her profession as
in fact the highest, and had been guilty of
selecting it for herself. She had only consented
to come down and nurse so swell a
patient as Catherine because she was in
extremity, and because the Sister had some
special acquaintance with nervous disorders and
skill in treating; them.

Catherine had opened her eyes at the princess
in disguise, of course penetrating the disguise,
from the first moment she saw her. The
sick woman had come under the spell of the
nurse's vitality until everybody who could make
a diagnosis said the one craze Avould cast out
the other, the craze of work would expel
the craze of lethargy, the craze of social
regeneration would break the back of individual
despondency and despair. Thus Mrs. Ililliard

wrote, and Oliver was free to think over the
news.

Catherine alive, in health, awakened from
lier long unhealthy sleep with its haunting
nightmare ! Catherine loosed from her o^ravc-
clothes I Catherine informed of the riches of
life, stretching out her hands to take them fur
herself and share them ^vith others ! If he
could but see and speak with Catherine nov,
would she not understand him, and feel with
him at last, whatever came of it ?

But to see Catherine, with idiom all was
well, Oliver must abandon Fan in her trepidation,
when, in the light of a fresh trial hanging
over her, she had more need of his help
than ever.

Oliver could not find it in this hcfirt to quit
his post under such conditions, though it was
also in his heart to writhe and fret at what
might have been, and the possible forfeiture of
his own chance of human happiness. But he

-was also capable of feeling thankful that it was
as he had every reason to believe — only his
own happiness, not Catherine's — above all, not
her well-being, which might be at stake. He
was not put to the torture of having to choose
between Fan and Catherine in this supreme
sense.

CHAPTER XXVII.

THE LAST Penny PAID.

The end came, as it often does after long
anxiety, when least expected. The traveling
jDarty had been under the necessity of staying
their wanderings and pitching their tent for a
longer season than usual. For many reasons
the leaders had chosen one of the loveliest and
most admired scenes in Europe for their temporary
resting place. It was early summer
again, so that the Stanhopess might resort to a
mountain and lake district where the air braced
every nerve, and which afforded opportunity
for feats of climbing and boating, to attract
ard occupy that member of the family whose

delectation and employment were always the
first cares, while the weary might rest in preparation
for a fresh campaign.

The lake of the four cantons lay shimmering
in its beauty, peacock-green or blue-black in
tint as it happened to be in light or in shade.
Great walnut-trees grew by its margin, and
dipped their branches in its waters, while the
most stunted pines ceased to flourish on the
bare short grass or the rocky summits of its
giant guardians. There were lower mountains
that would have been well-grown mountains
anywhere else, which rose sheer from the lake,
and were clothed with waving wood from the
soles of their feet to the crown of their heads ;
but one forgot them in the near presence of the
bald Ehigi and the desolate Pilatus and the
remoter vision of the blue ranee of the Enijel-
berry seamed and tracked with everlasting
snows.

The little burgher town, so grandly framed,

was not altogether smoothed down from its
ancient ruggedness and picturesqneness into
modern commonplace uniformity, or, still worse,
smartness. True, its great hotels, with bands
of music for evening promenades, Avere trying
to the sensitive visitor, and its shops with their
staple of carved wood, however pretty, and
verging here and there on art proper, were not
without their objections. But there was something
to be said for the old covered rickety
bridges over the pale green water, with the
rude representations of the grotesque horrors of
the Dance of Death ; the Water Tower ; the
bold rouo'h rendering; on the face of the rock
of the great sculptor's idea of the lion of
Switzerland, wounded to death, its paw still
defending the broken lily of France.

Apart from a Babel of tongues, in which
English prevailed, and swarms of motley
tourists with the Ehigi railway as the scientific
means to the desired end of attaining a rci^jiou

SO strange in giddy height and width of view,
so familiar by the descriptions and raptures of
its crowds of admirers — and those inevitable
attributes of lucerne, were not very conspicuous
in the early summer when the Stan-hopes
occupied their quarters — there were two
distinct, even discordant, associations sharing
the ground between them. There were the
more vivid and recent traces of what all well-instructed,
incredulous people now call the
myth of William Tell — the national hero whose
imaginary personality struck the first blow in
breaking the fetters — doubtless as fabulous as
the rest — of his country. Certainly, the common
representation of him in a stage kilt, theatrically
administering the oath of allegiance to his
equally fantastic fellow - conspirators, as it
figured in cheap photographs, was not calculated
to inspire faith in his identity.

There was also the mediaeval legend which,

VOL. III. K

in its wild superstition, belonged to all Christendom,
of the unrighteous judge who falsely condemned,
not his lord and king alone, Lut the
King of kings and the Saviour of men. And
there was not found any place for repentance,
in men's horrified minds, for this traitor anemone
than for the arch-traitor. Pontius Pilate
was doomed for ever to hide his white, 
face, and wring his accursed,
palsied hands ^vith a feeble show of washing
away the innocent blood from which no holy
baptism of water coukl cleanse them.

Constantly as the sun rose or set on the
glorious world of mountain peaks, wood, and
water, these two idealised memories awoke and
rose in conflict, oflimmerinir through the white
mists of morning, or brooding under the purple
vault of night — the honest-brave Swiss freeman
Who bade all Swiss slaves go free — the false-hearted
Ionian coward dio saw no evil in this
man, and yet delivered up the Deliverer of the

World into the hands of this deadly foes to do
with Him what they would.

At Lucerne, Fan's baby was born. To the
mother her little daughter came as an ano'el
from heaven, promising her a fresh paradise
instead of the old, which had turned out but a
waste howling wilderness ^vith green oases here
and there.

To the father the child brought the delight
of a new toy with which he might play joyously
for a while, and then, without thinking, break
it. Harry had none of the trembling reverence ,
and clumsy awkwardness, in the middle of their
tenderness, which some inexperienced fathers
betray on their first introduction to their
offspring. Harry took his infant daughter in
his arms without hesitation and dandled her
like an expert at once. The nurse and all
Ayho saw this performance cried out he was the
most charmingly fatherly voun^ follies who had
ever been beheld.

K 2

To her Uncle Horace, the last arrival
was simply a fresh possession of Harry's, a
rum ' and funny possession, with which the
bachelor uncle was chary in having much todo,
and that inflicted on him sundry spasms of
bashfulness, but of which on the whole he did
not disapprove.

As for Oliver, ' the little woman ' made him
more inclined to thank God and take courage.
She was a tiny, weak weapon which might yet
prove all-powerful in casting down strongholds
and overthrowing a foul god, even the jovial
Bacchus of Greek worship, which, seen near,
was hideous as Dagon and cruel as Moloch.

But there came a speedy interruption to
Fan's recovery. Harry, whom her danger and
weakness, together with the mil she had made
him, subdued for the moment, was devoted to
her in those da's. He was sitting by her socii,
when she started up, and fixing on him eyes
full of the craving care of an inappeasable

anxiety, amazed and alarmed even Harry, who
hardly knew what mental apprehension, anymore
than physical fear, meant, by the eager
inquiry, ' Where's Harry ? '

He hastened to soothe her by the assurance
of his presence, without effect. He cried aloud,
as he quailed before the blank non-recognition,
and impatient denial of the glance which met
his imploring looks, for Horry — Constable — any
witness to convince Fan that here Alas Harry
by her side.

The witnesses came quickly, and she knew
each of them — down to the nurse who had
been an utter stranger to her till within the
last few weeks ; but she did not know her
husband, and she would not believe what the
others said of his being himself, and of his
standing in the room, the nearest of all to her,
bending over her, clasping her hand. ' Where's
Harry ? ' she continued to demand with terrible,
heart-rending insistance.

The long strain had snapped the strings of
the fine instrument at last. She cried for
Harry day and night, in his sight and hearing.
As she cried she broke the silence which she
had only once before stirred in order to claim
succour for him ; she poured forth in full
measure her incalculable sufferings. She lived
over again to one appalled auditor the long
nights when she had sat listening for a footstep
which never came, but was replaced by other
footsteps, each, in its turn, causing her heart to
bound with unwarrantable expectation, and
sink in the sickness ■ — growing always deadlier,
of hope deferred ; till it seemed as if all the
footsteps Avliich approached and departed in
ignorance and indifference, trod, deliberately
and mercilessly, over her quivering heart,
spurning it as they passed. She showed how
the truest woman in the world had been fain to
impose upon herself with miserable deceptions,
before she had confessed, in the secrecy of her

own soul, that the fine gold of her idol was only
base clay under its lacquer — how the most
straightforward and sincere of human beings
lead been driven to play at the wretched game
of keeping up appearances, of laying herself out
to hoodwink her neighbours. She had ])eea
humbled in the dust as well as worn out by
ceaseless struggles, and tortured to frenzy:
Her sleep had gone from her eyes. Peace had
been unknown to her — a God-fearing, Christ-loving
woman.

The revelation was like the opening of those
Books before which every son of man will
smite his breast and call on the mountains to
fall upon him and the hills to cover him. And
Harry Stanhope's accuser, day and night,
before God and his brethren, was the woman
who loved him best, and would sooner have
bitten her tongue out than said the hjzhtest
word to blame him.

Every effort was made to withdraw Harry

from the awful, ghastly ordeal. The instant
Horace guessed instinctively what Fan was
speaking of incessantly in the monotonous voice
as tuneless as his own, which he could no longer
catch so as to distinguish the words, he started
forward with fury, as if he were mad himself,
to drag Harry away ; but Harry shook his
brother off.

Oliver laid a firm hand on Harry's shoulder,
but from that, too, Harry freed himself. ' Let
me alone. Constable,' he gasped. ' My place is
by my wife, and whatever I have done or left
undone, I will stay with her and hear the last
she has to say to me.'

None could dispute his light, and the men
drew back ; but there were still women's pitiful
voices beseeching him to have mercy on himself.
' Go away, sir, for Heaven's sake — for
her sake. She does not mean it ; she does not
know what she is savings. Your stavinir will
do no good.'

But Harry would not listen to the entreaties,
and in the end he heard no voice save
Fan's. He stood there till her tale of martyr-dora
was burnt in and branded on his conscience.
Under the operation his face did not
grow sharp as Fan's sharpened, neither did his
fair hair betray patches of grey, as her dark
hair betrayed when it was pushed aside that
the death-sweat might be wiped from her
temples. Yet his whole aspect underwent
such a change as it was hardly possible he
could entirely lose, so as to become the same
that lie had been before. He grew perceptibly
older-looking in those days which could be so
easily counted, with the sudden stamp of ripening
to withering, which rapid, mortal illness
sometimes impresses even on an infant's face.

He had never before willingly encountered
what was painful either to his senses or his
sensibility. He had always selected the paths
which were easiest and most agreeable to

himself, without too much rcfrard to their soinjz
down hill. They had brought him to where
the battle raged hottest in the Valley of the
Shadow of Death ; and though it was not himself,
but another, who was slain — the fumes of
the smoke, the clatter of the strife, the deep
wounds, the flowing life-blood, the gloom of
that valley of shadows, were not likely to
depart utterly from his consciousness, and leave
him in the light-hearted, light-headed carelessness,
the hard, untempered blaze of sunshine,
of his former experience.

Fan had forgotten her baby in that last
whirl of the tempest which swept her away,
but she remembered it in the end. In the
pouring out of her tribulation without restraint,
she had constantly called on Horace and Oliver
to help Harry, who stood nailed to the ground
there by her pillow. Then, when her voice
was sinking into an indistinguishable nuu'mur,
and her hands letting go every earthly hold,

she felt gropingly for her child, and struggled
to utter another sentence audibly. She did
not speak for the child with her passing breath
as so many mothers have spoken for their
children. Fan's care for Harry had swallowed
up her care for their child. She spoke to the
unheeding, unconscious infant who for many a
long year would be a helpless human being,
needing tender fostering and watchful protection,
and instead of recommending the child to
the father, in the bewilderment of poor Fan's
unapproachable fidelity to Harry, she recommended
the father to the child. ' Baby, take
care of Harry,' she managed to say, and with a
few more fluttering breaths, died. The words
of Fan's final, fond, foolish injunction were still
ringing in Harry's ears when he staggered out
of the room.

CHAPTER XXVIII.
Oliver's return.

Death, and not marriage, wipes out offences,
clears scores, and opens the bolts and bars of
shut hearts a little, for a brief space. Harry
Stanhope's relations mostly wrote to condole
with the young widower on the death of the
wife whom they had never countenanced.
Lord Mount Mallow — after all, only a connection
by marriage, who happened to be then disporting
himself in the playground of Europe,
actually offered to defer climbing a mountain
and come out of his way to grace Fan's
funeral.

Agncta Amyott wrote impulsively, instead

of penning a letter in which, while the proprieties
were well preserved, the writer committed
herself to nothing. She was deeply
grieved, not merely for her dear old Harry,
but for her dear sister, her former kind friend,
whom Agneta declared she would now give
half the world to be able to see, if but once
again. And what about the daring little baby?
What could three young men make of such a
charge? It was deplorable to think of it.
Would Harry let her send a trustworthy person
to fetch the baby, now that she had a home of
her own to receive it in ? There were the little
Amyotts' nurse and nurseries all ready. She
had not been able to speak to her husband yet,
but she felt certain Mr. Amyott would not object.
To be sure, the close of Agneta's letter,
in which there was the first note of hesitation,
sounded more natural than the beginning.

Harry rejected each overture not so much
bitterly or pettishly, as with the first sternness

and obduracy which had ever burst up through
this constitutional softness and irrepressible buoyancy.
' Nobody shall mourn for Fan but the
real mourners — you, Horry, and Constable
and me.

Fan's baby shall not be taken out of
charity into the house of any man — or woman
either. She shall not be brought up as Ave
were, if I can help it.'

Fan's baby succeeded to what was left of
her mother's little fortune ; she might also
have the reversion of wdiat Harry and Horace
could keep of their legacy. In the meantime
she was not given over to the tender mercies
of three ignorant men, though, even if she
had, she might have fared worse. There was
not a woman, high or low, in the Swiss hotel
in which she had been born, who was not interested
in the small specimen of humanity, and
there was one woman — a hard-working clergyman's
liard-working wife, loitering and rather

pining abroad while doing her best to get rid
of the lacjijinfy, idle weeks of her husband's
necessary holiday — who pounced upon the
motherless baby as a windfall, or rather, as
she would have called it, a Godsend.

Oliver had not been greatly attracted previously
to these reverent Weathered, in any
chance intercourse which he had held with
them. He had respected them as very worthy
people, but they had seemed to him, what they
were, somewhat fanatical and narrow in their
views. As for Harry Stanhope, no two persons
could have been more widely removed from
what he had proved hitherto, or could have
possessed less in common with his past, than
the strongly professional as well as pious couple
who were taking, but scarcely enjoying, a compulsory
breathing space in their toiling life.

But from the moment that Mrs. Weathered's
motherliness appropriated the care of Fan's
baby, Harry, as it were, instinctively — with

another of lies instincts of self-preservation probably
— took to her and clung to her and her
husband in his misery, with a pathetic dependence
and trust, to which they were not slow to
respond.

Indeed, Any's remorse from an early stage
assumed the form of conciseness rather than
despair, his natural humility and amiability
standing him in good stead here. Fan had willed
his rescue from folly and evil with her whole
devoted heart, and though he would never now
have the consolation — the positive gladness, of
proving to her that he was a rescued man, and
St), of more than making up to her, in her love,
for all the anguish he had cost her, he was still,
in his present mood, eager to do what Fan had
wished, to be as she had chosen for him, in his
best interests. He trusted brokenly that it might
atone — if it were only to her memory, that Fan
might know he was sorry and was pulling himself
up, somehow, sometime — that Fan's God

and his would accept and confirm the late repentance
in the great redemption He has provided
for sinners.

Poor Harry had never been proud, and he
was not afflicted with the insane egotism which
sees in its possessor an object of such consequence
in the universe, to his Maker no less than to
himself, that he must needs interfere with the
working of human and divine love. Such a
one-sided reasoner will hold, against every assurance
to the contrary, that he has sinned beyond
forgiveness, and it is too late for him to
repent and think better of it. In fact, there is
a false Mephistopheles dignity and subtle compensation
in this conclusion, when shame, regret,
and grief still take the attitude of resentful
defiance.

But it was not so with Harry, not even
in his way of regarding his baby. He did
not turn from it, in the beginning, with the
blind repugnance and unreasoning, unrighteous

VOL. III. L

grudge, with which some widowers are tempted
to regard the child that has cost its mother her
life. Certainly it was not her child, but her
husband, who had killed Fan. Yet Harry might
have been so far dishonest as to have given a
sop to his conscience, by shifting a part of the
responsibility and blame on the innocent child.
He might have taken a cruel satisfaction in revenging
Fan, by trampling alike on his own
natural affections, and on the just claims of his
infant daughter.

But Harry never did so. He seemed rather
• to transfer at once to the baby all the fondness
for the mother which was thrown back on his
hands, When she was taken from him. In addition
he was ready to lavish on the child a
double portion of the protecting affection which,
so long as he was himself, he had shown to
Horace.

Watching Harry in the new light of his
mournful fatherhood, when he was called on, every

generous and manly impulse, to be father
and mother in one, to the mite whose best
friend or worst foe, whose nearest natural
guardian, he foimd himself, Oliver Constable
arrived at a correct conclusion. If any mere
human creature could help to make a man of
Harry Stanhope, could raise him from his
soulless levity and the vicious craving which
was grafted on it, it was — strange yet natural
to say, not a brave, devoted woman like Fan,
dio had gone down into the breach and held
a shield over her husband, and striven vainly
to be the stay to him which, had their relations
to each other been what they ought, he should
have proved to her — but this merest atom of a
fellow-mortal, a thousand times weaker than
Harry himself, who could neither appeal to him
nor remonstrate with him, who could simply
hang heavily upon him in her helplessness, and
dio was, humanly speaking, altogether at his
mercy for happiness or wretchedness.

L 2

Oliver was inclined to believe that Larry's
self-conviction had gone to the root of the
matter, and that even his most mercurial temperament
would never shake it off altogether.

Harry was well-nigh as sacred a trust bequeathed
to Oliver by Fan as her child could
be. Indeed, while there were many humane
people to interpose and accept the gracious
task of befriending the motherless babe, who
would volunteer to fill the thankless office of
standing by Harry and backing him in resisting
the poison which was coursing through his
veins, and the familiar demon that beset him ?
But in the meantime Oliver was not frightened
to leave Harry Stanhope with his brother, his
infant, and the Weathered. When Oliver
recalled the last he confessed he had been
unjust in asking incredulously who would
bestow themselves on Harry unless to serve
themselves by his undoing ? So far from
a knowledge of his former offences disposing

the Weathered to withdraw from the old
offender, it would only attach them to him
more firmly. For a sinner who had turned or
who gave the faintest indication of turning
from the error of his ways, had, if it be possible,
an almost morbid fascination for the clergyman
and his wife. They were not content with fulfilling
the divine commission, and preaching
the grand truth that their Master would have
mercy and not sacrifice, their zeal ran away
Avitli their discretion until they would have
preferred the dying thief to the Apostle Paul.
They want the length of selecting for their
friends and associates rueful transgressors, in
preference to men and women who had been
kept and had kept themselves, with infinite pains,
from gross transgression. This enthusiastic
weakness which caused the Weathered to dote
on reclaimed burglars and pet converted infidels,
almost to the cold exclusion of people
who had refrained from picking and stealing.

and who had reverently trusted and believed,
was apt to be fertile in producing wrath and
restiveness in the intolerant honest and loyal
sections of the community ; and, what was still
worse, in growing crops of hypocrisy and fraud
among the hardened and desperately deceitful
outcasts from society. But at least it rendered
the couple safe to care for Larry Stanhope
and do their best to help him, and Oliver
did not think that Harry would abuse their
kindness.

Oliver Constable did not hurry post haste,
though he turned his face in the direction of
Friarton Mill, Avhen he separated from his companions,
in the course of a few weeks after
Fan's death. He knew that many changes as
well as a great blank awaited him, and he
sought to fit himself to meet them in a spirit of
peace, as well as to fid healing for his recent
wound.

It was a soft, grey October afternoon when

Oliver, leaving the railway at an intermediate
station as before, walked through the well-known
fields in their autumn livery, and arrived
at Friarton Mill.

As it chanced — a chance for which she
would never forgive herself — Sally Pope, who
had not been apprised of the exact date when
he was likely to return, had gone on her yearly
holiday to visit her relations. Only a strange
young housemaid kept house and received
Oliver, taking in good faith his assertion that
he was her master.

The dreary reception had, as a compensation,
a certain relief for the traveller ; but he
was not long left to his own thoughts. He
had hardly eaten the meal which his servant
improvised in a state of consternation, with
regard to a future searching investigation and
sharp condemnation of all deficiencies by old
Sally, when he became aware, as he was in the
act of strolling half mechanically across the

court, to his former smoking station in the mill
gallery, that he was threatened already with
visitors from Copley Grange. A lady and
gentleman were walking across the park, and
making straight for the picturesque old mill.

Oliver groaned under this ill-timed manifestation
of the popular admiration shared
between show places and show people, and
prepared to make himself scarce. He stopped
short in his retreat, and faced the intruders,
the moment he recognised that they were Mr.
and JVIrs. Amyott.

The couple were the most put out by the
encounter, for they had clearly not expected to
meet the miller in his own domain. It miirht
be that the squire was but partially informed
of this young wife's former familiarity with
Friarton Mill as well as with Copley Grange
Farm, and that he had proposed to take advantage
of the fine afternoon bv making her better

CD * O

acquainted with what was, still more than the

artistic almshouses, a charming aesthetic advance
take beloiighig to his place.

In that case Mrs. Amyott might have had
some difficulty in evading the proposal, or she
might have been fain, on her side, to get over
the first visit to Friarton Mill in a new character,
as early as possible, in the absence of its
master.

These explanations were more probable
than what lead flashed across Oliver's mind,
and caused him to contort his figure by one of
his old excited, awkward movements, in a revulsion
from a crying case of heartless selfishness.
He had thought for an instant, could the
Amyotts possibly have guessed the half-resolution
which he was only turning over in his own
mind, to let or even sell the mill and millhouse,
and quit the neighbourhood, where
there seemed nothings remaining for him to do,
where he had tried his utmost to work out his
notions of duty and a career, and had signally

failed P Did the Amyotts know, from Friarton
gossip, that the Constables' baking business in
the town had diminished to such a fraction
that, in justice to himself and his coming creditors,
Oliver must give up the premises from
which the business had departed? Were his
nearest neighbours seizing the first opportunity,
with indecent haste and mean covetousness, to
sound him, in the hope of, at the same time,
obtaining Naboth's vineyard and getting rid of
Mordecai at their spates ?

Perhaps Mr. Amyott trusted to an immediate,
tempting, and what he might imagine a
substantially handsome offer of purchase, at a
fancy price, to induce a man, impoverished and
embarrassed by his crotchets, to sell his birthright,
and so to secure to the owners of Copley
Granite what one of them had lon^j craved. If
that were so, a man might well pray to be
delivered from the mania for high art, prevailing?
to the extinction of common feeling.

For was not the dainty bride, in her refinement
of bridal finery — sobered down still
further by the necessity of wearing a black
gown, in memory of her brother's late lowborn
wife, keenly desirous, under her pretence
of mourning, to cut away the last link between
her and the Constables ? And all the while
she might have guessed, if she had cared to use
her woman's wit, how much of old Peter Constable's
honestly and laboriously earned money
had gone to fill up the gaps left by Mrs.
Arayott's brother's reckless improvidence.

It was only for a moment that Oliver indulged
the suspicion. He saw almost immediately
that the Amyotts were as much taken by
surprise, and more put out, than he was, though
they recovered themselves with the comparative
celerity and ease of well-bred people, who
were, by their nurture and position, master
and mistress of social situations, and equal to
any social difficulty.

For that matter, Agneta did such justice to
her training and played her part so well, that
Oliver felt inclined to think she was lost as a
simple squire's wife, and ought to have been
a duchess, if not a princess of some reigning
royal family, or a queen in her own person.
She exhibited precisely the proper amount of
feeling for the occasion, without being overcome.
She was touched, she was gently
courteous and even friendly to Oliver, without
overstepping the limits which the circumstance
of her having become Mr. Amyott's wife imposed
upon Harry Stanhope's sister. She alluded
simply and sadly to ' the melancholy
event ^ of Fan's death. She enquired with interest
when he had heard from Harry, and
expressed her earnest good wishes for the welfare
of ' the dear little baby.' She broke off to
thank him with grave sincerity for all he had
done for her brothers — though, with regard to
the last graciously grateful speech, Oliver could

not avoid the impression that Agneta considered
him in some respects the obliged person,
by having had it in this power to serve the
Stanhopess.

When the conversation strayed to more
general topics, Mrs. Amyott referred with a
blending of judicious candour and tact — while
her slightly stooping, and slightly grey, but
well-preserved husband was paying her the
lover-like compliment of listening with pleased
attention to every word she said — to the changes
which had taken place in the Mill court since
she was there last. She displayed thus with
perfect serenity a considerable acquaintance
with the landmarks.

Surely, Mr. Constable, there have been
some boughs lopped from the willow; and,
ah ! you have had the old seat, which I used to
call " the Pilgrim's seat," removed from under
the mulberry-bush ! '

Every word was in such unexceptionable

taste ; Oliver was let down so gracefully and
gradually from the terms which Agneta Stanhope
had insisted on establishing between them,
during those vanished summer days, that he
was inclined to acquiesce in the squire's conviction
that this last acquired ' gem was the
most finely polished in his whole collection of
treasures.

In comparison, Mr. Amyott's role required
little from the performer, but he also acquitted
himself admirably, with just the degree of
admission of Oliver's claims which became a
gentleman who would not disallow an obligation,
and yet who viewed, with reason, the
whole connection between Copley Grange Farm
and Friarton Mill as a foolish mistake. But he,
too, did not refuse to recollect the past. He
made some cursory mention of his wife's
brothers having been his tenants in the farm ;
nay, he said With a smile in reference to his
recent marriage, that the temporary arrangement

had helped in bringing about what was
for him a most fortunate as well as permanent
result. His first introduction to his wife had
arisen from it. Such trifling causes are, in
some sort, the motive power in shaping out our
destinies.

Listening[ to her husband's flattering acknowledgment
of the fruitfulness — for him — of
her brothers' short tenancy of Copley Grange
Farm, Agneta smiled sweetly back upon him.
Mr. Amyott was somewhat worn and still more
languid in his middle age ; a man to whose
over-cultivated nature much of the life around
him, with which his wife's fresh youth had
some instinctive sympathy, was rough, rude,
boisterous, and oppressive, even when it was
not offensive, so that the abiding" expression of
his aristocratic features was wistful and pensive,
rather than resolute and hopeful : still he was
a fine patrician-looking man, only a little past
the prime of life, and a trifle the worse for the

wear. He was gentle and elegant — according
to the old standard of elegance, in his whole
tone ; a shade plaintive and fretful occasionally,
but never morose or violent. lie was deferential,
almost to a fault, to the wishes of his
wife, which he was well able to gratify, since
he happened to be in the possession of an ample,
unencumbered rent-roll, a charming place, so
well-ordered an establishment that her stepchildren
never came in their young stepmother's
way, but fell at once into the pleasantness and
most desirable relations with her, and a position
second to few in the county. From Agneta's
point of view, she had good cause to be satisfied
with the marriage which had fulfilled the expectations
of her guardians. Her education —
whatever else it had stifled in her, had served
to develop largely a reasonable prudence.

The Amyotts managed to make use of the
fact of Oliver's arrival that very afternoon, as
an excuse for not waiting to receive the invitation

to enter the Mill-house, which its master
was in no haste to give, while both recognised
that the omission on the first encounter served
as an index of the extent of their future intercourse.


Left alone, Oliver acknowledged the happy
couple were free from ulterior designs in invading
his privacy. Apart from these, what
was Hecuba to him, or he to Hecuba ? He had
an idea that Harry and Horace Stanhope, with
their baby, would settle down at a distance
from Copley Grange, which would still farther
simplify matters and smooth down awkwardness,
so that in the future intercourse of the
Manor-house and the Mill, Fan's marriage, with
its girlish aspirations, would soon be as though
it had never been — and it was best so.

Oliver reached the carved gallery at last;
and leant over the balustrade looking down on
the water of the Brook and away over the
woody undulating ground of Copley Grange

VOL. III. M

Park, Moliere the sombre siren horns were
covered with dark crimson laws, and no note
of a bird broke the stillness, wliicli was only
made ave by the monotonous babbhniz of the
Brook. How vividly some of the more significant
scenes of his life, since he attained manhood,
rose before him there I The thorns were
red and white ngoin in flower, and the thrush
was once more sinoinc^, as he broke to Fan his
life-purpose, and combated her objections.
How full of confidence he had been ! With
what high hopes and steadfast resolves he had
entered on his mission, and it had come to
nothing ! He had been foiled on every side,
till at last he was allowing himself to drift out
of the struggle.

He was watchings the ducks eating the
mulberries, and turning his back, in vain, on a
stalwart younfr figure cumbered with a limber
attendant, iK-longiniz, by rights, to Oliver's
gone-by 'Varsity days, nd yet starting up,



stepping out there through the park, and hailing
him on his threshold, in spite of him.

He was walking with Fan in her garden,
listening to her unwonted chatter and warm
admiration of these new friends.

The master baker was jostled, tripped up,
and thrown down afresh by his late journeyman
in the twilight lane yonder.

Oliver was cut dead anew by Catherine
Hilliard in the High Street of Friarton.

The frost was on the ground while Harry
Stanhope was besieging Oliver's bedroom door
to announce his intentions ; and presently the
brother was finding the sister on the hearthrug,
holding her back from her fate.

Oliver was grasping Fan's hands and pledging
himself the devil should not have Harry.
Oliver was binding himself to give up any
grain which he mi<^ht have gathered from the
crop which had cost him so dear, that he might
help her to lie on the bed which she had

31 2

invade for licrsclf. Yet Harry's deliverance lead
proved larder to elect tliaii that of Tain
Lane in the ballad. It had been beyond
the power either of strong man or devoted
woman, though it was just possible, after
Fan's dead hands dropped the task, it might
be performed by Ijaby fingers in God's great
way of nature.

Would Oliver, with his present knowledge,
do all he had done over aiiain, if the choice
were once more c^iven him? He thought it
over deliberately and as calmly as he could,
in trying to form his plans for the future, and
he honestly believed he would. He solemnly
thanked God for the boon of such a belief, to
soften the soreness of his disappointment and
defeat, and still the ache of his heart. The
consciousness confirmed his faith that there*
had been some c^ood in his aims. Thevv had
not owed their origin entirely to presumption
and self-conceit. However rash and over-confident

lie might have been, however much
he had bungled the whole business, he had the
assurance of his conscience that the fault had
not lain largely his motives. Yes, he would
if he could begin i^ all over again — to establish
higher principles of trade — to make trade
honourable, to fill hungry mouths with wholesome
food ; and he Avould still have granted
Fan's petition at all hazards. How did he know
that he was to prove the pioneer of trade reformation,
while he was well assured that he
was his sister's natural refuge and stay? He
could not have made himself strange to his
own flesh, with whom his first duty lay. He
must have acknowledged the obligation for
charity to begin at home.

Before the dusk prevented him, Oliver took
out and re-read Harry Stanhope's last letter
It was a little looser than the usual brief
reports, which were hardly higher intellectual
flirts than those of the young rustics whose

vicar has seen that they have profited by a
night-school This Alas the ordinary style of
Harry's letters : —

Dear Constable, — Here goes. We are all
well. Baby is thriving. She has got her frocks
shortened, and looks the better for it. It is
still awfully lot. We — Harry and me, for Mr.
and Mrs. Weathered don't try the dodge — took
a header, and had a swim in the river for an
hour this morning*. Woodhurst — that's the man
whose ground lies all about here, is to let us
have lots of fishing. I hope you're all right.

Yours, &c.'

That was as nearly as possible the substance
of the iniclerkly shawls which Harry sent.
But to write at all, without compelling cause,
was a OTcat advance on the whiter's native in-considerateness
and freedom from any comprehension
of responsibility.

In the letter which Oliver held in his hand.

however, llany, in his stumbling jerking manner,
had contrived to say a good deal more.

The two Stanhopess had gone back with the
Weathered, on the return of the clergyman
and his wife to their country parish, and had
found lodgings close to the vicarage where Mrs.
Weathered still had thebaid in her kind care.
It was the attraction of the baby — with the fear
of doing it harm by removing it from the good
offices of an experienced matron — which in the
beginning drew Harry and his brother across
the Channel, back to England, and down into
the rural retirement of a remote parish. But
it soon became plain that the Weathered —
coming in contact with Harry Stanhope at a
turning point in his life, getting him into their
hands Avhen his heart was wrung with suffering
and his whole character subdued — had ac-quire
a ^rowinijj influence over the youni:!^ man. He
was rapidly adopting their forms of thought and
turns of speech, and falling in, to some extent,

-vvith their habits and practices. He had always
possessed in a sense a ductile disposition, apt
to take the mocking of its surroundings and
associations. But a great wrench lead been
required to separate a thoughtless young fellow
from his low atmosphere — laden with earthly
vapours and dense with worldliness. and to
launch him into the higher, rarer air of
altogether loftier principles and considerations,
breathed by the Weathered. Harry had
suffered such a wrench and received such an
impetus as propels many men — especially many
shallow, impulsive men — to the opposite poles
of their former opinions and pursuits.

At this epoch of his history — when Harry
Stanhope turned inevitably, with a sick heart,
from his old interests ; when all his former
sports, though he still engaged in them
mechanically, were Hat and stale to him ;
when what was spiritual in his moral
constitution craved spiritual consolation and

refreshment — something beyond this world,
some promise of reward and restoration for this
lost love and its object, some reparation of all
wrong, and enduring foundation for all good —
Harry was carried out of the past in a totally
new direction from any he had followed
hitherto, where his brother would join him
sooner or later.

Harry retained his simple cordiality, but
the simplicity had got a new bias, and the
cordiality a fresh outlet. In those letters — the
occasional writing of which, without the inducement
of borrowing money, was a marvel in
itself — while he expressed himself scantily, there
was also something of the transparent prattle
though not the ^\\^\\ of a mv\.

c CO

In the more recent prattle Oliver learnt a
good deal of church services and parish work,
in which, to his wonder at hast, he found Harry
was taking part. He had been practising with
Mr. Weatherley's choir, and doing a little rudimentary

teaching in his schools, as well as helping
Mrs. Weathered with her parish children's
annual feast and the machinery of her different
clubs.

Harry did not dream of making the slightest
apology for those extraordinary occupations.
He was as free from self-consciousness now as
ever. He mentioned the schools and the festival
as naturally and unaffectedly as if he had been
referring to a cricket-match and the dinner
which followed. That struck Oliver as the
most hopeful symptom in the case, and he was
as devoutly glad as the Weathered could have
wished.

But Oliver's gladness received a sudden check
when he found Harry writing humbly enough,
to be sure, of his unfitness for reading for orders,
as Mr. Weatherley had just been suggesting he
mii^ht do.

Good heavens, I should think not I' assented
Oliver in a great heat. * I am clad Harry

retains one iota of common sense, if Weatherley
is so far out of this mind. Xow, even supposing
Harry has outlived his lamentable propensity —
supposing he were to pass muster, I should have
to interfere and speak to the bishop.'

But poor Harry was not really thinking of
anything so far beyond him. He was only
modestly preluding the statement that he had
been with Mr. Weatherley when he was delivering
some of his cottage addresses, and Harry
had been moved and helped to say a word of
warning from his own experience.

Was Harry in the way of being taught to
go about and speak at such meetings ? Had he,
too, turned social reformer and preacher — in
the last particular, as Oliver was free to admit,
shrugging his shoulders, far outstripping his,
Oliver's, performances ? Would Harry's inveterate
fancy for joining in whatever was going on,
his incorrigible good-fellowship, thenceforth, or
even for a time, take the shape of lay aid in

priestly ministrations, pointing Mr. Weatherley's
morals by a word in season from a sinner who
was a standing commentary on the vicar's text
at once a warning and an example, a young
man who was ready to proclaim himself an evildoer
formerly, one who had known both the
temptation and the penalty, but had escaped
with the skin of his teeth ? Would Harry, if he
continued in Avell-doing, go on exposing his
shortcomings, steeling himself in the exposure,
till he should come to Fan's wrongs ? Would
he regard it as an act of expiation, and an
offering for the good of his fellow-men, to
speak out thus, and when his little daughter
was old enough to listen to his words and
understand them, Avould he still tell his piteous
tale, and humble himself in her hearing — it
midst be in the hearing' of some other evangelist's
daughter or sister, who mii]rht have
replaced Fan and become Harry's second wife,
and the mother of his children ?

Oliver writhed at the mere notion. He
recalled Fan's strong, proud reserve in the
middle of her ardour, her delicate reticence,
lier unconquerable shrinking from common
speculation and coarse comment. Were the
sacred secrets of her death-bed to be bruited
about and made food for vulgar curiosity by
this new kind of weak excess in the man who
had inflicted the agony ?

Then Oliver called himself back. Had he
any right to sit in stern judgment on Harry
Stanhope's weakness, granted that it was
weakness even to self-indulgence ? What if
this were the sole refuge for Harry Stanhope,
the only means by which the man whom Fan
had so loved and striven to win, could be won
to virtue and temperance ? What if this were
the single method by which Harry could serve
his fellow-creatures ? There are dull or besotted
scholars who can receive no teachings save from
homely, broad personalities, and there are

primitive teachers who if they are not personal
are nothing. Such teaching might appear
little better than foolish and despicable to
Oliver Constable, and yet what assurance had
he, in his arrogance and self-sufficiency, that it
was not amonfT the foolish thini^^s which God
has chosen to confound the wise ? Might not
Fan, from her place among the angels, regard
these ebullitions — which were at least frank and
guileless — that vexed Oliver s soul, in an alto-other
different licht from that in which she
would have seen them, had she been still living
un erring woman on earth ?

No ; let poor Harry do what seemed good
unto him. God forbid that Oliver should put
hindrances in Harry's path — thee path which
was, perhaps, best suited for his stumbling feet.

ClIAPTEE XXIX.

FRESH SERVICE.

Ox the night of his return, Oliver lead been
tempted to say —

My wound is deep,
I fain would sleep,
Take thou the vanguard of the three ;

lout the next day found him again leading the
van. Happy the wounded who have still
strength for the fight, and whose presence is
yet wanted in the thick of the fray.

Sally Pope arrived at an early hour the
following turning, and gave her master her
greeting. She was so full of self-reproach for
her unlucky absence the previous evening that

it diverted lier in some degree from the loud
condolences which he was only too content to
be spared. And Sally was a shrewd woman ;
she knew" that ' men-folk do not care to return
to the topic of their grief, as poor critters of
women will discuss it at large, and find comfort
in dwelling on their trials ; ' so v;hen her
single heartfelt lamentation for ' poor Miss Fan
as where that nimble and clever,' had been
made, Sally set herself to divert Oliver from
the cold comfort of his lonely home-coming, by
retailing to him all the latest news of Friarton.

Lord, Master Oliver, we're not singular in
our troubles ! There's young Dadd down with
fever, lying between life and death. Not a
critter will enter Dadd's shop — not to say the
house, and the old people are nigh besides
themselves.'

Poor Jack ! poor souls ! ' said Oliver. ' But
what has become of the Sister — the wonderful
nurse Mrs. Billiard imported into the town ? '

Oh ! she's gone these three months, the
more reason that Miss Hilyard is as spry as
any of the rest of the young hides. But now,
Master Oliver,' broke off Sally, putting her
head on one side and speaking deprecatingly,
almost mincingly, ' I know as great allowance
ought to be made for idle ladies, and that they
nun be left for to direct themselves in many
ways not open to the commonality, else they'll
fall to pieces like a dry wash-tub, or go allover
red rust like a flat-iron laid aside, and be
in danger of slipping through their friends'
fingers like Miss Hilyard all but slipped, and
gave no end of trouble, the silly tiling ! Still,
Master Oliver, do you think it is proper for
ladies, as are none so old or ill-favoured, to go
and get rid of their spare time — and all time is
to spare with them — a-feeling of the pulses and
looking at the tongues of sick carters and
masons and their families, ay, and of tramps
and their brats, a-treating of them to shooken'-

VOL. III. N

up pillows and cooling driiikn, and as many
blisters and draughts as they can set their minds
to — save us ? '

Well, Sally, at least you'll allow it is a
good chance for the masons and tramps,' said
Oliver with a laugh.

I dunno,' Sally shook her head. ' I think
the world's turned upside down. But leastways
better such folly than that Miss 'slily Policy's
been up to.'

What has Miss 'Mily been up to ? '

Gone and lost her good name, which she'll
never pick up again — not though she were the
queen on the throne, with armies and navies to
scour the Avorld in search of it, at her word.
Xow there's nothing left Miss 'Mily save a
patched-up marriage, to cover the disgrace as
will not be covered, to a rolling stone of a
ne'er-do-well that will bring her to want and
misery. Her as was such a pert piece, setting
herself up, picking holes in the coats of her

betters, and mufulinij; in her lii]^ht-lieadedness at
this body and that body, as if she herself were
a non-siicli and could go her own road and
fear no fall.' Sally ended with the cruel relish
with which the old, who ought to be, and who,
let us be thankful, often are, the most charitable,
still sometimes, alas ! under provocation, contemplate
their young neighbours' receiving
their deserts.

You must be mistaken, Sally,' remonstrated
Oliver, grieved and shocked. ' It cannot
be as you say. The Polleys have always
been most respectable people. Even Policy,
though a useless sinner, picked himself up,
you know. You must have taken some
coarse scandal for gospel. Mrs. Policy has
been a good mother*, and has looked well after
her daughters.'

'Excuse me, Master Oliver, but it's much
you know of it, sir,' said Sally, half huffily,
half scornfully. * And it is little thanks Mrs.

N 2

Policy, poor woman, have got for her work in
the shop and her rule of her family. She were
a bit set up, in her own way, and vaunty of
what she had done for them coals and that
silly man of hers. Nobody came near herself,
and nought that belonged to her was to
be sneezed at. Ah ! her mouth's shut now
and she won't hold up her head again, not by
a long chalk, as she has done in Friarton. I
am sorry for her though,' reflected Sally, showing
some signs of relenting, ' for she were a
throuf][h-^oin^ Woman. Her took the whole
load upon her own shoulders, when it fell off
them sloping ones of Policy's, and asked help
from nobody. Hard she drudged a dozen
years back, never sparing herself, to keep her
family out of the gutter. It was ill-done of
any one of them to humble her pride. list it's
the way of children — so it is. It's a comfort
to the likes of me, as is a single wximan, alone
in the world, except for a niece and newly or

two — looking after my savings I'll be bound,
Master Oliver — to think that I might have had
a man and bairns to my share, and been
no better — rather worse served. But I'll fault
Mrs. Polley with this ' — Sally returned to the
charge — ' she would do everything in the shop
Avitli her ten fingers. She would keep the
management of the books and accounts in
her own hands. Why, them gals weren't
properly brought up to the grocery business or
to any other. They were as silly as silly could
be, if you took them off weighing a pound of
sugar, or cutting a bar of soap, as a child could
do. Our Miss Fan could have bought them
at the one end of the town and sold them at
t'other. Thevv went a deal of their time
hand-idle, or falling with their best clothes;
and was that an up-bringing to keep them out
of mischief? T have it on good authority, they
would lay a-bed in the mornings, and they
were out at their gadding every blessed evening,

though she pulled their up tight about
minding meals and hours, and shutting up to
her face. If they vere quick, they could get
their heads out — most of all Miss 'Mily, as
was the mother's favourite — so it seems she
had been drawing a score under her mother's
nose, and carrying on at a fie rate with that
scamp of a half gentleman — a pretty gentleman
! Mrs. Sam Cobbes' Lon'on brother, though
Mrs. Policy had forbidden her gal to have anything
to say to him.'

I should think so,' said Oliver, with decision.
He knew the man — a fellow with a specious
address, and the glamour of expectations
from a rich uncle in the Customs, which served
him as an apology for losing such mongrel
situations as he occasionally condescended to
fill, and for loafing away the greater portion of
his days, hanging on to other and luunbler relations
than the autocrat in the Customs, the
credulous Cobbes for instance, ahvavs in a lazy,

ft *

often in a disreputable fashion. He Alas just
the sort of acquaintance, full of false pretensions,
vulgar smartness, and strongly-flavoured
dash, to take the fancy of an ignorant, ,
wilful girl like 'Mily Policy. And
on the man's side, he would not hesitate to
amuse himself with her openly-expressed admiration,
as the best joke going.

But Sally was eager to empty her budget.
Mrs. Policy she finds out that 'Mily is snapping
her lingers in her mother's face,' the
storyteller resumed the thread of her narrative,
nothing loth, ' and keeping company
with Birt on the sly, continually ; so the old
woman's temper, as is none of the coolest at the
best of times, flies into a blaze, and she up and
dares the gal to see the fellow again, or she
will be turned to the door, as not worthy of
such a home, and to serve as a warning to her
sisters. Mrs. Policy, if you please, never lets
'Mily out of her sight from that moment, except

at night, when the mother locks the gals*
room door on them, in their hearing.

Sure enough, it is no more use than locking
the stable-door after the horse has got his
head out of the halter, and kicked up his heels
in giving the stable-boy the go-b}'. And the
black affront before the rest of the family — certain
to leak out too, with the feeling of a gaol,
after the liberty the gal had snatched, in spite
of Mrs. Policy's tantrums, drum Miss 'Mily from
bad to worse. She goes and throws dust into
the eyes of them sallies of sisters, or else she
scares them into telling no tales ; she bribes
the poor slavc}^ of a maid. Any how, Master
Oliver, she manages to give her mother the slip
again, gets out of the house after it is shut up
for the night, and runs and meets the scoundrel
at the properest hours. All is up with the
foolish, wrong-headed lass's good name then,
Master Oliver, I need not go for to tell you. Mrs.
Pollen catches her youngest daughter a stealing

in at the airy-door, under cloud of night, and
thrusts her out with her own hand, raisins: that
'Mily is never to cross her mother's honest
threshold aij^ain. She will have nought more
to say to the gal ; she may go back to where
she came from.

Them as told me,' said Sally, after a pause
to recover her breath in her unconscious dramatising
of the miserable details, ' maintained
that Policy did interfere, and try to put in a
word for his daughter ; but, in course, this wife
would not hear him, and it do stand to reason
that he has been so poor a critter, he has lost
all title to be listened to. The lon<]^ and the
short of it is, the talk was over the whole town
the next morning. The Cobbes took 'Mily in —
they could not do less — with Birt, who had
tot the ital into trouble, their brother ; and
'Mily Policy is to be married, and go straight
off to Lon'on, or Manchester, or Glasgow — one
of them bi<:^ towns — with her bargain next

week. Folk think Sam Cobble's that asliametl,
lie has forked out the money — though lie's none
so rich, and the coal and potato trade ain't so
flourishing — and has used all his influence to
over-persuade Birt, by threatening to expose
him to his uncle in the Customs, to make the
gal the amends of marrying her against his
^vill — the mean scuff.'

I am afraid it is a bad business,' admitted
Oliver sadly, compelled as he was to regard
this lin^erini]^ version, in a lower walk of life,
of the wild, youthful escapades, and the half-brutal
parental tyranny and violence which
met the rebellion half wav, that were to be
found in every rank, before Christian civilisation
did its work, a century and more
ago. Now such evil tales were only possible
among the desperately vicious of the highest,
and the desperately ignorant of the lowest,
ranks, or in the gross materialism and incapability
of self-restraint which form the standing

reproach and ixrievoiis disfigurement, to set
against the many virtues of that large class of
smaller shopkeepers — to raise whom in the scale
of humanity Oliver Constable had been willing
to devote his life.

Oliver went immediately to Friarton to look
after his own business. It did not take him long
to despatch what he had to do. He had only
to receive the last report from the not greatly
interested foreman. It was quite what Oliver
had expected. He went through it in less
than an hour. It took him no more than ten
minutes afterwards to write out, in the back
shop, his announcement of giving up his father's
and his own baking business — he could not
pretend to sell the goodwill of what lead ceased
to pay its cost — to be inserted in the next
week's Friarton's newspapers.

Oliver walked alone the Ilion Street afterwards,
without happening to meet any save
the most casual acquaintances. He passed the

Polled's' shop door, having a glimpse of Mrs.
Policy ^vith the purplish flush on lier face to
which she was liable, fixed in her checks, and
a certain hard, set turn of the head and jerking
activity of movement, as she served her customers.
He knew that she would stand and
do her work there, though the force she put on
herself might involve the danger of her falling
behind the counter. But he could not go in
then, or for some time to come — not till the
sough of the scandal in the family had sofar
died out, and the bitter mortification its
head was experiencing, had partly worn off.
Sympathy and condolence were not to bethought
of here. They would be a positive
insult.

But there was nothings to hinder Oliver
from repairing to the Dadds'. forgetful of the
coolness between him and Jack, or rather
spurred on by it to the quicker exercise of old
friendship.

Oliver found the shop much as it had been
described by Sally Pope, forsaken by customers,
abandoned to the disheartened journeymen and
shop-boys, with the goods either unexposed for
sale or lying about in a state of confusion and
disorder, which marked the absence or indifference
of the masters. For both the Dadds had
taken pride in their well-filled, well-kept
shop. Friarton was somewhat given to panics
in case of dangerous infectious diseases. The
undaunted Sister who had brought licht above
the horizon had not stayed long enough to
convert the town to her view of illness.

Oliver had barely time to enquire for the
patient, when old Dadd hurried out from
the back shop and accosted him. It was a
relief to distinguish the voice of an old friend
who had come voluntarily into the shop and
was standing quietly leaning against the counter,
instead of fleeing from the place, as if it
were a pest-house. It almost exhilarated the

stoiit-licarted old man, who was keeping up
bravely, to crack one of his old jokes.

Not come back yet a family man, Mr.
Oliver ? Not wholly without its advantage — I
mean the bachelor state. Mind coming in
farther Bless you ! dont you mind? It weill
do Mrs. Dadd a power of good to see a strange
face — as ain't really strange — quite the contrary",
and ain't the doctor's or one of them
dratted nurses — which they never keep their
time nor do their booty properly, as the poor
fellow needing them knows to his cost. His
mother can't watch day and night for weeks,
and I'm but a poor hand at the trade,' said the
father wistfully, ' though I would give a deal to
take it up off-hand. But, you see, it don't
come natural like to a man as it do to a woman,
and I wasn't bred to it, in any sort, being come
of a healthy family,' rambled the linen-draper,
staving off questions, as Oliver suspected, till
they were through the back shop, up the stair

and into the vacant, dreary-looking best parlour,
Avitli its torn prescriptions cast heedlessly on the
carpet and its tray of half-empty physic-bottles
and slops put down recklessly on the edge of
the table, where guests had been wont to see
more substantial fare carefully deposited.
Then old Dadd raised his fist and was about to
bring it down on the table with a bang — which
in the very act of being dealt, was caught up and
so much suppressed that it barely caused the
physic-bottles to jingle, because Jack's bedroom
lay no farther off than the other side of the
passage. ' Yes, sir, my boy Jack is swimming
for his life, tlicy tell me,' said the poor man,
winking his e3x^s, knitting his brows hard, and
speaking as if Oliver were about to question the
statement.

The door behind them opened, and the unnaturally
stitched voice sank into silence
abruptly, while the late speaker turned eagerly
to meet the new comer.

Mrs. Dadd had thought Oliver-was the
doctor, and entered hastily. At the sudden
sight of her son's contemporary and old companion
standing there in the Hush of health
and strength, she broke down, for a moment,
more completely than Dadd had done, to his
great dismay. For Mrs. Dadd Alas a mannerly
woman — so far as she understood manners.
She prided herself on being at home with sickness,
and she was accustomed to say, she did
not know what a woman was good for, unless
it were to bear up on these occasions when a
man was sure to give way. One gain that was
got by her sinking into a chair and covering
lier face, in place of greeting Oliver, was that it
roused old Dadd to bustle about in order to
quiet her, and to seek to explain the strange
state of matters to Oliver.

Xow, don't take on so, like a good soul ;

l:^e ain't worse since morning. jS'o, I knew it.
And don't you go for to think, Mr. Oliver, it's

any ill feeling to you that's sticking in the
Missus's throat. Nothing of the kind, sir.
Why, til at was all out of head with poor Jack
himself — who was never a chap to bear malice,
months ago. He said to me only the other
day when this illness was coming on him ; " I
can't tell what ails me, father ; it ain't my
head, or my back, or my legs in stickler —
only I feel seedy all over. T ain't fit for the
shop, and I'm still less fit for a field-day " —
you see the autumn manoeuvres was dominion
" if it had been a year or two back, I might
have gone out to Friarton Mill and had a quiet
afternoon with Constable, and tried Avhat that
would have done for me. Yes," he said, "I
remember there was bad blood between us ;
but I'm not so cock sure as I have been, that I
had the best of it. Anyhow, Constable was the
right sort to go to, at a pinch. You could look
to be borne with, and set on sour feet again

VOL. III.

when you felt you lead not a leg left to stand
on, as it is my bad luck to do to-day." '

That was very good of Jack,' said Oliver
warmly. ' Then you'll let me sit up with him tonight,
since he'll not mind ; perhaps he'll rather
like it. I don't mean to boast of my qualifications
as a nurse; but I think you and Mrs. Dadd
may trust me to see to the doctor's orders.'

I should think so, Mr. Oliver,' said Dadd
with emphasis. ' You are kind, and we are much
indebted to you, as we'll tell you better some
day, please God. Others has offered, but none
so hearty, or idiom we could put such faith in,'
old Dadd astonished Oliver by saying. ' And
as to Jack's minding or likings, bless you ! he
don't know his own mother from a stranger,
and hasn't these three days back.'

'It's that as has made me useless, Mr. Oliver,'
said Mrs. Dadd, sitting up and apologising
feebly ; ' so that I haven't even had the grace
to thank you for your offer.'

Never mind thanks,' said Oliver. ' Did niy
father go out of his Away to thank you when
you stayed at Friarton Mill and brought this
little girl through her fever ? '

'Ah, that was different; that was all in a
woman's way for a motherless little thing, and I
ran no risk, having had the scarlet fever myself
when I was a child. I wish I had been with
her at the last, poor soul ! When her trouble
came upon her, in a strange place, and none as
she knew, save men to look after her, I reckon
she would have cared then to see the face of an
old acquaintance, as was a woman like herself
and knew her needs. But the Lord will protect
you, Mr. Oliver, as He may have raised you
up, and sent you home, at this time, to save my
dear Jack. May be it is the greatest mark of
respect I could show you or any man, after all,
to think of leaving my own lad in your care.'

Oliver did not know about having been
raised up and sent home to save Jack Dadd,



but lie said ' Surely,' Avitli fervour to Mrs.
DadcVs passionate amendment on her fonnal
thanks.

So Oliver was regularly installed, with the
doctor's consent, night-nurse to Jack Dadd ; and
in place of calling at the Meadows, he went out
of the way to avoid the house and any chance
of encountering Mrs. Hilliard or her cousin, ashe
passed backwards and forwards between the
rooms above the shop in the High Street, Friar-ton,
and Friarton Mill for a considerable number
of mornings and evenings. Such fellow-townsmen
as he met contented themselves with
looking curiously after him, whether they
stopped him to enquire for the sick man, or
Whether they crossed the street to shun the
lightest breath of infection. An odd fish, Oliver
Constable, not without feeling — strange to say
in his queer composition.

CHAPTER XXX.

STUMBLED ACROSS — INTERVIEWED — Taken AT

HIS WORD.

OxE night, before it was late, as Oliver was
stooping over Jack, trying to ascertain whether
he were really muttering irrelevantly,

There's Ruby, and Rover, and Ranter, too,'

or asking for something the sufferer wanted,
a man's figure in professional black, which was
yet not the doctor's, appeared on the opposite
side of the bed. Oliver looked up — it was
Mr. Holland, the Dadds' and Oliver's minister.
He had not been there before — partly because
he had been away on sick leave, partly because
he had returned, only half recruited,

after the anxiously economised weeks at the
sea-side with this family — difficult for the poor
minister to afford in more ways than one. And
this wife lead so implored him not to put his
shaken health and strength, not fairly reestablished,
to the severe test of a fever-laden
atmosphere, that he had yielded reluctantly,
and kept away from the unconscious Jack and
his burdened father and mother, till Mr. Holland
could do so no longer. Come what misjlit
of it, though it should cost him his own life,
and his wife should be left a widow and his
children fatherless, the pastor must be at his
post ; and when he went to it, he found the
rebel of his conc^rco-ation lianLjin^ over the
sick man — indifferent to inhaling!; the tainted
vapours at the Mountain-head.

Mr. Holland coloured hi^'li and hesitated.

Oliver looked u}) and spoke without the
slightest difficulty, rather with a rouiihish freedom,
born of the necessity of the moment.

Hallo, sir ! are you there ? Look here,
Holland ; from the colour of your coat, you
have seen more sickness than I. Can you feel
a pulse ? Can you pronounce on the state of a
tongue ? You come as a stranger, you can tell
how Jack strikes you. What do you think of
his chance ? '

Mr. Holland stepped forward and did as he
was required. Oliver and he consulted together
and watched and nursed Jack, without
a thought of anybody besides, for some hours.
Then, after the clergyman had taken up his hat
to go, he hesitated once more, put it down
again, and touched Oliver's arm with a hand
that shook slightly.

Brother,' said Mr. Holland solemnly, in
phraseology adopted both by Papists and Puritans
in exceptional circumstances and seasons
of strong feeling, ' have you any objection to
joining with me in prayer, and offering up an
intercession for oiu' sick brother P '

»

None In the Avorlcl,' replied Oliver promptly.
And the two men prayed aloud by the voice of
the one, for Jack Dadd.

The next Sunday, Mr. Holland preached a
sermon, which slightly bewildered his hearers,
on the text, ' Not they who say " Lord, Lord,"
but they who do the will of my Father.'

The early October mornings were getting
always darker — with a darkness which partook of
white haze as well as dank wet, dimmer, chiller,
when Oliver — buttoning up his great coat, as he
came out of the Dadds' house into the street,
where last night's lamps were still burning, and
which had not yet woke up for the day, since not
even an early milkman had put in an appearance
was startled by a woman in a bonnet and veil,
hugging a shawl round her, coming out upon
him from the nearest alley, and accosting him
in a gasping, constrained voice.

'Please, sir, can you tell me how Mr. —
how Mr. Jack Dadd is <Tointr on this morning?'

enquired the speaker, with little pants between
the broken utterances of the words.

In place of answering the question, Oliver
exclaimed in amazement, ' Miss 'Liza Policy !
What are you doing here at this hour of the
mornings ? '

Oh, Mr. Oliver, don't betray me ! ' cried
}X)or 'Liza, in her natural voice, though it was
quivering with distress and terror. ' I thought
you would not know me. But never mind
that just now; tell me quick, how is Jack?
Oh ! will he die, Mr. Oliver ? Will Jack die .? '

I hope not,' said Oliver gently ; ' he's no
worse, and every hour stained is in his favour.
But this is not a time for you to be out. It
was not six dien Mrs. Dadd took my seat.
Let me see you home. Miss 'Liza, at once.'

Oh ! no, no, Mr. Oliver,' refused 'Liza, in a
fresh paroxysm of alarm and trouble. Mother
would be fit to kill me outright, if I came in
with a man — with a gentleman, at this hour of

the morning — though it is mornings — not iii^ht '
pleaded 'Liza piteously ; ' and old Betty Miles
lias come to wash, and had the door opened
for her ' — taking; further refute in the business
of the day's having really begun — • or else I
should not have dared to get up, and slip out
at all. Oh dear ! You do not know how hard
mother has grown, how hard everything is,
since poor 'Mily went wrong,' protested 'Liza,
weeping, not violently, but in a crushed manner.
It is so dull you cannot think ! We dare not
lift up our heads from our work, or make a
joke, or speak of running out to pay a single
call. Mother says we are all as bad as 'Mily,
and have no sense or feeling. She is ashamed
of us. No respectable people will wish us
to darken their doors, or dream of returning
our visits. But oh ! it would be nothing,
Mr. Oliver,' broke off 'Liza, returning to the
dominant cause of her misery, ' if Jack Dadd
Acre only a little better. Mother may do or say

what she chooses,' continued the girl, writhing
like any other Avorm trodden on, and turning
on its oppressor, ' I must and will hear how
Jack is, or I shall go mad. Mother may serve
me as she served 'Mily. I don't care, there !
Anybody may hear me, and go and tell mother
that likes.'

'Jack is highly honoured,' said Oliver, at
a loss for any other observation. ' But now,
don't you think, since he is no worse, and will
soon, I trust, be a great deal better, it would
be as well for you to take care of yourself, and
do what your mother wishes you, for his sake,
as well as hers, Miss 'Liza ? '

Oh ! hush, hush ! Don't say my name, incase
anybody hear you,' 'Liza objected with the
greatest inconsistency. ' You are a kind chap —
that is, you are very good ; but I did not mean
you or anybody to see or know me. I thought
you would not penetrate my disguise,' said 'Liza
with solemn simplicity.

I was too clever,' said Oliver, tempted to
laiigli.

'But you Avill not think ill of me?' besought
'Liza — sinking a<]rain, in a moment, from
the part of the heroine of romance she had
formerly longed to play, ^vhich, even this
morning, she had found some faint compensation
in trying to support, for Jack was not dead,
only very ill — into the affronted, unhappy,
childish young woman. ' You will not tell
upon nie? You see Jack Dadd and I have
known each other all our days, and sometimes — •
well, he has looked and said things — though he
was not always kind. lie was fair angry because
I let you talk to me first when you came back,*
explained 'Liza, with a little hysterical giggle.
I am sure, Mr. Oliver, we two said nothing
which all the Avorld might not have heard, and
Jack had mvcu himself no v'vA\t to interfere
With me for speaking to anybody. Now mother

says nobody ^vill ever care to come near us
again, after the disgrace 'Mily has brought
upon the family.' 'Liza began to droop afresh,
and to cry without the most distant admixture
of small triumphant laughter. ' It would be
very hard and cruel, if it were true, for low
could we — Ann and I, help it ? Mother was always
putting 'Mily before us,' complained Liza
resentfully, ' and Jack and 'Mily would carry
on together, just to plague me, I believe. Oh
dear ! what am I doing P ' — stopping short and
w^rin2?inoj her hands — ' Blaminf]^ Jack when he
may be dying or dead for aught I know ; and
I may never see or speak to him again in my
life. But I should not mind that, if God would
only let Jack Hve and get well and be happy,
though it were all away from me. Oh !
Mr. Oliver, will he live ? Will Jack lives '

The poor delicate girl was quite spent and
shaken. She was forced to let Oliver — who

was not Without some apprehension of arousing
the bhncl fury of Mrs. Poles — give her his arm
within sight of her mother's door.

So that was the way of it ? ' Oliver said
to himself softly, as he walked away. ' Poor
thing ! poor old Jack — who can hardly move a
finger at this moment ! And I came between
them and made mischief, did I ? without the
faintest suspicion, in my stupid bungling? But,
let us be thankful, it may not be too Late to set
this right if the beggar will only recover.'

Oliver was coming in to Jack, not going
from him, when the gas-lights in the streets of
Friarton looked white and bright and encouraging
as they look with the night setting
in — not yellow and faded and dispiriting, after
a career of unwarrantable dissipation, according
to their faithless discomfiting habit with the

CD

first streak of dawn.

There were still many people about, largely
the promenaders, slippers, and callers belonging

to the classes to which day brings
work and evening recreation, with the recreation
consisting mainly of Avhat is best expressed
by the old-fashioned word ' gadding ' — going
abroad and foraging for some little excitement
in the way of gossip or otherwise. This was
the season when the Policy girls had been v/ont
to disport themselves among their acquaintances,
till the striking of a clock sent them scampering
and scuttling home, like Cinderella minus her
glass slipper.

And sure enough 'Mily Policy came forward
in her conspicuous hat and outrageous skirt,
bustling along as if all the business of Friar-ton
were left for her to do, and meeting Oliver
Constable in the face.

At the first glance she appeared perfectly
unabashed. The only difference in her was
that to the girlish pertness and boldness there
was added a touch of the hard brazenness
which defies such a position as hers. She was

alone — lie espied Oliver at once. Her sharp
eyes had never been known to miss man or
woman, and now — far from being cast down,
they were roving on all sides, challenging everj^
passer-by. There was the complete contrast
between 'Liza and 'Mily Policy which is generally
to be found between the sinned against
and the sinner. 'Mily attempted no foolish
disguise. She was not seeking to escape from
Oliver's recognition. She darted np to him,
hailing him loudly — ' Mr. Oliver Constable, it
is a treat to see you now-a-days.'

Oliver stopped and spoke to 'Mily. She
made no enquiry for Jack Dadd, or the most
distant allusion to Oliver's recent loss. On the
contrary, in full view of his mourning, she
referred to the chancres which had occuiTcd
lately, with boisterous gaiety. ' And there are
more and greater changes coming, I can tell
you, Mr. Oliver,' said 'Mily, in her glides
manner. ' I am turning my back on this dull

hole, I'm glad to say. I am to be married
next Thursday ; the day is so near that I need
not make a mystery of it. I dare say you
have heard, though you have not wished me
joy yet. If you were quicker about it, I might
give you an invitation to my wedding.'

Do.' said Oliver, on the impulse of the
moment ; ' and I'll be happy to come in the
character of an old friend.'

Will you ? ' asked 'Mily, quickly and doubtfully.
' Will you, indeed, Mr. Oliver ? Do you
mean what you say ? '

Yes, of course.'

That will be awfully good of you. I'll
be as proud as a peacock ; no ' — with a sudden
flush — ' not that, but very much obliged and
thankful to show his friends that all the people
I ever knew have not turned their backs upon
me.' She finished with bitterness, still her
voice and face betrayed some shame and regret.
Would 3'ou mind walking and talking with me

VOL. III. p

a bit, Mr. Oliver ? ' she asked almost gently.
'We'll turn down into Jervis's yard, where
there is nobody-working at this hour. I should
like to speak out to you this once. It is not
late, and though it were, there's nobody to
hinder me from stopping out till after ten, now.
But, oh! Mr. Oliver' — breaking out passionately
— ' it was mother herself put the finishing
touch to my folly. I had been wild and flown
in her face, and disobeyed her, but I was not
bad, when she turned me from mv father's
door, and locked it in my face. She has herself
to thank for what came of it, — no, no, I
don't mean that ' — cried 'Mily, calling; herself
back with an accent of terror in her despair —
What is it the Bible says about them as
curses father and mother ? And it is only them
as honours whither and mother that lives long ;
so that any way I'm booked to die young like
Jack Dadd and Fan — I beg your pardon,
Mr. Oliver — Mrs. Harry Stanhope. Well, I've

got an inkling there are worse fates going.
But it was heartless and ill done of me,' confessed
poor 'Mily, with something like real
contrition in the tears which welled up into
her round eyes, — ' to come forward and look in
your face, and at the band round your hat, and
begin with my idle nonsense — only it's such
sore nonsense now-a-days — you can't guess,
Mr. Oliver. Did you ever think it would come
to this — that my banns should be put up here,
hi Friarton, and my marriage-day next week,
yet neither mother, nor 'Liza, nor any of them,
should care to come near me? That they
should not be able to tell what I'm to wear, or
seek to bid me good-bye before I go ? '

It will be better when you are gone,' said
Oliver. ' Forgiveness and forgetfulness will
come in time. You will try to do your best,
'Mily, God helping j^ou, in the future, and
when you come back '

I'll never come back, never,' said 'Mily,

r 2

with strong conviction. ' I'll never show my
face here ao-ain, tlioiiizli I've soufijht to look as
if I did not care that I had met the disgrace, I
deserved, I suppose. Hit you'll come to my
marriage, Mr. Oliver,' pleaded 'Mily, ' and wish
me the best that can happen to me, now l! Birt
will be pleased, because of your college breeding
and connections, and will think more of me
since a gentleman like you does not hold it
beneath him to stand by me. And you will
tell them at home some day, Mr. Oliver, what
I wore — you'll take a good stare at my bonnet
and gown for the purpose — and how I looked,
and that I had taken care, as far as I coidd,
out of the little bit of money my aunt 'Mily,
as was also my godmother, left me, that everything
about the marriage should be as slap-bang
as the Cobbcs could manage it ? Xo doubt
mothers daughter, considering what mother
has made of the shop, and what her bank-book
comes to, mii'lit have been entitled to a ^rreat

deal more. I knoAv I used to fancy I might
be married in a white satin and go ofT in a
carriage and pair at least,' replied 'Mily, lialf-
proudly, half ruefully ; ' still you'll see there
will be nothing in the way the marriage is
gone about, to affront mother and the rest —
though none of them has come to look after
my credit and theirs,' ended 'Mily, with a considerable
flavour of the old woman lingering
about her still.

CIIAPTEE XXXI.

LIFE AM) DEATH.

Jack Dadd was more like a girl than ever —
mere like even than the priest of pink and Avhite
complexioned lads — with whom to associate the
idea of a bold, rude, fox-hunter or a slashing
soldier, or a reckless buccaneer, as they had
been represented in Jack's favourite songs,
would have been the height of absurdity,
pathetic in the very wildness of the imagination.
He was wasted and worn to skin and bone,
and faded to the colour of blanched wax, Ivincj
with his eyes shut, though he was not sleeping.
Yet Jack was considered to have got the turn, to
be in a fair, though still a precarious, way of

recovery. Oliver had not altogether resigned
his functions ; he was with Jack this night
ao'ain sitting; readiness at ti little distance from
the bed, when he was startled by hearing a
piping voice address him, and looking round,
he saw Jack's eyes wide open, with reason in
their glance, fixed upon him. It was a critical
moment, for between delirium and sheer feebleness.
Jack had not before shown any consciousness
of Oliver's identity.

Noll,' said Jack, ' don't sou remember
how I won your taws that time ? ' referring to
a famous, far-off, game of marbles in the Friar-ton
playground.

Oliver was immensely relieved. ' Yes,
Jack, you beat me to sticks,' he admitted
candidly, while Jack emitted the ghost of a
chuckle at the recollection of his old victory.

But Jack's next speech was not so reassuring.
' Constable,' said Jack, ' I've often
been guilty of rank impudence to you.'

Gammon ! ' said Oliver ; ' slight up for the
rest of the night, old boy ; let me turn you
round, and do you try and get another sleep,
which Avill set you on your pins again in no
time, and let me finish mv book.'

But Jack's hour for conversation had come,
and he would not be silenced. ' I sav, Constable,
I hope I may get over this bout, and be
let off this time, to live and make up for some
things I've done unlike — unlike a gentleman.'

Heaven help the lad ! who was too shy in
the middle of his forwardness to sav a Christian,
the young counter-jumper who had his own
standard for a man and a gentleman.

'You may live to behave like a prince.
Jack, if you'll only be careful and not exhaust
yourself. Here ; swallow this stuff, and snooze
away.'

But Jack was at his confessions acjain, more
briskly than before, the moment he had taken
the stimulant. * T wonder if anybody but the

poor old guv'iior, and the mother, and perhaps
a good fellow like you, Constable, Avould care
whether I hopped the twig or not? I don't
deserve it from some people. There's 'Liza
'Liza Polley — 'Liza might not have always
known her own mind, or rather, her friends
went in and bamboozled her, and put a lot of
nonsense into her head, but I Alas not quite
fair to 'Liza. I came dovrn hard upon her,
when, as it turned out, you were not going-after
her, and when, if you will believe me,'
said Jack, with emphasis, succeeding in raising
himself on his elbow, ' she never cared a rap
for you, it was me she cared for all the time —
poor 'Liza ! ' ended Jack, falling back with a
sigh.

The delicious naivete of the assertion pleased
Oliver greatly, while he hastened to give ita
handsome corroboration. 'lam profoundly
convinced of the truth of what you say,
Jack ; and if it would not bring on a fresh

attack of fever, I might generously tell you in
return that Miss 'Liza Polley met me at break
of day the other morning, daring the 'wrath of
her mother, just to hear the last news of your
health;

Did she, though ? ' exclaimed Jack, With
his poor face brightening into a dim glow of
satisfaction ; ' and 'Liza is as frightened as a
hare while her mother has been like a she-bear
that has been robbed of her whelps, since she
sent 'Mily up the spout.' There was a little
pause. Oliver hoped Jack was dropping off
to sleep. ' I'll not forget it of 'Liza Policy,'
Jack spoke again, with drowsy, lordly magnanimity
; ' it was the best errand she ever ran on.
I'll act on the square to her — on the square all
]round, please God. And as for Mrs. Polley,
Avon't the guv'nor make her squeak to a different
tune, when he calls to pop the question
to the mother for me ? '

Yes, Jack was hiding to recover, to be a

man instead of a boy — a good man ' please
God,' as he Lad said simply. And it Avould
please the Father of Lights, the source and the
reward of all goodness.

Death and desolation were distanced for
once. The strange, sad sights, sounds, and
memories which the King of Terrors, even
though his sceptre has been wrested from his
grasp, still brings with him, and leaves behind
him wherever his ' pale feet ' pass, woidd be
changed for the cheery, sweet, common tokens
of returning health and life : the fresh, open
air, everyday work, the familiar faces of friends
no longer anxious or averted.

Oliver felt it like a great boon to himself.
He went to 'Mily Policy's marriage with much
better spirit and hope, since there was no
longer the least probability of his having to
attend Jack Dadd's funeral.

Oliver represented 'Mily's circle, though
Sam Cobble gave her away. An old friend

lent lier this countenance when lie needed it.
For lie was conscience-stricken and shame-smitten
throng all lier defiance. She was
really smarting keenly under the abandonment
of lier kindred. She was awaking silently — and
when lead 'Mily ever been silent before ? — and
sadly, already, even before he had made her
his wife, to the utter poverty and short-lived
nature of the passion which had existed between
her and the man for whom she had
not generously but wilfully, sacrificed all
that Avoient hold dear. For this reason she
was susceptible to the compliment of Oliver's
presence even more than to the show of her
gaudy blue silk gown and desperately smart
bonnet and veil. She thanked him with an
earnestness which struck Oliver in 'Mily, and
Avliich he considered far out of proportion to
the cause of the thanks, in the last words she
said to him. She went with her husband
straight from the church to the railway-station.

as the Cobbcs could not be expected to furnish
the sliabbiest version of a weddings-breakfast,
and left immediately fur Manchester. There
was no trace of the couple when Oliver followed
them to the station in the course of a
quarter of an hour, intending to take a short
journey on his own affairs.

Oliver Constable had his foot on a carriage
step when the station-master hurried up,
white and scared-looking, struggling to maintain
his composure. He whispered to Oliver,
'There's been an accident to the 11.30 train
north, close to Medlar Bridge. I've just had
word. There's folk hurt. All that can help
is wanted immediately ; but there's no use
driving the town wild, and brins^inj^ out a
pack of useless, frantic people as long as it can
be prevented. Would you mind, sir, coming
^vith me and the nearest doctor and the surface-men
? '

All right,' consented Oliver, in reference to

what was evidently all wrong. lie, too, was
agitated by the suddenness and shock of the
niessa<]^e.

It Alas not till the little party had started
and aroused the suspicion of a few idlers, though
another quarter of an hour would pass before
the vague alarm took shape, spread abroad and
thrilled the town, that Oliver recollected the
11.30 train north was the very train by which
the newly-married pair were to travel. He
told himself the next moment that amongst
the hundreds in the train there was little likelihood
that the Birds should be the particular
Victims.

The place where the last portion of the
train had run off the line, with the usual
amount of overthrow and wreck, lav about
midway between Friarton and the next station,
from which assistance had already come, before
the Friarton station-master and his band of
helpers arrived. Oliver save only the debris

of broken carriages and a throne; of excited
but uninjured people, when he leapt from the
engine, on reaching: his destination. ' Not so
bad as had been feared from the earliest report,'
Oliver heard proclaimed by various
voices immediately. Two of the smashed carriages
where found to have been empty. Only
one carriage and the o'uard's van were occupied.
A woman had been killed, and five or
six persons more or less hurt.'

Oliver Constable passed through the eager
speakers, looking on every side for the Birds,
half expecting to find 'Mily in hysterics if
she had happened to be in a carriage near
those which had broken loose, and if she had
seen anything of the accident.

Before he was aware he found himself close
to the waiting-room into which the sufferers had
been carried. A railway servant at the door,
taking it for granted that Oliver was seeking for
the room and had a right to enter, beckoned him

ill before lie could tliiiik where lie was ^oiufi,
among the doctors and their patients — fainting
or groaning, while pulses were felt, heads
bandaged, and limbs set.

Oliver prepared to retreat, but first he casta
quick glance round. Stay ! Was not that
Birt in the soiled, jaunty new clothes for which
'Mily had paid, out of her little bit of money?

The man did not look niucli the worse, in
spite of the outcry he was making over what
a doctor was coolly pooh-cooling as a trifle
of a broken collar-bone.

But where was 'Mily ?

In another moment Oliver learnt the incredible
fact that Birt did not know. The
bridegroom had been smoking with the guard
in the van when the accident happened, and
ever since then — speaking from Birt's point of
view — he had been in far too bad a way to
enquire after anybody. But no doubt she was
somewhere outside, giving and screeching

with the rest of the women. She ought to be
looked up hit once — Birt grumbled crossly,
taking the hast word of scolding; — to see if she
could not make a beginning in minding her
duty, and trying to do something for him
when he was in mortal agony and as sick asa
dog.

Oliver, with his heart standing still, took one
step towards the door of another room which
was kept closed. An elderly woman turned
the key in the lock and let him go in. Alas !
yes ; there lay all that was mortal of 'Mily,
the poor mangled body decently composed,
covered over and put away from fascinated,
appalled gaze, or rude, gloating scrutiny — ill
the very dress she had so often pictured herself
as swearing, that she had bidden Oliver notice
particularly, which she had, not tlnxe hours
before, gone to church in. The chubby face
was little altered, except for the closed eyes,
since it had been spared, Awhile death must

VOL. III. Q

have proved instantaneous. With no friend by
her side, not missed, though she was in lier
bridal glory, till Oliver sought lier out, the
disastrous end of 'Mily's foolish young life lead
deed come swiftly.

In the grief and oppression with which
Oliver set about making the necessary arrangements,
he could yet believe that, as 'Mily had
said of Fan's fate, so her own might have been
more miserable still.

It was a wise choice made by the warrior
and poet king — rather to fall into God's than
into man's hands. To die in an instant, though
it were on her marriage morning, in her bridal
finery, dien her heart was softened in the act
of quitting Friarton, thinking as she thought
in all probability — with regretful tenderness of
her mother and family, and repenting of lier
misconduct, while, at the same time, all faith
and hope in her husband had not been crushed
out of her, was surely better than to live on

at the mercy of a man like Birt, to be dragged
down by him into lower and lower depths, to
risk becoming at last as heartless and worthless
as himself.

Oliver had a worse ordeal to fiice before
night than that of seeking out 'Mily on her
marriage day, as the woman killed in the railway
accident.

Mrs. Policy sent over an express to Friar-ton
Mill to bid Mr. Constable come into the
town and speak to her. In other circumstances
it would have been an exacting, unreasonable
demand ; as it was Oliver, like
any man with a true man's heart, obeyed it
as he would have obeyed the behest of the
Queen.

He found the Polleys' shop with the shutters
up in the middle of the afternoon, for the first
time in his recollection. Mrs. Policy was not in
the back shop ; she was in her daughters' room,
to which she had gone, with rapid unsteady

Q 2

feet, the moment a rash or stolid customer
had pushed forward to the counter, and, in
]place of giving an order, had told the tragedy
in all its raw anguish and frightful force,
without waiting to wei<ih words, or to secure
the presence of some solemnly commissioned,
skilled, and pitying comforter. The mother
was sittings by the side of the bed in which
'Mily had been wont to sleep. Mrs. Policy's
hard-working hand was mechanically smoothing
down the crochet quilt, which had been
one of the few feats of industry accomplished
by the joint efforts of the sisters while they
were still at school, and in which 'Mily, though
the youngest, had played the foremost part. The
first married of the three workers was to have
carried off the quilt, but the bargain had not
been kept in spite of 'Mily's double title to the
prize.

The heavy flush had not grown lighter on
Mrs. Policy's cheeks. She continued dry-eyed

and silent, while all the eyes around her were
dim, and the faces swollen with crying, and as
Oliver — the last person there who had seen
and spoken with 'Mil' — entered the room, a
fresh bm'st of lamentation broke from her
sisters, even her father groaned aloud, and
bowed his face over his shaking hands.

Oliver took Mrs. Policy's hand reverently.
I am very sorry,' he muttered. ' She could
not have suffered. She is in better hands even
than in those of the friends who loved her best.
I have done all that was required

Mr. Oliver,' said Mrs. Policy, in a loud,
harsh voice which startled everybody, ' I have
sent for you in case I should not live another
night. How do I know when them as I've seen
full of youth and life and gladness is took in
the twinkling of an eye ? I want to thank you
before I die, and I may' never have another
chance. Yes, I know all you have done for
my 'Mily this day. You have stood beside her

both as a bride aud as a corpse. When
every friend she had gave my jjal up, and left
lier to be despised and trodden upon, when the
mother as bore and lead turned lier adrift,
that so her folly mihi jzroAv into sin, showed
no mercy, you came to her and let her feel she
had one friend left on earth, so that she miirht
be able to believe that she had still a Father
and Saviour in heaven. You have ordered
her cofTni and undertook, if necessary, to pay
for it, and are ready to see all that the cruel,
grinding, tearing wheels left of her, laid in it,
and to help to carry her yourself to the churchyard.
Mr. Oliver, my thanks ain't worth much ;
for aught that I know, they may be no better than
ill Lavishes and curses, since I Alas the unnatural
mother as shut 'Mily out into the street, where
she had no refuge, save the base villain that had
decoyed her from her mother's roof. Hold your
tongue, Policy, and you gals, and you, sir,
though you were thrice my pastor,' addressing

Mr. Ilollaud, as lie came softly and sorrowfully
into the room. She resisted fiercely all attempts
of her frightened husband and children and the
other awed bystanders to stay her wild self-accusation.
' I Avill speak out. I've sung my
own praises and been my own trumpeter many's
the time. I'll publish likewise my barbarous
cruelty. It was I as denounced my own
dau2^1iter and condemned her to destruction
and an early grave. So what would it serve
you, Mr. Oliver, though you were to let me go
down on my knees and bless you, because you
had more pity on my 'Mily — my bright, clever
'Mily, that is now as cold and still as a clod of
the valley, than her wicked mother had on her
poor, thoughtless child ? '

You loved her better than yourself, all the
time you blamed her most,' Oliver told the
miserable woman. ' It was your very love for
her, and pride in her, which made, you hard.
She knew that then ; she knows it better now.'

Something in the words spoken almost at
random, opened the closed floodgate of tears
which quenched the frenzy blazing into a de-domini
flame, and saved the stout heart from
breaking. ' Yes, 1 were fond and proud of my
']\Iily, with good reason,' protested Mrs. Polley
more softly, though the softness was expressed
by the deep sobs which rent her breast, and
the torrents of tears that gushed from her eyes.
There was none of the other gals fit to
hold a candle to her. She were that smart,
my little 'Mily, she coidd run and speak
by the time she was eighteen months. I've
seen her a sitting up rosy and fill of roguery,
playing with the pillows in this here bed, when
other children would have been Ivinj:^ like so
many little losses. Her fingers and Iter tongue
alike Avere that clever ! She had furnished her
piece and begun another of this very bed quilt
lonjz before Ann or 'Liza had 2;ot half through
with either of theirs — and her the yoimirest and

.^riLLEU AND Baker. 23

only in her first quarter at the school. " I'll make
them stand about, mother, she would say to me,"
with one of her merry laughs ; '* and I'll wager
I'll be married first, as well as first done with my
bit of the crochet, and get the quilt all to myself"
So she has been married first, and she has died
first, leavings me and her father behind, as
ought by rights to have gone long before her.
Oh! 'Mily, 'Mily, if I could but have died
for you ! '

Poor 3'oung 'Mily Policy's death on her 
morning' caused a o'reat revulsion in the

O iD O

feelings which had been entertained towards
her in her native town. Her awful fate wiped
out, in human eyes, the sum of her transgressions.
Iter death was regarded — not so much
in the light of retribution as of atonement. A
tender veil of commiseration and charity was
drawn over her offences till they were in a fair
wav to be forgotten as well as forgiven. Her
memory was likely to survive in Friarton and

appeal to all gentle, romantic hearts for generations
to come — not as that of the erring girl, but
as that of the newly-made Avise who perished in
the first hours of her wifehood.

'Mily's intimate associates were forced to
acknowledge remorsefully the little allowance
they had made for her temptations, and the
unanimity with Avhicli they had forsaken her in
her humiliation.

Even some of the townspeople who had
only noticed and inveighed against the girl as
an exceedingly vulgar, pert, giddy creature,
experienced an uncomfortable conviction that
her opportunities of learning to become more
civilised, modest, and steady had been limited,
and, such as they were, might have been a
good deal counteracted by the old feuds and
jealousies between classes. At the same time
the blithe rin of her voice as it had floated
accidentally 1o them, the light fall of her footstep
when she had passed them, lingered in the

ears of these judges, and smote them With the
realisation of how young this 'Mily Policy must
have been, when her detractors had not thouu'lit
it beneath their superior age, rank, and refinement,
to enlarge on her sins against L^ood taste.
'Mile lead lier revenge in this fact, that whereas
she and her set had been heartily despised,
sharply ridiculed, and religiously shunned by
those more gently bred ladies of Friarton,
who held it as a pious duty to work forbear
with, instruct and assist the laziest and
most reckless of the poor in the town, very few
could now afford to scorn 'Mile. All except
the smallest and grossest minds saw that the
solemnity of death, even without its tragedy —
as in 'Mily's piteous case — invested the girl
With a simple dignity in her grave. But it
was a pity that not more men and women had
possessed the larger, gentler eyes to recognise
that the sacredness of life had also bestowed
on her worth and importance — even

wliilc she still bounced about her mother's shop,
and flounced along the streets.

Remorse, in its slightest manifestation of
doubt and discontent with one's self, is not an
agreeable sensation, therefore the townspeople
of Friarton, who, like the rest of the world,
greatly preferred to feel at ease in their own
minds, if not gently titillated with a consciousness
of having done their best in the matters of justice
and mercy, began to look around them in
order to discover any loophole of escape from
the painful impression that they had been hard
and contemptuous to 'Mily Policy and perhaps
hounded her on — for girls are sensitive as well
as perverse — to her undoing. They were remarkably
successful in their search. For one
man had, as it were, redeemed the humane
character of Friarton. Oliver Constable had
paid respect to the girl from the first, and
shown her mercy to the last. lie had acted as
the representative of lier neighbours, and so

removed, in a great measure, the lurking self-reproach
from their consciences. And it was
the same Oliver who had cone in for nursiuf^
old Dadd's son, and pulled him through his
fever.

It did seem as if Oliver Constable had
come home from watching by his sister's deathbed
to save the life of Jack Dadd and to speak
a parting word of forgiveness and God-speed to
'Mily Policy, so as to deliver the whole town
from the charge of selfish cowardice and intolerant
persecution. If so, what sort of man
could he really be who had received such
a commission and given himself to its fulfilment
?

The reaction which had set in for poor
'Mily extended to Oliver. His fellow-townsmen
commenced to conceive an altogether different
impression of him, to exalt and make much
of him, to canonise him — not merely before a
hundred years had elapsed, but in his very lifetime.

This experience is comparatively rare,
still it happens sometimes that just as men's
sins occasionally go before them to judgment,
so men's patient continuance in well-doing is
observed and awakens a response in their
brethren before death has set its seal to virtue.

In the meantime Oliver was perfectly unaware
of the sudden revolution in the sentiments
of the town towards him, so that in place of
being unpopular and lightly esteemed — not to
say grossly slandered — h<^ had sprung at once
to the height of popularity and general respect,
among those who were not particularly ashamed
of thus turning their coats, after they had so
recently decried and abused their champion and
hero.

The only thing which struck Oliver as he
walked along the streets of Friaiton, in the
drizzle and mud of November, was, that in spite
of the season and the weather, he was constantly

lueetiDg friends and acquaintances, and
that not merely everybody had something to
say to him, but that all men and women were
in the best humour, overflowing with geniality,
as if they were reflecting June sunshine rather
than November fo^^.



CHAPTER XXXII.

'DO THEY BELIEVE IX ME Now ? '

Oliver Constable's announcement that lie was
retiring from the baking business had appeared
three times in the Friarton weekly newspapers.
The first time it was received with scoffs and
sneers, the next it was met by a troubled
silence, the last time it was anticipated by an
urgent protest, though 01i\cr did not happen
to be within hearing;. The earliest result of his
advertisement — so far as Oliver knew — came
in the shape of a formal call in the backshop
from Jim Hull.

Jim had never entered the premises since
he and his nephew 'Arry set up a rival business.

Oliver made no question that Jim came
now with some proposal from the nourishing
firm of which he was one of the representatives,
while he indulged in an austere satisfaction at
the realisation of his own prophecies of the
certain consequences of Olivers new-fangled,
liar-splitting scruples and crotchets. Anyway,
Oliver thought, Jim Hull might have
saved himself the trouble. It was execrable
taste in him to come and crow at all, in the
circumstances.

Et tu Brute ! ' Oliver said in spirit to his
father's old friend and servant, who arrived to
speak to Oliver of his acknowledged failure,
and to suggest Jim's nephew's further rise on
Oliver Constable's downfall.

Neither did Jim seem to prosper on his
heartlessness and vindictiveness. He looked
much older and greyer, and his fine, well-cut
face was all creased over with the wi ankles
which had been just perceptible, here and

VOL. III. R

there, two or tlircc years before. Tic face had
always looked compact, but now it had a contracted
appearance, as if Jim had got into a
habit of setting his few teeth and drawing his
grizzled brows together, by the hour.

Master Oliver,' said Jim hesitatingly, ' will
you not think twice of this resolution ? '

I have no intention, Jim,' said Oliver
shortly, as he drummed on the table before
him ; and then, scorning to make use of a subterfuge,
he added, ' It is not in my power.'

Not though I bring you the earliest information
that my nephew 'Arry is also giving up,
leastways selling his business here ? ' said Jim,
leaning halfway across the table in his earnestness.
' He has got word of a famous opening
in London, which is a field as will suit him
better,' said Jim, in a lower tone, sinking back
in his chair.

Oliver was taken by surprise. He could
only say it would be odd if Friarton were left

without bakers, except the small fry. But
there could be no difficulty in finding a purchaser
and successor to such a tJirivbuj business
as Jim and his nephew had established.
Were there no other nephews of Jim's ? — Oliver
remembered a whole family of sons, cousins
of Harry's — to take the place of the ambitious
fellow who thought Friarton beneath his
further attentions, and would, no doubt, die
Lord Mayor of London ? Oliver had — he could
not have told why, unless in the underlying
sense of bitterness produced by the contrast
with his own experience — put an emphasis on
the epithet ' thriving ' which he had applied to
Jim and his nephew's business.

The stress on the word caused Jim to
wince. A dull, faded red suffused the old
servant's Withered face, and caused positive
pain to the quondam master. What right had
Oliver to taunt Jim with his success ? Was
not the old man at liberty to make his methods,

R 2

in which he saw no harm, succeed to the
utmost of this power ?

While Oliver took himself to task. Jim was
informing him, ceremoniously, that the only
nephew he had in the baking trade, besides
'Arry,had gone to Australia, ' and well for him,'
muttered the speaker. ' But I was thinking,
Master Oliver,' resumed Jim, wistfully, ' that
you might take 'Arry's business, of which my
share would go far to buy up the goodwill, and
carry it on instead of the old one here.'

What, Jim ! because I have half ruined
myself with the one, go on to wholly ruin
myself with the other ? ' said Oliver, with a
forced laugh to hide his perplexity and embarrassment.


But things is different,' insisted Jim eau^erlv.
It were the opposition — of which there would
be no more, not a scrap — as did for you ; and I
would manage for you again, if you liked to
have me. There's a deal more work left in

me yet than some folks think for,' Jim put in
resentful parenthesis, flicking away the remains
of floiu' from his sleeve. ' I'm not the
man as would advise another man, least of all
3'ou, Master Oliver, if you will believe me, to
fling good money after bad ; but here is the finest
chance as ever Providence made — on purpose,
I had almost said, for you to retrieve your
losses, and build up Constable's business again
on a firmer foundation than ever, and carry out
your schemes to boot,' cried Jim, waxing
enthusiastic, ' if you'll not go and fang it to the
dogs in a pet.'

Oliver was fairly puzzled, lie was a man
tenacious of his principles and projects. So far
from being wearied out by disappointment and
tlnvartimi, and Glad of the excuse to throw the
baking business over, it ' riled ' him thoroughly,
tortured and mortified him, to resign it and all
the hopes he had set upon it, after what they had
cost him. He was strongly tempted to catch

at the most distant prospect, consistent With
common prudence, of resuming the trade, and
waging it thenceforth to a triumphant issue,
for the benefit of his fellow-men.

But what of the old practiced difficulties
with Jim ? Oliver was not disposed to yield
an atom of what he looked upon as trade
righteousness. Sooner sacrifice half-a-dozen
businesses, or promises of business, than make
a holocaust of his trade creed, which was a prominent
part of his Christian creed. Jim, with
the hold on his master which the manager's
havinfj^ lar<:felv contributed to buy back the
business must give him, would be in a position
to maintain his opposite views, Awhile Oliver
would no longer have the poAver to object to
them, far less to put them down.

'I am greatly obliged to you, Jim,' said
Oliver, at last, ' and not the least for this — that,
in spite of the mull I have made, you speak as
if you had some faith in me still. But I am

not cured of my hobbies ; I am as great a fool
as ever, you will think, when I tell you that I
cannot be in business as a baker and suffer
artificially-whitened bread, or fancy bread
which is not weighed, to go out of my slip.
Besides, I do not know what other eccentricities
might occur to me, which I should feel
bound to tee carried out.'

Instead of the half-repressed disgust which
Oliver had expected to excite, Jim met the
declaration with a shame-faced assent. ' Never
mind, Master C)li\'cr, them are trifles after all,
and it's erring on the safe side. Yes, sir, I'm
bound to say to you this much — it's erring on
the safe side,' raising his voice, and speaking
sternly, while he fumbled nervously with his
watch-chain.

With the exception ot another abrupt sentence,
' I'll swallow all your stipulations, and
stick to you like a vice, now, Master Oliver,
never fear,' it was all the admission Jim Hull

ever made to (Jlivcr of having found himself
the wrong man in the wrong place. But it was
enough to recall to Oliver's mind stories he had
heard, only half believed and never repeated,
of the sort of bread which the new business had
gone on to sell in Friarton. A young doctor,
who had taken upon himself the office of unpaid
analyst in defence of an ungrateful public, had
pronounced the bread largely and most perniciously
adulterated. 'Arry Iliad advanced a
long way before his sickened and horrified
uncle in courses which Jim had found himself
utterly imablc to restrain to mild, ,
traditional trade liberties. London
was indeed a fitter field for 'Arry's genius.

The day has long gone by when the outbreak
of deadly epidemics aroused the frantic
outcry of poisoned wells and poisoned loaves.
But are the water and the bread ]provided for
the people really pure and wholesome ? Has
the time not come for the old charge to be

revived in more measured and reasonable tones,
without any thought of vengeance on sins which
are those of ignorance — however wilful — sloth,
and haste to make rich, not of deliberate conspiracy
and barbarous treachery against human
health and life ?

But, Jim, though you consent to bear
with my fads, I am afraid the Friarton people
will still find them insupportable. They will
still clamour for bread of chalky whiteness,
varying in size as well as in shape. I have
wearied them out with my efforts to be honest
and do them food ai]^ainst their will.'

']^o, you haven't,' said Jim decisively.
Xo one will wag a finger against your bread.
They have come to know better. Bless you !
they are ready to swallow wholesale any stufT
you may offer them.'

Oliver stared, then thinking Jim was making
another covert allusion to his nephew's tolerably
extensive experiments on the palates and digestive

organs of his customers, Oliver delicately
waived the point in discussion.

Oliver Constable and Jim Hull talked for
some time on the practicability of Oliver's
stepping into a vigorous business in place of
laying down an exhausted trade. The longer
they talked, the more Oliver became satisfied
of the possibility and advisability of the
proceeding — that the career he had proposed
for himself might not be cut short, and that he
might have the chance of rising like a phoenix
from its ashes.

The last thinijj which vexed Oliver was that
Jim pressed him to go in for the new premises
reared by Jim and his nephew — which were
in full working order, rather than transfer their
business to the Constables' bakehouse and
shop, which had latterly been only half used.

What ! Give up the shop Peter Constable
lead proudly built for his son, which Agneta
Stanhope had foolishly called ' the ancestral

shop,' ^vitli all the kindly associations to which
Oliver was so susceptible, and remove into
these brand-new premises, destitute of any association
except that they had been raised to
knock down the other, which they had done !

Yet all was true that Jim argued. Time
and tide were sweeping away the okl traffic
from the old channels. The new premises
were in a better situation than Oliver's. They
had commanded ampler space and secured freer
ventilation. They were more commodious and
convenient. The spot on which Peter Constable
built his shop had long been looked on
with a covetous eye by those public-spirited
citizens of Friarton who held that the town
should have a new town-hall worthier of the
name than that in which Oliver had delivered
his lecture on Wordsworth, and Lady Cicely
Hartley had been a stall-keeper in a bazaar.
The town was flourishing' in funds at the
present moment, and the talk about the town-hall

was actually passing into deed. If
Oliver were to sell the piece of ground on
which his shop and Bakehouse stood to the
new town-hall committee, his exchequer would
at once be considerably replenished. There
was no resemblance between the shop and
bakehouse and Naboth's vineyard. The former
had seen their day and effected their purpose.
Peter Constable would have been the first to
pat his son on the shoulder and enjoin him,
Sell, my boy ; sell when it is wise and right
to do it. My memorial, my idea ! Never
mind them. AYould I have had them stand in
the way of your progress, which is the procuress
of your work ? Thevv have taken care
of themselves hitherto, they will live again
like everything which has real vitality in it,
in a new mould, shaped to the fresh needs of
a later day.'

The treaty in hand between Oliver and Jim
Hull was still unsuspected in Friarton when

Oliver found his back shop and this leisure a
second time invaded — not by delegates from
his journeymen bakers ; truth to tell, they were
the last to comprehend intelligently and to
give in anything like a cordial adherence to
their master. It was a deputation from his
fellow-tradesmen that next waited upon Oliver.
The party consisted of old Dadd, Policy, who
had enough manhood for a deputation in
which his wife's bonnet and gown would have
looked out of place, and another shopkeeper —
the saddler, whose bill to Harry Stanhope
Oliver had taken care should be 2:)aid in full.

They were so occupied With the ceremoniousness
of their mission that Oliver could
hardly get them to sit down or put their hats
out of their hands ; and old Dadd, who was the
leader, kept saying 'sir' to Oliver at every other
word. They had not come to ask the miller
and baker to go into the vestry or council asa
step to becoming churchwarden or mayor.

They had no notion of giving liii a dinner ora
piece of plate — solutions to the formal visit
which, luckily never crossed Oliver's mind.
They had conic to more purpose.

These tradesmen — representing very nearly
the Avhole shopkeepers of Friarton — the deputation
had furnished themselves with a list of
the names — were there to beg Oliver to withdraw
his announcement of retiring from business.
' We feel, sir, you are an honour to
our order,' said old Dadd, with as much spirit
as if it Avere an order of knighthood. ' Sir,
wx mayn't all see with your eyes, or be
prepared to carry out your views to a ^, but
we do see they does you great credit. We are
quite sure, sir, the world and trade in the long
run, would be none the worse of a few more
gents like you in them. So, Mr. Oliver, to
retain you among us, we, your fellow-shopkeepers
in this here town, 'humbly and 'earthly
solicit you to keep on your late worthy Other's

business. And eve are here, sir, in a body, or
as the representatives of a body, to pledge yon
our support in such plain reforms and improvements
as you think fit to introduce. We ask
you to excuse us for not being wide awake to
their crying necessity from the first. Sir, men
could not speak fairer,' wound up Dadd, in
some elation at his own eloquence.

There Alas more behind. This flattering
petition came from the general body of the
shopkeepers, stirred up by their leaders, who,
in their private capacities, had something else
to say. It was Dadd, again, who acted as
their mouthpiece, and, though not quite so
fluent, was as fervent and *earth as before.
He remarked, abruptly, there were some
favours no man with a heart in his breast
could think of repaying, to which sentiment
Policy choruses incoherently, ' No, nor no
woman with a heart in her bosom — quite so,
quite so, Mr. Dadd.' Then old Dadd went onto

press on Oliver, in the friendliest, most considerate
manner, such an advance in money as
these three could afford, to tide him over the
temporary difficulties which might have induced
him to give up the baking business.

It was all clear to Oliver at last, while he
shrugged his shoulders, grimaced fearfully,
and stammered out his thanks, assuring the
gentlemen there was no occasion for their
last act of friendship, but he would never
forget their generous sjnnpathy and confidence,
never. The truth was it warmed his heart,
and he was not at all sure that if he had gone
on to say this was the proudest moment of
his life, there would have been the least
hypocrisy in the trite hyperbole in his case.

Yes, it was pleasant to have won some
appreciation — however little deserved — from
his fellow-townsmen, who ought to know him
best, to be assured that they gave him credit,
after all, for meanings well.

• The nature, of the acknowledgment touched
and softened Oliver more than he could express.
He wished his father and Fan might know it.
As he went out into the streets afterwards, he
was sensible of breathing another air, of his
face being irradiated with a different light.
He was no longer surprised that he encountered
so many friends, and that they were all
so friendly. Of course they must see he felt
that everybody was almost intolerably kind,
till he could have wished they would not
come round a beggar so, and demoralise him
with their kindness. 'Do they believe in me
now ? ' Oliver was saying to himself, half sadly,
in the midst of his gladness, half incredulously
still.

Oliver 's feet, like fate, at this crisis, carried
him in the direction of the Meadows. All
danger of infection from Jack Dadd's fever
was over, and nothing could be more salutary

VOL. III. s

for the reformer, to prevent his losing his head
altogether, than the cold douche of Mrs. Hilliard's
laughter, and Catherine's indifference, in
contradiction to the absurd excitement of the
rest of the inhabitants of Friar ton.

But the instant he was shown into the
Meadows' drawing-room — cheery even on a
November day, Oliver discovered that the
antidote he was seeking was useless, or rather
that there was no such corrective. The town's
dilatory admiration and gratitude were there
before him, in all the excess in which they
might be expected from women. Mrs. Hilyard's
inveterate jests sounded very much as if they
vere uttered to save herself from breaking
down, and her jolly voice grew shaky when
she asked after Fan's baby.

With regard to Catherine, she midst still
have been silent and stiff, had she not been
penetrated, stirred to the depths of her nature,
and spurred on by a full share of the public

feeling. So much so, that when they were
giving Oliver tea and he had cunningly worked
roimd the conversation to a neutral topic — the
new orders of nurses and the new theories
of nursing — Catherine, her pale eager face,
and eyes alight and aglow, with an expression
which had all at once acquired a certain
likeness to Fan's, suddenly turned round on
him and told him barefacedly, with the clearest
personal application — Sister Elizabeth's opinion
was that her own work was good, but it was
a better and nobler work to prevent the evils
which took such costly sacrifices to cure them.
When a man stood to his post, laboured to
clear away his share of the abuses which had
crept into all trades, and called nothing common
and unclean — that was preventing great
and widespread evils.

'Oh, Gemini!' groaned Oliver, gathering
up his long legs in a marvellous coil which
would have done credit to the brothers Ravens

2

port, ' don't you two go in with the others to
make a fool and a hero of me ! '

Who shall prevent us ? ' cried Mrs. Hilliard.
' If the town take it into its thick head
to give you its freedom on an exquisitely illuminated
card — the illumination done by the
most accomplished young lady in the place —
or if it think fit to crown you with an olive-wreath
covered with goldbeater's leaf, you will
have to submit. It would never do for you
to be ungracious, that would spoil everything.'

Then don't let the town take it into its
head. Upon the whole, you had better all
suffer me to go away in peace, before you
recover from your delusion.'

It is not now we are deluded,' said
Catherine. ' Our eyes have been opened, so
that we — some of us, no longer see men and
women — not so much like trees walking, but
as hideous caricatures. We see plain at last,
and recognise our kind — our kin, God-sib — our

gossips, if you will, as God made them,
through what they have made themselves, or
what their neighbours have consented to make
them. Do you think so lightly of us as to
imagine we shall ever forget the sight? Do
you not know it is like life from the dead to
recognise brothers and sisters — a great multitude
which no man could number, wherever
we turn ? No, you will not have the heart to
go away from Friarton,' she finished, in a
lower tone which was still audible to him, as
she played with her spoon, ' just when we are
beginning to understand, and when God is
going to show you the work of your hands,
and to establish it.'

Oliver made an excuse to cross the room
with his cup. On his return to his seat, he
paused behind Catherine Hilhard's chair, and
said for her ear alone, ' Take care, Catherine,
or else you will be more cruel in the end than
ill the beginning '

Have I been cruel ? ' she asked, drawing
back shyly. But this was the season of settling
accounts, and he deserved full payment. ' No,
not to you,' she whispered tremulously, with
a soft smile. ' If I was cruel, it was to myself —
never to you.'

Mrs. Hilliard entered her protest, later in
the evening ; for Oliver stayed to dinner without
troubling to go home to dress, and he was
still lingering, talking, as he had never talked
in his life before, after Mrs. Hilliard had reminded
him there was such a ceremony as
locking the doors in most households. Then
she suggested, ' If there are to be two enthusiasts,
social reformers, muscular Christians —
whatever you Hke to call yourselves — instead
of one, and I'm sure one was quite enough to
come to grief, what is to become of me, I
should like to know? I shall have a bad
time of it, for though Catherine is her own
mistress, there is such a being as an indignant

ex-guardian, and I'm not her sole cousin.
When all trades are held alike, and everybody
is respected, half of my occupation will begone,
while my ungrateful kindred, whom I
have suffered to set good, sound long-established
social distinctions at defiance, will never admit
a laughing hyena into their menagerie.'

LONDON t partes Br

SPOTTISWOODE AND CO., New-street SQrXBB

Ant Parliament bTHEET

U^

3 0112 047688145

,s?^5s?^
