OF THE

U N Diversity

or ILLINOIS

sib

V. I

in 2010 with funding from

University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign

http://www.archive.org/details/mitchelhurstplac01vele

VOL. I.

% llobcl

MARGARET VELEY

AUTHOR OF "for PERCIVAL "

Que voulez-vous ? Helps ! notre mere Nature,
Comma toute autre mere, a ses enfants gates,
Et p(jur les malveiius elle est avai*e et dure ! "

IN TWO VOLUMES
VOL. L

MACMILLAN AND CO.



The Kiijht oJ'Tnuiifliil'ion and Rejti'odwtwn is lieservfd.

(<

TO

Barbara's best friend
Elfride lONIDES

HER STORY IS MOST AFFECTIONATELY
AND GRATEFULLY INSCRIBED.

CHAPTER I.

Pair

TREASURES DROPPED AND PICKED UP . 1

CHAPTEE II.

AN UNEXPECTED INVITATION . . 19

CHAPTER III.

*' WELCOME TO MITCHELHURST PLACE " . 48

Chapter IV.

DINNER AND A LITTLE MUSIC . . 73

CHAPTER V.
AN OLD LOVE STORY . . . 95

CHAPTER XL

Page

Reynold's resolution . . . 12-1:

CHAPTER VII.

A GAME AT CHESS . . . 160

CHAPTER VIII.
Barbara's tune . . . . 192

CHAPTER IX.

OF MAGIC LANTERNS . . . 20iJ

CHAPTER X.
AN AFTER-DINNER DISCUSSION . . 237

CHAPTER I.

TREASURES DROPPED AND PICKED UP.

"Dans I'air pale, eminent ses tranquilles lumieres
Rayonnait I'astre door de barrier-saison."

There was nothing remarkable in the
scene. It was just a bit of country lane,
cut deeply into the side of a hill, and
seamed with little pebbly courses, made by
the streams of rain which had poured across
it on their downward way. The hill-side
faced the west, and, standing on this ledge
as on a balcony, one might look clown into
a valley where cattle were feeding in the
pastures, and where a full and softly-flowing

VOL. I. B



river turned the wheel of a distant mill, and
slipped quietly under the arched bridge of
the lower road. Sometimes in summer the
water lay gleaming, like a curved blade, in
the midst of the warm green meadows, but
on this late October day it was misty and
wan, and light vapours veiled the pale globe
of the declining sun. Looking upward from
the valley, a broad slope of ploughed land
rose above the road, and the prospect ended
in a hedge, a gate, through whose bars one
saw the sky, and a thin line of dusky, red-trinket
firs. But from the road itself there
was nothing to be seen in this direction
except a steep bank. This bank was crowned
with hawthorn bushes, and here and there a
stubborn stunted oak, which held its dry
brown leaves persistently, as some oaks do.
With every passing breath of wend there
was a crisp rustling overhead.

This bit of road lay deserted in the faint
yellow gleams. But for a wasp of straw,

caught on an overhanraio* two;, and some
cart-tracks, which marked the passage of a
load, one might have fancied that the pale
sun had risen, and now was about to set,
without having seen a single wayfarer upon
it. But there were four coming towards it,
and, slowly as two of them might travel,
they would yet reach it while the sunlight
lasted. The little stage was to have its
actors that afternoon.

First there appeared a man's figure on
the crest of the hill. He swung himself
over the gate, and came with eager strides
down the field, till he reached the hedge
which divided it from the road. There he
stopped, consulted his watch, and sheltering
himself behind one of the little oaks, he
rested one knee on a mossy stump, and
thus, half-standing, half-kneeling, he waited.
The attitude was picturesque, and so was
the man. He had bright grey-blue eyes,
hair and moustache brown, with a touch of

B 2

reddish gold, a quick, animated face, and a
smiling mouth. It was easy to see that he
was sanguine and fearless, and on admirable
terms with himself and the world in general.
He was young, and he was pleasant to look
at, and, though he could hardly have dressed
with a view to occupying that precise position,
his brown velvet coat was undeniably
in the happiest harmony with the tree
against which he leaned, and the withered
foliage above his head.

To wait there, with his eyes fixed on
that unfrequented way, hardly seemed a
promising pastime. But the young fellow
was either lucky or wise. He had not been
there more than five minutes by his watch,
when a girl turned the corner, and came,
with down-bent head, slowly sauntering
along the road below him. His clasping
hand on the rough oak-bark shifted slightly,
to allow him to lean a little further and
gain a wider range, though he was careful

to keep in the shelter of his tree and the
hawthorn hedge. A few steps brought the
girl exactly opposite his hiding-place. There
she paused.

She sauntered because her hands and eyes
were occupied, and she took no heed of
the way she went. She paused because her
occupation became so engrossing that she
forgot to take another step. She wore long,
loose gloves, to guard her hands and wrists,
and as she came she had pulled autumn
leaves of briony and bramble, and brier
sprays with their bunches of glowing hips.
These she was gathering together and
arranging, partly that they might be easier
to carry, and partly to justify her pleasure
in their beauty by setting it off to the best
advantage. As she completed her task, a
tuft of yellow leaves on the bank beside her
caught her eye. She stretched her hand to
gather it, and the man above looked straight
down into her unconscious upturned face.

She was not more than eighteen or
nineteen, and by a touch of innocent shyness
in her glances and movements she
might have been judged to be still younger.
She was slight and dark, with a soft loose
cloud of dusky hair, and a face, not flowerlike
in its charm, but with a healthful beauty
more akin to her own autumn berries — ripe,
clear skinned, and sweet. As she looked
up, with red lips parted, it was hardly
wonderful that the lips of the man in
ambush, breathlessly silent though he was,
made answer with a smile. She plucked
the yellow leaves and turned away, and
he suffered his breath to escape softly in a
sigh. Yet he was smiling still at the pretty
picture of that innocent face held up to
him.

It was all over in a minute. She had
come and gone, and he stood up, still
cautiously, lest she should return, and
looked at the broad brown slope down

which he had come so eagerly. Every step
of that lightly-trodden way must be retraced,
and time was short. But even ashe
faced it he turned for one last glance at
the spot where she had stood. And there,
like coloured jewels on the dull earth, lay
a bunch of hips, orange and glowing scarlet,
which she had unawares let fall. In a
moment he was down on the road, had
caught up his prize, and almost as quickly
had pulled himself up again, and was standing
behind the sheltering tree while he
fastened it in his coat. And when he
had secured it, it seemed, after all, as if
he had needed just that touch of soft
bright colour, and would not have been
completely himself without it.
♦ " Barbara's gift," he said to himself,
looking down at it. " I'll tell her of it
one of these days, when the poor things
are dead and dry ! No, that jbhey never
shall be ! " He quickened his pace. " They

shall live, at any rate, for me. It would
not be amiss for a sonnet. Loves Gleaniiifj
yes, or Loves Alms,' and before the
young fellow's eyes rose the dainty vision
of a creamy, faintly-ribbed page, with strong
yet delicately-cut Woman type and slim
italics. Though not a line of it was written,
he could vaguely see that sonnet in which
his rosy spoil should be enshrined. He
could even see Barbara reading it, on some
future day, while he added the commentary,
which was not for the world in general,
but for Barbara. It became clearer to him
as he hurried on, striking across the fields
to reach his destination more directly.
Snatches of musical words floated on the
evening air, and he quickened his pace
"unconsciously as if in actual pursuit. To
the east the sky grew cold and blue, and
the moon, pearl white, but as yet not
luminous, swam above him as he walked.
So the poet went in quest of rhymes.

and Barbara, strolling onward, looked for
leaves and berries. She had not gone far
when she spied some more, better, of course,
than any she had already gathered. This
time they were on the lower bank which
sloped steeply downward to a muddy ditch.
Barbara looked at them longingly, decided
that they were attainable, and put her
nosegay down on the damp grass that
she might have both hands free for her
enterprise.

She was certain she could get them.
She leaned forward, her finger-tips almost
brushed them, when a man's footsteps, close
beside her, startled her into consciousness of
an undignified position, and she sprang back
to firmer ground. But a thin chain she
wore had caught on a thorny spray. It
snapped, and a little gold cross dropped
from it, and lay, rather more than half-way
down, among the briers and withered leaves.
She snatched at the danc^lino: chain, and

stood, flushed and disconcerted, trying to
appear absorbed in the landscape, and unconscious
of the passer-by who had done
the mischief. If only he would pass by as
quickly as possible, and leave her to regain
her treasure and gather her berries !

But the steps hesitated, halted, and there
was a pause — an immense pause — during
which Barbara kept her eyes fixed on a
particular spot in the meadow below. It
appeared to her that the eyes of the unknown
man were fixed on the back of her
head, and the sensation was intolerable.
After a moment, however, he spoke, and
broke the spell. It was a gentleman's
voice, she perceived, but a little forced and
hard, as if the words cost him something
of an effort.

I — I beg your pardon, but can I be of
any service ? I think you dropped something
ah ! a little cross." He came to her side.
Will you allow me to get it for you ? "

Barbara went through the form of glancing
at him, but she did not meet his eyes.
"Thank yon," she said, "but I needn't
trouble you, really." And she returned to
her pensive contemplation of that spot
where the meadow grass grew somewhat
more frankly tufted.

He paused again before speaking. It
seemed to Barbara that this young: man did
nothing but pause. " I don't think you can
get it," he said, looking at the brambles.
*' I really don't think you can."

If Barbara had frankly uttered her inmost
sentiments she would have said, " Great
idiot — no — not if you don't go away ! "
But, as it was, she coloured yet more in her
shyness, and stooped to pick up her nosegay
from the ground. He had been within an
inch of treading on it.

Oh, I beg your pardon ! " he exclaimed,
starting back. ** How clumsy of me ! "

Something in his tone disarmed her. She

feared that she hall been-ungracious, and
moreover she was a little doubtful whether
she would not find it difficult to resin her
trinket without his help. " You haven't
done any harm," she said. Then, glancing
downward, " Well, if you will be so kind."

The new-comer surveyed the situation
so intently that Barbara took the opportunity
of surveying him.

She was familiar, in novels, with heroes
and heroines who were not precisely beautiful,
yet possessed a nameless and all-conquering
charm. Perhaps for that very reason
she was slow to recognize good looks where
this charm was absent. The tall young
fellow who stood a few steps away, gazing
with knitted brows at the little wilderness
of briers, was really very handsome, but he
was not certain of the fact. Beauty should
not be self-conscious, but it should not
despondently question its own existence.
This man seemed to be accustomed to a

chilly, ungenial atmosphere, to be numbed
and repressed, to lack fire. Barbara fancied
that if he touched her his hand would be cold.

In point of actual features he was decidedly
the superior of the young fellow
who was climbing the hill-side, but the
pleasant colour and grace were altogether
wanting. Yet he was not exactly awkward.
Neither was he ill-dressed, though his clothes
did not seem to express his individuality,
except perhaps by the fact that they were
black and grey. Any attempt at description
falls naturally into cold negatives, and
the scarlet autumn berries which were justa
jewel-like brightness in the first picture
would have been a strange and vivid contrast
in the second.

His momentary hesitation on the brink
of his venture was not in reality indecision,
but the watchful distrust produced by a
conviction that circumstances were hostile.
He wished to take them all into account.

Having briefly considered the position of
the cross, and the steepness of the bank,
he stepped boldly down. In less than half
a second the treacherous earth had betrayed
him ; his foot slipped, he fell on his back,
and slid down the short incline to the
muddy ditch at the bottom, losing his hat
by the way.

Barbara, above him, uttered a silvery
little " Oh ! " of dismay and surprise. She
was not accustomed to a man who failed
in what he undertook.

The victim of the little accident was
grimly silent. With a scrambling effort he
recovered his footing and lost it ao;ain. A
second attempt was more successful ; he
secured the cross, clambered up, and restored
it to its owner, turning away from her
thanks to pick up his hat, which luckily
lay within easy reach. Barbara did not
know which way to look. She was painfully,
burningly conscious of his evil plight.

His boots were coated with mire, his face
was darkly flushed and seamed with a
couple of brier scratches, a bit of dead
leaf was sticking in his hair, and '' Oh,"
thought Barbara, "he cannot possibly know
how muddy his back is ! "

She stood, turning the little cross in
her fingers. " Thank you very much," she
said nervously. " I should never have got
it for myself."

Are you quite sure ? " he asked, with
bitter distinctness. " I think you would
have managed it much better."

I'm sure I would rather not try." She
dared not raise her eyes to his face, lout she
saw that he wore no glove, and that the
thorns had torn his hand. He was winding
his handkerchief round it, and the blood
started through the white folds. " Oh, you
have hurt yourself ! " she exclaimed. He
answered only with an impatient gesture
of negation.

How am I to thank you '? " lie asked
despairingly.

Don't you think the less said the better,
at any rate for me ? " he replied, picking
a piece of bramble from his sleeve, and
glancing aside, as if to permit her to go
her way with no more words.

But Barbara held her ground. " I should
have been sorry to lose that cross. I — I
prize it very much."

"Then I am sorry to have given you
an absurd association with it."

Please don't talk like that. I shall
remember your kindness," said the girl
hurriedly. She felt as if she must add
something more. '* I always fancy my cross
is a kind of — what do they call those things
that bring good luck ? "

'' Amulet ? Talisman ? "

"Yes, a talisman," she repeated, with a
little nod. " It belonged to my godmother.
I was named after her. She died before 1

was a year old, but I have heard my mother
say she was the most beautiful woman she
ever saw. Oh, I should hate to lose it ! "

Would your luck go with it ? " He
smiled as he asked the question, and the
smile was like a momentary illumination,
revealing the habitual melancholy of his
mouth.

Perhaps," said Barbara.

AVell, you would not have lost it this
afternoon, as it was quite conspicuously
visible," he rejoined.

By this time he had brushed his hat,
and, passing his hand over his short waves
of dark hair, had found and removed the
bit of leaf which had distressed Barbara.
She advanced a step, perhaps emboldened
a little by that passing smile. " Oh, I beg
your pardon," she said, " but when you
slipped you got some earth on your coat."
(She fancied that " earth " sounded a little
more dignified than " mud " or " dirt," and

VOL. I. c

that he might not mind it quite so much.)
Please let me brush it oft' for you." She
looked ap at him with a pleading glance
and produced a filmy little feminine handkerchief.


He eyed her, drawing back. '' No ! " he
ejaculated ; and then, more mildly, " No,
thank you. I can manage. No, thank

you."

I wish " Barbara began, but she

said no more, for the expression of his face
changed so suddenly that she looked over
her shoulder to discover the cause.

A gentleman stood a few steps away,
gazing at them in unconcealed surprise.
A small, neat, black-clothed gentleman,
with bright grey eyes and white hair and
whiskers, who wore a very tall hat and
carried a smart little cane.

Uncle ! " the girl exclaimed, and her
uplifted hand dropped loosely by her side.

Chapter 11.

AN UNEXPECTED INVITATION.

The old gentleman's face would have
been a mere note of interrogation, but fora
hint of chilly displeasure in its questioning.
The young people answered with
blushes. The word was the same for both,
but the fact was curiously different. The
colour that sprang to Barbara's cheek was
lio^ht and swift as flame, while the man at
her side reddened slowly, as if with the
rising of a dark and sullen tide, till the
lines across his face were angrily swollen.
The bandage, loosely wound round his hand,
showed the wet stains, and the new-comer's
bright gaze, travelling downwards, rested

c 2

on it for a moment, and then passed on to
the muddy boots and trousers.

Uncle," said Barbara, *' I dropped my
gold cross, and this gentleman was so kind
as to get it back for me."

"It was nothing — I was very glad to
be of any service, but it isn't worth mentioning,"
the stranger protested, again with
a rouo^h edo^e of effort in his tone.

*' On the contrary," said the old gentleman,
" I fear my niece has given you a
great deal of trouble. I am sure we are
both of us exceedingly obliged to you for
your kindness." He emphasised his thanks
with a neat little bow. To the young
man's angry fancy it seemed that his glance
swept the landscape, as if he sought some
perilous precipice, which might account for
the display of mud and wounds.

Yes," said Barbara quickly. *' the bank
is so slippery, and there are such horrid
brambles — look, uncle ! I came to meet

you, and I was gathering some leaves, and
my chain caught and snapped."

Ah I that bank ! Yes, a very disagreeable
place," he assented, looking up at the
stranger. " I am really very sorry that

you should have received such " he

hesitated for a word, and then finished,
"such injuries."

"The bank is nothing. I was clumsy,"
was the reply.

"I think, Barbara, we must be going
home," her uncle suggested. The young
man stood aside to let them pass, with a
certain awkwardness and irresolution, for
their road was the same as his own.

I beg your pardon," he said, abruptly,
but perhaps, if you are going that way, you
can tell me how far it is to Mitchelhurst."

They both looked surprised. "About a
mile and a half. Averse you going to
Mitchelhurst ? "

Yes, but if you know it "

We live there," said Barbara.

Perhaps you could tell me what I want
to know. I would just as soon not go on
this afternoon. Is there a decent inn, or,
better still, could one be tolerably sure
of getting lodgings in the place, without
securing them beforehand ? "

"You want lodmns^s there ? "

Only for a few days. I came by train
a couple of hours ago " — he named a neighbouring
town — '' and they told me at the
hotel that it was uncertain whether I should
find accommodation at Mitchelhurst ; so I
left my luggage there, and walked over to
make inquiries."

"I do not think that I can recommend
the inn'' said the other, doubtfully. " I
fear you would find it beery, and smoky,
and noisy — the village ale-house, you understand.
Sanded floors, and rustics with long
clay pipes — that's the kind of thing at the
*Bothwell Arms'"

"Ah! the 'Roth well Arms!"

"And as for lodgings," the old man continued,
with something alert and watchful
in his manner, " the fact is people dont care
to lodge in Mitch el hurst. They live there,
a few of them — myself for instance — but
there is nothing in the place to attract
ordinary visitors."

He paused, but the only comment was —

Indeed ? "

"Nothing whatever," he affirmed. "A
little, out-of-the-way, uninteresting village
but you are anxious to stay here ? "

The stranger was re-arranmnor the
loosened handkerchief with slender, unskilful
fingers.

For a few days— yes," he repeated, half
absently, as he tried to tuck away a hanging
end.

"Uncle," said Barbara, with timid eagerness,
" doesn't Mrs. Simmonds let lodgings ?
When that man came surveying, or something,

last summer, didn't he have rooms
in her house ? I'm very nearly sure he did."

Her uncle intercepted, as it were, the
stranger's glance of inquiry.

"Perhaps. But I don't think Mrs.
Simmonds will do on this occasion."

Why not ? " the other demanded. " I
don't suppose Fm more particular than the
man who came surveying. If the place is
decently clean, why not '? "

Because your name is Harding. I don't
know what his might happen to be."

The young man drew himself up, almost
as if he repelled an accusation. Then he
seemed to recollect himself.

Yes," he said, " it is How did you
know that 1 "

The little Mitchelhurst gentleman found
such pleasure in his own acuteness that
it gave a momentary air of cordiality to his
manner.

'' My dear sir," he replied, looking critically

at Harding's scratched face, " I knew
the Roth wells well. I recognise the Bothwell
features."

"You must be a keen observer," said
the other curtly.

Voice too," the little man continued.
*' Especially when you repeated the name
of the inn — the Roth well Arms."

Hard in o^ laughed.

Upon my word I The Roth wells have
left me more of the family property than
I was aware of."

Then there was your destination. Who
but a Roth well would ever want to stay at
Mitchelhurst ? "

I see. I appear to have betrayed myself
in a variety of ways." The discovery of
his name seemed to have given him a little
more ease of manner of a defiant and half-mocking
kind. " What, is there something
more ? " he inquired, as his new acquaintance
recommenced, " And then "

Yes, enough to make me very sure.
You wear a ring on your little finger which
your mother gave you. She used to wear
it thirty years ago."

True ! " said Harding, in a tone of
surprise. " You knew my mother then '? "

As I say — thirty years ago. She is
still living, is she not ? And in good
health, I trust ? "

'' Yes." The young man looked at his
ring. "You have a good memory," he
said, with an inflection which seemed to
convey that he would have ended the
sentence with a name, had he known
one.

The little gentleman took the hint.

My name is Herbert Hayes." He spoke
with careful precision, it was impossible to
mistake the words, yet there was something
tentative and questioning in their utterance.
The young man's face betrayed a puzzled
half-recognition.

IVe heard my mother speak of you," he
said.

"But you don't remember what she
said?"

"Not much, I'm afraid. It is very
stupid of me. But that I have heard her
speak of you I'm certain. I know your
name well."

There was nothing much to say. We
were very good friends thirty years ago.
Mrs. Harding might naturally mention my
name if she were speaking of Mitchelhurst.
Does she often talk of old days ? "

Not often. I shall tell her I met you."

Barbara stood by, wondering and interested,
glancing to and fro as they spoke.
At this moment she caught her uncle's eye.

By the way," he said, " I have not
introduced you to my niece — my great-niece,
to be strictly accurate — Miss Barbara
Strange."

Harding bowed ceremoniously, and yet

with a touch of self-contemptuous amusement.
He bowed, but he remembered that
she had seen him slide down a muddy
bank on his back by way of an earlier
introduction.

''Mr. Roth well Harding, I suppose I
should say ? " the old man inquired.

"No. I'm not named Bothwell. I'm
Reynold Harding."

Reynold ? "

'' Yes. It's an old name in my father's
family. That is," he concluded, in the dead
level of an expressionless tone, 'ras old a
name as there is in my father's family, I
believe."

I suppose his grandfather was named
Reynold," said Mr. Hayes to himself.
Aloud he replied, " Indeed. How about
Adam 1 "

Hardens: constrained himself to smile, but
he did it with such an ill grace that Mr.
Hayes perceived that he was a stupid

prig, who could not take a joke, and gave
himself airs.

About these lodgings ? " the young man
persisted, returning to the point. " If Miss
Strange knows of some, why won't they
do for me ? "

Mr. Hayes gulped down his displeasure.

"There is only one roof that can shelter
you in Mitchelhurst," he said magnificently,
and th^it is the roof of Mitchelhurst
Place."

Of Mitchelhurst Place ? " Reynolds was
taken by surprise. He made a little step
backward, and Barbara, needlessly alarmed,
cried, " Mind the ditch ! " Her impulsive
little scream nearly startled him into it, but
he recovered himself on the brink, and they
both coloured again, he angrily, she in
vexation at basins; reminded him of his
mishap. " How can I go to Mitchelhurst
Place ? " he demanded in his harshly hurried
voice.

As my guest," said Mr. Hayes. " I am
Mr. Croft's tenant. I live there — with my
niece."

The young man's eyes went from one to
the other. Barbara's face was hardly less
amazed than his own.

'' Oh thank you ! " he said at last. " It's
exceedingly good of you, but T couldn't
think of troubling you — I really couldn't.
The lodsfino^s Miss Strange mentioned will
do very well for me, I am sure, or I could
manage for a day or two at the inn."

Indeed — " Mr. Hayes began.

But I am not particular," said Harding
with his most defiant air and in his bitterest
tone, " I assure you I am not. I have
never been able to afford it. I shall be all
right. Pray do not give the matter another
thought. I'm very much obliged to you for
your kindness, but it's quite out of the
question, really."

No," said Mr. Hayes, resting his little

black kid hands on the top of his stick and
looking up at the tall young man, "it
is out of the question that you should go
anywhere else. Pray do not suggest it.
You intended to go back to your hotel
this evening and to come on to Mitchell
tomorrow ? Then let us have the
pleasure of seeing you tomorrow as early
as you like to come."

Indeed — indeed," protested Harding,
I could not think of intruding."

The little gentleman laughed.

My dear sir, who is the intruder at
Mitchelhurst Place? Answer me that!
No," he said, growing suddenly serious,
"you cannot go to the pothouse — you —
your mother's son — while I live in the
Roth wells' old home. It is impossible — I
cannot suffer it. I should be for ever
ashamed and humiliated if you refused a
few days' shelter under the old roof. I
should indeed."

If you put it so "

There is no other way to put it."

I can say no more. I can only thank
you for your kindness. I will come," said
Reynold Harding, slowly. Urgent as the
invitation was, and simply as it was accepted,
there was yet a curious want of
friendliness about it. Circumstances constrained
these two men, not any touch of
mutual liking. One would have said that
Mr. Hayes was bound to insist and Harding
to yield.

That is settled then," said the elder
man, " and we shall see you tomorrow.
I am a good deal engaged myself, but
Barbara is quite at home in Mitchelhurst,
and can show you all the Both well memorials
— the Bothwell are the romance of
Mitchelhurst, you know. She'll be delighted
to do the honours, eh, Barbara?"
The wl murmured a shv answer.
Oh, if I trespass on your kindness 1

think that's enough ; I needn't victimise
Miss Strange," said the young man, and
he laughed a little, not altogether pleasantly.
" And I can't claim any of the
romance. My name isn't Bothwell."

The name isn't everything," said Mr.
Hayes. '' Come, Barbara, it's getting late,
and I want my dinner. Till tomorrow,
then," and he held out his hand to their
new acquaintance.

Young Harding bowed stiffly to Barbara.
Till tomorrow afternoon."

The old man and the girl walked away,
he with an elderly sprightliness of bearing
which seemed to say, " See how active I
still am 1 " she moving by his side with
dreamy, unconscious grace. They came to
a curve in the road, and she turned her
head and looked back before she passed
it. Mr. Reynold Harding had taken buta
couple of steps from the spot where they
had left him. He had apparently arranged

VOL. I. D

his bandage to his satisfaction at last, and
was pulling at the knot with his teeth and
his other hand, but his face was towards
them, and Barbara knew that he saw that
backward glance. She quickened her steps
in hot confusion, and looked straight before
her for at least five minutes.

During that time it was her uncle who
was the hero of her thoughts. His dramatic
recognition of Harding and Harding's ring,
his absolute refusal to permit the young
man to go to any house in Mitchelhurst
but the Place, something in the tone of
his voice when he uttered his " thirty years
ao^o," hinted a romance to Barbara. The
conjecture might or might not be correct,
but at any rate it was natural. Girls who
do not understand love are apt to use it to
explain all the other things they do not
understand. She waited till her cheeks were
cool, and her tliouoiits clear, and then she
spoke.

I didn't know you knew the Roth wells
so well, uncle."

My dear," said her uncle, *' how should
you ? "

I suppose you might have talked about
them."

I might," said Mr. Hayes. *' Now you
mention it, I might, certainly. But I
haven't any especial fancy for the gossip
of the last generation."

Well, I have," said the girl. And after
a moment she went on. " How long is it
since they left the Place ? "

Her uncle put his head on one side with a
quick, birdlike movement, and apparently
referred to a cloud in the western sky
before he made answer.

Nineteen years last Midsummer."

And when did you take it ? "

A year later."

The two walked a little way in silence,
and then Barbara recommenced.

D 2

"This Mr. Harding — he is like the
Rothwclls, then?"

Roth well from the crown of his head
to the sole of his foot. The old people,
who knew the family, will find him out
as he walks through the village — see if
they don't. The same haughty, sulky,
sneering way with him, and just the same
voice. Only every Bothwell at the Place,
even to the last, had an air of being a
(J rand seigneur which this fellow can't very
well have. Upon my ward, I begin to
think it was the pleasantness thing about
them. I don't like a pride which is conscious
of being homeless and out at elbows."

Barbara undauntedly pursued her little
romance.

You are talking about the men," she
said. " Is Mr. Harding like his mother ? "

Well, she was a handsome woman,"
Mr. Hayes replied indifferently, " but she
had the same unpleasant manner."

The girl was thrown back on an utter
blankness of ideas. A woman beloved
may have a dozen faults, and be the
dearer for them ; but she cannot possibly
have an unpleasant manner. Barbara
could frame no theory to fit the perplexing
facts.

As they turned into the one street of
Mitchelhurst, Mr. Hayes spoke musingly.

To-morrow afternoon, Barbara, let that
young man have the blue room — the large
room. You know which I mean ? "

Yes, uncle."

*see that everything is nice and in
order. And, Barbara "

Yes, uncle," said Barbara again, for he
paused.

"Mr. Keynold Harding will probably
look down on you. I suspect he thinks
that you and I are about fit to black his
boots. Be civil, of course, but you needn't
do it."

'' Tm sure I don't want," said the girl
quietly ; " and at that rate I should hope
he would come with them tolerably clean
tomorrow."

Mr. Hayes laughed suddenly, showing
his teeth.

'* By Jove ! " he said, " they were dirty
enough this afternoon ! "

In my service," said Barbara. " Now I
come to think of it, it seems to me that I
ought to clean them."

Nonsense ! " her uncle exclaimed, still
smiling at the remembrance. " And you
saw him roll into the ditch ? — Barbara, the
poor fellow must hate you like poison ! "

She looked down as she walked, drawing
her delicate brows a little together.

I dare say he does," she said softly, as
if to herself.

Between ten and eleven that evening Mr.
Reynold Harding sat by his fireside, staring

at the red coals as they faded drearily into
ashes. Being duly washed and brushed, he
showed but slight traces of his accident.
The scratches on his face were not deep,
and his torn hand was mended with little
strips of black plaster. Intently as he
seemed to think, his thoughts were not
definite. Had he been questioned concerning
them he could have answered only
Mitchelhurst." Anger, tenderness, curiosity,
pride, and bitter self-contempt were
mixed in silent strife in the shadows of his
soul. The memory of the Eothwells had
drawn him on his pilgrimage — a vain,
hopeless, barren memory, and yet the best
he had. He had intended to wander about
the village, to look from a distance at the
Bothwell' house, to stand by the Roth-wells'
graves in the churchyard, and to
laugh at his own folly as he did so. And
now he was to sleep under their roof, to
know the very rooms where they had lived

and died, and for this he was to thank
these strangers who played at hospitality
in the old home. He thought of the
morrow with curious alternations of distaste
and eagerness.

Mr. Hayes, meanwhile, with the lamplight
shining on his white hair, was studying
a paper in the Transactions of the
County Archaeological Society, " On an
Inscription in Mitchelhurst Churches*' Mr.
Hayes had a theory of his own on the
subject, and smiled over the vicars view
with the tranquil enjoyment of unalloyed
contempt.

And Barbara, in the silence of her room,
opposite a dimly-lighted mirror, sat brushing
her shadowy hair, whose waves seemed
to melt into the dusk about the pale
reflection of her face. As she gazed at it
she was thinking of some one who was
gone, and of some one who was to come.
Dwelling: amono^ the old memories of

Mitclielhurst Place, her girlish thoughts
had turned to them for lack of other food,
till the Bothwell were real to her in a
sense in which no other fancies ever could
be real. She was so conscious that her
connection with the house was accidental
and temporary, that she felt as if it still
belonged to its old owners, and she was
only their guest. They were always near,
yet, whimsically enough, in point of time
they were nearest when they were most
remote. Barbara's phantoms mostly belonged
to the last century, and they faded
and grew pale as they approached the
present day, till the latest owner of the
Place was merely a name. The truth was
that at the end of their reign the Bothwell,
impoverished and lonely, had simply
lived in the house as they found it, and
were unable to set the stamp of any individual
tastes upon their surroundings.
They were the Bothwell of the good old

times who left their autographs in the books
in the library, their patient needlework on
quilts and bell-pulls, their mouldering rose-leaves
in great china jars, their pictures
still hanging on the walls, and traces of
their preferences in the names of rooms
and paths. There' were inscriptions under
the bells that had summoned servants long
ago, which told of busy times and a full
house. The lettering only differed from
anything in the present day by being
subtly and unobtrusively old-fashioned.
"Mb. Gerald" and "Mr. Thomas" had
given up ringing bells for many a long
day, and if the one suspended above Miss
Sarah's name sometimes tinkled through
the stillness, it was only because Barbara
wanted some hot water. Miss Sarah was
one of the most distinct of the girl's
phantoms. Eighty or wrongly, Barbara
always believed her to be the beautiful
Miss Bothwell of whom an old man in

the village told her a tradition, told to
him in his boyhood. It seemed that a
Bothwell of some uncertain date stood for
the county (rand pretty nigh ruined himself,"
said her informant, with a grim, yet
admiring, enjoyment of the extravagant
folly of the contest), and in the very heat
of the election Miss Bothwell drove with
four horses to the polling-place, to show
herself clothed from head to foot in a
startling splendour of yellow, her father's
colour.

They said she was a rare sight to seethe
old man concluded meditatively.

'' And did Mr. Bothwell get in ? " asked
Barbara.

No, no ! " he said, shaking his head.
No Bothwell ever got in for the county,
though they tried times. But he pretty
nigh ruined himself."

Had she cared to ask her uncle, Barbara
might very possibly have ascertained the

precise date of the election, and identified
the darkly beautiful girl who was whirled
by her four spirited horses into the roaring,
decorated town. But she was not inclined
to talk of her fancies to Mr. Hayes. So,
assuming the heroine to be Miss Sarah,
she remained in utter ignorance concerning
her after life. Did she ever wear the
white robes of a bride, or the blackness of
widow's weeds ? Barbara often wondered.
But at night, in her room, which was
Sarah Bothwell's, she could never picture
her otherwise than superbly defiant in the
meteor-like glory of that one day.

As she brushed her dusky cloud of hair
that evening she called up the splendour
of her favourite vision, and then her
thoughts fell sadly away from it to Reynold
Harding, the man who had kindred
blood in his veins, but no inheritance of
name or land. Those iron horse-hoofs, long
ago, had thundered over the bit of road

where Barbara gathered her autumn nosegay,
and where young Harding — oh, poor
fellow ! — slipped in the mire, and scrambled
awkwardly to his feet, a pitiful, sullen
figure to put beside the beautiful Miss
Bothwell.

Was she glad he was coming ? She
laid down her brush and mused, looking
into the depths of her mirror. Yes, she
was glad. She did not think she should
like him. She felt that he was hostile,
scornful, dissatisfied. But Mitchelhurst
was quiet — so few people ever came toit,
and if they did come they went away
without a word — and at eighteen quiet is
wearisome, and a spice of antagonism is
refreshing. Did he hate her as her uncle
had said ? Time would show. She took
her little cross from the dressing table,
and looked at it with a new interest.
No, she did not like him. " But, after
all," said Barbara to herself, *'he is a

Bothwell, and my fairy godmother introduced
us ! "

Many miles away a bench of hips, scarlet
and orange, lay by a scribbled paper. They
had had adventures since they were pulled
from a Mitchelhurst brier that afternoon.
They had been lost and found, and travelling
by rail had nearly been lost again. A
clumsy porter, shouldering a load, had
blundered against an absorbed young man,
Tho was just grasping a rhyme ; and the
red berries fell between them to the dusty
platform, and were barely saved from perils
of hurrying feet. Still, though a little
bruised and spoilt, they glowed ruddily in
the candle-light, and the paper beside them
said —

Speech was forbidden me ; I coidd hut stay,
Ambushed behind a leafless hawthorn screen
And look upon her passing. She lead been
To pluck red berries on that autumn day,
And Love, who from her side will never stray,
Stole some for pity, seeing me unseen,

And sighing, let tliemfall, that I might glean —
Poor gift ^ quoth he ' that Time shall take axoayP
Nay J hut I mock at Time I It shall not be
That, Fleet of foot, he robs me of my ijrize ;
Her smile has kindled all the sullen skies,
Blessed the dull furrows, and the leafless tree,
And year by year the autumn, ere it dies,
Shall bring my rosy treasure back to me ! "

CHAPTER III.

MiTCHELHURST was, as Mr. Hayes had
said, a dull little village, by no means likely
to attract visitors. It was merely a group
of houses, for the most part meanly built,
set in a haphazard fashion on either side of
a wide road. Occasionally a shed would
come to the front, or two or three poplars,
or a bit of garden fence. But the poplars
were apt to be mercilessly lopped, with
just a tuft at the extreme tip, which gave
each unlucky tree a slight resemblance to a
lion's tail, and the gardens, if not full of
cabbages, displayed melancholy rows of
stumps where cabbages had been. There
was very little traffic through Mitchelhurst

Street, as this thoroughfare was usually
called, yet it showed certain signs of life.
Fowls rambled aimlessly about it, with a
dejected yet inquiring air, which seemed to
say that they would long ago have given
lip their desultory pecking if they could
have found anything else to do. A windmill,
standing on a slight eminence a little
way from the road, creaked as its sails
revolved. Sounds of hammering came from
the blacksmith's forge. Children played on
the foot-path, a little knot of loungers
might generally be seen in front of the
Bothwell Arms," and at most of the doorways
stood the Mitchelhurst women, talking
loudly while their busy fingers were plaiting
straws. This miserably paid work was much
in vogue in the village, where generation
after generation of children learned it, and
grew up into stunted, ill-fed girls, fond
of coarse gossip, and of their slatternly
independence.

VOL. I. E

At the western end of the village, beyond
the alehouse, stood the church, with two or
three yews darkening the crowded graveyard.
The vicarage was close at hand, a
sombre little house, with a flagged path
leading to its dusky porch. Mitch hurst
was not happy in its vicars. The parish
was too small to attract the heroic enthusiasts
who are ready to live and die for
the unhealthy and ignorant crowds of our
great cities. And the house was too poor,
and the neighbourhood too uninteresting,
for any kindly country gentleman, who
chanced to have "the Reverend" written
before his name, to come and stable his
horses, and set up his liberal house-keeping,
and preach his Sunday sermons there. No
one chose Mitchelhurst, so " those few sheep
in the wilderness " were left to those who
had no choice, and the vicars were almost
always discontented elderly men. As a rule
they died there, a vicar of Mitchelhurst

being seldom remembered by the givers of
good livings. The incumbent at this time
was a feeble archaeologist, who coughed
drearily in his damp little study, and looked
vaguely out at the world from a narrow
and mildewed past. As he stepped from
the shadowy porch, blinking with tired
eyes, he would pause on the path, which
looked like a row of flat unwritten tombstones,
and glance doubtfully right and left.
Probably he had some vague idea of going
into the village, but in nine cases out often
he turned aside to the graveyard, and
sauntered musingly in the shadow of the
old yews, or disappeared into the church,
where there were two or three inscriptions
just sufficiently defaced to be interesting.
He fancied he should decipher them one
day, and leave nothing for his successor todo,
and he haunted them in that hope.

When he went into the street he spoke
kindly to the women at the doors, with an

E 2 , UNIVERSITY OF
ILLINOIS LIBRARY.

obvious forgetfulness of names and circumstances
which made him an object of contemptuous
pity. They could not conceive
how any one in his senses coukl make such
foolish mistakes, and were inclined to look
on the Established Church as a convenient
provision for weak - minded gentlefolks.
They grinned when he had gone by, and
repeated his well-meant inquiries, plaiting
all the time. It was only natural that the
vicar should prefer his parishioners dead.
They did not then indulge in coarse
laughter, they never described unpleasant
ailments, and they were neatly labelled
with their names, or else altogether silent
concerning them.

The vicar's shortcomings might have been
less remarked had the tenants of Mitchell
Place taken their proper position in
the village. But where, seventy or eighty
years before, the great gates swung open
for carriages and horses, and busy servants,

and tradesmen, there came now down the
mossy drive only an oLi man on foot, and
a girl by his side, with eyes like dark
waters, and a sweet richness of carnation
in her cheeks. Mr. Hayes and his niece
lived, as the later Bothwell had lived, ina
corner of the old house. It was queer
that a man should choose to hire a place
so much too big for him, people said, but
they had said it for nineteen years, and
they never seemed to get any further.
Herbert Hayes might be eccentric, but he
was shrewd, he knew his own business, and
the villagers recognised the fact. He was
not popular, there was nothing to be got
by begging at the Place, and he would not
allow Barbara to visit any of the cottages.
But it was acknowledged that he was not
stingy in payment for work done. And if
he lived in a corner he knew how" to make
himself comfortable there, which was more
than the last Bothwell had been able to do.

The church and vicarage were at one
end of Mitchelhurst, and the Place, which
stood on slightly rising ground, was at the
other. It was a white house, and in a dim
light it had a sad and spectral aspect, a
pale blankness as of a dead face. The
Bothwell who built it intended to have
a stately avenue from the great ironwork
gates to the principal entrance, and planted
his trees accordingly. But the site was
cruelly exposed, and the soil was sterile, and
his avenue had become a vista of warped
and irregular shapes, leaning in grotesque
attitudes, dwarfed and yet massive with
ao-e. In the leafiness of summer much of
this singularity was lost, but when winter
stripped the boughs it revealed a double
line of fantastic skeletons, a fit pathway
for the strangest dreams.

The gardens, with the exception of a
piece close to the house, had been so long
neglected that they seemed almost to have

forgotten that they had ever been cultivated.
Almost, but not quite, for they had
not the innocence of the original wilderness.
There were tokens of a contest. The plants
and grasses that possessed the soil were
obviously weeds, and the degraded survivals
of a gentler growth lurked among them
overborne and half strangled. There was a
suggestion of murderous triumph in the
coarse leaves of the mullen and docks that
had rooted themselves as in a conquered
inheritance, and the little undulations which
marked the borders and bits of rock-work
of half a century earlier looked curiously
like neglected graves.

It seemed to Barbara Strange, as she
stood looking over it all, on the day on
which Mr. Harding was to come to Mitchell
that there was something novel in
this aspect of desolation. She knew the
place well, for it was rather more than a
year since she came, at her uncle's invitation,

to live there, and she had seen it
with all the changes of the seasons upon it.
She knew it well, but she had never thought
of it as home. The little Devonshire
vicarage which held father and mother, and
a swarm of 5^oung sisters and brothers —
almost too many to be contained within
its walls — was home in the past and the
present. And if the girl had dreams of
the future, shy dreams which hardly revealed
themselves even to her, they certainly
never had Mitchelhurst Place for a background.
To her it was just a halting-place
on her journey into the unknown regions of
life. It was like some great out-of-the-way
ruinous old inn, in which one might chance
to sleep for a night or two. She had merely
been interested in it as a stranger, but on
this October day she looked at it curiously
and critically for Mr. Harding's sake. She
would have liked it to welcome him, to
show some signs of stately hospitality to

this son of the house who was coming
home, and for the first time a full sense of
its dreariness and hopelessness crept into
her soul. She could do nothing, she felt
absurdly small, the great house seemed to
cast a melancholy shadow over her, as she
went to and fro in the bit of ground that
was still recognised as a garden, gathering
the few blossoms that autumn had spared.

Barbara meant the flowers to brighten
the rooms in which they lived, but she
looked a little doubtfully into her basket
while she walked towards the house. They
were so colourless and frail, it seemed to
her that they were just fit to be emptied
out over somebody's grave. '' Oh," she
said to herself, " why didn't he come in the
time of roses, or peonies, or tiger lilies ?
If it had been in July there might have
been some real sunshine to warm the old
place. Or earlier still, when the apple
blossom was out — why didn't he come

then ? It is so sad now." And she
remembered what some one had said, a few
weeks before, loitering up that wide path
by her side : '' An old house — yes, I like
old houses, but this is like a whited
sepulchre, somehow. And not his own —
1 should not care to set up housekeeping
in a corner of somebody else's sepulchre."
Barbara, as her little lonely footsteps fell
on the sodden earth, thought that he was
perfectly right. She threw back her head,
and faced the wide, blind gaze of its many-widowed
front. Well, it was Mr. Harding's
own family sepulchre, if that was any
consolation.

Her duty as a housekeeper took her to
the blue room, which Mr. Hayes had chosen
for their guest, a large apartment at the
side of the house, not with the bleak northern
aspect of the principal entrance, but
looking away towards the village, and commanding
a wide prospect of meadow land.

The landscape in itself was not remarkable,
but it had an attraction as of swiftly varying
moods. Under a midsummer sky it
would lie steeped in sunshine, and dappled
with shadows of little, lightly-flying clouds,
content and at peace. Seen through slant
lines of grey rain it was beyond measure
dreary and forlorn, burdening the gazers
soul with its flat and unrelieved heaviness.
One would have said at such times that it
was a veritable Land of Hopelessness. Then
the clouds would part, mass themselves,
perhaps, into strange islands and continents,
and towering piles, and the sun would
go down in wild splendours of flame as of
a burning world, and the level meadows
would become a marvellous plain, across
which one might journey into the heart
of unspeakable things. Then would follow
the pensive sadness of the dusk, and the
silvery enchantment of moonlight. And
after all these changes there would probably

come a grey and commonplace morning, in
which it would appear as so many acres of
very tolerable grazing land, in no wise
remarkable or interesting.

Barbara did not trouble herself much
about the prospect. She was anxious to
make sure that soap and towels had been
put ready for Mr. Harding, and candles in
the brass candlesticks on the chimney-piece,
and ink and pens on the little old-fashioned
writing-table. With a dainty instinct of
grace she arranged the heavy hangings of
the bed, and, seeing that a clumsy maid
had left the pillow awry, she straightened
and smoothed it with soft touches of a
slender brown hand, as if she could sympathetically
divine the sullen weariness of
the head that should lie there. Then,
fixing an absent gaze upon the carpet,
she debated a perplexing question in her
mind.

Should she, or should she not, put

some flowers in Mr. Harding's room ? She
wanted to make him feel that he was
welcome to Mitchelhurst Place, and, to
her shyness, it seemed easier to express
that welcome in any silent way than to put
it into words. And why not ? She might
have done it without thinking twice about
it, but her uncle's little jests, and her own
loneliness, while they left her fearless in
questions of right and wrong, had made
her uneasy about etiquette. As she leaned
against one of the carved pillars of the
great bed, musing, with lips compressed
and anxious brow, she almost resolved that
Mr. Reynold Harding should have nothing
beyond what was a matter of housewifely
duty. Why should she risk a blush or a
doubt for him ? But even with the half-formed
resolution came the remembrance of
his unlucky humiliation in her service, and
Barbara started from her idle attitude, and
went away, singing softly to herself.

When she came back she had a little
bowl of blue and white china in her hands,
which she set on the writing-table near the
window. It was filled with the best she
could find in her basket — a pale late rosebud,
with autumnal foliage red as rust (and
the bud itself had lingered so long, hoping
for sunshine and warmth, that it would
evidently die with its secret of sweetness
folded dead in its heart), a few heads of
mignonette, green and run to leaf, and
rather reminding of fragrance than actually-breathing
it ; a handful of melancholy
Michaelmas daisies, and two or three white
asters. The girl, with warm young life in
her veins, and a glow of ripe colour on her
cheek stooped in smiling pity and touched
that central rosebud with her lips. No
doubt remained, if there had been any doubt
till then — it was already withered at the
core, or it must have opened wide to answer
that caress.

"Don't tell me !" said Barbara to herself
with a little nod. " If such a drearily doleful
bouquet isn't strictly proper, it ought to
be!"

It was late in the afternoon before the
visitor came. There was mist like a thin
shroud over the face of the earth, and little
sparks of light were gleaming in the cottage
windows. Keynold Harding held the reins
listlessly when the driver got down to open
the great wrought-iron gate, and then resigned
his charge as absently as he had
accepted it. He stared straight before him
while the dog-cart rattled up the avenue,
and suffered himself to sway idly as they
bumped over mossy stones in the drive.
The trees, leaning overhead, dropped a dead
leaf or two on his passive hands, as if that
were his share of the family property held
in trust for him till that moment.

There was something coldly repellent in
the stony house front, where was no sign

of 2freetino[ or even of life. The driver
alighted again, pulled a great bell which
made a distant clangour, and then busied
himself at the back of the cart with
Harding's portmanteau, while the horse
stood stretching its neck, and breathing
audibly in the chilly stillness. There was
a brief pause, during which Harding, who
had not uttered a word since he started,
confronted the old house with a face as
neutral as its own.

Then the door flew open, a maid appeared,
the luo[o:ao:e was carried into the hall, and
Mr. Hayes came hurrying out to meet his
guest. " Welcome to Mitchelhurst Place ! "
he exclaimed. That '' Welcome to Mitchell
Place ! " had been in his thoughts fora
couple of hours at least, and now that it
was uttered it seemed very quickly over.
Harding, who was paying the driver out of
a handful of change, dropped a couple of
coins, made a hurried attempt to regain

them, and finally shook hands confusedly
with Mr. Hayes, while the man and the
maid pursued the rolling shillings round
their feet. "Thank you — you are very
kind," he said, and then saw Barbara in
the background. She had paused on the
threshold of a firelight room, and behind her
the warm radiance was glancing on a bit
of white-panelled wall. Reynold hastily
got rid of his financial difficulties and went
forward.

'* Oh, what a cold drive you must have
had ! " she cried, when their hands met.
You are like ice ! Do come to the fire."

'' We thought you would have been here
sooner," said Mr. Hayes. 'the days draw
in now, and it gets to be very cold and
damp sometimes when the sun goes down."

Hardino^ murmured something about not
having been able to get away earlier.

This isn't the regular drawing-room,
you know," his host explained. "I like

VOL. I. F

space, but there is a little too much of it in
that great room — you must have a look at
it tomorrow. I don't care to sit by my
fire-side and see Barbara at her piano across
an acre or two of carpet. To my mind this
is big enough for two or three people."

•' Quite," said Reynold.

'^ The yellow drawing-room they called
this," the other continued.

The young man glanced round. The
room was lofty and large enough for more
than the two or three people of whom Mr.
Hayes had spoken. But for the ruddy
firelight it might have looked cold, with
its cream-white walls, its rather scanty
furniture, and the yellow of its curtains and
chairs faded to a dim tawny hue. But the
liberal warmth and light of the blazing
pile on the hearth irradiated it to the
furthest corner, and filled it with wavering
brightness.

o

It's all exactly as it was in your uncle's

time," said Mr. Hayes. " When he could
not go on any longer, Croft took the whole
thing just as it stood, with all the old
furniture. But for that I would not have
come here."

All the charm would have been lost,
wouldn't it ? " said Barbara.

The charm — yes. Besides, one had
need be a millionnaire to do anything with
such a great empty shell. I suspect a
millionnaire would find plenty to do here
as it is."

I suppose it had been neglected for a
long while ? " Reynolds questioned with his
hard utterance.

Mr. Hayes nodded, arching his brows.

Thirty or forty years. Everything
allowed to go to rack and ruin. By Jove,
sir, your people must have built well, and
furnished well, for things to look as they
do. Well, they shall stay as they are while
I am here ; I'll keep the wind and the

F 2

rain out of the old house, but I can do no
more, and I wouldn't if I could. And when
Fm gone. Croft, or whoever is master then,
must see to it."

"Yes," said the young man, still looking
round. " Fm glad you've left it as it used
to be."

Just as your mother would remember
it. Except, of course, one must make
oneself comfortable," Mr. Hayes explained
apologetically. "Just a chair for me, and
a piano for Barbara, you see ! "

Reynolds saw. There was a large eastern
rug spread near the fire-place, and on it
stood an easy-chair, and a little table
laden with books. A shaded lamp cast its
radiance on a freshly-cut page. By the
fire was a low seat, which was evidently
Barbara's.

That's the way to enjoy old furniture,"
said Mr. Hayes. " Sit on a modern chair
and look at it — eh ? There's an old piano

in that further corner ; that's very good to
look at too."

'' But not to hear ? " said Harding.

You may try it'*

"That's more than I may do," said
Barbara, demurely.

You tried it too much — you tried me
too much," Mr. Hayes made answer. " You
did not begin in a fair spirit of investigation.
You were determined to find music
in it."

The girl laughed and looked down.

And I did," she murmured to herself.

"Ah, you are looking at the portraits,"
Mr. Hayes went on. " There are better
ones than the two or three we have here.
I believe your Uncle John took away a few
when he left. Your grandmother used to
hang over there by the fireplace. The one
on the other side is good, I think — Anthony
Bothwell. You must come a little more
this way to look at it."

Harding followed obediently, and made
various attempts to find the right position,
but the picture was not placed so as to
receive the full firelight, and being above
the lamp it remained in shadow.

'stay," said the old gentleman, 'Til
light this candle."

He struck a match as lie spoke, and the
sudden illumination revealed a scornful face,
and almost seemed to give it a momentary
expression, as if Anthony, of Mitch hurst
Place, recognised Reynold of nowhere.

The younger man eyed the portrait coldly
and deliberately.

Well," he said, " Mr. Anthony Bothwell,
my grandfather, I suppose ? "

Great-grandfather," Mr. Hayes corrected.

Oh, you are well acquainted with the
family history. Well, then, I should say
that my great-grandfather was remarkably
handsome, but "

If it comes to that you are uncommonly

like him,'^ said his host, with a little chuckle,
as he looked from the painted face to the
living one, and back aojain.

Reynolds started and drew back.

Oh, thank you ! " he said, with a short
laugh. If he had been permitted to continue
his first remark, he would have said,
but as unpleasant-tempered a gentleman
as you could find in a day's journey."

The words had been so literally on his
lips that he could hardly realise that they
had not been uttered when Mr. Hayes spoke.

For the moment the likeness had been
complete. Then he saw how it was, laughed,
and said —

Oh, thank you."

But he flashed an uneasy glance at
Barbara, who was lingering near. Was he
really like that pale, bitter-lipped portrait ?
He fancied that her face would tell him,
but she was looking fixedly at Anthony
Bothwell.

"Mind you are not late for dinner,
Barbara," said her uncle quickly.

She woke to radiant animation.

"won't be," she said. "But if you are
going to introduce Mr. Harding to all the
pictures first "

"I'm not going to do anything of the
kind."

That's right. Mr. Harding's ancestors
won't spoil if they are kept waiting a little,
but I can't answer for the fish."

"Pray don't let any dead and gone
Bothwell interfere with your dinner," said
Reynolds. " If one's ancestors can't wait
one's convenience, I don't know who can."

CHAPTER IV.

DINNER AND A LITTLE MUSIC.

Barbara was the first to reappear in
the yellow drawing-room. She had gone
away, laughing carelessly ; she came back
shyly, with flushed cheeks and downcast
eyes. She had. put on a dress which was
reserved for important occasions, and she
was conscious of her splendour. She felt
the strings of amber beads that were wound
loosely round her throat, and that rose and
fell with her quickened breathing. Nay,
she was conscious to the utmost end of the
folds of black drapery, that followed her
with a soft sound, as of a summer sea, when
she crossed the pavement of the hall. For

Barbara's dress was black, and its special
adornment was some handsome black lace
that her grandmother had given her. Something
of lighter hue and texture might have
better suited her age, but there was no
questioning the fact that the dignified richness
of her gown was admirably becoming
to the girl. One hardly knew whether to
call her childish or stately, and the perplexity
was delightful.

Her heart was beating fast, half in apprehension
and half in defiance. Over andover
again while she waited she said to
herself that she had not put on her best
dress for Mr. Harding's sake, she had not.
She did not care what he thought of her.
He might come and go, just as other people
might come and go. It did not matter tog



her. But his coming seemed somehow to
have brought all the Roth wells back to life,
and to have revealed the desolate pride of
the old house. When she looked from

/

Reynold's face to Anthony's, she suddenly
felt that she must put on her best dress
for their company. It was no matter of
personal feeling, it was an instinctive and
imperative sense of what the circumstances
demanded. She had never been to such
a dinner party in all her life.

The feeling did her credit, but it was
difficult to express. Feelings are often difficult
to express, and a woman has an especial
difficulty in conveying the finer shades of
meaning. There is an easy masculine way
of accounting for her every action by supposing
it aimed at men in general, or some
man in particular ; and thus all manner of
delicate fancies and distinctions, shaped
clearly in a woman's mind, may pass through
the distorting medium to reach a man's
apprehension as sheer coquetry. The knowledge
of this possibility is apt to give even
innocence an air of hesitating consciousness.
Barbara was by no means certain that her

uncle would understand this honour paid,
not to any living young man, but to the
traditions of Mitchelhurst Place, and her
blushes betrayed her shame at his probable
misleading: of her meanings. And what
would Mr. Harding himself think 1

He came in with his languid, hesitating
walk, looking very tall and slender in his
evening dress. He had telegraphed home
for that dress suit the day before. The fact
that he was travelling for a week or two,
with no expectation of dining anywhere
but in country inns, might naturally have
excused its absence, but the explanation
would have been an apology, and Harding
could not apologise. He would have found
it easier to spend his last shilling. Perhaps,
too, he had shared Barbara's feeling as to
the fitness of a touch of ceremony at
Mitchelhurst.

At any rate he shared her shyness. He
crossed the room with evident constraint,

and halted near the fire without a word.
Barbara's shyness was palpitating and
aflame; his was leaden and chill. She
did not know what to make of his silence ;
she waited, and still he did not speak ;
she looked up and felt sure that his
downcast eyes had been obliquely fixed on
her.

Uncle is last, you see," she said. '* I
knew he would be."

I was afraid I might be," he replied.
A clock struck before I expected it. 1
suppose my watch loses, but I hadn't found
it out."

Oh, I ought to have told you," she
exclaimed penitently. " That is the great
clock in the hall, and it is always kept ten
minutes fast. Uncle likes it for a warning.
So when it strikes, he says, ' That's the hall
clock ; then there's plenty of time, plenty
of time, I'll just finish this.' And he goes
on quite happily."

I fancied somehow that Mr. Hayes was
a very punctual man."

Because he talks so much about it. I
think he reminds other people for fear they
should remind him. When I first came he
was always saying, 'Don't be late till I
was quite frightened lest I should be. I
couldn't believe it when he said, ' Don't be
late,' and then wasn't ready."

You are not so particular now ? "

Oh yes, I am," she answered very
seriously. " It doesn't do to be late if you
are the house-keeper, you know."

A faint gleam lighted Harding's face.

Of course not ; but I never was," he
replied, in a respectful tone. "How long
is it since you came here '? "

I came with my mother to see uncle a
great many years ago, but I only came to
live here last October. Uncle wanted somebody.
He said it was dull."

I should think it was. Isn't it dull for
you ? "

Sometimes," said Barbara. *' It isn't at
all like home. That's a little house with a
great many people in it — father and mother,
and all my brothers and sisters, and father's
pupils. And this is a big house with nobody
in it."

Till you came," said Keynold, hesitating
over the little bow or glance which should
have pointed his words.

Well, there's uncle," said Barbara with
a smile, ''he must count for somebody.
But feel exactly like nobody when I am
going in and out of all those empty rooms.
You must see them tomorrow."

The clock on the chimney-piece struck,
and she turned her head to look at it.
Thais five minutes slow," she said.

And the other was more than ten minutes
fast."

"Yes, it gains. Do you know," said
Barbara, " I always feel as if the great clock
were the time, so when it fairly runs away

into the future and I have to stop it, to let
the world come up with it again, it seems tome
almost as if I stopped my own life too."

Some people would be uncommonly
glad to do that," said Harding ; " or even
to make time go backward for a while."

Well, I don't mind for a quarter of an
hour. But I don't want it to go back,
really. Not back to pinafores and the
schoolroom," said Barbara with a laugh,
which in some curious fashion turned to a
deepening flush. The swift, impulsive blood
was always coming and going at a thought,
a fancy, a mere nothing.

Harding smiled in his grim way. " I
suppose it's just as well not to want time to
run back," he said at last.

Uncle might find himself punctual for
once if it did. Oh, here he comes ! " The
door opened as she spoke, and Mr. Hayes
appeared on the threshold with an inquiring
face.

All ! you are down, Barbara ! That's
right. Dinner's ready, they tell me."

Reynolds looked at Barbara, hesitated, and
then offered his arm. Mr. Hayes stood
back and eyed them as they passed — the
tall young man, pale, dark-browed, scowling
a little, and the girl at his side radiantly
conscious of her dignity. Even when they
had gone by he was obliged to wait a
moment. The sweeping folds of Barbara's
dress demanded space and respect. His
glance ran up them to her shoulders, to the
amber beads about her neck, to the loose
coils of her dusky hair, and he followed
meekly with a whimsical smile.

They dined in the great dining-room,
where a score of guests would have seemed
few. But they had a little table, with four
candles on it, set near a clear fire, and shut
in by an overshadowing screen. " We are
driven out of this in the depth of winter,"
said Mr. Hayes. " It is too cold — nothing

VOL. I. G

seems to warm it, and it is such a terrible
journey from the drawing-room fire. But
till the Sitter weather comes I like it, and
I always come back as soon as the spring
begins. We were here by March, weren't
we, Barbara ? "

The girl smiled assent, and Harding had
a passing fancy of the windy skies of March
glancing through the tall windows, the
upper part of which he saw from his place.
But his eyes came back to Barbara, who
was watching the progress of their meal
with an evident sense of responsibility.
The crowning grace of an accomplished
housekeeper is to hide all need of management,
but this was the pretty anxiety of a
beginner. " Mary, the currant jelly," said
Miss Strange in an intense undertone, and
glanced eloquently at Reynolds's plate. She
was so absorbed that she started when her
uncle spoke.

Why do you wear those white things —

asters, are they not ? They don't go well
with your dress."

Barbara looked down at the two colourless
blossoms which she had fastened among the

o

folds of her black lace. " No, I know they
don't, but I couldn't find anything better in
the garden to-day."

It wouldn't have mattered what it was,"
Mr. Hayes persisted, with his head critically
on one side. " Anything red or yellow — -
just a bit of colour, you know."

But that was exactly what I couldn't
find. All the red and yellow things in the
garden are dead."

Why not some of those scarlet hips you
were gathering yesterday ? " said Reynolds.

*' Oh ! Those ! " exclaimed Barbara, looking
hurriedly away from the scratch on the
cheek nearest her, and then discovering that
she had fixed her eyes on his wounded hand.
Do you think they would have done ?
Well, yes, I dare say they might."

G 2

I should think they would have done
beautifully, but you know best. Perhaps
you did not care for them ? You threw
them away ? " He was smiling with a
touch of malice, as if he had actually seen
Barbara in her room, gazing regretfully at a
little brown pitcher which was full of autumn
leaves and clusters of red rose-fruit.

"Of course they would have done," said
Mr. Hayes.

Yes, perhaps they might. I must bear
them in mind another time. Uncle, Mr.
Harding's plate is empty." And Barbara
went on with her dinner, feelings ano^ry and
aggrieved. " He might have let me think
I had spared his feelings by giving them
up," she said to herself. " It would have
been kinder. And I should like to know
what I was to do. If I had worn them he
would have looked at me to remind me. I
can't think what made uncle talk about the
stupid things."

During the rest of the meal conversation
was somewhat fitfuL The three, in their
sheltered, fire-lit nook, sat through pauses,
in which it almost seemed as if it would be
only necessary to rise softly and glance
round the end of the screen to surprise
some ghostly company gathered silently at
the long table. The wind made a cheerless
noise outside, seeking admission to the Teat
hollow house, and died away in the hopelessness
of vain endeavour. At last Miss
Strange prepared to leave the gentlemen to
their wine, but she lingered for a moment,
darkly glowing against the background of
sombre brown and tarnished gold, to bid
her uncle remember that coffee would be
ready in the drawing-room when they liked
to come for it.

Mr. Hayes pushed the decanter to his
guest. " Where is John Roth well now V he
asked.

I don't know," said Harding, listlessly.

He was peeling a rough-coated pear, and he
watched the long, unbroken strip gliding
downward in lengthening curves. " somewhere
on the Continent — in one of those
places where people go to live shabbily."

Mr. Hayes filled the pause with an
inquiring '' Yes ? " and his bright eyes
dilated.

Yes," the other repeated. " Didn't you
say he took some pictures away with him ?
They must be all gone long ago — pawned
or sold. How would you raise money on
family portraits ? It would look rather
queer going to the pawnbroker's with an
ancestor under your arm."

But there was his mother's portrait.

He would not "

Hm ! " said Harding, cutting up his
pear. "Well, perhaps not. Perhaps he
had to leave in a hurry some time or
other. ^ A miniature would have been more
convenient."

*but this is very sad," said Mr. Hayes.
He spoke in an abstract and impersonal
manner.

Harding assented, also in a general way.

Very sad," the other repeated. Then,
quickening to special recollection — '* And
your uncle was always such a proud man.
I never knew a prouder man than John
Bothwell five-and-twenty years ago. And
to think that he should come to this ! "

He leaned back in his chair and slowly
sipped his wine, while he tried to reconcile
old memories with this new description.
The wine was very good, and Mr. Hayes
seemed to enjoy it. Reynolds Harding
rested his elbow on the table, and looked
at the fire with a moody frown.

Some pride can't be carried about, I
suppose," he said at last. "It's as bad as a
whole gallery of family portraits — worse, for
you cannot raise money on it."

Mr. Hayes nodded. " I see. Rooted in

the Mitch hurst soil, you think? Very
possibly." He looked round, as far as the
screens permitted. "And so, when this
went, all went. But how very sad ! "

The young man did not take the
trouble to express his agreement a second
time.

And your other uncle," said Mr. Hayes
briskly, after a pause. " How is he ? "
My other uncle ? "

Yes, your uncle on your father's side —
Mr. Harding."

Oh, he is very well — getting to be an
old man now."

*' But as prosperous as ever ? "
"More so," said Hardens in his rouo;h
voice. " His money gathers and grows like
a snowball. But he is beginning to think
about enjoying it — he is evidently growing
old. He says it is time for him to have a
holiday. He never took one for some
wonderful time — eighteen years I think it

was ; but he lias not worked quite so bard
of late."

*' Well, he deserves a little pleasure
now."

I don't know about that. If a man
makes himself a slave to money-getting I
don't see that he deserves any pleasure.
He deserves his money."

The old gentleman laughed. " Let the
poor fellow amuse himself a little — if he
can. The question is whether he can, after
a life of hard work. What is his idea of
pleasure '? "

Yachting. He discovered quite lately
that he wasn't sea-sick ; he hadn't leisure to
find it out before. So he took to yachting.
He can enjoy his dinner as well on board
a boat as anywhere else, he can talk about
his yacht, and he can spend any amount
of money."

You haven't any sympathy with his
hobby ? "

I ? I've no money to spend, and I am
sea-sick."

You are ? I remember now," said Mr.
Hayes, thoughtfully, " that your grandfather
and John Bothwell had a great dislike to
the water."

Ah ? It's a family peculiarity ? A proud
distinction ? " Harding laughed quietly,
looking away. He was accustomed to laugh
at himself and by himself. '' It's something
to be able to invoke the Bothwell ancestry
to give dignity to one's qualms," he said.

Mr. Hayes smiled a little unwillingly.
He did not really require respect for the
Roth well sea-sickness, but it hardly pleased
him that the young fellow should scoff at
his ancestry, just when it had gained him
admission to Mitchelhurst Place. " Bad
taste," he said to himself, and he returned
abruptly to the money-making uncle. '' I
suppose Mr, Harding has a son to come
after him ? "

Yes, there's one son," Keynold replied,
with a contemptuous intonation.

And does he take to the business ? "

I don't know much about that. I fancy
wants to begin at the yachting end,
anyhow."

Only one son." Mr. Hayes glanced at
young Harding as if a question were on his
lips ; but the other's face did not invite it,
and the subject dropped. There was a
pause, and then the elder man began to
talk of some Roman remains which had
been discovered five miles from Mitchell
Reynold crossed his long legs,
balanced himself idly, and listened with
dreary acquiescence.

It was some time before the Roman
remains were disposed of and they rejoined
Barbara. They startled her out of her
uncle's big easy-chair, where she was half-lying,
half-sitting, with all her black
draperies about her, too much absorbed ina

novel to hear their approach. Harding,
on the threshold, caught a glimpse of the
nestling attitude, the parted lips, the hand
that propped her head, before Miss Strange
was on her feet and ready for her company.

Mr. Hayes, stirring his coffee, demanded
music. He liked it a little for its own sake,
but more just then because it would take
his companion off his hands. He was tired
of entertaining this silent young man, who
stood, cup in hand, on the rug, frowning
at the portraits of his forefathers, and he
sent Barbara to the piano with the certainty
that Harding would follow her. As soon
as he saw them safely at the other end of
the room he dropped with a sigh of relief
into the chair which she had quitted, and
took up his book.

The girl, meanwhile, turned over her
music and questioned Keynold. He did
not sing ? — did not play ? No ; and he
understood very little, but he liked to

listen. He turned the pages for her, once
or twice too fast, generally much too slowly,
never at the right moment. Then Barbara
began to play something which she knew
by heart, and he stood a little aside, with
his moody face softening, and his 
eyes following her fingers
over the keys, as if she were weaving the
strands of some delicate tissue. When she
stopped, rested one hand on the music-stool
on which she sat, and turned from the
piano to hear what her uncle wished for
next, he saw, as she leaned backward, the
pure curve of her averted cheek, and the
black lace and amber beads about her softly-rounded
throat.

Oh, I know that by heart, too ! " she
exclaimed.

He took up a sheet of music from the
piano, and gazed vaguely at it while she
struck the first notes. He read the title
without heeding it, and then saw pencilled

above it in a bold, but somewhat studied,
hand,

Adrian Scarlet."

For a moment the name held his glance ;
and when he laid the paper down he looked
furtively over his shoulder. He knew that
it was an absurd fancy, but he felt as if
some one had come into the room and was
standing behind Barbara.

CHAPTER V.

AN OLD LOVE STORY.

The next morning saw the three at
breakfast in a little room adjoining the
drawing-room. The sky was overcast, and
before the meal was over Barbara turned
her head quickly as the rain lashed the
window in sudden fury. She arched her
brows, and looked at Mr. Harding with
anxious commiseration.

It's going to be a wet day," she said.

He raised his eyes to the blurred
prospect.

It looks like it, certainly."

Her expression was comically aghast.

I never thought of its being wet ! "

Yet such a thing does happen occasionally."


Yes, but it needn't have happened today.
I thought you would want to go
out. What loll you do ? "

*' Stay indoors, if you have no objection."


But there is nothing to amuse you.
You will be so dull."

Less so than usual, I imagine," said
Keynold. '' Do you find it so difficult to
amuse yourself on a wet day ? "

No, but I have a great deal to do.
Besides, it is different. Don't men always
want to be amused more than women ? "

Poor men ! " said he.

Mr. Hayes read his letters and seemed
to take no heed of his niece's trouble. But
it appeared, when breakfast was finished,
that he had arran-ed how the mornings
should be spent. He announced his intention
of taking vounoj Harding over the

Place, and lie carried it out with a
thoroughness which would have done
honour to a professional guide, showing
all the pictures, mentioning the size of the
rooms, and relating the few family traditions
— none of which, by the way, reflected
any especial credit on the Bothwell. He
stopped with bright-eyed appreciation
before a cracked and discoloured map,
where the Mitchelhurst estate was shown
in its widest extent. Reynold looked
silently at it, and then stalked after his
host through all the chilly faded splendour
of the house, shivering sometimes, sneering
sometimes, but taking it all in with eager
eyes, and glancing over the little man's
white head at the sombre shelves of the
library or the portraits on the walls. Mr.
Hayes was fluent, precise, and cold. Only
once did he hesitate. They had come to
a small sitting-room on the ground floor,
which, in spite of long disuse, still somehow

VOL. I. H

conveyed the impression that it had
belonged to a young man.

This was John Bothwell's favourite
room," he said. He looked round. " I
remember, yes, I remember, as if it were
yesterday, how he used "

Harding waited, but he stood staring
at the rusty grate, and left the sentence
unfinished.

"And to think that now he should be
living from hand to mouth on the Continent
! " he said at last, and compressed his
lips significantly.

He took the young man to the servants'
hall, across which the giggling voices of
two or three maids echoed shrilly, till they
were suddenly silenced by the master's
approach. Reynolds followed him down long
stone passages, and thought, as he went,
how icy and desolate they must be on
a black winter night. He was oppressed
by the size and dreariness of the place,

and bewildered by the multiplicity of
turnings.

'* I think," said Mr. Hayes suddenly,
that I have shown you all there is to see
indoors."

And, as Reynold replied that he was
much obliged, he pushed a door, and
motioned to his guest to precede him.
Reynold stepped forward, and discovered
that he was in the entrance hall, facing
Barbara, who had just come down the
broad white stairs, and still had her hand
upon the balustrade. It seemed to him
as if he had come through the windings
of that stony labyrinth, the hollow rooms
and pale corridors, to find a richly-coloured
blossom at the heart of all.

Oh, Barbara, I'll leave Mr. Harding to
you now," said the old gentleman. " Tm
going to my study — I must write some
letters."

He crossed the black and white pavement

H 2

with brisk, short steps, and vanished
through a doorway.

Has uncle shown you everything ? "
she asked.

I should think so."

It's a fine place, isn't it ? "

Very fine, and very big," said Harding
slowly. " Very empty, and ghostly, and
dead."

Oh, you don't like it ! I thought it
would be different to you. I thought it
would seem like home, since it belonged to
your own people."

Home, sweet home ! " he answered
with a queer smile. " Well, it is a fine
place, as you say. And what have you
been doing all the morning 1 "

Housekeeping," said Barbara. ^' And
now" — she set down a small basket of
keys on the hall table, as if she were preparing
for action — " now I am going to set
the clock riofht."

"I'll stay for that if you'll allow me,"
said Reynold. " I remember what you told
me last night. It is the time, and the
world stands still when it stops."

For me, not for you," the girl replied.
*' You have your watch — you don't believe
in the big clock."

'eyes, I do. Here, in Mitchelhurst, what
does one want with any but Mitchelhurst
time % What have I to do with Greenwich ?
But as for Mitchelhurst, your uncle has
talked to me till I feel as if I were all
the Bothwell who ever lived here. Why,
what's this ? Sunshine ! "

Yes," said Barbara. *' It's going to
clear up."

It could hardly be called actual sunlight,
but there certainly was a touch of pale
autumn gold growing brighter about them
as they stood.

Harding was listening to the monotonous
tick — tick— tick — tick.

I remember a man in some book,"
he said, " who didn't like to hear a clock
going — always counting out time in small
change'

Oh, but that's a worrying idea ! I
should hate to think of my life doled out
to me like that ! "

I'm afraid you must," he answered,
with his little rough-edged laugh. " It
would be very delightful to take one's life
in a lump, but how are you going to have
more than a moment in a moment ? There
are plenty of us always trying to do it. If
you could find out the way "

'' How, trying ? " said Barbara.

Trying to keep the past and grasp the
future," Harding replied. " Working and
waiting for some moment which is to hold
at least half a lifetime — when it comes !
Oh, I quite agree with you ; I should
like a feast, and I am fed by spoonfuls ! "

She looked up at him a little doubtfully,

and the clock went on ticking. " I always
thought it was like a heart beating," she
said, swerving from the idea he had presented
as if it were distasteful. "Now I"

There was silence in the empty hall, as
if, in very truth, she had laid her brown
young hand upon Time's flying pulse, and
stilled it,

Talk of killing; time ! " said Hardino^.
No," Barbara answered, without turning
her head. " Time's asleep — that's all —
asleep and dreaming. He'll soon wake up
again."

She had so played with the idle fancy
that, quite unconsciously, she spoke in a
hushed voice, which deepened the impression
of stillness. Harding said no
more, he simply watched her. His imagination
had been quickened by the sight
of the Place ; its traditional memories,
its pride, and its decay had touched him
more deeply than he knew. Life, with its

hardness and its haste, its obscure and ugly
miseries and needs, had relaxed its grasp,
and left him to himself for a little space
in the midst of that curious loneliness. He
felt as if the wide, living, wind-swept
world beyond its walls were something
altogether alien and apart. Everything
about him was pale and dim ; the very
sunlight was faded, as if it were the faint
reflection of a glory that was gone ; everything
rested as if in the peace of something
that was neither life nor death. Everything
was faded and dim, except the girl who
stood, softly breathing, a couple of steps
away, and even she seemed to be held by
the enchantment of the place, and to wait
in passive acquiescence. Reynolds's grey
eyes dilated and deepened.

But as she stood there, unconscious of his
gaze, Barbara smiled. It was just the
slightest possible smile, as if she answered
some smiling memory ; a curve of the lip,

hardly more than hinted, which might
betoken nothing deeper than the recollection
of some melodious scrap of rhyme or
music. Yet Reynold drew back as if it
stuns him. " That's not for me ! " he said
to himself.

The movement startled Barbara from
her reverie. " Oh, how like you are to
that picture in the drawing-room ! " she
exclaimed, impulsively.

He knew what she meant, and the
innocent utterance was a second sting.
But he laughed. " What, the good-looking
one ? "

It seemed to her that she could have
found a light answer but for his eyes upon
her. As it was, he had the gratification of
seeing her colour and hesitate. " I — I
wasn't thinking — I didn't mean — " she
stammered, shyly. " Oh, of course!" And
then, angry with herself for her unreadiness,
she stepped forward, and, with a

gesture of impatience, set the pendulum
swinofinor.

Time is to go on again ? " said he.

Yes," Barbara replied, decidedly. " It
would be tiresome if it stood still long. It
had better go on. Besides, I'm cold," and
she turned away with a pretty little shiver.
I want to go to the fire ; I can't stay to
attend to it any longer."

Harding lino-red, and after an instant
of irresolution she left him to a world which
had resumed its ordinary course.

At luncheon there was the inevitable
mention of the weather, and Mr. Hayes,
with his eyes fixed upon his plate, said,
"Yes, it has cleared up nicely. I suppose
you are going into the village ? "

The young people hesitated, not knowing
to whom the question was addressed.
Miss Strange waited for Mr. Harding,
and Mr. Harding for Miss Strange. Then
they said "Yes" at the same moment,

and felt themselves pledged to go together.


"I thought so," said Mr. Hayes, and
began to remind his niece of this thing
and that which she was to be sure and
show their visitor. " And the sooner you
go the better," he added when the meal was
over. " The days grow short."

Barbara looked questioningly at Mr. Harding.
" If you like to go "

I shall be delighted, if you will allow
me," said the young man, and a few
minutes later they went together down the
avenue.

"The days grow short," Mr. Hayes had
said, and everything about them seemed set
to that sad autumnal burden. The boughs
above their heads, the ground under foot,
were heavy with moisture, the bracken was
withered and brown, there were no more
butterflies, but at every breath the yellowing
leaves took their uncertain flight to the wet

earth. The young people, each with a neatly
furled umbrella, walked with something of
ceremonious self-consciousness, making little
remarks about the scenery, and Mr. Hayes,
from his window, followed them with his
eyes.

Roth well, every inch of him," he said
to himself, as Reynold turned and looked
backward at the Place. " I never knew one
of the lot yet who didn't think that particular
family had a right to despise all the
rest of the world. The only difference I can
see is that this fellow despises the family
too. Well, let him! Why not? But,
good Lord ! what an end of all his mother's
hopes ! " And Mr. Hayes went back to
his fireside — Ms, while John Roth well was
dodging his creditors on the Continent !
There was unutterable dreariness in the
thought of such a destiny, but the little old
man regretted it with a complacent rubbing
of his hands and a remembrance of Roth-well's

arrogance. There is a belief, engendered
by the moral stories of our childhood,
that it is good for a man that his unreasonable
pride should be broken — a belief
which takes no heed of the chance that
its downfall may hurl the whole fabric of
life and conduct ito the foulness of the
gutter. Mr. Hayes naturally took the moral
story view of a pride by which he had
once been personally wounded ; yet he wore
a deprecating air, as if Fate, in too amply
avenging him, had paid a compliment to
his importance which was almost overpowering.


It was more than a quarter of a century
since Bothwell and he had been antagonists,
though they had not avowed the fact in so
many words, and Bothwell, with no honour
or profit to himself, had baffled him.
Herbert Hayes was then over forty and
unmarried. The Mitchelhurst gossips had
made up their minds that he would live

and die a bachelor. But one November
Sunday he came, dapper, bright-eyed, and
self-satisfied, to Mitchelhurst church, gazed
with the utmost propriety into his glossy
hat, stood up when the parson's dreary
voice broke the silence with "Ashen the

wicked man " and, looking across at the

Roth wells' great pew, met his fate in a
moment.

The pew held its usual occupants — the
old squire, grey, angular, and scornful ;
young Bothwell, darker, taller, paler, less
politely contemptuous, and more lowering ;
Kate, erect and proud, sulkily conscious of
a beauty which the rustic congregation
could not understand. These three Hayes
had often seen. But there was a fourth,
a frail, colourless girl, burdened rather than
clothed with sombre draperies of crape,
pale to the very lips, and swaying languidly
as she stood, who unconsciously caught his
Stance and held it. She suffered her head,

with the little black bonnet set on the
abundance of her pale hair, to droop over
her Prayer-book, and she slid downward
when the exhortation was ended as if she
could stand no longer. The time seemed
interminable to him until she rose again.

His instantaneous certainty that there
was no drop of Bothwell blood in her veins
was confirmed by later inquiry. He learnt
that she was distantly related to the squire's
wife, and had recently lost her parents.
Though she had not been left absolutely
penniless, her little pittance was not enough
to keep her in idleness, and she was staying
at Mitchelhurst while the question of her
future was debated. It was difficult to see
what Minnie Newton was to do in a hardworking
world. She could sink into helplessly
graceful attitudes, she could watch
you with a softly troubled gaze, anxious
to learn what she ought to think or say ;
she was delicate, gentle, and very slightly

educated. She had not a thought of lier
own, and she was pure with the kind of
purity which cannot grasp the idea of evil,
and fails to recognise it, unless indeed vice is
going in rags and dirt to the police-station,
and using shocking language by the way.
Her simplicity was touching. She thought
nothing of herself; she would cling to the
first hand that happened to be held out
to her. She might be saved by good luck,
but nature had obviously designed her fora
victim.

Miss Newton was polite to Mr. Hayes
as to everybody else, but she was the last
person at Mitchelhurst Place to suspect the
little gentleman's passion. The very servants
found it out, and wondered at her
innocence. John Bothwell laughed.

What a fool she is ! " he said to
his sister, as he stood by the window
one day, and saw Hayes coming up the
avenue.

That's an undoubted fact," said the
magnificent Kate.

"And what a fool he is ! " John continued.

*' Well, we won't quarrel about that
either," she replied liberally. '' They will
be all the better matched."

'' Matched ? " said Bothwell. " No."

She looked up hastily.

Eh ? " she said. " Not matched ? And
why not ? "

Instead of answering, he deliberately
lighted a cigarette and smoked, gazing
darkly at her.

Kate shruo^o^ed her shoulders.

What difference can it possibly make
to you ? "

He took his cigarette from his lips
and looked at it.

It will make a difference to him," he
said at last.

The bell rang, and the knocker added
its emphatic summons. One of Bothwell's

VOL. I. I

doors beoran to bark. Kate had risen, and
stood with her eyes fixed on her brother's
face.

It would be a very good thing for
the girl," she remarked meditatively. " I
don't see what is to become of her, poor
thing, unless she marries."

'* Damn him ! " said Roth well.

The answer was not so irrelevant as
it appeared. His gaze was as steady as
Kate's own, and seemed to prolong his
words as a singer prolongs a note. She
drew her brows together, as if perplexed.

"Well," she said, turning away, "I must
go and look after our lovers ! "

'' And I," he said.

The dapper, contented little man had
done Roth well no harm, but the young
fellow cherished a black hatred, born of the
dulness of his vacant life. Hayes, without
being rich, was very comfortably off, and he
was apt to betray the fact with innocent

ostentation. A sovereign was less to him
than a shilling to John Roth well, and it
seemed to the latter that he could always
hear the gold chinking when Hayes talked.
One could do so much with a sovereign, and
so little with a shilling. Bothwell was
hungry, with a hunger which only just fell
short of being a literal fact, and he bad
to stand by, with his hands in his empty
pockets, while Hayes could have good
dinners, good wine, good clothes, good
horses, whatever he liked in the way of
pleasure — and was " such a contemptible
little cad with it all," the young man
snarled. His own poverty would have been
more bearable had it not Ijeen for his neighbour's
ease and security. And now, heaven
be praised! — heaven? — the prosperous man
had set his heart on this whitefield, fair-haired,
foolish girl who was under the roof
of Mitchelhurst Place, and for once he should
be baffled.

I 2

Bothwell set to work with evil ingenuity
it seemed almost fiendish, but, really, he
had nothing else to do — to ruin Hayes's
chance of success. But for him it must
have been almost a certainty. Kate was
inclined to favour the suitor. The old squire
disliked him, perhaps with a little of his
son's feeling, but would have been very well
satisfied to see the girl provided for. And
Minnie Newton was there for any man,
who had a will of his own, and was not
absolutely repulsive, to take if he pleased.
The course of true love seemed about to
run with perfect smoothness till young
Bothwell stepped in and troubled it.

Mockery, not slander, was his weapon.
As Miss Newton idled over her embroidery
he would lounge near her and make little
jests about Hayes's age, size, and manners.
She listened with a troubled face. Of course
Mr. Bothwell was talking very cleverly,
.and she tried not to remember that she

had found Mr. Hayes very kind and pleasant
when lie called the day before. Of course
it was absurd that a man of that age should
want to be taken for fi five-and-twenty — yes,
and he had a very ridiculous way of putting
his head on one side like a bird — when Mr.
Bothwell had insisted on having her opinion,
she had said, " Yes, it was very ridiculous "
and a gentleman, a real gentleman, would
not talk so much about his money, and
what he could do with it — Mr. Bothwell
said so, and he certainly knew. And as she
had agreed to it she supposed it was quite
right that he should repeat this at dinner-time,
as if it were her own remark, though
she wished he wouldn't, because his father
turned sharply and looked at her. But, no
doubt, Mr. Hayes did look absurdly small
by the side of John Bothwell, and there
was something common in his manners.
Many people might think they were all
very well, but a lady would feel that there

was something wanting. And so on, and soon,
till she began to ask herself what John
Bothwell would say of her if, after all this,
she showed more than the coldest civility
to Mr. Hayes.

Kate perfectly understood the position
of affairs, but did not choose openly to
oppose her brother. If Hayes would have
come and carried Minnie off, young 
fashion, she would have been secretly
pleased. As it was, she was contemptuously
kind to the girl, and if the little suitor met
the two young women in the village. Miss
Bothwell shook hands and looked away.
Once she found herself some business to doat
the Mitch hurst shop, and sent Minnie
home, lest she should be out too long in the
December cold. She had spied Herbert
Hayes coming along the street, and had
rightly guessed that he would see and
pursue the slim, black-clothed figure. And,
indeed, he used his walk with Miss Newton

to such good purpose that he might have
won her promise then and there if a tall
young man had not suddenly sprung over a
stile and confronted them. Minnie fairly
cowered in embarrassment as she met Eoth-
weirs meaning glance, which assumed that
she would be delighted to be rid of a bore,
and she suffered him to give her his arm
and to take her home, leaving poor Hayes
to feel very small indeed as he stood in the
middle of the road. He tried a letter,
but it only called forth a little feebly-penned
word of refusal as faint as an
echo.

Hayes never suspected the young man's
deliberate malice. He fancied the old
squire, if anybody, was his enemy ; but he
was more inclined to set the difficulty down
to the Roth wells' notorious pride than to
any special ill-will to himself.

*' No one is good enough for them, curse
them ! " he said over the little note. " They

won't give me a chance of winning her.
I'm not beaten yet though ! "

But he was. Early in January Minnie
Newton took cold, drooped in the chilly
dreariness of the old house, and died before
the spring came in.

One day Kate Bothwell came upon Hayes
as he lingered, a melancholy little figure, by
the girl's grave.

Ah, Miss Bothwell," he said, looking up
at her, " I wanted to have had the right
to care for her and mourn her, but it
was not to be ! "

No," said Kate. " I'm sorry," she
added, after a moment. It was just at
the time when she herself was about to
defy all the barren traditions of the
Eothwells to marry Sidney Harding with
his brilliant prospects of wealth. Harding's
half-brother, who had made the great
business, was pleased with the match,
and promised Sidney a partnership in a

couple of years. Everything was bright
for Kate, and she could afford a regretful
thought to poor Hayes. " I'm sorry,"
she said.

Her voice was hard, but the slightest
proffer of sympathy was enough. " Ah ! I
knew you wished me well — God bless you ! "
said the little man, " and help you as you
would have helped me ! "

Perhaps Kate Bothwell felt that at that
rate Providence would not take any very
active interest in her affairs. She turned
aside impatiently. " Pray keep your thanks
for some one who deserves them, Mr.
Hayes. I don't."

You could not do anything, but I know
you were good to her. She told me, that

afternoon " He spoke in just the proper

tone of emotion.

Nonsense ! " Kate answered, sharply.
How could she ? there was nothing to
tell." Mr. Hayes might well say, even a

quarter of a century later, that Miss Roth-well
had an unpleasant manner.

Nevertheless she held a place in that
idealised picture of his love which in his old
age served him for a memory. In Sidney
Harding's death, within a year of the marriage,
he saw a kindred stroke to that which
had robbed him of his own hope, and he
never thought of Kate without a touch of
sentimental loyalty. When he met Kate's
son that October afternoon, with the familiar
face and voice, on his way to Mitchelhurst,
he had felt that, Bothwell though he was,
he must be welcomed for his mother's sake.
And yet it had almost seemed as if it were
John Roth well himself come back to sneer
in a new fashion.

How came he to be so evidently poor
while old Harding was rolling in wealth ?
Mr. Hayes, sitting over the fire, wondered
at this failure of Kate's hopes. People
had called it a fair exchange, her old name

for the Hardings' abundance of newly coined
gold. But where was the gold ? Plainly
not in this young Harding's pockets. What
did he do for a living ? Why was he not
in his uncle's office, a man of business with
the world before him ? There was no stamp
of success about this listless, long-legged
fellow, who had come, as hopeless as any
Roth well, to linger about that scene of slow
decay. " He'll do no good," said Mr. Hayes
to himself, stirring up a cheerful blaze.

CHAPTER VI.
Reynold's resolution.

Meanwhile the young people had passed
through the great gate and turned to the
right. " Do you mind which way you go ? "
Barbara asked, and Reynold replied that he
left it entirely to her. "Then," she said,
we will go this way, and come back by
the village ; you will get a better view so."

At first, however, it seemed that a view
was the one thing which was certainly not
to be had in the road they had chosen. On
their left was a tangled hedge, on their
right a dank and dripping plantation of
firs. The slim, straight stems, seen one
beyond another, conveyed to Reynold the

impression of a melancholy crowd, pressing
silently to the boundary of the road on
which he walked. It was one of those
fantastic pictures which reveal themselves
in unfamiliar landscapes, and Barbara, who
had seen the wood under a score of varying
aspects, took no especial heed of this one, as
she picked her way daintily by the young
man's side. Indeed she did not even note
the moment when the trees where succeeded
by a turnip-field, lying wide and wet under
the pale sky. But when in its turn the
field gave place to an open gateway and a
drive full of deep ruts, in which the water
stood, she paused. " You see that house ? "
she said.

It was evident from its surroundings of
soaked yard, miscellaneous buildings, dirty
tumbrils, and clustered stacks, that it was
a farm-house. Harding looked at it and
turned inquiringly to her. " It was much
larger once," said Barbara. "Part of it

was pulled down a long while ago. Your
people lived here before they built Mitchell
Place."

He pushed out his lower lip. " Well,"
he said, " I think they showed their good
taste in getting out of this."

"But it was better then," said the girl.
And even now, sometimes in the spring
when I come here for cowslips "

She stopped short, for he was smiling.
Oh, no doubt ! Everything looks better
then. But I have come too late." He had
to step aside as he spoke to let a manure
cart go by, labouring along the miry way.
And what do you call this house ? " he
asked.

Mitchelhurst Hall. I don't think there
is anything much to see, but if you would
like to look over it or to walk round it "

No, thank you ; I am content." He
took off his hat in mocking homage to
the home of the Roth wells, and turned to

go. 'sand have you any more decayed
residences to show me, Miss Strange ? "

Only some graves," she answered, simply.

Oh, they are all graves ! " said Harding
with his short laugh, swinging his umbrella
as they resumed their walk. Already Barbara
had become accustomed to that little
jarring laugh, which had no merriment in it.
She did not like it, but she was curiously
impressed by it. When the young man was
grave and stiff and shy she was sorry for
him ; she remembered that he was only Mr.
Reynold Harding, their guest for a week.
But when he was sufficiently at his ease to
laugh she felt as if all the Bothwell were
mocking, and she were the interloper and
inferior.

I suppose it does seem like that to you

as if they were all graves," she said

timidly, as she led the way across the road

to a gate in the tangled hedge ; the field

into which it led sloped steeply down.

That is what people call the best view of
Mitchelhurst," she explained.

To the left was Mitchelhurst Place, gaunt
and white among its warped and weatherbeaten
trees. Before them lay the dotted
line of Mitchelhurst Street, and they looked
down into the square cabbage-plots. The
sails of the wind-mill swung heavily round,
and the smoke went up from the blacksmith's
forpje. To the rio;ht was the church,
with its thickset tower, and the sun shining
feebly on the wet surface of its leaden
roof. Barbara pointed out a small oblong
patch of grass and evergreens as the vicarage
garden, while a bare building, of the rawest
red brick, was the Mitchelhurst workhouse.
The view was remarkably comprehensive.
Mitchelhurst lay spread below them in
small and melancholy completeness.

"Yes, it's all there, right enough," said
Reynold, leaning on the gate. " An excellent
view. All there, from the Place where

my people spent their money, to the workhouse,
where By Jove ! " his \^ice

dropped suddenly, " I'm not Roth well
enough to have a right to be taken into
the Mitchelhurst workhouse ! They'd send
me on somewhere, I suppose. I wonder
which they would call my parish ! "

Are you sorry ? " Barbara asked, after
a pause.

'' Sorry not to be in the workhouse ? "
indicating it with a slight movement of
his finger. " No, not particularly."

I didn't mean that," said the girl, a
little shortly. " I meant, of course, are you
sorry you are not a Bothwell ? "

'' I don't know."

He spoke slowly, half reluctantly, and
still leaned on the gate, with his eyes
wandering from point to point of the little
landscape, which was softened and saddened
by the pale light and paler haze of October.
It was Barbara who finally broke the silence.

VOL. I. K

You didn't like the house this morning,
and you didn't like the old hall just now,
so I thought most likely you wouldn't care
for this."

'well, it isn't beautiful," he replied,
without turning his head. ''Do you care
much about it, Miss Strange ? Why should
anybody care about it ? There are wonderful
places in the world — beautiful places
full of sunshine. Why should we trouble
ourselves about this little grey and green
island where we happened to be born ?
And what are these few acres in it more
than any other bit of ploughed land and
meadow ? "

I thought you didn't care for it,"
said Barbara, sagely. " I thought you
scorned it."

Scorn it — I can't scorn it ! It isn't
mine ! " He turned away from it, as if ina
sudden movement of impatience, and
lounged with his back to the gate. " It's

like my luck ! " he said, kicking a stone
in the road.

Barbara was interested. Harding's tone
revealed the strength and bitterness of his
feelings. He had never seemed to her so
much of a Bothwell as he did at that
moment. *' What is like your luck ? " she,
ventured to ask.

He jerked his head in the direction
of Mitchelhurst. " I may as well be
honest," he said. '' Honest with myself —
if I can ! Look there — I have mocked at
that place all my life ; for very shame's
sake I have kept away from it because I
had TO wed I didn't care whether one stone
of it was left upon another. What was it
to me ? I am not a Bothwell. I'm Reynold
Harding, son of Sidney Harding, son of
Reynold Harding — there my pedigree grows
vague. My grandfather is an important
man — we can't get beyond him. He died
while my father was in petticoats. He

K 2

was a pork-butcher in a small way. I
believe he could write his name — my name
and that he always declared that his
father was a Reynold too. But we don't
know anything about my great-grandfather
perhaps he was a pork-butcher in a
smaller way. My uncle Robert went to
London as a boy and made all the money,
pensioned his father, and afterwards educated
his half-brother Sidney, who was
twenty years younger than himself He
would have made my father his partner if
he had lived. If my father had lived I
might have been rich. As it is, I'm not
rich, and I'm not a Bothwell."

*' Well, you look like one ! " said Barbara.
She was not very wise. It seemed to hera
cruel thing that this earlier Reynold
should have been a pork-butcher — a misfortune
on which she would not comment.
She looked up at the younger Reynold
with the sincerest sympathy shining in

her eyes, and in an unreasoning fashion
of her own took part with him and with
the old family, as if his grandfather were
an unwarranted intruder who had thrust
himself into their superior society. "You
look like one ! " she exclaimed, and Reynold
smiled.

'^ And after all," she said, pursuing her
train of thought, "you are half Bothwell,
you know. As much Bothwell as Harding,
are you not ? "

He was still smiling. "True. But that
is a kind of thing which doesn't do by
halves."

She assented with a sigh. She had never
before talked to a man whose grandfather
was a pork-butcher, and she did not know
what consolation to offer. She could only
look shyly and wistfully at Mr. Harding,
as he leaned against the gate with his
back to the prospect, while she resolved
that she would never tell her uncle. She

did not think her companion less interesting
after the revelation. This discord, this
irony of fate, this mixing of the blood of
the Roth wells and the small tradesman,
seemed to her to explain much of young
Harding's sullen discontent. He was the
last descendant of the old family of which
she had dreamed so often, and he was the
victim of an unmerited wrong. She wanted
him to say more. " And you wouldn't
come to Mitchelhurst before ? " she said,
suggestively.

"No; but the thought of the place was
pulling at me all the time. I couldn't get
rid of it. And so — here I am ! And I
have seen the dream of my life face to
face — it's behind my back just at this
minute, but I can see it as well as if I were
looking at it. I'm very grateful to you
for showing me this view, Miss Strange,
but you'll excuse me if I don't turn round
while I speak of it ? "

Oh, yes," said Barbara, wonderingly.

He had his elbows on the top rail of the
gate, and looked downward at the muddy
way, rough with the hoof marks of cattle.
You see," he explained, " I want to say
the kind of thing one says behind a — a
landscape's back."

I'm sorry to hear it," she answered.
She had drawn a little to one side, and
had laid a small loved hand on one of

o

the gate posts. Somebody, many years
before, had deeply cut a clumsy M on
the cracked and roughened surface of the
wood. The letter was as grey and as
weather-worn as the rest. Barbara touched
it delicately with a finger-tip, and followed
its ungainly outline. Probably it was his
own initial that the rustic had hacked,
standing where he stood, but she recognised
the possibility that the rough carving might
be the utterance of the great secret of joy
and pain, and the touch was almost a caress.

Some people follow their dreams through
life, and never get more than a glimpse
of them, even as dreams," said Harding,
slowly. *' Well, I have seen mine. I have
had a good look at it. I know what it
is like. It is dreary — it is narrow — cold
hideous."

Oh ! " cried Barbara, as if his words
hurt her. Then, recovering herself, " Fm
sorry you dislike it so much. Well, you
must give it up, mustn't you ? "

He laughed. " Life without a fancy,
without a desire ? " he said.

Find something else to wish for''

What ? If there were anything else,
should I care twopence for Mitchelhurst ?
No, it is my dream still — a dream I'm
never likely to realise, but the only possible
dream for me. Only now I know how poor
and dull my highest success would be."

You had better have stayed away," said
the girl.

He took his elbows off the gate, and
bowed in acknowledgment of the polite
speech. " Oh, you know what I mean,"
she said hurriedly.

Yes, I know. And, except for the
kindness of your fairy godmother, I believe
you are perfectly right. T/iat, of course,
is a different question."

Barbara would not answer wdiat she
fancied might be a sneer. " You see the
place at its worst," she said, " and there is
nobody to care for it ; everything is
neglected and going to ruin. Don't you
think it would be different if it belonged
to some one who loved it ? Why don't you
make your fortune," she exclaimed, with
sanguine, bright-eyed directness, as if the
fortune were an easy certainty, " and come
back and set everything right ? Don't you
think you could care for Mitchelhurst
if "

She would have finished her sentence

readily enough, but Reynold caught it
up.

'' If !'' he said, with a sudden startled
significance in his tone. Then, with an air
of prompt deference, " Shall I go and make
the fortune at once, Miss Strange ? Shall
I ? Yes, I think I could care for Mitch el-hurst,
as you say, if — " He smiled. " One
might do much with a fortune, no doubt."

Make it then," said Barbara, conscious
of a faint and undefined embarrassment.

Must it be a very big one "? "

Oh, I think it may as well be a tolerable
size, while you are about it. Hadn't we
better be moving on ? "

Mr. Harding assented. "Where are we
going now ? "

To the church. That is, if you care to
go there."

*' Oh, I like to go very much. I wonder
what you would call a tolerable fortune,"
he said in a meditative tone.

*' My opinion doesn't matter."

'' But you are going to wish me success
while I am away making it ? "

Oh, certainly."

"That will be a help," he said gravely.
I shan't look for an omen in the sky just
now — do you see how threatening it is out
yonder 1 "

The clouds rolled heavily upwards, and
massed themselves above their heads as
they hastened down a steep lane which
brought them out by the church. Barbara
stopped at the clerk's cottage for a ponderous
key, and then led the way through a little
creaking gate. The path along which they
went was like a narrow ditch, the mould,
heaped high on either side, seemed as if it
were burdened with his imprisoned secrets.
The undulating graves, overgrown with
coarse grasses, rose up, wave-like, against
the buttressed walls of the churchyard,
high above the level of the outer road.

The church itself looked as if it had been
dug out of the sepulchral earth, so closely
was it surrounded by these shapeless
mounds. Barbara, to whom the scene was
nothing new, and who was eager to escape
the impending shower, flitted, alive, warm,
and young, through all this cold decay,
and never heeded it. Harding followed
her, looking right and left. They passed
under two dusky yew trees, and then she
thrust her big key into the lock of the
south door.

"Are my people buried in the churchyard
? " he asked.

''Oh, no!" she exclaimed reverentially.
Your people are all inside."

He stepped in, but when he was about
to close the door he stood for a moment,
ffazins: out through the low-browed arch.
It framed a picture of old-fashioned headstones
fallen all aslant, nettles flourishing
upon forgotten graves, the trunks of the

great yews, the weed-grown crest of the
churchyard wall, defined with singular clearness
upon a wide band of yellow sky. The
gathered tempest hung above, and its
deepening menace intensified the pale tranquillity
of the horizon. " I say," said Harding
as he turned away, "it's going to
pour, you know ! "

"Well, we are under shelter," Barbara
answered cheerfully, as she laid her key
on the edge of one of the pews. "If it
clears up again so that we get back in
good time it won't matter a bit. And
anyhow we've got umbrellas. The font is
very old, they say."

Harding obediently inspected the font.

"And there are two curious inscriptions
on tablets on the north wall. Mr. Prior
he's the vicar — is always trying to read
them. Do you know much about such
things ? "

Nothing at all."

Oh ! " in a tone of disappointment.
'' I'm afraid you wouldn't get on with Mr.
Pry or then."

^a'm afraid not."

Perhaps you wouldn't care to look at
them."

Oh, let us look, by all means."

They walked together up the aisle. "•/
don't care about them," said Barbara, " but
I suppose ]mr. Pryor would die happy if
he could make them out."

*then I suspect he is happy meanwhile,
though perhaps he doesn't know
it," Keynold replied, looking upward at
the half effaced lettering.

He can read some of it," said the girl,
but nobody can make out the interesting
part."

Harding laughed, under his breath. Their
remarks had been softly uttered ever since
the closing of the door had shut them
in to the imprisoned silence. He moved

noiselessly a few steps further, and looked
round.

Mitchelhurst Church, like Mitchelburst
Place, betrayed a long neglect. The pavement
was sunken and uneven, cobwebs
hung from the sombre arches, the walls,
which had once been white, were stained
and streaked, by damp and time, to a
blending of melancholy hues. The half
light, which struggled through small panes
of greenish glass, fell on things blighted,
tarnished, faded, dim. The pews with their
rush matted seats were worm-eaten, the
crimson velvet of the pulpit was a dingy
rao^. There was but one bit of vivid modern
colourings in the whole building — a slim
lancet window at the west end, a discord
sharply struck in the shadowy harmony.
To the memory of the vicar before last,"
said Barbara, when the young man's glance
fell on it. Such gleams of sunlight as
lingered yet in the stormy sky without

irradiated Michael, the church's patron
saint, in the act of triumphing over a
small dragon. The contest revealed itself
as a mere struggle for existence ; a Quaker,
within such narrow limits, must have fought
for the upper hand as surely as an archangel.
Harding as he looked at it could
not repress a sigh. He fully appreciated
the calmness of the saint, and the neatness
with which the little dragon was coiled, but
it seemed to him a pity that the vicar
before last had happened to die ; and he
was glad to turn his back on the battle,
and follow Miss Strange to the north
chancel aisle. "These are all the Roth well
monuments," she said. " Their vault is just
below. This is their pew, where we sit on
Sunday."

Having; said this she moved from his
side, and left him gazing at the simple
tablets which recorded the later generations
of the old house, and the elaborate

memorials of more prosperous days. More
than one recumbent figure slept there, each
with upturned face supported on a carven
pillow ; the bust of a Bothwell was set up
in a dusty niche, with lean features peering
out of a forest of curling marble hair ;
carefully graduated families of Roth wells,
boys and girls, knelt behind their kneeling
parents ; the little window, half blocked by
the florid grandeur of a grimy monument,
had the Bothwell arms emblazoned on it
in a dim richness of colour. In this one
spot the dreariness of the rest of the building
became a stately melancholy. Harding
looked down. His foot was resting on the
inscribed stone which marked the entrance
to that silent, airless place of skeletons and
shadows, compared to which even this dim
corner, with its mute assemblage, was yet
the upper world of light and life. If he
worked, if fortune favoured him, if he succeeded
beyond all reasonable hope, if he

VOL. L L

were indeed predestined to triumph, that
little stone might one day be lifted for him.
The windows darkened momentarily with
the coming of the tempest. Through the
dim diamond panes the masses of the yew-trees
where seen, and their movement was
like the stirring of vast black wings. The
effigies of the dead men frowned in the
deepening gloom, and their young descendant
folded his arms, and leaned
against the high pew, with a slant gleam
of light on his pale Bothwell face. Barbara
went restlessly and yet cautiously up and
down the central aisle, and paused by the
readings-desk to turn the leaves of the Teat
old-fashioned prayer-book which lay there.
When its cover was lifted it exhaled a
faint odour, as of the dead Sundays of a
century and more. While she lingered,
lightly conscious of the lapse of vague
years, reading petitions for the welfare of
*thy servant GEORGE, our most gracious

King and Governour," " her Royal Highness
the Princess Dowager of Wales, and all the
Royal Family," the page grew indistinct in
the threatening twilight, as if it would
withdraw itself from her idle curiosity. She
looked up with a shiver, as overhead and
around burst the multitudinous noises of
the storm, the rain gushing on the leaden
roof, the water streaming drearily from
the gutters to beat on the earth below, and,
in a few moments, the quick, monotonous
fall of drops through a leak close by.
This lasted for ten minutes or a quarter of
an hour. Then the sky grew lighter, the
downpour slackened, a sense of over-shadowing
oppression seemed to pass away, and
St. Michael and his dragon brightened
cheerfully. Barbara went to the door and
threw it open, and a breath of fresh air
came in with a chilly smell of rain.

As she stood in the low archway she
heard Harding's step on the pavement

L 2

behind her. It was more alert and decided
than usual, and when she turned he met
her balance with a smile.

"Well?" she said. "I didn't like to
disturb you, you looked so serious."

I was thinking," he admitted. " And
it was a rather serious occasion. My people
are not very cheerful company."

And now you have thought ? "

"Yes," he said, still smiling. "Yes, I
have thought — seriously, with my serious
friends yonder."

Barbara, as she stood, with her fingers
closed on the heavy handle of the door,
and her face turned towards Harding, fixed
her eyes intently on his.

I know ! " she exclaimed. " You have
made up your mind to come back to
Mitchelhurst."

"Who knows?" said he. "I'm not
sanguine, but we'll see what time and
fortune have to say to it. At any rate

my people are patient enough — they'll
wait for me ! "

To the girl, longing for a romance, the
idea of the young man's resolution was
delightful. She looked at him with a
little quivering thrill of impatience, as if
she would have had him do something
towards the great end that very moment.
Her small, uplifted face was flushed, and
her eyes were like stars. The brightening
light outside shone on the soft brown
velvet of her dress, and something in her
eager, lightly-poised attitude gave Reynolds
the impression of a dainty brown-plumaged,
bright-eyed bird, ready for instant flight.
He almost stretched an instinctive hand to
grasp and detain her, lest she should loose
her hold of the iron ring and be gone.

I know you will succeed — you will
come back ! " she exclaimed. " How long
first, I wonder ?"

'' Shall I succeed ? " said Reynold, half

to himself, but half questioning her to win
the sweet, unconscious assurance, which
meant so little, yet mocked so deep a
meaning.

"Yes!" she replied. "You will! You
must be master here."

Master ! She might have put it in a
dozen different ways, and found no word
to weaken the swift, meaning flash in his
eyes which that word did. Her pulses did
not quicken, she perfectly understood that
he was thinking of Mitchelhurst. She could
not understand what mere dead earth and
stone Mitchelhurst was to the man at her
side.

You will have to restore the church one
of these days," she said.

Harding nodded.

Certainly. But it will be very ugly,
anyhow."

Well, at least you must have the roof
mended. And now please, will you get

the key ? It is on the ledge of that pew
just across the aisle. I think we had better
be going — it has almost left off raining."

She stepped outside and put up her
umbrella, while he locked up his ancestors,
smiling grimly. It seemed rather unnecessary
to turn the key on the family
party in that dusty little corner. They
were quiet folks, and, as he had said, they
would wait for him and his fortune not
impatiently. If he could have shut in the
brightness of youth, the warmth and life
and sweetness which alone could make the
fortune worth having if he could have come
back in the hour of success to unfasten the
door and find all there — then indeed his big
key would have been a priceless talisman.
Unfortunately one can shut nothing safely
away that is not dead. The old Eoth wells
were secure enough, but the rest was at
the mercy of time and change, and all the
winds that blow.

The pair were silent as they turned into
Mitchelhurst Street. Reynolds looked at the
small, shabby houses, and noted the swinging
sign of the " Bothwell Arms," though
his deeper thoughts were full of other
things. But about half way through the
village he awoke to a sudden consciousness
of eyes. Eyes peered through small pane
windows, stared boldly from open doorways,
met him inquisitively in the faces of loiterers
on the path, or were lifted from the dull
task of mending the road as he walked by
with Barbara. He looked over his shoulder
and found that other people were looking
over their shoulders, after which he felt
himself completely encompassed.

"People here seem interested," he remarked
to Miss Strange, while a pale-faced,
slatternly girl, with swiftly-plaiting
fingers, leaned forward to get a better

view

Why, of course they are interested.

You are a stranger, you know. It is quite
an excitement for them."

You call that an excitement ? " said he.

Yes. If you spent your life transplanting
in one of these cottages you would
be excited if a stranger went by. It would
be kinder of you if you did not M^alk so
fast."

*'No, no," said Harding, quickening his
steps. " I don't profess philanthropy."

*' Besides, you are not altogether a
stranger," she went on. " I dare say they
think you are one of the old family come
to buy up the property."

Why should they think anything of the
kind ? " he demanded incredulously.

Well, they know you are staying at the
Place. Every child in the street knows that.
And, you see, Mr. Harding, nobody comes
to Mitchelhurst without some special reason,
so perhaps they have a right to be curious.
I remember how they stared a few months

ago — it was at a gentleman who was just
walking down the road "

Indeed," said Harding. " And what
was Its special reason for coming ? I
suppose' he added quickly, " I've as good
a right to be curious as other Mitch hurst
people."

*' Oh, I don't know. He was a friend of
Uncle Herbert's — he came to see him."

And did he walk slowly from motives of
pure kindness ? " the young man persisted.

*' Yes," said Barbara defiantly. " He
stood stock still and looked at the straw
plaiting. I don't know about the kindness ;
perhaps he liked it."

'^ Well, I don't like it."

But you needn't take such very long
steps : these three cottages are the last.
Do you know I'm very nearly running ? "

Of course he slackened his pace and
begged her pardon ; but in so doing he relapsed
into the uneasy self-consciousness of

their first interview. When they reached
the gate of the avenue he held it open for
her to pass, murmuring something about
walking a bit farther. Barbara looked at
him in surprise, and then, with a little
smiling nod, went away under the trees,
wondering what was amiss. " I can't have
offended him — how could I ? " lie said to
herself, and she made up her mind that
her new friend was certainly queer. It was
the Roth well temper, no doubt, and yet his
awkward muttering had been more like the
manner of a sullen schoolboy. A Bothwell
should have been loftily superior, even if he
were disagreeable. It was true, as Barbara
reflected, almost in spite of herself, that Mr.
Harding had no such hereditary obligation
on the pork-butcher side of his pedigree.

Reynold had spoken out of the bitterness
of his heart, and a bitter frankness is the
frankest of alL But perhaps he had not
shown his wisdom when he so quickly

confided his grandfather to Miss Strange.
Because we may have tact enough to choose
the mood in which our friend shall listen
to our secret, we are a little too apt to
forget that the secret, once uttered, remains
with him in all his moods. In this case
the girl had been a sympathetic listener,
but young Harding scarcely intended that
the elder Reynold should be so vividly
realised.

Later, when all outside the windows was
growing blank and black, Barbara went upto
dress for dinner. She was nearly ready
when there came a knock at her door, and
she hurried, candle in hand, to open it. In
the gloom of the passage stood the red-armed
village sfirl who waited on her.

** Please, miss, the gentleman told me to
give you this," said the messenger, awkwardly
offering something which was only
a formless mass in the darkness.

*' What ? " said Miss Strange, and turned

the light upon it. The wavering little
illumination fell on a confusion of autumn
leaves, rich with their dying colours, and
shining with rain. Among them, indistinctly,
were berries of various kinds, hips
and haws, and poison clusters of a deeper
red, vanishing for a moment as the draught
blew the candle flame aside, and then reappearing.
One might have fancied them
blood drops newly shed on the wet
foliage.

Oh ! " Barbara exclaimed in surprise,
and after a moment's pause, " give them tome."
She gathered them up, despite some
thorny stems, with her disengaged hand,
and went back into her room. So that was
the meaning of Mr. Harding's solitary
walk ! She stood by the table, delicately
picking out the most vivid clusters, and
trying their effect against the soft cloud of
her hair, louder than ever in the dusk
of her mirror. " I hope he hasn't been

slipping into any more ditches I " lie said
to herself.

With that she sighed, for the thought
recalled to her the melancholy of an
autumnal landscape. She remembered an
earlier gift, roses and myrtle, a summer gift,
the giver of which had gone when the
summer waned. She had seen him last on
a hot September day. '* We never said
good-bye," Barbara thought, and let her
hand hang with the berries in it. '' He
said he should not go till the beginning of
October. When he came that afternoon
and I was out, and he only saw uncle, I
was sure he would come assail. Well, I
suppose he didn't care to. He could if he
liked — a girl can't ; there are lots of things
a girl can't do ; but a man can call if he
pleases. Well, he must have gone away
before now. And he didn't even write a
line, he only sent a message by uncle, his
kind regards — Who wants his kind regards ?

and lie was sorry not to see me. Very
well, my kind regards, and I'm sure I don't
want to see him ! "

She ended her meditations with an
emphatic little nod, but the girl in the
mirror who returned it had such a defiantly
pouting face that she quite took Barbara by
surprise.

I'm not angry," Miss Strange declared
to herself after a pause. "Not the least in
the world. The idea is perfectly absurd.
It was just a bit of the summer, and now
the summer is gone." And so saying she
put i\lr. Harding's autumn berries in her
hair, and fastened them at her throat, and,
with her candle flickering dimly through
the long dark passages, swept down to the
yellow drawing-room to thank him for his

craft

CHAPTER VIL

A GAME AT CHESS,

When Kate Bothwell promised to be
Sidney Harding's wife she was very honestly
in love with the handsome young fellow.
But this happy frame of mind had been
preceded ^by a period of revolt and disgust
when she did not know him, and had
resolved vaguely on a marriage — any
marriage — which should fulfil certain conditions.
And that she should be in love
with the man she married was not one of
them. In fact, the conditions were almost
all negative ones. She had decreed that
her husband should not be a conspicuous
fool, should not be vicious, should not be

repulsively vulgar, and should not be an
unendurable bore. On the other hand he
should be fairly well off. She did not
demand a large fortune, she was inclined to
rate the gift and prospect of making money
as something more than the possession of
a certain sum which its owner could do
nothing but guard. Given a fairly cultivated
man, and she felt that she would
absolutely prefer that he should be engaged
in some business which might grow and
expand, stimulating the hopes and energies
of all connected with it. The sterility and
narrowness of life at Mitchelhurst had
sickened her very soul. She was conscious
of a fund of rebellious strength, and she
demanded liberty to develop herself, liberty
to live. She knew very well how women
fared among the Eothwells. She had seen
two of her father's sisters, faded spinsters,
worshipping the family pride which had
blighted them. Nobody wanted them, their

VOL. I. M

one duty was to cost as little as possible.
That they would not disgrace the Roth well
name was taken for granted. Kate used to
look at their pinched and dreary faces, and
recognise some remnants of beauty akin to
her own. She listened to their talk, which
was full of details of the pettiest economy,
and remembered that these women had
been intent on shillings and half-pence all
their lives, that neither of them had ever
had a five-pound note which she could
spend as it pleased her. And their penurious
savings had been for — what ? Had it
been for husband or child it would have
been different, the half-pence would have
been glorified. But they paid this life-long
penalty for the privilege of being the Misses
Bothwell of Mitchell] burst. Life with them
was simply a careful picking of their way
along a downward slope to the family vault,
and it was almost a comfort to think that
the poor ladies were safely housed therewith

their dignity intact, while Kate was
yet in her teens.

Later came the little episode of Minnie
Newton and her admirer. Kate perceived
her brother's indifference to the girl's welfare,
and the brutality of his revenge on the
man whose crime was his habit of chinking
the gold in his waistcoat pocket. Probably,
with her finer instincts, she perceived all
this more clearly than did John Roth well
himself. She did not actively intervene,
because, in her contemptuous strength, she
felt very little pity for a couple whose fate
was ostensibly in their own hands. Minnie
was not even in love with Hayes, and Kate
did not care to oppose her brother in order
to force a pliant fool to accept a fortunate
chance. She let events take their course,
but she drew from them the lesson that her
future depended on herself. And, miserably
as life at Mitchelhurst was maintained, she
was, perhaps, the first of the family to see

M 2

that the time drew near when it would not
be possible to maintain it at all, partly from
the natural tendency of all embarrassments
to increase, and partly from John Bothwell's
character. He could not be extravagant,
but he had a dull impatience of his father's
minute supervision. Kate made up her
mind that the crash would come in her
brother's reign.

She had already looked round the neighbourhood
of her home and found no
deliverer there. Had there been any one
otherwise suitable the Bothwell pride was
so notorious that he would never have
dreamed of approaching her. An invitation
from a girl who had been a school friend
offered a possible chance, and Kate coaxed
the necessary funds from the old squire,
defied her brother's grudging glances, and
went, with a secret, passionate resolve to
escape from Mitclielhurst for ever. She
saw no other way. She was not conscious

of any special talent, and she said frankly
to herself that she was not sufficiently well
educated to be a governess. Moreover,
the independence which achieves a scanty
living was not her ideal. She was cramped,
she was half-starved, she wanted to stretch
herself in the warmth of the world, and
take its good things while she was young.

Fate might have decreed that she should
meet Mr. Robert Harding, a successful man
of business in the city, twenty years older
than herself, slightly bald, rather stout,
keen in his narrow range, but with very
little perception of anything which lay right
or left of the road by which he was travelling
to fortune. The beautiful Miss Roth well
would have thanked Fate and set to work
to win him. But it is not only our good
resolutions that are the sport of warring
chances. Our unworthy schemes do not
always ripen into fact. Kate did not meet
Mr. Robert Harding, she met his brother

Sidney, a tall, bright-eyed, red-lipped young

fellow, with the world before him, and the

pair fell in love as simply and freshly as if

the croquet ground at Balaclava Lodge were

the Garden of Eden, or a glade in Arcady.

In a week they were engaged to be married,

and were both honestly ready to swear that

no other marriage had ever been possible

for either. To her he appeared with the

golden light of the future about his head ;

to him she came with all the charm and

shadowy romance of long descent, and of a

poverty far statelier than newly won wealth.

Friends reminded Sidney that with his

liberal allowance from his brother, and his

prospect of a partnership at twenty five, he

might have married a girl with money had

he chosen. Friends also mentioned to

Kate, with bated breath, that the Hardings'

father, dead twenty years earlier, had been

a pork-butcher. Sidney laughed, and Kate

turned a\^'ay in scorn. She was absolutely

glad that she could make what the world
considered a sacrifice for her darlings

Mitchelhurst her engagement, though
not welcomed, was not strongly opposed.
John Roth well sneered as much as he dared,
but he knew his sister's temper, and it was
too like his own for him to care to trifle
with it, So he stood aside, very wisely, for
there was a touch of the lioness about Kate
with this new love of hers, and he saw
mischief in the eyes that were so sweet
while she was thinking about Sidney. It
was at that time that she spoke her word
of half-scornful sympathy to Herbert Hayes.

And in a year her married life, with all
its tender and softening influences, was
over. An accident had killed Sidney Harding
before he was twenty-five, before his
child was born, and Kate was left alone
in comparatively straitened circumstances.
For her child's sake she endured her sorrow,
demanding almost fiercely of God that He

would give her a son to grow up like his
dead father, and when the boy was born
she called him Reynold. Sidney was too
sacred a name ; there could be but one
Sidney Harding for her, but she remembered
that he had once said that he wished
he had been called Reynolds, after his father.
It was pathetic to see her dark eyes fixed
upon the baby features, trying to trace
something of Sidney in them, trying hard
not to realise that it was her own likeness
that was stamped upon her child. 'she is
darker, of course," she used to say, " but — "
He could not be utterly unlike his father,
this child of her heart's desire ! It was
not possible — it must not be — it would be
too monstrous a cruelty. But month by
month, and year by year, the little one
grew into her remembrance of her brother's
solitary boyhood, and faced her with a
moody temper that mocked her own. No
one knew how long she waited for a tone

or a glance which should remind her of her
dead love, remind her of anything but the
old days that she hated. None ever came.
The boy grew tall and slim, handsome after
the Bothwell type, with a curious instinctive
avidity for any details connected with
Mitchelhurst and his mother's people. He
would not confess his interest, but she
divined it and disliked it. And Key d old,
on his side, unconsciously resented her
eternal unspoken demand for something
which he could not give. He would scowl
at her over his shoulder, irritated by his
certainty that her unsatisfied eyes were
upon him. Mother and son were so fatally
alike that they chafed each other continually.
Every outbreak of temper was a
pitched battle, the combatants knew the
ground on which they fought, and every
barbed speech was scientifically planted
where it would rankle most.

A crisis came when it was decided that

Keynolcl should leave school and go into his
uncle's office. The boy did not oppose it
by so much as a word; but as he stood,
erect and silent, while Mr. Harding enlarged
on his prospects, he looked aside for a
moment, and Kate's keener eyes caught
his contemptuous glance. To her it was an
oblique ray, revealing his soul. He despised
the Hardings; he was ashamed of his
father's name. She did not speak, but in
that moment with a pang of furious anguish
she chose once and for ever between her
husband and her son, and sealed up all
her tenderness iu Sidney's grave.

Reynolds's stay in Robert Harding's office
was short, but it was not unsatisfactory
while it lasted. He never professed to like
his work, but he went resignedly through
the daily routine. He was not bright or
interested, but he was intelligent. What
was explained to him he understood, what
was told him he remembered, as a mere

matter of course. He acquiesced in his life
in a city counting-house, as his grandfather
at Mitchelhurst had acquiesced in his narrow-existence
there. It seemed as if the men
of the family were apathetic and weary
by nature, and only Kate had had energy
enough to revolt.

An unexpected chance, the freak of a rich
old man who had business relations with
Robert Harding, and who remembered
Sidney, made Reynold the possessor of a
small legacy a few months after he had
entered his uncle's service. He at once
announced his intention of going to Oxford.
Of course, as he said, without his mother s
consent he could not go till he was of
age, and if she chose to refuse it he must
wait. Kate hesitated, but Mr. Harding,
who was full of schemes for the advancement
of his own son, did not care for an
unwilling recruit, and the young fellow
was coldly permitted to have his way.

His mother, in spite of her disapproval,
watched his course with an interest which
she would never acknowledge. Was he
really going to achieve success in his own
fashion, perhaps to make the name she
loved illustrious ?

Nothing was ever more commonplace and
unnoticeable than Keynold's university
career. He spent his legacy, and came
back as little changed as possible. It
seemed as if he had felt that he owed
himself the education of a gentleman, and
had paid the debt, as a mere matter of
course, as soon as he had the means.
What do you propose to do now ? " Kate
inquired. He answered listlessly that he
had secured a situation as under-master ina
school. And for three or four years he
had maintained himself thus, making use
of his mother's house in holiday time, or in
any interval between two engagements, but
never taking anything in the shape of

actual coin from her. She suspected that
he hated his drudgery, but he never spoke
of it.

Thus matters might have remained if it
had not been for Robert Harding's son.
The old man, whose dream had been to
found a great house of business which
-should bear his name when he was gone,
was unlucky enough to have an idle fool
for his heir. Reynolds's record was not
brilliant, but it showed blamelessly by the
side of his cousin's folly and extravagance.
Mr. Harding hinted more than once that
his nephew might come back if he would,
but his hints did not seem to be understood.
Little by little it became a fixed
idea with him that Reynold alone could
save the name of Harding, and keep his
cousin from utter ruin. He recognised a
kind of scornful probity in his nephew,
which would secure Gerald's safety in his
hands, and perhaps he exaggerated the

promise of Reynold's boyhood. At last he
stooped to actual solicitation. Kate gave
the letter to her son, silently, but with a
breathless question in her eyes.

The old man offered terms which were
almost absurdly liberal, but he tried to
mask his humiliation by clothing the proposal
in dictatorial speech. He gave
Reynold a clear week in which to consider
his reply, and almost commanded him to
take that week. But Mr. Harding wrote,
if in ten days he had not signified his
acceptance, the situation would be filled
up. He should give it, with the promise
of the partnership, to a distant connection
of his wife's. " Understand," said the final
sentence, " that I speak of this matter for
the first and last time."

I think," said Reynold, looking round
for writing materials, " that I had better
answer this at once."

Not to say ' No ! ' " cried Kate. " You

shall not ! " She stood before him, darkly
imperious, with outstretched hand. It
seemed to her as if the whole house of
Harding appealed to her son for help. He
was asked to do the work that Sidney
would have done if he had lived. " You
shall not insult him by refusing his offer
without a moment's thought — I forbid it ! "
she exclaimed.

"Very well," said Keynold. "I will
wait." He turned aside to the fire-place,
and stood gazing at the dull red coals.

His mother followed him with her glance,
and after a moment's silence she made an
effort to speak more gently. "He is your
father's brother," she said.

Yes," Reynold replied, in an absent
tone. " Such an offer couldn't come from
the other side."

The words were a simple statement of
fact, the utterance was absolutely expressionless,
but a sudden flame leapt into

Kate's eyes. "Answer when and as you
please ! " she cried. Her son said nothing.
He was waiting at the time to hear about
a tutorship which had been mentioned to
him. The matter was not likely to be
settled immediately, and the next morning
he appeared with his bag in his hand, and
announced that he was going into the
country for a few" days, and would send his
address. In due time the letter came with
Mitchelhurst " stamped boldly on it, like
a defiance.

When Barbara Strange bade young Harding
go and make his fortune, she did not
know the curious potency of her advice.
The words fell, like a gleam of summer
sunshine, across a world of stony antagonisms
and smouldering fires. And, with all
the bright unconsciousness of sunshine, they
transformed it into a place of life and hope.
She had called her little cross her talisman,
but Harding's talisman — for there are such

things — was the folded letter in his pocketbook.
As she stood beside him, flushed,
eager, radiant, pleading with him, " Could
not you care for Mitchelhurst, if — " she
awakened a sudden craving for action, a
sudden desire of possession in his ice-bound
heart. To any other woman he could have
been only Reynolds Harding, a penniless
tutor, recognised, perhaps, as a kind of
degenerate offshoot of \\iq Bothwell tree.
But to Barbara he was the one remaining
hope of the old family of which she had
thought so much ; he was the king who
was to enjoy his own again, and her shining
glances bade him go and conquer his kingdom
without delay. And in Mitchelhurst
Church, as he stood among his dead people,
with the rain beating heavily on —
The lichen-crusted leads above,"
he had made up his mind. He would cast
in his lot with the Hardiness till he should
have earned the right to come back to the
VOL. I. N

Eotliwells^ inheritance. He would do it,
but not for the Roth wells' sake — for a
sweeter sake — breathing and moving beside
him in that place of tombs. He looked up
at the marble countenance of his wigged
ancestor, considering it thoughtfully, yet
not asking himself if that dignified personage
would have approved of his resolution.
Keynold, as he stared at the aquiline
features, wondered idly whether the lean-faced
gentleman had ever known and loved
a Barbara Strange, and whether he had
kissed her with those thin, curved lips of
his. Of course they were not as grimy and
pale in real life as in their sculptured likeness.
And yet it was difficult to picture
him alive, with blood in his veins, stooping
to anything as warm and sweet as Barbara's
damask-rose mouth. It seemed to Reynolds
that only he and Barbara, in all the world,
were truly alive, and he only since he had
known her.

When lie went back into the lanes alone,
after leaving her at the gate, the full
meaning of the decision which had swiftly
and strangely reversed the whole drift of
his life rushed upon him and bewildered
him. He hastened away like one in a
dream. It was as if he had broken through
an encircling; wall into light and air. Ever
since his boyhood he had held his fancy
tightly curbed, he had reminded himself by
night and day that he had nothing, was
nothing, would be nothing ; in his fierce
rejection of empty dreams he had chosen
always to turn his eyes from the wonderful
labyrinthine world about him, and to fix
them on the dull grey thread of his hopeless
life. Now for the first time in his
remembrance he relaxed his grasp, and his
fancy, freed from all control, flashed forward
to visions of love and wealth. He let it
go — why should he hinder it, since he had
resolved to follow where it led ? In this

N 2

sudden exaltation his resolution seemed half
realised in its very conception, and as he
gathered the berries from the darkening
hedgerows he felt as if they were his
own, the first-fruits of his inheritance. He
hurried from briar to briar under the pale
evening sky, tearing the rain-washed sprays
from their stems, hardly recognising himself
in the man who was so defiantly exultant
in his self-abandonment. Nothing seemed
out of reach, nothing seemed impossible.
When the darkness overtook him he went
back with a triumphant rhythm in his
swinorinor stride, feeling: as if he could have
gathered the very stars out of the sky for
Barbara.

This towering' mood did not last. It was

o

in the nature of things that such loftiness
should be iu secure, and indeed Reynolds
could hardly have made a successful man
of business had it been permanent. It
would not do to add up Barbara and the

stars in every column of figures. But the
very fact of passing from the open heavens
to the shelter of a roof had a sobering
effect, the process of dressing for dinner
recalled all the commonplace necessities of
life, and in his haste he had a difficulty
with his white necktie, which was distinctly
a disenchantment. The shyness and reserve
which were the growth of years could not
be shaken off in a moment of passion.
They closed round him more oppressively
than ever when he found himself in the
yellow drawing-room, face to face with Mr.
Hayes, and, being questioned about his
walk, he answered stiffly and coldly, and
then was silent. Yet enough of the exaltation
remained to kindle his eyes, though his
lips were speechless, when he caught sight
of Barbara standing by the fire-side, with a
cluster of blood-red berries in her hair, and
another nestling in the dusky folds of lace
close to her white throat. The vivid points

of colour held his fascinated gaze, and
seemed to him like glowing kisses.

He had a game of chess with his host
after dinner. As a rule he was a slow
and meditative player, scanning the pieces
doubtfully, and suspecting a snare in every
promising chance. But that evening he
played as if by instinct, without hesitation.
Everything was clear to him, and he
pressed his adversary closely. Mr. Hayes
frowned over his calculations, apprehending
defeat, though the game as yet had taken
no decisive turn. Presently Barbara came
softly sweeping towards them in her black
draperies, set down her uncle's coffee-cup
at his elbow, and paused by Harding's side
to watch the contest. Her presence sent a
thrill through him which disturbed his
clear perception of the game. It made a
bright confusion in his mind, such as a
ripple makes in lucid waters. He put
out his hand mechanically towards the

pawn which he had previously determined
to move.

Dear me ! " said Barbara, strong in the
traditional superiority of the looker-on,
why don't you move your bishop ? '*

Reynold moved his bishop.

Quick as lightning Mr. Hayes made his
answering move, and, when it was an accomplished
fact, he said —

Thank you, Barbara."

Reynold and Barbara looked at each
other. The aspect of affairs was entirely
changed. A white knight occupied a previously
guarded square, and simply offered
a ruinous choice of calamities.

Oh, what have I done ? " the girl exclaimed.


Reynold laughed his little rough-edged
laugh.

Nothing," he said. " Don't blame yourself.
Miss Strange. You only asked me why
I didn't move my bishop. I ought to have

explained why I didst. Instead of which
—I did. It certainly wasn't your fault."

Barbara lingered and bit her under-lip
as she gazed at the board.

I've spoilt your game," she said remorsefully.
'* I think I'd better go now I've done
the mischief."

No, don't go ! " Harding exclaimed, and
Mr. Hayes, rubbing his hands, chimed in
with a mocking —

No, don't go, Barbara ! "

The girl looked down with an angry
spark in her eyes*'

Well, I'll give sou some coffee," she
said to the young man ; " you haven't had
any yet."

*' And then come back, Barbara ! " her
uncle persisted.

She did come back, flushed and defiant,
determined to fight the battle to the last.
But for her obstinacy Mr. Hayes would
have had an easy triumph, for young Harding's

defence collapsed utterly. Apparently
he could not play a losing game, and a
single knock-down blow discouraged him
once for all. Barbara, taking her place by
his side, showed twice his spirit, and at one
time seemed almost as if she were about
to retrieve his fallen fortunes. Mr. Hayes
ceased to taunt her, and sat with a puckered
forehead considering his moves. He kept
his advantage, however, in spite of all she
could do, and presently unclosed his lips to
say ** Check ! " at intervals. But it was not
till he had uttered the fatal " Mate ! " that
his face relaxed. Then he got up, and made
his niece a little bow.

Thank you, Barbara ! " he said, and
walked away to the fire-place.

The young people remained where he
had left them. Barbara trifled with the
chessmen, moving them capriciously here
and there. Reynolds, with his head on his
hand, did not lift his eyes above the level

of the board, but watched her slim fingers
as they slipped from piece to piece, or
lingered on the red-stained ivory. She
brought back all their slain combatants,
and set them up upon the battle-field.

I wish I hadn't meddled ! " she said
suddenly. " I spoilt your game."

She spoke in a low voice, and Reynold
answered in the same tone,

What did it matter % "

No, but I hate to be beaten. I wanted
you to win."

Well," said he, still with his head down,
you set me to play a bigger game today."


Ah ! " said Barbara, decidedly. " I
won t meddle with that ! "

*' No ? " he said, looking up with a half-hinted
smile. Her cheeks were still burning
o^ with the excitement of her Ion or
struggle, and her bright eyes met his
questioning glance.

Perhaps you think I can't help
meddling ? " she suggested.

Perhaps you can't. You are superstitious,
aren't you ? You believe in
amulets and that kind of thing — or half
believe. Perhaps you are foredoomed to
meddle, and destiny won't let you set me
down to the game and go quietly away."

Barbara was holding the king between
her fingers. She replaced it on its square
so absently, while she looked at Reynold,
that it fell. His words seemed to trouble
her.

"Well, if this game is an omen, you
had better not let me meddle," she said at
last.

How am I to help it ? "

"Thank you !" she exclaimed resentfully ;
I'm not so eager to interfere in your
affairs as you seem to take for granted ! "

Indeed I thought nothing of the kind.
I thought we were talking of destiny. And,

you see, you were good enough to take a
little interest this afternoon."

She uttered a half reluctant '^ Yes." She
had a dim feeling that she was, in some
inexplicable way, becoming involved in
young Harding's fortunes.

The notion half-frightened, half-fascinated
her. When they began their low-voiced
talk she had unconsciously leaned a little
towards him. Now she did not precisely
withdraw, but she lifted her face, and there
was a touch of shy defiance in the poise of
her head.

Mr. Hayes, as he stood by the fire, was
warming first one little polished shoe, and
then the other, and contemplating the
blazing: loss.

Barbara," he said suddenly, '* did we
have this wood from Jackson ? It burns
much better than the last."

Barbara was the little housekeeper again
in a moment. She crossed the room, and

explained that it was not Jackson's wood,
but some of a load which Mr. Green had
asked them to take. " You said I could
do as I pleased," she added, " and I
thought they looked very nice logs when
they came."

"Green— ah! Jacob Green knows what
he's about. Made you pay, I dare say.
No, no matter." The girl's eyes had gone
to a little table, where an account-book
peeped out from under a bit of coloured
embroidery. " I'm not complaining ; I
don't care about a few extra shillings, if
things are good. Get Green to send you
some more when this is burnt out."

Reynold had risen when Barbara left
him, and after lingering for a moment, a
tall black and white figure, in the lamplight
by the chessboard, he followed her, and took
up his position on the rug. The interruption
to their talk had been unwelcome, but it
was not, in itself, unpleasant. He liked to

see Barbara playing the part of the lady of
the Place. It was a sweet foreshadowing
of the home, the dear home, that should one
day be. There should be logs enough on
the hearths of Mitch hurst in October
nights to come, and, though the fields and
copses round might be wet and chill, the
old house should be filled to overflowing
with brightness and warmth and love.
Some wayfarer, plodding along the dark
road, would pause and look up the avenue,
and see the lights shining in the windows
beyond the leafless trees. Reynolds pictured
this, and pictured the man's feelings as he
gazed. It was curious how, by a kind of
instinct, he put himself in the outsider's
place. He did not know that he always
did so, but in truth he had never dreamed
anything for himself till Barbara taught
him, and his old way of looking at life was
not to be unlearnt in a day. Still he was
happy enough as he stood there, staring at

the fire, and thinking of those illuminated
windows.

He could not sleep when he went to bed
that night. The head which he laid on the
chilly softness of his pillow was full of a
joyous riot of waking visions, and he closed
his eyes on the shadows only to see a girl's
shining glances and rose-flushed cheeks.

CHAPTER Viii.
barbara's tune.

Heeding fell asleep towards morning, and
woke from his slumber with a vague sense
that the world had somehow expanded into
a wide and pleasant place, and that he had
inherited a share of it. And though the
facts were not quite so splendid when he
emerged from his drowsy reverie, enough
remained of possibilities, golden or rosy, to
colour and brighten that Saturday. It is
something to wake to a conviction that
one's feet are set on the way to love and
wealth.

While he dressed, he thought of the
letter he had to write, and then of its

consequences. How long would it be
before he would have the right to come
and say to Barbara, *' I have begun the
fortune you ordered, I am not rich yet,
but I have fairly started on the road to
riches and Mitchelhnrst — will you wait forme
there ? " Or might he not say, " Will
you travel the rest of the way with me ? "
How long must it be before he could say
that ? Two years ? Surely in two years
he might unclose his lips ; for he would
work — it would be no wearisome task. A
longing, new and strange, to labour for his
love flooded the inmost recesses of his soul.
The man's whole nature was suddenly
broken up, and flowing forth as a stream
in a springtide thaw. It seemed to him
that he could give himself utterly to the
most distasteful occupations ; in fact, that
he would reject and scorn any remnant of
himself that had not toiled for Barbara.
The girl herself woke up, a room or two
VOL. I. o

away, and lay with her eyes fixed on the
tester of the great shadowy bed. It was
early, she need not get up for a few minutes
more. The pale autumn morning stole in
between the faded curtains, and lighted her
vivid little face, a little face which might
have been framed in a couple of encircling
hands. And yet, small as it was, where it
rested, with a cloud of dusky hair tossed
round it over the pillow, it was the centre
and the soul of that melancholy high-walled
room. She had dreamed confusedly
of Reynold Harding, and hardly knew where
her dream ended and her waking thought
began— perhaps because there was not much
more reality in the one than in the other.

Girls have an ideal which they call First
Love. It is rather a troublesome ideal,
involving them in a thousand little perplexities,
self-deceits, half-conscious falsehoods
; but they adore it through them all.
First Love is the treasure which must be

given to the man they promise to marry ;
the bloom would be off the fruit, the dewdrop
dried from the flower, if they could
not assure him that the love they feel for
him was the earliest that ever stirred within
their hearts. The utmost fire of passion
must have the freshness of shy spring
blossoms. Love, in his supreme triumphant
flight from soul to soul, must swear he
never tried his wings before.

But, to be honest, how often can a girl
speak confidently of her first love ? She
reads poems and stories, and the young
fellows who come about her, while she is
yet in her teens, are hardly more than
incarnate chapters of her novels. How did
she begin ? She loved Hector, it may be,
and King Arthur, and Roland, and the Cid.
Then perhaps she had a tender passion for
Amy's Leigh, for the Heir of Redclyfl'e, or
for Guy Livingstone; and the curate, or the
squire's son. just home with his regiment



from India, carries on the romance. This
she assures herself is the mystic first love ;
but the curate goes to another parish, or the
lieutenant's leave comes to an end, and the
living novel is forgotten with the others.
She will order more books from Muche's and
take an interest in them, and in the hero
of some private theatricals at a country
house close by. She will meet the young
man who lives on the other side of the
county, but who dances so perfectly and
talks so well, at the bachelors' ball. She
will think a while first of one, then of the
other ; and afterwards, when the time comes
to make that assurance of first love, she
will, half unconsciously efface all these
memories, and vow, with innocent, smiling
lips, that her very dreams have held no
shape till then.

Miss Strange was intent on the change in
her little World of coloured shadows. Adrian
Scarlett and Reynold Harding rose before

her eyes as pictures, more life-like than
she could find in her books, but pictures
nevertheless, figures seen only in one aspect.
Adrian, a facile, warmly tinted sketch of
a summer poet ; Reynolds, a sombre study
in black and grey — what could the little
girl by any possibility know of these young
men more than this ? Reynolds's romance,
with its fuller development, its melancholy
background, its hints of passion and effort
might well absorb the larger share of her
thoughts. Her part was marked out in it ;
she was startled to see how a word of hers
had awakened a dormant resolution. She
was flattered, and, though she was frightened
too, she felt that she could not draw back ;
she had inspired young Harding with
ambition, and she must encourage him
and believe in him in his coming fight
with fortune. Barbara found herself the
heroine of a drama, and for the sake of her
new character she began to rearrange her

first impressions of the hero, to dwell on
the pathos of his story, to deepen the
ditch into which he had slipped in her
service, till it would hardly have known
itself from a precipice, to soften the chilly
repulsion which she had felt at their meeting
into the simple effect of his proud reserve.
She lay gazing upward, with a smile on
her lips, picturing his final home-coming,
grouping all the incidents of that triumphant
day about the tall, dark figure with the
Bothwell features, who was just the puppet
of her pretty fancies. The vision of his
future, expanding like a soap-bubble, rose
from the dull earth, and caught the gay
colours of Barbara's sunny hopes. Everything
would go well, everything must go
well ; he should make his fortune while
he was yet young, and come back to the
flowery arches and clashing bells of rejoicing
Mitchelhurst. Beyond that day her fancy
hardly went. Of course he would have to

take the Dame of Roth well, the name which,
for the perfection of her romance, should
have been bis by right. At that remembrance
she paused dissatisfied — the pork-butcher
was the one strong touch of reality
in the wbolc story. In fact the mere
thought of him brought her back to everyday
life, and to the certainty that she must
waste no more time in dreams.

Reynold, consulting his uncle's letter,
found with some surprise that he had
pushed silence to its utmost limit, and that
another day's delay would have overstepped
the boundary which Mr. Harding had so
imperiously set. The discovery was a
shock ; it took away his breath for a
moment, and then sent the blood coursing
through his veins with a tingling exhilaration,
the sense of a peril narrowly escaped.
He was glad — glad in a defiant, unreasonable
fashion — that he had not yielded till
the last day, though at the same time he

was uneasy till this answer should be
despatched. He went up to his room
immediately after breakfast, and sat down
to his task at the writing-table which faced
the great window.

After one or two unsatisfactory beginnings
he ended with the simplest possible note of
acceptance, to which he added a postscript,
informing his uncle that he should remain
two or three days longer at Mitchelhurst
Place, and hoped to receive his instructions
there. He wrote a few lines to end the
question of the tutorship for which he had
been waiting, addressed the two envelopes,
and leaned back in his chair to read his
letters over before folding them.

As he did so he looked out over the far-spreading
landscape. The sunshine broke
through the veil of misty cloud and widened
slowly over the land, catching here the sails
of a windmill, idle in the autumn calm,
there a church spire, or a bit of white road.

or a group of poplars, or the red wall of an
old farmhouse. The silver grey gave place
to vaporous gold, and a pale brightness
illumined the paper in his hand on which
those fateful lines were written. One would
have said Mitchelhurst was smiling broadly
at his resolution. Reynold stretched himself
and returned the smile as if the landscape
were an old friend who greeted him, and
tilting his chair backward he thrust his
letter into the directed cover.

When I come back," he said to himself,
'•' I will take this room for mine."

Writing his acceptance of his uncle's offer
had not been pleasant, yet now that it was
done he contemplated the superscription,

^' B. Harding, Esq.^'

with grave satisfaction. Finally, he took
up the pen once more, hesitated, balanced
it between his fingers, and then let it fall.
Why should T write to her ? " said he,

while a sullen shadow crossed his face.
She will hear it soon enough. Since she
is to have her owen way about my career for
the rest of my life, she may well wait a day
or two to know it. Besides, I can't explain
in a letter why I have given in. No, I
won't write to-day." He shut up his
blotting case with an impatient gesture,
and there was nothing for Mrs. Sidney
Harding by that afternoon's post.

He went down the great stone stairs with
his letters, and laid them on the hall table,
as Barbara had told him to do. Then,
pausing for a moment to study the weatherglass,
a note or two, uncertainly struck,
attracted his attention. The door of the
yellow drawing-room was partly open, and
Mr. Hayes was presumably out, for Barbara
was at the old piano. When Harding
turned his head he could see her from
where he stood. The light from the south
window fell on the simple folds of her soft

woollen dress, and brightened them to a
brownish gold. She sat with her head
slightly bent, touching the keys questioningly
and tentatively, till she found a little
snatch of melody, which she played more
than once as if she were eagerly listening toit.
The piano was worn out, of that there
could be no doubt, yet Reynolds found enchantment
in the shallow tinkling sounds.
He could not have uttered his feelings
in any words at his command, but that
mattered the less since Mr. Adrian Scarlett
had enjoyed his feelings in the sumner
time, and, touching them up a little, had
arranged them in verse. It was surely
honour enough for that poor little tune
that its record was destined to appear one
day in the young fellow's volume of poems.

AT HER PIANO.

It chanced I loitered through a robin,
Dutch' with a shaded, sultry gloom,

And full of memories of old, times —
/ lingered, slicqnng into rJujmes
My visions of those earlier days
'Mid their neglected loaifs and strays
A yellowing keyhoard caught my gaze,
And straight I fancied, as I stood
Resting my hand on polished bloodletting
my eyes, contented, trace
The daintiness of inlaid grace,
That Music's ghost, outworn and spent.
Dreamed, near her antique instrument.

But when I broke its silence, fain
To call an echo hack again
Of some old fashioned, tender strain,
Played once by play long since dead —
I found my dream of music fled !
The chords I wakened could but speak
In jangled utterance, thin and leak,
In shallow discords, as when age
Reaches its last decrepit stage.
In feeble notes that seemed to chide —
This loss the end ! I stepped aside.
In my impatient weariness,
Into the window's draped recess.
Without, was all the joy of June ;
Within, a piano out of tune !

But lohile, half hidden, thus I stayed,
There came in one echo lightly laid
White hands upon the yellow keys

To seek their lingering harmonies.
I think she sighed — / know she smiled —
And straightway Music was beguiled
And all the faded bygone years,
With all their bygone hopes and fears,
Their long for gotten smiles and tears,
Their empty dreams that meant so much,
Began to sing beneath her touch.

The notes that time had taught to fret,
Racked with a querulous regret,
Forsook their burden of complaint,
For melodies more sweetly faint
Than lovers ever dreamed in sleep —
Than rippling murmurs of the deep —
Than whispered hope of endless j^eace —
Ah, let her play or let her cease,
For still that sound is in the air,
And still I see her seated there I

Yet, even as her fingers ranged,
T knew those jangled notes unchanged.
My soul had heard, in ear's despite.
And Love had made the music right.

So had Master Adrian written, after a
good deal of work with note-book and
pencil, during a long summer afternoon,
and then had carried his rhymes away to
polish them at his leisure. Reynold

Harding merely stood listening in the hall,
as motionless as if he were the ghost of
some tall young Bothwell, called back and
held entranced by the sound of the familiar
instrument. Barbara knew no more of his
silent presence than she did of Adrian's
verses. When she paused he stepped
lightly away without disturbing her. He
was very ignorant of music ; he had no
idea what it was that she had played ; to
him it was just Barbara's tune, and he felt
that, when he left Mitchelhurst, he should
carry it in this heart, to sing softly to him
on his way.

He passed into the garden and loitered
there, recalling the notes after a tuneless
fashion of his own. The neglected grounds,
which had seemed so sodden and sad when
first he looked out upon them, had a pale,
shining beauty as he walked to and fro,
keeping time to the memory of Barbara's
music. The eye did not dwell on their

desolation, but passed through the leafless
boughs to bright misty distances of earth
and cloudland. Reynold halted at last by
the old sun-dial. The softly diffused
radiance marked no passing hour upon it,
but rather seemed to tell of measureless
rest and peace. There was a slight
autumnal fragrance in the air, but the
young man perceived a sweeter breath,
and stooping to the black earth, he found
two or three violets half hidden in their
clustering leaves. He hardly knew why
they gave him the pleasure they did ; he
was not accustomed to find such delicate
pleasure in such things. Perhaps if he had
analysed his feelings he might have seen
that, for a man who had just pledged
himself to a life of hurrying toil, there was
a subtle charm in the very stillness and
decay and indolent content of Mitchelhurst,
breathing its odours of box and yew into
the damp, windless air. It was a curious

little pause before the final plunge.
Eeyuold felt it even if he did not altogether
understand, as he stood by the sun-dial
which recorded nothing, with the violets at
his feet, and the rooks sailing overhead
across the faintly-tinted sky. A clump of
overgrown dock-leaves stirred suddenly,
Barbara's cat pushed its way through them
and came to rub itself against him. He
bent down and caressed it. " I'll come
again — I'll come home," he said softly, ashe
stroked its arching back.

CHAPTEE IX.

OF MAGIC LANTERNS.

It was fortunate that young Harding
demanded little in the way of gaiety from
Mitchelhurst. Such as it could give, however,
it gave that evening, when the vicar,
and a country squire who had a small place
five or six miles away, came to dinner.
The clergyman was a pallid, undersized
man, who blinked, and twitched his lips
when he was not speaking, and had a
nervous trick of assenting to every proposition
with an emphatic " Yes, yes."
After the utterance of this formula his
conscience usually awoke, and compelled
him to protest, for he considered most

VOL. I. p

tliinsfs that were said or done in the
world as at any rate slightly reprehensible.
This might happen ten times in one conversation,
but the assent did not fail to
come as readily the tenth time as the first.
It would only have been necessary to say,
with a sufficient air of conviction, "You
see, don't you, Mr. Pryor, that under these
circumstances I was perfectly justified in
cutting my grandmother's throat with a
blunt knife ? " to secure a fervent " Yes,
yes ! " in reply.

The squire was not half an inch taller,
a little beardless man with withered red
cheeks, and brown hair which was curiously
like a wig. Barbara had doubted through
two or three interviews whether it was a
wig or not, and she had been pleased when
he talked to her, because it gave her an
excuse for looking fixedly in the direction
of his head. At last he arrived one day
with his hair very badly cut, and a bit

of plaster on his ear, where the village
barber had snipped it, after which she took
no further interest in him. Happily her
previous attention had given him a very
high opinion of her intelligence and good
taste, and Mr. Masters remained her loyal
admirer. " A very sensible girl, Miss
Strange," he would say, and Mr. Pry or
would reply " Yes, yes," and then add
doubtfully that he feared she was rather
flighty, and that her indifference to serious
questions was much to be regretted. This
meant that Barbara would not take a class
in the Sunday-school, and cared nothing
about old books and tombstones.

The dinner was not a conversational
success. Mr. Masters, on being introduced
to Reynold Harding, was amazed at the
likeness to the old family, and repeatedly
exclaimed, " God bless my soul ! How very
remarkable ! " Harding looked self-conscious
and uncomfortable, and the vicar

p 2

said " Yes, exactly so." The little squire's
eyes kept wandering from the young man's
face to the wall and hack again, as if he
were referring him to all the family
portraits. By the time they had finished
their fish the resemblance was singularly
heightened. Reynold was scowling blackly,
and answering in the fewest possible words,
which seemed to ornate against each other ashe
uttered them. Mr. Hayes, who did not
care twopence for his young guest's feelings,
looked on with indifferent eyes, and would
not interfere, while Barbara made a gallant
little attempt to divert attention from
Reynold's ill-temper by talking with incoherent
liveliness to the clergyman. As
ill-luck would have it, Mr. Masters, who
had more than once addressed his new
acquaintance as " Mr. Roth well," suddenly
grasped the fact that he was not Roth well
at all, but Harding, and began to take
an unnecessary interest in the Harding

pedigree. He was so eager in his investigation
that he did not see the young
man's silent fury, but went on recalling
different Hardings he had known or heard
of. " That might be about your grandfather's
time," he reckoned.

You never knew my Hardings ! " said
Reynold abruptly, in so unmistakable a
tone that Mr. Masters stopped short, and
looked wonderingly at him, while Barbara
faltered ia the middle of a sentence. At
that moment the remembrance of his grandfather
was an intolerable humiliation to the
poor fellow, tenfold worse because Barbara
would understand. The dark blood had
risen to his face and swollen the veins on
his forehead, and his glance met hers.
She coloured, and he took it as a confession
that he had divined her thoughts.
In truth she was startled and frightened
at her hero of romance under his new
aspect.

'' Pry or," said Mr, Hayes sharply, " you
nre all wrong about that inscription in
the church. Masters and I have been
talking it over— eh, Masters ? — and we
have made up our minds that your theory
won't do."

"Yes," said the vicar, and Mr. Masters
chimed in, following his host's lead almost
mechanically. The worthy little squire
concluded that he must have said something
dreadful, and wondered, as he talked,
what these Hardings could have done. " I
suppose some of 'em were hanged," he said
to himself, and stole a glance of commiseration
at Reynolds, who was gloomily intent
upon his plate. *' People ought to let one
know beforehand when there's anything
disagreeable like that —-why, one might talk
about ropes ! I shall speak to Hayes,
though perhaps he doesn't know. A
deucedly unpleasant young fellow, but so
was John Bothwell, and it must be

uncommonly uncomfortable to have anything
of that kind in one's family. God
bless my soul ! he looked as if he were
going to murder me ! "

Barbara breathed again when the inscription
was mentioned, recognising a safe
and familiar topic, warranted to wear \^ell.
They had not ended the discussion when
she left them to their wine. Mr. Masters
was quicker than Reynold, and held the
door open for her to pass, with a little
old-fashioned bow, but he exclaimed over
his shoulder as he closed it, "No, no, Pry or,
you are begging the question of the date'*
and she went away with those encouraging
words in her ears. Mr. Masters and Mr.
Pryor might disagree as much as they
pleased. They would never come to any
harm.

Still, as she waited alone till the gentlemen
should come, she could not help feeling
depressed. The yellow drawing-room was

more brilliantly lighted than usual, and the
portrait of Anthony Roth well chanced to be
especially illuminated. Barbara sat down
on a low chair, and took a book, but she
turned the leaves idly, and whenever she
lifted her eyes she met the painted gaze of
the face that was so like Eeynoid. By
nature she was happy enough, but her
lonely life in the desolate old place, the lack
of sympathy, which threw her back entirely
on her own thoughts, the desires and dreams
which she did not herself understand, but
which sprang up and budded in the twilight
of her innocent soul, had all combined to
make her unnaturally imaginative. A little
careless irresponsibility, a little healthy fun
and excitement, would have cured her
directly. But, meanwhile, the silence and
decay of the great hollow house impressed
her as it would not have impressed a heavier
nature. She was like a butterfly in that
wilderness of stone, brightening the spot on

which she alighted, but failing to find the
sunlight that she sought. Her moods
would vary from one moment to the next,
answering the subtle influences which a
breath of wholesome air from the outer
world would have blown away. As she sat
there that evening she wished she could
escape from Mitchelhurst and Mr. Harding.
His angry glance had printed itself upon
her memory, and it haunted her. She had
been playing with his hopes, trying to
awaken his ambition, thinking lightly of
the Bothwell temper as a mere item in the
romantic likeness, and suddenly she had
caught short of something* menacing and
cruel, beyond all strength of hers. She
lifted her head, and Anthony Bothwell
looked as if he were smiling in malicious
enjoyment at her trouble. The very effort
she made to keep her eyes from the picture
drew them to it more certainly, till the
firelight room seemed to contract about the

portrait and herself, leaving no chance of
escape from the ghostly tete-d-tHe.

The sound of steps broke the spell. She
threw down her book as the door opened,
and could scarcely help laughing at the
queer little company, the three small elderly
men, and the tall young fellow who towered
over them. A covert glance told her that
Keynold was as pale, or paler, than usual,
and she noticed that he answered in a
constrained but studiously polite manner
when the good-natured little squire made
some remark on the chilliness of the autumn
evenings. After a moment he came across
to her, and stood with his elbow on the
chimney-piece, looking at the blazing logs,
while Anthony Bothwell smiled over his
shoulder.

Barbara wondered what she should say to
the pair of them, and she tormented her
little lace edged handkerchief in her embarrassment.
Finally she let it fall. Young

Harding stooped for it, and as lie gave it
back their eyes met, and be smiled.

Are you going to play to us ? " be asked.

'' I wish Miss Strange would play for meat
my entertainment at the schools next
week," said Mr. Pryor plaintively. *' Won't
you be persuaded, Miss Strange ? "

I'll play for you now if you like," she
answered, *but you know my uncle won't
let me play at the penny readings. And
really it is no loss, I am nothing of a
musician."

The vicar sighed and looked across at
Mr. Hayes. *' I wish he would ! " be said.
** Couldn't you persuade him ? I can't get
the programme arranged properly."

Why, haven't you got the usual people'*

*' Yes, yes, I have got the usual people.
But perhaps," said Mr. Pryor, not unreasonably,
" it would be as well to have something
a little different — a little new, you
know. It is extremely kind of them, but

the audience, the back benches, don't you
know '? — Well, I suppose they like variety."

Barbara looked gravely sympathetic.

And it's rather awkward," Mr. Pry or
continued, '^ young Dickson at the mill has
some enorao'ement that evening;, and won't
be able to sing ' Simon the Cellarer,' unless
I put it the first thing."

Why, he sings nothing else ! " Miss
Strange exclaimed.

Yes, he does know two other songs, I
believe, but they are, in my opinion, too
broadly comic for such an entertainment as
this. He hummed a little bit of one in
my study one evening, in a very subdued
manner, of course, just to give me an idea.
I saw at once that it would never do. I
stopped him directly, but I found myself
singing the very objectionable words about
the parish for days. Not ahud^ you know
not aloud l^^

Mr. Pryor looked sternly over the top of

j\liss Strangers head, and pressed his lips
so tightly together that she was quite
sure he was singing Mr. Harry Dickson's
objectionable song to himself at that very
moment.

But why shouldn't he sing * Simon the
Cellarer' at the beginning just as well as at
the end ? " she questioned.

Yes," said the vicar, *' but there is my
little reading, of course that must come in
early — my position as the clergyman of the
parish, you see. And I thought of something
a little improving, a short reading out
of a volume of selections I happen to have,
Simon the Cyrenian '."

Why, you read that before," Barbara
began, and then stopped and coloured.

'* Yes, yes," said Mr. Pryor, '* I did, but
I don't think they paid much attention,
the back benches were rather noisy that
evening, and it is a nice length, and seems
very suitable. But the difficulty is how to

keep ' Simon the Cellarer ' and ' Simon the
Cyrenian ' apart on the programme. I don't
know how it is to be managed, I'm sure. I
thought perhaps you would play us something
appropriate between the song and the
reading. I'm afraid some of the audience
may smile."

Reynold took his arm from the chimney-piece.
'' Appropriate to both Simon ? " he
inquired.

*' Yes, just so, to both Simon. At least,
not exactly that, but something by way of
a transition, I suppose."

I wonder what that would be like,"
Barbara speculated. " I'm really very sorry
I can't help you, Mr. Pryor."

"Oh never mind," said the clergyman.
I did tell Dickson he might change the
name in his song, but he wouldn't, in fact
he answered rather flippantly. Well, 1
suppose I must find another reading, but
it's a pity, when I knew of this one. Such

a suitable length ! Unless' he looked at
Reynold, " unless your friend — "

Reynold's " No ! " was charged with
intense astonishment and horror. *' I can't
play a note," he added.

*' But you could recite something," Mr.
Pryor persisted. "Now that would really
be very kind. Something like the * Charge
of the Light Brigade ' — ' Into the valley of
death,' don't you know, 'Rode the six
hundred' — that pleases an audience. We
had a young man from Manchester once
who did that very well, a little too much
action, perhaps, but remarkably well. Or
something American — American humour.
If it isn't flippant I see no objection to it ;
one should not be too particular, I think.
And it is very popular. Not flippant, and
not too broad — but I needn't say that — I
feel very safe with you. I'm sure you
would not select anything broad."

Harding had recoiled a step or two, and

stood with a stony gaze of unspeakable
scorn. " It's out of the question," he said,
I couldn't think of such a thing. It's
utterly impossible. Besides, I shall be gone."

Well, I'm very sorry," said the vicar,
*' I only thought perhaps you might." He
turned to Barbara, " Your other friend was
so very kind at our little harvest home.
Mr. — I forget his name — but it was very
good of him."

"Mr. Scarlett," said Barbara. She had
her hand up, guarding her eyes from the
flickering brightness of a log which had
just burst into flame, and Reynold, looking
down at her, questioned within himself
whether there were not a faint reflection
of the name upon her cheek. But it might
be his jealous fancy,

Yes, yes, Scarlett, so it was. A very
amusing young man."

This soothed the sullen bystander a little,
though he hardly knew why, unless it

might be that he fancied that Barbara
would not like to hear Mr. Scarlett described
as a very amusing young man. But
when she answered " Very amusing," with
a certain slight crispness of tone, it struck
him that he would have preferred that she
should be indifferent.

The vicar took his leave a little later,
mentioning the duties of the next day asa
reason for his early departure. " Must
be prepared, you know," he said as he shook
hands with the squire.

Mr. Hayes came back from the door,
smiling his little contemptuous smile.
That means that he has to open a
drawer, and take out an old sermon," he
said, turning to Mr. Masters. *well, as
I was saying "

Does he always preach old sermons ? "
Reynold asked Barbara.

I think so. They always look very
yellow, and they always seem old."

VOL. I. Q

Always preaches old sermons, and has
the same old penny readings — do you go ? "

"Oh yes, we always go. Uncle thinks
we ought to go, only he won't let me do
anything."

'^ Do you loan to do anything % "

''No," said the girl. It was a truthful
answer, but her consciousness of the intense
scorn in Harding's voice made it doubly
prompt.

But do you like going ? "

She hesitated. " Oh yes, sometimes. I
liked going to the harvest home entertainment."


Oh ! " A pause. '' Did Mr. Scarlett
sing ' Simon the Cellarer ' ? "

No, he did not." After a moment she
went on. "They are not always penny
readings ; a little while ago we had a magic
lantern and some sacred music. They were
views of the Holy Land, you know, that
was why we had sacred music."

Oh ! " said Reynold again. " And did
you enjoy the views of the Holy Land ? "

"Well, not so very much," she owned.
They didn't get the light right at first,
and they were not very distinct, so he told
us all about Bethlehem, and then found out
that they had put in the wrong slide, and it
was the woman at the well, so they had to
change her, and then he told us all about
Bethlehem over again. Joppa was the best ;
a fly got in somewhere and ran about over
the roofs of the houses — it looked as big asa
cat. I shall always remember about
Joppa now. Poor Mr. Pryor began quite
gravely — " Barbara paused, turned her head
to see that her uncle was sufficiently
absorbed, and then softly mimicked the
clergyman's manner. **' Joppa, or Jaffa,
may be considered the port of Jerusalem.
It is built on a conical eminence overhanging
the sea ' — and then he saw us all
whispering and laughing and the fly running

Q 2

about. He told us it wasn't reverent ; lie
was dreadfully cross about it. He stopped
while they took Joppa out, and, I suppose,
they caught the fly. Anyhow it never got
in any more. Oh yes, it was rather amusing
altogether."

'' Was it ? "

She threw her head back and looked up
at him. "You are laughing at me," she
said in a low voice, " but it isn't always so
very amusing at home."

His face softened instantly. " I oughtn't
to have laughed," he said. " I ought to
know — " He could picture Barbara shut
up with her smiling, selfish, unsympathetic
little uncle, in the black winter evenings
that were coming, all the fancies and
dreams of eighteen pent within those white-panelled
walls, and exhaling sadly in little
sighs of weariness over book or needlework.

But he saw another picture too, a dull
London sitting - room whose ^ dreariness

seemed intensely concentrated on the face
of a disappointed woman. Life had held
little more for him than for Barbara, but he
had rejected even its dreams, and had spent
his musings hours in distilling the bitterness
of scorn from its sordid realities. He would
not have been cheered by a magnified fly.
You are wiser than I am, Miss Strange,"
he said abruptly.

What do you mean ? "

You take what you can get."

She considered for a moment. " You
mean that I go to Mr. Pryor's entertainments,
and hear ' Simon the ' "

Cyrenian ! Yes, and see Joppa in a
magic lantern. That is very wise when the
real Joppa is out of reach."

I don't know," said Barbara hesitatingly,
that I ever very particularly wanted to goto
Joppa."

"Nor I," said Harding, "but being someway
off it will serve for all the unattainable

places where we do want to be. 'Joppa
may be considered the port of Jerusalem ' —
wasn't that what Mr. Pryor said ? " He
repeated it slowly as if the words pleased
him. '' And where do you really want to
go?"

To Paris," said Barbara, with a world of
longing in the word. " To Paris, and then
to Italy. And then — oh, anywhere ! But
to Paris first."

Paris ! " Harding seemed to be recording
her choice. "Well, that sounds
possible enough. Surely you may count on
Paris one of these days. Miss Strange ; and
meanwhile you can have a look at it with
the help of the magic lantern."

She laughed. " Not Mr. Pryor's."

"Oh no, not Mr. Pryor's. I shouldn't
fancy there were any Parisian slides in his.
But I suspect you have a magic lantern of
your own which shows it to you whenever
you please."

Pretty often," she confessed.

The dialogue was interrupted by a tardy
request for some music from Mr. Masters.
Barbara went obediently to the piano, and
Reynold followed her. She would rather
he had stayed by the fireside ; his conscientious
attempts to turn the leaf at the
right time confused her dreadfully, and she
dared not say to him, as she might have
done to another man, *' I like to turn the
pages for myself, please." Suppose he
should be hurt or vexed ? She was learning
to look upon him as a kind of thundercloud,
out of which, without a moment's
warning, came flashes of passion, of feeling,
of resolution, of fury, of scorn. She did
not know what drew them down. So she
accepted his attentions, and smiled her
gratitude. If only (" Yes, please ! " in
answer to an inquiring glance) — if only he
would always be too soon, or always a little
too late ! Instead of which he arrived at

a tolerable average by virtue of the variety
of his failures. Worst of all was a terrible
moment of uncertainty, when, having turned
too soon, he thought of turning back.
*' No, no ! " cried Barbara.

Fm very stupid," said Harding, " I'm
afraid I put you out." " No, no," again
from Barbara, while her busy fingers worked
unceasingly. "Couldn't you give me justa
little nod when it's time ? " A brief
pause, during which his eyes are fixed with
agonised intensity on her head, a fact of
which she is painfully conscious, though her
own are riveted on the page before her.
She nods spasmodically, and Reynolds turns
the leaf so hurriedly that it comes sliding
down upon the flying hands, and has to
be caught and replaced. As usual, displeasure
at his own clumsiness makes him
sullen and silent, and he stands back without
a word when the performance is over.
Mr. Masters thanks, applauds, talks a little

in the style which for the last forty years
or so he has considered appropriate to the
young ladies of his acquaintance, and finally
says good night, and bows himself out of
the room.

Mr. Hayes stands on the rug, and hides a
little yawn behind his little hand. " Is
Masters trying to make himself agreeable ? "
he asks. " Let me know if I am to lookout
for another housekeeper, Barbara."

Barbara has no brilliant reply ready.
The hackneyed joke displeases her. As her
uncle speaks, she can actually see Little-mere,
the village where the small squire
lives ; a three-cornered green, tufted with
rushy grass, with a cow and half-a-dozen
geese on it ; a few cottages, with their
week's wash hung out to dry; a round
pond, green with duckweed ; a small alehouse
; a couple of white, treeless roads,
leading away into the world, but apparently
serving only for the labourers who plod out

in the morning and home at night ; an
ugly little school-house of red brick and
slate ; and Littlemere Hall, square, white,
and bare, set down like a large box in the
middle of a dreary garden. She cannot
help picturing herself there, with Mr.
Masters, caught and prisoned ; the idea is
utterly absurd, bat it is hideous, as hateful
as if an actual hand were laid on her. She
shrinks back and frowns. ^' You needn't
get anybody just yet," she says.

Very good," her uncle replies. " Give
me a month's warning, that's all I ask."
He yawns again, and looks at his watch.
Reynolds takes the hint, and his candle, and
goes.

Good riddance ! " says the little man on
the rug. " Of all the ill-mannered, cross-grained
fellows I ever met, there goes the
worst ! A Roth well ! He's worse than any
Bothwell, and not the genuine thing either !
Can't he behave decently to my friends at

my own table *? "What does he mean by his
confounded rudeness? Masters is a better
man than ever he will be ! ''

Barbara shuts the piano, and lays her
music straight. Poor little Barbara, trying
with little soft speeches and judicious
silences to steer her light-winged course
among these angry men, is sorely perplexed
sometimes. Now as Mr. Hayes mutters
something about '* an unlicked cub," she
thinks it best to say, "Well, uncle, it isn't
for very long. Mr. Harding will soon be
going away."

"Yes, he'll soon be going away, and for
good too ! Never will he set foot inside
Mitchelhurst Place again — I can tell him
that ! When he crosses the threshold he
crosses it once for all. Never again — never
again ! "

This time Barbara, who is looking to the
fastenings of the windows, is in no haste
to speak. She feels as if she had been

conspiring with Harding, and, remembering
their schemes for his return, her uncle's
reiterated assurances ring oddly and mockingly
in her ears. " When lie crosses the
threshold, he crosses it once for all." No,
he does not ! He is going away to work,
he will come back and buy the Place of
Mr. Croft, he will be living there for years
and years when poor Uncle Hayes is dead
and gone. And she, Barbara, has done it
all. With a word and a look she has given
a master to Mitchelhurst.

But, being a prudent girl, she merely says
Good night."

Chapter X.

AN AFTER-DINNER DISCUSSION.

Mr. Pryor, aloft in his pulpit in Mitchell
church, with a sounding-board suspended
above his head, was preaching about
the Amalekitess to a small afternoon congregation.
The Amalekitess had happened
to come out of that drawer in his writings
of which Mr. Hayes had spoken,
and perhaps did as well as anything else he
could have found there. He was getting
over the ground at a tolerable pace, in spite
of an occasional stumble, and was too much
absorbed in his manuscript to be disturbed by
an active trade in marbles which was going
on in the front row of the Sunday scholars.
Indeed, to Mr. Pryor's short-sighted eyes,

his listeners were very nearly as remote as
the Amalekitess themselves.

Some of the straw-plaiting girls, whose
fingers seemed restless during their Sunday
idleness, were nudging and pulling each
other, or turning the leaves of their hymnbooks,
or smoothing their dresses. A
labourer here and there sat staring straight
before him with a vacant gaze. A farmer's
wife devoted the leisure moments to thinking
out one or two practical matters, over
which she frowned a little. The clerk, in
his desk, attended officially to the Amalekite,
but that was all.

Barbara and Reynolds were apart from all
the rest in the square, red-lined pew which
had always belonged to the Roth wells.
When they stood up their heads and Reynold's
shoulders were visible, but during
the sermon no one could see the occupants
of the little inclosure except the preacher.

Reynold had established himself in a

corner, with his head slightly thrown back
and his long legs stretched 'out. Barbara,
a little way off, had her daintily-gloved
hands folded on her lap, and sat with a
demurely respectful expression while the
voice above them sent a thin thread of
denunciation through the drowsy atmosphere.
Harding did not disHke it. Anything
newer, more real, more living, would
have seemed unsuited to the dusty marble
figures which were the principal part of the
congregation in that corner of the church.
He had knelt down and stood up during
the service, always with a sense of union
between his own few years of life and the
many years of which those monuments were
memories ; and the old prayers, the " Lighten
our darkness, we beseech Thee, Lord,"
had fallen softly on his ears. Perils and
dangers seemed so far from that sleepy
little haven where he hoped to live his
later days, and to come as a grey-haired

man, when all the storms and struggles
were over, and hear those words Sunday-after
Sunday in that very pew. Barbara,
from under her long lashes, stole a meditative,
questioning glance at him while he
was musing thus, and the glance lingered.
The young fellow's head rested against the
faded red baize, his eyes were half closed,
his brows had relaxed, his mouth almost
hinted a smile. He was not conscious of
her scrutiny, and, seeing his face for the
first time as a mere mask, she suddenly
awoke to a perception of its beauty.

Overhead, it appeared that the Amalekitess
typified many evil things, and were by no
means so utterly destroyed as they should
have been. Mr. Pry or intended his warnings
to be as emphatic as those of the fierce
old prophet, and he drew a limp white
finger down the faded page lest he should
lose his place in the middle. Time had
made the manuscript a little unfamiliar.

My brethren," said the plaintive voice
from beneath the sounding-board, " we must
make terms — ahem ! — we must never make
terms with these relentless enemies who lie
in wait for us as for the Israelites of old.
Seem ember " — he turned a leaf and felt the
next to ascertain if it where the last. It was
not, and he hurried his exhortation a little,
finding it long, yet afraid to venture on
leaving anything out. Meanwhile a weary
Sunday-school teacher awoke to sudden
energy, plunged into the midst of the boys,
and captured more marbles than he could
hold, so that two or three escaped him and
rolled down the aisle, amid a general manifestation
of interest. The luckless teacher
was young and bashful, and the rolling
marbles seemed to him to fill the universe
with reverberating echoes.

The vicar reached the goal at last, and
gave out a hymn. Then the young people
in the red-lined pew appeared once more,

VOL. I. R

Miss Strange singing, Reynold looking round
to deepen and assure his recollection of that
afternoon. When he found himself in
the churchyard, passing under the black-coughed
yews with Barbara, he broke the
silence. " I shall be far enough away next
Sunday."

Tt was so strange to think that by the
next Sunday his work would have begun,
the work which he so loathed and so desired.
He had directed his letter to his uncle at
his place a few miles out of town, where
Mr. Harding always want from Saturday to
Monday, and he remembered as he spoke
that the old gentleman would have received
it that morning. Reynold pictured a little
triumph over his surrender, but he did
not care. Something — it could hardly be
Mr. Pryor's sermon — had sweetened his
bitter soul, and he did not care. He felt as
if that little corner of Mitchelhurst church
had become an inalienable possession of his,

and he could enter into it at any time
wherever he might chance to be.

Barbara was sympathetic, but slightly
pre-occupied. If young Harding had understood
women a little better he would
certainly have perceived the pre-occupation,
but as it was he only saw the sympathy.
When they got back to the Place she delayed
him in the garden, as if she too felt the charm
of that peaceful afternoon and regretted its
departure. They loitered to and fro on the
wide gravel path, where grass and weeds
encroached creeping from the borders, and
paused from time to time watching the sun
as it went down. iVt last, when there was
only a band of sulphur-coloured light on the
horizon, Barbara turned away with a sigh.

Reynold did not understand her reluctance
to go in. In truth she was uneasy at the
thought of the long evening which her
uncle and he must spend in the same room.
Mr. Hayes had come down in a dangerous

R 2

mood that morning, not showing any special
remembrance of Harding's offence of the
night before, but seeming impartially displeased
with everything and everybody. If
ill-temper were actual fire, his conversation
would have been all snaps and flashes like
a fifth of November. Letters absorbed his
attention at breakfast, but Barbara perceived
that they only made him crosser than before.
Happily, however, since a storm of rain
hindered the morning's church-going, he
went to his study to write his answers, and
was seen no more till lunch-time, after
which the weather cleared, and the young
people walked ofi" together to hear about
the Amalekitess. Reynold had no idea how
anxiously Barbara had been sheltering him
all day under her little wing, but now the
sun was down, there was no help for it,
they must go in and face the worst. She
had paused and looked up at him as if she
were about to say something before they

left the garden, but nothing came except
the little sigh which he had heard.

Even when they went in, fate seemed a
little to postpone the evil moment. Harding,
coming down-stairs, saw a light shining-through
the door of a small room — the
book-room, as it was sometimes called. A
glance as he passed showed Barbara, with
an arm raised above her head, taking a
volume from the shelf. " Can I help you ? ''
he asked, pausing in the doorway.

Oh, thank you, but I think this is
right." She examined the title-page. The
window shutters were closed, the room was
dusky with its lining of old brown leather
bindings, ad Barbara's candle was just a
glow-worm glimmer of brightness in it.
You might put those others back for me
if you would. I can manage to take them
down, but it isn't so easy to put them up
again."

Tall Keynold rendered the required service

quickly enough, while she laid the book she
had chosen with some others already on the
table, and began to dust them. It was an
old-fashioned writing-table, with a multitude
of little brass-handled drawers. The young
man took hold of one of these brass handles,
and noticed its rather elaborate workmanship.
" Look inside," said the girl, as she
laid her duster down.

The drawer was full of yellowing papers,
old bills, and miscellaneous scraps of various
kinds. She pulled out a few, and they
turned them over in the gleam of candlelight.
"Butcher, Christmas, 1811," said
Barbara, " and here is a glazier's bill. What
have you got ? "

'' To sink in o' and bricking new well, 32 ft.
deep," Reynold replied. "It is in 1816.
To making new pump, 38 ft. long."

"Why, that must be the old pump by
the stables," said Barbara. " Look at this
receipt, ' for work Don accord en to Bill ? ' "

There seem to be plenty of them. Are
the other drawers full too ? "

Yes, I think so. You had better take
one as a souvenir."

No, thank you." He smiled as he thrust
the bills he held down among the dusty
bundles in the drawer, and brushed his
finger tips fastidiously. " Souvenirs ought
to be characteristic. A receipted bill would
be a very respectable souvenir, but I'm
afraid it would convey a flilse impression of
the Bothwell."

She looked away, a little perplexed and
dissatisfied. It seemed to her that the
future master of Mitchelhurst should not
talk in that fashion of his own people, and
she did not understand that the slight
bitterness of speech was merely the outcome
of a life of discontent. He hardly knew
how to speak otherwise. " I suppose they
would have paid everybody if they hadn't
had misfortunes," she said.

No doubt. We would most of us pay
our bills if we had nothing else to do with
the money."

Well," Barbara declared with a blush,
the next Bothwell will pay his bills, I know."

We'll hope so." His smile apparently
emboldened her, for she looked up at him.
Mr. Harding," she began.

"Well?"

She put her hand to her mouth with
an irresolute gesture, softly touching her
red lips. " Oh — nothing ! " she said.

*' Nothing?" he questioned. But at that
moment there was a call. " Barbara !
Barbara ! are }^ou stopping to write those
books?"

She turned swiftly, caught them up and
was gone, sending an answering cry of
*' Coming, uncle — coming ! " before her.

Reynold lingered a little before he
followed her, to wonder what that something
was that was nothing.

o o

When he went in he found Mr. Hayes
and Barbara both industriously occupied with
their reading, after the fashion of a quiet
Sunday in the country. He took up the
first volume that came to hand, threw
himself into a chair, and remained for a
considerable time frowning and musings over
the unread page. Mr. Hayes turned his
pages with wearisome regularity, but after
a while Barbara laid her Good Words on
her lap and gazed fixedly at the window,
where little could be seen but the reflection
of the lamp in the outer darkness. The
silence of the room seeming to have become
accustomed to this change of attitude, the
slightest possible movement of her head
brought Reynold within range. He moved,
and she was looking at the window, from
which she turned quite naturally, and met
his glance. Her fingers were playing
restlessly with her little gold cross, and
Harding said, " Your talisman ! "

No word had been spoken for so long that
the brief utterance came with a kind of
startling distinctness.

My talisman still, thanks to yon,"
Barbara replied.

The absurdity of his misfortune was a
little forgotten, and the fact of his service
remained, so Harding almost smiled as he
rejoined —

I say * thanks to it ' for my introduction."
Mr. Hayes knitted his brows, and looked
from one to the other with bright, bead-like
eyes. When, a minute later, a maid came
to the door, and asked to speak to Miss
Strange, he waited till his niece was gone,
and then sharply demanded —

What was that about a talisman ? "
That little cross Miss Strange wears.
She calls that her talisman."

Indeed ! Why that particular cross ? "
'' It belonged to her godmother, I believe,"
said Harding.

The old gentleman stared, and then considered
a little.

Her godmother, eh ? Why," he began
to laugh, *her godmother — what does Barbara
know about her ? "

I think she said she was named after
her "

'^ So she was."

And that her mother told her she was the
most beautiful woman she ever knew "

That's true enough. She was beautiful,
and clever, and accomplished, no doubt
about that. One ought to speak kindly of
the dead, they say. Well, she was beautiful,
and if ever there was a selfish, heartless
coquette "

Hey ! " said Reynold, opening his eyes.
Is that speaking kindly of the dead ?"

Very kindly," with emphasis.

But Miss Strange's mother "

Well, I should think she must havT-
begun to find her friend out before she died.

I don't know, though; Mrs. Strange isn't
over wise, she may contrive to believe in
her still. I wonder what Strange would
say, if lie ever said anything ! So that
is Barbara's talisman ! Not much virtue
in it, anyhow ; but I dare say it will do
just as well. There have been some queer
folks canonised before now."

He ended with a chuckling little laugh.
Evidently he knew enough of the earlier
Barbara to see something irresistibly comic
in the girl's tenderness for this little relic
of the past.

Harding was grimly silent. Barbara's
fancy might be foolish, but since she
cherished it, he hated to hear this ugly little
mockery of her treasure, and he had found
a half-acknowledged satisfaction in the remembrance
that the little cross was a link
between himself and her. Now, when she
came into the room again, and Mr. Hayes
compressed his lips, and glanced from the

little ornament to his visitor, and then to
his book again, in stealthy enjoyment of
his joke, the other felt as if there were
something sinister in the token. He wished
Barbara would not caress it as she stood
by the fire. He would have liked to throw
it down and tread it under foot.

There might have been some malignant
influence in the air that day, for Barbara
will wonder as long as she lives what made
her two companions insist on talking politics
at dinner. She did not like people to talk
politics. She had never looked out the
word in the dictionary, and perhaps she
might not have objected to a lofty discussion
of " the science of government, that part
of ethics which consists in the regulation
and government of a nation or state." She
looked upon talking politics as a masculine
diversion, which consisted in bandying
violent assertions about Mr. Gladstone. It
never led, of course, to any change of

opinion, bat it generally made people raise
their voices, and interrupt one another, and
get red in the face. As far as her opportunities
of observation went, Barbara had
judged pretty correctly.

Her uncle held what he called his political
creed solely as a means of enjoyable argument.
He considered himself an advanced
Liberal, but he had so many whims and
hobbies that he was the most uncertain of
supporters. No one held his views, and if,
by some inconceivable chance, he had convinced
an adversary, he would have been
very uncomfortable. He would have felt
himself crowded out of his position, and
would have retired immediately to less
accessible ground, and defied his disciple to
climb up after him. When he had arranged
his opinions he was obliged to find ingenious
methods of escaping their consequences.
For instance, with some whimsical recollection
of the one passion of his life, he chose

to hold advanced \ie\vs about Woman's
Rights, which disgusted his country neighbours.
Woman was, in every respect but
physical strength, the natural equal of man.
She was to be emancipated, to vote, to take
her place in Church and State — when Mr.
Hayes was dead. At present she was
evidently dwarfed and degraded by long
ages of man's oppressive rule, and needed
careful education, and a considerable lapse
of time, to raise her to the position that
was hers by right. Meanwhile she must be
governed, not as an inferior, on that point
he spoke very strongly indeed, but as a
minor not yet qualified to enter into possession
of her inheritance, and he exerted
himself, in lather a high-handed fashion, to
keep her in the proper path. The woman
of the future was to do exactly what she
pleased, but the woman of the present —
Barbara — was to do as she was told, and
not talk about what she did not understand.

By this arrangement Mr. Hayes was able
to rule his womankind, and to deny the
superiority of his masculine acquaintances.

It was precisely this question that came
up at dinner-time. Harding had no real
views on political matters ; he was simply
a Conservative by nature. He had none of
the daring energy which snatches chances
in periods of change ; his instinct was that
of self-defence, to bold rather than to gain ;
to gather even the rags of the past about
him, with the full consciousness that they
were but rags, rather than to throw himself
into the little of the present. It was true
that he was going to work for Mitclielhurst
and Barbara, but the double impulse had
been needed to conquer his shrinking pride-that
a man should be hustled by a mixed
and disorderly crowd was bad enough, but
that a woman should step down into it,
should demand work, should make speeches,
and push her way to the polling-booth, was

in Harding's eyes something hideously degrading
and indecent. As to the equality
of the sexes, that was rubbish. Man was
to rule, and woman to maintain an ideal of
purity and sweetness. Education, beyond
the simple old-fashioned limits, tended only
to unsex her.

He would have opposed Mr. Hayes's
theories at any time, but they cut him to
the quick just then, when he bad felt the
grace of womanhood, when a woman bad
passed into his life and transformed it.
The old man was airily disposing of the
destinies of the race in centuries to come,
the young man was fighting for his own
little future. He could not rule the world.
Let it roar and hurry as it would, but never
dare to touch his wife and home. What
did the man mean by uttering his hateful
doctrines in Barbara's hearing ? Her bright
eyes came and went between the speakers,
and Reynold longed to order her away,

VOL. I. s

to shut her up in some safe place apart,
where only he might approach her.

He need not have been anxious. There
was no touch of ambition in the girl's tender
feminine nature to respond to her uncle's
arguments. She did not want to vote, and
wondered why women should ever wish to
be doctors or — or — anything. Her eager
glances betokened uneasiness rather than
interest. Indeed the inferior being, scenting
danger, had tried to turn the conversation
before the terrible question of Woman's
Rights had been mentioned at all. She
had endeavoured to talk about a lawn-tennis
ground rather than the aspect of Wish
affairs. Harding did not know much about
lawn-tennis, but he was quite ready to talk
about it, just as he would have talked about
crewel-work, if she had seemed to wish it.
Mr. Hayes, however, pooh-poohed the little
attempt at peace.

What is the good of planning the

ground now ? " he said. " x4.nd who cares
for lawn-tennis ? "

I do," said the girl " It's much more
amusing than talking about Mr. Gladstone
and Mr. Parnell''

That's all you know about it," her
uncle retorted. " Now if you had been
educated — "

Oh yes, of course," she replied, with
desperate pertness. "You are always talking
about the woman of the future — I dare say
she will like to see people make themselves
hot and disagreeable, arguing about Ireland."
She made a droll little face of disgust.
Well, she may, but I don't ! "

Perhaps the woman of the future will
be hot and disagreeable too," Harding
suggested.

You mio^ht not find her agreeable," said

Mr. Hayes drily. '* She would be able to

expose the fallacy of your views pretty

clearly, I fancys

2

"Weil," Barbara struck in hurriedly,
amazed at her own boldness, " we g-et hot
enough over tennis sometimes, but nobody's
ever so cross over that, as men are when
they argue."

Good heavens ! " said Mr. Hayes. " To
think that women, who rightfully should
share man's most advanced attainments and
aspirations — " and off he went at a canter
over the beaten ground of many previous
discussions.

Barbara looked from him to young Harding.
His dark eyes were ominous, he was
only waiting, breathlessly, till Mr. Hayes
should be compelled to pause for breath.
I hope you don't mean to imply, sir — "
he began, and Barbara perceived that not
only had she failed to avert a collision, bat
that, by her thoughtless mention of the
woman of the future, she had introduced the
precise subject on which the two men were
most furiously at variance. Thenceforward

she merely glanced from one to the other
as the noisy battle raged, watching in dumb
suspense as one might watch the rising of
a tide. Mr. Hayes had been thoroughly
cross all day, and had not forgiven Reynold's
rudeness of the evening before. Under
cover of his argument he was saying all the
irritating things he could think of, while
Harding's harsher voice broke through his
shrill-toned talk with rough contradictions.

After a time Barbara was obliged to
leave them, and she went back to the
{lrawino;-room with a sin kin o[ heart. She
had been uneasy the night before, but that
was nothing to this. How earnestly she
wished Mr. Pryor back again! She was
pitiless, she would have flung the gentle
flaccid little clergyman between the angry
combatants without a moment's hesitation,
if she could only have brought him thereby
the force of her desire. Happily for Mr.
Pryor, however, he was safe in his study,

putting away the Amalekitess ant the bottom of
the drawer, till their turn should come again.

At last when Barbara was in despair at
the lateness of the hour, she sent one of
the maids to tell the gentlemen that coffee
was ready, and crept into the hall behind
her messenger to hear the result. At the
opening of the door there was a stormy
clamour, and then a sudden silence. It
was closed again, and the maid returned.
Master says. Miss, will you send it in ? "
The last hope was gone, she could do
nothing more but pour out the coffee, and
wish with all her heart it were an opiate.

She was as firmly convinced as Reynold
himself of the vast superiority of men,
but these intellectual exercises of theirs
upset her dreadfully. If only it had been
Mr. Scarlett ! He had a light laughing
way of holding her uncle at arm's length,
avowing himself a Conservative simply as a
matter of taste, and fighting for the old

fashions which Mr. Hayes denounced, because
he wanted something left that he
could make verses about. Barbara, as she
stood pensively on the rug, recalled one
occasion when Adrian Scarlett put forward
his plea. He was sitting on the sill of
the open window, with the evening sky
behind his head, and while he talked he
drew down a long, blossomed spray of
pale French honeysuckle. "Oh yes, I'm a
Conservative," he said ; " there are lots of
things I want to conserve — all the picturesqueness,
old streets, and signs, and manor-houses,
old customs, village greens, fairs,
thatched cottages, little curtsying maidens,
old servants, and men with scythes and
flails, instead of your new machines." She
remembered how Mr. Hayes had interrupted
him with a contemptuous inquiry whether
there was not as much poetry to be found
on one side as on the other. " Oh yes,"
he had assented, idly swinging his foot,

as fine on your side no doubt, or finer.
You have the Marseillaise style of thing to
quicken one's pulses. Yes, and I came
across a bit the other day, declaring —

' Que la Liberty sainte est la seule esse,
Que Von n' adore que devout! "

The words, uttered in the sudden fulness
of his clear, rounded tones, seemed to send
a great wave of impulse through the quiet
room. Barbara could recall the sharp " Well,
then ? " with which Mr. Hayes received it.

Ah, but not for me," young Scarlett
had answered. " You don't expect me to
write that kind of thing ? It isn't in me.
No, I want to rhyme about some little
picture in an old-fashioned setting — Pamela,
or Dorothy, or — or Ursula, walking between
clipped hedges, or looking at an old sundial,
or stopping by a basin rimmed with mossy
stone to feed the gold fish. Or dreaming
- —-and she must not be a Girton young

woman — I couldn't imagine a Girton young
woman's dreams ! "

And so the argument ended in laughter.
If only it could have been Adrian Scarlett
instead of Reynold Harding in the diningroom
that night ! Barbara's apprehensions
would all have vanished in a moment.
But Mr. Scarlett was gone, (" He mifjht
have said good-bye," thought Barbara,) and
the pleasant time was gone with him. The
window was closed and shuttered, and the
honeysuckle, a tangle of grey stalks, shivered
in the wind outside.

She tried to amuse herself with Good
Words again, but failed. Then she went to
the piano, but had no better success there.
She was listening with such strained attention,
that to her ears the music was only
distracting and importunate noise. As a
last resource she bethought her of a half-finished
novel which she had left in her
bed-room. She had not intended to go on

with it till Monday, but she ivoidd, and
she ran up-stairs with guilty eagerness to
fetch it.

She was coming back along the passage
with the book in her hand, when she heard
the opening and shutting of doors below,
and the quick fall of steps. In another
moment Reynold Harding came springing
up the wide stairs to where she stood.
There was a lamp at the head of the staircase,
and as he passed out of the dusk
into its light, she could see his angry eyes,
and she knew the veins which stood out
upon his forehead, looking as if the blood
in them were black.

He saw her just before he reached the
top, and stopped short. For a moment
neither spoke, then he drew a long breath,
and laid his hand upon the balustrade.

"Miss Strange," he said, 'Tin going
away."

Barbara hardly knew what she had expected

or feared, but this took her by
surprise.

Goings ? Not now ? " she exclaimed in
amazement.

"Not to-night — it is too kte. I mud
stop for the night. I can't help myself.
But the first thing tomorrow morning."

*'0h, why?"

*' I can't stay under the roof of a man
who has insulted me as your Uncle has
done. It is impossible that we should meet
again," said Reynolds. His speech seemed
to escape in fierce little jets of repressed
wrath. *' I'm not accustomed — I ought
never to have come here ! "

Oh ! " cried Barbara, in a tone of
pained reproach.

He was silent, looking fixedly at her.
The meaning of what he had said, and
the fatal meaning of what he had done,
en me upon him, arresting him in the midst
of his passion. All his fire seemed suddenly

to die down to grey ashes. What madness
had possessed him ?

They faced each other in the pale circle
of lamplight, which trembled a little on the
broad, white stairs. Reynolds, stricken and
dumb, grasped the balustrade with tightening
fino-hers. Barbara leaned against the white-panelled
wall. She was the first to speak.

Oh ! " she said in a low voice. " That
you should be driven out of Mitchelhurst ! "

"Don't!" cried he. "God! it was my
own fault ! "

What was it ? What did you quarrel
about ? "

"Do I know % " Reynold demanded.
Ask him ! Perhaps he can remember
some of the idiotic jangling. Why did
we begin ? Why did wee go on ? I don't
believe hell itself could be more wearisome.
I was sick to death of it, and yet something
seemed to goad me on — I couldn't give
in ! It was my infernal temper, I suppose."

'* Oil I am so sorry ! " Barbara whispered.

** He shouldn't have spoken to me as he
did, when I was his guest at his own
table," young Harding continued. " But
after all, he is an old man, T ought to
have remembered that. Well, it's too late ;
it's all over now ! "

But is it too late ? Can't anything be
done?"

He almost smiled at the feminine failure
to realise that the night's work was more
than a tiff which might be made up and
forgotten.

Kiss and make friends — eh ? " he said.
Will you run and fetch your uncle ? "

The leaden little jest was uttered so miserably
that Barbara only sighed in answer.

^'No," said the young man, "it's allover.
Even if I could apologise — and I
can't — I couldn't sit at his table again.
It wouldn't be possible. No, I must go ! "

And you are sorry you ever came ! "

Don't remind me of that ! I'm just as
sorry I came here as that I ever came
into the world at all."

The old clock in the dusky hall below
struck ten slow strokes.

This will be good-night and good-bye,"
said Harding. " I shall be gone before you
are down in the morning."

Even as he spoke he was thinking how
completely his bitter folly had exiled him
from her presence.

You are going home ? "

*' Home ? Well, yes, I suppose so. By
the way, I don't knows that I shall go
home tomorrow. I may have to stay
another day in Mitchelhurst. That depends
I shall see when the morning comes.
Your uncle's jurisdiction doesn't extend
beyond the grounds of the Place, I suppose.
I won't trespass, he may be very sure of
that, and I won't stay in the neighbourhood
any longer than I can help. Only,

you see, this is rather a sudden change
of plans."

I am so sorry," the girl repeated. " I
hate to think of your goii]g away like
this. I'm ashamed ! "

'* No ! no ! Tm rightly served, though you
needn't tell Mr. Hayes I said so. I was
fool enough to let my temper get the upper
hand, and I must pay the penalty. How
I could be such an inconceivable idiot — but-that's
neither here nor there. It was my owen
fault, and the less said about it the better."

Barbara shook her head.

No, it was my fault."

This time Harding really smiled, drearily
enough, but still it was a smile.

Yours ? " he said. " That never occurred
to me. How do you make it out ? "

Well," she said, looking down, and
tracing a joint of the stone with, the tip
of her little embroidered slipper, " it was
partly my fault, anyhow."

Tills "partly" seemed to point to sores
definite.

'* How do you mean ? " he asked, looking
curiously at lier.

"I knew he Alas cross," she said. "I
knew it this morning as soon as he came
down, and he generally gets worse and
worse all day. He isn't often out of temper
like that — only now and then. I dare say
he will be all right tomorrow, or perhaps
the day after."

"That's a little late for me!" said
Harding.

So you see it 2ca^ my fault. I ought
to have told you."

"Well, perhaps if you had, I might have
been a trifle more on mv o^uard. I don't
know, I'm sure. Yes, I wish you had
happened to warn me ! But you mustn't
reproach yourself. Miss Strange, it v\^asn't
your fault. You didn't know what 1 was,
you couldn't be expected to think of it."

"But I did think of it!" Barbara cried
remorsefully.

'you did?"

Yes, I was tliinkiiig of it all day. OJi
how I lois I had done it ! But I wasn't
sure you would like it — I didn't know. I
thought perhaps it night seem" — she
faltered — " might seem as if I thought
that yoti "

''I see ! '"' Reynold answered in his harshest
voice. " I needn't have told you just novv^
that I had a devil of a temper ! "

Barbara drew herself up against the wall
with her head thrown back, and gazed
blankly at inn.

Oh, don't be afraid ! " he said with a
lauQ:h. " I'm not oroino; to Itt you 1 "

Don't talk like that ! " she cried. " Oh !
there's uncle coming[ ! " and turning she
fled back to her own room. Harding heard
the steps below, and he also went off, not
quite so hurriedly, but with long strides,

VOL. I. T

and vanished into the shadows. The innocent
cause of this ahirni crossed the hall,
from the drawing-room to the study, banging
the doors after him, and the lamplight fell
on the deserted stairs.

Harding struck a light and flung himself
into a chair. Barbara's words and his own
mocking; laughter seemed still to be in tlK>.
air about him. The silence and loneliness
bewildered him, he could not realise thais
chance of speech had escaped him, and
that Barbara's entreaty must remain unanswered.
Her timid self-reproach had
stabbed him to the heart. That the poor
little girl should have trembled and been
silent, lest he should speak harshly, and
then that she should blame herself so
bitterly for her cowardice — it was a sudden
revelation to Reynold of the ugliness of
those black moods of his. One might have
pictured the evil power broken by the
shock of this discovery and leavings shame-stricken

patience in its place, or, at least,
one might have imagined strenuous resolutions
for the days to come. But Reynold's
very tenderness was mixed with wrath ; he
cursed the something in himself, yet not
himself, which had frightened Barbara, he
could not feel that he was answerable. That
she, of all the world, should judge him so,
filled his soul with a burning sense of wroncr.

How could you think it ? " he pleaded
with her in his thoughts, *' my dear, how
could you think it ? " And yet he did not
blame her. Ah God ! what a bitter, miserable
wretch he had been his whole life
through ! Why had no woman ever taught
him how to be gentle and good ? He
blamed neither Barbara nor himself, but a
cruel fate.

It was not till late, when he had collected
his things, and made all ready for his departure
in the morning, that he remembered
that he would not see her again, that he

T 2

absolutely could not so much as speak a
word to make amends. He must cross the
threshold of the old house as early as he
possibly could, his angry pride would not
allow him a moment's delay, and what
chance was there that she would be up and
dressed by then ? It was maddening to
think of the long slow hours which they
would pass uiider the same roof, each hour
gliding away with its many minutes. And
in one minute he could say so much, if
but one minute were granted him! "But
it won't be," he said sullenly, as he lay
down till the dawn should come, '' it isn't
likely." And he ground his teeth together
at the remembrance of the many minutes
spent in wrangling with Mr. Hayes, while
Barbara waited alone.

END OP VOL. I,

JILL. By E. A. Dilly. 2 vols. Globe 8vo.

125.

A very lively and spirited Btorj', written with a good deal of the
realism of such authors as Defoe, and describing the experiences of a
young lady. . . . Extremely entertaining and life like. It will be seen
from this that Miss Dilly has hit perfectly the tone of sincere
biography." — The Spectator.

A very original autobiographical narrative, so cynically frank and
so delightfully piquant, that it is quite a marvel. Read with understanding,
the narrative is not uninstructive ; it is certainly well worth
reading for entertainment only." — The iSt. James's Gazette.

A ROMAN SINGER. By F. Marion Crawford.

Author of "Mr. Isaacs," "Doctor Claudius." Crown
8vo. 6s.

We are not making use of conventionalities of criticism when we
call this a masterpiece of narrative. . In Mr. Crawford's skilful
hands it is unlike any other romance in English literature. . . . The
characters in the novel possess strong individuality, brought out simply
by the native stress of the story." — The 'Times.

Mr. Crawford's new book is in its way as much a success as his
pi-envious productions. . . . This charming novel." — Morning Post.

Mr. Crawford's new book is likely to be popular. . . . He is much
stronger with character and emotion, and in these matters ' A Roman
Singer ' leaves little to be desired. . . . The story is full of exciting
interest, is told with remarkable directness and vigour." — Tfi^ Athenaeum.

BY THE AUTHOR OF "JOHN HALIFAX, GENTLEMAN."

MISS TOMMY: A MEDIEVAL ROMANCE. By

the Author of " John Halifax, Gentleman." Crown 8vo.

6.<f.
The book has what the author would call a ' mediaeval ' charm of its
own, and reading it is like smelling at a china bowl of last year's roses.'
at. James's Gazette.

BY CHARLOTTE M. Yonge.

THE ARMOURER'S PRENTICES. By Charlotte

M. Y()X(;e. Author of " The Heir of Kedclylfe." 2 vols.
Crown Svo. 12.?.

*'.Vn excellent representation of London life in the beginning of the
sixteenth century. . . . The author has consulted all the best authorities
upon citizen life in the early Tudor days, and the result is in every
way .satisfactory." — Academy.

MR. WILLIAM BLACKS NEW NOVEL.

JUDITH SHAKESPEARE. By William Black,

Author of " Yolniuli'," "A Princess of Thule," "Madcap
Violet," &c. 3 Vols. Crown Svo. dls. 6d.

Macmillan And CO., LONDON.

LORD TENNYSON'S WORKS.
THE WORKS OF ALFRED, LORD TENNYSON.

A new Collected Edition in Seven Volumes. Extra fcaji.
8vo. 55. each Volume.

A limited number of copies are printed on best Hand-made Paper.
Orders for this Edition will be taken for Sets onbi, at the rate of 10.<t. 0'/.
per Volume. The Volumes will be published as follows : —

Vol. I. EARLY POEMS.

Vol. II. LUCRETIUS: and other

poems.
Vol. Ill, IDYLLS OF THE KING.
A^oL IV. THE PRINCESS : and
MAUD.

Vol. V. ENOCH ARDEN : and IN

Memoriam.
Vol. VL QUEEN MARY : and

HAROLD.
Vol. VII. BALLADS : and other

Poems.

LORD TENNYSON'S NEW BOOK
THE CUP: AND THE FALCON. By Alfred,

Lord Tennyson. Cap. 8vo. 5s.

Just Published. Croivn 8^•o. Price Is. M.
The Works of Alfred, Lord Tennyson, Poet Laureate. A
New Collected Edition. Corrected throughout by the Author.
With a New Portrait.

MR. THOMAS WOOLNER'S NEW POEM.
Silent: A Poem. By Thomas Woolner, Ea.,
Author of "My Beautiful Lady," "Pygmalion," &c.
Crown 8vo. 65.

THE COLLECTED

WORKS OF RALPH WALDO EMERSON.

Globe Svo. Price 55. each Volume.

1. Miscellanies. With an Introductory

Essay by John

MORLEY.

2. Essays.

3. Poems.

4. English Traits : and Representative

Men.

5. Conduct of Life: and Society

and Solitude.

6. letters: and Social Aims, &c.

Messrs. Macmillan and Co's edition of Emerson's works has the advantage
of an Introductory Essay by Mr. John Morley, which seems to
supply precisely the information and the comment which an English
reader needs." — Athenaeum.

ENGLISH POETS. Selections, with Critical Introductions
by Various Writers, and a General Introduction
by Matthew Arnold. Edited by T. H. Ward, Mea.
4 vols. New Edition. Crown Svo. 7^. 6d. each.
I. CHAUCER TO DONNE. I III. ADDISON TO BLAKE.

II. BEN JONSON TO DRYDEN. 1 lY. WORDSWORTH TO ROSSETTI.

In Crown Svo., cloth. Price 6s. each Volume.

BY CHARLES KINGSLEY.

Westward Ho ! I Hepatic. Alton Locke.

Hereward the Wake. 1 Two Years Ago. Yeast.

BY CHARLOTTE M. YONGE.

The Heir of Radcliffe.

Heartless.

Hopes and Fears.

The Daisy Chain.

Dynevor Terrace.

Pillars of the House. 2 vols.

Clever Woman of the Family.

The Young Stepmother.

The Trial.

BY

My Young Ascites.

The Three Brides.

The Caged Lion.

The Dove in the Eagle's Nest.

The Chaplet of Pearls.

Lady Hester : and the Dangers

Magnum Bonum. [Papers

Love and Life.

Unknown to History.

WILLIAM BLACK.

A Princess of Thule.
Madcap Violet. [Phaeton.

Strange Adventures of a
The Maid of Killeena : &c.
Poland.

Green Pastures and Piccadilly.

Macleod of Dare.

White Wings.

The Beautiful Wretch : &c.

'Shannon Bells.

Tom Brown at Oxford. | Tom Brown's School Days.

John Inelegant. By J. H. Storehouse.

BY THE AUTHOR OF "JOHN HALIFAX, GENTLEMAN."

The Gillies. Illustrated. I Agatha's Husband. Illustrated.

The Head of the Family. Illus. My Mother and I. Illustrated.

Olive. Illus. by G. Bowers. | Miss Tommy.

BY HENRY James.

The Madonna of the Future:

The American.
The Europeans.
Daisy Miller, &c.
Eoderick Hudson.

and other Tales.
Washington Square, &c.
The Portrait of a Lady.

MACMILLAN'S Two Shilling Novels.

BY THE AUTHOR OF "JOHN HALIFAX, GENTLEMAN.

Olive. Agatha's Husband. | The Head of the Family.
The Gillies. ~

Patty. By Mrs. ]\[acquoil>.

BY George FLEMING.
A Nile Novel.
Mirage.

The Head of Medusa.
Vestigia.

BY THE
Hogan. M.P.
Christy Carew.
The Hon. Miss Ferrara

Two Marriages.

15Y MRS. Oliphant.

The Curate in Charge.
A Son of the Soil.
Young Margrave.
A' Beleaguered City.
\UTIIUR OF "HOGAN, MP."

I Flitters, Tatters, and
I Counsellor, Weeds,
Other Sketches.

the
and

A NEW AMERICAN NOVEL.
Ramon. A Story. By Helen Jackson. Two

Vols. Globe 8vo. "128.

A NEW GIFT BOOK.
THE ENGLISH ILLUSTRATED MAGAZINE, 1884.

A Handsome Volume, consisting of 792 closely printed
pages, and containing 428 Woodcut Illustrations of various
sizes, bound in extra cloth, coloured edges, 7s. Qd.
The Volume contains a COMPLETE SERIES of DESCRIPTIVE
SKETCHES by the Author of " John Halifax, Gentleman," with Illustrations
by C. Napier Hey ; a complete HISTORICAL NOVEL, by Charlotte
M. Yonge, author of " The Heir of Radcliffe " ; and numerous Shut
Stories and Essays on Popular Subjects by well-known writers.

NEW BOOK BY MR. PHILIP GILBERT Hamilton.

HUMAN INTERCOURSE. A Series of Essays. By
Philip Gilbert Hamilton, Author of " Thoughts about
Art," '* Etchers and Etching," &c. Crown Svo. 86-. 6d.

CHARLES LAMB'S POEMS, PLAYS, AND Miscellaneous
ESSAYS. AVith Introduction and Notc-s
by Alfred Anger, Editor of "The Essays of Elia," &c.
Globe Svo. 6s.

NEW BOOKS FOE Children

MRS. Wordsworth's NEW BOOK.

CHRISTMAS TREE LAND. By Mrs. Wordsworth,

Author of "Carrots," "Cuckoo Clock," "Two Little Waifs. "
With Illustrations by Walter Crane. CroAvn Svo. 4s. 6d,

NEW STORY BOOKS FOR BOYS.

CHARLIE Astarte. A Tale of Adventure. By
Alfred St. Johnston, Author of "Camping among
Cannibals." With Illustrations by Hugh Thomson. Crown
Svo. 5s.

THE FRENCH PRISONERS. A Story for Boys.
By Edward Bert. Crown Svo. 4?. 6d.

BY the author of

"JOHN HALIFAX, GENTLEMAN."
ALICE Beaumont ; A Fairy TAv. By the Author
of "John Halifax, Gentleman." With Illustrations by
James Godwin. New Edition, revised by the Author.
Globe Svo. 4s. 6d.

1?

M ACM ILL AN AND CO., LONDON.

3 0112 056519009

OF THE
UN Diversity
or ILLINOIS



V. 2

in 2010 with funding from

University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign

http://www.archive.org/details/mitchelhurstplac02vele

VOL. Iii,

iobcl

MARGARET VELEY

author' OF "for percival"

Que voulez-vous ? Helps ! notre mere Nature,
Comme toute autre mere, a ses enfants gates,
Et pour les malleus elle est avare et dure ! "

m TWO VOLUMES

VOL. n.

MACMILLAN AND CO.



Tie RwM of Translation and Reproduction is Reserved.

V54/T^J

CONTENTS OF VOL. II.

CHAPTER I.

Page

NO LETTER . . . . 1

CHAPTER II.

ONE MORE HOLIDAY . . . 27

CHAPTER III.

MOONSHINE . . . . 44

CHAPTER IV.

^9

CHAPTER V.

love's messenger . . . 85

CHAPTER VI.

Vigil

A PERPLEXING REFLECTION . . 112

CHAPTER VII.

TWO Glances . . . . 144

CHAPTER VIII.

IX Hatfield LANE . . . 157

CHAPTER IX.

A VERSE OF AN OLD SONG . . . 185

CHAPTER X.

JANUARY, 1883 . . . . 232

CHAPTER I.

NO LETTER.

The Mitchelliiirst postman, coming upto
the Place in his daily round, found a
young man loitering to and fro within
view of the sate. The mornings was a
pleasant one. The roadside grass was grey
with dew, and glistening pearls and diamonds
were strung on the threads of gossamer,
tangled over bush and blade. The hollies
in the hedgerows were brave and bright,
and there were many-tinted leaves yet
clinging to the bramble-sprays. Sun and

VOL. II. B

wet together had turned the common road
to a shining, splendid way, up which the
old postman crept, a dull, little, toiling
figure, with a bao; over his shoulder, and
something white in his hand. The young
man timed his indolent stroll so that they
met each other on the weedy slope, which
led to the iron gate, with its solid pillars,
and white stone balls. There, with the
briefest possible nod by way of salutation,
he demanded his letters.

The old fellow knew him as the gentleman
who was staying with Mr. Hayes, and
touched his cap obsequiously. He had
carried his bag for more than thirty years,
and remembered old Squire Bothwell, and
Mr. John, and he fumbled with the letters
in his hand, half expecting a curse at his
slowness, and hardly knowing what name
he was to look for. The other stood with

his head high, showing a sharply-cut profile
as he turned a little, looking intently in
the direction of the Place. Through the
black bars shone a pale bright picture of
blue sky, and level turf, and the gnarled
and fantastic branches of the sunlit avenue.
There were yellow leaves on the straight
roadway, and shadows softly interlaced,
and at the end the white, silent house.

The postman finished his investigation,,
and announced in a hesitating tone, " No,
sir, no letter, sir. No letter at all, name of
Bothwell."

The young man turned upon him.
Harding, I said."

Yes, sir. No, sir, no letter name of
Harding."

Are you sure ? Give them to me."

He looked them over. There were letters
and papers for Mr. Hayes, one or two for

B 2

the servants, and one that had come from
Devonshire for Barbara. He gave them
back with a meditative frown, and turned
on his heel without a word. The postman
pushed the gate just sufficiently to permit
of a crab-like entrance to the grounds, and
plodded along the avenue, while the young
fellow walked definitely away towards the
village.

"The old boy doesn't write business
letters on Sunday, I dare say," he said
to himself. " No, I don't suppose he would.
Well, I shall hear tomorrow. As well tomorrow
as to-day, perhaps — better, perhaps.
And yet — and yet — Oh God ! to get to
work ! I have banished myself from her
presence, I have shut that gate against me
that old fool goes crawling up there with
his letters — any one in Mitchelhurst may
knock at that door, and I may not !

There's nothing left for me but to do the
task she set me, and by Heaven, I will !
I shall have the right to speak to her
then, at any rate !"

Barbara had intended to see Reynold
before he left that morning. She did not
know what she wanted to say, she was
uneasy at the thought of the interview,
but she could not endure that he should
be dismissed from the old house without
a parting word. While Harding was
moodily doubting whether he had not
alienated her for ever, she was wondering
what she could say or do to atone for the
wrong done to him by her timidity. She
did not fully understand the meaning of
the wrathful anguish of his last speech, but
she knew that she had pained him. She
planned a score of dialogues, she wearied
herself in vain endeavours to guess what

he would say, and tied, tired out, she
solved the question by sleeping till the
sunlight fell upon her face, and the banished
man was already beyond the gate.

She knew the truth the moment she
awoke. It was only to confirm her certainty
that she dressed hurriedly and went
out into the passage, to see the door
standing wide, and the vacant room. It
seemed but yesterday, and yet so long
ago, since she made it ready for the coming
guest, who had left it in anger. Barbara
sighed, and turned away. At the head of
the stairs she recalled the slim, dark figure
that had stood there so few hours before,
fixing his angry eyes upon her, and grasping
the balustrade with long fingers as he
spoke. The very ticking of the old clock
reminded her of their talk together the
morning after he came, and seemed to

say '^ gone ! gone I gone ! gone ! " as she
went by.

Her uncle came clown a few minutes
later, greeted her shortly, and glanced at
the table. It was laid for two. " T suppose
there is nothing to wait for ? " he said.

"Nothing," said Barbara, and she rang
the bell.

He unfolded a newspaper and spoke from
behind it. " You know that young fellow
is gone ? "

'' Yes."

Time he did go ! I wish he had never
come ! Did you say good-bye to him ? "

No. He went before I was down."

Mr. Hayes uttered a little sound expressive
of satisfaction, and the iii perceived
that she had accidentally led him to suppose
that she had had no talk with Harding
since the quarrel. She did not speak.

The maid came into the room with the
urn, and Mr. Hayes turned to her. *' What
man was that I saw in the hall just
now ? "

He came for the gentleman's portmanteau,
sir. He was to take it to Mrs.
Simon ds."

He started, but controlled himself. " Mrs.
Simmonds ? "

Yes, sir, Mrs. Simmonds at the shop."

Mr. Hayes was silent only till the door
was closed behind her. Then, *^ He has
done that to spite me ! " he said furiously.
'' Serves me right for trying to be civil to
one of these confounded Bothwell ! They
have the devil's own temper, every one of
them, and if they can do you a bad turn,
they will ! "

Barbara said nothing, but made tea rather
drearily.

Confound him ! " Mr. Hayes began
afresh. "Now I suppose the whole place
will be cackling about this ! He deserves
to be kicked out of the parish, and J
should like to do it ! I wish to heaven,
Barbara, you wouldn't pick young men
out of the ditches in this fashion ! You
see what comes of it ! "

Barbara, appealed to in this direct and
reasonable manner, plucked up her spirit,
and replied, rather loftily, that she would
certainly remember in future. She further
remarked that the fish was getting cold.

Mr. Hayes threw down the paper, and
took his place. There was silence for a
minute or two, and then he began again.

"There isn't a soul in Mitchelhurst that
doesn't know he was staying here. What
do you suppose they will say when they
find him starting off at a moment's notice,

and taking a lodging in the village, not a
stone's throw from my gate ? "

Barbara privately thought that, as Mr.
Harding had betaken himself to the further
end of Mitchelhurst, her uncle's talent for
throwing stones must be remarkable. She
did not suggest this, however, and when
he repeated his question, "What do you
suppose they will say ? " she only replied
that she did not know, she was sure.

Don't you ? " said he, with withering
scorn, "Well, I do." It was true enough.
He could guess pretty well what the gossips
would say, and the sting of it was that their
version would not differ very much from the
actual fact.

Barbara looked down, and finished her
breakfast without a word. She knew that
silence was the safest course she could
adopt, since it gave him no chance of

turning this anger on her, but she also
knew that it irritated him dreadfully.
That, however, she did not mind. Barbara
herself was rather cross that morning. She
had meant to be up early, and she had slept
liter than usual ; she was vexed and disappointed,
and she had been worried by the
jarring tempers of the last two days. She
kept her head bent, and her lips closed,
while j\Ir. Hayes drank his second cup
of tea with a muttered accompaniment of
abuse.

Look here," he said suddenly, getting
up, and going to the fire, " I don't know
how long that fellow means to stay in
Mitchelhurst, but, till he leaves, you don't
go beyond the gate. I don't suppose you
would wish to do so " — he paused, but she
was apparently absorbed in the consideration
of a little ring on her finger — " I

should hope you have proper feeling enough
not to wish to do so " — this appeal was also
received in a strictly neutral manner — " butin
any case you have my express command
to the contrary."

Very well," said Barbara, with a little
affectation of being rather weary of the
whole subject.

*' I do not choose that you should be
exposed to insults' Mr. Hayes continued.

Very well," said Barbara again. " I
can stay in if you like, though I don't
think Mr. Harding would insult me."

I beg your pardon, my clear, but you
are not qualified to judge in this matter.
If you had heard Mr. Harding's conversation
last night you might not be quite so sure
what he would or would not do. It is my
duty to protect you from an unpleasant
possibility, and you will oblige me by not

going beyond — or rather by not going near
the gate."

Barbara, tired of saying " Very well,"
said " All right."

"Wednesday is the night of Pryor's
entertainment at the schools. I shall be
sorry to disappoint him, but I certainly
shall not o;o unless Mr. Hardino^ has left
the place. He has shown such a deplorable
want of taste and proper feeling that he
would probably take that opportunity of
thrusting himself upon us."

Mr. Hayes paused once more, but the
girl did not seem inclined either to defend
or to denounce their late guest. She
changed her position listlessly, and gazed
out of the window.

*' A gentleman would not, but that proves
nothing with regard to Mr. Harding. You
are very silent this morning, Barbara."

I have a headache," she said, " I'm
tired," and to her great relief, Mr. Hayes,
after walking two or three times up and
down the room, went off to his study.

The poor little man was not happy. He
sincerely regretted the quarrel of the evening
before, which had come upon him, as
upon Reynold, unawares. He was accustomed
to the society of a few neighbours,
dio understood him, and said behind his
back, " Oh, you must not mind what Hayes
says ! " or " I met Hayes yesterday — a little
bit more cracked than usual!" and took all
his sallies good-humouredly, with argument,
perhaps, or loud-voiced denial at the time,
but nothing in the way of consequences.
Thunder might roll, but no bolt fell, and
the sky was as clear as usual at the next
meeting. Mr. Hayes had unconsciously
fallen into the habit of talking without any

sense of responsibility. On this occasion
a variety of circumstances had combined
to irritate him, and his personal dislike of
Reynold Harding had given a touch of acrid
malice to his attack, but he meant no more
than to have the pleasure of contradicting,
and, if possible, silencing his companion.
The game was played more roughly than
usual, but Mr. Hayes never realised that
his adversary was angrily in earnest till it
was too late. Excitement had mastered
him, there was an interchange of speeches,
swift and fierce as blows, and then he saw
Kate Eoth well's son, standing before him,
trembling with fury, and hoarsely declaring
that he would leave the house at once. He
had only to close his eyes to see him again,
the tall young: figure leaning forward into
the light, with his clenched hands resting
on the polished table, amid the disarray of

silver and glasses, his dark brows drawn
down, and his angry eyes aglow. Conciliation
was impossible on either side,
though the shock of definite rupture so far
sobered them that Harding's departure was
deferred to the morning. But, " I will never
break bread under your roof again ! " the
young man had said, with a glance round
the room, and a curious significance of tone.
Then he turned away to encounter Barbara
upon the stairs.

To Harding, matters had seemed at their
worst during the black hours of silence, and
the morning brought something of comfort.
If there is but a possibility that work may
help us in our troubles, the dullest day is
better than the night. But to Mr. Hayes
the daylight came drearily, showing the
folly of a business which nothing could
mend. For more than a quarter of a

century he had plumed himself on his
gratitude to Kate Bothwell for her kindness
to his dead love, and had imagined
that he only lacked an opportunity to serve
her. And this graceful sentiment, being
put to the test, had not prevented him
from quarrelling with her son, and turning
the young fellow out of doors. Yes, he,
Herbert Hayes, had actually driven Kate's
boy from Mitchelhurst Place ! and what
made it worse, if anything could make it
worse, was the revelation of the utter
impotence of that cherished gratitude. He
regretted what he had done, but he must
abide by it. Apologise to Harding ? — he
would die first ! Own to one of the
Bothwell that he had been in the wronor?
the mere thought, crossing his mind, ashe
tied his cravat that morning, very nearly

choked him. Never — never ! Not if it were
VOL. n. c

Kate herself ! But he reddened to the roots
of his white hair at the thought of the
gossip and laughter which would follow the
unseemly squabble.

He would be unfairly judged. He said
so over and over again, and in a certain
sense it was true, for he had never intended
to quarrel with his guest. But he could not
prove even the innocence he felt. He remembered
two or three bitter fragments of
their wrangling which would condemn him
if repeated. Yet he knew he had not meant
them as his judges would take them. " Well,
but," some practical neighbour would say, " if
you say such things, what do you expect ? "
That was just it — he had expected nothing,
though nobody would believe it, and all at
once this catastrophe had come upon him.

So he went down to breakfast, sincerely
troubled and repentant, and consequently

in a very unpleasant mood. Repentance
seldom makes a man an agreeable companion,
and when it seizes the head of the
house the subordinate members naturally
share his discomfort. The moment he set
foot in the breakfast-room he was met by
the news of Harding's stay in the village,
and his anger blazed up again, though,
through it all, he had an uncomfortable
consciousness that the young man had a
right to stay in Mitchelhurst if he pleased.
If he could only have convinced himself
that Reynold was utterly in the wrong, he
would have forgiven him and been happy.
But it is almost impossible to forgive a
man who is somewhat in the wrong, yet
less so than oneself.

Harding had been guided by Barbara in
his search for a lodging. When they were
standing together at the edge of the ditch,

C 2

she had reminded her uncle that Mrs.
Simmonds had let her rooms to a man
Who came surveying. The fact was so
unprecedented that the good woman might
be pardoned for imagining herself an
authority on what gentlemen liked, and
what gentlemen expected, on the strength
of that one experience. Harding confirmed
her in her innocent belief by agreeing to
everything she proposed. Within half an
hour of his arrival he was sitting down to
what the surveyor always took for breakfast,
and the surveyor's favourite dinner
was cooking for him as he walked fast and
far on the first road that presented itself.
He almost reached Littlemere before he
turned, and had to scramble over a hedge,
to avoid what might have been an awkward
meeting with Mr. Masters. The little squire
went by unsuspectingly, though Reynolds,

finding himself face to face with a bull in
the meadow, nearly jumped back upon
him. Happily however the bull took time
to consider, and before he had made up his
mind whether he liked his visitor or not,
the coast was clear, and the young man
sprang down into the road, and set off on
his way back to Mitchelhurst, where he
arrived just as Mrs. Simmonds was beginning
to look out for him. The surveyor
had ordered rather an early dinner.

Hardin 2: had done his best to check any
gossip about his affairs, but his landlady
was burning with curiosity. She made a
remark about Mr. Hayes as she set the dish
on the table, and her lodger replied that it
certainly was a queer fancy for a lonely man
to live in that great house, and might he
trouble Mrs. Simmonds for a fork ? She
supplied the omission with many apologies,

and said that ]mr. Hayes was not very
popular in the neighbourhood, she believed.

Isn't hew said Keynold, slicing away.
Well, all I can say is that I found him a
very hospitable old gentleman. He had
never seen me before, and he invited me
to stay there for three days. Wouldn't
take any denial."

Well, to be sure, sir, we can but speak
as we find," said Mrs. Simmonds, handing
the potatoes. " Only, you see, there are
some of us who remember the old family
you'll excuse me, sir, but it's wonderful
how you favour Mr. John — and it's not the
same, sir, having a stranger there. It's 92ot
like old times."

"No," said Reynold with a jarring little
laugh. " I should think it was a good
deal better. Thank you, Mrs. Simmonds,
I have all I want."

And with a nod, which was exactly Mr.
Johns, he dismissed the old lady.

She was disconcerted ; she did not know
what to make of this young man with the
Bothwell features, who was not gratified by
a respectful allusion to the family. " A
good deal better ! " Well, of course, the
Eothwells held themselves very high, and
thought other people were just the dirt
under their feet. There was no pleasing
them with anything you sent in, nothing
was good enough, and they expected you
to stand curtseying and curtseying for their
custom, and to wait for your money till all
the profit was gone. Mr. Hayes paid as soon
as the bill was sent in, and Miss Strange
was a pleasant-spoken young lady. " A
good deal better " — well, no doubt it was.

And yet the good woman had not been
insincere when she spoke of the old times

with a regretful accent in her voice. She
remembered John Bothwell's father as a
middle-aged gentleman, alert and strong.
Those old times were the times when she
was a rosy-cheeked girl, whom Simmonds
came courting: at her father the wheelwright's,
and not Simmonds only, for she
might have done better if she had chosen.
It was in the good old times that they setup
their little shop, and that their little girl
was born who had been in the churchyard
three-and-twenty years come Christmas.
There were no times now like those before
Mitchelhurst Place was sold, when she
didn't know what rheumatism was, and
there were none of your new-fangled Board
Schools, to teach children to think little of
their elders. It was not to be supposed
that sirs. Simmonds thought that her stiff
old joints would become flexible again if

the Rotliwells came back to the manor-house,
but she certainly felt that in their
reign the world went its way with fewer
obstructions and less weariness, and was
more brightly visible without the aid of
spectacles. She had an impression, too,
that the weather was better.

She straightened herself laboriously after
taking the apple-pie from the oven, and
was horrified to find the crust a little
caught on one side. Having to explain
how this had occurred when she carried it
in, she had no opportunity of continuing
the previous conversation, and the moment
dinner was over Keynold was out again.
The fact was that Mrs. Simmonds's parlour,
which was small and low, and had been
carefully shut up for many months, was
not very attractive to the young man, who
was fresh from the faded stateliness of the

old Place. Besides, he was anxious to
keep down importunate thoughts by sheer
weariness, if in no other way.

He went that afternoon to the Hall,
the dreary old farmhouse which Barbara
had pointed out as the Roth wells' earlier
home, and walked in the sodden pastures
where she picked her cowslips in the spring.
He looked more kindly at the old house, in
spite of the ignoble disorder of its surroundings,
but he lingered longest at the gate
where she had shown him Mitchelhurst,
spread out before him like the Promised
Land. He studied it all in the fading
light, and then, with a farewell glance at
the white far-off front of the Place, he
went down into the village, tired enough
to drop asleep over the fire after tea.

"To-morrow, the letter," was his last
thought as he lay down.

CHAPTER IT.

ONE MORE HOLIDAY.

The inevitable morning came, but the
letter did not.

Harding was first incredulous, then when
a light flashed upon him, he was at once
amused and indignant.

So ! I kept you waiting till the latest
day, and you are returning the compliment.
I am given to understand that you can take
your time as well as I ? That's fair enough,
no doubt, only it seems rather a small sort
of revenge, and, as things have turned out,
it's a nuisance. What is to be done now ?
Shall I wait another day for my instructions,

or shall I go up to town at once ? I told
him to write here, but, after all, what is
there to say, except, ' Be at the office on
such a day ? ' Shall I go, or stay ? "

He tossed up, not ill-pleased to decide
his uncle's affairs so airily. The coin
decreed that he should stay.

It's just as well," he said to himself.
"I don't want to seem impatient if he isn't."

But the additional day of idleness proved
very burdensome. He fancied that the
Mitchelhurst gossips watched his every
movement ; he felt himself in a false
position ; he shut himself up in his little
sitting-room and asked for books. Mrs.
Simmonds brought him all she had, but
she looked upon reading as a penitential
occupation for Sundays, and periods of
affliction, and the volumes were well suited
for the purpose. Harding thrust them

aside. The local paper was nearly a week
old, but he read every word of it.

There'll be a new one tomorrow, sir,"
said his landlady, delighted to see that he
enjoyed it so much.

Thank you, Mrs. Simmonds, but I shall
be far enough away by this time to-morrow''
the young man replied.

He spent a considerable part of the afternoon
lying on the horse-hair couch, and
staring at the ceilings. A ceiling; is not, asa
rule, very interesting to study, and the
only thing that could be said for this one
was that it was conveniently near. Reynolds
could examine every smoke-stain at his ease,
and every fly that chanced to stroll across
his range of vision. The first he noticed
made him think of Barbara and Joppa, but
the later comers were simply wearisome.
There is a distressing want of individuality

about flies. Even when one buzzed about
his head, with a fixed determination to
wander awhile upon his forehead, he had
not an idea which fly it was. It seemed to
him, as he lay there, with his arm thrown
up for a pillow, that flies in general were
just one instrument of torture of, say, a
billion-fly power. The afternoon sunshine
and the smouldering fire had wakened more
than he could reckon in the little parlour.

He would not have cared to confess how
much he was troubled by his uncle's silence.
He had expected to be met rather more
than half-way, instead of which it seemed
that he was to be taught to know his place.
The idea was intolerable, and it haunted
him.

When Mrs. Simmonds came in with a
tray (the surveyor always took his tea
between five and six), she made a remark

or two about things in general, which
Reynold, turning his lustreless eyes upon
her, endeavoured to receive with a decent
show of interest. When she brought the
tea-pot, she told him that Mr. Hayes had
sent to the Roth well Arms for a carriage
early that afternoon. " Indeed ! " said
Reynold, this time endeavouring to conceal
the interest he felt.

What were they going to do ? " he
wondered, as he propped his head on his
hand and sipped his tea. Was the old man
taking Barbara away ? What did it mean ?

It meant simply that Mr. Hayes had
wearied of his self-imposed seclusion, and
had announced to his niece that he should
drive over to Littlemere and see Masters.
He added that he might not return to
dinner, and that she was not to wait for
him. While Reynold lay on the sofa the

carriage had gone by, Avitli the little man
sitting in it, his head rather more bowed
than usual, planning how he would explain
the quarrel to his friend. " Masters will
understand — he knows how the fellow
behaved the night before," said Mr. Hayes
to himself a score of times. But every time
he said it he felt a little less certain that
Masters would understand exactly as he
wished.

Mrs. Simmonds, returning after a considerable
interval, told her lodger that the wind
was getting up, and she thought there
was going to be a change in the weather.
She mostly knew, as she informed him,
on account of her rheumatism. Reynold
opened the door for her and her tray, and
then went to the window.

The moon had risen, the low roofs and
gaunt poplars of Mitchelhurst were black

in its light, and wild wreaths of cloud were
tossed across the sky. It was a sky that
seemed to mean something, to have a mood
and expression of its own. Reynolds watched
it for a few minutes, till its vastness made
the little box of a room, where even the
flies had fallen asleep again, insupportably
small. He took his hat and went out.

He did not care which way he went, if
only it were not in the direction of the
Place. Mr. Hayes, when he charged
Barbara not to go near the gate, had a
sort of fancy that the young fellow might
walk defiantly on the very edge of the
forbidden ground, and peer through the
bars with a white, spiteful face. The girl
acquiesced indifferently. She might not
altogether understand Eevnold Harding,
but she knew most certainly that he
would never approach them.

VOL. II. D

It chanced that evening that he took a
narrow lane which led out of the Littlemere
road. It proved to be a rugged but very-gradual
ascent. Presently it led him
through a gate, and, still gently rising,
became a mere cart track across open
fields, where the wind came in sudden,
hurrying gusts over the grey slopes, and
brought undefinable suggestions of hopelessness
and solitude. Teaching the highest
point the wayfarer passed through another
gate, and pursued a level road, bordered
by spaces of unenclosed grass, sometimes
widening almost to a common, sometimes
shrinking to a mere strip between
the white way and the low hedgerows.
Reynolds pushed forward, gazing at the
sky. The clouds, torn and driven by the
wind, fled wildly overhead, like shattered
squadrons, and yet rolled up in new unconquered

masses, as if from a gloomy host
encamped on the horizon. The moon, slowly
climbing the heavens, fought her way as a
swimmer fights the waves. Now she would
show a pale face through the blanched
ripples of a misty sea, then would be overpowered
by a black deluge of cloud, which
darkened earth and sky, and swept over
her sunken and scarcely suspected presence.
And then suddenly she would emerge, pearl-white
and pure, from the midst of the fierce
confusion, rising unopposed over a gulf of
shadowy blue. Or yet again she would
glance mockingly from behind a rent veil
of gossamer at the lonely little traveller who
toiled so far below, under the vast arch of
the heavens, and who raised his pre-occupied
eyes to her, from the world of dream and
mystery which he carried with him under
the little arch of his skull. To Harding just

D 2

tliCii that inner world seemed more real,
stranger, and less trodden, than did the
world without. The billows of cloud, vast
and formless and dark, rolling on hio-h,
were no more than symbols of the undefined
forebodings which gathered blackly in his
soul and changed with every thought. The
wild and restless melancholy of the evening
harmonised so marvellously with his temper,
that he could almost have forgotten its outward
reality, had it not been for the wind
which blew freshly in his face. It did not
seem possible that, when hereafter he came
back to Mitchelhurst, he could walk this
way whenever he pleased.

Yet he noted landmarks now and then.
Here was a thin row of firs, slim and black,
then a bare stretch of road where he stepped
quickly, his shadow at his side for company,
and then a sturdy oak, with all its brown

leaves astir in a gust, which whispered
hurriedly as he went by. Somewhat further
yet the way grew narrow, dipping down
into a little hollow, where a runnel of clearwater
crossed it, glancing over the pebbly
earth. There was a plank at one side, and
Reynolds, stepping on it, smelt the water-mint
which clustered at its edge. It seemed,
somehow, as if the night, which uttered his
desolate thoughts in the wind and the flying
clouds, breathed them in that perfume.

Reynolds was one of those who take little
interest, even as children, in stories of
goblins and witches, yet who sympathise
with the mood which gave such legends
birth, something which in its unshapen
darkness and mystery is more impressive
than the strangest vision. Why this inexplicable
mood, with its world-wide suggestiveness,
should have come upon him

that evening, transforming the bit of upland
country through which he walked to a grey
and ghostly region, he could not tell. He
tried to reason with his shadowy presentiments.
He was going to his work the next
day ; that very evening he was going back
to the little parlour over the shop ; Mrs.
Simmonds would have his supper ready, old
Simmonds would be smoking bad tobacco in
the back room ; his walk would lead to
nothing else. Yet he could not convince
himself. He could call up his uncle and
Mrs. Simmonds before his eyes, but they
were grotesque apparitions in his cloudland.
What was it that he was awaiting ? Why
did he feel as if the crisis of his fate were
come, as if it would be upon him before
the night were over ? " Are we to see it
out together?" he said, looking up at the
moon.

He hardly knew whether he had uttered
the question aloud or not, and he stopped
short. There was a pool close by, roughly
fenced from the road, and fringed with
ragged bushes on the further side. He sat
down on the rail. " To-morrow," he said
to himself, " nothing can happen before tomorrow."
He took old Mr. Harding's letter
from his pocket, and tried to read it in
the moonlight, but a sudden gust caught
it, and almost tore it out of his hand. He
crushed the flapping paper together, put it
back, and sat gazing at the black pool at
his side, idly wondering whether it were
deep enough to drown a man. It looked
deep, he thought — as deep as the heavens,
and a troubled gleam of moonlight rested
on it every now and then. Harding knew
well that he should never touch his life, yet
he played that night with the fancy that

in one of the darkened moments when the
moon was hidden, it would not be difficult
to drop below that shadowy surface, and
effectually end the business, so that when
the bright france rested there aorain it
should read nothing. He fancied the moonbeams
travelling swiftly along the road, and
not finding him, while he lay hidden under
the water, with a clump of osiers bending
and quivering above him in the windy
night. "Why couldn't I do it?" he asked
himself. " Why do I go on to meet my
ill-luck ? It is coming, I know, to play me
some devil's trick — I feel it in the air, just
as Mrs. Simmonds feels a change of the
weather in her poor bones."

So, idly jesting, he stooped and tossed a
pebble into the brimming blackness, and ashe
did so he pictured to himself the groping
hands, and the ugly strangling fight with

death which the moon might chance to see,
if it tore its veil aside too quickly. And,
besides, there was the grim uncertainty of
it. IVhat was under that dusky surface ?
"That's as you please to put it, I suppose,"
said Reynold, getting to his feet. " Eternity,
or just a little black mud. And, by Jove,
that railing's rather shaky ! " He turned
his face towards Mitchelhurst, laughing at
his own folly. "Well, I'll take tomorrow
and its chance of fortune — presentiments
and all ? "

The wind, which had fought against him
as he came, seemed now so impatient to
get him safely back to Mrs. Simmonds, that
it fairly took him by the shoulders and
hurried him along, as if it knew that it
was between nine and ten, and that the
good lady was addicted to early hours.
And perhaps Reynold himself was slightly

ashamed of his moonlit vagary, and not
alton-ether unwilling: to seek the shelter of
that little roof. He ran and walked down
the field path, and saw the glimmering lights
of the village below, small sparks of friendly
welcome in the great night. When, finally,
he turned into the Littlemere road, and was
somewhat sheltered from the wind, he meta
couple of youths, fresh from the " Roth-well
Arms," harmonious in their desire to
sino; together, hut not in the result of their
efforts. About a hundred yards further he
encountered the Mitchelhurst policeman.
The road was quite populous and homely.
He had outstripped his forebodings in his
hurried race, and the question whether his
landlady would think that he was very late
for supper was uppermost in his mind. He
opened the door, which was never fastened
till Simmonds bolted it at nio-ht, and drew

a breath which gave him a comprehensive
idea of the variety of goods they kept in
stock. With the chilly sweetness of the
night air still upon him, the young man
strode into his room, and confronted Barbara
Strange, who rose from the sofa to meet
him.

All his misgivings overtook him in a
moment.

CHAPTER III.

MOONSHINE.

"Miss Strange!" he exclaimed, amazed.

Oh ! " cried Barbara, " I thought you
would never come ! '*

You wanted me ! You have been wait

gf or me ! If I had known " And

while he spoke the strangest thoughts and
possibilities shaped themselves in his brain,
and died away again. If her presence called
them up it also killed them. He saw that
she was frightened. Her lip quivered, and
her eyes looked larger and a little vague.
She was orazino^ at him through a brig-ht
film of unshed tears.

'* If I had known," he repeated confusedly,
as he stepped forward. " What is it ? "

They had not shaken hands in his first
astonishment, and now she still looked up
at him, and his hand dropped unheeded.

I don't know what you will say to me,"
she began. '* I am so very, very sorry — I
felt I must come myself and ask you to
forgive me."

I forgive you ! Why," said Keynold,
his eyes shining, " it is you who should
forgive ! "

Barbara started, and the hot tears dropped,
and slid over her burning blushes. She
turned away, but too late to hide them.
"What do you mean?" she said. "You
don't know. I haven't told you yet. What
do you suppose I have come for like this ?
What do you mean ? "

He drew back as if he were stunir.

Well, what is it then ? "

She threw two letters on the table.

Letters ? You came with those ? Upon
my word Miss Strange, it's very kind -'

He stopped short, looking from the letters
to her and back again. Barbara shrank
away, drawing herself together, but she
resolutely fixed her eyes upon his face.

Why — why — " stammered Harding,
turning as pale as death, and then he
dropped into a chair and began to
laugh.

The letter that lay nearest to him was
dii-acted " R. Harding, Esq." in his own
handwriting.

It is my fault ! " cried Barbara. '' Tell
me what I have done ! It is something:
that matters very much ! I knew it — I felt
it was, the moment I found them. I came
with them directly— I was so afraid you

might have gone away. Don't laugh ! Oh
I know it matters dreadfully ! "

Harding had had time to master himself.

On the contrary," he said, " it doesn't
matter at all."

He threw himself back in his chair,
tilting it carelessly, and looking at Barbara.

Doesn't it ? " said the girl incredulously.
Doesn't it really ? "

Not a bit ; why should it ? How did it
happen ? "

Since everything was lost, he might as
well hear her talk.

It was my fault," Barbara repeated, still
doubtfully. " I told you to put them on
the hall table — it was the day we had those
people to dinner."

Keynold nodded.

*' I had my apron on, I was busy. I
went out to speak to the gardener, and I

thought I would give them to the boy, so
I put them in my apron pocket, yours and
one of mine, and I never thought of them
again."

He had balanced his chair very dexterously,
and was still looking at her.

*' And they have been in that little apron
pocket of yours ever since ! Dear me, Miss
Strange, I hope yours wasn't an important
letter. I'm sorry for your correspondent."

*' No, mine didn't matter. Mr. Harding,
tell me about yours — tell me the truth !
All the time I have been waiting; here —
and I thought you never ivoidd come ! — I
have felt more and more sure that yours
did matter. I can't tell why, but I am
certain. Let me know the worst, please.
Tell me what I have done ! "

**I don't know why you are so determined
that you must have done something

dreadful. I assure you Fm not in the habit
of writing such terribly important letters
as you seem to suppose."

Keynold, as he spoke, had been thinking
how strange it was that people should
excite themselves about their plans for the
future. What child's play and chance it
all was ! You dreamed, and schemed, and
worked it all out, you made allowance for
everything except what was really going to
happen, and suddenly it was all over, and
there was nothing more to be said or done.
Here, for instance, was Mitchelhurst Place
blown away like a bubble I Possibly, somewhere,
there miofht be found something in
the shape of a house, a certain quantity
of stone and timber, set on the face of the
earth and called by that name, but had
Reynolds been opposite the gate at that
moment he would have looked at it with

VOL. II. E

indifference. His Mitclielhurst Place, the
one he had thought about so much, the
one he meant to give the best years of
his life to win, was, it now appeared, a
house of cards. Barbara and he had been
mightily interested in setting it up, and
really it had been a very lofty and presentable
edifice, till Barbara forgot to put
a letter in the post, and so it all tumbled
down in a minute. It was a pity, certainly.

Tell me the truth," said the girl's voice
again, with its soft accent of entreaty.

But you won't believe me ! I tell
you again, Miss Strange, it doesn't matter
a bit. And again, if you like ! And
again ! "

She looked fixedly at him, and stretched
out her hand towards the letters.

*every well," she said. "Shall I post
these for you as I go back ? "

He brought down his tilted chair with
sudden emphasis, and sprang up.

'' No ! "

He had lost all, but at least his pride was
safe. His mother and old Mr. Harding
need nevviir learn how nearly they had had
their way. He knew what deadly offence
he had given by the silence which would
be taken for a calculated insult, but he
would a thousand times rather face their
anger than appeal to their pity with a
lame story of a letter delayed. Besides,
it was too late. Old Harding was a man
of his word, the place was filled up, the
chance was gone.

No ! " cried Reynold.

*' There ! " the girl exclaimed. " I knew
it ! I saw your face when you looked at the
letters first — and now again ! You do not
choose to tell me what I have done. Very

E 2

UNIVERSITY OF
Illinois LIBRARY

well, why don't you say so at once ? You
treat me as if I were a baby ! "

Her cheeks were flushed, her mouth
quivered, she looked childishly ready to
cry.

You do not choose to tell me what I
have done." No, why should he ? The one
thing he saw clearly was that the mischief
was irreparable ; the less said about it,
therefore, the better. There was but one
avenue to fortune and love for him, and it
was closed before his eyes by this night's
revelation. Some men would have set to
work at once to make another, but not
Reynold Harding. He simply accepted the
decree of Fate, and felt that he had half
expected it all the time. And after all,
what had Barbara done ? Most likely he
would have failed, even if his letter had
been duly sent. His ill-luck would have

dogged him on his way to wealth. Perhaps
it was more merciful, when, with one sharp
stroke, it spared him the long struggle.
What right had he to find fault with
Barbara, the timid messenger of misfortune ?
Was he to answer her brutally — " You have
ruined me ! " — and throw the weight of his
future on the little throbbing heart which
had never been so burdened before ? The
very idea was absurd. It was absurd to
look back, absurd to murmur ; the dream
of Mitchelhurst was over and done with,
it was not worth a withered leaf. Let it
lie where it had fallen.

"Miss Strange," he said, *'I assure you
you are making too much of this accident.
Regrets are wasted on it. Mine was a business
letter, it is true, but the chances are
that it would have come to nothing. I
hesitated a long: while before I wrote it, and

I am not sure it was not a mistake. Think
no more about it."

Will you write again ? " she persisted.

Oh, we shall see. I'm going up to
town tomorrow — I can settle everything
then. I don't think there will be any
occasion to write."

He realised his utter severance from all
his hopes when he heard himself say that
he was going back to town. The girl who
stood questioning him had kindled a strange
brightness in his life, a light which revealed
her own ripe-lipped, radiant face, and then
with capricious breath had blown it out
again, and left him in darkness and alone.
He had lost her, and yet, by a fantastic
contradiction, she had never been half so
near to him as at that moment. " You
are deceiving me ! " she said, sorrowfully.
'^ Don't think I don't know it! Oh, if

there were anything I could do to make
amends ! " And in her pain and pity, and
her certainty that in some unspoken way
she had wronged him-more than she could
understand, she unconsciously swayed towards
Reynolds with her eyes and lips
uplifted. She wanted to quiet the aching
of her regret. She wanted a channel
through which her over-wrought feelings,
might pour in atoning self-sacrifice.

He knew that she did not love him,
though she herself was ignorant of her own
heart, but he also knew that he might have
her in his arms if he chose, acquiescent
remorseful, submissive, with her head upon
his breast. That one moment was his.
Through the fierce throbbing of his pulses
he was oddly conscious of all his surroundings
— the little room which smelt of paraffin
and of unused furniture, the letters lying

on the magenta table-cloth, the Slippery
little horse-hair sofa from which Barbara
had risen to meet him ; everything was
mean, dreary, and hideous. But he had
only to make one step across the patchwork
rug of red and black, only to ask her to
share that hopeless future of his, and he
might take her to himself in her pliant
grace, and his lips would meet hers !

He was her master, yet he stood still
drawing his breath deeply, and eyeing the
parti-coloured rug as if it were a yawning
gulf between them. He would not cross it,
he would say no word of love or of reproach
to spoil her afterlife, but his soul was bitter
as gall. At that moment he felt himself
strong enough to give up everything, but
he could not be tender. Was she in later
days to remember him vaguely as a poor
sullen fellow whose schemes and talk came

to nothing, who was too helpless to make
his way in the world ? Was she, perhaps,
to try to do something for him — to recommend
him, for instance, to some friend who
wanted a tutor for a dull boy ? Was she to
give him her little dole of pity and friendship
? No, by Heaven ! he would not have
that, when he might have taken herself.
Why should he suffer in silence, and not
inflict one answering touch of pain, if only
that he might feel his power to wound ?
She was trying him too cruelly with that
innocent offer of atonement, which meant
so much more than she understood.

Because he would not speak the " Marry
me, Barbara ! " which was at his very
lips, he controlled his voice and asked with
an air of polite inquiry, "What is it that
you so kindly wish to do for me ? "

What ? Oh, I don't know ! " she faltered

in confusion. " What can I do ? I don't
know. Only if there were anything — if
there ever could be "

He looked at her, gravely at first, then
with a smile that deepened slowly. She
met his glance with her appealing eyes, but
she could not meet his smile. Its derision
reached her like a stinging lash, and she
shrank away. " I loisli I had never come ! "
she said in a low tone. All her sweet
compassionate longing was driven back upon
her heart by his mocking smile, and turned
to something that choked her. " I wish I
hadn't ! " she repeated in a stifled voice,
and went towards the door, eager to escape.

Reynold perceived that he had succeeded
admirably. It seemed unlikely that Barbara
would ever come to him again.

A sudden roar of wind in the chimney
startled them both, and recalled him to some

consciousness of the outer world. He took

his hat from the table, and held the door for

her to pass.

Good-bye," she panted, still with her

eyes averted.

*' I'm coming with you."

No, you are not ! "

Pardon me, but I think I am."

No ! " Barbara repeated. He smiled,

but followed her. She turned on the stairs

in angry helplessness and faced him. " But

I would rather you didn't ! " she exclaimed.
Did you come alone ? "
Yes, and I can go back alone."
But Mr. Hayes— what did he say ? "
He is out, he didn't know. Oh ! " with

a terrified glance, " if he should be back

first ! "

Harding unlatched the outer door, and

she flew out into the rushing wind. He

was at her side in a moment. " Take
my arm," lie said.

'' I won't ! " cried the girl, angrily. " Why
don't you leave me when I ask you ? "

'* Because you can't go all through Mitchell
alone this stormy night — and so late,"
said Keynold, raising his voice to dominate
an especially furious gust.

Barbara caught at Mrs. Simmonds's
railings to steady herself. " Thank you ! "
she shouted, "it's very kind of you to
remind me that I ought not to be hereat
this time of night ! " She felt as if her
words were torn out of her mouth and
whirled away. She ended with something
that sounded like a sob, but she herself
hardly knew what it was, or what became
of it.

Nonsense ! " said Reynolds, as if he were
hailing her from an almost hopeless distance.

You must let me see you safely to the
gate." The gust subsided a little. " You
must indeed," he added in a more natural
tone.

Will you leave me "? " she persisted.
'* It's all I ask you ! "

<« Very well," he answered, angrily.
But I suppose Mitchelhurst Street is as
free to me as to you, and T don't see that
you can want more than half of it. Take
whichever side you please, and 111 go the
other."

^' Good night," she said, ignoring this
declaration. He waited only to ascertain
her intention, and then strode across the
way to the further path.

They walked through the village in this
fashion, two dusky shapes, grotesquely
blown and hustled by the strong wind, k
capricious blast, catching Barbara's dress,

would send her scudding helplessly for a
few yards before she could regain her self-^
control. The tall figure on the other side
of the road, clutching at his hat, would
quicken his long steps to keep up with her
involuntary increase of speed. When she
contrived to pull herself up he slackened his
pace, timing his movements with shadowlike
accuracy and persistence.

The clouds were flying in such quick
succession that for some time there was
no decided break through which the moon
misfht show her face. The heavens were
a vast moving canopy, glimmering with
diffused light, that grew to spectral whiteness
now and again, when the veil was thin
over the hidden orb. Harding blessed the
obscurity which might save Miss Strange
from the wondering comments of Mitchell



hurst. They only met three or four men,

fighting their homeward way against the
wind, and, country fashion, keeping the
centre of the road. One of these caught
sight of Reynold, and, staring at him,
shouted a jovial " Good night," to which
the young man, glad to monopolise his
attention, made a courteous reply, while
the slim little figure, on the other side of
the way, stole along in the shadow of the
houses unobserved. Presently they passed
beyond the village street and turned into
the road which led up to the Place, where
the high banks sheltered them a little, and
they did not meet the wind so directly.
Barbara kept to the hedgerow on the left,
Reynolds skirted that on the right, and
though the narrower way enforced a rather
closer companionship, they walked with an
air of indifference as serene as the stormy
night permitted.

When they reached the little slope at the
gate, Harding halted. Barbara had to cross
the road, and while she did so he stood
perfectly still, not attempting to lessen the
distance between them by one step. The
wild noise of the blast in the tree tops made
a kind of rushing accompaniment to the
silence. All at once the ragged clouds
parted, and the moon sailed suddenly into
a blue rift. Everything became coldly and
brilliantly distinct, even to the lock of the
wrought-iron gate, towards which Barbara
stretched an unloved hand. As she touched
it she hesitated.

Mr. Harding," she said.

There was a lull between two gusts, and
the fury which had preceded it made it
seem like an absolute and charmed tranquillity.
Reynolds advanced at her summons
with a slightly exaggerated obedience. The

moon was at his back and his black shadow
seemed to hurry before him, to throw itself
at the girl's feet, and then to slip past her
through the iron bars, as if it would creep
into Mitchelhurst Place, and take possession
by stealth.

Why did you make me angry ? " said
Barbara in a tremulous voice. " Why did
we come through the village in this idiotic
way ? "

I was under the impression that you
declined my escort," he replied, with conscious
meekness.

You make me behave rudely — icy do
you ? I went to your lodgings to tell you
how sorry I was, and to ask your pardon
for my carelessness, and it seems as if I
went for nothing but to quarrel. Anyone
would think so. Perhaps you think
so?"

VOL. II. F

*' No," said Reynolds, smiling, " I don't.
And it isn't a very serious quarrel, is it ? "

Don't sneer at me any more, or you
will make me hateful ! " cried Barbara. " 1
can't bear it ! I will never ask you again
if there is anything I can do — never ! You
needn't have shown me how you despised
me : you might have been a little kinder
when I went to you like that ! "

She swallowed down a sob.

Really I'm very sorry if anything I
said — " he began.

Oh never mind now what you said or
did ! I know it, and that's enough. I
won't give you another chance, but I won't
quarrel. It hurts me, it's horrid, it's worse
than Uncle Hayes. Do let us part friends
or — or — something like friends — not in
this miserable way ! "

With all my heart."

She took ber hand from the gate and
turned towards him.

Say you forgive me then ! For everything
! "

Ah ! that I can't do' Reynolds replied,
finding a kind of distorted pleasure in
playing with her earnestness. " I'm not
sure, yet, that there is anything to forgive."

Forgive me on the chance ! "

*' Oh no, I couldn't presume to do that !
It would be a chance whether i/ou forgave
me afterwards for my impertinence."

A sudden blast nearly sent her tottering
into his arms. She recovered herself, looked
at him in speechless indignation as if he
had ordered it, pushed open the gate, and
the black tracery of bars swung back into
its place, dividing them.

Reynold stood where she had left him,

gazing after her. She went a little way up

F 2

the drive, and then Lingered, half turning
as if she thought some one had called. The
ground on which she stood was dry and
white in the moonshine, and dappled with
fantastic, moving shadows. The little old
trees fought against the wind, swaying their
bare, misshapen arms above her head. The
stone balls on either side of the entrance
gleamed like skulls in the pale light, guarding
the avenue to the sepulchral house, with
its glassy rows of windows. For a moment
the picture was as clear as day, with Barbara
standing in the middle of the road ;
then a great wave of stormy cloud rolled
up and overtopped the moon, and in the
dusky confusion she vanished.

CHAPTER IV.

Reynold's regret.

With the passing of that gleam of moonlight
it seemed to Reynold Harding that
Mitchelhurst Place disappeared finally ito
the abyss that waits for all created things.
Where the house, in its curious ghastly
whiteness, had stood a moment earlier, was
now nothing but baffling gloom, and the
very gate vanished into the shadows, as if
there were no need of any substantial
barrier between him and the lost vision.
The scene had closed with dramatic suddenness,
and he felt that the play was
played out, but how long he stood staring
at the dusky curtain he did not know.

At last he turned, and made his way
down the dim road. The bewildering
obscurity seemed to press upon his sight,
and he quickened his pace to gain the
corner where his glance might rest on the
scattered lamps of Mitchelhurst Street —
little flames shuddering and struggling in
the gale. He had gone about half the
distance to his lodgings, when he saw two
advancing eyes of fire at the end of the
street Nearer and nearer they came, but,
owing to the clamour of the wind, the noise
of wheels was inaudible till the carriage was
close upon him where he paused on the
sidewalk. Then for a moment there was
a gleam of light upon the road, and in it
appeared, as in a kind of magic-lantern
picture, a sorry-looking grey horse, travelling
reluctantly beyond his stable at the
inn, a shabby driver, buttoned closely

against the wind, with his hat pulled low
on his brows, a flashing of revolving wheels,
and the black silhouette of the Michel hurst
fly. Harding looked after it till he saw
the lamp shine for a moment, with sudden
brightness, as the carriage turned, and then
go out. After this fashion was Mr. Hayes,
too, lost in the darkness which had swallowed
everything else, and Reynold's gaze
conveyed a not unkindly farewell.

The night gathered and deepened in the
village, and the oxeat starless dome bent
its vaulted gloom over the half-dozen lights
which glimmered on cottages and cabbage
plots. Now and again a dog would bark,
or the wind would pass with a wilder wail,
and the sign of the Rofhcell Arms would
creak discordantly. The people to whom
that little hollow was the world, lay close
and safe in their houses, wakened, perhaps.

by the gale to hope that no tiles would
fall, and no damage be done in the
gardens, listening drowsily for awhile,
and then turning in their beds to sleep
again.

It was not till the moon was low in the
west that it broke once more through the
clouds, and, peering in at a small uncurtained
window, revealed the white face
of a man who sat by it, with drooping head
and listless hands. He was not asleep, but
he did not move. With that same glance
the moon espied St. Michael in the lancet
window, sedulously trampling on his little
dragon, while the old clock above his head
recorded the passing of the hours with a
labour of slow strokes. Those two, and
those two only, did the moon see in all
Mitchelhurst, and then vanished again and
left them, till the wind went down, and the

day came slowly over the grey fields, with
a deluge of autumnal ram.

Mrs. Simmonds was sorry to lose her
lodger, and sorry that the weather should
be so bad, and that he should look so pale.
She busied herself about his breakfast, and
brought him the local paper with the air of
a successful prophet.

I told you there'd be another to-day,
sir," she said as she laid it down, " and
here it is ! " Reynold briefly acknowledged
the attention, but he never touched it.
So set as he was upon that other one 1 "
said Mrs. Simmonds later to her husband.

Simmonds suggested that he might have
found something that specially interested
him in the other paper, somebody dead
and leaving money, may be, or somebody
mysteriously disappeared, or something —
he looked as if he'd had a shock of some

sort. But ]airs. Simmonds was inclined to
think that he was most likely upset by the
thought of his railway journey. She knew
it was all lie could do to swallow a bit, if
she were going anywhere, with all her
packing on her mind, and very likely the
gentleman was of the same way of feeling.
As to a shock, he hadn't got any shock out
of the paper, she knew. He might have
had some bad news in the letters Miss
Strange brought him, for he told her with
his own lips that they were very important,
and that was why she came with them
herself.

You see, the old gentleman was out,"
said Mrs. Simmonds, "so I suppose she
didn't know what to do."

'' I shouldn't think the old gentleman
would be best pleased," said Simmonds.

The good woman considered for a moment.

Well, I shan't tell him," she announced
finally.

Harding drove to the nearest station ina
gig. The rain was not so heavy then, the
downpour lead become a persistent drizzle.
Nevertheless the village looked drenched
and dismal enough as he bade it good-bye,
and swung round the corner of the churchyard
wall, where the yellow weeds stood
up in the crevices behind the slant grey
veil, and the great black-plum aged yews
let fall their heavy tears upon the graves.
In another minute a clump of trees hid
the square tower and the leaden roof, and
Mitchelhurst was left behind. But the
young man looked right and left at the
wet hedgerows till they reached a spot
where a ploughed field rose above the bank
on one side, while on the other a deep
bramble-grown ditch divided the road from

the sodden meadows. He fixed his eyes on
that. It was exactly a week that Wednesday
since he first met Barbara Strange.

Late that afternoon he walked into a dull
room in a dull suburb of London, and a
woman who stood in the window, snipping
the dead fronds from a homesick-looking
fern, turned to meet him. There was no
mistaking the relationship. Allowing for
the differences of sex and age, they were
as like as they could possibly be, except
that in every glance and gesture the woman
showed a fuller and richer life than did the
man. There was something of imperious
grace in her movements which made him
seem awkward, hesitating:, and constrained.
She suffered him to touch her cheek with his
lips, but showed no inclination to speak first.
Back again, you see," he said, drawing
a chair to the hearth-rus.

"Yes. I should think you must be wet."

Damp, I suppose."

He glanced round the room. The flock
paper, the red curtains, the grimy windows,
the smoky fire, had the strange novelty
which the most familiar things will sometimes
put on. The atmosphere was loaded
with acrid fog, and the blackness of the
great city. He raised his foot and warmed
a muddy boot, while his thoughts went
back to the stateliness and airy purity of
the old manor house, where the great logs
cracked and glowed upon the hearths.

Mrs. Harding came and rested her
elbow on the chimney-piece, looking down
at her son.

*'I left Mitchelhurst this morning," said
he, after a pause.

Yes ? "Well, I suppose you had seen
enough of it."

It was time to come home, anyhow," he
said.

You had business in town 1 "

The tone and words would have served
as well for any chance visitor.

'' Yes— naturally."

He put the other foot to the fire by way
of a change.

I did not know," said Mrs. Harding. " I
have nothing to do with your business. It
certainly isn t mine. You are always welcome
to be here as much as you please, but of
course you will attend to your own affairs."

Keynold made no answer.

You are your own master," she continued,
after a short silence. '' I have
recognised that for some years. I have
not expected you to go my way."

One must go one's own way, I
suppose," said the young man.

And if I expected you to show some
slight consideration for me, in taking
the way you have chosen — I was mistaken
! ''

He stirred the fire, and replaced the
poker, but did not look at her or speak.

"You know what I mean ? " she
demanded.

Perfectly."

Reynold, you might have written !
Your uncle's offer deserved a word. I do
not say you might have accepted it, but
you might have refused it courteously.
Was that so much to ask? You have
insulted him wantonly, and he will never
pardon it. After all, he is your father s
brother, and an old man. Reynold, you
should have written ! "

He did not raise his eyes from the
burning coals.

Well," he said, " I did propose to
write before I went away."

She winced at the thrust.

I was wrong ! " she owned, with bitter
passion in her voice. " It would have been
better."

As things have turned out," said
Reynolds, " T think it would."

Poor little Barbara ! If that angry,
dark-eyed woman had known how near
the fulfilment of her hopes had been, aud
lost by how pitiful a chance ? Rut the
secret was safe.

Kate Harding drew a long breath.

'* Well, I have no more to say about
it. Perhaps it is best that we should
understand each other. You knew how
your silence would wound me ; it was
deliberate — it was calculated. Well, it kas
wounded me, I don't deny it. But it is

all over now, and you will never wound
me again. Do what you please, now and
always — as you have done."

He signified his attention sullenly, with
a slight movement of his head.

"It is all over," she continued. *the
situation is filled up, and nothing would
ever induce Robert Harding to suffer you
to enter his office — not if you offered to
sweep it ! He will not trouble you anymore,
and, since the matter is ended, let
it never be mentioned between us again."

It was easy to see that she was, as she
had said, deeply wounded, and there was
a tragical intensity in her speech. Her
son made answer with the same mute
gesture of assent.

Presently she moved away, and for a
few minutes she busied herself about the
room. She gathered up the leaves she had

VOL. IL G

cut off, put away two or three things that
were lying about, and then came back to
him.

Dinner will be ready at the usual time,"
she said, in a cold, everyday voice. " And
then we can talk of other things."

Yes," Reynold answered, with a start,
looking up from his reverie. He had been
thinking the evenings before. When he
went into the little sitting-room after his
walk, and Barbara rose up from the sofa
to meet him, he had been startled, she Alas
confused and frightened, and they had
forgotten the ordinary greetings. And
then they had talked, he had sat looking
at her, he had stood up and held himself
aloof — how had he done it ? Well, it had
been for Barbara sake. Afterwards they
had ozone through Mitchelhurst together.
Together? No, absurdly apart, with the

breadth of the street between them. And
at last they had talked at the gate, and
he had vexed her, and she had hurried
away without a word of farewell. It
seemed to him now that he had never
meant that. It was impossible he could
have meant it. Why, they had never
shaken hands, he had never touched her,
and he remembered that she had no glove
on, he had seen her hand in the moonlight
on the latch of the gate. She had said,
Let us part friends' he had only to
consent.

It is well that we cannot recall our
moments of temptation. Reynold had been
able to pain her then with a jest, he bad
been strong enough in his bitterness of
heart to let her go without a word, but
now as he sat staring at the fire, idly
clasping his knee, he regretted his strength.

G 2

If he could have taken Barbara's hand ho
would, and the long fingers, loosely knit
together, suddenly tightened at the thought.
A woman's small hand would not have had
much chance of escape from such a class)
as that.

But at that moment his mother aroused
him from his mutinous.

CHAPTER V.

love's messenger.

The first week of December had not gone
by, and already the winter had set in. Mr.
Pry or, as he walked from the vicarage up
the lonely road to Mitchelhurst Place, said
to himself that it was a most unpleasant
afternoon. Of his own free will he would
not have left his fireside, but Destiny had
turned him out, and he went feebly and
heavily along the iron road, feeling as if
Nature were in a mood of freezing malice
and took pleasure in his sufferings. The
air was still, yet it came very keenly to
his pallid face, his feet were cold, the hand

that held his umbrella was remarkably old,
a red-edged manual of prayers and devotional
readings, tucked under his left
arm, showed a tendency to slip, and
altogether Mr. Prior had a half-numbed
sense that it was not fair that any one
should want him in such weather.

The skv was sfrev, a chilly fog; narrowed
the horizon, and all the hedges and boughs
in the little frozen landscape were covered
with hoarfrost. It was like a dreaui of
a dead spring. Every little clump of trees
was au orchard, white with sterile blossoming,
spectral flowers which would vanish
as suddenly as they had come. Every
sound was deadened, till it was almost
startling to come upon a man at work by
the wayside, lopping hoary branches from
the hedo'e, and flinoino^ them down, withall
their delicate tangle of white sprays,

upon the frosted grass. It was a grim task
to be the only sign of energy in that ghostlike
world ; such a task as in an old picture
Death himself might have undertaken.
Happily, however, for good Mr. Pryor's
nerves, it was the face of an ordinary flesh
and blood labourer, with the breath steaming
from his gaping mouth, that was lifted
as he went by.

The vicar crept, shivering, up the avenue
to the house, which was more than ever
like a great white tomb. He asked the
servant who admitted him how Mr. Hayes
was that afternoon.

*'Mueh the same, thank you, sir," said
the woman, showing him into the yellow
drawing-room, ibid putting a piece of wood
on the fire, '' I'll tell Miss Strange you are
here."

He stood miserably on the rug, looking

down into the fender, and squeezing his
red-edged book under his arm, till at the
sound of the opening door he turned and
saw Barbara. The girl came forward
quickly, and touched the fumbling fingers
which he held out, as she uttered a word of
greeting.

Mr. Hayes is much the same, they tell
me," said the clergyman in a melancholy
voice.

"Yes," said Barbara, "I suppose there
isn't any difference. But I think anyhow
he isn't any worse. Mamma is with him,
and he was taking some beef-tea just now "
Mr. Pry or nodded grave approval of the
beef-tea — " but he'll be very glad to see you
in a few minutes. Won't you sit down ? "

He sat down, nursing the book, which
had a narrow ribbon hanging out of it.

I hope Mrs. Strange is pretty well — as

well as can be expected ? " he said, after
a pause. " Not over-fatigued, I trust ? "

"Oh, no; I don't think so," the girl
replied. " Mamma seems very well."

"Ah, quite so. She bears up, she bears
up. Well, that is what we must all try todo
— to bear up. It is the only thing."

"Yes," said Barbara. She was not quite
sure that she ouo;ht to have said that her
mother seemed very well. " Of course it
is a trying time," she added, by way of
softening the possibly indiscreet admission.

"Certainly, certainly — very trying for
you both," Mr. Pryor agreed. Yet even to
his dull eyes it was apparent that this very
trying time had not dimmed the bright face
opposite. There was a peculiar radiance
and warmth of youth about Barbara that
afternoon, a glow of life which forced itself
on his perception. She did not smile, she

was very quiet, and yet it seemed as if
some new delight, some unspoken hope,
had awakened within her, quickening and
kindling her to the very finger-tips. She
sat demurely in her low chair, with her face
turned towards the window, but there was
a soft flame of colour on her cheek, and a
light in her eyes when she lifted her drooping
lashes. In that great, cold house,
through which the shadow of death was
creeping, she was the incarnation of life and
promise, a curious contrast to her surroundings.
It would hardly have seemed stranger
if suddenly, in the desolate world without,
one had come on a burning bush of pomegranate
flowers among the cold frost-blossoms
of the Mitchelhurst hero-es.

o

Mr. Pryor felt something of all this. Ho
did not quite like it. Of course he did not
want to see the girl haggard and weary,

but he was so chilly, as lie sat there by the
fireside with his book on his knee, that it
seemed to him as if the swift, light pulsations
of youth were hardly proper. He
would have been more at his ease with
Barbara if she had had a slight toothache,
or a cold in her head. He felt it his duty
to depress her a little, quietly, as she sat
there.

'^ The hour of Death's approach is a
very solemn one, even for the bystanders,'^
Mr. Pryor began, after a moment's consideration.


Barbara said, " Yes it was," with an
almost disconcerting readiness.

Yes, yes, and we should endeavour to
profit by it. We should spend it, not only
in regrets for those who are about to betaken
from us, but in thoughts of the
future."

Barbara's red lips parted in another
"Yes." The future — she was thinking of
it. It was easier to think of it than of the
old man who was dying.

Of the future," Mr. Pryor continued,
caressing; the smooth leather of his book
with his unloved hand, and softly pulling
the pendent ribbon, " of the time when we
shall be lying — yes, yes, each one of us — as
our friend is now." He glanced up at the
ceiling, to indicate that he meant Mr.
Hayes, taking his beef-tea in the bed-room
on the first floor.

The o;irl said nothing but looked meditatively
at the folds of her dress, as if she
were in church. It would have been
pleasant if Mr. Pryor had brought a
funeral sermon out of his table drawer, and
could have gone on without these embarrassing
pauses.

When our hour is at hand," he said at
last, " as — as it must be one of these days.
How shall we feel then, Miss Strange ? "

Barbara didn't know.

No," said the vicar, " we don't know.
But we must think — we must think. Try
to picture yourself in your uncle's position
what would your life look to you if you
were lying there now "? "

She looked up with a sudden startled
flash. "I haven't had my life — it would
only look like a beginning," she said with a
vision as of a rose-garlanded doorway to a
vault. " If I were going to die directly I
couldn't feel like Uncle Hayes."

The passionate speech awoke the clergyman's
instinct of assent. "No, no," he
said, "certainly not. Certainly not." At
that moment a message came : " Would
Mr. Pryor kindly step up-stairs ? " and

lie went, not altogether sony to bring his
little discourse to a close.

Barbara, left to herself, sat gazing at the
window, till at last the hinted smile, which
had troubled her companion, betrayed itself
in a tender, changeful curve. '* Adrian ! "
she said softly, under her breath. '* Oh,
how could I ? How could I ? Adrian !
and I thought you didn't care ! "

She was restless with happiness. She
sprang up, and walked to and fro, too glad
at heart to complain of the walls that held
her, and yet feeling that she needed air and
freedom for her joy. She leaned against
the window, and looked out at the wintry
world, murmuring Adrian's name against
the chilly pane. There was no voice to
give her back her tender speech, yet she
hardly missed it. No praise is so sweet to
a woman as the reproaches she heaps upon

herself for aa unjust suspicion of lier lover.
To defend him to others is a mixture of joy
and pain, but to feel that she has wronged
him, and that to trust him is safer than to
trust her doubts, is a passionate delight.

This joy had come to Barbara that very
morning. She had been sitting in her
uncle's room, reading a novel by the fireside,
while the old man slept, as she
thought. She softly turned page after page
till a feeble voice broke the silence.
Where's your mamma ? " said Mr. Hayes.

Down-stairs, waiting letters. Do you
want her ? " And Barbara stood ready
to go.

"No, I don't want her. Writings her
daily bulletins, ch ? Well, well. What's
the time ? You haven't given me my
medicine."

It's very nearly time," said Barbara,

with a glance at the clock. There was a
little clinking of bottle and glass, and then
she came to the bedside, and stood looking
down at the wrinkled, fallen face among the
pillows. " Can I help you ? '' she asked.

Wait a bit, can't you ? '' said the old man.

She waited, looking aside, yet watching
for the slightest movement on his part.
Her soft young fingers closed round the
half-filled glass, and his dim eyes rested on
them. Presently he raised himself with an
effort, and the girl put another pillow
behind him. He stretched out a trembling,
clings-white hand, carried the glass to his
lips a little uncertainly, and emptied it.

She set it down. " Shall I take away
that pillow ? " she asked.

'' No— wait."

Barbara, after a minute, shifted her
position, and stood by the carved post at

the foot of the bed, while her thoughts
went back to her novel. She was not
heartless, she was only young. Her uncle
had never been very much to her, and she
found it as difficult to concentrate her mind
on this melancholy business of sickness and
dissolution as if it were a sermon. And yet
she did sincerely desire to behave properly,
and to feel properly, too, if it could be
managed.

The little old man rested awhile, sitting
up in his bed. He perceived that the girl's
thoughts were far away. He could keep
her standing there as long as he pleased, a
motionless figure against the faded green
curtains, but he could not narrow her world
to his sick-room. Perhaps for that very
reason he felt a desire to awaken her from
her reverie.

How old are you ? " he asked.

VOL. II. H

Nineteen."

The answer was given with a lifting of
her long lashes. She had not expected any
question about herself.

*' Nineteen ? ''

Yes. At least I shall be nineteen next
month."

A month more or less made little
difference to Barbara.

** As much as that ? '' he said. " Barbara,
perhaps I ought to say something before I
go.

Her attention was effectually aroused,
and her brilliant gaze rested on the dull,
waxen mask before her. But after a
moment his eyes fell away from hers.

I thought 1 did right," he said.

Yes ? " Barbara questioned.

'' That young man who came here — what
was his name ? '*

Mr. Harding."

'' No, no, no ! " he cried irritably. " No !
What made you think of him ? The first
one ? "

Mr. Scarlett ? "

He nodded.

But it does t matter," he said. ^' If
you were thinking of the other one it
doesn't matter about Scarlett."

What about him ? "

He wanted to speak to you before he
went away, and I told him to wait. Better
to wait — you were so young, you know."

He did want to speak to me ! " the girl
exclaimed under her breath.

"Plenty of time," said Mr. Hayes.
He's young too. I told him he could
come again to Mitchelhurst if he felt the
same. I thought it was best — I thought it
was best," he repeated, trying to drown a

H 2

faint consciousness that to have parted
with Barbara would have upset all his
arrangements.

I'm sure you did," she answered soothingly.


I know your mother would say it was
best — wouldn't she ? Besides, I didn't do
any harm, since you were thinking of the
other one."

He was here last,'^ said Barbara.

So he was," the sick man answered,
with a flash of his old briskness. '* And
girls soon forget."

Barbara said nothing. What was the
good of protestations ? She would never
utter a word against Reynold Harding —
never. And what could she say about
Adrian Scarlett? She had not owned to
herself that she cared for him. If she did —
and she was conscious of strong pulsations,

which flushed her face, and filled her veins
with tingling warmth — the more reason for
silence. She laid a hand on the carved
foliage of the post, and faced the dim figure
propped in the bed. There was something
grotesquely feeble about the little man's
attitude. His face, discoloured and pale,
drooped in the greenish shadow of the
hano;ino^s, his unshaven chin rested on his
breast, his parchment hands lay in a little
nerveless heap on the counterpane before
him. One would have said that he was set
lip in sport, as children set up dolls and
nine-pins, on purpose to be knocked over.

Hadn't you better lie down ? " said Barbara,
after considering him for a while. She
wanted to speak tenderly, for the sake of
the strange new gladness which was throbbing
at her heart ; yet the facts of sickness
and hopeless decay had never seemed so

distasteful. When he assented, she put her
arm about him with the utmost care, but
she could hardly help shrinking from the
clutch of his chilly fingers on her wrist.

Bothwell are a bad lot," he said, " bad
and poor. Scarlett would be a better match.
Some of his people have money."

The habit of deference to her Uncle
Hayes prevented her from resenting this
speech.

"Never mind about that, please, uncle,"
she said gently.

"Good family, too," said Mr. Hayes,
indistinctly to himself. " I did it for the
best, as your mamma would see."

"Never mind about mamma, Uncle
Hayes," said the girl again. " I'm sure you
had better rest a little."

And when he acquiesced she went back
to her novel, which was all about Adrian

Scarlett. After all, he had not gone off
without a thought of her — he had not
slighted her. Perhaps she was too young,
and at any rate she could not be angry
with her uncle since he had told her of
Adrian's love. She had a right to think
of him as Adrian, surely, if he loved her.
So he had been sent away — where ? Perhaps
he would see somebody else, somebody
better and more beautiful, and she would
be forgotten. Well ! — Barbara's eyes were
fixed intently on the page — even if he did
forget her, it might break her heart, but she
need not be ashamed that she had thought
of him, since she held the happy certainty
that he had thought of her. Happen what
might in his after life, he had loved her
once — he had ! — he had ! And she had
feared that he had only laughed at her, she
had thought that he might be heartless — Oh

how was it possible that she could have
been so wickedly unjust! She deserved
that he should never come back to her.

It was an incongruous business altogether.
It was as if a breath from a burial vault
had quickened the faint flame in Barbara's
heart to sudden splendour, for if old Hayes
had actually been the mummy he very much
resembled, he could not have been more
remote from any comprehension of the
message which he had delivered. His lips
had relaxed in utter feebleness, and the
secret had escaped. He did not see the
look which flashed into the girl's eyes, and
when Mrs. Strange, who might have been
more observant, came to take her place by
the bedside, Barbara stole softly away,
hanging; her head in the consciousness of
those flushed cheeks, which seemed too like
holiday wear for such a melancholy time.

Her mother might have been surprised, for
she had been a little uneasy, fancying
that the girl looked sad. Barbara was buta
young thing, and had been left too long
shut up with but dismal company.

And, if Mrs. Strange had only known it,
the poor little girl had been her own most
dismal company. From the time that Reynold
Harding went away she had been
restless, frightened, and miserable. When
the exaltation of that evening had passed,
a sudden terror at the thought of her own
daring overtook her. She was not only
afraid of her uncle's anger, but doubtful
whether she had not really committed an
unpardonable sin against the social law.
When she hurried to Harding with the
letters, she had somehow vaguely believed
that he would shelter her, that he would
stand by her if she were blamed. And

when he had played with her, refused to
trust her, and vanished into the night
with a mocking smile, leaving her utterly
alone, she had felt absurdly desolate. At
first she had waited, in sickening apprehension,
for her uncle to hear of her visit to
Mr. Harding. Fate, however, seemed whimsically
inclined to protect her. First there
was the storm of rain which prevented a
meeting with all the gossips of Mitchelhurst
at the Penny Reading. Then, a day or
two later, came Mr. Hayes' accident — a
mere slip on the stairs, it was supposed,
till the doctor hinted at something in the
nature of a fit. Barbara saw that detection
was postponed, but still she felt that the
sword honor over her head, and nis^ht after
night she tossed in an agony of doubt.
Had she really done anything very dreadful ?
She recalled Mr. Harding's ambitious words

and glances — did they mean that he thought
lightly of a girl who would go to him as she
had done ? Over and over again she asked
the useless questions — Did they mean that ?
Did they not ? — What did they mean ?
And leaving his meaning; out of the matter,
what would other people say ? Suppose she
went and told them — ah ! but how and what
would she tell them ? She might say, "" I
found I hadn't posted Mr. Harding's letters,
so I took them to him at once : wasn't
that the best thing to do % " How right and
reasonable it sounded ! But if she said,
I went secretly to a man's lodgings at

night " at the mere thought a blush

passed over her like a scorching v/ave of fire.
What would her mother say ?

Even in her misery she was childish
enough to wince at the thought of her
sisters at home. She had been proud to be

mistress of a house while they were still in
the school room, and the idea that she had
been wanting in dignity, perhaps even in
modesty, and that she might be ostentatiously
controlled and watched, by way of
punishment, was intolerable to her. To be
humiliated before Louisa and Hetty — how
could she endure it ? They where not ill-natured,
but they had a little resented her
advancement, and Barbara, as she lay in
her great over-shadowing bed, could fancy
all the out-spoken comments and questionings
in the roomy attic where the three
used to sleep. She did not want to go back
to the Devonshire vicarage, and yet Mitchell
was fast becoming hateful to her.
The pictures on the walls gazed at her
with Reynolds's eyes, his presence haunted
the house from which he had been banished.
What was the wrong that she had done

him ? She did not know, and the uncertainty
seemed to mock her as he had mocked
her that night. The poor child said to
herself quite seriously that he had taken
away all her youth and happiness. She
fancied that she felt old and weary as the
days went by, fretting her simple heart with
unacknowledged fear.

And now suddenly came the message
of Adrian's love, and lifted her above all her
dreary little troubles. What did it matter
that it was uttered by those dry, bloodless
lips, which stumbled over the blissful words ?
What did anything matter since Adrian
cared for her, and life was all to come ?
Why had she tormented herself about
Reynold Harding ! Reynold Harding ! He
was utterly insignificant, he was nobody !
She could tell Adrian about that expedition
of hers, it was so unimportant, so trivial,

that lie could not be jealous ; he could not
mind. Adrian's jealousy ! There was something
delightful, even in that terrible possibility.
But he would not be jealous,
everything was warm, and glad, and full
of sunshine when Adrian was there.

She resented Mr. Pryor's professional allusions
to the uncertainty of life. There are
moments so perfect that they ought not to
be degraded by thoughts of disease and
death, ought not to be measured or weighed
in any way whatever. Barbara felt this,
and she thrust aside the clergyman's lecture
as soon as he left the room. Let him talk
of such things to Uncle Hayes. As for her,
she lingered at the window, thinking of her
newly-found happiness, while she gazed at
the hoary fields, with their black boundaries
of railing or leafless hedge, till a faint pink
flush crept over the pale sky, as if it were

softly suffused with her overflowing joy.
Mitchelhurst Place, of which Harding had
dreamed so tenderly a few months earlier, asa
home for himself and his love, was to the
eager girl at that moment only a charnel-house,
full of death and clinging memories,
from which she panted to escape. It was
true that she had first met Adrian Scarlett
there, but she had the whole world in which
to meet him again. " And he will always
know where to find me," she said to herself
with a touch of practical common sense in
the midst of her rapture. " He can look out
papa's name in the Clergy List, any day."

CHAPTER YI.

A PERPLEXING REFLECTION.

The April sun was shining into two
pleasant sitting-rooms, only divided by a
partially drawn curtain. Their long windows
opened on a wide gravel walk. Beyond
this lay a garden, bright with the airy,
leafless charm of spring. The grass was
grey-green as yet, the borders brown earth,
but there were lines and patches of gay
spring flowers, and a blithe activity of birds,
while the white clouds floated far away in
the breezy sky.

Adrian Scarlett, who was a guest in the

house, came slowly sauntering along one of
the sunshiny paths, between the yellow
daffodils, with eyes intent on a handful of
printed leaves. Now and again he stopped
short, trying a different reading of a line,
or twisting his little pointed beard with
white fingers, while he questioned some
doubtful harmony of syllables. Once he
took a pencil from his pocket, and with
indignant amusement marked a misprint.
After each of these pauses he resumed his
dreamy progress, unconscious of any wider
horizon than the margin of his page.

Presently his loitering walk brought him
to one of the tall, shining windows, and
thrusting the little bundle of proofs into
his pocket, he unfastened it and stepped in.
He found the room untenanted, except b}^
two or three flies, which buzzed in the
sunny panes as if summer time had come.

VOL. IL

A piano stood open, with some music lying
on it, and the young man sat down with his
back to the curtained opening, began to
play, and amused himself for a while in
an agreeably discursive fashion. But after
a time he felt that he was not alone. The
conviction stole upon him gradually, though,
as far as he knew, there had been no sound
in the further room, and he had previously
believed that everybody was out. He
glanced over his shoulder more than once,
but saw nothing.

Shall I go and look *? " he asked himself.
But it may be somebody I don't know,
and don't want to know. Suppose it should
be a housemaid come to be hired, and
waiting till Mrs. Wilton comes in. What
should I say to the housemaid? Or, by
the way, the parson said something about
Easter offerings yesterday, perhaps this is

the clerk or somebody come for them.
Perhaps if I go in he'll ask me for an
Easter offering. I think I won't risk it.
Shall I go into the garden again ? "

While he debated the question, he went
on playing, feeling that the music justified
an apparent unconsciousness of the invisible
companionship. The sunshine lighted up
the reddish golden tint of his hair and
moustache, and the warm flesh colours of
his face. Presently his wandering fingers
slackened on the keys, and then after a
momentary pause of recollection he struck
the first notes of a simple air, and played
it, with his head thrown back and a smile
on his lips.

Near him an old-fashioned mirror hung,
a little slanted, on the wall, and as his
roving eyes fell on it, a beardless, sharply-cut
face appeared in its shadows, motionless

I 2

and pale, gazing out of the heavy frame
with a singular look of eagerness.

Adrian started, but his surprise was so
quickly mastered that it was hardly perceptible,
and he continued as if nothing had
happened, apparently suffering his glances
to wander as before, though in reality he
watched the dark eyes and sullen brows
bent on him from the wall. The face
appearing so picturesquely, interested him,
and after a moment the interest deepened.
As he had before become gradually conscious
of the man's presence, so now did
a certainty steal over him that he was
somehow familiar with the features in the
mirror.

The stranger was evidently standing where
he might see and not be seen, and he leant
on a high-backed chair so that he was
partially hidden.

Who the deuce is he ? and where have
I seen him ? and what does he want here "? "
said Scarlett to himself, continuing to play
the tune which had evoked the apparition.
*'He doesn't look as if he went round for
Easter offerings. Can't want to tune the
piano, or why didn't he begin before I came
in ? Hope he isn't an escaped lunatic —
there's something queer and fixed about his
eyes ; perhaps I had better soothe him with
a softer strain. By Jove ! I have seen him
somewhere, and uncommonly good-looking
he is, too ! How can I have forgotten
him ? He isn't the sort of man to forget.
He doesn't look quite modern, somehow,
with his full, dark hair, and his beardless
face ; or, rather, I feel as if he were not
quite modern — but why ? "

Adrian glided into the accompaniment to
an old song, and sang a quaint verse or

two softly to himself. The face in the
mirror relaxed a little. After a moment
the man straightened himself, drew back,
and vanished. Adrian finished his song,
and then, in the silence that ensued, a
slight movement was audible, enough to
warrant his entering the further room, as
if he had just suspected the presence of a
visitor.

The man of the mirror was sitting in an
arm-chair, with a book in his hand. He
looked up a little hesitatingly and awkwardly,
as if he were doubtful whether to
rise or not. Adrian hastened to apologise
for his musical performance.

I had no idea there was any one
here," he said. " I hope I didn't disturb
you?"

"Not at all," said the stranger, glancing
at the book he held, and furtively reversing

it. "An enviable talent," he added, with
an evident effort.

For oneself, perhaps," answered Scarlett.
But I'm not sure it is desirable in a next-door
neighbour."

He was still trying to identify his companion.
The voice, unmusical and almost
harsh, did not help him in the least, and,
oddly enough, now that they were actually
face to face, he was less absolutely certain
that he ouo^ht to recognise the man. " It
may be only a likeness to somebody I
know," he reflected. " But to whom, then ?
And why does he look at me like that ?
He seems to think he knows me ! "

I hope you'll go on if you feel inclined,"
said the stranger.

Adrian shook his head.

"Thank you, but I think I've made about
noise enough for one morning."

He took up the paper and skimmed a
column or two. Presently he looked from
behind it, and their eyes met.

'' I can't help thinking," he said, " that
we have met before somewhere, haven't
we ? I don't know where, but I have an
idea that your memory is better than
mine."

The other was obviously taken by surprise.

*' No," he said, drawing back and frowning.
"No — in fact I'm sure we haven't
met — at least not to my knowledge. My
name is Harding."

Scarlett owned that the name conveyed
nothing to his mind, but when in return he
mentioned his own, he was certain that he
caught a flash of recognition in the other's
eyes. " He expected that," he soliloquised,
as he picked up his paper again. " Here is
a mystery ! Deuce take the fellow — why

did he stare at me so ? He isn't as handsome
as I thought he was in the glass —
he's ill-tempered and awkward ; it isn't a
pleasant face, though of course the features
are good. He might make a good picture
and, by Jove ! that's what he was — a
picture ! and I didn't know him out of his
frame ! I wonder whether it's a chance
resemblance, or whether "

*' Were you ever at a place called Mitchell
? " he asked, abruptly.

The blood mounted to Harding's face.

'' Yes," he said. .

*then," said Adrian, "you must surely
be some connection of the family at the
old Place — the old family at the old Place,
I mean. I have made out the likeness
that puzzled me. There is a picture
there "

^'I am connected with the family," said

Harding, "on my mother's side. It isn't
much to boast of "

If you come to that," Scarlett answered
lightly, " what is ? But I'll confess — I daresay
I ought to be ashamed of myself — but
I'll confess that I do care about such things.
I don't want to boast, but I would rather
my ancestors were gentlemen, than that
they were butchers and bakers and — well,
the candlestick-makers might be decorative
artists in their way, and so a trifle
better."

Harding scowled, but did not speak.

You don't agree with me," Adrian went
on, with his pleasant smile. " Well, you
can afford to scorn the pride of long descent
if you choose. And, mind you, though I
prefer the gentleman, I dare say the tradesman
mio^ht be more valuable to the community
at large ! "

I hope so," said Harding with a sneer.
''My grandfather was a pork butcher."

Oh ! " exclaimed Adrian, blankly. " You
combine both, certainly ! " He was decidedly
taken aback by the announcement, as the
other had intended, but he recovered himself
first. It was Harding who looked
sullen and ill at ease after the revelation
into which he had been betrayed, as if
his grandfather had somehow recoiled upon
him, and knocked him down.

Young Scarlett felt that he could not
get up and go away the moment the pork-butcher
was introduced, though he half
regretted that he had come from the piano
to talk to his sulky descendant. 'swell,
you get your looks from your ancestors at
Mitchelhurst," he said ; " it's quite wonderful.
I studied those portraits a good deal,
aud there's one on the right-hand side of

the fire-place in the yellow drawing-room, as
they call it — do you know the house well ? "

Yes, well enough. Yes, I know Anthony
Bothwell's picture."

'' It might be yours," said Adrian.

Reynold's only answer was a doubtful
Hm ! "

A fine old house ! " Scarlett remarked,
as he rose from his chair. If his companion
intended to treat him to such curt, half-hostile
speeches, he would leave him alone,
and ask Mrs. Wilton, or one of the girls,
about him, later. He might satisfy his
curiosity so, more pleasantly.

But, "A fine old house I" Harding repeated.
'eyes, a fine, dreary, chilly, decaying,
melancholy old house." He leant back
in his chair and looked up at Scarlett, " Did
you ever see a more hopeless place in all
your life ? "

Come ! Not so bad as that ! "

"Well, it seems to me that there is no
hope about it' Reynolds persisted ; "no
hope at all. A ghastly nightmare of a
house. Why doesn't somebody pull it
down ! "

You must have seen it under unfavourable
circumstances."

Very likely. I was there last October.
It might be better in the summer-time."

You stayed there ? "

Yes, a few days."

Did they tell you I had been ? " Scarlett
asked, impulsively. " Did they speak of
me — Mr. Hayes, and — Miss Strange ? "

The men looked at each other as the
name was spoken, Reynold's dark gaze
crossing the bright grey-blue gleam of
Adrian's glance. " They said something of
a Mr. Scarlett who had been there — yes."

And they were well, I hope ? "

'' Well enough— then."

'' Then ? " cried Adrian. " Then ! Why,
what has happened since ? "

'' Didn't you know old Hayes was dead ? "

The young man drew a long breath.
No, I didn't ! "

"Died just a week before Christmas.
The old house is shut up."

Adrian was silent for a moment. " Poor
old fellow ! " he said at last. " Fm very
sorry to hear it. And the house shut up
of course Miss Strange would go back to
her people in Devonshire." Reynolds looked
at him silently. " I wonder who will take
the old Place ! " said Adrian. " If I were
rich — " Their glances met once more, and
he stopped short, and strolled towards the
window.

"A castle in the air," he said, presently.

*' I don't suppose I shall ever see MitcL el-hurst
again, since the poor old gentleman
is gone. But I shall always remember the
place. Not for its beauty, precisely. I
know when I went there first I was surprised
that he should care to live in a
corner of that great white pile. Something
rather sepulchral about it. Did you ever
notice it by moonlight ? "

Reynolds Harding said, Yes, he had.

I recollect an almost startling effect
one night," Scarlett continued. " And the
avenue too — that queer avenue — gnarled
boughs, with thin foliage quivering in the
wind, and glimpses of summer sky shining
through. I think if I were a painter I
would make a picture of those trees."

There was a picture of them, stripped of
their leaves, and wrestling with an October
gale, before the eyes of the man to whom

he spoke. "They might be worth painting,"
he said. " I suppose they weren't
worth cutting down. If they had been, I
fancy there wouldn't be any avenue left."

I suppose not. Well, anyhow I'm glad
it was spared. There's an individuality
about the place — melancholy it may be,
perhaps dreary, as you say, but it isn't
commonplace, so it misses the worst dreariness
of all." He recurred to his first idea.
I wonder who will live there now poor
old Hayes is dead."

"Eats," said Reynolds. "And perhaps
an old man and his wife, to take care of it."

Scarlett stood, with a shadow on his
pleasant face. He had meant to go back to
Mitchelhurst quite early in the summer, and
he slipped a hand into his pocket, and
fingered the little bundle of printed leaves
which had played a part in his day-dream.

He bad counted on a welcome from the
white-haired old gentleman, whose whims
and oddities he understood and did not
dislike, and he had waited contentedly-enough
till the time should come. In fact,
he had found plenty to do that winter,
what with Christmas visits, and the preparation
of his poems for the press. As
Adrian looked back, he realised that it had
been a very agreeable winter, and that it
had slipped away very quickly. The
thought of Mitchelhurst had been therethrough
it all, but, to tell the truth, it had
not been very prominent. He would have
spoken to Barbara in the autumn, if he had
been left to himself, yet he had recognised
the wisdom of the old man's prohibition,
he had enjoyed the pathos of that unspoken
farewell, and the sonnet which he touched
and retouched with dainty grieving, and

VOL. II. K

he had looked forward, very happily, to
the end of his probation. Barbara, who
was certainly very young, was growing a
little older while he waltzed, and sang, and
polished his rhymes, and made new friends
wherever he went. Adrian had too much
honesty to pretend to himself that he had
been broken-hearted in consequence of their
separation. He had not even felt uneasy,
for, without being boastful, he had been
very frankly and simply sure of the end
of his love-story. He knew Barbara liked
him.

And now it seemed that his testy little
white-haired friend had gone out of the
great old house into a smaller dwellings
and he had been reckoning on a deadman's
welcome. A welcome — to what ? To
the cold clay of ^litcheJhurst churchyard?
The week before Christmas — Scarlett remembered

that he had been very busy the
week before Christmas, helping in some
theatricals at a country house. He had
been called, and called again at the end
of the performance. And just then, at
Mitchelhurst, the curtain had fallen forever
on the little part which Mr. Hayes
had played, and Barbara had looked on
its black mystery.

He bit his lip impatiently. There had
been no harm in the theatricals, just the
usual joking and intimacy among the actors
behind the scenes, and the usual love-making
and embraces on the stage. Adrian conscience
was clear enough, and yet the
recollection of the girl who played the
heroine (painted and powdered a little more
than was absolutely necessary, for the mere
pleasure of painting and powdering, as is
the way with amateurs), came back to him

K 2

with unpleasant distinctness. He could see
her face, close to his own, as he remembered
it on the Riot little gaslit stage, in their
great reconciliation scene, the scene that
was always followed by a burst of applause.
Everybody had admired his very becoming
dress, and Scarlett himself had been rather
proud of it. But now in a freak of his
vivid imagination, he pictured the masquerading
figure that he was, all showy
pretence, with a head full of cues and inflated
speeches, set down suddenly in the
wintry loneliness of Mitchelhurst Place, and
passing along the corridors to the threshold
of the dead man's room, to see Barbara
turn with startled eyes in the midst of
the shadows. God ! how pitiful and incongruous
was that frippery, as he saw it in
his fancy, brought thus into the presence of
the last reality !

And Barbara, bad sbe wondered at ibis
silence during all these months ? Never
one word of regret for the old man wbo
bad been kind to bim ! ** I wouldn't
bave bad it happen for anything ! ^' be said
to himself. " What bas sbe thought of
me?"

Harding, with eyelids slightly drooping,
was watching bim, and Scarlett suddenly
became aware of the fact.

No, I suppose nobody is likely to take
the old bouse," be said hurriedly. " I used
to think it must be dull for Miss Strange,
shut up there with nobody but ber uncle."

I should say it was."

*' Well, Devonshire's a nice county, not
that I know much of it. What part of
Devonshire do the Strange live in — do you
know ? "

"North Devon," Reynolds Harding answered,

and then added, half reluctantly,
Sandmoor, near Ilfraconabe."

*^Ah, it isn't a part I know at all,"
said Adrian aloud, and to himself he
repeated " Sandmoor, near Ilfracombe."

At that moment the door opened, and
one of the daughters of the house came
in. " Oh, Mr. Harding ! " she exclaimed,
advancing, and shaking hands in a quick,
careless fashion, " I'm afraid you've been
kept waiting a long while."

It doesn't matter," said Harding, standing
very stiffly. '' Is Guy ready now, Miss
Wilton?"

Yes, he's waiting in the hall. Bob got
him away to the stables, and I didn't know
he was there till just now : you know what
those boys are when they get together. I
thought Guy had letter wait in the hall, for
I'm afraid he's not as clean as he mio'ht be."

'' It doesn't matter," Harding replied
again. " He very seldom is'

'' I did try to brush him," said the girl
good-humouredly, " but I didn't do much
good."

Wanted something a good deal more
thorough, no doubt," Adrian suggested.

I hope he delivered his message "? "
Harding inquired. 'rit is his birthday
tomorrow, and his father is going to take
him for the day to the seaside. He was to
ask if your brother would go with him."

"Oh, Bob will be delighted, I'm sure,"
said Miss Wilton. " I should think you
would enjoy the holiday, Mr. Harding, you
must be thankful to get rid of your charge
now and then."

Scarlett, sitting on the end of the sofa,
saw Harding's face darken with displeasure.
'* It makes very little difference, thank you,"

said the tutor coldly. " I think I'll go and
find Guy now." And he bowed himself
out of the room in his sullen fashion. The
girl looked after him, and then turned to
Adrian and laughed.

Aren't we dignified ? " she said. '' What
did I say to make him so cross ? I didn't
mean any harm."

"Oh, I don't know — I don't think you
said anything very dreadful. Who is
Guy?"

"Guy Eobinson. His father has no end
of money, Jones and Robinson the builders,
you know, who are always getting big
contracts for things in the newspapers —
you see their names for ever. Old Robinson
has bought the Priory, so they are neighbours
of ours. Guy is twelve or thirteen,
the only boy, and they won't send him to
school."

Mr. Harding is his tutor ? "

Miss Wilton nodded.

I shouldn't much fancy him for mine,"
said Scarlett reflectively. *' I'm rather
inclined to pity Master Guy."

"You needn't," the girl made answer,
glancing shrewdly. " I think Mr. Harding
is there under false pretences."

False pretences ? "

Yes. I believe they think he is stern,
and will keep Guy in order, and my private
conviction is that he does nothing of the
kind. Nobody could keep Guy in order,
without perpetual battles, and Mr. Robinson
always ends the battles, by dismissing the
tutor. I never hear of any battles with Mr.
Harding."

I see. You think he spoils the boy."

"Spoils him? Well, I think that in
his supreme contempt for Guy and all the

Robinson, he just takes care that he doesn't
drown himself, or blow himself up with
gunpowder, or break his neck, and I don't
believe he troubles himself any further. I
wonder what made the boy want to go to
the seaside."

How far is it ? "

'' Well, about thirty miles if they goto
Salthaven. There's a railway — I should
think old Robinson will have a special.
Bob will have a great deal too much to eat
and drink, and he'll be ill the day after.
And if he and Guy can think of any
senseless mischief, they are sure to be upto
it, and the old man wall swaofo^er and
pay for the damage. Boys weill be boys,"
said Miss Wilton, with pompous intonation.

Adrian laughed. " Perhaps Mr. Harding
will go too."

Oh no ! I know he won't."

*' How do you know ? "

Mr. Eobinson won't take him. My
belief is that he's rather afraid of Mr.
Harding. Oh ! there he goes with Guy,
out by the garden way."

Scarlett looked over her shoulder. "What
a handsome fellow he is 1 "

Handsome ? " Miss Wilton turned her
head, and looked doubtfully at her companion.

Yes. Don't you think so ? "

N-no. It never occurred to me. Do
you mean it really, or are you laughing ? "

Of course I mean it. Did t you ever
look at him ? "

Why yes, often."

"Well, then?"

I suppose his features are good, when
one comes to think about them," said the
girl, with a dubious expression in her eyes.
Yes, I suppose they are."

I wish mine were anything like as
good," said Scarlett, with dispassionate
candour.

You wish yours " Miss Wilton

began, and ended with an amazed and
incredulous laugh which was exceedingly
flattering. It was so evidently genuine.

'* I don't think you half believe me now,"
he said. ^' But I assure you, if you were

to ask an artist he would tell you "

An artist ? Oh, I dare say an artist
might say so. But I don't believe a ivoman
would say that Mr. Harding was good-looking."


How if she were an artist ? "
*' Oh, then she wouldn't count."
*' But why wouldn't a woman think so ? "
She paused to consider. " I don't know,'
she said, 'rand yet I do mean it, somehow.
He may be handsome, but he doesn't seem

like it. I think a woman would want him
to seem as well as to be."

Do you mean that she wouldn't admire
him unless he gave himself airs ? That's
not very complimentary to the woman, you
know."

Miss Wilton shook her head. " I don't
mean that. He might not think about
himself at all — I should like him all the
better." She stood for a minute with her
eyes raised to Adrian's, yet was plainly
looking back at the image of Reynolds
Harding which she had called up for the
purpose of analysis. At last, " He isn't a bit
unconscious ! " she exclaimed. " He is the
7nost self-conscious man I know. I believe
he is always thinking about himself! "

If he is," said Scarlett, *' as far as I
could judge I should say he didn't enjoy it
much."

'' That's it ! " she said. " He doesn't find
himself attractive, and so — no more do we.
Isn't that it ? "

He smiled. " There's something in the
idea as far as it goes. But it doesn't alter
his features, you know."

Of course not. But we don't look at
them."

Adrian stood, pulling his moustache, and
still smiling. He was not afraid, vet he
found it rather pleasant to be told that this
picturesque tutor, who had been shut up in
Mitchelhurst Place with Barbara, was not
the kind of man to take a woman's fancy.
It was pleasant, but of course it did not
mean much. Molly Wilton might be perfectly
right, and yet it would not mean
much. It is easy to lay down general
rules about women, and very clever rules
they often are. The mistake is, in applying

these admirable theories to any one
particular woman — she is certain to be an
exception. Scarlett, while he listened to
his companion, did not forget that there
are always women enough to supply a
formidable minority.

I say," Miss Wilton exclaimed, with a
real kindling of interest in her face, " I'll
just go and take off my hat, and then we
might try over that duet, you know."

To this he readily assented, but when she
left the room he lingered by the window,
and presently ejaculated " Poor devil ! "
It is hardly necessary to say that he was
not thinking of Molly Wilton, who assuredly
was neither angel nor devil, but a bright,
wholesome, rather substantial young woman.

CHAPTER VII.

TWO GLANCES.

After all it was not Molly Wilton who
first came into the room where Adrian
waited for the duet, but her elder sister,
Amy. Each sister had her recognised province,
in which she reigned supreme. Amy
was the beauty of the family, and had a
taste for poetry ; Molly was musical and
lively. This arrangement worked perfectly,
and Molly admired her sister's charms, and
her poetical sympathies, without a trace
of jealousy, feeling quite sure that justice
would be done to her if there where any
question of music or repartee.

Adrian was not looking at his proofs
when Miss Wilton came in. He was sitting:
on the sofa, with his legs stretched out
before him, gazing into space, and thinking
of Sandmoor, near Ilfracombe. It was absolutely
necessary that he should put himself
into communication with that place, but
how was it to be done ? Should he write
that day, or should he go the next ?

Oh, I have interrupted you ! " Miss
Wilton ejaculated, and stopped just inside
the door.

Interrupted me ! Not a bit of it ! I
was only "

"You were thinking of that sonnet — I
know you were ! "

No, really," said Adrian, almost wishing
he glad been thinking of that sonnet. " No,
I wasn't. In fact I think the sonnet is
pretty well finished."

VOL. II. L

"Is it ? You must read it to me, won't
you ■? " and she came forward eagerly, took
a chair, and dropped into a graceful attitude
of attention. She had a real taste for
poetry, and the poet was also to her liking.
This was not the first time that she had
listened, with shining eyes and quickened
breath, and had brought the colour to the
young man's cheek by saying with soft
earnestness, " I like that — 0, I like that ! "
Adrian found it very pleasant to read his
poems to Miss Wilton.

** If you like," he said. " If you are sure
it won't bore your's

Of course I like," she answered.

It's the first sonnet of all, you know,"
he explained, " a sort of dedication. I
didn't like the one I had, so I shall make
them put this in instead." He pulled his
papers out of his pocket, and took a leaf of

manuscript from among the printed pages.
*' You must tell me what you think of it,"
he said, and cleared his throat.

At that moment Molly opened the door.
She saw the state of affairs at a glance, and
slipped into her place, as quietly as if she
had come into church late, and spied a
convenient free seat.

Adrian read —

** Have not all songs been sung, all loves been told 1
What shall I say when nought is left unsaid ?
The world is fill of memories of the dead,
Echoes, and relics. Here's no virgin gold,
But all assayed, none left for me to mould
Into new coin, and at your feet to shed.
Each piece is mint-marked with some j^oet's head,
Tested and rung in tributes manifold.

for a single word should he mine own —
And not the homage of long-studied art.
Common to all, for you who stand apart !
weariness of measures tried and known !
Yet in their rhythm, you — if you alone —
Should hear the passionate pulses of my heart ! "

L 2

As he finished he lifted his eyes and
looked at Amy. Where else should a
young man look, to emphasise the meaning
of his love-poem, except into a woman's
sympathising eyes ? But the look, mere
matter of course as it was, startled and
silenced her. ^' You — if you alone ! " The
words, spoken with the soft fulness of
Adrian's pleasant voice, rang in her ears.
A young woman whose attractions were
recognised by all the family might very
well be pardoned for not at once perceiving
that the emphasis was purely artistic.

But the silence which would have been full
of meaning for the lover, frightened the poet.

You don't like it ! " he exclaimed,
anxiously.

Oh yes, I do — I like it very much."

*' But there is something wrong," Adrian
persisted. " I am sure you don't like it."

Indeed — indeed I do," the girl declared
fervently, and Molly chimed in with an
enthusiastic —

Oh, Mr. Scarlett, it's charming ! ''

It's very kind of you to say so," he
replied, pocketing his sonnet and going
towards the piano, still with a slightly
troubled expression. " Shall we try that
duet now ? "

Molly's thoughts were very easily diverted
from poetry. She set up the music ; but
just as she was about to strike the first
note, an idea occurred to her, and spinning
half round on the stool —

*' Amy," she said, ''' do ;i/ou call that Mr
Harding so very good-looking ? "

Amy was taken by surprise.
"11 oh no ! " she answered.
There ! " Molly exclaimed, looking up
at Scarlett.

Why, what do you mean ? " Miss Wilton
asked. " Somehow I can't fancy he'll live.
Whenever I look at that man's face I think
of death."

What a queer idea ! " said the younger
sister reflectively. "Well, he certainly
doesn't look strong, and I should think
that Eobinson boy would be enough to
worry anybody into an early grave."

Adrian, standing by the piano, raised his
eyes to the old mirror, as if he half expected
to see the pale face with its watchful eyes
below the gleaming surface of the glass.
But it reflected only a vague confusion of
curtain and wall-paper, and the feathery
foliage of a palm.

I say," said Molly, " had you met him
before this morning, or did you introduce
yourselves ? "

We introduced ourselves. I found he

knew a place where I stayed last summer.
Don't you remember," he said, looking across
at Amy, " the old house I told you about ? "

I remember. Where you wrote that
bit, 'Waiting hy the Sundial ?^^

Scarlett nodded.

Yes. Well, I found he knew it well
in fact it turned out that he was a
connection "

What, of your friends there ? "

No, not of my friends, of the old family
who used to have the place."

''Oh, your friends aren't the old family
then ? " said Molly.

No, they are not. I ought to say they
were not — there were only two of them," he
added in an explanatory fashion, " old Mr.
Hayes, and his niece Miss Strange, and Mr.
Harding told me to-day that the old man
was dead. I didn't know it."

Molly looked up sympathetically, but, ashe
did not seem to be overpowered with
grief, she went on, after a moment —

Isn't it funny how, when one has never
heard a name, and then one does hear it,
one is sure to hear it again in three or four
different ways directly % Did you ever
notice that ? "

Mr. Scarlett wasn't sure that he had, but
he agreed that it was a very remarkable
law.

"Yell it always is so — you notice," she
said. " Now I don't remember that I ever
knew of anybody of the name of Strange
in all my life, and now the Ashfordss have
got a Miss Strange staying with them, and
here your friend is a Miss Strange."

His glance quickened a little at this illustration
of the rule in question.

*' Curious ! " he said. " And who is this

Miss Strange who is staying with the
Ashfordss ? "

Oh, she is a clergyman's daughter from
Devonshire. She is very pretty. Amy,
don't you think that Miss Strange is
pretty 1 "

Very pretty," said Amy, taking a book
from the table.

Yes, very pretty, for that style," Molly
repeated.

And what is her particular style ? "
Adrian asked, keeping his eyes, which were
growing eager, fixed upon the keyboard.

"Oh, I don't know — she's rather small,"
said Molly lamely (Barbara was not as tall
as Amy Wilton), " and she is dark — too
dark, I think." (Amy was decidedly fair.)
She has a quantity of black hair. Do
you like black hair ? " (Amy's was wound
in shining golden coils,) " and rather a

colour, and fine eyes. Oh, dear, how difficult
it is to describe people ! "

It might be so, and yet young Scarlett,
as he listened, could actually see a pair of
soft eyes shining under darkly pencilled
brows, a cloud of shadowy hair, and lips of
deep carnation. It would rather have
seemed that Miss Molly Wilton excelled
in the art of description.

Do you know what her name is ? " he
asked in an indifferent voice, stooping a
little to look at a speck on one of the keys,
and touching it with a neat finger-nail.

What, clo you think it may be your
Miss Strange ? "

It's possible," he said. " Her people were
somewhere in that part of the world."

I did hear her name — no, don't say
it ! Amy, do you remember Miss Strange's
name ? "

Amy looked up absently.

*' Something old-fashioned — wasn't it Barbara
? "

Adrian had lifted his head, and their eyes
met. In that moment the girl saw what a
glance could mean. It was just a flash of
light, and then his ordinary look.

Yes," he said, " that's the name ; it
must be the Miss Strange I know."

Dear me ! " said Molly, '' I hope I didn't
say any harm of her just now ! You'd better
go and call. You remember the Ashfordss, you
went with us to a garden party at their place
when you were staying here two years ago."

Adrian smiled, and moved towards the
window, forgetting his engagement at the
piano.

Oh ! " said the disappointed musician,
aren't we to have the duet then ? "

I beg your pardon," he answered, coming

back with bright promptitude, " Tm quite
ready."

But Amy, as their voices rose and filled
the room, sat gazing at the page which she
did not read. She had seen how Adrian
Scarlett could look, when he heard the name
of Barbara. And she had thought, because
he turned towards her when he read a
sonnet — she had thought — what ? A pink
flush dyed her delicate skin. Our pardonable
mistakes are precisely what we ourselves
can never pardon.

The song being ended young Scarlett
made his escape. He was half amused,
half indignant.

*' Sandmoor near Ilfracombe ! Confound
the fellow, he knew where she was all the
time, and I thought he was rather unwilling
to give me her Devonshire address ! Sand-moor
near Ilfracombe indeed ! "

CHAPTEE Vii

IN Hatfield LANE.

When Reynold Harding assured Miss
Wilton that it made very little difference to
him whether he got rid of his pupil for a
day or not, he told a lie. From the moment
when he heard of Guy's holiday, he had
resolved in his own mind that on that
day of freedom, he would see Barbara
Strange.

He knew that she was staying with the
Ashfordss, and he had heard the Robinson
girls talking about her one day after
luncheon.

That pretty little Devonshire girl finds
it dull, I think," said Violet.

Who wouldn't ? " her sister exclaimed.
She has had time to hear all old Ashford's
stories a dozen times before this, and they
are stupid enough the first time. But 
you know she finds it dull ? "

They say she is always running about
the fields looking for primroses and cowslips.
I saw her when I was out riding this morning,
leaning on the gate into Nutfield Lane,
with her hands full of them."

How very picturesque ! Looking into
the lane for some more ? "

"Or for some one to help her carry what
she'd got. I don't know what I oughtn't be
driven to, myself, if I had to listen to old
Ashford's prosing, and then go crawling out
for a couple of hours boxed up in Mother
Ashford's stuffy old brougham, two or three

times a week. And Willy Ashford hardly
ever comes, now he's engaged to that girl in
Kensington."

No," said Muriel, " and I don't know
that he would mend matters much if he did.
Well, perhaps somebody with a taste for
cowslips and innocence, will happen to walk
along Nutfield Lane next time Miss Strange
is looking over the gate. What did you
think of doing this afternoon ? "

They where standing in the window, and
speaking low. But their voices were metallic
and penetrating, and the tutor, who was
watching Guy's progress through a meal,
which had worn out his sisters' patience,
heard every word. He had his back to
the light, and the boy did not see the black
full veins on his forehead.

*' But I want some more tart," said
Guy.

The request was granted with careless
liberality.

Is that enou D-h ? " Harding asked.

The boy eyed it. He did not think he
could possibly manage any more, but he
said —

*' I don't know," just as a measure of
precaution.

Well, eat that first," said the other, and
sat, resting his head on his hand.

He knew Nutfield Lane. It was three or
four miles from the Priory ; Guy and he
went that way sometimes. He remembered
a gate there, with posts set close to a couple
of towering elms, that arched it with their
budding boughs, and thrust their roots
above the trodden pathway. There was a
meadow beyond, the prettiest possible background
for a pretty little Devonshire girl
with her hands full of cowslips. As to her

looking out for any one — he would like to
walk straight up to those vulgar, chattering,
expensive young women, and knock their
heads together. It seemed to Harding that
there would be something very soothing
and satisfying about such an expression of
his opinion, if only it were possible ! But
it could not be, and he relinquished the
thought with a sigh, as he had relinquished
the pursuit of other unattainable joys.

'* N — no, I don't want any more," said
Guy, regretfully. *' Only some more beer."
Harding nodded, with that absent-minded
acquiescence which had endeared him to his
pupil. Guy was only to him like a buzzing
fly, or any other tiresome little presence,
to be endured in silence, and, as far as
possible, ignored. But when that afternoon
the boy came to him with the announcement
that he should be twelve on Tuesday,
VOL. n. M

and his father was going to take him somewhere
for the whole day, Reynolds raised his
head from the exercise he was correcting,
and looked at him fixedly.

That's all right," he said, after a moment.

In that moment he had made up his mind.
He wanted to see Barbara. And then ? He
did not know v^^hat then, but he wanted to
see her.

The white spring sunshine lighted the
page which Guy had scrawled and blotted,
and Reynold sat with the pen between his
fingers, dreaming. He would see Barbara,
but he would not even attempt to think
what he would do or say when they met.
He had planned and schemed before, and
chance had swept all his schemes away. Now
he would leave it all to chance ; it was
enough for him to think that he would
certainly see her again.

He would see her, not standing as lie had
seen her first, in sad autumnal scenery, not
coming towards him in the pale firelight room,
not walking beside him to the village, while
the wind drove flights of dead leaves across
the grey curtain of the sky, not as she
faced him, frightened and breathless, in the
quivering circle of lamplight on the stairs,
not as he remembered her last of all, when
she stood beyond the boundary which he
might not cross, and Mitch hurst Place rose
behind her in the light of the moon, white
and dead as dry bones. It seemed to him
that it must always be autumn at Mitchell
with dim, short days, and gusty
nights, and the chilly atmosphere laden
with odours of decay. But all this was
past and over, and he was going to meet
Barbara in the spring. Barbara in April —
all happy songs of love, all the young

M 2

gladness of the year, all tender possibilities
were summed up in those three words. He
was startled at the sudden eagerness which
escaped from his control, and throbbed and
bounded within him when he resolved to
see her once again. But he did not betray
it outwardly, unless, perhaps, by an attempt
to write his next correction with a dry
pen.

He listened to Guy's excited chatter
as the day drew near, and set out with
him to carry the invitation to Bob Wilton,
in a mood which, on the surface, was
one of apathetic patience. Nothing he
could do would hasten the arrival of
Tuesday, but nevertheless it was coming.
When the two boys went off to the stables
together, he waited. He mio^ht as well
wait in the Wilton* sunny drawing-room
as anywhere else. And when some one

entered by the further door and began to
play, he listened, not ill pleased. He had
no ear for music, but the defect was purely
physical, and except for that hindrance
he might have loved it. As it was he
could not appreciate the meaning of what
was played beyond the curtain, nor could
he recognise the skill and delicacy with
which it was rendered. To him it was
only a bright, formless ripple of sound,
gliding vaguely by, till suddenly Barbara's
tune, rounded and clear and silver sweet,
awoke him from his reverie.

For a moment he sat breathless with
wonder. Only a dull memory of her music
had stayed with him, a kind of tuneless
beating of its measure, and the living
notes, melodiously full, pursued that poor
ghost through his heart and brain. His
pulses throbbed as if the girl herself were

close at hand. Then he rose, and softly-stepped
across the room. Who was it who
was playing Barbara s tune ? Who but the
man who had played it to Barbara ?

Considered as a piece of reasoning this
was weak. Anybody would have told him
the name of the composer, and could have
assured him that dozens and scores of men
might play the thing. Barbara might have
heard it on a barrel organ ! But Harding's
thoughts went straight to the one man
who had left music lying about at Mitchell
with his name, "Adrian Scarlett,"
written on it. Barbara's tune jangled
wildly in his ears ; she had learnt it from
this man, or she had taught it to him.

Thus it happened that Adrian looked up
from his playing, and saw the picture in
the mirror, the face that followed him with
its intent and hostile gaze. And Reynolds,

standing apart and motionless, watched the
musician, and noted his air of careless ease
and mastery, the smile which lingered on
his lips, and the way in which he threw
back his head and let li's glances rove,
though of course he did not know that all
these things were a little accentuated by
Adrian's self-consciousness under his scrutiny.
He was sure, even before a word had been
uttered, that this was the man whose name
had haunted him at Mitchelhurst, and who
won ]mr. Pryor's heart by singing at his
penny reading. To Reynold, standing in
the shadow, Scarlett was the type of the
conquering young hero, swaggering a little
in the consciousness of his popularity and
his facile triumphs.

To some extent he wronged Adrian, and
on one point Adrian wronged him. He
believed that Harding had exulted in the

idea of putting him on the wrong scent
with his " Sandmoor near Ilfracombe."
But in point of fact Harding had given the
address with real reluctance. He had been
asked where the Strange lived, and had
told the truth. To have supplemented it
with information as to Barbara's whereabouts
would have been to assume a knowledge
of Scarlett's meaning in asking the
question, a thing intolerable and impossible.
Yet Harding's morbid pride was galled by
his unwilling deceit, and he wished that
the subject had never been mentioned. He
had no doubt that his rival would go to
Sandmoor, but he did not exult in the
thought of the disappointment that awaited
him there.

Still, when Tuesday came it undoubtedly
was a satisfaction to feel that the express
was carrying Mr. Scarlett further and

further from the gate which led into
Nutfield Lane. Otherwise the day was of
but doubtful promise, its blue blotted
with rain-clouds, which Guy Robinson regarded
as a personal injury. It brightened,
however, after the birthday party had
started, and Reynolds set out on his rather
vague errand, under skies which shone and
threatened in the most orthodox April
fashion. The heavens might have laid a
wager that they would show a dozen different
faces in the hour, from watery
sadness to glittering joy. It was hardly
a day on which Mrs. Ashford would care
to creep out in her brougham, but a little
Devonshire girl, tired of a dull house,
might very well face it with an umbrella
and her second-best hat.

Harding made sure that she would. If
she failed to do so he had no scheme

ready. He did not know the Ashford,
and to go up to their house and ask for
Miss Strange, could lead, at the best, to
nothing but a formal interview under the
eyes of an old lady who would consider
his visit an impertinence. But Barbara
would come ! It was surely time that his
luck should turn. When the hazard of
the die has been against us a dozen times
we are apt to have an irrational conviction
that our chance must come with the next
throw, and Harding strolled round the
Ashfordss' place, questioning only how, and
how soon, she would appear. To see her
once — it was so little that he asked ! — to
see her, and to hold her hand for a
moment in his own, and to make her lookup
at him, straight into his eyes. And
if she had the fancy still, as he somehow
thought she had, to hear him say that he

forgave her, why, he would say it. As if
he had ever blamed her for the little forgetfulness
which had ended all his hopes
of fortune ! And yet, if Barbara could
have known how near that fortune had
been ! The old man's health had failed
suddenly during the winter, the great inheritance
was about to fall in, and Reynolds
would have been a partner and his own
master within a few months from his
decision. " Well," he said to himself as he
leant on the gate in Nutfield Lane, "and
even so, what harm has she done ? Was I
not going to say No before I saw her ? And
if she persuaded me to write the Yes which
turned to No at the bottom of her apron
pocket, am I to complain of her for that ? "

He thought that he would ask her for a
flower, a leaf, or a budding twig from the
hedge, just by way of remembrance. At

present lie lead none, except the unopened
letter which she had given back to him
in his lodgings at Mitchelhurst.

The day grew fairer as it passed. Though
a couple of sparkling showers, which filled
the sunlit air with the quick flashing of
falling drops, drove him once and again for
shelter to a hay-stack in a neighbouring
meadow, the blue field overhead widened
little by little, and shone through the
tracery of leafless boughs. He felt his
spirits rising almost in spite of himself.
He came back, after the second shower, by
the field path to the lane, and was in the
act of getting over the gate when he heard
steps coming quickly towards him. Not
Barbara's, they were from the opposite
direction. He sprang hastily down, and
found himself face to face with Mr. Adrian
Scarlett, who was cummins a tune.

Reynolds drew a long breath, and stood
as if he were turned to stone. Adrian
was only mortal, he lifted his hat, and
smiled his greeting, with a look in his grey-blue
eyes which said as plainly as possible,
Bidrit you tJdnk I was at Sandmoor ? "
and then walked on towards the Ashfordss'
house, where he had been to the tennis
party two years before. He would be
very welcome there. And if he should
chance to meet Barbara by the way, he
knew very well what he was going to
say to her. But a- moment later he felt
a touch of pity for the luckless fellow
who had not outwitted him after all.
Poor devil ! " he said, as he had said
the day before.

The epithet, which, like many another,
is flung about inappropriately enough, hit
the mark for once. Reynold stood pale

and dumb, choked with bitter hate, but
helpless and hopeless enough for pity. He
would do no more with hate than he had
done with love. He knew it, and presently
he turned and walked drearily away.
He did not want to see Barbara when she
had met Adrian Scarlett. He had meant
to see her first, to end his unlucky little
love-story with a few gentle words, to
hold her hand for a moment, and then to
step aside and leave her free to go her
way. What harm would there have been ?
But this man, who was to have everything,
had baulked him even in this. She would
not care for his pardon now, and perhaps
it would hardly have been worth taking.
If one is compelled to own one's forgiveness
superfluous it is difficult to keep it sweet.

So he did not see Barbara when, a little
later, she came up Nutfield Lane by Scarlettt's

side. They stopped by the gate, and
leant on it. Barbara had no flowers in
her hands, but it seemed to her that all
the country-side was blossoming.

She looked a little older than when
Adrian had bidden her his mute farewell
at jMitchelhurst. The expression of her
face was at once quickened and deepened,
her horizon was enlarged, though the gaze
which questioned it was as innocent as ever.
But her dark eyes kept a memory of the
proud patience with which she had waited
through the winter. There had been times
when her faith in the Clergy List had been
shaken, and she had doubted whether
Adrian would ever consult its pages, and
find out where her father lived. She did
not blame him ; he was free as air ; yet
those had been moments of almost unbearable
loneliness. She never spoke of him

to anybody ; to have been joked and
pitied by Louisa and Hetty would have
been hateful to her. She thought of him
continually, and dreamed of him sometimes.
But there was only a limited satisfaction
in dreaming of Adrian Scarlett ; he was apt
to be placed in absurdly topsy-turvy circumstances,
and to behave unaccountably.
Barbara felt, regretfully, that a girl who
was parted from such a lover should have
dreamed in a loftier manner. She was
ashamed of herself, although she knew she
could not help it. Now, however, there
was no need to trouble herself about dreams
or clergy lists ; Adrian was leaning on the
gate by her side.

'' What you must have thought of me ! "
he was saying. " Never to take the least
notice of your uncle's death ! I can't
think how I missed hearing of it."

It was in the Twines and some of the
other papers," said Barbara.

The melancholy little announcement had
seemed to her a sort of appeal to her
absent lover.

*' I never saw it. I was — busy just
then," he explained with a little hesitation.
** I suppose I didn't look at the papers. I
have been fancying you at Mitchelhurst all
the time, and promising myself that I would
go back there, and find you where I found
you first."

Barbara did not speak ; she leaned back
and looked up at him with a smile. Adrian's
answering gaze held hers as if it enfolded it.

I mi(/Jd have written," he said, '' or
inquired — I might have done something,
at any rate I I can't think how it was I
didn't ! But I'd got it into my head
that I wanted to get those poems of

VOL. II. N

mine out — wanted to go back to you with
my volume in my hand, and show you the
dedication. I was waiting for that — I
never thought "

Yes," said the girl with breathless
admiration and approval. "And are they
finished now ? ''

Confound the poems ! " cried Adrian with
an amazed, remorseful laugh. A stronger
word had been on his lips. " Don't talk
of them, Barbara! To think that I neglected
you while I was polishing those
idiotic rhymes, and that you think it was
all right and proper ! Oh, my dear, if you
tried for a week you couldn't make me feel
smaller ! If — if anything had happened
to you, and I had been left with my
trumpery verses — "

You shall not call them that ! Don't
talk so ! "

*swell, suppose you had got tired of
waiting, and had come across some better
fellow. There was time enough, and it
would have served me rjolit."

1 don't know about serving you right,
but there wouldn't have been time for me
to get tired of waiting," said Barbara, and
added more softly, " not if it had been all
my life'

Listen to that ! " Adrian answered, leaning
backward, with his elbows on the gate.
*^A11 her life— for ?;^6'.^"

His quick fancy sketched that life : first
the passionate eagerness, throbbing, hoping,
trusting, despairing ; then submission to
the inevitable, the gradual extinction of
expectation as time went on ; and finally
the dimness and placidity of old age, satisfied
to worship a pathetic memory. Hardly
love, rather love's ghost, that shadowy

N 2

sentiment, cut off from the strong actual
existence of men and women, and thinly
nourished on recollections, and fragments
of mild verse. Scarlett turned away, as
from a book of dried flowers, to Barbara.

'' What did you think of me ? " he said,
still dwelling on the same thought. " Never
one word ! "

'swell, I felt as if there were a word
—at least, a kind of a word — once," she
said. " I went with Louisa to the dentist
last February — it was Valentine's Day —
she wanted a tooth taken out. There
were some books and papers lying about
in the waiting-room. One of them was an
old Christmas number, with something of
yours in it. Do you remember ? "

N— no," said Scarlett doubtfully.

Oh, don't say it wasn't yours ! A
little poem — it had your name at the end.

There can't be another, surely," said Barbara,
with a touch of resentment at the
idea. *' There were two illustrations, but
I didn't care much for them ; I didn't
think they were good enough. I read the
poem over and over. I did so hope I
should recollect it all ; but he was ready
for Louisa before I had time to learn it
properly, and our name was called. It
was a very bad tooth, and Louisa had gas,
you know. I was obliged to go. I am
30 slow at learning by heart. Louisa would
have known it all in half the time; but I
did wish I could have had just one minute
more."

Tell me what it was," Adrian said.

My Jove loves me'' Barbara began in a
timid voice.

Oh — that ! Yes, I remember now. The
man who edits that magazine is a friend

of mine, and he asked me for some little
thing for his Christmas number. If I had
thought you would have cared I could have
sent it to you."

Her eyes shone with grateful happiness.

But 1 didn't," said Adrian. '' I didn't
do anything. Well, go on, Barbara, tell
me how much you remembered."

Barbara paused a moment, looking back
to the open page on the dentist's green
tablecloth. As she spoke she could see
poor Louisa, awaiting her summons with a
resigned and swollen face, an old gentleman
examining a picture in the Illustrated London
News through his eyeglass, and a
lady apprehensively turning the ^d.gQ^ of
the dentist's pamphlet. On Diseases of the
Teeth and Gums. Outside, the rain was
streaming down the window panes. Barbara
recalled all this with Adrian's verses.

*' My love loves me. Then therefore care
For rain or shine, for foul or fair ?

My love loves me.
My daylight hours are golden wine,
And all the happy stars are mine,
My love loves me ! "

"Lovelies away I' she began more doubtfully,
and looked at Adrian, who took it up.

Love flies aica.y, and summer mirth
Lies cold and grey upon the earth,

Love flies away,
The sun has set, no more to rise,
And far, beneath the shrouded skies,

Love flies aivay."

Yes ! " cried Barbara, '' that's it ! I had
forgotten those last lines — how stupid of
me''

*not at all," said Adrian. "You remembered
all that concerned you, the
rest was quite superfluous."

*' Oh, but how I did try to remember
the end ! " she continued pensively. " It

haunted me. If I had only had a minute
more ! But all the same I felt as if I had
had something of a message from you that
day. It was my valentine, wasn't it ? "

Scarlett's eyes, with a look half whimsical,
half touched with tender melancholy,
met hers.

I lois we were worth a little more
my poems and I ! " said he. '' I wish I
were a hero, and had written an epic.
Yes, by Jove ! an epic in twelve books."

Oh, not for me ! " cried Barbara.

CHAPTER IX.

a verse of an old song.

Adrian ! "

The name was uttered with just a hint
of hesitating appeal.

** At your service," Scarlett answered
promptly. He had a bit of paper before
him, and was pencilling an initial letter to
be embroidered on Barbara's handkerchiefs.

** Adrian, did you hear that Mr. Harding
you know whom I mean — was ill ? "

Yes, I did hear something about it."
He put his head on one side and looked
critically at his work. "Is it anything
serious ? "

Yes," said Barbara. " I'm afraid it
is."

'' Poor fellow ! I'm very sorry. How
the days do shorten, don't they ? "

Yes," said Barbara again. " They spoke
as if he were o^oiDo- to — die."

Really ? I'm sorry for that. It is
strange," Adrian continued, putting in a
stroke very delicately, " but one of the
Wilton girls used always to say he looked
like it. I think it was Molly."

Barbara sighed but did not speak.

'' Let's see," said Adrian, " he left the
Robinsons — what happened ? Didn't the
boy get drowned ? "

"No!" scornfully, "he fell into the
water, but somebody fished him out."

"Not Harding?"

"No, somebody else. Mr. Harding went
in, but he couldn't swim, and he didn't

reach Guy. But lie got a chill — it seems
that was the beginning of it all."

Scarlett leant back in his chair, twirling
the pencil between his fingers and looking
at Barbara, whose eyes were fixed upon the
rug. They were alone in the drawing-room
of a house in Kensington. Their weddings
to be in about six weeks' time, and
Barbara was staying for a fortnight with
an aunt who had undertaken to help her
in her shopping — a delightful aunt who
paid bills, and who liked a quiet nap in
the afternoon. Adrian sometimes went outwith
them, and always showed great respect
for the good lady's slumbers.

Well," he said, after a pause, *^ and
where is Mr. Harding now ? "

"At his mother's. She lives at Westbourne
Park."

Westbourne Park," Scarlett repeated.

*' By Jove, that's a change from Mitchell
! A nice healthy neighbourhood, and
convenient for Whiteley's, I suppose ; but
lovat a change ! I say, Barbara, how do
you happen to know so much about the
Hardings ? "

'' Adrian ! "

And again she seemed to appeal and
hesitate in the mere utterance of his name.
She crossed the room, and touched his
shoulder with her left hand, which had a
ring shining on it — a single emerald, a
point of lucid colour on her slim finger.

Adrian, I wanted to ask you, would
there be any harm if "

No," said Adrian gravely, " no harm
at all. Not the slightest. Certainly not."

He took her other hand in his.

She looked doubtfully at him.

What do you mean ? "

What do you mean, Barbara ? "

*' I wanted to go to the door and ask
how he is — that's alL I feel as if I
shouldn't like to go away without a word.
We didn't part quite good friends, you
know. And last year he was making his
plans, and now we are making ours, and

he Oh, Adrian, why is life so sad ?

And yet I never thought I could be as
happy as I am now."

It's rather mixed, isn't it ? " he said,
smiling up at her, and he drew her hand
to his lips. Barbara's eyes were full of
tears. To hide them, she stooped quickly
and touched his hair with a fleeting kiss.

** By all means ^o and ask after your
friend before you leave town," said Adrian.
Let us hope he isn't as bad as they
think."

** He is," said the girl.

Long before this she had told Adrian
about her night adventure at Mitchelhurst.
She had been perfectly frank about it, and
yet she sometimes doubted her own confession.
It seemed so little when she spoke
of it to him, so unimportant, so empty of
all meaning. Could it be that, and only
that, which had troubled her so strangely ?
He had smiled as he listened, and had
put it aside. " I don't suppose you did
very much harm' he said, " but any one
with half an eye could see that he wasn't
the kind of fellow to take things easily.
Poor Barbara ! " She stood now with something
of the same perplexity on her brow ;
the thought of Reynold Harding always
perplexed her.

There was a brief silence, during which
she abandoned her hands to Adrian's clasp,
and felt his touch run through her, from

sensitive finger tips to her very heart. Then
she spoke quickly, yet half unwillingly,
Very well then, I shall go'

You wish it ? " Adrian exclaimed, swift
to detect every shade of meaning in her
voice. " Because, if not, there is no reason
why you should. If you hadn't said just
now you wanted to go "

She drew one hand away and turned a
little aside. " I know," she said, " I did
say it. Really and truly I don't want to
go ; it makes me uncomfortable to think
about him, but I want to have been."

Get it over then. Ask, and come
away as quickly as you can."

To-morrow ? " said Barbara. " I thought,
perhaps, as aunt was not going with us
about those photograph frames, that tomorrow
might do. I couldn't go with
aunt."

You have thought of everything. Goon."



*' You might put me into a cab after we
leave the shop," she continued. " I think
that would be best. I would go and just
inquire, and then come straight on here. I
don't want to explain to anybody, and if
you say it is all right "

Why, it is all right, of course. That's
settled then," said Adrian.

The next day was dreary even for
late November. Adrian and Barbara passed
through the frame-maker's door into an
outer gloom; chilly and acrid with a touch
of fog, and variegated with slowly-descending
blacks. Everything was dirty and damp.
There were gas-lights in the shop windows
of a dim tawny yellow.

Scarlett looked right and left at the

sodden street and then upward in the
direction of the sky. ** This isn't very
nice' he said ; *' hadn't we better go
straight home ? "

No — please ! " Barbara entreated. *' We
have filled up tomorrow and the next
day, and aunt has asked some people to
afternoon tea on Saturday."

'* All right ; it may be better when we
get to Westbourne Park. I'll go a bit of
the way with you."

He looked for a cab. Barbara waited

passively by his side, gazing straight before

her. She had never looked prettier than

she did at that moment, standing on the

muddy step in the midst of the universal

dinginess. Excitement had given tension

and brilliancy to her face, she was flushed

and warm in her wrappings of dark fur,

and above the rose-red of her cheeks her
VOL. n. • o

eyes were shining like stars. " Here weare
! " said Scarlett, as he hailed a loitering
hansom.

They drove northward, passing rows of
shops, all blurred and glistening in the
foggy air, and wide, muddy crossings, where
people started back at the driver's hoarse
shout. Scarlett, with Barbara's hand in his,
watched the long procession of figures on
the pavement — dusky figures which looked
like marionnettes, going mechanically and
ceaselessly on their way. To the young
man, driving by at his ease, their measured
movements had an air of ineffectual toil ;
they were on the treadmill, they hurried
for ever, and were always left behind.
Looking at them he thou Hit of the myriads
in the rear, stepping onward, stepping continually.
If they had really been marionnettes
! But the droll think; was that each

figure had a history ; there was a world-picture
in every one of those little, jogging
heads.

Presently the shops became scarce, the
procession on the pavement grew scattered
and thin. They were driving up long, dim
streets of stuccoed houses. They passed a
square or two where trees, black and bare,
rose above shadowy masses of evergreens
all pent together within iron railings. One
might have fancied that the poor things
had strayed into the smoky wilderness, and
been impounded in that melancholy place.

AVe must be almost there," said Adrian
at last, when they had turned into a cross
street where the plastered fronts were lower
and shabbier. He put the question to the
cabman.

Next turning but one, sir," was the
answer.

• 2

Then I'll get out here," said Scarlet.

Barbara murmured a word of farewell,
but she felt that it was best. She always
thought of Reynold Harding as the unhappiest
man she knew, and she could not have
driven up to this door to flaunt her great
happiness before his eyes. She leant forward
quickly, and caught a glimpse of that
dear happiness of hers on the side walk,
smiling and waving a farewell, the one
bright and pleasant thing to look upon in
the grey foulness of the afternoon.

A turning — then it was very near indeed !
Another dull row of houses, each with its
portico and little flight of steps. Here
and there was a glimmer of gas-light in the
basement windows. Then another corner
and they were in the very street, and
going more slowly as the driver tried to
make out the numbers on the doors. At

that moment it suddenly occurred to Miss
Strange that her errand was altogether
absurd and impossible. She was seized
with an overpowering paroxysm of shyness.
Her heart stood still, and then began to
throb with labouring strokes. Why had
she ever come ?

Had it depended on herself alone she
would certainly have turned round and
gone home, but the cab stopped with a
jerk opposite one of the stuccoed houses,
and there was an evident expectation that
she would get out and knock at the door.
What would the cabman think of her if
she refused, and what could she say to
Adrian after all the fuss she had made ?
Well, perhaps she could face Adrian, who
always understood. But the cabman ! She
alighted and went miserably up the steps.

A servant answered her knock, and stood

waiting. Between the maid and the mano



Barbara plucked up a desperate courage,
and asked if Mrs. Harding was at home.
She was.

How is Mr. Harding to-day ? " inquired
Barbara, hesitating on the threshold.

Much as usual, thank you, miss," the
girl replied. " Won't you step in ? "

She obeyed. After all, as she reflected,
she need only stay a few minutes, and to
go away with merely the formal inquiry,
made and answered at the door, would
be unsatisfactory. Mr. Harding might
never hear that she had called. She followed
the maid into a vacant sitting-room,
and gave her a card to take to her mistress.
The colour rushed to her very forehead
as she opened the case. Her Uncle Hayes
had had her cards printed with Mitchell
hurst Place in the corner, and though, oncoming

to Kensington, she had drawn her
pen through it, and written her aunt's
address instead, it was plain enough to
see. How would a Bothwell like to read
Mitchelhitrst Place on a stranger's card ?
She felt that she was a miserable little
upstart.

Mrs. Harding did not come immediately,
and Barbara as she waited was reminded
of the dentist's room at Ilfracombe. " It's
just like it," she said to herself, " and I
can't have gas, so it's worse, really. And
she hasn't got as many books either."
This brought back a memory, and her
lips and eyes began to smile —

My love loves me. Tien wherefore care
For rain or slmie, for foul or fair ?
Mis love loves me."

But the smile was soon followed by a sigh.
The door opened and Mrs. Harding

came in. To Barbara, still in her teens,
Reynold's mother was necessarily an old
woman, but she recognised her beauty
almost in spite of herself, and stood amazed.
Mrs. Harding wore black, and it was rather
shabby black, but she had the air of a
great lady, and her visitor, in her presence,
was a shy blushing child. She apologised
for her delay, and the apology was a condescension.


*you don't know me," said the girl in
timid haste, "but I know Mr. Harding a
little, and I thought I would call."

Oh, yes," said Kate, " I know you byname.
Miss Strange. My son was indebted
to Mr. Hayes for an invitation to Mitchell
Place last autumn."

I'm sure we were very glad," Barbara
began, and then stopped confusedly, remembering
that they had turned Mr. Reynold

Harding out of the house before his
visit was over. The situation was embarrassing.
" I wish we could have made
it pleasant for him," she said, and blushed
more furiously than ever.

** Have made Mitchelhurst Place pleas-after
? " Mrs. Harding repeated. " Thank
you, you are very kind. I believe he had
a great wish to see the Place."

It's a fine old house," said Barbara,
conversationally. ** I have left it now.'

So 1 supposed. I was sorry to see in
the paper that Mr. Hayes was dead. I
remember him very well, five-and-twenty
or thirty years ago."

I am going abroad," the girl continued.
*^ I — I don't exactly know how long we
shall be away. I am going to be married.
But they told me Mr. Harding was ill — I
hope it is not serious ? I thought, as I

was near, that I should like to ask before I
went."

Mrs. Harding considered her with suddenly
awakened attention. " He is very
ill," she said, briefly. *' You know what is
the matter with him ? "

Yes, I suppose so."

He was not very strong as a boy. Atone
time he seemed better, but it was only
for a time."

"I'm very sorry," said Barbara, standing
up. " Please tell him I came to ask how
he was before I went."

Mrs. Harding rose too, and looked
straight into her visitor's eyes. ** Would
you like to see him ? "

I don't know," the girl faltered. " I'm not
sure he would care to see me. If he would — "

Mrs. Harding interrupted her, 'excuse
me a moment," and vanished.

Barbara, left alone, stood confounded.
She was taken by surprise, and yet she
was conscious that to see Reynold Harding
was what she had really been hoping and
dreading from the first. Some one moved
overhead. Perhaps he would say " No,"
in that harsh, sudden voice of his. Well,
then, she would escape from this house,
which was like a prison to her, and go
back to Adrian, knowing that she had done
all she could. Perhaps he would laugh,
and say "Yes."

She listened with strained attention. A
chair was moved, a fire was stirred, a door
was closed. Then her hostess reappeared.
*' Will you come this way ? " she said.

Barbara obeyed without a word. The
matter was taken out of her hands, and
nothing but submission was possible. The
grey dusk was gathering on the stairs, and

through a tall window, rimmed with squares
of red and blue, rose a view of roofs and
chimneys half drowned in fog. Barbara
passed onward and upward, went mutely
through a door which was opened for her,
and saw Reynold Harding sitting by the
fire. He lifted his face and looked at her.
In an instant there flashed into her memory
a verse of the old song of Barbara Aliens
sunof to her as a child for her name's sake : —

Slowly, slowly, site came up,
And slowly she came nigh him ;
And all she said when there she came,
Young man, I think you're dying.' "

The words, which she had sung to herself
many a time, taking pleasure in their grotesque
simplicity, presented themselves now
with such sudden and ghastly directness,
that a cold damp broke out on her forehead.
She set her teeth fast, fearing that Barbara s

speech would force its way through her
lips with an outburst of hysterical laughter.
What could she say, what could anybody
say, but, " Young man, I think you're
dying ? " The words were clamouring so
loudly in her ears that she glanced apprehensively
at Mrs. Harding to make sure
that they had not been spoken.

Reynolds's smile recalled her to herself,
and told her that he was reading too much
on her startled face. " Won't you sit
down ? " he said, pointing to a chair.
Before she took it she instinctively put
out her hand, and greeted him with a
murmur of speech. What she said she did
not exactly know, but not those hideous
words, thank God !

Mrs. Harding paused for a moment by
the fire, gazing curiously at her son, as
if she were studying a problem. Then

silently, in obedience to some sign of his,
or to some divination of her own, she
turned away and left the two together.

Barbara looked over her shoulder at the
closing door, and her eyes in travelling
back to Harding's face took in the general
aspect of the room. It was fairly large and
lofty. Folding doors, painted a dull drab,
divided it from what she conjectured was
the sick man's bed-room. It was dull, it
was negative, not particularly shabby, not
uncomfortable, not vulgar, but hopelessly
dreary and commonplace. There was in it
no single touch of beauty or individuality
on which the eye could rest. Some years
earlier an upholsterer had supplied the
ordinary furniture, a paper-hanger had put
up an ordinary paper, and, except that
time had a little dulled and faded everything,
it remained as they had left it.

The drab was rather more drab, that was
all.

Well," said Reynolds from his arm-chair,
*' so you have come to see me."

*' I wanted to ask you how you were — I
heard you were ill," Barbara explained, and
it struck her that she was exactly like a
little parrot, saying the same thing over
and over again.

"Very kind of you," he replied. "Do
you want me to answer ? "

If — if you could say you were getting
a little better."

He smiled. " It looks like it, doesn't
it ? " he said, languidly.

Barbara's eyes met his for a moment,
and then she hung her head.

No, it did not look like it. Two candles
were burning on the chimney-piece, but the
curtains had not been drawn. Between the

two dim lights, yellow and grey, he sat,
leaning a little sideways, with a face like
the face of the dead, except for the great
sombre eyes which looked out of it, and
the smile which showed a glimpse of his
teeth. His hand hung over the arm of
his chair, the hot nerveless hand which
Barbara had taken in her own a moment
before.

I am so sorry," she said. " I hoped I
might have had some better news of you
before I went away. Did you know I was
going away — going to be married ? "

She looked up, putting the question in a
timid voice, and he answered "Yes," with
a slight movement of his head and eyelids.
*' I wish you all happiness."

Thank you," said Barbara gratefully.

*' And where are you going ? "

To Paris for a time, and then we shall

see. He" — this with a little hesitation —
he is very busy."

*' Busy — what, more poems ? " said the
man who had done with being busy.

Yes. Did you see his volume ? "

Harding shook his head. " I'm afraid
I'm a little past Mr. Scarlett's poetry."

Oh ! " said Barbara, *' of course one
can't read when one is ill. You ought to
rest."

'^ Yes," he assented, " I don't seem able
to manage that either, just at present, but
I dare say I shall soon. Meanwhile I sit
here and look at the fire."

'' Yes," said the girl. " Some people see
all sorts of things in the fire."

So they say," he answered listlessly.
"/ see it eating its heart out slowly. And
so you are going to Paris ? That was your
dream when you were at Mitchelhurst."

VOL. II. p

*' Yes — you told me to wait, and it would
come, and it is coming. Oh, but you had
dreams at Mitchelhurst, too, Mr. Harding !
I wanted them to come true as well as
mine."

Did you ? That was very kind of you.
Mitchelhurst was a great place for dreams,
wasn't it ? But I left mine there. Better
there."

'^ 1 felt ashamed just now," said Barbara,
*' when your mother spoke about your staying
with us at Mitchelhurst. She doesn't
know, then ? Oh, Mr. Harding, I hate to
think how we treated you in your old home,
and I know my poor uncle was sorry too ! "

What for ? People who can't agree are
better apart, and Mrs. Simmonds' lodgings
were comfortable enough," said Reynold.

Oh, but it wasn't right ! If you and
uncle had only met — "

Well, if all they tell us is true, I
suppose we shall before long. Let's hope
we may both be better tempered."

Don't ! " cried Barbara, with a glance
at the pale face opposite, and a remembrance
of her Uncle Hayes propped up
in the great bed at Mitchelhurst. Would
those two spectres meet and bow, in some
dim underworld of graves and skeletons ?
She could not picture them glorified in anyway,
could not fancy them otherwise than
as she had known them. '' Pray don't,"
she said again.

'every well," said Reynolds, "but why
not ? It makes no difference. Still, talk of
what you please."

Does it hurt you to talk ? "

"Yes, I believe it does. Everything
hurts me, and therefore nothing does. Soif
you like it any better, it doesn't."

F 2

I won't keep you long," said Barbara.
*' Perhaps I ought not to have come, but
I felt as if I could not leave England
without a word. You see, there is no
knowing how long I may be away — "

'' You were wise," said Reynolds. *' A
pleasant journey to you ! But don't come
here to look for me when you come back.
The fire will be out, and the room will be
swept and garnished. This is a very chilly
room when it is swept and garnished."

To Barbara it was a dim and suffocating
room at that moment. She hardly felt as
if it were really she who sat there, face to
face with that pale Bothwell shadow, and
she put up her hand and loosened the fur at
her throat.

** You do not mind my coming now ? "
she said, ignoring the latter half of his
speech. *' You remember that evening ?

You did not make me very welcome theu.'^
A tremulous little laugh ended the sentence.
He shifted his position in the big chair
with a weary effort, and let his head fall
back. "It's different," he said. "Everything
is different. I was alive then — five-and-twenty
— and I was afraid you might
get yourself into some trouble on my
account — you had told me how the Mitchell
people gossipped. / understood, but
they wouldn't have. Did the old man hear
of it?"

No," said Barbara ; "he was ill so soon."
Harding made a slight sign of comprehension.
" Well, it wouldn't be my business
to say anything now," he went on in
his hoarse low voice. " Besides, there is
nothing to say. If the Devil had a daughter,
she couldn't make any scandal out of an
afternoon call in my mother's house. She

couldn't suspect you of a flirtation with a
death's head. Visiting the sick — it is the
very pink of propriety."

Barbara felt herself continually baflOied.
And yet she could not accept her repulse.
There was something she wanted to say to
Mr. Harding, or rather, there was a word
she wanted him to say to her. If he would
but say it she would go. very gladly, for
the walls of the room, the heavy atmosphere,
and Reynolds's eyes, weighed upon
her like a nightmare. He had likened her
once in his thoughts to a little brown-plumage
bird, and she felt like a bird
that afternoon, a bird which had flown
into a gloomy cage, and sat, oppressed and
fascinated, with a palpitating heart. It
seemed to her that his eyes had been
upon her ever since she came in, and she
wanted a moment's respite.

It came almost as soon as the thought
had crossed her mind. Keynold coughed
painfully. She started to her feet, not
knowing what she ought to do, but a thin
hand, lifted in the air, signed to her to be
still. Presently the paroxysm subsided.

Don't you want anything ? " she ventured
to ask.

He shook his head. After a moment he
opened a little box on the table at his
elbow, and took out a lozenge. Barbara
dared not speak again. She looked at the
dull, smouldering fire. " Young man," she
said to herself with great distinctness,
'' Young man, 7 t/iij?/v you're dying."

She had the saddest heartache as she
thought of it. That for her there should
be life, London, Paris, the South — who
could tell what far-off cities and shores ?
who could tell how many years with

l)einQf carried forward on the full flood
of prosperity, had been left stranded and
wrecked, on the low, desolate shore of
death. It might have been Adrian passing
thus beyond recall, the sun might have
been dying out of her heaven, and at the
thought she turned away her head, to hide
the hot tears which welled into her eyes.

You are sorry for me," said Reynold.

It was true, though the tears had not been
for him. " I'm sorry you are ill," she said.
She got up as she spoke, and stood by the fire.

Very kind, but very useless," he answered
with a smile.

Useless ! " cried little Barbara. ^' I know
it is useless ! I know I can't do anything !
But, Mr. Harding, we were friends once,
were t we f

He was silent. " I thought we were ? "
she faltered.

Friends — yes, if you like. We will
say that we were — friends."

I thought we were' she repeated
humbly. *' I don't mean to make too
much of it, but I thought we were very
good friends, as people say, till that unlucky
evening — that evening when you and
Uncle Hayes — you were angry with me
then!"

'' That's a honos while a^o."

"It was my fault," she continued. "I
didn't mean any harm, but you had a right
to be vexed. And afterwards, that other
evening when I went to you — I don't know
what harm I did by forgetting your letter —
you would not tell me, but I know you
were angry. Afterwards, when I thought
of it, I could see that you had been keeping
it down all the time, you wouldn't reproach
me then and there," said Barbara, with

cheeks of flame, " but I understood when
I looked back. It was only natural that
you should be angry. It was very good of
you not to say more."

I think it was," said Reynolds, but so
indistinctly that Barbara, though she looked
questioningly at him, doubted whether she
heard the words.

It would be only natural if you hated
me," she went on, panting and eager, now
that she had once began to speak. "But
you mustn't, please, I can't bear it ! I
have never quarrelled with any one, never
in all my life. I don't like to go away and
feel that I am leaving some one behind me
with whom I am not friends. So, IMr.
Harding, I want you just to say that you
don't hate me."

Oh, but you are making too much of
all that," he replied, and then, with an

invalid's abruptness, he asked, "Where's
your talisman ? "

She looked down at her watch chain.
*^I gave it to Mr. Scarlett, he liked it,"
she said, with a guilty remembrance of
Reynold among the brambles. " But you
haven't answered me, Mr. Harding."

Her pleading was persistent, like a child's.
She was childishly intent on the very word
she wanted. She remembered how her uncle
had laughed as she walked home after that
first encounter with young Harding. " And
you saw him roll into the ditch — Barbara,
the poor fellow must hate you like poison ! "
No, he must not ! It was the cord she
could not bear, it was only the word she
knew.

Nonsense ! " he said, moving his head
uneasily, " Let bygones be bygones. We
can't alter the past. We are going different

ways — go yours, and let me go mine in
peace."

It was a harsh answer, but the frown
which accompanied it betrayed irresolution
as well as adorer.

I can't go so," Barbara pleaded, emboldened
by this sign of possible yielding.
I never meant to do any harm. Say you
are not angry — only one word — and then
111 go."

I know you will." He laid his lean
bands on the arms of his chair, and drew
himself up. " Well," he said, '' have it
your own way — why not ? What is it that
I am to say ? "

Say," she began eagerly, and then
checked herself She would not ask too
much. " Say only that you don't hate me,"
she entreated, fixing her eyes intently on
his face.

I love you, Barbara."

The girl recoiled, scared at the sudden
intensity of meaning in his eyes, and in
every line of his wasted figure as he leaned
towards her. His hoarse whisper sent a
shock through the deadened air of the
drab room. Those three words had broken
throurfi the frozen silence of a life of

o

repression and self-restraint, in them was
distilled all its hoarded fierceness of love
and revenge. In uttering them Reynold
had uttered himself at last.

To Barbara it was as if a Hash of fire
showed her his passion, such a passion asher
gentle soul had never imagined, against
the outer darkness of death and his despair.
Something choked and frightened her, and
seemed to encircle her heart in its coils.
It was a revelation which came from within
as well as without. She threw out her

ways — go yours, and let me go mine in
peace."

It was a liars answer, but the frown
which accompanied it betrayed irresolution
as well as anger.

I can't go so," Barbara pleaded, emboldened
by this sign of possible yielding.
I never meant to do any harm. Say you
are not angry — only one word — and then
111 go."

*' I know you will" He laid his lean
hands on the arms of his chair, and drew
himself up. " Well," he said, '' have it
your own way — why not ? What is it that
I am to say ? "

Say," she began eagerly, and then
checked herself She would not ask too
much. " Say only that you don't hate me,"
she entreated, fixing her eyes intently on
his face.

I love you, Barbara.'^

The girl recoiled, scared at the sudden
intensity of meaning in his eyes, and in
every line of his wasted figure as he leaned
towards her. His hoarse whisper sent a
shock through the deadened air of the
drab room. Those three words had broken
through the frozen silence of a life of
repression and self-restraint, in them was
distilled all its hoarded fierceness of love
and revenge. In uttering them Keynold
had uttered himself at last.

To Barbara it was as if a fish of fire
showed her his passion, such a passion asher
gentle soul had never imagined, against
the outer darkness of death and his despair.
Something choked and frightened her, and
seemed to encircle her heart in its coils.
It was a revelation which came from within
as well as without. She threw out her

hands as if he approached her. 'adrian''
she cried.

Reynold, leaning feebly on the arms of
his chair, laughed.

'* Well," he said, '' are you content ? I
have said it."

Oh," said Barbara, still gazing at him,
I know now — I understand — you do hate
me ! "

Love you," he repeated. " I think I
loved you from the day I saw you first. I
dreamed of you at Mitchelhurst — only of
you ! Mitchelhurst for you, if you would
have it so — but you — i/ou I "

No ! " she cried.

And afterwards you were afraid of me !
If it had been any one else ! But you
shrank from me — you were afraid of me —
the only creature in the world I loved !
And then that last night dien you came

to me — how clever of you to discover that
I was fighting with something I wanted
to keep down ! So I was, Barbara ! "

He paused, but she only looked helplessly
into his eyes.

"You don't know how hard it was,"
he continued meaningly. " For if I had
chosen "

No ! " she cried again.

Yes ! Do you think I did not know ?
Yes! I might have had your promise
then ! I might have had "

He checked himself, but she did not
attempt a second denial.

Well, enough of this," said Reynolds,
after a moment. '* It need not trouble you
long. Look in the Times and you will
soon see the end of it. But you can
remember, if you like, that one man loved
you, at any rate."

VOL. II. Q

'' One man does," said Barbara, in a
voice which she tried to keep steady.

"Ah, the other fellow. Well, you know
about that."

"Yes, I know."

"And you know that in spite of all I
doit hate you. No, I don't, though I daresay
you hate me for what I have said.
But I can't help that — you asked for it."

Yes," said Barbara. " I wish I hadn't."

Forget it, then," he replied, with a
gleam of triumph in his glance.

You know I can't do that," she said.

She was too young to know how much
may be forgotten with the help of time,
and it seemed to her that Reynold's eyes
would follow her to her dying day, that
wherever there were shadows and silence,
she would meet that reproachful, unsatisfied
gaze, and hear his voice.

You are very cruel ! " she exclaimed.

Am I ? " he said more gently. " Poor
child ! I never meant to speak of this. I
never could have spoken if you had not
come this afternoon. I could not have
told it to anybody but you, and you were
out of my reach. Why did you come ?
You were quite safe if you had stayed
away. You should have left me to sting
myself to death in a ring of fire, as the
scorpions do — or don't ! What made you
come inside the ring 1 It's narrow enough,
God knows — ! " he looked round as he
spoke. " And you had all the world to
choose from. As far as I was concerned
you might have been in another planet.
I couldn't have reached you. What possessed
you to come here, to me ? Well,
you did, and you are stung. Is it my

fault ? "

Q 2

"No, mine'' said the girl, passionately.
I never meant to hurt you, and you know
I didn't, but it has all gone wrong from
first to last. Anyhow, you have revenged
yourself now. I wish — I wish that you
were well, and strong, and rich "

That you might have the luxury of
hating me % No, no, Barbara. I'm dying,
and no one in all the world will miss
me. I leave my memory to you."

He smiled as he spoke, but his utterance
almost failed him, and Barbara's answer
was a sob.

'' I take it, then," she said in a choked
voice. " Perhaps I should have been too
happy if I had not known — I might never
have thought about other people. But I
shan't forget."

Then she saw that he had sunk back
into his chair, and his face, which had

fallen on the dull red leather, was a
picture of death. The marble bust in
Mitchelhurst Church did not look more
bloodless.

Oh ! " said Barbara, " you are tired ! "

Mortally," he replied, faintly unclosing
his lips. '* Good-bye."

She paused for an instant, looking at
the dropped lids which hid those eyes
that she had feared. She could do nothing
for him but leave him. " Good-bye," she
said, very softly, as if she feared to disturb
his rest, and then she went away.

The window on the stairs was a dim
grey shape. Barbara groped her way down,
and stood hesitating in the passage. It
was really only half a minute before the
maid came up from the basement with
matches to light the gas, but it was like
an age of dreary perplexity.

"I've just left Mr. Harding," she said
hurriedly to the girl, whose matter-of-fact
face was suddenly illuminated by the jet
of flame. " I'm afraid he's tired. I think
somebody ought to go to him."

Mind the step, miss," was the reply.
'^ I'll tell missis. I dare say he'll have
his cocoa, I think it's past the time."

Oh, doit wait for me ! " cried Barbara.
" I'm all right."

She felt as if Reynold Harding might
die by his fireside while she was being
ceremoniously shown out. She reached the
door first and shut it quickly after her, to
cut all attentions short. She had hurried
out at the gate, under the foggy outline
of a little laburnum, when a shout from
the pursuing cabman aroused her to the
consciousness that she had started ofi" to
walk.

Thus arrested, she got into the hansom,
covered with confusion, and not daring to
look at the man as she gave her address.
He must certainly think that she meant to
cheat him, or that she was mad. She
shrank back into the seat, feelings sure
that he would look through the little hole
in the roof, from time to time, to see
what his eccentric fare might be doing,
and she folded her hands and sat very
still, to impress him with the idea that she
had become quite sane and well-behaved.
As if it mattered what the cabman thought !
And yet she blushed over her blunder
while Reynold Harding's "I love you,"
was still sounding in her ears, and while
the hansom rolled southward through the
lamp-lit, glimmering streets, to the tune
of Barbara Allen.

CHAPTER X.

JANUARY, 18 83.

A train of human meino7'ies,
Crying : The past must never pass away.''^

They depart and come no more,
Or come as phantoms and as ghosts.'^

"When we are married," Adrian had
said on that blissful day in Nutfield Lane,
"before we go abroad, before we go anywhere,
we will run down to Mitchelhurst
for a day, won't we ? "

Barbara had agreed to this, as she would
have agreed to anything he had suggested,
and the plan had been discussed during
the summer months, till it seemed to

have acquired a kind of separate existence,
as if Adrian's light whim had been transformed
into Destiny. The bleak little
English village stood in the foreground of
their radiant honeymoon picture of Paris
and the south. The straggling rows of
cottages, the cabbage plots, the churchyard
where the damp earth, heavy with its
burden of death, rose high against the
buttressed wall, the blacksmith's forge with
its fierce rush of sparks, the Bothwell Arms
with the sign that swung above the door
were all strangely distinct against a
bright confusion of far-off stir and gaiety,
white foreign streets, and skies and waters
of deepest blue. All their lives, if they
pleased, for that world beyond, but the
one day, first, for Mitchelhurst.

Thus it happened that the careless fancy
of April was fulfilled in January. January

is a month which exhibits most English
scenery to small advantage ; and Mitchell
wore its dreariest aspect when a fly
from the county town drew up beneath the
swaying sign. The little holiday couple,
stepping out of it into the midst of the
universal melancholy, looked somewhat out
of place. Adrian and Barbara had that
radiant consciousness of having done something
very remarkable indeed which characterises
newly-married pairs. They had
the usual conviction that an exceptional
perfection in their union made it the very
flower of all love in all time. They had
plucked this supremely delicate felicity, and
here they were, alighting with it from the
shabby conveyance, and standing in the
prosaic dirt of Mitchelhurst Street. The
sign gave a long, discordant creak by way
of greeting, and they started and looked up.

It wouldn't be worse for a little grease,"
the landlord allowed, in a voice which was
not much more melodious than the creaking
sign.

Scarlett laughed, but he realised the
whole scene with an amusement which
had a slight flavour of dismay. Was
this the place which was to give his
honeymoon an added touch of poetry ?
How poor and ignoble the houses were !
How bare and bleak the outlines of the
landscape ! How low the dull, grey roof
of sky ! How raw the January wind upon
his cheek ! There was only a momentary
pause. Barbara was looking down the well-known
road, the bullet-headed landlord
scratched his unshaven chin, and the disconsolate
chickens came nearer and nearer,
pecking aimlessly among the puddles.

I suppose you can give us some

luncheon ? " said the young man, and in
the interest of that important question it
hardly seemed as if there had been a pause
at all.

The landlady arrived in a flurry, asking
what they would please to order, and
Adrian and she kept up a brisk dialogue
for the next five minutes. Finally, it was
decided that they should have chops. Perhaps
the discussion satisfied some traditional
sense of what was the rio^ht things to do on
arriving at an inn. There was nothing; to
have hid the chops which Adrian had
chosen, and he murmured something of
fixed fate, free-will " under his moustache,
as he crossed the road in the direction
of the church.

"In an hour," he said. '' That will give
us time to see the church and the villas.
Then, after luncheon, we will go to the

old Place, and the fly shall call for us there,
and 'take us back the short way. Will that
do, Barbara ? "

Of course it would do ; and when they
reached the churchyard she bade him wait
a moment and she would get the key.
The stony path to Mrs. Spearman's cottage
was curiously familiar — the broken palings,
the pump, the leafless alder-bush. The
only difference was that it was Barbara
Scarlett — a different person — who was
stepping over the rough pebbles.

She returned to Adrian, who was leaning
against the gate-post.

Mitchelhurst isn't very beautiful," he
said, with an air of conviction. " I thought
I remembered it, but it has come upon
me rather as a shock. Somehow, I fancied
Barbara, is it possible that I have taken
all the beauty out of it — that it belongs

to nne now, instead of to Mitchelhurst ?
Can that be ? "

She smiled her answer to the question,
and then —

I think it looks very much as usual,"
she said, gazing dispassionately round. " Of
course, it is prettier in the spring — or in
the summer. It was summer when you
came, you know."

She had a vague recollection of having
pleaded the cause of Mitchelhurst at some
other time in the same way, which troubled
her a little.

"Yes, I know it was summer," said
Adrian. " But still "

'* You mustn't say anything against
Mitchelhurst," cried Barbara, swinging her
great key. " It isn't beautiful, but I feel
as if I belonged to it, somehow. It
changed me, I can't tell why or how, but

it did. After I had been six months
with Uncle Hayes, I went home for a
fortnight in the spring, and everything
seemed so different. It was all so bright
and busy there, everybody talked so fast
about little everyday things, and the rooms
were so small and crowded. 1 suppose it
was because I had been living with echoes
and old pictures in that great house.
Louisa and Hetty were always having
little secrets and jokes, there wasn't any
harm in them, you know, but I felt as if I
could not care about them or laugh at
them, and yet some of them had been wy
jokes, before I went to Mitchelhurst. And
I could not make them understand why I
cared about the Eoth wells and their pictures,
when I had never known any of them."

Louisa is a very nice girl," said
Scarlett; "but if Mitchelhurst is all the

difference between you two, I am bound
to say that I have a high opinion of the
place."

Well, I don't know any other difference."
Don't you ? " and he smiled as he followed
her along the churchyard path. *' No
other difference ? None ? " He smiled, and
yet he knew that the old house had given
a charm to Barbara when he saw her first.
She had been like a little damask rose,
breathing and glowing against its grim
walls. He took the key from her hand,
and turned it in the grating lock.

It seemed as if the very air were unchanged
within, so heavy and still it was.
Barbara went forward, and her little footfalls
were hardly audible on the matting.
Adrian, with his head high, sniffed in search
of a certain remembered perfume, as of
mildewed hymn-books, found it, and was

content. It brought back to him, as only
an odour could, his first afternoon in the
church, when he stood with one of those
books in his hand, and watched the Roth-well
pew which held Barbara.

Having enjoyed his memory he faced
round and inspected St. Michael, who was
as new, and 'neat, and radiant as ever.
Adrian speculated how long it would take
to make him look a little less of a parvenu.
'' Would a couple of centuries do him any
2:ood, I wonder ? " he mused, half-aloud.
"Not much, I fear." The archangel returned
his gaze with a permanent serenity
which seemed to imply that a century more
or less was a matter of indifference to his
dragon and him.

Barbara had gone straight to the Roth-well
monuments, where Scarlett presently
joined her. She did not take her eyes from

VOL. II. R

the tombs, but she stole a warm little hand
under his arm. " I wish he could have
been buried here," she said in a low voice.

Reynolds had said that he bequeathed her
his memory, but now, in her happiness, it
seemed to be receding, fading, melting away.
She gazed helplessly in remorseful pain ; he
was only a chilly phantom ; the very fierceness
of his passion was but a dying spark
of fire. She could recall his words, but
they were dull and faint, like echoes nearly
spent. She could not recall their meaning
that was prone. The declaration of love
which had burst upon her like a great wave,
filling her with pity and wonder and fear,
had ebbed to some unapproachable distance,
leaving her perplexed and half incredulous.
Adrian, in flesh and blood, was at her side,
and she thrilled and glowed at his touch ;
but when she thought of Reynolds Harding

she met only a vague emptiness. He was
not with the Eoth wells in this quiet corner ;
he was not where she had left him, lying
back in his leathern chair. That room was
swept and garnished and cold, as he had
said. No doubt they had put him in some
suburban cemetery, some wilderness of
graves which to her was only a name of
dreariness. Standing where he had once
stood in Mitchelhurst Church, she only felt
his absence, and she thought that she could
have recalled him better if he had been at
rest beneath the dimly-lettered pavement
on which her eyes were fixed.

She was wrong. Memories cannot bear
the outer air, or be laid away in the cold
earth ; they can only live when they are
hidden in our hearts, and quickened by our
pulses. Barbara could not keep the remembrance
of Reynold's love alive, with no

R 2

love of her own to warm it. But in her
ignorance she said, wistfully —

I wish he could have been buried here!"
and then added in a quicker tone, " I suppose
you'll say it makes no difference where
he lies''

'* Indeed I sha net," said Adrian. " There
may be beauty or ugliness, fitness or unfitness,
in one's last home as well as any
other. Yes, I wish he were here. But he
was an unlucky fellow ; it seemed as if he
were never to have anything he wanted,
didn't itr'

How do you mean — not anything ? "

"Well, I think he would have liked
Mitchelhurst Place."

Yes," said Barbara, ''he would, I
know."

*' And I am sure he would have liked
the name of Bothwell. He was ashamed

of his father's people. That pork-butcher
rankled."

Oh ! " said Barbara, still looking at
the tombs, " did you know about that ?
Did everybody know 1 " She spoke very
softly, as if she thought the dusty Bothwell,
peering out of his marble curls, might
overhear. ^'No, I suppose be didn't like
him."

I know he didn't. Well, he hadn't the
name he liked : he was saddled with the
pork-butcher's name. And then, worst of
all, he couldn't have you, Barbara ! "

She turned upon him with parted lips
and a startled face.

Well," said Scarlett, '' he couldn't, you
know."

"Adrian! how did you know he cared
for me ? He did, but how did you know it ?
I thought I ought not to tell anybody."

I saw him once," said Scarlett, " and I
found it out. I saw him again — just passed
him in the road, and we did not say a word.
But I was doubly sure, if that were possible.
Poor devil I If he could have had his way
we should not have met in the lane that
day, Barbara."

'' I never dreamed of it," she said. " I
thought he hated me."

If a girl thinks a man hates her," said
Adrian, '' I suppose the chances are he does
one thing or the other."

I never dreamed of it," she repeated,
never, till he told me at the end. It
could not be my fault, could it, as I did
not know ? But it seemed so cruel — so
hard ! He had cared for me all the time, he
said, and nobody had ever cared for him."

"You mustn't be unhappy about that,"
said Scarlett, gently.

But that's just it ! " Barbara exclaimed,
plaintively. " I ought to be unhappy, and
I can't be. Adrian ! I've got all the happiness
— a whole world full of it — and he
had none. I must be a heartless wretch
to stand here, and think of him, and be
so glad because "

Because her hand was on Adrian's arm.

My darling," he said, in a tone half
tenderly jesting, half earnest, '^ you mustn't
blame yourself for this. What had you todo
nth it ? Do you think you could have
made that poor fellow happy ? "

She looked at him perplexed.

He loved me," she said.

I know he did. You might have given
him a momentary rapture if you had loved
him. But make him happy — not you !
Not anybody, Barbara ! How could you
look at his fc^ce, and not see that he

carried his unhappiness about with him ?
I verily believe that there was no place
on the earth's surface where he could have
been at peace. Underneath it — perhaps ! "

Barbara sighed, looking down at the
stones.

You people with consciences blame
yourselves for things foredoomed," said
Scarlett. *' Harding's destiny was written
before you were born, my dear child.
Besides," he added, in a lighter tone,
'what would you do with the pair of us ?"

That's true," she said, thoughtful.

Take my word for it," he went on, *' if
you want to do any good you should give
happiness to the people who are fit for it.
You can brighten my life — oh, my darling,
you don't know how much ! But his —
never ! If you were an artist you might
as well spend your best work in painting

angels and roses on the walls of the family
vault down here as try it."

'eyes," said Barbara. Then, after a
pause, she spoke with a kind of sob in her
voice, " But if one had thrown in just a
flower before the door was shut ! I
couldn't, you know, I hadn't anything to
give him I "

Scarlett, by way of answer, laid his hand
on hers. When you come face to face with
such an undoubted fact as the attraction a
man's lonely suffering has for a woman,
argument is useless. It is an ache for
which self-devotion is the only relief. He
perfectly understood the remorseful workings
of Barbara's tender heart.

*' I couldn't do without you, my dear,"
he said.

Oh, Adrian ! — no ! " she exclaimed.
** That day when I said good-bye to him,

lie fancied I was crying for him once, and
even that was for you. I was just thinking,
if it had been you sitting there ! "

Foolish child ! I'm not to be got rid
of so easily."

Don't talk of it ! " said Barbara.

Her hand tightened on his arm, and she
looked up at him, with a glance that said
plainly that the sun would drop out of her
sky if any mischance befell him.

*' Well," she said, after a minute, more in
her ordinary voice, as if she were dismissing
Reynold Harding from the conversation,
I'm glad you know. I wanted you to
know, but of course I could not tell you."

It's wonderful with women," said Adrian,
gliding easily into generalities, "the things
they do?i't think it necessary to tell us,
taking it for "granted that we know them,
and we can I know them and do/i't know

them to our dying day — and the things
they do think it necessary to tell us, with
elaborate precautions and explanations —
which we knew perfectly well from the
first."

Oh, is that it ? " Barbara replied, smartly.
Then I shall tell you everything, and you
can be surprised or not as you please."

I shan't be much surprised," said
Adrian, '' unless, perhaps, you tell me
something when you think you are not
telling anything at all."

And with this they went off together to
look at the seat in which he sat when
Barbara saw him first, and then she stood
in her old place in the Eothwells' red-lined
pew, and looked across at him, recalling
that summer Sunday. It would have been
a delightful amusement if the church had
been a few degrees warmer, but Barbara

could not help shivering a little, and Adrian
frankly avowed that he found it impossible
to maintain his feelings at the proper pitch.

I'm blue," he said, " and Tm iced, and
I can't be sentimental. And you wore a
thin cream-coloured dress that day, which
is terrible to think of. Might write something
afterwards, perhaps," he continued,
musingly. "Not while my feet are like
two stones, but I feel as if I might thaw
into a sonnet, or something; of the kind."

Barbara looked up at him reverentially,
and Adrian beo^an to lauo^h.

** Let's go and eat those chops," he said.

Later, as they walked along the street
towards Mitchelhurst Place, Scarlett was
silent for a time, glancing right and left
at the dull cottages. Here and there one
might catch a glimpse of firelight through
the panes, but most of them were drearily

blank, with grey windows and closed doors.
It was too cold for the straw-planters to
stand on their thresholds and gossip while
they worked. There was a foreshadowing:
of snow in the low-hanging clouds.

What are you thinking of ? " Barbara
asked him.

'* Don't let us ever come here again ! "
he answered. '' It's all very well for this
once ; we are young enough, we have our
happiness before us. But never again !
Suppose we were old and sad when we

came back, or suppose " He stopped

short. " Suppose one came back alone,"
should have been the ending of that
sentence.

*every well," she agreed hastily, as if
to thrust aside the unspoken words.

We say our good-bye to Michel burst
to-day, then ? " Adrian insisted.

Yes. There won't be any temptation
to come again, if what they told us is
true — will there ? "

She referred to a rumour which they
had heard at the Roth well Anus that as
Mr. Croft could not find a tenant for the
Place he meant to pull it down.

No," said Scarlett. " It seems a shame,
though," he added.

Presently they came in sight of the
entrance — black bars, and beyond them a
stirrings black boughs in the January
wind, over the straight, bleak roadway to
the house. The young man pushed the
gate. " Some one has been here to-day,"
he said, noting a curve already traced on
the damp earth.

Some one to take the house, perhaps,"
Barbara suggested. '' Look, there's a carriage
waiting out to the right of the door.

I wish they hadn't happened to choose
this very day. I would rather have had
the old Place to ourselves, wouldn't you ? "

Much," said adrian.

These young people were still in that
ecstatic mood in which, could they have
had the whole planet to themselves, it
would never have occurred to them that
it was lonely. Their eyes met as they
answered, and if at that moment the
wind-swept avenue had been transformed
into sunlit boughs of blossoming orange,
they might not have remarked any accession
of warmth and sweetness.

The old woman who was in charge recognised
Barbara, and made no difficulty about
alh^wino- them to wander through the rooms
at their leisure. In fact, she was only too
glad not to leave her handful of fire on
such a chilly errand.

Is it true," Mrs. Scarlett asked eagerly,
"that Mr. Croft is going to pull the
house down ? "

So they tell me, ma'am. There's to
be a sale here, come Midsummer, and after
that they say the old Place comes down.
There's nobody to take it now poor Mr.
Hayes is gone."

Adrian's glance quickened at the mention
of a sale, and then he recalled his expressed
intention never to come to Mitchelhurst
again. '' Perhaps he'll find a tenant before
then," he said. " You've got somebody
here to-day, haven't you ? "

The woman started in sudden remembrance.
" Oh, there's a lady," she said, " I
most forgot her. She said she was one
of the old family, and used to live here.
My orders are to go round with 'em when
they come to look at the house, but the

lady didn't want nobody, she said, she
knew her way, and she walked right off.

I hope it ain't nothing wrong, but
she's been gone some time."

I should think it was quite right,"
said Scarlett. " Come, Barbara."

They went from room to room. All
were silent, empty, and cold, with shutters
partly unclosed, letting in slanting gleams
of grey light. The painted eyes of the
portraits on the wall looked askance at
them as they stood gazing about. All the
little modern additions which Mr. Hayes
had made to the furniture for comfort's
sake had been taken away, and the Bothwell
had come into possession of their own
again.

Scarlett opened the old piano as he

passed. "Do you remember?" he said,

glancing brightly, and with a smile curving
VOL. II. S

his red lips, as he began, with one hand,
to touch a familiar tune. But Barbara
cried " Hush ! " and the tinkling, jangling
notes died suddenly into the stillness.
Suppose she were to hear ! "

I wonder where she is," he rejoined,
with a glance round. " She must have
come to say good-bye to her old home,
too."

There was no sign of her as they crossed
the hall (where Barbara's great clock had
long ago run down) and went up the wide,
white stairs. But it was curious how they
felt her unseen presence, and how the
knowledge that at any moment they might
turn a corner and encounter that living
woman, made the place more truly haunted
than if it had held a legion of ghosts.
They walked in silence, like a couple of
half-frightened children, along the passages.

and the remembrance that the old house
was doomed was with them all the time.
It was strange to lay their warm light
hands on those strong walls, which had
outlasted so many lives, so much hope,
and so much hopelessness, and to think
that they, in their fragile, happy existence
might well remain when Mitchelhurst Place-was
forgotten. It seemed hardly more thana
phantom house already.

I almost think she must have gone,"
Barbara whispered, as they came downstairs
again.

"No," said Adrian, with an oblique
glance which her eyes followed.

Kate Harding was standing by one of

the windows in the entrance hall, a stately

figure in heavy draperies of black. Hearing

the steps of the intruders she turned

slightly, and partially confronted them, and

S a

the light fell on her face, pale and proud,
close-lipped, full of mute and dreary-defiance.
Only she herself knew the
passionate eagerness with which, as a girl,
she had renounced her old home — only-she
knew the strange power with which
Mitchelhurst had drawn her back once
more. Fate had been too strong for her,
and she had returned to her own place,
perhaps to the thought of the son who
had belonged more to it than to her.
Her presence there that day was a
confession of defeat too bitter to bespoken,
a last homage of farewell to the
old house which she was not rich enough
to save.

Her eyes, resting indifferently on the
girl's face, widened in sudden recognition,
and she looked from Barbara to Adrian.
Her glance enveloped the young couple

in its swift intensity, and then fell coldly
to the pavement as she bent her head.
Barbara blushed and drooped, Scarlett
bowed, as they passed the motionless
woman, drawn back a little against the
wall, with the faded map of the great
Mitchelhurst estate hanging just behind
her.

Their fly was waiting at the door, and
in less than a minute they were rolling
quickly down the avenue. Adrian, stooping
to tuck a rug about his wife's feet, only
raised himself in time to catch a last
glimpse of the white house front, and to
cry, " Good-bye, Mitchelhurst ! " Barbara
echoed his good-bye. Mitchelhurst was
only an episode in her life ; she cared for
the place, yet she was not sorry to escape
from its shadows of loves and hates, too
deep and dark for her, and its unconquerable

melancholy. She left it, but a touch of
its sadness would cling to her in after
years, giving her the tenderness which
comes from a sense — dim, perhaps, but all-pervading
— of the underlying suffering of
the world. She looked back and saw her
happiness tossed lightly and miraculously
from crest to crest of the black waves
which might have engulfed it in a moment ;
and even as she leaned in the warm
shelter of Adrian's arm, she was sorry
for the lives that were wrecked, and broken,
and forgotten.

Look ! " he said quickly, as the road
wound along the hill-side, and a steep
bank, crowned with leafless thorns and
brown stunted oaks, rose on the right,
this is where I said good-bye to you,
Barbara, and you never knew it ! "

*' Never!" she cried. ''No, I thought

you bad gone away, and hadn't cared to
say good-bye."

*' Well, you were kinder to me than you
knew. You left me a bunch of red berries
lying in the road."

Ah, but if I had known you were
there ! "

Why," said Adrian, " you wouldn't
have left me anything at all. You would
have died first I You know you would !
It was better as it was."

'* Perhaps," she allowed.

Anyhow, it is best as it is," said he
conclusively, and to that she agreed ; but
her smile was followed by a quick little
sigh.

What does that mean 1 " he demanded,
tenderly.

Nothing," she said, " nothing, really"

It was nothing. Only, absorbed in

picturing Adrian's mute farewell, she had
passed the place where she first saw Reynold
Harding, and had not spared him
one thought as she went by. And she
was never coming to Mitchelhurst again.

THE END.

C^ov nd Taylor, Printers, Bvvnn», gffo'k:

3 0112 056519017
