OF THE

UN Diversity

or ILLINOIS

B75G
v.\

A BRETON MAIDEN,

VOL. I.

V

AT ALL THE LIBRA Lies

BORN IN THE Purple. By Maxwell Fox.

3 vols.

A NEW FACE AT THE DOOR. By Jane Stanley,

author of ' A Daughter of the Gods.' 2 vols.

THE SPORT OF CHANCE. By William Sharp.

3 vols.

SWEET IS TRUE LOVE. By Katharine King, author

of ' The Queen of the Regiment,' ' Off the Roll,' &c. 2 vols.

A DOUBLE WEDDING. By the Author of St. Slave's,'
'planta's Cross,' ' Annette,' &c. 3 vols.

HURST & BLACKETT, 13, GREAT MARLBOROUGH STREET.

BY

A FRENCH LADY

AUTHOR OF "TILL MY Wedding-day.'

A troubled record
A simple record and serene."
Swinburne.

IN THREE VOLUMES.
VOL. I.

LONDON :

HURST AND BLACKETT, LIMITED,

13, GREAT MARLBOROUGH STREET.

1888.

All Rights Bcservcd.

A BRETON MAIDEN.

^ CHAPTER I.

,' De Carnoet, examine me long and carefully',

and tell me if I really am the same

'elegant and brilliant chevalier you knew

'^-'yesterday ! Do I appear to you as charm-living

and as much of a lady-killer as ever?

look at my hands and feet ! Gaze at the

Beauty of my face, and say if there is not

-Jome change in me ! Am I the man to

jsvhom our beautiful Queen said but a

short time since, " Monsieur de Valour's,

exit is unfair of you to come with all the

VOL. I. B

charms of the courtier to our humble farm
of Trianon !" I pray you, De Carnoet,
look at me and say if I am in truth that
same man !'

And the young man, assuming the
most striking and graceful attitudes, stood
before his friend. He was indeed most
charming — young, bright, and handsome ;
with large black eyes and that dark complexion
common to men of the south. He
was dressed in a silk and satin suit, embroidered
with silver and gold ; with rich
lace round his neck, and rich lace falling
over his dainty, small hands.

Well, De Valvourgs, I kncAv you to be
vain ; but not to such an extent ! What
can have happened to you ?'

Happened ! The most startling, surprising,
astonishing, amazing, studying
thing in the world ! Throw your tongue
to the dogs ! (style Seine !) — Give it up,

my dear De Carnoet, and listen. I am a
married man !'
No!'

I am — a — married — man ! I am,
I believe, neither bigger nor smaller than
yesterday ; neither more serions nor more
frivolous ; yet for me everything is
changed.'

'You married ! I do not see . . .'

Yes, married ! Can you not fancy me
leading one tender nursling by my right
hand and one by my left ; or, like King
Henry the Fourth of worthy memory,
playing at horses and on all fours to
amuse the bantlings ? I, a married man
the father of a family ! I am undone !
I am undone !'

When you explain yourself, I may be
able to understand.'

'• It all comes from this : I was invited to
the house of a Dowager-Countess I had never

B 2

seen before ; — I came, I saw, I conquered,
and I am to be married forthwith.'
'To the Dowager?'

No, not quite so bad as that ! To her
granddaughter, an orphan.'

But if she is young, rich, and pretty — '
Young, rich, and pretty ! — You speak
comfortably, you who are left in all the
blessedness of bachelordom ; but is there
anything in the Avorld that can compensate
a man for the loss of his liberty ? The
truth is, however, that she is young and
rich. But as to her beauty I know absolutely
nothing about it ; yet I marry her
all the same.'

It is most gallant. But who forces . . . ?'
Who else but my uncle could force
me, since it is he who holds the purse-strings
— my uncle, who has never married
— thank Heaven — and who has lived
all his life in independence of Court

and men ? — You should have seen him
this morning, seated bolt upright in his
stiff arm-chair, with his grand Louis
Xiy.'s air, one leg crossed carefully
over the other, and trifling with his
jewelled snufF-box while he talked to me !
He had sent for me, and I bowed low
before him on entering his room, as behoves
the heir-presumptive ; and he
replied to my salutation with a keen
look and an amused smile. — My uncle
is no fool, and on the whole, though
his heir, I am rather fond of him. — " My
nephew," he said, ''I am glad to see
you punctual at the rendezvous ; punctuality
is a kingly virtue." I bent low
and said to myself — " And of a nephew
who hopes for a heritage." — He seemed to
read my thoughts, and, smiling still, went
on, " I have to speak to you on a matter
of great importance." And he looked so

kind and well-intentioned that I said to
myself, " Good heavens ! is he going
to make me his heir now?" But he —
'' Pray sit down, nephew, it will enable
you to bear more comfortably with my
news." I sat down, and he resumed.
"You know, my dear nephew, that your
forefathers have always been personages of
some importance at Court ; particularly
at that of Louis XIV. — that Court par
excellence ! It was a good idea of His Majesty
to invite all his great noblemen to come
and render him homage and contribute to
his glory ; for what could be more delightful
than to see the highest in the land vie
with one another in all kinds of exciting
pleasures and vanities, and prove to the
world at large, that the French nobility could
be the most elegant as well as the most
extravagant of those days ! Yes, it was
charming, — but it was high-priced. Be

proud, therefore, that your forefathers
were great at Court, and pleased that
they amused themselves right royally.
Only the misfortune is that they died
ruined, and left you no money to
live upon. — But this is an honour also,
since they spent their fortunes to please
their sovereign. — Fortunately for you,
however, the sons of my ancestors, soldiers
from father to son, were satisfied
with shining at the head of their regiments,
which is not so costly a game ;
and to-day you are the heir of their glory
too. But on one condition — never forget
that — that you satisfy me and do my will
to the end."

1 felt rather snubbed ; but, anxious to
assure him of my obedience, I said,

" Uncle, I would never "

" Yes, yes, you are very well ; you
spend your money in a manner worthy of

your ancestors, and I find no special fault
with you so far. — But now I am going to
ask you to do something to please me.
I wish you to marry."

"'I marry!" I cried, alarmed beyond
description. — How thankful I was to be
seated !

" I offer you my Chateau de Cohors
with an income that will enable you to
shine a little ; but, as for you it is necessary
to shine much, you will have to contribute
your share ; and I have ready
exactly what you require — a young girl
barely eighteen, whose fortune will enable
you to live as you please."

" But, uncle " I cried, in despair.

Without noticing my interruption, however,
he continued,

'* Otherwise you have left as a resource
to follow in my steps and those of my
forefathers, and join the army."

"but, uncle, it is impossible that "

" Impossible ! Surely you are not
married already ?"

"No, no ! that is just what I meant to
say. It is too soon to marry at twenty-six
— just think, twenty-six "

But, my dear De Carnoet, what shall
I say ? I begged and begged at least for
time ; I even threatened to kill myself —
which amused him very much, and made
me laugh too on second thoughts. But it
was all of no use. It is settled ; and there
is no hope left for me. Oh ! that Dowager,
that Dowager, I shall never forgive her.'

It was your own fault, always running
from conquest to conquest ! Imagine
what a very different future there would
be before you if you had not pleased — that
Dowager !*

You are laughing at me. But, all the
same, it is an awful thing to be called

suddenly to break with all that makes life
delightful.'

And when is it to be ?'

Very soon. In fact my uncle is terribly
anxious about what is going on herein
Paris. He thinks we are simpletons to
wait quietly for all these dreadful things to
cease of themselves instead of preparing for
an inevitable struggle. He is furious with
the nobles who are giving up their feudal
privileges — " their rightful inheritance," ashe
says — and with the others who are running
away, as if they could not see it was
the most fatal course they could adopt ; —
for has it not been said often enough,
les absents ont tonjoiirs tort"" He is leaving
Paris himself; but only to go to
his own place in Provence — disgusted
with it all, and really frightened at the
consequences he foresees. He was a
soldier, as I have told you, and nothing will

do for him but to call all the noblesse to
arms and gather them round the throne.
He thinks — excuse me, De Carnoet — that
we are all cowards for allowing the king
so tamely to submit to his fate, and for
looking on in such a state of helplessness,
and swallowing outrage after outrage without
giving sign of life. He has ordered
me to leave Paris at once ; and I must
very soon start for Brittany.'

'Brittany? Why?'

To see my future wife there.'

In Brittany ?'

Yes.'

Where ? What is her name ? What . . .'

Do not get excited, please ; — you who
always preach to me to be calm, and whoso
haughtily blame the outbursts of my
hasty disposition !'

My dear fellow, I am a Breton — you
have forgotten that ; and your going to

Brittany on such an important matter cannot
but interest me deeply. Where is it
you are going?'

To the Chateau de Kerguennec'

Impossible !'

Why ? I see nothing impossible in
that.'

It is so strange ; the Chateau is close
to my birthplace, and I know the Comte
and Comtesse de Kerguennec. But who
is it you are going to marry?'

Their niece.'

^ Niece ? Which one ? What is her
name?'

Renee de Kerguennec'

Renee ! ah, I know her. How extraordinary
!'

You know her ? Oh, how glad I am !
What kind of a girl is she ? Tall ? short ?
fair ? dark ? handsome ? pretty ? ugly ?
What? which?'

'My dear chevalier, I am sorry that I
cannot tell you.'

Cannot tell me ! and yet you say you
know her?'

I knew her, I should have said, when
she was a child of ten or eleven ; but she
left for the Convent after her father's death,
when her uncle and aunt came to live at
Kerguennec ; and since she has lived there,
I have been in Paris.'

And you do not call me the most
unfortunate of men ? I thought you
would tell me all about her. But asa
girl of ten or eleven what Alas she
like?'

Like all little girls of that age, I
think.'

You think ! Ah ! it is easy to see that
my miserable fate does not touch your
heart. If you were in my position, how I
should grieve for you and try to comfort

you ! Just imagine a man actually on ibis
way to marry a girl he has never seen and
to whom one answers calmly that she was
Like all little girls of that age, I think !"
And you do not pity me ?'

Not much. I should be more inclined
to pity her ; a girl of eighteen is scarcely
like a child who does not know her
own mind ; and it is a matter of some importance
to her also, if she knows about
the intended marriage and is expecting
you.'

Well, yes, after all I suppose it is ;
but, upon my word of honour, I had not
thought of considering it in that light
before. You see, I do not know what she
is — good or bad, angel or shrew. I cannot
guess what her dreams for the future maybe,
and whether I am called to fulfil them ;
while I know what I am and what my
wishes are. I know that I wish for

liberty, just as in the past. And, as to my
temper, am I not always amiable and
charming, easy to please and satisfy, &c

And the two young men laughed heartily.

Upon the whole, young De Valvourgs
was right — he was amiable and easy-tempered
enough — and, having once told his
friend of his misfortune, which did not
seem to lie very deep under the surface,
he felt much comforted.

He had all the quickness and vivacity
of the Provencal, and all his great power
of speech ; indeed, it was often as if
thoughts came to him through much
speaking. He was very imaginative, very
sensitive, and very fond of pleasure, which
was, in fact, the chief aim of his life. But
he was a man of honour, and this was the
link between the two young men, who
differed in almost everything else.

De Carnoet was of a sober disposition
a Breton, calm, simple, upright, and
true. He was much sought after by
the better men, and even by his gay companions,
who knew they could trust him.
He was tall, had a fine face, with deep-blue
eyes, which had in them the dreaminess
so generally found in the Breton who
has lived all his life near the Lances with
their vast expanses of heath and broom.
Although he had been for some years in
Paris, the impressions of his early youth
clung to him as much as ever; and these
had been of a serious nature.

The result of the conversation between
the two young men was that they decided
to g<^ together to Brittany. De Carnoet
was glad to think of doing the honours of
his country to his friend, who on his part
said he felt much more courageous in his
company against the troubles that might

await him in the courtship of his bride-elect.


Mounted on good horses, and accompanied
by servants well armed, they started
soon after on their journey — a long and
difficult one in those times — and some
days after they reached the borders of
Brittany.

From that moment all seemed changed
for them ; they forgot the atmosphere of
blood and murder, excitement and pain,
they had long lived in in Paris, and felt
their hearts expand, their thoughts purified,
and the fear of the future disappearing.
Everywhere around them were pretty
views, quaint hamlets and villages lost in
the silence of the fields — everything spoke
of peace, and calm, and security.

The young Provencal fell at once
under the soothing influence. He felt
sure now that Renee de Kerguennec

VOL. I. c

must be sweet and gentle, and that he was
going to a life of peace and happiness.
How could a woman living among
such picturesque and simple surroundings
be proud and ambitious, harsh or
unkind ?

They had travelled for some time, when
the landscape changed suddenly before
them. To abundance and fertility succeeded
a barren land, — almost a desert ; and life
itself seemed extinct. There was scarcely
anything to break the solemn sadness of
the sea of furze and broom and heath
which on all sides bounded the horizon,
except that at times eyes and mind, tired
by the monotony of the thirsty and sterile
land, were arrested by the gigantic dolmens
of granite, or by the huge memoirs crowned
indeed by the cross, but mysterious and
awful relics of a religion which exists no
looser.

But the landscape changed once more ;
they passed deep and sunless villages ;
and dark and rugged hills shut out all
the view, till suddenly a bright white line
appeared far away at the horizon, telling
them of the sea, limitless and immense —
the sea that speaks of freedom from all
narrow bonds, that makes men bold and
hopeful ; the sea that enlarges the soul
with thoughts of eternity.

Suddenly De Carnoet touched his friend's
arm. They had reached a high table-land,
swathed in the green of the hills, and
dotted here and there with clumps of
vigorous and healthy fir-trees. Below
the sheer precipice at their feet, the sea
roared and dashed against the granite
rocks of the deep bay it had hollowed out
for itself during the course of centuries.
The rocks shook under the violence of its
blows, and huge columns of water and

spray were launched with irresistible force
in the air.

The thought that this turmoil lasted
for ever, and that a tempest might increase
it a thousandfold, was almost too much
for the human mind to conceive and bear
with ; jet* on the extreme point of the
headland, at the entrance of the bay,
where the waters raged with the utmost
fierceness, and raised high on its precipitous
rocks, stood a large castle of bygone days,
with the proud outlines of its towers and
battlements stretching against a bright,
clear sky. It looked so bold, so invincible,
so proud, that the chevalier remained
entranced at the sight, and in a moment
imagination had recalled to him the poetry
of the past — those knights clad in armour,
and spear in hand, bent on redressing
wrong; or those armies of mounted warriors,
with clanking steel, rushing to

the attack, and the castle, at the blast
of its fanfares, ready to receive its enemies
and destroy them; — or else preparing a
gorgeous pageant to welcome its friends
and give them a royal hospitality.

As the young Provencal gazes at the
sight, a name reaches his ear above the
tumult of the waves —

Kerguennec'

And, turning round, his eyes question
his friend.

Yes, that is the Chateau de Kerguennec'

The young man feels the blood of youth
mantle his cheeks and forehead, and make
his heart beat violently — Kerguennec ! and
Renee — that Renee de Kerguennec he is
coming to see lives there ! Ah ! surely a
descendant of this noble and fearless race
should be worth the winning !

When brought at last face to face with
what is now plainly seen to be but the

ruins of a past glory — the glamour still
upon him, he crosses the pont-levis head
erect, defiant of what fate may have in
reserve for him behind those mouldering
walls.

CHAPTER 11.

The two young men, whose arrival had
been announced by a courier, found their
host ready to welcome them ; and, having
got rid of the dust of the high-road, but
still in their travelling dress, they went for
their first introduction to the ladies of the
Chateau, the Comtesse and Mademoiselle
de Kerguennec.

They were received in a large, handsome
hall with high oriel mullions windows
emblazoned with many a crest and shield,
through which the sun fell in soft rays of
coloured light on the dark panelled walls
and highly-polished floor.

The comtesse was half reclining on a
low chair ; she was about thirty-five years
old, fair, and of delicate features, and
looked very ill. Coming with graceful
carriage from the end of the room, Renee
de Kerguennec stood before them, a charming
vision ; and the chevalier, who, after
profound salutations, had scarcely dared
to look at her, was struck with her extreme
beauty.

She was tall and erect, and with a
splendour of health that contrasted delightfully
with the sickly looks of her aunt.
Her hair, raised high and loose on the top
of the head, was dark chestnut ; her eyes
were brown ; her complexion dazzling ; her
well-curved mouth and lips were most
pleasant ; and her wide, white brow spoke
of no common intellect.

Low and sweet was her voice as she
welcomed the stranger, and charming her

smile as she renewed acquaintance with
Rohan de Carnoet, her play-fellow of seven
or eight years before.

So she was not only young and rich,
but also beautiful, this bride De Valvourgs
had been sent to claim ! And suddenly
a feeling of wild enthusiasm swept over
the young man — to vanish almost as
suddenly before a rapid, impulsive survey
of his past life and of his own merits,
which left him disconsolate and dissatisfied
with himself — a new and very
unwelcome feeling.

As his friend had told him, he had
thought only of himself in coming to
Brittany, and now he was ashamed of his
selfishness, for he realized how important
to the girl before him was the kind of
husband who had been deemed worthy of
her ! Would she ever think that he
was worthy? Would he ever win this

handsome and intelligent girl who had
been chosen for him? Would she ever
put her hand in his and agree to their
being called husband and wife ? It was
preposterous, — impossible ! The more he
thought of it, the feebler his chance of winning
her seemed to be; and by the end of the
interview he told himself that he would fail.
And, once alone in their rooms, De
Valvourgs' usual flow of words burst
forth. How was it that his friend had
not seen the promise of such beauty
in the child of ten? Had De Carnoet
tried to keep the knowledge of it from
him on purpose, so that he might be
struck down from the first and fall helplessly
in love? — And he had so fallen,
and his happiness was no longer in
his own keeping ! Ah ! that he had
never left Paris ! How could he help
seeing the difficulties and troubles before

him ! Such a woman to win ! She was beyond
all the dreams and all the poetical
fancies of his youth. How could he ever
expect her to love him ! Ah ! that he had
never left Paris ! . . . .

His friend, accustomed to his way of
talking, only laughed.

How charming to think that after all
this will be a love-match,' he said.

A love-match ! De Carnoet ! What do
you mean ? What have you seen in her
that can make you say that ? A love-match
! Do you intend to make me believe
that she — that you could see in her —
signs ? — Impossible ! Speak, I entreat you,
speak !'

She has not told me yet,' replied the other,
who was as full of satisfaction as his friend
of fear : ' but I noticed how her eyes followed
every one of your movements ; and
how they were even raised now and then

to your face. And I noticed, too, how
oblivious of my humble self she was !
Yes, I saw it all, marked it all, — not one
sign of her interest in you escaped me.
And I feel glad for your sake that she is
beautiful ; and I am proud of the happiness
you will have in showing your Breton
bride to the world.'

And yet the young man sighed.

Thanks, De Carnot, thanks, it is kind
of you to feel so for me. But will she
ever be my wife ? Alas ! I doubt it ! Do
not laugh at me ; but I have never felt so
nervous before, so — unworthy of a woman.
Till now the society of women has always
been so pleasant ; I was always so welcome
; they made so much of me and it
was so easy for me to reciprocate their
attentions and praises — an exchange of
frivolities, in fact. But how will frivolity
answer here ? Badly, I fear ; and I do not

feel able to be serious, to be serious always.
—What shall I do?'

Wait before you despair ; a few days
will tell us much of Avhat she is. But I
believe her to be as charming as she is
beautiful. She only spoke a few words of
recognition to me ; just to be civil, you
understand ; yet they fell on my ear like
a grateful sound. I believe I shall never
forget her saying, " We were play-fellows
once, were we not, Monsieur de Carnoet?"
You are a fortunate man, De Valvourgs ;
and you will have to thank heartily that
Dowager-Countess after all.'

I do not see it like you ; I dread to love
her ; and I dread her not loving me. I am
just now a perfect coward ready for flight.
Ah ! uncle, uncle, whatever put it into
your head to marry me !'

'Looking forward to the bantlings on
the right and on the left, eh ?'

'If she refuses me, De Carnoet, what
shall I do?'

She will not. You — flying from flower
to flower, choosing and forgetting the most
beautiful — who could refuse you? — But
now let us go and dress. I suppose you
will don one of your bewitching coats and
put me in the shade as you always do ?'

I never heard you complain of that
before ; nor did you appear to mind. But,
do you know, somehow I don't seem to
care for the brilliant suits I brought with
me ; I wish I had something of a more
serious character, something more sober,
something less showy, less '

Change with me.'

Ah ! no, no ! — Love ! love ! have I met
with thee at last?'

But it is so sudden — so very sudden !
Do you really believe in it ? — To tell you
the truth, I do not.'

Alas ! I do. De Carried, let us flee,
let us rush back to Paris.'

'Thanks. Not till after dinner. You
see, I am not in love like you. After
dinner, chevalier, let us put it off till after
dinner !'

And, laughing, the two friends retired
to the important cares of their toilets.

Visitors from Paris were welcome in the
country in those times of stirring events,
and the conversation at dinner naturally
flowed on the topics of the day. They
talked of the rebellion in Paris, as it was
still called by many ; they talked of the
fall of the Bastille with a laugh — that
old Bastille which had become of so little
use of late, and which certainly was not
in the habit of sheltering the poor behind
its walls! What could have made the
populace wreak its vengeance upon it ?
Bread would be none the less dear for that

exploit! They talked of the National
Guard, With Lafayette at its head ; of his
fatuity when, taking up the blue and red
cockade of the citizen soldiers and placing
the white one of royalty in the midst, he
had declared that the red, white, and blue
cockade would conquer the world !

The comte, a staunch Breton, was no
admirer of the Court at Paris ; and its
troubles, he thought, were deserved ; but it
was hard that the noblesse who had lived in
the country all their life, and looked after
the welfare of their people, should have to
pay for the mistakes of others. His feudal
privileges he had given up long ago ; still
he did not like to see it passed into a law
that they should be abolished for ever.

The comtesse, in a gentle voice, said to
her neighbour,

And so you have left Paris too, Monsieur
de Valvourgs. I hear that many

have done so already. Will not Their
Majesties feel very much the void thus
made around them?'

Ah ! but I should not have left it of
my own accord,' exclaimed the young man,
carried away by his loyalty. ' My devotion
to the Queen is such that I would be there
near her now, and at all times of danger, if
1 had my choice.'

When he had thus spoken, he found the
eyes of Mademoiselle de Kerguennec fixed
on him with a strange expression in them.

The feeling honours you,' the comtesse
went on. ' I suppose this rebellion will
not last long?'

The chevalier did not feel at his ease,
and replied, tamely enough,

'We all think so. The populace was
angry; but, having done such grand things,
it will rest now, no doubt. My uncle's
opinion is that all the noblesse should come

VOL. 1. D

forward and surround the throne, and give
the king the help and countenance he needs.
But it would be called civil war, I suppose.'
It would lead to it,' said the comte,
but it would not last lonsr, though they
say we are so few nobles left : — one
hundred and ten thousand out of twenty-six
million men. It does not seem much,
does it? Richelieu would be glad, if he
knew.'

One hundred and ten thousand noblemen
would soon crush all the citoyen
battalions.'

Yes ; and Lafayette will tell you that
it is to keep order and watch over the
king he has raised the National Guard.
They would fight with us.'

Surely we scarcely need their aid.'

But there will be no fighting. I expect
the next news will tell us that all is at
peace.'

It is so strange,' said the comtesse, ' to
hear of those rumours of war in our quiet
part of the world ; we seem fast asleep in
the past. And, let them say what they
please in Paris against the noblesse we are
safe in our feudal homes ; our Bretons are
such a quiet people.'

Quiet, yes ; but they can fight, trust
them for that,' replied the comte, laughing.
' Fortunately, they have no occasion
for fighting.'

'No, they will not fight and rebel,
like those peasants who have burnt down
chateaux and convents elsewhere,' said
Monsieur Brevelaye, the cure, who had
spoken very little till then. 'For whom
or against whom, should they fight ? Has
not Monsieur le Comte truly said, that the
nobleman of Brittany lives among his people,
and sees after their wants and relieves
their more grievous burdens ? We are like

D 2

SO iiiany patriarchal families. It is only
the master who has deserted and oppressed
his people who has reason to fear.'

Upon the whole, the speech of the cure,
though intended to allay the fears of those
around him, struck a more warlike note
than all that had been said before, and
the comte looked at him across the table,
his eyebrows slightly drawn together.

'There will be no iio:htino: among' us.'
he repeated ; ' and, if there was, Monsieur
le Cure would be the first to stop it.'

He would never bless lighting for an
unjust cause,' replied the cure, simply.

He would never allow it at all,' persisted
the comte.

The cure did not reply, and they all
rose.

The evening was splendid, the sea calm
and lovely, and the noise of its weaves at
so great a height came like a soothing

music that mixed itself with the soft
words and the perfume of flowers.

The comte proposed a walk through
some parts of the ruins, and the comtesse,
excusing herself because of her weakness,
was left behind with the cure.

The part of the Chateau now inhabited
had been rebuilt and kept up at different
times, and offered nothing extraordinary ;
but there were left still, from past ages,
nooks and corners and unexpected surprises,
which the young men enjoyed
seeing in the company of Mademoiselle de
Kerguennec.

She had talked very little during the
dinner, but now she joined her uncle in
showing the old ruins to the best advantage;
and to their surprise they found
her full of that quiet fun which is so
delightful in a well-bred woman ; and the
Chevalier de Valvourgs told himself that

lie had never been so happy in his-life.


Now I will take you,' said the comte. ' to
our grand show, the abode of our best ghost
or thereabouts ; for we have a few ghosts,
great and small, graduated according to
the vastness of their crimes in the days of
their flesh, or to the imagination of their
inventors. What should we be without our
ghosts and legends in Brittany ? What
do you say, Rohan ?'

We should be nothing. I could not
understand our country Without them.'

Having crossed several rooms in a fair
state of preservation, they came to one in a
round tower, and suddenly the sea seemed
to borrow a mighty voice and its waters
to struggle and tear and hight like souls
tormented down below. Through the
narrow, cross-shaped loopholes the vast
ocean was seen in the distance rolling

solemnly and majestically under a canopy
of clouds, regardless of the turmoil at the
foot of the precipice.

'This turret,' said the comte, 'which
must have been used as an extra prison,
is known as the " Threshold of Death ;"
cheerful, is it not ?'

Fairly so.'

The waters have hollowed out for
themselves a deep cavern, where the
fearful battle is for ever renewed ; but it
is the hand of man that has partly blocked
its opening ; so that the victim falling into
the whirlpool down below, should never
be carried away and reveal the secret of
his death. No vessel can approach it
without being shipwrecked, and no human
foot can climb down the precipices that
surround it ; nevertheless, according to
the legend, a man attempted it, accomplished
it, and died of grief on the rocks

below, before the sight that was revealed
to him.'

^ Why? how was that?'

Reriee will tell you, she delights in all
these things ; and it really takes too much
out of one of my age to relate them. Now,
Renee, we are listening.'

The young girl smiled, and said,

This is idleness, sir.'

Then, becoming serious, her two hands
folded before her, her eyes fixed afar as if
forgetful of her audience, she began :

In the neighbourhood of Kerguennec
lived a baron, and his castle was as strong
as this one. The neighbours, bold and
brave and tierce warriors both, had unfortunately
quarrelled and were deep-rooted
enemies. It happened, in the
course of time, that they also became
rivals in love. Both fell in love with a
maiden as beautiful as the day, and as

good as the angels in Heaven. But she had
been promised and betrothed to the powerful
baron, the enemy of the Comte de
Kergnennec.

The baron had taken a vow of going to
Palestine, so he thought it best at once to
keep his vow in order not to be separated
from his bride after his marriage. Leaving
his betrothed in his chateau under his
mother's care, and a strong guard of faithful
men, he set out for the Holy Land.
He had gone some distance when a blast
upon the horn of one of his fleetest messengers
made him turn round, and he
learned with grief and rage that the young
girl had been seized ; that she was at Kern
in this castle, and that his rival had
resolved upon immediately marrying her.

The young baron and his small band of
retainers utter cries of malediction and
vengeance; they turn their horses' heads

towards home again ; they ride in hot
haste ; they rush forward ; the trumpet
sounds far and wide ; the baron's numerous
vassals are assembled ; and the valiant
army, animated by fierce hopes of revenge,
press on to the walls of Kerguennec.

Nothing can check the furious attack ;
the warriors win the besieged place ; uttering
loud cries of victory, they search the
castle for their conquered foe. They reach
this spot, and the guilty man pays the
forfeit with his life.

But in the midst of the shouts of
triumph, heart-rending screams, the screams
of a woman, are heard coming from below ;
the fierce comte has had time to dispose
of his victim. To see whence the cries
come is impossible, but the baron in his
mad grief dashes down the ramparts,
urges his friends to follow him, and leaps
from rock to rock, from abyss to abyss,

and surmounts every obstacle. At last
they see him pause, his eyes are fixed
with horror on the whirlpool where the
racking waters are lashed into fury by the
tempest ; then, uttering a piercing cry and
extending his arms as one fascinated, he
calls on her he loved, and falls dead before
the victim whose cries have long ceased to
be heard.

Never again did the young baron and
his beautiful fiancee tread the soil of their
native land ; never again did the halls of
their homes resound with their laughter ;
their promises of love Avere buried in the
waves ; but two unhappy spirits ever since
wander round this chamber of death,
uttering moans and lamentations ; and on
stormy nights their voices are plainly
heard crying, '' Woe, woe to Kerguennec !
Woe, woe ! Let its fall be great — woe to
Kerguennec !" '

And, raising her hand,

Hark !' she murmured low.

And the sea below seemed to sigh —
^ Ker-guen-nec !'

The young men had never taken their
eyes off her face while she told the fate
of the victims of her lawless ancestor; and
the young chevalier's heart vibrated at
her words like the harp touched by a
master-hand. The comte it was who
broke the silence.

Nice, is it not ? A charming way of
o:ettin2: rid of troublesome friends or hated
enemies.'

But the entrance of the cave?'

Ah ! never ask for particulars when
you are told a legend.'

Then that Threshold ?'

The secret of the passage is lost. In
my youth I tried to discover it. I had
workmen here, but they were not to the

manner born, and the secret is a secret
still.'

'Then it really is all a myth, I suppose?'

Would you prefer it to be otherwise ?
However, there is no doubt about the
oubliette down below, for, dien the sea is
calm and the light good, wee can see from
the distance the cave beneath, with its
heavy rocks crosswise barring the entrance.
There misfht have been another kind of
entrance to it ; but a legend is a legend,
you know, and has its way of explaining
matters.'

As they where returning to the house,
the chevalier said, in a subdued voice, to
Renee de Kerguennec,

Do not such stories haunt you in the
stormy nights, mademoiselle?'

They are so very, very old,' she replied,
with a smile.

'But a curse is abiding, and sorrow

predicted must I would not that a

breath of sorrow came near you, mademoiselle.'


She looked up quickly in his face.

You almost make me afraid.' she laughed
; * but I thank you for the feeling of
kindness implied. Only, be comforted, so
many generations of brave and good men
have passed away with their joys and their
sorrows since those days of legend ; and,
besides, the destiny of every human being
the destiny of the last of the Kerguennecs
which I am — is it not in God's hand?'

CHAPTER III.

Time passed quickly at the Chateau ; many
invitations had been made, and many
visitors, old and young, from all parts of
the neighbourhood came to hear the last
ne\YS from those who had just left the
king and queen. Great animation prevailed;
expeditions and friendly calls filled
the time, and the noise of horses and
carriages during the day, and the music and
dancing at night, made the old place ring
with the sounds of life again.

A grand race those Breton gentlemen
were, with their strongly-built frames,
round heads, and keen black or blue eyes.

Men of granite, borrowing their strength
from the pure atmosphere of their country
and the purity of their lives. They questioned
the young men with that genuine
and exquisite kindness of heart which
with love of independence, forms the
principal trait in the Breton character.
Simple, discreet, earnest, self-contained, and
self-reliant they were ; and the stranger
was welcome at their hearths.

Some still wore the Breton dress : the
wide Gaelic plaited breeches, the round
coat with its extraordinary number of
buttons, and long embroidered vest, and
shoes with large buckles ; while their long
hair, cut close on the front of the head
in the style of the old Merovingian kings,
floated on their shoulders.

And a noble costume it was, even
though the peasants wore the same ; those
peasants with whom the seigneurs seemed

to live on a footing of equality and
friendship.

So these were the Bretons in their
homes, those Bretons so ill-judged and so
often laughed at in Paris ! And it could
but add to the pleasure of the young
stranger's visit to Brittany to find himself
among men not only differently dressed
from the ordinary inhabitants of France,
and with different customs and manners,
but also with the traditions of a glorious
past fresh upon them. To be with the
descendants of a strong and warlike race,
which for more than six centuries had
held its own against powerful and hateful
neighbours — the Kings of France ; sometimes
fighting them alone, sometimes with
the help of the English, and sometimes fighting
the English themselves and disputing
with them the supremacy of the Channel.
To recollect while among them how some

VOL. I. E.

of those Englishmen had at different times
taken a foothold in Brittany, and lived
in the barbarous style that led to the
immortal Combat des Trente, and the
cause of that fight ; — how Beaumanoir
had said to Sir Bembrough at Ploermel,
Knight of England, it is a shame for you
to chain like oxen by two and three, and
flog and torment the peasants as you do,
the peasants who labour in the fields, and
through whose labour we set corn and
wine 1 Truly, if they did not do the work
for us, we noblemen would even have todo
it ourselves, and endure their privations
and hardships. Cease, therefore, I
pray you, to injure them.' To which Bem-
brough had replied : ' Know that the
English race is born to conquer and rule
everywhere ; therefore, Beaumanoir, hold
thy peace And then they had fought
that wonderful fight and the Breton won.

Or else, how the English had lived
among them as friends, and how Jean de
Montfort, who had crushed his rival with
their help, loved them so that he loaded
them with honours and gave them all the
high posts to fill in the duchy, till his
barons and noblemen grumbled and gave
him the choice either to send them away or
to go away himself; — Which last he chose
to do and retired to England. And how,
when the French king saw the Bretons
without their duke, he sent an army to
take possession of the duchy, and the
Bretons sent to him and he came back —
people falling on their knees before him
and weeping with joy at his return. And
how they then fought the King of France,
and the Bretons won again.

But he had yet to learn that since
the marriage of Anne de Bretagne with
Louis XII. of France, and the powerful

E 2

enemy had had a voice in the parliament
of Brittany, vexations had never ceased,
king after king proving himself to be the
enemy of the Breton independence — a
question of life and death now to the
Breton who had never yielded, but had
rebelled, conspired, and fought to the last.

And how, throughout those centuries of
struggle for independence, the peasant had
gone hand in hand with his master,
fio^htino^ with him with the same indomitable
courage, the same unconquerable will.
It was no Wonder the Breton peasant
remained attached to that master, no
wonder the seigneur loved the peasant.

But these seigneurs were the men who
had gradually become proud of the advanced
civilization of France, and were
ready to associate with her and even uphold
her ideas, little dreaming what these
would soon be. They now thought it a

shame that the French king and queen
should suffer such indignities at the hands
of their subjects, and they despised that
power of a day, as they believed it to be,
that Republic which, caring nothing for
what was glorious in the past, seemed to
have no work but to destroy.

Still they did not want war. They
meant to remain at peace in the midst of
the turmoil of events going on in Paris,
safe among their devoted peasants. And sono
doubt they would have remained but
for the priest in their midst — that lowly
peasant-priest, so devoid of ambition, who
was to be the cause that torrents of blood
should be shed in the unhappy country.

Monsieur Brevelaye, the rector, or cui's,
of Kerguennec, was a fair specimen of his
class. He was a tall man, with a slight
stoop acquired by hard study. He stood
out from the rest of the visitors at the

Chateau, clad in his long; priestly garments,
humble and generally silent, but with the
same courtly manner as the noblemen he
was with. He Alas a peasant's son, who,
when a lad, had been a goat-herd or had
held the plough, till his pious mother and
father, but more especially his brother,
determined to make him a priest. To
their hard life of labour was to be added
another burden; — further privations, where
already there was so little to spare, had to
be devised. But once having thought of
that great honour — a priest in the family
they never swerved from their purpose.
The young lad joined in the general wish
of his family and was sent to school and to
long continued sorrow.

The peasant in Brittany was attached
to his master, but the inhabitant of the
town, little by little, had forgotten the
Breton tongue and longings, and loved

the civilization which brought him an
easier life. The peasants and the town
people hated each other, as only earnest
people can hate, — the peasants calling the
former in their own tongue and with
the deepest contempt, * Galloped,' — ' False
Breton,' or 'Traitor to the Breton cause ;'
the other being in no way behind in calling
them savages. For the poor peasant
lad, with his peasant clothes, his peasant
manners, his Breton speech and ignorance
of French, to be seated among the younger
boys of the town, so different in everything,
and so much more advanced than he
was, there was many a moment of torture
and misery. But slowly and surely the
young scholar made his way, through
trials and sorrows, and in spite of that
more terrible pain still, home-sickness, to
which the Breton is so prone, till one day,
swallowed up in the seminaries he lost his

dress and originality in exchange for the
dress, and thoughts, and hopes of the priest.

Then at last has the reward come,
he is a priest. He returns to his village,
his heart bursting with lono;ino: towards
his own. He reaches his lowly and beloved
cottage ; he hears his parents speak ; but
his father remains with uncovered head
before him ; his mother kneels down for
his blessing ; his brother, who has done so
much for him, stands while he eats, waiting
till he has done before he himself begins.

Outside, among the young girls his
playmates once, some have become mothers
; others are still free, but he is a man
of God, and all heads bow before him. No
heart is there among them that will ever
beat for him, never will he call a wife
his own. The sacerdos of the humble
priest is renunciation, and renunciation is
not joy, but a martyrdom freely chosen.

Circumstances call him in time to bethe
rector of his own parish, and he enters
the homes of the companions of his childhood
as the best friend God has sent them
upon earth. He crosses the threshold of
that chateau he had looked up to with
veneration and awe — a visitor, a friend,
and a counsellor. He sits at the table
of his seigneur, side by side with his
most honoured guests. He is without
pride or false shame ; he is humble because
of the unworthiness of the instrument God
has chosen to carry out His designs upon
earth ; but he also knows the sacredness of
his office, and that it is this these people
honour in him.

And in 1790 he receives an order from
Paris to swear that he will serve and obey
the ' Constitution.' But he knows nothing
about it, except that the king is
being insulted when he should command,

and he refuses. He is told that, having
refused to swear obedience to the new
powers, he will have to give np his parish
and his work to a stranger. But like a true
Breton he waits, goes on unshaken with
his harassed ministry, and means never to
yield.

Perhaps the only one among the comte's
guests, he had long foreseen that the peasants
would rebel against the decree that
deprived him of his office, if it ever was
enforced. He sees it in the stern looks of
the men of his flock, and in their deeper
reverence ; in the strong man who approaches
him nearer as if to take him
under his protection ; in the woman who
looks up to him as to one on the eve perhaps
of becoming a martyr.

He sees it also in his brother Look,
whose love is deep tenderness combined
with deep reverence ; who kneels down in

the dust to receive his blessing, and
who will protect the priest who has
lost all power of fighting upon earth in
order to win souls for heaven. In the
looks of that brother does he also read
resistance.

A simple creed those men had. There is
a God in heaven, and the priest is God's
minister on earth ; therefore the priest must
be honoured as one would honour God. But
the peasants were not the only ones with
this simple faith ; it went through all
ranks, and the honour paid by the nobleman
to his priest was also graced
with the same intense conviction and
earnestness.

Among these men one stood out from
the rest, Monsieur Rohan de Carnoet,
the father of the chevalier's friend,
who, with his Breton dress, his long
hair flowing on his shoulders, and his

fine face, was a remarkable man, and one
of strong individuality. He seemed to
command the respect of all, and the
young chevalier wondered the more, because,
having been taken to his Manoir by
his son, he had found him to be a man of
quiet, retired habits, and comparatively
poor.

The Manoir, though a large and hospitable
mansion, was devoid of most of the
treasures of the past, so prized by a proud
race of men — some rare pictures, now and
then some jewelled sword of the Crusade
days — but otherwise it was almost bare of
things of value.

The sight of his friend's home made the
chevalier understand how it was that
Rohan de Carnoet had always resolutely
refused to join in the more extravagant
pleasures of the Court. Still it was not
the lack of wealth, but more the stern

moral atmosphere that seemed to seize
upon one. But even this failed to explain
the respect paid to Monsieur de Carnoet
by everyone.

He longed to ask who Monsieur de
Carnoet was ; but meanwhile, noticing how
his friend, who had known Mademoiselle
de Kerguennec from her youth, stood
aloof when all men pressed round her, he
asked himself if it were not because of his
poverty that he did so. He would, however,
have done him more justice if he
had seen in his retirement a question of
honour. Rohan de Carnoet, knowing the
understanding between the two families,
and having: been from the first the chevalier's
confidant, felt it his duty to do
nothing that would interfere with his
friend's courtship ; and even carried the
feeling to an extreme. No, his poverty
was no disgrace, and would scarcely have

prevented his being accepted by Renee de
Kerguennec as a suitor ; and this the
chevalier would soon hear.

But there was another man who had not
the scruples of Rohan, and who strongly
resented the chevalier's presence at the
Chateau.

Ydeuc de Trogleff was about thirty
years of age. He had travelled much,
knew the world, and had become an accomplished
courtier. But he had all the
defects of his people's good qualities ; was
proud, irascible, obstinate, easily offended,
and unforgiving.

From the first he had shown coldness
to the chevalier, and the latter, quick to
feel this, had returned his coldness with
dislike. It was evident to everyone that
De Trogleff was anxious to please Mademoiselle
de Kerguennec, and it had not
escaped him who had come to win her

for his bride. It was even said that Deuce
TroglefF had asked her in marriage and
had been refused. No wonder, therefore,
if the presence of the young chevalier at
the Chateau — the purpose of which he
could guess — was most disturbing to him.

But Mademoiselle de Kerguennec saw
nothing of the growing enmity between
the two men. Proud of her people and
of the past ; brave and fearless like them,
but ever gentle and amiable, she fulfilled,
with the greatest tact and courtesy, the
duties of hostess, in order to relieve her
aunt, who was unable to do anything.

Admired by all, she flitted from one to
another, bringing freshness and pleasantness
in her path. The chevalier — a stranger
to her country, but the occasion of the
present gathering of friends — had her first
care. From her perfect simplicity and
open behaviour towards all, it was evident

that no thought of pleasing him more
than another had entered her mind ; and
that no thought of marriage had as yet
disturbed her. If it was true that
Ydeuc de TroglefF had failed once, there
was no stern that he could be more such



restful were he to try again.

Although Rohan de Carnoet had impressed
on his friend the importance of
keeping watch over his quick southern
temper, it was difficult to secure peace
with one who was determined to have
war, and a small incident took place which
might have had serious consequences, and
which Rohan never forgot.

The whole party were one day on
horseback, when they came to a narrow
causeway, where only one could ride at
a time. Ydeuc de Trogleff, who knew of
this, and who was incensed at seeing the
chevalier close to Mademoiselle de Kern

all the time, managed his horse
on approaching it so as to force the
chevalier back, and himself pass the first
after her. Had another done it, it might
have been an accident caused by the restlessness
of the horse ; but, coming from De
Trogleff, the chevalier knew at once it had
been done intentionally, and the hot blood
of youth and anger rushed to his face.
Yet he tried to quell the fury within him,
and wait till away from Mademoiselle de
Kerguennec to speak to him.

I shall never forget,' he said, ' that the
only insult I have received in your hospitable
land came from you.'

To which the other replied, haughtily,

It is immaterial to me whether you
do or not.'

In a moment he saw the chevalier raise
his whip ; but with a laugh, as if to set
him at defiance, he spurred his horse close

VOL. I. F

to him. Fortunately, the whole proceedings
and the provocation offered to the
chevalier had been witnessed by others ;
and several of the gentlemen rushed
forward, entreating De Trogleff to desist
from conduct which could only bring
shame upon them all ; and at last the two
men were parted, the chevalier promising
to forgive for his host's sake, but Deuce
Trogleff swearing he would always
remember how they had all taken part
against him.

To live at peace after such a scene was
difficult, and the chevalier was thankful
when he saw the number of guests diminish
and Rohan and himself were left alone
with the inhabitants of the Chateau.

CHAPTER IV.

There are some women who have the
power of bringing out the best points
in their fellow-creatures. They believe
in the goodness of human nature, and see in
others those good qualities which they most
esteem and think they themselves lack :
unconscious that it is their very faith
which is producing the effect, though it
may be but for a season. His spirit must
be poor indeed who knows that one
he loves or esteems believes him to be
great and good, and who yet does not
strive to reach the ideal he is thought to
fulfil.

f2

Thus the Chevalier de Valvourgs felt himself
ennobled by his contact with Mademoiselle
de Kerguennec. He who had never
thought of anything but pleasure, and who
had followed the bent of his natural disposition
for good or for evil, felt within himself
the highest aspirations, and would fain have
done great things so that he might prove to
her — and to himself — that he was not devoid
of those feelings which she took for granted
existed in him. He felt himself to be an
altered man, little dreaming how transient
the change might prove if he was called
back once more to his former atmosphere
of frivolity.

After two weeks at the Chateau the
chevalier felt that he was expected to
declare himself. He had promised his
uncle to marry; and if he had not loved
Mademoiselle de Kerguennec he still would
have tried to keep his promise, though he

might have done so while calculating the
chances of separating himself virtually
from his wife. But he loved the bride
he had come to win, and with the new
feelings in him, a spirit of diffidence,
unknown before, swept over him, and
made him nervous before the possibility of
a refusal.

'What a day before me!' he said to his
friend, on the morning he was preparing
himself for his interview with the comte.
Is it not astonishing that I, the gay
and brilliant butterfly, as I used to be
called, should have so burnt my wings at
the fire of love — and so quickly, too ! Ah !
De Carnoet, De Carnoet, I would not wish
my worst enemy to be in the state of mind
I am in. I want to marry and I want
to be free ; I dread the bondage and worship
the chain ; I am seized with an all-overpowering
desire to run away, or with

an all-mastering longing to worship here
all the days of my life. And yet the
dread of her refusing me haunts me
most, for she is of an independent
disposition, and the comte will not thwart
the inclinations of his niece. I could
die, I could die if it came to this. But
you do not pity me, you never did pity
me ; from the first you pooh-poohed the
intensity of my love ; and even to-day, when
my fate is to be decided, you do not feel
for me! You, a friend too — it is hard.' —
And the chevalier shook the lace carefully
round his neck. ' That rascal Thurio will
never learn how much depends on the
appropriate fold of a tie. — You believe in
my love, do you not ?'

Yes, oh yes. It is early yet ; only a
fortnight, you know.'

A fortnight ! but what a fortnight
when each day is filled with the most

bewildering and conflicting desires, and
has the length of a century. I never
knew before how much one's happiness
can depend on another, and how uncontrollable
is the wish to be noble
and virtuous near a noble and virtuous
woman! De Carnoet, it frightens meat
times! Shall I ever be able to
satisfy her? Will not her disappointment
in me be terrible? But I must make her
love me, otherwise I shall be unhappy and
watched for ever.'

De Carnoet looked at his friend's face
doubtfully, a smile on his lips.

Would you be wretched— for ever ?'
'Should I? I tell you, you have no
fellow-feeling for me! You never had;
you are so cold yourself that you will
not even understand another who is not.
There is little fear of your ever falling
in love as I have done ; you will be

considering the pros and cons, calculating
this chance or that — happy, prudent fellow
that you are ! Now I think of it, I have
never yet seen you overcome by any
woman's charms ; my idea is that you cannot
be. Oh, how I envy your indifference
! What would I not give now to
change places with you !'

Change.'

^ No, no, I do not mean it, and in my
agitation I hardly know what I say. But
there goes the breakfast-bell — Ah ! De
Carnoet, Avhat a day, what a day for me !
Wish me good luck, at least.'

But what would you consider good
luck ; to be refused or to be accepted ?'

Accepted, by Heaven ! Refused, I
should die.'

Or run back to Paris ?'

'Never, never !' And the chevalier hastened
to the dining-room.

With the kind but incredulous smile on
his lips, Rohan de Carnoet followed his
friend leisurely. He was amused at the
chevalier's moods ; and it was very much
to him like watching the whims and
fancies of an amiable child, though he did
not tell himself so and was unconscious
of it. He had a sort of fondness for his
brilliant friend so unlike himself in almost
everything, and he felt glad also of his admiration
for Mademoiselle de Kerguennec —
glad to see him love her as he thought the
whole world should love her ; glad she was
his first thought and care even as she was
his own first thought too — her image never
leaving him for one moment night or day.

Yes, it was all as it should be ; no
woman had he ever met in the world he
could compare with her ; none so beautiful,
none so graceful, none so good. De Trogleff
loved her ; and his friend loved her. And

anyone coming near lier must love lier.
It would be a charming match ; in his
mind's eye he could picture her and his
friend walking side by side, and both looking
happy and well ; he could fancy his
friend chatting away and she listening to
his lively talk as he himself could listen, and
laughing even as he laughed ; and it was
pleasant to him to fancy her amused and
happy. No thought of self was there. It
was not true that he was too cold ever to
love; but it certainly was true that he had not
yet learned to read his own heart aright ;
he might have loved at first sight even as his
friend had loved, but it was not in his
nature to become at once aware of it ; the
seed had not only to be sown in his heart,
but had to grow before he would believe
it had been sown.

On that morning they found Renee
as fresh, as cordial, and as simple as

ever. During those days of delightful
intercourse swift was the flight of time,
and of sorrow there was none. The
comte carefully kept from them the
ncAvs he received from Paris of the bloodshed
and massacres ; but, even had they
known, their soft laughter might have
overcome their dread or sympathy. The
three young people were happy, very
happy, and it would have been difficult
for them to weep long over the distant
troubles of unknown people.

The breakfast came to an end, and then
the chevalier asked the comte discreetly
if he could speak to him. Renee guessed
why, and, with open eyes, followed the
retreating forms of those two — and of
Rohan, driven away from her presence
at that moment by some instinct he did
not quite make out.

Renee de Kerguennec liked the young

Chevalier de Valvourgs. He was handsome
and bright, and she felt sure he was
kind-hearted and good, and everything one
could desire. She had no objection to
marrying him, — for what could she desire
better? Her uncle and aunt were satisfied,
and why should she not be ?

She never asked herself if she loved
him. Love was not an analytic study in
those days, and a girl in her position was
not likely to have heard much about it.
No books were there either to tell her of
the experiences of others ; and, if love
came to her, she would have to hug the
new feeling to her heart ignorant of what
other maidens have found it to be before
her.

Had she thought of it, — had she known
anything about it, she would have known
that she was not in love. It was pleasant
to be near such a bright and amusing

companion; and he evidently liked her.
There could be no reason, therefore, against
their being happy together, if they married.
She saw none, and looked for none.
Of course they would be happy. And
perhaps she was right.

A simple and inexperienced and liigh-
principled girl, provided she meets with
a man truly in love with her, is tolerably
sure to find love in marriage, and abide
by that first and only love to the end
of her life. Passion is one thing, love
with honour is another; and this last is the
only one a good woman craves after. Yes,
most likely Mademoiselle de Kerguennec
would be happy, if she married the Chevalier
de Valvourgs — but she was not in
love with him.

During his interview with her uncle,
something besides her own welfare
occupied her. There was something

in lier father's will that she knew must
prove trying to the man asking her in
marriage ; and she felt very tenderly towards
the chevalier, to whom she could
fancy her uncle explaining it.

The comte received the young man's
overtures kindly. He told him of the
pleasure it had been to them to make his
acquaintance, and that he felt his niece
would be made happy by him. If everything,
as was usual, had not been quite
settled beforehand between the taro families,
it Alas because Renee was an orphan and
practically independent ; it was, moreover,
because of a clause in her father's will, and
this he would now explain to him.

My brother, you see, had some extraordinary
notions about the marriage of his
only child, and, as they came from his deep
affection for her, we can scarcely blame
him. At the same time, it is but fair to

ourselves to remark that the semblance of
insincerity the clause forces upon us is a
trial we should have been thankful to be
spared. On his death-bed my brother
made me promise him not to name the
conditions of his daughters fortune until
after she had been asked in marriage, and
these conditions are trying enough to require
consideration on your part.'

■• My niece can marry when she chooses,
but she can have no power over her fortune
before she is twenty-one. She has a
small income till then, but an income altogether
inadequate to the requirements of
a married life such as she is bound to by
her rank.

Supposing she accepts you, you will
either have to marry her, and wait three
years for the very fair fortune she brings,
or wait three years before marrying her ;
unless you are in a position to waive the

question of money altogether till then,
because you have enough of your own.
The affairs are so settled that no borrowing
can be made.

Had it been in my power to make those
conditions known to your uncle Avhen you
were first mentioned to us, I would have
done so ; but my promise to my brother
was binding. He saw, no doubt, safety in
those conditions for his daughter against a
hasty marriage, and thought that twenty-one
was early enough for a girl to marry.
But my niece feels this arrangement — particularly
the concealment exacted from us
very much. Till now she had refused
to listen to any proposition of marriage,
and would have done so for you had it
not been that her grandmother assured us
that your uncle would meet any emergency
arising from this difficulty.

However, now you know how things

stand, it is for you to consider whether you
still are willing to marry my niece or not.
At all events, your uncle shout be communicated
with at once by you, I think.
Some of my friends will be glad to receive
you while you wait for his answer, and
make up your mind.'

The chevalier looked at him anxiously.

Do you mean to imply that I must
leave your roof at once — that I must not
tell Mademoiselle de Kerguennec of my
feelings towards her? This is terrible !'

You love her, then ?'

I do love her deeply and sincerely, and
the happiness of my whole life is dependent
on her answer. My uncle, I know,
will overcome all difficulties.'

Yes ; but ' — the comte hesitated — ' we
ought to be sure before. You see, this is
one of the difficulties of obeying the commands
of men who are no more. My bro-vol.

I. o

ther, in his anxiety about his daughter's
happiness, does not seem to have contemplated
a case of true love with narrow
means ; his heiress being rich, he feared
the fortune-hunter.'

Yes, yes, I see ; but I — I do not care
for money — that is, I have, in fact, been
much too dependent on my very generous
uncle ever to have considered — in short, I
have never thought about money matters ;
I have always had more than enough.
My love for Mademoiselle de Kerguennec
is sincere, true '

Yes, but supposing your uncle objected
?'

But he will not.'

'So my niece's grandmother assured us.'

I am his heir, his only heir ; and he is
very rich.'

I know.'

Will you not allow me to speak to
mademoiselle ?'

The comte thought awhile. Like his
brother, he wanted Renee to be loved and
to make a happy marriage, and wished that
every precaution for ensuring it should betaken.
But he saw that the chevalier loved
her, and that he seemed everything one
could desire. Surely if Renee's father had
still lived he would have removed the difficulty
at once. On the whole, the comte
thought he might trust the chevalier ; moreover
he was aware that Renee was able to
guide herself in the matter.

'Will you allow me to speak to her?'
the chevalier repeated.

I think perhaps I am justified in allowing
you to do so. Speak to her, she knows
all about this clause in the will and why it
was thought of It will be easier for both

g2

of you to come to an understanding now
that there is nothing to hide.'

To do the young man justice, he had
said truly he did not care for money ;
that is, he did not know the value of
money. It never had happened to him to
put his hand into his pocket and find it
empty, or to see his debts remain unpaid.
On his way to his bride-elect, however,
his conversation with his uncle, and the
way he had calculated the income he
would give him, rather troubled him.
What if he refused to help him in this
unexpected emergency ? The very thought
brought a flush to his face and increased
his longing to make Mademoiselle de
Kerguennec love him. Part from her,
he said to himself, he could not do.

Renee was standing in the recess of a
deep window, and gazing far into the
distance. The weather had been stormy

during the night, and now everything
lay in soft and undefined outlines under
the cloudy sky. A mantle of deep purple
clothed the hills far away, while now
and then a white, soft light from above
broke through the thickness of the clouds,
sometimes resting on the top of the trees,
sometimes on the church steeple that seemed
to shoot out of a bower of verdure ; while
all the cottages scattered round it lay hid
to the view.

Nothing was there to trouble the stillness
of the peaceful landscape, and Mademoiselle
de Kerguennec's face as she stood
thinking reflected the calm of nature.
What would the chevalier decide ? Would
he stay ? or would he leave without seeing
her ? Would the will offend him, or would
he try to conquer the obstacles thus put
in his way? And what would then be
her feelings towards him? Could she

regret him if he gave her up without
a struggle ?

Then she heard his step, and knew he
was coming towards her ; and when she
saw him standing before her, her smile
was even like that break in the clouds,
the harbinger of joy. In a moment,
seeing her thus, a flood of passionate love
passed over him, and he spoke for the first
time to her out of the fulness of his
heart.

Mademoiselle,' he said, at once coming
near her, ' I have to ask all your indulgence,
and all your patience and generosity,
for I want of you a boon more precious
by far to me than my very life. Do not
speak hastily, and pray listen to me to the
end, for your verdict will fix my destiny.
From the moment I saw you — from the
very first moment when I saw you near
and heard your voice, I knew that life

without you would be impossible forme.
Tell me, can you think of me asa
friend — your best, your dearest friend ;
one who will watch over your destiny with
a jealous care, and whose every thought
will be for your happiness? Can you join
your destiny to mine?'

He was standing near her ; he felt almost
suffocated by his love, and his words came
only by snatches ; but although her heart
beat quicker, and a flush of pleasure rushed
to her face, she answered him with an
untroubled calm.

I thank you for the kindness of your
feelings towards me, chevalier — but are not
there some difficulties ?'

Oh, we will conquer them,' he broke
in, quickly. ' Fear not ; were my uncle
to see you, he would sacrifice everything
rather than take from me the happiness of
my life.'

Are you sure your happiness depends
on me?'

Sure ! I could not exist without you ;
as well deprive a man of his eyes when
he has just beheld the most enchanting
scene, or shut him in prison when all he
loves is without. No, I could not exist
without you ! You are the guiding star
beckoning to me, and shining over the
whole of my future life. I see your
presence like the glory of the morning
over every one of my days. With you by
my side, I see a path strewn with flowers ;
I feel the warmth of all the purest delights ;
the joy of the sweetest pleasures. Under
the light of your eyes I can become a
nobler man. I feel ready to struggle towards
a higher sphere of thought and
action. Were you to leave me, were you
to disappear from my life, everything must
be darkness and desolation, and my future

be wrecked. Do not refuse to tread life
by my side, to hold out to me the helping
hand of affection, the strengthening look
of love. In your presence I loathe my
past nothingness, and all great things seem
easy Avhen near you. Say, will you not
accept me as the companion of your life,
for you to help, and to strengthen, and to
guide?'

It was sweet, very sweet ! This child
of the south, with his loveable soul, was
very delightful to listen to; could make
life appear very enchanting, and she said,

I would willingly try ; but, while undervaluing
your own merits, you exaggerate
my powers to help you.'

Alas ! I have none ! none ! Only give
me some share of your affection in return
for my deep love ; only promise you will
in time try — to love me too.'

I will try,' she replied, a soft blush of

maidenhood on her cheeks. 'It is early
yet, is it not ?' And the sweet, enchanting
smile did away with the pain the words
might inflict.

But you will try ? You promise ?
Say that you promise ; say again that you
will try to love me, and I am satisfied.
Say that you do not reject me.'

No, I do not reject you, and if
you feel sure you care for me — and it is
God's will, I hope our union will be
blessed.'

In his transport, he knelt on one knee
before her, he pressed with delight to his
lips the hand held out to him, and then
rose to his feet.

Every year of my life from now I consecrate
to you, and for your happiness I
will live. Trouble shall never come near
you ; I will jealously watch over my own
treasure.'

He paused, and then went on more
quietly. ' And now tell me, advise me, had
I better go to my uncle, or send a messenger
to him ?'

I will tell you what I think, and then
you must do as you find best. My uncle
and aunt greatly desire to keep me with
them ; would not your income, joined to
my present one, be sufficient for us if we
stay? Would you stop here? Is your
affection for me great enough to forego
all the pleasures of Paris ? In three
years we could take our place in the world
three years of seclusion and happiness
would make us stronger to meet with the
difficulties that are inherent to a life at
Court. Will you agree to this ? I tell
you frankly that I should prefer it. The
Court frightens me ; it seems to me that
you will no longer belong to me entirely
when there. — You hesitate.'

I know not what to say. Is not the
bird to leave the nest when it begins to
feel its wings ?'

Wait, then, three years.'

No, no ! rather any condition than that.
Three years ! rather death at once. No, I
could not wait three years.'

Then we must fall back upon your
uncle.'

And his generosity I answer for. But
you will think of me in my absence ?'

Nay, do not go yourself,' she murmured,
some instinct making her loth to part
with this bright sunbeam that embellished
life for her ; ' stay with us. You have a
trusty and sure servant — send him.'

Will the comte allow my staying near
you while '

We will ask him. — But I must go now
to my aunt and tell her of our happiness.
You are a great favourite of hers, and

she will be pleased.' And, lightly leaning
her hand on the arm of her accepted
lover, she went to the comtesse.

Later on, as Rohan de Carnoet was returning
from a visit, he met his friend full
of enthusiasm and delight.

'• Ah ! it is as I thought,' he said. ' You
are accepted.'

De Carnoet, congratulate me ; no happier
man can exist in this world. I had
no idea what love could be. Everything is
new for me on earth. I am dazzled, fairly
dazzled by my good fortune. I, who was
afraid — do you remember how afraid I
was, De Carnoet? Such a short time ago,
and now But you scarcely congratulate
me as I thought you would ! Is anything
the matter ? Have you met with
any accident ?'

No, I am very glad for you, very glad
indeed.'

Then why so gloomy ?'

'Am I gloomy ? I was not aware.'

But you are, you are. I thought you
would rejoice in my happiness ; you
seemed so to wish I should succeed, and
now '

Forgive me, De Valvourgs ; you perhaps
are right, I ought to rejoice more
entirely with you ; but somehow I feel sad.
It cannot be envy or regret, and yet I
suppose there is something of both. We do
so long for a happiness we seem deprived
of, and our heart feels so lonely when there
is no sympathy near — I mean, you are so
very happy, while I '

Oh, I know, I know; I can understand.
It was selfish of me to ask for an unbounded
joy like mine. Such a prize!
There is none like her upon earth, none
like her !'

None like her !' murmured De Carnoet
to himself, ' none like her !'

'And she is mine — mine !'

Yes — I congratulate you, De Valvourgs
; you will have reason to be proud
of your Breton wife.'

And he passed on, while his friend, looking
after him, said to himself, with an easy
smile of commiseration,

Poor fellow ! no wonder he feels sad ;
I should feel just the same in his place ;
but it is me she loves, or will love — Ah !
Renee, my beautiful Renee, what a happy
life is before us !'

That night Mademoiselle de Kerguennec
appeared in all her beauty. She was
full of quiet enjoyment. Her modest
assurance, when talking to the chevalier,
was very enchanting to see ; there
was no bashfulness, and no timidity. She

openly held out to him the hand of friendship
till she could offer him the hand of
love ; never dreaming even if love could
ever be necessary. She talked to him
frankly about their future plans, taking
the lead if need be, and listening with
attention when his suggestions came — one
they were and one they were to be, and
he was bright and handsome — and could
plead so well ! She smiled to herself when
remembering his words and how easily
they flowed ! His heart was no doubt
very full when he spoke ; — she could never
have said such things. Ah, she would be
happy, very happy !

The chevalier, accustomed to the byplay
of treacherous love, drank his full at
this cup of pure joy. An angel coming
down with outstretched wings from heaven
and alighting upon earth to make it a
heaven for him, was to him scarcely

strong enough a figure to express his new
sensations.

And Rohan was there and looked on,
cheered except with the crumbs of
politeness her delicacy made her give him
that he should not be altogether left aside.
He witnessed the chevalier's rapture,
looked at her new beauty, and her efforts
not to leave him entirely forgotten did not
satisfy him. What was it that had come
over him ? Why was he not able to shake
off that feeling of desolation which oppressed
him ? None like her — no, none
like her was there in the world for him, —
and she was his friend's !

Surely, surely he was above envy, he
told himself. And to envy the chevalier
he had now known for years seemed below
him. Yes, he was above envy, but he sought
for affection — her affection, perhaps — they
had lived so intimately of late, and

VOL. I. H

it had been so very sweet ; but he must
bid farewell to that pleasant intercourse for
the future. He would only be in their
way ; no one would care for him to be
there, and no one would notice his absence.
He had better go; better leave them to
themselves. And he determined to quit
the Chateau on the morrow.

CHAPTER V.

It is one thing when, with harassed
spirits, we promise ourselves to take some
great step on the morrow, and another to
act towards its accomplishment when the
day dawns, and strength and courage are
renewed. The next morning, in the sweet
sunshine of Mademoiselle de Kerguennec's
presence, things assumed a different aspect
for Rohan de Carnoet. What was it that
had made him sad the day before? The
joy of the two lovers ? Was it not right
they should be happy together, and ought
he not to be satisfied with the few efforts

h2

she had made to remember him ? Surely
he had been unjust! Why should he not
bask in the sunshine of her countenance
to the last, and rejoice with her in her
happiness? — No, he would not go away.

The hesitation that still remained in
him was done away with by the comte
asking Monsieur and Madame de Carnoet
to come to the Chateau on a visit. The
power of decision being taken away from
him, he thought he was right to be satisfied
and thankful.

To the noise and excitement of the two
preceding weeks succeeded calm and quiet ;
and, with each one at the Chateau fully aware
of the goodwill of the others, the days
passed on full of enjoyment and peace.

Meanwhile, the messenger of the chevalier
was going through France the bearer of
the all important news.

One day as the chevalier was walking

with Renee on the terrace of the Chateau,
and the others were seated a little lower
down in the gardens, he asked her suddenly
what it was in Monsieur de Carnoet
that drew such marked respect from everyone,
and she looked up pleased at his
question.

You are right, chevalier,' she said ; ' you
should know all about the family of your
friend ; and I am delighted to tell you. I
suppose you guessed that the Canoes
are poor? But they are not likely to
have told you the cause of their poverty ;
Monsieur Rohan is so modest and retiring ;
do you not find him so ?'

Yes, always.'

Now let me see how much history
you know ; I mean our own Brittany
history ?'

He laughed.

'Very little, I fear, except such

fragments as I have picked up lately.'
Brittany is so far from Provence, is it
not ?' she replied, looking at him with an
amused smile.

Oh ! do not try to exculpate my ignorance,'
he replied, in the same tone. ' To
tell you the truth, in my knowledge of
history I ought to be likened to a man
carvings a bas of seeds of which some will
bring forth names — some facts, some dates,
some places ; and who, when he wants a
particular part of history, opens his bag and
drops some seeds on the ground, and puts
together the facts that spring up, in
such a place with the dates and names
which spring up in another. I always
scatter my seeds broadcast, and pickup
my knowledge by bits as it springs
up ; and in that way I know a deal of
history — and geography.'

I am not sure that I understand, but

I gather that in that way you are never at
a loss for an answer.'

Right or wrong there is always an
answer ready : history is rather amusing
that Away.'

Unfortunately, what 1 have to tell you
is not amusing, but very sad and serious.
All our history is more or less so ; we area
stern and serious people, though not
lacking in poetry and love. Above all,
we are great lovers of independence,
and to this love of independence do
the Carnoets owe their misfortune — or
greatness, as one is pleased to consider
it.

The Carnoets are an old family, so old
that their name is associated with all the
exploits of the first Brittany kings ; and
some of its members are found at every
step in the history of the struggle of
Brittany against its foreign enemies. Thus

it is that no further back than the early-part
of this century it happened that
the grandfather of your friend was condemned
to death as traitor by the infamous
Regent of France. ' Our Parliament, or
Etats," was still in existence, though
with maimed liberties, when the Regent
determined to crush it altogether. Then
there was but one cry in Brittany, and
noblemen and peasants rose en masse.

They conspired against the government
of France in the woods and among
druidical monuments. At Ploermel the

nobility united in the Marquis de L

my cousin's chateau. The room is still inexistence.
They sang the old lays that
had often led their fathers and forefathers
to victory, declared their union with France
null and void, and proclaimed their entire
separation from the country which had
violated all the liberties which Louis-xii.

liacl sworn to respect in marrying
Anne de Bretagne.

Unfortunately, they allied themselves
to an ambitious Spaniard, who wanted his
king, Philip V. of Spain, to become Regent
of France, and this alliance proved their
ruin. They were betrayed, and the peasants
also, who hated the Spaniards, and who
had not been forewarned, were angry when
they saw their ships in sight. From that
moment the conspirators were lost.

The Regent sent into our unfortunate
country thirty thousand of those dragoons
trained in the Cevennes against the
Protestants. They committed the most
abominable outrages, — the most brutal
murders, and hunted men as beasts of prey.
But the noblemen had either hied or were
in hiding. Then the Regent promised that,
if the chiefs of the conspiracy would give
themselves up, he would withdraw the

troops. Three of those brave men came
forward, and a fourth was betrayed. The
Regent, instead of having them judged by
their peers, instituted an informal tribunal,
and they were condemned to death at
Nantes. Their fortunes were confiscated,
their chateaux dismantled, their escutcheons
broken into pieces, and their woods and
forests cut down six feet off the ground asa
mark of dishonour. I will tell you the
lament sung about that terrible event, or
rather about the death of one of those
four men.

'But Monsieur de Carnoet, who had been
prevented by his wife from giving himself
up, had escaped so far, and was ready to
embark for Spain with one of his friends
in a Spanish ship, when he heard cries of
distress close by ; and, in spite of his
friend's entreaties and the threats of the
Spaniards that they would leave him behind,

if he did not come at once, he rushed
towards the place from which the cries
proceeded. There he saw a woman being
ill-treated by dragoons, and only consulting
his indignation, he fired, and, fighting
desperately to the last, died pierced by
numberless wounds, but with the comfort
of knowing that the victim of the dragoons
had escaped. His chateau was not
only demolished, but burnt down to the
ground, and his widow and only son left
destitute.

The French government tried to hold up
the names of all those men to execration and
dishonour, but the admiration of their own
people, who consider them the last heroes
of Brittany's independence, has never
failed their descendants ; and I had rather
be as poor as your friend and be able to
count the noble deed among the many
noble ones of my ancestors.'

Renee che Kerguennec's face was aglow
with enthusiasm as she related the few
particulars of the ' Conspiracy of Cella-mare.'


I will sing the lament of the death of
the Marquis of Pontcalec to you, if you
like,' she said, softly ; and, with her sweet,
low voice trembling; in her eagerness and
excitement, she began :

i

wer - seen ne - ve zo sa vet ;

i^

:t^

Train - tour ! ah ! mal - los did - ta ! War

;it=.j

:& ^ I

^rpt:

Train - tour ah ! mal - los did ! . . ah !

But, stopping suddenly :

T forgot you did not understand our

Breton tongue she murmured ; ' I will
give you the burden of the lament, but I
will spare you the refrain.

*A new song has been made, made on the Marquis de

Pontcalec ;
Those Who betrayed him be cursed, be cursed !
Yes ! a new song on the young Marquis de Pontcalec,

so handsome, so full of life, and so noble-hearted
!
He loved the Bretons, for he was born a Breton.
He was born a Breton and was brought up among his

own.
He loved his brethren, but not the town-people, who

all belong to the French party,
Who are always trying to injure those who have

neither fortune nor riches ;
Those who labour night and day to keep their

mothers alive !
He had thought to help us in our misery ;
While they only tried to have him beheaded !

Seigneur marquis, hide yourself ; that occasion they
have found it !"
He has been lost a long time ; in vain they look for
him ; they cannot find him.

A wretch from the town, who begged for his ready

is the one who denounced him !
A peasant would never have betrayed him, even if

offered five hundred crowns —
It was the fete of Our Lady of the Harvest ; the

dragoons were out searching :
Tell me, dragoons, are you not looking out for the

marquis ?"
We are looking for the marquis ; do you know how

he is dressed?"
He is dressed like a peasant, blue overcoat with

embroideries, blue waistcoat and leather gaiters,

small straw hat with red lines, on his shoulders

flowing, long black hair ;
Leather belt, with two Spanish pistols ;
His clothes are of thick stuff, but underneath he

wears golden ones :
"If you give me three crowns, I will tell yoa whereto

find him " —
We shall not give you three sous, and you will take

us to Pontcalec !"
Dear dragoons, in God's name, do not hurt me ;
*' Do not injure me, and I will show you at once

where he is,
*' He is there yonder, in the priest's house, at table

with the Cure of Lisjnol."

Seigneur marquis, fly ! fly ! Here are the dragoons

coming ;
Here are the dragoons coming with shining arms-and

red coats."
I cannot believe that a dragoon would dare to

touch me,
I cannot think the fashion should have come for a

dragoon to lay hands on a marquis."
He had barely finished speaking when the dragoons

filled the room, and he seized his pistols.
If anyone comes near, I fire," he cried.
Seeing this, the old Cure fell at the feet of the
Marquis.
In God's name and your Saviour's, do not fire, my
dear seigneur !"
At that name of our Saviour, who has suffered so

patiently,
At that name of our Saviour, his tears flowed in

spite of himself ;
His teeth were clenched, his head low against his

breast ;
But, looking up, he said, " I will go." —
As he crossed the parish of Lignol the poor peasants

said.
They said, the inhabitants of Lignol : " It is a sin
thus to bind the marquis."

As he passed near Berne, arrived a troop of
children.
Good-morning, good-morning, Monsieur le Marquis,

we are going to catechism ?"
Farewell, my good little ones, I shall see you no

more."
"But where are you going, seigneur? will you not

return soon?"
I do not know, only God knows ; little ones, I amin
danger."
He wanted to caress them, but both his hands were

chained.
Hard would be the heart that could not have been

moved ; — even the dragoons wept.
And yet men of war have hard hearts in their breasts.
When he arrived at Nantes he was judged and

condemned ;
Condemned not by his peers, but by footmen fallen

from behind their masters' carriages.
They asked Pontcalec, "Seigneur marquis, what
was it you did?"
"I did my duty, follow your trade !"

I cry, my children, for a thing that will make you

cry too.
He is dead, poor people, he who fed you and

clothed and helped you,

He is dead, he who loved you, inhabitants of

Berne ;
He is dead, he who loved his country, and who

loved it unto death !
He died at twenty-two, and as martyrs and holy

men die !
God ! have mercy upon his soul. The seigneur

is dead; and my voice dies.
Curses ! curses on thy head, thou who didst betray

him !
Curses — curses !'

As Renee de Kerguennec ended the
lament, which gave so true a picture of her
country and manners, a deep sigh, almost a
sob, burst from her lips.

Brittany, my poor Brittany !' she exclaimed.
Then, looking up at the chevalier
half timidly, she added, ' Forgive me if
I seem to forget myself; I love my people,
I am proud of our heroes and feel for
them. But we will say no more on this
subject ; and, now that you know better

VOL. I. I

who your friend Rohan is, I feel sure you
will care for him none the less.'

No, indeed, no, indeed,' replied the
chevalier, quickly; ' I am thankful to you,
believe me, thankful for anything that can
make me feel with you.'

At that moment Rohan himself joined
them. The traces of emotion were yet on
Renee's face, and his eyes met hers still
wet with tears, and for one moment she
stood facing him, as if undecided.

How was it those two had not joined
hands before, and that their hearts were
still silent. Perhaps it is that the Breton
is slow to receive new impressions, or more
likely that the truth was still unknown to
both. They were friends, had always been
friends, they could feel for one another, and
perfectly understood each other. It was so
natural it should be so; were they not
both Bretons, and, like the unfortunate De

Pontcalec, had they not been brought up
among their own people, till the convent
opened for her education and the Court
for his.

And now they had met again, but a
strand-er had come between them With his

o

proposal of marriage, a stranger they both
liked, and who seemed too bright ever to bethe
cause of trouble or sorrow to anyone.

Renee soon recovered, and with her
wonted smile said to the young men :

I will leave you now. You promised
to accompany me to the rector to-day,
remember ;' and she was gone.

De Valvourgs ! what does this mean ?'
Rohan exclaimed, as soon as she was out
of hearing. ' Tears ! What can have
happened? Mademoiselle de Kerguennec
in sorrow ? Tell me, I entreat you, what
is the matter.'

Nothing, nothing, believe me, De Caria



not. She has only been telling me who
the friend is I have cared for so long now.
She has told me of Brittany ; of the fate
of your grandfather; and has sung the
Death of Pontcalec." '

Ah ! she has not forgotten ! We used
to sing it together once as children, a long,
long time back, as it seems to me now ; and
she has not forgotten.'

De Carnoet,' the chevalier went on,
holding out his hand impulsively, ' I am
glad to know of your grandfather, proud to
be known by a grandson of his ; I trust we
shall for ever remain friends, and that
nothing will come to separate us.'

No one could desire it more than I do,'
replied Rohan. ' Your friend I am and
will remain.'

CHAPTER VI.

The day did not pass, however, under the
gentle influence of the poetry of great
deeds. In the afternoon a servant came to
announce the visit of Monsieur de TroglefF,
and they all knew that the comte would
have a difficult moment with him.

The chevalier looked at Renee, and said,
in a low, loving voice :

You are mine — mine ! He comes too
late now ?'

Too late,' she replied, with a smile,
though it seems that he came a year ago,
poor man.'

Do you pity him?'

Do you not pity all those who have to
bear with pain ?'

But that man, that man !'

But she laughed, little knowing the intense
hatred existing between the taro men.'

Ydeuc de Trogleif stood haughtily before
the comte.

Comte, tell me if it is the truth that
Mademoiselle de Kerguennec is to be
betrothed to the Chevalier de Valvourgs ?'

It is possible she will be.'

Possible ! possible ! Then will you
explain the words you used a year ago
when I came to ask you for her hand?'

'• I told you that my niece refused to
hear anything about marriage before she
was twenty-one.'

But now she is only eighteen ?'

She is only eighteen.'

^ I wait for your explanation, comte.'

You have a right to it. Her grandmother
who lives near Paris was so anxious
she should make the acquaintance of the
chevalier that she yielded ; and — and has
accepted him as a bridegroom that is to
be.'

But. comte, I judge I have a right to
speak to Mademoiselle de Kerguennec.
She ought to have been told of my having
asked her in marriage before the chevalier
came. She ought to have given me an
answer. You had no right to dispose
of her hand before speaking to me.
You were bound to let me know of
the chevalier's intentions. 1 consider [
have been most unjustly treated. On
my word of honour, I will not thus
tamely submit, I will not bow submissively
before such a decision ! Mademoiselle
de Kerguennec must hear me ;
she will understand that you were bound

to speak to her of my proposals. Never,
comte, never shall I forget this. I find
no excuse for what you have done, no
excuse for this gratuitous insult offered
to me. I had been willing; to wait till
Mademoiselle de Kerguennec could hear
me ; I relied on you to let me know if she
ever changed her mind. I would have
waited till she was twenty-one ; but to
treat me thus, to put me aside — spurn
me like an unworthy cur ! I will not bear
it, I will not bear it. I demand that
Mademoiselle de Kerguennec should hear
me, hear me even now, though it may be
too late. 1 demand that she should judge
between you and me, comte, between you

and me '

She will, sir, as soon as you can govern
yourself; as soon as I am able to make
you understand that my niece was told of
your having asked her in marriage '

Ah ! she was told ? and — and-and

— she did not see that — that she
could accept

Is that the truth ?' he exclaimed,
furious.

The comte smiled.

My dear sir, were it not that we all
know your fiery temper, I would not, believe
me, put up with your way of speaking
to me. You should have known that
I would act honourably by you, and by
all men ; you would have heard from us
of my niece's engagement. However, nothing
is settled yet '

Nothing settled ! Do you say that
nothing is yet settled?'

Nothing. That is, we are waiting for a
letter from Provence which will decide my
niece's future destiny.'

I must speak to Mademoiselle de
Kerguennec, comte, you have no right to

forbid me. I must tell her of my loving
her, of my waiting for her, she must
know '

'• Is it quite necessary she should, do
you think, after she has refused you ?'

'Then I ought to have known it, and
not to have been kept waiting.'

'No one kept you waiting, you were
free to do as you chose ; no binding words
were there between you and me '

But now, now you say all is not
concluded ? I must see her, I must ; you
cannot refuse me.'

My niece is in her own home and
perfectly free ; — you forget this. I have
no power to prevent her from seeing you.
Her father put her under my charge, and
that charge I have tried to fulfil to the
best of my knowledge for her good, but I
have no right to sway her mind one way
or the other. If you persist, I will tell her

of your wish, and let her do as she thinks
best.'

I certainly do insist on my right of
speaking to her.'

Very well ! Wait here, I will go to her
myself and explain the object of your
visit.'

Please to do so.' Monsieur de TroglefF
waved his hand impatiently, and, walking
up and down the room, waited for the
young girl to appear.

She soon came in ; gentle, unaffected, and
amiable as ever.

• You wish to see me. Monsieur de
Trogleff.'

He looked at her, and she saw him
tremble in the effort he made to conquer
himself. He could not speak. The sight
of the beautiful, calm girl before him sent
through his brain a ncAV longing for
her he had thought of with love ; and

it was the chevalier who had won the
prize — the chevalier, a Provencal ! He
mastered himself at last.

'Yes, I wanted to see you, mademoiselle;
I come to you for redress. I have waited a
whole year before speaking to you ; until
you were twenty-one, the age before which
the comte told me you would not allow anyone
to speak to you of marriage, I would not
force you to hear of my loving you. But I
hear now that — that another's spoken, that
another has — has been listened to, while I
waited left in ignorance of your change of
mind on the subject ; and 1 who would have
waited for ever for your condescending to
hear me, I am told that — that '

She interrupted him :

I am most sorry, monsieur ; had I known
that you were waiting for any decision from
me, I would have let you know. But I
was only told of your kind feelings towards

me, after my grand-mother's letter about
Monsieur le Chevalier de Valvourgs had
reached us. You must forgive me, but I
did not feel that — that a union between us
could — a woman, you see, has her fancies —
while justly admiring you for your great
qualities, my heart did not prompt me toto
You must forgive me,' she repeated,
' and we must remain friends ; I
should be grieved if it were not to be so.
We shall remain friends, shall we not ?' and
she took a few steps towards him and held
out her hand to him.

He took her hand and carried it to his
lips.

I — love you. Your happiness would
have been my greatest care — T waited to
speak to you — I hoped that you would
listen to me in time. I deeply regret now
I listened to the comte ; I ought to have
spoken openly to you. I '

I entreat you do not distress us and
yourself with a trouble that could not be
avoided. Marriages are written in Heaven,
you know, and ours was not determined
there — and it could not have taken place.
You must comfort yourself. Do not such
things happen continually in this world?
But we part friends. It will always be a
pleasure to see each other, will it not ?
It will always be a pleasure for me to see
you.'

Ah ! I shall never, never comfort myself,
mademoiselle, for this — misunderstanding.
Had I spoken to you before
before the chevalier came '

My uncle told me, before he came,
of your wish to marry me, so that his
presence has really nothing to do with
my decision. I seem cruel, I feel it, but
I cannot help speaking simply to you. It
is all so easily explained. I do trust you

will be comforted in time. I assure you
it will add greatly to my happiness to
know it. I feel as if I had been so unkind
towards you, and yet — yet, how could I
help it ? Suppose you were told of a
young lady in love with you, and you did
not think your dispositions would agree,
what would you do ?'

Do ? do ? Ah ! the more I see

you — the more I regret '

nay, nay; and you will come '

Never ! I never could see you again —
never, never ! I must leave you, I am
heart-broken ; but — but I shall remember
who it is that '

What is it you mean ?'

Oh ! nothing, nothing. Farewell, farewell.
There are things a man cannot
forgive ;' and Monsieur de Trogleif left the
uncle and niece together.

Who is it he is threatening, uncle ?'

My dear child, who but me.'

You ! Threatening you !'

'But he will forget, when his fit of
anger is over.'

Will he forget ?'

And her uncle, who well understood
what De Trogleff meant, merely said,

I feel sure of it.'

CHAPTER VIL

The messenger, the messenger Thurio has
returned.' The words were heard and repeated
by everyone, though nobody knew
who had uttered them first.

Where is he ? Bring him here,' cried
the chevalier, rushing out to meet him.

What news, Thurio ?'

Bad ! bad ! Monsieur le Chevalier.'

Bad ?'

I would not undertake such a journey
again, even for my dear master's sake ;
you meet nothing but cut-throats and
executioners and '

VOL I. K

But the letter — the answer?'

It is all right, it is all right, Monsieur
le Chevalier. I hid it. Ah ! Monsieur le
Chevalier, it is well for a servant to risk
his life, but what is the use of losing it, if
by so doing he fails to serve his master?
I knew what importance you set on the
answer.' — A matter of life and death it is,
I make sure, — 1 said to myself, remembering
your words and ways when sending
me to your uncle on that perilous journey
'

But the answer, man. What keeps
you chattering there instead of giving me
my uncle's answer ?'

Well, Monsieur le Chevalier, as I said,
I have it safe ; but only because I dressed
myself like them — like a common fellow ;
do you not notice my dress. Monsieur le
Chevalier? I am no longer the courier of
Monsieur le Chevalier, but a trader, a

simple trader, and I made sure of the
letter in a safe place ; and now I can die
in peace. Ah ! You would not be astonished
at my speaking as I do of death and
fear of death if you had seen the people
murdered in the streets as I have, only
because they had called themselves comte
or marquis. For there seem to be no
more dukes nor marquises, nor any noblemen
left in France, nothing but honest
citoyens — when they can be honest.'

Look here, Thurio, give me the letter
immediately, and I will listen to you afterwards.
Now come, I do not want to get
angry with you, for I know that you are a
faithful servant.'

'Angry ! Faithful ! Monsieur le Chevalier,'
grunted the man, half good-humoured,
looking down towards his boots.
^ I thank my stars that I am a faithful
servant, and also that I was a saddler once,

an apprentice-saddler, Monsieur le Chevalier,
for I always had a fancy for horses,
but that saddler's business has saved my
life and your letter, Monsieur le Chevalier !'
And, taking off one of his boots, he began
carefully to cut the stitches towards the
top, so as not to injure the boot nor the
lining inside, and going on talking, boot
in hand. ' Twenty times was I asked to
stand and deliver, Monsieur, le Chevalier,
but I would deliver nothing — " Take all I
possess," I cried, "but I am a nobody like
you, and you will find nothing upon me;
sou may turn everything inside out, and
search everywhere." There, Monsieur le
Chevalier, it is peeping out, and very
tempting it looks ; but I must not cut that
bit of leather carelessly — that bit of leather
held my very life, or the stitches did,
which is the same thing, is it not. Monsieur
le Chevalier ? Ah ! a few have ozone through

the letter, but better so than a sword through
your servant's body, Monsieur le Chevalier
or your letter, such as it is, would not be
here

^ Oh, Thurio, how long will you try my
patience ?'

Ah, but, Monsieur le Chevalier, you
should have seen people like you being
run after in the streets as I did!
'■^ Canaille r' I could almost have cried.
"What is it you are doing against your
betters, canaille f' would I have said to
them, but for that bit of shoe-leather so
neatly stitched ! What was the use of
stitching it so carefully, if I lost my
head. — There ! I deliver the message into
your hands. Monsieur le Chevalier. It is
rather soiled and discoloured, for it was
not fair weather always. But there it is,
a-nd right glad am I ! — And please let the
people know here what I have done ; tell

them low I deserve their praise. The
servants must have some consideration forme,
must they not?'

'Tell them yourself, Thurio, I fancy
you can speak for yourself a little. But
there, tell them from me that your master
is highly pleased with you. And now,
comte, this letter — ah ! it is as I thought,
all-kindness. Mademoiselle, Comte, De
Carnoet — all of you come and hear what a
delightful and good-natured old uncle mine
is. It is all settled. Read the letter aloud,
please, Comte ; we are all friends here.'

And the comte read :

' My dear Nephew,

I am more than delighted
to find that you are so truly happy ! It
reads like a dream from fairy-land to hear
of love, peace, and beauty ! We manage
to do without all those things now-a-days

here, and til e world is not a bit the pleasant
for it ! I may as well tell you now that I
knew Mademoiselle de Kerguennec to be
beautiful ; only I thought you would be
glad, under the circumstances, to find it out
for yourself. In my opinion, a wife should
be a delight to look upon ; otherwise I do
not understand the happiness of a married
man. True, they say that love is blind,
which is very comforting, but I have
failed to find in the world that friends are
blind also ; and we must expect sooner or
later through their kindness to recover the
use of sight. — But I am no judge in such
matters ! No doubt if I had met with a
Mademoiselle de Kerguennec, I should have
married ; for who could resist the charms
you describe with such enthusiasm, As it
is, I did not, and therefore are you my
heir ! Whether this is to be regretted or
not, you are the best judge.

Now let us see about this money business,
for it is most just that young people
should care to live, as well as old and
crusty bachelors like me. I have followed
the advice of several friends, and have sent
all my available money out of France, as I
have no wish for these good folk to get it.
You will therefore receive this year thirty or
forty thousand francs from England through
our lawyer — if he remains an honest man,
which I believe he will. This 1 suppose
will be enough for the present, for I should
advise you strongly to remain where you
are. Indeed, you have no choice, for the
king is really nothing else than a close
prisoner, and I feel sure you do not approve
of this gathering of noblemen out of the
kingdom. How different it mio;ht have
been if, instead of waiting to ask the
help of our enemies, we gentilshommes of
France had rallied round the throne from

the very first. But it is clifficiilt to know
now what to do for the best. However, as
I said before, I see no other course open to
you but to enjoy your happiness to the full
in that most safe and quiet of places —
Brittany.

Thurio declares he is able to take this
letter to you without being beheaded or
hung, drawn, or quartered twenty times on
his way — otherwise, I should not have
risked your life and mine by sending such
an epistle. I know we can trust him and
his expedients ; but he would not tell me
what he meant to do, for fear I should
betray him under torture ! But, thank
heaven, there is no torture in our time to
add to the horrors of the people's doings ;
the work is quick and effective, and one
does not mind that so very much.

I must ask you, my dear nephew, to
excuse my mentioning anything so dismal

in a letter of congratulation ; unfortunately
it is difficult to escape contagion when you
are in the thick of the disease, and we
speak of nothing else but of our own
woes here. So forgive this part of my
letter.

My compliments to Monsieur le Comte
and Madame la Comtesse, though such
things as noblemen are no more to be, by
the sacred will of the people of France !
And, as to my future niece, tell her that
the thought of being able to see her great
goodness and beauty some day, will
embellish every moment of my life, and
that she has my warmest wishes for her
happiness.

Your affectionate uncle,

Louis.'

Thus the answer that had been so long
coming was as good as it could be, and

everyone was made happy by it at Kern
; yet in the evening, as the young
men were going to separate for the night,
the chevalier said to his friend,

De Carnoet, tell me what you think of
my uncle's letter ?'

'It is a most kind one.'

Nothing else ?'

What is it you mean ?'

Well, do you know, I have never heard
my uncle speak, or ever seen him Avrite
so sadly. Does it not strike you as if
he were either ill, or very much distressed
? It is strange, De Carnoet, but it
positively spoils my happiness. I feel as
if I ought to be near him either to revive his
spirits or help him out of his difficulties
whatever these may be. How hard it is
for us here to understand all that is going
on in France ! I wish, — I almost wish I
could be affianced to mademoiselle at once.

even sooner than the comte proposes, and
then go and see him.'

You would not leave her?'

Only for a few days, or a week or two at
the utmost. I could manage, I daresay,
just as well as Thurio.'

But — but think, De Valvourgs ; it would
be — it must be — sorrow for her ; it must
be anxiety. I believe even your uncle
would blame you. How strange that, having
reached such a height of happiness,
you should think of endangering it. How
I should prize every moment near her, if I
were in your place. But you do not really
mean to go ?'

No, when one comes to speak of it, I am
afraid I must not go. But yes, it is as I
tell you ; something or other prevents me
from giving myself up wholly to my good
fortune. What is it ? a presentiment, or
what ?'

You love your uncle and feel that he
is sad, that is all. But everyone almost,
except us, in this far-away palace, De
Valvourgs, is feeling sad in France, and
even for those emigres who have gone to
Germany or England, it must be terrible,
I should say. We are most fortunate ;
let us be thankful, De Valvourgs, and I
entreat you, in whatever you wish to do,
remember her first.'

Yes, yes, but for her I would go to him,
for he has been a father to me ; I have
known of no other. But you are right,
how can I think of leaving her now ?
Though, as Thurio has returned very
quickly, I might — but no — I will not
think of it ; good-night — good-night. No :
I could not bear to leave her now, I could
not. Good-night, good-night.' And they
parted.

Once in his room, Rohan de Carnoet felt

in no way disposed to rest. The day had
brought him strange feelings of uneasiness.
This friendly intercourse with the inhabitants
of Kerguennec had been charming.
They had lived together more like the
members of one family since his father
and mother had joined them. It had
seemed so natural to reciprocate a thousand
little cares and attentions, and to
bring his own share to the common fund
of good-temper and pleasantness. All had
been joy. Every day had brought fresh
simple and pure pleasure, and everything
had contributed to the general happiness.
The weather had been exceptionally fine ;
the evenings, spent mostly in the woods,
had been clear and calm ; the atmosphere
laden with the scent of flowers. ' A dream
of fairy-land,' Rohan de Carnoet repeated
to himself when alone.

Yet, though they had all longed for

that letter to come, though the letter was
as satisfactory as it could be, something
there was that had brought an unwelcome
change. When it was decided that the
jianqailles for various reasons should take
place as early as possible, Renee de
Kerguennec had suddenly turned pale and
they had all been glad at last to separate.
Now, the chevalier was thinking of his
uncle before thinking of the bride he had
just secured. As for himself, the unsatisfied
longing of once before had returned,
and was stronger than ever. Though sure
now that Mademoiselle de Kerguennec had
never forgotten the friendship of their
younger days, he wanted to leave her — to
be far away from her. He was almost
vexed with her for having for one
moment looked so pale, and certainly
much annoyed with the chevalier for
not considering her enough, and for

daring; to think of leaving: her so soon.

He paced up and down his room till the
night was far advanced. Tired out, he at
last sat down in his arm-chair, and, closing
his eyes, a feeling of sleep came over him.

In a moment he found himself alone in
the woods, on the seat Mademoiselle de
Kerguennec was most fond of; a strong
scent of pine-trees was upon him, the soft
murmur of the running brook lulled his
senses in soft forgetfulness — and then she
appeared to him, with the same beautiful
face, the same enchanting smile, the same
white dress she usually wore on those
warm days ; and, as she approached him,
she laid her hand on his shoulder, and
her eyes were lost in his, her face touched
his, — and he started up wide awake.

He lifted his hand to his forehead like
a man suddenly struck with a horrible
fear ; his eyes acquired a strange fixedness,

as if arrested by some dreaded
sight. Then, by a strong effort of Ville
laughed out —

Nay, nay, these creatures of the brain
are but the offsprings of habit and of
sleep. We live surrounded by people and
things, and the mind, getting accustomed
to rest on what surrounds us, carries
the image before us, when drowsiness
falls on our senses. It may be a sound,
it may be a perfume, a flower ; it may bea
picture, it may be a living creature — a

woman . We are such creatures of

habit, that even in sleep we cling to
what is near. We would that people did
not pass away, that things should remain
for ever the same; then would we willingly
live for ever That is all — that is

all — an absence, a new tune, a new face,
new impulses, and the present drives away
the past — and the past may have been

VOL. I. li

pleasant, may have been sad, but — it is
the past, and it cannot be recalled ! So
this day — this night — this dream — are
already things of the past, never again to
revive the same intensity of life — things
of the past — things of the past.'

And Rohan de Carnoet went to rest to
look for strength for the morrow.

The betrothal, the comte thought, had
better take place at once, and everyone
seemed naturally to come to the same conclusion.
What the reasons were for such
haste none could have told. Some near
relations of Mademoiselle de Kerguennec
were invited ; and, a few days after the
receipt of the letter, there was a new
gathering of friends at Kerguennec.

The impression of sadness the letter of
his uncle had first left in the chevalier's
mind passed away. He was elated and

brilliant; only regretting that it should
be his jianqailles they were preparing instead
of his wedding. His perfect happiness
was contagious. The whole household,
even down to the servants, felt it.

Thurio seemed as excited as his master,
boasting loudly that his apprenticeship to
the saddler had saved not only his own
life but that of his master and his bride,
and everyone else concerned. The chevalier
indulged his fancy, and liberally rewarded
his having so cleverly saved his own neck
from the wiles of a whole nation set on the
watch to catch him.

The comtesse and Madame de Carnoet
rejoiced in the happiness of the girl they
loved so much ; they were certain that her
union with the chevalier would prove
a source of blessing. Meanwhile, the
ceremony of the betrothal would be gone
through, and would give more liberty to

l2

the young people — and be a security in
those days of change and trouble.

Mademoiselle de Kerguennec herself
seemed satisfied. After that first moment
of maidenly fear, she had yielded herself
entirely to the joy of the chevalier, and
was looking forward to contributing to his
happiness all the days of her life.

Rohan de Carnoet stood aloof Modest
and retiring they knew him to be, and
no wonder was expressed at his absence.

So the day came when the two young
people were to promise that they accepted
each other as husband and wife, and would
be faithful to their troth.

The cure was there, and during the
dinner there was not a jarring note, not a
discordant element, to check the flow of
good-will and satisfaction that prevailed.

After dinner the guests retired to the
drawing-room — made brilliant with flowers.

The Prayer-book and the two rings that
were to be exchanged were on the table
near the cure ; and an expectant silence
fell on everyone waiting for the fiancee to
appear. At last she came leaning on her
uncle's arm. She was extremely pale but
exquisitely beautiful.

The chevalier felt as if he could fall
on his knees before her; his voice and
hand trembled as he came towards her,
and, seeing him there, she smiled a
smile of affection and encouragement.
Thus, pleased with each other, they prayed
God to bless their fianqailles ; and having
received, lowly kneeling, the blessing of
the priest, they rose and exchanged rings.
The young people felt this was the
beginning of a union to be binding for life.
Kind feelings and kind words filled the rest
of the time, and both the chevalier and
Renee, in this atmosphere of love, looked

forward to love and peace and happiness
in the future.

No thought of sorrow could find place
in their hearts — no anxiety for the morrow;
it was sweet to love, and sweet to live.
Alas ! at that very moment hatred and
revenge were raging uncontrolled in
France.

CHAPTER VIII.

The cure had left, but he had asked the
youiig people, and as many of the elder
ones as could come, to join them that night
in the service of the midnight mass which
was to be held in boats on the open sea.
He thought it would end the day in a
befitting manner, he had said, if they were
to come and praise God for His blessings
along with their poorer and less fortunate
brethren ; and they all looked forward with
pleasure to their evening. A boat was to
be in readiness for them at an appointed
place ; but as discretion was above all

things needful, and they must see that they
were not followed, there was just enough
in the adventure to make it exciting.

It did not occur to them that they
might be doing wrong in going to pray
with the priest they honoured, though he
was exercising his ministry in secret ;
they never thought of the hardship this
secresy entailed upon the poor villagers,
who held their ceremonies of baptism and
marriage and even of death either in the
night or in secluded places. — Poor humble
believers who were going through the
trial of their faith as thousands had done
before them in the world, — and who were
obliged to worship, in fear of seeing the
beloved priest who ministered to their
spiritual wants carried off to prison and to
death !

Renee and her uncle and the two young
men were just thinking of getting ready

for the ^valk, when there was suddenly
heard outside the door a strange and
unusual commotion ; and a servant in
great trepidation announced the visit of
the mayor of the next town. Two soldiers
accompanied him. These remained
outside the door, but the mayor, dressed
in plain clothes, and with the tricolour
scarf round his body as a sign of his office,
advanced towards the middle of the room
within hearing of those assembled there.

Citoyen Kerguennec,' he said, ' please
excuse this visit, which no doubt surprises
you. But, first of all, let me tell
sou that you have nothing to fear from
it ; I come here simply prompted by my
great respect for you, and by my anxiety to
keep the peace. You cannot be ignorant
of what is taking place on your estate ;
how the citoyen cure defies all authority,
for he not only refuses to acknowledge

the existing government, but in spite of
the decree issued against him continues
to exercise his ministry. I am grieved to
say that I have now orders to arrest
him ; and you know that once in prison
there is little hope of escape. To-morrow
a new cure will come, and what happened
once before cannot happen again.
The first cure appointed to replace him
had to go because he always found his
church empty, and the people gone at
his approach ; now, however, if the villagers
show the same opposition, my duty
will be to employ force to make them
respect the cure. I entreat you, therefore,
to use your power or authority over the
citoyen cure, for him not to incite his
people to revolt. Till now we have been
spared all those scenes of bloodshed, and
I would do anything for the people
under my jurisdiction to be so spared to

the last. May I reckon on your help
citoyen T

'Your visit honours you, sir,' replied
the comte, with great politeness, ' but I
am afraid I have no power over Monsieur
le Cure ; he feels himself bound by his
duty to remain by his flock.'

He feels himself bound to rebellion
and obstinacy through selfishness,' replied
the mayor, quickly. ' The disturbers of
peace should be chastised ; and it is a
pity it should be one of those bound by
their calling to speak of peace who is
the cause of discord. But I am commanded
to meet rebellion by force ; and, citoyen,
although I do not care to make use of
threats in this altogether conciliatory visit,
let me advise you to be careful how you
show hospitality to a man almost under
the sentence of death ; let me advise you
not to abet the citoyen cure in his disobedience

to the law. We have been
spared so far, I repeat ; and I believe it is
in our power to be spared to the last.
Ask hin to cro away and to leave us ; we
shall then have peace.'

'• I am sorry that I cannot agree with
you in this ; their priest gone, the villagers
would resist still, I fear.'

Then so much the worse for the villagers,
and for all concerned. I have
done a thing outside my office entirely ;
I am running the risk of being censured
or even dismissed for it, but I was determined
to try to keep the peace in our
country places if possible, determined to
try every means and to ask for your aid ;
but I can do no more. Whatever happens
in future, remember that you have been
forewarned. Citoyens, citoyennes I wish
you good-day.'

Stay one moment, sir, and allow me to

thank you warmly for your well-meant
visit, and to tell you that I appreciate it
fully. I will do my utmost to secure
peace, believe me ; and whatever happens
you may be sure that I am of one mind
with you in Ravishing to avoid the disgraceful
scenes of disorder and bloodshed that
have taken place so often elsewhere. Again
I thank you, sir.' And the comte bowed
courteously to the mayor, whose face
flushed with a pleasure he was bound to
hide. Then, muttering more words of
salutation, he left.

A strange sensation of dismay fell on the
party at the Chateau. The comtesse, who
was near Renee, seized her in her arms
convulsively, crying,

Oh ! what a visit of ill-omen at such a
moment !'

'Dearest,' said the comte, soothingly,
why seek trouble where it is not ? This

relates entirely to a different matter, and
has nothing to do with us.'

'But his threats !'

Do not attach too much importance to
them. Why should evil come to us because
it has come to others? there is no such
law in the world ; on the contrary, some
rejoice while others weep ; there are even
some who profit by the weeping of others.
But let us see in what we can help this
worthy man who seems better than his
fellows. Moreover, he is right ; I Lavish
we could persuade Monsieur Brevelaye
to go.'

He must be persuaded to go,' said Monsieur
de Carnoet ; ' but I fear our peasants
will not take it kindly, and his brother will
be a terrible fellow to convince. But, indeed,
it is the best thing for him to do ; he is sure
to be caught sooner or later ; while we can
look after him when he is abroad, and send

him supplies till these troubles are past.
Are you going to the service, comte ?'

No, I will not seem to — abet Monsieur
Brevelaye's disobedience, as the man has
it. There is nothing lost by prudence.'

But we can go, can we not ?' asked
Renee.

Still bent upon pleasure !' said the
uncle, playfully touching her cheek.

No, not quite that ; but we might speak
to the villagers on our return and advise
them to be quiet. Could we not ?' she
ended, looking up for approval at the
chevalier.

Certainly, I think mademoiselle is right ;
the more we show ourselves ready to
submit to them, the easier they mil find
it.'

You think your example of some
importance? Well, well, perhaps you are
right, only be prudent, be prudent.'

Dear uncle, are not love and youth
always allied to prudence ?'

The uncle laughed, as Renee meant he
should.

Anyhow, there can perhaps be no
harm done to-night by your joining the
service ; the new cure only comes tomorrow,
and till then there is no danger
for Monsieur Brevelaye. But remember
he told you he thought there Avere spies
set to watch him ; see that you are not
followed, if you can help it.'

We will be very careful, never fear, and
now let us go. I must first go and get ready.
It is a pity to take off the betrothal dress
so soon, is it not ?' she remarked laughingly
to the chevalier.

You will all the sooner put on the
bridal one, I hope,' he replied, in the same
tone. And the younger members of the
party started off chatting cheerfully ; and,

strange to say, not about the charms
and loveliness of their surroundings, but
about Paris, that treacherous beacon
set on high, where so many a young man
from the province had become forgetful
of the sweet and simple joys of home ;
Paris, with its Court and its King and
beautiful Queen. How delightful to meet
there again after all the present troubles
were over. It would enhance every
pleasure for the two young men to have to
introduce Renee to the world they knew so
well ! They would be two to guard over
her, two to be jealous of her happiness,
two whose first thought and care she
would be !

And she laughed and thanked them.

And the chevalier related his first announcement
to Rohan of his future marriage
— told his fiancee how he had dreaded
to see her ; how he had felt the presence of

VOL. I. M

his friend to be a tower of strength on his
way to her ; and how Rohan had not found
out in the girl of eleven whether the woman
of eighteen would be beautiful or ugly !

And so they Walked on, well pleased with
themselves, well pleased with one another,
and soon arrived at the village buried in
peace.

How difficult to realise that there might
soon be war there ! Poor peasants, they
did not go out of their way to fight, and
were peaceful enough if left alone ! Why
should there always be some element of
discord coming from Paris to disturb them ?
From time immemorial it had been so ;
and at last they had almost always been
obliged to yield — at least of late. If there
was a new struggle it would end again in
the same way ; and all sorts of sorrow
would come upon them.

So thought Renee on reaching the first

cottages ; and she became serious, promising
herself to do her utmost to help
them through. They went through the
village, passed the pretty church which
looked sadly forlorn and desolate. No
urchin was ever seen now playing on
its steps ; no beggar leaning against
its wall. This refuge of the poor and
lonely was forsaken as if stricken by the
plague. For more than six months now it
had been shut ; and the bells, always so
dear to the Breton heart, had been silent.
For the cure appointed by the Republic
had found nobody to ring them for him ;
Avhen he had done it himself, the peasants
had taken it as a signal to avoid the
church ; and he had been reduced to say
the mass alone, and at last had left in
despair. They certainly had a will of their
own, those poor peasants, and were not to.
be carelessly trifled with !

Soon they readied a house a little
apart from the rest, though just the same
as the others, with its low thatched roof
and small windows, and the chevalier found
himself for the first time within a Breton
cottage, and looked around him with much
interest.

It was composed of but one large room,
at one end of which about a dozen cows
were sheltered for the night. Only a low
door and a manger separated this part
of the habitation from the rest.

Ranged along the walls were the lits clos,
deep cupboards up to the ceiling, with
three or four or more broad shelves, on
which the bedding was laid; each shelf
having its own sliding-doors of walnut,
carved with open patterns, to admit a little
air.

The cattle was under the master's eye
during the night, and so were the sons

and daughters, and the servants of the
farm ; who undressed and dressed each in
the compartment assigned.

The dark carved doors, the large cupboards,
also of sculptured walnut, with
their highly-polished brass fittings, which
contained all the wardrobe and the goods
and chattels of the family, gave a look
of luxury to the room, in spite of cattle,
earthen floor, and naiTOw windows.

On one side of the wide, open fireplace
was a wooden construction — a high-backed
arm-chair for the oldest of the
family, who among these people of patriarchal
customs and manners receives the
greatest marks of respect and reverence.
On the other side was a bench for the
invited guest or the pauper. In the middle
of the room was a table, with a large,
round, dark rye loaf, covered up with a
spotless, coarse white cloth ; and a pitcher

of cider. This was the hospitality offered
to any new comer. From the thick and
blackened rafters hung herbs, onions,
hemp, seeds, tools, or anything that
could hold there. Above the huge chimney
a strange-looking leather ball was
seen, and an old gun. Over the hearth
was an iron pot containing the soup for
the members of the family on their
return.

At that time of night the flies were at
rest ; the smell from the cows Alas not over
offensive ; and when an old man — a bedridden
invalid — pushed back one of the
carved doors of his bed, and his whitehead
was seen resting on a clean pillow,
the chevalier thought the room in no way
repulsive.

Mademoiselle de Kerguennec sat on the
haute or oak collier close to the bed — used by
those who had to climb to the upper shelves

to sleep ; and there she talked to the old
man, while the flickering resin light stuck
in the large chimney shed a kind of halo
round the face of the beautiful girl.

Juan, we are a little late, I fear : are
all the others gone?'

They are gone, mam'zelle, but will return
for you as far as creek Henbon,if you
will go there.'

And you are pretty well, Juan ?'

Just the same, by the will of God.'

Not troubled in your mind by all the
bad news from Paris ?'

The invalid looked sharply at the chevalier,
hesitating ; and Renee, noticing it,
laughed.

^ Why, Juan, this is my fiance the
Chevalier de Valvourgs. We went through
the ceremony to-day ; won't you wish me
good luck ?'

Ah ! mam'zelle, ah ! mam'zelle, good

luck ! — it is not that which one would wish
to you, but all happiness and God's blessing,
mam'zelle. Monsieur le Chevalier, I am
pleased to see you.'

The old man's speech rather took aback
the young chevalier, who answered that
he also was pleased to make his acquaintance.
But Renee was determined to
speak to Juan of what was uppermost in
her mind.

Juan, are you aware that the second
cure is coming tomorrow to replace your
son ? Is Monsieur le Cure very much put
out, do you think ?'

My son will do God's will, which is to
stay by his flock, whatever the wicked
devise.'

But, if he went away for a short time,
would it not be safer? He would return
to us when all these troubles are
over.'

He who lias put his hand to the plough
should not look back.'

You mistake, Juan, your son could not
call it " looking back." It would be great
sorrow to him, no doubt, but there would
be no dread of fighting and killing.'

Martyrs there have been always in the
church of our blessed Lord ; if he is called
to martyrdom, we will go to him in
Heaven, where he will pray for us. — But
the men must be waiting for you at
the creek, and time is short ; it will
very soon be twelve o'clock, and you
must not make our holy priest wait for
you.'

Well, we will go, Juan, but I wish you
could see the matter as we do at the
Chateau, and raise your voice against
what will cause blood-shedding ; God does
not approve of that, you know. Tomorrow
soldiers are coming with the new

cure. What may not happen in such a
conflict ?'

Soldiers ! soldiers ! — Ah, Monsieur de
Carnoet, your grandfather, knew what they
were, those soldiers of the French king,
but — but the soldiers of Christ have more
power than any of these.'

I am sorry, Juan, that you do not consider
it better to yield to the storm :
many good men have done so. But goodbye,
we will not keep Monsieur le Cure
waiting. Good-bye, Juan.'

'Is this Monsieur Brevelaye's father?'
asked the chevalier when they were outside.

Yes,'

He seems a fine old man, but very determined.
Will all the others be as obstinate ?
There is but little hope of peace, if so.'

The chevalier is right, — indeed there
is not ! What does the law-maker in
Paris know of the longings and spiritual

wants of the Breton peasants ? That
humble priest, born among them, whose
language and thoughts they understand,
whose virtues they know, is to be replaced
by an alien to the soil ! They
are to be parted from their adviser, their
comforter, their friend, the only one
they can go to in trouble and at every
step in life : — from him who has opened to
them the Christian world and who will
at their death open to them the gates of
Heaven ! But their life of toil and sad
privation is but a longing for Heaven, for
without the hope of everlasting rest it
would be difficult, almost impossible for
them to exist !

And their priest who knows their
longings, who has the same aspirations,
whose life is one long renunciation and
earth but a stepping-stone to Paradise, he
will not leave his flock and look after his

own life and comfort here below. He is of the
stuff that martyrs are made of, — with but
one object in life : to gain Heaven through
much tribulation and even through death !
With that one object in view, that one
hope, everything else fails in interest ; persecution
is welcome, for it adds to the list
of his merits — it forces the expected reward
; it is as a promise from on high
that he is thought worthy; it brings
Heaven nearer ! Death only could be
more welcome ; but he will not court
death, and this will be accounted to him
among the number of his good deeds !

The care of his body is in his brother
Loik's keeping. Loik worships his brother,
and has an almost feminine tenderness for
him; his brother is a man of God and
does not think of providing himself with
the necessities of life; and he — Loik — is unworthy

to sit and talk with him, but cooks
his meals, if need be, and makes his bed. His
mother spins the flax and makes the linen
for both her sons, but that of the cure is
always the finer. The old father, who
has worked so hard and has lost his health
in order to make him a priest, always
asks him for his blessing ; and Lo'ik, who
cleans his boots, kneels down before him and
worships and says his beads. His brother
looks to heaven ; he looks to his brother,
and with the two there is the same absorbed
look that prevents men from seeing the
trifles of life, and makes them go straight
to the end before them. —

The three young people had become
thoughtful, and walked the rest of the
way more or less in silence. They reached
the creek, however, and felt sure nobody
had been watching them.

They found awaiting them with a fishing-boat,
rowers who put off from the little
bay that had sheltered them.

The sea was calm and beautiful, and the
moon, now and then veiled by light summer
clouds, shed a mild soft light on the
waves. The farther they got from the
shore, the larger the number of boats they
saw emerge all along the coast from the
tall cliffs — gliding in silence towards the
open sea and avoiding that path of silvery
water which danced under the moon's
rays. Soon in the perfect silence of the
night, only broken by the noise cf the
oars, was heard a distant silver bell, and
every bark rowed towards the place from
which the sound came. One large boat,
all alone, was there in the distance, and, as
soon as it was perceived, the eyes of the
crowd of men, women, and children in the

other boats, were all directed towards it.
They remained at a respectful distance
and formed a semicircular group round it ;
then the boat advanced towards the centre
and stopped, and in the midst of the
silence, broken only by the gentle murmur
of the waves that came rippling up against
the keels of the boats, a man's voice rose
strong and solemn :

Dominus vobiscum !'

And the kneeling crowd responded :

Et cum spirit u tuo !'

And the cure, clothed in his white surplice
and embroidered stole, the golden
threads of which now and then glittered
like the twinkling light of a star, began to
say mass to the serious and attentive
crowd, whose murmured responses lost
themselves on the moving waters.

And, when the silver bell announced the

elevation of the consecrated host, the crowd
prostrated themselves and wept aloud, for
their shepherd was an outcast, and the
consolations of religion they could only
get by stealth.

At last the mass was concluded, and the
priest's voice borne above the waves pronounced
the blessing on the people. Then
his sermon began. Alas ! the burden
of it was this : Forgiveness of sins to
those who persevered in the path they
had already chosen, but eternal damnation
and reprobation if they accepted the
new priest's teaching; if they allowed
themselves to be seduced into assisting
at his mass, into believing in the sanctity
of his ceremonies, or even into selling him
the necessaries of life. Baptism and marriage,
through him — he, their true priest,
declared null and void and even criminal.
No, they had their choice : Damnation for

all eternity, or everlasting bliss. He would
be faithful ; let them be faithful too, even
unto death.

The ceremony was over, and the boat
containing the cure speedily disappeared
with the help of its strong oarsmen. Then
the people who had been on their knees
rose up, and suddenly a powerful voice
started the Canticle of Hell in which all
joined before separating and going back to
their homes. This canticle Renee and
Rohan de Carnot knew well, and awful it
sounded borne away in the silence of the
waters. It runs thus :

Let us all descend into hell, Christians ! and see
what a horrible punishment those condemned souls
which God's justice holds enchained in the midst of
flames, suffer for having abused His goodness in this
world.

Hell is a deep abyss full of darkness into which
even the smallest streak of light never penetrates.

Its gates have been closed and locked by God

VOL. I. N

Himself, and He will never open them — the key is
lost.

The hottest furnace here below is but as smoke in
comparison with hell-fire, — a fire which is always
burning the condemned souls.

It would be far better to be burning in a furnace
until the end of the world than to be tormented
for a short hour in hell !

As maddened dogs they cry, and know not whereto
flee.

Flames everywhere, over their heads, under their
feet ; flames on all sides which burn for ever without
consuming !

After having been left for some time in the flames,
they will be plunged by Satan into an icy lake, and
from the icy lake into the flames ; from the flames
into the water again, as a bar of iron in the forge.

Then will they cry, and call out bitterly :

" Have pity, O God, have pity on us !" '

But it will be in vain that they cry, for so long as
God exists, so long will their torments and sufferings
endure'*

From the ' Barras Breiz,' translated into French by
monsieur de la Villemarque.

An hour afterwards, as Renee, the
chevalier and Rohan were once more at
the Chateau, thankful to be all together
again, the comte asked :

And were you successful in advising
our people, children ? Did they listen to
your voice?'

Uncle,' said Renee, softly, looking upto
him with her wonted attitude when in
earnest, her two hands folded low before
her, her face grave and thoughtful, ' uncle,
tell me again that God is a merciful God.'

^ Dearest, what is it ? you look sad and
harassed.'

I feel a pain there,' she murmured,
putting her hand to her heart, ' a pain and
a great fear. Oh, that we could save
those we love from fear and sorrow and
pain ! Oh, that we could be sure of their
eternal bliss ! Then slipping down on her
knees, and hiding her face on her aunt's

N 2

shoulder, ' I would give my life this
moment, every hour of my happiness for
you all — you I love, every one of you !'

And she burst into tears.

Renee, my darling ! This day of emotions
has been too much for you. Come,
love, come with me and rest. Child ! God
is ever merciful towards those that love
him.'

And the comtesse, raising her niece
sobbing in her arms, tried to soothe her
overwrought imagination and feelings ; —
the weak comforting; the strong;. And the
young girl felt this, and, making a great
effort to recover herself, smiled bravely
through her tears.

Forgive me,' she said, ' I am afraid I
forgot myself— a great wave of sorrow
rushed over my heart and overwhelmed
me for a moment. Perhaps,' she added,
looking up lovingly at her fiance ' perhaps

it is that we had been so happy all day, and

the contrast, when brought into contact

with the stern side of life, was so great.

You all forgive me ?'

Her uncle, taking her two hands in his

and kissing her forehead, said cheerfully

to her :

Child, at your age there should be

none of those fainting of the soul ; life is
full of promises of joy for you ; and our
joy, the joy of those who, like us, have
lived beyond their youth, is to share their
child's joy. Do not allow your sad thoughts
to rob us of our dearest delight.'

She pressed his hands gratefully in hers,
and murmured :

You are good and kind like the dear
father I have lost !' And tears of gratitude
seemed ready to follow; but a courageous
smile chased them away. 'You are
right; whenever I feel sad I will think

of you all ; and, thanking God for so
much love, how can I but be happy and
joyful?'

CHAPTER IX.

The next day was splendid, and in the
early morning everything lay bathed in a
golden haze of light. Certainly, if men
had set apart this day for trouble and
fighting, nature was not in sympathy with
them, for the greatest calm pervaded sea,
and earth, and sky. — How often in our life
have we reproached nature for being careless
of our pains and unsympathetic, and
yet how many a time has sorrow been
lightened and failing strength renewed
under the influence of a beautiful sky;
how many a time has the refreshing breeze

inspired the trembling with courage ; how
many a time has a glorious sunset lifted
up our souls, even beyond the lost joys
we grieve over, to a boundless hope in the
unknown !

We would have nature weep when we
weep, — but there are so many Who then are
rejoicing ! Rather let us all agree that a
beautiful day is a delight man at all times
ought to prize and be grateful for.

The inhabitants of Kerguennec met
together with happy looks of hope and
resolution ; each rejoicing in the morning's
gladness, and meeting; with welcome
greetings from the others.

The four gentlemen, all animated with
the same desire for peace, determined to
go out early to see the villagers ; persuasion
and example would surely bear fruit.
Renee wanted to go also, wanted to ride
out with them ; the freshness of the day

urged Lier on to activity, and her affection
for them all prompted her not to part from
them. But there was her aunt, looking so
delicate, though with a smile of satisfaction
on her lips at seeing her niece herself
again, — her aunt, always so glad to have
her near ; so she conquered the longing,
arranged the cushions for her on the easy-chair,
caressed her, and spoke soothingly
to her. The chevalier knew, and so did
Rohan, how she longed to be on horseback
with them, but her self-denial was
precious to them, even dearer than their
own pleasure at having her with them.

The comte determined to find out the
cure's brother, for he felt that in him was
centred all the obstinacy and rebellion
which animated the rest. Loik once made
sure of, there was no hope of resistance
left for the others. But Loik was nowhere
to be found.

Although the comte was loved, the
villagers knew that he had advised their
cure to leave them, and they were angry.
They knew now that, if he wanted to see
Loik, it would be to try to dissuade him
from the course they had finally adopted ;
therefore was Loik nowhere to be found.
The cure was also in hiding. The comte
went to Juan Brevelaye, their father,
but there he Alas met with the same arguments
that his niece had met with the
evening before.

So you will not tell me where either
of your sons are ?' he asked him, on going
away.

I am not one to interfere with the
ways and will of the man of God,' he
replied.

At that moment a stir was heard from
one of the beds, and Loik himself
appeared.

Loik ! you Avere here all the time ?'
exclaimed the comte.

I have been sleeping, master.'

The comte looked at him ; his eyes were
wonderfully bright for a man just out of
sleep.

Then you have not heard what I said
to your father?'

May be I have, and may be I have not,
master ; you and yours in times past have
not always preached submission to us poor
people.'

As far as I am personally concerned, I
never had any occasion to ask you to fight,
nor to resist the authority set over us.
As to the past, we seigneurs of the land
struggled for our interests, and for yours,,
so mixed with ours. But I see no good
that can come of resistance now ; we have
not the means.'

Loik looked at Mm in a half cunning

way, and said

Union is strength, master.'

Union ! What can you mean ? Union
with whom?'

What did this common villager mean to
imply ? Was he also in communication with
the gentilshommes who had emigrated and
who were now trying to find allies in
France ? He himself had been asked to
help ; asked if he could raise troops supposing
England lent her help, so that the
emigres could land in Brittany and find
themselves at the head of an army. But
he had not given a second thought to the
matter; he desired neither to emigrate
nor to fight, but to avoid all kind of
disorder if possible. Had Loik heard from
those abroad? he asked himself. So he
repeated :

Union — with whom ? Union between

US cannot be, I had rather leave France
than fiofht.'

So others have done before you, master,
and may be they are sorry they did so.
The peasant now is forsaken by those he
used to help. But even so can the peasant
resist.'

' This is folly, Loik ; you will bring
upon us a mass of reckless soldiers, and
all the miseries civil war entails. Better
remain quiet.'

Yes, after we have obtained what we
want, Ave will.'

And that is ?'

Not much : to be left alone with our
noble count, and our holy priest. And if
we are victorious they will have to leave
us alone.'

If you are victorious ! Are you then
all this time organizing war, war against
your own brethren of France, and that too

without arms, without ammunition, without
chief?'

^ If our natural chiefs leave us, we must
even find some among ourselves ! But
may be, all will not be like you. May be,
some will be found.'

And deeply wrong would they be who,
with eyes opened to what must be the end
of such a struggle, dare to encourage you
to begin it.'

But may be, more than ourselves will
fight.'

I cannot understand you ; speak plainly
and let me know what it is you are
doing.'

Master, you are no longer our friend ; T
will not betray those who are.'

The comte looked at him.

Are you the only peasants going to
resist ?'

That will be as the Lord wills,' replied
the other.

tell me the truth, Loik ; — are you, or
are you not planning anything with your
friends of the other villages ?'

Would you lead us if we are ?'

No ! I will not ; I have said it ; I had
rather leave France as others have done
than undertake such murderous and useless
work.'

Leave France, master, for you it will
perhaps be better.'

Where is your brother?'

That is not my secret, and I have no
right to tell. Some there are who, without
strong castles like yours, have offered their
persecuted priest shelter ; but you, master,
you neither shelter our persecuted priest,
nor ^vill you help us to save him from
death. That is not as it should be ; that is

not as it used to be of old between the
seigneur, the peasant, and the Lord's
anointed.'

The comte had not thought of offering;
any refuge to Monsieur Brevelaye, knowing
how well he could depend on his brother
and on the love of his parishioners ; but
the reproach of Loik made him feel that
perhaps he had been remiss. He certainly
knew of the danger of sheltering the priests
who had not taken the oath to the Republic ;
but fear was not in his nature. He could
have hesitated to do it for the sake of his
wife and his niece ; but these he could send
away. Having suddenly got the matter
clearly before his mind, he said :

If I offered him refuge, would you
submit ?'

Loik looked at him awhile, then at his
father, and replied :

'Master, I thank you. You might

run some danger yourself in doing so
1 know it — as much danger even as
your brother — yet I offer him refuge if
you will relinquish your plans of resistance.'


Thank you, master, thank you ; nobody
need know of my brother's retreat, and
your life need not be endangered, but I
am glad of the leave you give me. You
will not be angry now to hear that there
are certain old places in the ruins of the
Chateau where he can hide without coming
in contact with you.' And Loik looked at
the comte with his stern, cunning look.

How long have you been thinking of
this ?' asked the comte.

Does not master know of the passage
to the sea and the " Threshold of Death " V
The comte started.
Do you know of that passage?'
^ Truly, master, your father and mine
VOL. I. o

played in it many a time. What do you
say, father?'

Ay ! ay ! and many a time in the
room that shakes with the blows of the
waves, and no wonder, no wonder it
shakes !'

sis your brother there now?'

He was there yesterday ; he is wanted
elsewhere now.'

An angry frown came on the comte's
face.

You scarcely had a right to come thus
to my place,' he said, coldly.

The hunted hare will rush to any hole
he thinks safe,' replied Lo'ik.

Have you the secret of the door, then ?'
the comte asked, unwilling to show his
own ignorance of it.

I have.'

And have you used it ?'

It can be used as a way of escape ; for

the waves have withdrawn some way below
the cave. It is a perfectly safe place for
hiding.'

The comte thought a while, and then
said,

Will you do what I ask you, cease to
resist the decrees sent against your priest,
if I offer him a frank hospitality till he
can go abroad ? I am willing to run this
risk of death myself, if you accept my
conditions.'

Master '

You hesitate. Is not the risking of
my life, and, possibly, of all dear to me,
enough to satisfy you ?'

Master, you are truly kind, but — but
it is too late.'

Too late for what ?'

The villagers of another parish have
risen.'

'Which village? What will they do?'

o2

I am not at liberty to say.'

Then you have detained me here all
this time to keep me away from the others
said the comte, angrily. ' Take care I do
not punish you for this.'

If our master will not lead us, we will
even lead ourselves,' stubbornly replied
Lo'ik. ' We will be our own masters, and
fight without our betters.'

And soon turn against them, no doubt,'
exclaimed the comte, still in anger.

Never ! unless they first turn against
us.'

you are not a Republican, Lo'ik, and
would be angry, if I called you one ; yet
you have all the independence of the Republicans
; and also their forgetfulness of what
is due to those above them.'

Monsieur le Comte, we would die for
you — one and all die for you, as we hope

to prove. — " Our God, our Priest, and
our Seigneur," is our motto.'

The comte left the cottage angry and
irresolute. At the door he found the
Chevalier de Valvourgs, whom he had left
there with Rohan de Carnoet, to wait for
him. The chevalier told him that Rohan
had heard of something going on in the
next parish, and had gone there. They
set spurs to their horses, and galloped
away.

The comte knew now that a rising was
certain ; that perhaps there was fighting at
that very moment, and he regretted that
his wife and niece were still at Kerguennec.
This was the first moment of fear he had
really experienced as yet. To all the
horrors going on in France he had as it
were shut his eyes, believing it best to
remain quiet and silent ; but now danger

was encompassing him even in this own
home. Unconsciously he had sheltered
the disturber of their peace, for, if it was
true that spies Avere about the village,
it all depended now on their discovering
the priest's retreat, for the quiet life at
the Chateau to be at an end. He determined
at once to send his wife and

niece away, for the Marquis che L

had asked them already to come to his
place, where all was as yet quiet, thanks
to the priest there having emigrated, and
to the prkre assessment who had taken his
place being satisfied with the very few
people he called his flock.

They had gone some distance when they
heard the report of fire-arms, and hurried
forward. Soon from a high plateau they
saw what was going on — a hand to hand
fight between soldiers and peasants. The

peasants, armed with pitchfork, scythe, or
pen-hach,^ had rushed on the soldiers who,
unable now to fire, were using the butt
ends of their guns. To the surprise of

the comte, both the Marquis de L

and Rohan de Carnoet seemed mixed up
in the fight.

They rushed on and reached the fighting
parties just as the officer was calling
out in a rage to Rohan,

Who are you, thus to have interfered ?'

'You are our prisoner,' replied Rohan,
calmly, ' and I need not answer you unless
I like. But my name you shall hear; it is
Rohan de Carnoet.'

Ah ! a traitor's name,' the officer
exclaimed.

The name of a hero, a true hero,' replied
Rohan quickly, raising his hat in

Stick V with a heavy knob at the end.

reverence of the dead. All the peasants
clustered round him, and, raising their hats
as he had done, of a common accord cried
out,

'- A hero ! a Breton ! Long live Monsieur
de Carnoet our chief! Long live Monsieur
de Carnoet!'

Take all these men's guns away,' said
Rohan, ' and let them go.'

But, master '

What ? What have you to say ?'

Would it not be better to — clear the
earth of them?'

No, no. By heaven, no ! Let them
go ! — Ah, comte, you here too ?'

What are you doing ? What has
happened?'

Comte — marquis — comte.' growled the
soldiers. ' Ah ! ah ! We have fought in
France against the nobles, and thought they

Avere all dead or gone ; and here they grow
as thick as berries on a bush.'

Wait a while,' replied another, ^ wait a
while, we shall have our turn yet.'

All the guns having passed from the
soldiers' to the peasants' hands, Rohan said,

Now go, and, believe me, leave us in
peace in future.'

We will see,' the officer murmured.

Give them something to eat or drink,
before they go,' said the conte, ' there are
many wounded among them.'

There are some wounded among ours,'
replied Rohan, ' and a few dead, I fear.
You who are too bad to go back may stop
behind : we will take care of you,' he added,
speaking to the soldiers.

Some had serious wounds and could
scarcely stand, but their companions determined
to help them on as well as

they could, and not to leave them behind.
The two priests who were with them,
pale and faint and dreadfully excited,
refused to stay. The peasants looked
darkly after them and said among themselves
that they were only so many
vipers who ought to have been crushed to
death.

The comte and his companions went
further on to where the battle had begun,
and found two dead bodies — a soldier and
a peasant — and two or three men besides,
badly wounded. They were removed to
their homes, while the remaining peasants
came round Rohan again and said :

Master, we will keep these guns for our
own defence.'

You won them ; they are yours, but
beware how you use them. Now you
have brought the anger of the Bleus upon
us, we scarcely know what to expect.'

Master,' an old man cried, ' as long as
they have brave gentlemen like you at
their head the gars will be brave too and
win.'

And the others went on :

AVe are yours for ever ; for ever now I
You have saved us all ; we will fight under
your orders when you will. We are only
too thankful to be under you. Monsieur
de Carnoet.'

All this was said without tumult, but
with the stern determination of men
resolved to risk everything they held
dear.

You mistake my position, my good
friends,' Rohan replied, 'you know that it
was a mere chance my being here at that
moment, and that I was not at your head
at all.'

But you are now, master ; you cannot
go back now ; you must side with us.'

I will neither side with you nor with
them. I do not want to have anything to do
with such outbreaks ; it was fortunate for
you I came, since it gave you courage, but
beyond that. I have done nothing to
deserve your approval and occupy such a
post as you would give me. Understand
me, I do not wish to mix up in any of
those matters, low good-bye, friends, we
will laugh some day over this fight, I
have no doubt ; but for the present it is
very serious.'

Good-bye, master, you may say yon
refuse to be our captain, but we know
better ; we know that when we are in
danger we shall find you ready. That's
how we understand your "good-bye," Monsieur
de Carnoet.'

You make a great mistake, a great mistake
! I cannot say too often that I
will not fight at your head nor anywhere

else. But now 2:0 and take care of your

&

T

poor wounded comrades.'

The peasants said no more, but, stopping
where they were, looked at the four gentlemen
riding slowly away.

We shall know where to find him,' they
said comfortably to each other, ' we shall
know, and he will come. Is he not a
Carnoet ?'

Meanwhile the comte was pressings
Rohan to tell him what had taken place.

While I am using all my influence to
bring peaceful ideas about, I find you
fighting ; what can have made you do
such a thing?'

Rohan smiled sadly and said,

I am glad the marquis was with me ;
he will tell you how my peaceful notions
Avere all scattered in a moment to the
winds. I expect, comte, you would have
done the same. As I rushed on here after

having been told that this parish would not
accept their new priest, and were resolved
to light, I heard great cries and a good
deal of firing, and from the hill I saw the
peasants giving way, and felt they would
be massacred to the last man. You know,
comte, it is hard at such a moment to
calculate consequences. The two groups
were distinct ; — they were to me like the
past and present world brought face to
face. In an instant I found myself at the
head of the running away villagers. I can
scarcely understand it now,' he went on
quietly. ' I galloped down the hill towards
the soldiers, and the villagers turned and
followed my horse and rushed on the
Bleus, and before they had had time to
fire again, the peasants were upon them,
fighting as surely men never fought
before. It was rather a tough battle,
for the soldiers are all trained men. But

you saw the end — we had just finished as
you came. Some of your tenants were
countenancing and helping the others.'

And you had no arms yourself?'

Oh, dear no, only this !' and he cut
the air with his riding-whip. ' I don't
think I touched anybody even with this,
but I daresay I looked like some great
soldier brandishing his sword,' he added,
laughing.

And you, De L , you did not fight

either, did you?' asked the comte,
gravely.

No, I looked on ; there was no call
for me to do so ; they all managed very
well and quickly enough, I can tell you.
Rohan was quite a hero.'

Strong men will always enjoy a fair
fight, and it was amusing no doubt to
think of those peasants without guns
putting to flight soldiers in uniform,

and well armed ; particularly as the right
was decidedly on the side of the peasants ,
according to the view of the matter held
by the gentilsJiommes.'

But still the comte looked very
thoughtful.

We shall have trouble,' he said.

'But why fear, comte ? I have no
doubt we can hold our own against some
scores of soldiers at a time ; and they will
never send more about such a paltry business.
I believe the government will leave
us quiet now.'

My dear Rohan, the villagers are right,
you have become their chief, Whatever
you may say to the contrary ; — you are soin
heart now, and they are cunning enough
to see it, and they rely on you.'

You invited me, marquis, to Ploermel,
will you have me still ? If so, I will goat
once, and show the comte and all my

clear friends.yoncler that I will not allow
myself to get entangled in their broils.'

Yes, you had better come to Ploermel,
for we are quiet there now", at all events.
I should advise you all to come, and leave
those obstinate people to their fate.'

No,' replied the comte, ' I do not think
that would be right. I will stop behind ;
but, if you will take the comtesse and
Renee, I shall be glad.'

Very well, that is settled ; the household
of Kerguennec shall sleep this Aveek
at Ploermel. Let us hope, comte, you
will not miss us too much.'

I shall miss you very much ; but I will
join you as soon as I feel sure there is no
more mischief on foot here.'

But,' exclaimed De Valvourgs, ' what
shall we tell the ladies — that we bring
back a victorious general ; or shall we
say nothing ?'

VOL. I. P

It would come out piece-meal,' replied
the comte. ' You will be the first to tell
Renee about it ; — better have it all out at
once, and enjoy the comic part of our
position as long as we can. The tragic
will not delay, I fear.'

So it was agreed that nothing should be
kept from those at home, but Rohan grew
serious in proportion as De Valvourgs
grew elated at the prospect of having such
a thing to relate.

Don't you think, comte, after all, that
it might frighten the comtesse?' he remarked.
' Would it not be better to say
nothing; ?'

My dear Rohan, your warlike looks
would betray you.'

As they talked, and went on slowly and
leisurely, they reached the village of Kern
some time after the fight had
taken place, but, to their surprise, found

every man, woman, and child out of doors,
expecting them, and they were greeted
with cries of:

Good-morning, good-morning. Monsieur
de Carnoet; good-morning, Monsieur de
Carnoet !'

Good-morning, good people,' he replied.
You are all looking terribly idle ; what
is the matter with you ?'

But he soon knew that the adventure
was already all over the place, and that
his passage through the village was to bean
ovation.

You may have to pay dearly for this,'
said the comte.

^ Never fear, all will blow over, and
my glory be soon forgotten, believe me.'

Rohan, I consider you so compromised
now that I see nothing for you in case
of war but to leave the country or to

fight.'

p2

I will fight then

And we all started a few hours back
with the intention of forcing the peasants
to be quiet,' said the comte, sadly. ^ We
have indeed kept to our plan.'

As they approached the Chateau, they
met the cure and his brother. The gentlemen
raised their hats, and were going to
pass on without speaking when the cure
stopped them.

^ Monsieur Rohan,' he said, ' allow me to
thank you most earnestly for the help you
gave those men, who would perhaps have
perished to the last man but for you. God
will reward you. We know now that some
among you gentlemen feel for us.'

Don't take it so seriously, Monsieur le
Cure ; I saw a fight and I rushed to the
rescue of the weakest ; perhaps if it had
been the Bleus I might have helped
them.'

That — never !' said the cure, cain and
unmoved. ' Your name is that of a Breton
gentleman.'

^ Well, I have heard plenty about my
name to-day ; but all I mean is that I did
not purposely go to the rescue, and that
you owe me no thanks — neither you nor
anybody else. Good-morning, Monsieur le
Cure.'

^ Good-morning, sir,' answered the other,
more gravely still.

On reaching the cour-honneur they saw
Renee watching anxiously for them.

Not much use to try to hide your
grand doings, De Carnoet ; they know all
about them at the Chateau,' said De
Valvourgs.

And they did. Renee came quickly to
them with outstretched hands.

Tell me, tell me. Monsieur Rohan,
what it is you have done ?'

Covered himself with glory,' replied De
Valvourgs.

Then they went to the drawing-room
and heard that Monsieur Brevelaye had
just related everything.

How very indiscreet of him,' exclaimed
the chevalier. ' But he was not there,
nor was his brother, and they can scarcely
know the truth like eye-witnesses would.
Therefore I pray you listen to me.'

'But neither were you an eye-witness,'
the others exclaimed. ' So you also are
unable to tell the truth.'

Thus, half in laughter and half seriously,
the event of the morning was related. It
was not mentioned that there were at
least two men dead, and that blood had
flowed freely, for they were determined to
make light of the matter. Yet in one
bosom, at least, they could not still the

fears such an event gave rise to. That
Rohan had behaved and would always
behave like a hero, Renee de Kerguennec
felt sure ; but who could tell if this was
not the prelude of many other such
struggles? Who could say what the end
would be ?

'Tell me frankly, was there nobody
wounded? Not one man? Tell me the
truth !' she added, affecting to laugh, and
threatening him with her finger.

There were two or three wounded.'

Any dead ?'

Why should you care to know ? It
can do no good.'

Only that I like to know things
exactly. You can tell me the truth ; you
were an eye-witness, were you not ?' and
she smiled as she looked at him.

It will trouble you, I fear, to know that
there may be one or two.'

One or two dead ? No more ? Are
you quite sure ?'

No, I believe not.'

Thank you,' she said, and all her affected
gaiety was gone ; though she tried
hard to hide her feelings from him.

Do you blame me for having helped
our poor peasants ?' he asked.

Blame you ! You know I would have
done the same, although I am but a
woman.'

And they would have obeyed you, as
their forefathers obeyed another brave
woman once.'

'Then, why do you speak slightingly of
what you did this morning ? There cannot
be two measures ; if you were not
brave this morning, neither could I be,' she
added, with her quiet smile.

But it is the duty of man to hight, and
lead to fight.'

And the duty of woman to look on,
you will add.'

So the world would say.'

And so we do, we poor things born to
submit and to obey ! But, Monsieur Rohan,
tell me, is it really true that you do not
mean to mix in such matters T

Perfectly true. I have not the slightest
intention of becoming a knight-errant,
seeking to redress the wrongs of the
world.'

She looked at him, and then said,
gravely :

If what my uncle fears happens ; if our
people unite and fight against the government,
I suppose we shall see dreadful
things. What will our place be in such a
case ? What ought we to do ? Tell me
what your ideas are ?'

And Rohan, unconscious of the perfect
confidence that existed between them, and

thinking it was only because they Avere
both Bretons that their thoughts ran in the
same channel, replied simply :

I cannot help thinking of it, and
wondering what we ought to do. But,
to tell you the truth, what happened
this morning, took me by surprise. No
one was less prepared to lead men to
tight than 1 was when I left you, and yet
I find myself now in a position which may
influence my whole life.'

'But you say, you will not fight — will
not lead our peasants to fight ?'

Would you wish me to do so ; and do
you think it would be right ?'

I — I do not know what is right or
wrong in such a case, except — except that,
if we saw those poor people being butchered
by soldiers, I think we could not remain
idle.'

No, we could not remain idle. It is

what happened to me this morning. So I
suppose we must leave it to the future to
decide what my duty is.'

I fear it must be so. But, if there is
lighting, I feel sure you will be there in
spite of all you say.'

So everyone seems to think,' said Rohan y
gravely enough now.

You believe it yourself, you see. Oh !
it is hard to have trouble brought to one
so, is it not, when one has done nothing to
deserve it ? I shall not have a moment's
peace now, if there is any sign of the
struggle going on.'

But why should you trouble so about
it ? The chevalier is not a Breton, and
has nothing to do with our domestic
troubles ; he will remain by you.'

Yes,' she replied, thoughtfully, ^ unless
he prefers joining you also, and — and who
knows ? Two men killed to-day, do you

say? Is it not a dreadful thing to think
of losing thus suddenly those we love !
It is strange, but I have grown fearful
since the last few hours. We heard so
much about those murders in Paris and
yet I felt unmoved, while to-day, because
of a small struggle — I suppose it was because
of my knowing some of those concerned
in it — I feel so very sorry for the
poor people. Yes, I fancy that you would

be found with them if — if Well, I

must not think of this any more. Let us
have some music, I fear I am going to be
as foolish as I was last night ! — Your dear
mother, just try to fancy her sorrow and
grief! — But no, no, I must not go on
thinking of such things. — Ah, chevalier,'
she said, going towards her fiance, dio
had just appeared, ' we are going to sing;
will you come ?'

Certainly, Where you are, there shall
men hind me always, I trust.'

And so Renee played and sang, and
the day passed happily at the Chateau.
Yet in the evening alone in her room she
threw herself down on her knees and once
more repeated to herself,

I would die — I would die willingly
for them all. Lord, grant there may be
no more blood shed in our peaceful land,
no war, no death — no death of those we
love.'

CHAPTER X.

At my seat near Ploermel, if you come
with me, you will be at peace. Xo one will
molest you there. The authorities cannot
help mixing you up with this affair, seeing
the Carnoets are now residing with you ;
but you will take away all occasion of
offence by removing at once from the scene
of the affray.'

I believe you are right,' the comte
replied.

For himself, personally, he had little fear,
but, devotedly attached to his invalid wife,
he dreaded anything that might endanger

her peace. So, having once accepted

the invitation of the Marquis che L

for her, he was easily prevailed upon to
accompany her, and having gone through
the task of hiding their more precious
treasures, as every noble house was obliged
to do in those days of license and of rage
against the rich, the whole party went to
Ploermel.

The distance was serious enough for the
comtesse, and many were the halts made.
They had passed Scar and were nearing
Jcsselin when they were arrested by the
most unexpected sight.

An immense concourse of people were
pressing forward to a given point,
and the dreary solitudes of the Landes
were being animated by thousands of
human beings. The homharde^ and the
bigjioicf were heard above the talking and

A kind of clarion. f Small bag-pipes.

noise of these many men, women, and
children. All were in holiday attire, and
dressed according to their particular ]pays
or parish ; Leon and Treguier, Vannes and
Corneille, and many other places were
represented by their different costumes.

The women, with their snowy white
caps of all shapes and sizes, first attracted
attention. Almost all wore the open
bodice with embroidered and lace chemisettes
underneath ; to this some added an
immense white collar wonderfully plaited,
and falling low on the shoulders. The
scarlet dresses worn by many contrasted
with the deep black ones trimmed with
black velvet, and with wide, open sleeves
worn by others. The Avhole costume of
the latter was nun-like in appearance, even
to the hood. All the marriageable osiris had
their skirts trimmed with thick silver or
gold braid, each row representing so much

money a year — their marriage-portion.
One and all had thick gold crosses round
their necks.

Gorgeous and striking was the sight,
for the men's costumes were in keeping
With those of the women. Most of them
wore a large wide awake, like the sombrero
of the Spaniards, with a woollen or velvet
cord of many colours twisted round and
round the crown. Others had smaller
hats, similarly trimmed round the crown
and bordered with black velvet, but with
the ends, also of velvet, hanging behind
much like those on our children's hats.
All had long, flowing hair.

Some had long square coats like those
worn by the older noblemen at Court,
but with three rows on each side down
to the waist, of brilliant and closely
sewn buttons. Underneath was the deep
black velvet waistcoat. Others Adore

VOL. I. Q

the round coat and the thick white
woollen waistcoat falling below the hips
and richly embroidered ; this also was
adorned with buttons. All wore the
wide Gaelic breeches held up by a belt
with an ornamental clasp, or by a brilliant
red or blue sash four or five yards long
wound round and round the waist. Ornamental
gaiters and shoes with buckles,
completed these most picturesque costumes.


It was a motley crowd and glorious, as it
hurried through narrow roads deep and
low between strongly built embankments
of beaten earth crowned by huge hedges —
those future fortresses against the Republicans
that were so soon to invade the
country — or flocked within the fields along
the small paths close to the hedges.

They are going to the Soule' exclaimed

the marquis, joyfully. ' I had forgotten it,
chevalier ; you come at the right moment.
No such national games can you boast of
in the South, I know !'

In the South we sing,' the chevalier
replied, laughing, ' and that is everything
to us.'

And here we wrestle and fight, and in
good earnest too, as you will see. Comtesse,
can you bear the sight ?'

I fear not ; not to the end.'

But we will try to avoid the end ; and no
doubt by remaining here in your carriage
you will. It is a good place which commands
many roads, and you will have a
first-rate y'iqw of the start at least.'

Oh ! aunt, let us stay.'

There is no reason why you young-people
should not,' replied the comtesse,
^ even if I go away, but I will stop with you

here, dear child, as long as blood does
not flow ; that I cannot bear to see.'

'A game where blood flows !' exclaimed
the chevalier.

And freely — but what do our young
men care ? Do they not train all the year
round for their wrestling, racing, and this
foot-ball which is the crown of everything ?
Wait, and you will see.'

As they were disposing themselves for a
good view of the game, hurrahs were
heard from hundreds of throats, for the
tenants of the marquis had caught sight
of the party. A strong stalwart man
made his way towards them, and the marquis
cried out :

Ah, Ivon, in for the Soule again ?'

'Yes, yes, Monsieur le Marquis, in for
the Soule once more before old age comes ;
the youngsters have always something to
learn from their elders about it. But,

Monsieur le Marquis, I am so proud to see
you here ; it is as it should be. And you
are bringing us many people to the Chateau,
I hope ?'

'You are always wanting the house
full, Ivon ! My dear comtesse, this is
my head-farmer, and a terrible task-master
he is ! If I were to listen to him, I should

always live at L and have the place

full of people and make a great show of my
money.'

Nay, nay, master, the likes of you
should shine ; but as to the showing of
money -^ '

You don't approve of that ?'

'No, Monsieur le Marquis, no, never
show your money.'

Better put it in a stocking, eh !
Ivon ?'

The peasant looked at him with a sly
amused look.

'There be some in the world who
would require a rare large stocking,
methinks.'

I should, you think ?'

Our farms are doing well, master, very
well, and our cattle have greatly increased.'

Ah ! I see : you want me to praise you
before my cousins ?'

I say our farms are doing; well and

'B

eye have plenty of money ; but it i&
yours to spend, master, and I am right
glad when you spend part of it here ;
although you can spend it wherever you
please.'

You are very generous, Ivon, very
generous, considering that you have all
the hard Avork and I all the fun.'

Some there be who are born to show
us poor folks the better things that are
on the earth. 'T would be a sad world,

master, if there were none but peasants
like us everywhere.'

That is your view of it ? So you are
not like those men in Paris who would
destroy us altogether?'

Maybe they have other great things to
choose out of; we have only you and
yours, Monsieur le Marquis.'

The Marquis laughed, and said,

Ivon, your speech is most flattering?
So, if I understand you right, I must
make the most of myself to make you
happy?'

Yes, master ; I like to see the likes of
you in grand coaches, and on good
horses and bravely dressed. I want to
see your beautiful ladies with their
stiff silk gowns and hear their honeyed
words.'

'In fact, you are a born aristocrat,

Ivory. But, if I remember right, you
were always bravely dressed yourself asa
young fellow. Ah ! Ivon, beware of
vanity ! But I will do my best to please
you, and bring all the ladies that are
left in the land if they will only come.
You see, here is my cousin, Mademoiselle
de Kerguennec, who brings her fiance
with her.'

'Oh, mam'zelle, my congratulations!
Monsieur is not a Breton ?'

No, but as good as one, since he likes
a Bretonne, you see. I am glad to introduce
you to him. He has many servants
at his own place, but none better than
you, T feel sure. I hope you are increasing
in wealth, Ivon ?'

My master and Ave do that, thanks to
the Almighty.'

And thanks also to your energy and
cleverness, we all know that.'

The farmer laughed, and looking towards
the people:

I must go now,' he said. ^ The game
will soon beo^in, thrush I am not among;
the first to play.'

I suppose not ; among the last, most
likely,' said the marquis.

Yes, master — among the last.' And
the man looked well pleased.

'What a character the fellow is,' the
marquis went on, after the man had left.
^ You will see him looking as proud as a
peacock, when we have many people here,
for we are one family — " Our cows and our
horses and our farms are doing well!"
You should see him try to sell a cow, as
I did once, while some of my friends from
Paris were looking on. It might have
been as a compliment paid to me, to be
sure ; for the man is shrewd enough for
anything. But how my friends laughed !

'monsieur le Marquis and I could not sell
that cow for less, we really could not let
it go for less ! — Monsieur le Marquis and I
know all her good points, and at one time
she gave us a deal of trouble. Monsieur le
Marquis was telling me only this very morning,
' Ivon, shall we, or shall we not sell
that most excellent cow ? As to those
pigs, Ivon,' " etc., &c. Whenever any of
those friends see me, they are sure to ask
me how my fellow cowherd is doing.'

'I suppose he is truthful?' said the
chevalier.

Oh, dear yes ; and faithful from father
to son. I believe he could trace his pedigree
as far back as my own. His family
has been attached to ours for generations.
You should have heard him when told
he must not pay me any more tithes or
tolls, according to the new laws. He was
quite offended — " Do those people of Paris

take us for thieves, that we should not
pay our seigneur his clue ?" And I receive
my tithes just as in the past.'

Yes, so do I,' said the comte. ' But
how long it is to last, and how long weare
to keep such men attached to our
families under the new regime. Heaven
only knows ! — But the game is beginning!'

At that moment, several hundred men
from different parishes advanced, and formed
themselves into two camps. They threw
off their jackets, and were seen to be all more
or less dressed alike, — that is, with tight-fitting
flannels and short, tight breeches,
naked legs and arms, and thick shoes, and
even sabots weighing several pounds.

The winner of the last Soule was
repeating the rules, which may be thus
summarized : —

The goal was any one of the parishes

of the players (many of them lived eight
or ten miles off).

There were no boundaries.

Scragging, tripping, and hacking were
allowed, (practically anything and everything
was permitted).

The prize was the Soule itself, to which
was added a black bullock. —

The players, all strong men, the flower
of their village, listen to the rules, their
piercing eyes fixed on the speaker, their
clenched fists and outstretched necks betraying
the intensity with which they look
forward to the first rush.

At last the cry comes, as of old, for tournaments
:

Lists ! Lists !'

The crowd retires to the limits of the
meadow ; the ball is thrown up, and the
mad struggle begins.

All the men of the same parish keep
well together, and are distinguished by
some particular sign.

For a long time the ball remains where
it has first fallen, so great is the crush,
so ardent the players ; and for a longtime
also it seems to the lookers-on
as if no game were possible for that
day. Suddenly there is a cry, ' Ivon I
Ploermel !' Ivon at the head of his party
has 2fone head foremost against the strut
going group and has rushed madly away,
carrying the ball with him. The apparently
hopeless block is broken up at last,
and the whole indescribable mass starts
at his heels. But he is a fast runner,
as all who have run races with him
know; and he shrinks at nothing. A
wide stream is before him ; nothing loth
he jumps into it and swims across, while
the hundreds of players follow him, never

considering whether they can swim or
not, and are carried over by their very
violence and number.

Ivon is caught at last, and retires to
gain strength for the final struo^2:le. The
ball is kicked back ao;ain over the stream
and carried this time towards a thick
hedge some eight or ten feet high. After
another dreadful scrimmage they break
through, their hair entangled with tAvigs
and leaves, their faces torn and bleeding.
They come to a village, rush pele-mere
through it, swarm round the cottages,
through the narrow lanes, on to a long
hi2:h-road. Some take short cuts and
fill! suddenly upon their opponents, and
both parties stagger at the charge.
Further on a terrible fight goes on ;
many a brawny arm is seen rising above
the crowd ; many a fist descends with
fearful strength on uplifted faces. It is

time for the comtesse to retire, if she does
not wish to see the worst.

Fortunately they can follow the game
no more ; the players having reached the
top of a rugged hill, a violent kick sends
the ball flying, and down they rush headlong,
pushing, tumbling, rolling, and leave
at the bottom the weaker ones almost
crushed to death.

Meanwhile, hither and thither sway the
numerous spectators, uttering wild shrieks
and cries of encouragement. They have
lost all control over themselves ; they
call out the names of those they love
or know, to urge them on. But they leave
the wounded behind ; no pity is there for
the fallen — eyes and hearts are all for the
strong.

The number of players has greatly
diminished, and the best players who have
held themselves in reserve draw near.

The exhausted men fall back and leave
the glory of their parishes to them.*

But it is as well for us to draw the
veil on the last struggle that ensues. As
the marquis and his party, after having
long lost sight of the players, reached
Ploermel, loud cries greeted them ; and
the' heard that Ivon had won the Soule

The game was forbidden by the government after the
revolution ; for both Royalists and Republicans used it asa
means of revenge, and even murder.

CHAPTER XL

Thus it happened that the favourite farmer
of the marquis was the winner of the Soule
for that year. Ivon was in all his glory,
and was petted by the ladies of the
Chateau, who went to his cottage, overran
his farm, praised everything he did,
and wondered that he had not married
yet.

That he enjoyed the sunshine of their
presence was evident, but that he gloried
even more in the greatness of his master
was evident also. Every night he roamed
about within sight of the Chateau, look-vol.

I. K

ing up at the many lights there, as if
each told of his own and of his master's
fortune : listening; to the sinsiino: as if
it came from superior beings, of whom,
however, he formed a part. Envy was
unknown to him, and if anyone had told
him of a greater man than the marquis,
his master, he would not have believed
them — the king might be greater, but
kings were always full of faults, as
every Breton knew, and he saw no fault
in his master. And yet with this truly
Breton faithfulness he had cunning, as
indeed most of the Breton peasants have
the outcome, perhaps, of their endless
strut hollies, first in feudal times against
the unruly barons, and later on against
the French kings, who would fain have
crushed out their national existence altogether.


Such was Ivon, the man who was to

play a most important part in the story of

the Marquis de L .

The Chateau, now full of guests, offered
on the outside no beauty to speak of;
but it had lately been repaired in the
style of Louis XV., and was most finely
decorated and adorned in the interior.
The family having been twice allied to
royalty, there were many princely gifts
of irreat value to their owner ; beautiful
Goblin tapestry, the gift of one king,
a splendid clock the gift of another, and
so on. The marquis had as yet hidden
none of these things. He was one of
those who did not believe in the Republic
; one of those who expected it to
disappear with the same violence it had
come in ; who counted the days it had yet
to live, and who refused to believe in the
to others — fearful realities of the times.
He was worshipped by his people ; — he had

done no one any harm, and could not
believe the popular fury might even reach
him.

Everyone was happy at the Chateau.
Renee, in all her dazzling loveliness and
modesty, won every heart, and was the
favourite of high and low. What time
was there left for her to read in her
own heart ? How could she foresee the
dark future in store in the very Chateau
where all was now life and joy ? Even
Rohan de Carnoet was to count these
days among the happiest of his life ; —
this being in her presence continually.
With his Breton stolidity, he could glide
down the stream of love almost unknown
to himself.

Ivon had waited very long before marrying
; but, when the grand ladies at the
Chateau joked with him because of his
being still a bachelor, he did not tell

them that he was even then going through
all the preliminaries of Breton peasant
courtship. One day, however, a handsome
couple in beautiful costumes presented
themselves at the Chateau ; they
were Ivon and his fiancee coming to
invite everybody there to their wedding;
and the marquis, proud of them,
took them at once to the drawing-room,
where everyone accepted the invitation
with alacrity.

The o-irl Ivon had chosen was a well-to-do
peasant with many a gold braid to her
skirt on Sundays and fete-days; and it had
been necessary for Ivon to go through his
courtship according to established custom.
The parents of the girl, having been told
of the wishes of the rich farmer, had
prepared themselves for his first visit. On
the day appointed, Ivon and all his
relations, mounted on their horses, had

arrived to view the possessions of the girl
His friends had highly approved of his
choice, and her parents had in a general
Away expressed themselves willing to agree
to his suit. After the first visit, the lover
had retired for a time, and his cause had
been taken up by many a grave beggar
(treated always with much respect in
Brittany) and many a tailor, who had
come every day to the cottage to speak
of his love ; when, to make believe that
his suit was rejected, they had found
the frying-pan turned bottom upwards, or
the burning wood on end, smoking up the
large chimney ! By this it was meant :
that he was to go and look elsewhere.

One day the miller, the acknowledged
wit of the village, and usual go-between in
such affairs, had come. He had made sure
of success beforehand, for, when he had first
opened his door to go out on his errand,

he had retreated successfully on seeing a
magpie ! And when he tried a second time
he had seen two doves cooing to each
other !

No one could resist his eloquence, and
the bride had been won after many a
flower of rhetoric spent upon her. Then
had the house and all the possessions of
the girl been finally prepared ; and on the
next day the stable and hayloft had been
visited ; the deep wide cupboards had stood
open showing the quantity of linen and
coiffes belonging to the bride-elect.

At last the day for the wedding had
been fixed, and to work had gone all the
people of the village, the weaver with his
best wool ; and the tailor with his golden
thread working embroideries worthy of a
queen, to be added to those of past generations.
For two whole months had the
work progressed ; and then had the future

bride and bridegroom set forth together
to make their invitations. Masters and
servants, friends and relatives, — the whole
household indeed of chateau or cottage,
had been invited.

At last all was ready, and the day before
the wedding, beggars, tailors, millers and
all, had gone to witness the formal accepting
of the linen-press of the bride in her
future home.

A long time had it taken the workmen
to make this tine and large linen-press
of carved walnut with its elaborate brass
mountings, so well stocked now With
everything the bride might require for
many a day. It was put on a cart and
dragged by two oxen, their necks adorned
with ribbons and flowers, and with a
white heifer folio win fy the cart.

As the procession left the house of the bride,
the village bells sent forth their joyful peals.

But when the cart reached his door
they found it closed, and the master was
nowhere to be found. They knocked and
knocked, and at last the people from the
inside held a long parley with them, and
more eloquence was displayed on both
parts. But, as the door still remained
closed, sticks and blows were used, and
finally it was forced open, and the wardrobe
entered in all his glory, and was put
in the place of honour. Audits doors being
opened its riches stood revealed to the
eyes of the bridegroom and his assistants.

The day of the wedding comes at last,
and merrily ring the village bells ; the bride
is taken to church by her parents, and the
bridegroom follows with his friends. How
handsome they look, and hovv^ bravely
dressed in silver and gold, embroidery and
lace ! Are these the poor peasants, the
tillers of the ground ? Are these the hardworking

Avoient whose share upon earth
is to toil so unmercifully?

The crowd fills the church, and the
silver ring, with its heart coloured
red, is passed on the finger of the
bride.

The mass is said, and they enter the
vestry, and there the priest osiers the
newly-married couple bread and wine. He
breaks the bread in two pieces, tastes each
piece first, and then gives it to them ; and
so with the wine. Only one glass is there ;
he carries it to his lips, and the two drink
after him.

The ceremony is over, the guns fire and
the bells ring, and bride and bridegroom
come forth.

Outside, however, the children of the
village have assembled, and hold the thick
branch of a tree on which is tied, with a
red ribbon, a bull-finch, which tries its

best to escape. It is the bride who must
give it its freedom. She comes, and, with
a pair of scissors, cuts the ribbon, and
sends the bird back to liberty.

And now for the dancing, with those intricate
and wonderful figures which made
once the admiration of the court of Louis
XIV. Marvellously light are the feet of the
coat-driver, of the ploughman, and of all.
The heavy shot has been replaced by a
thin, low shoe; the stocking is pulled on
the well-shaped leg, and they go from
place to place in the hamlets and villages
around, inviting everybody, by stopping
and dancing before each cottage-door in
turn. The miller, his pistols in his large,
bright sash four or five yards long, fires
in the air now and then, and dances and
capers before the bride.

And thus they go on ; all the people of
the Chateau joining in the fun. Renee,

as a compliment to the bride, is dressed
in peasant clothes ; and how handsome a
peasant-girl she looks ! Even the good
Duchess Anne of loved memory, who had
done the same many years before, could
not have looked handsomer. Her Avhite
coiffe surrounds the fine oval of her face,
and increases her stature. The open bodice
is all aglow with gold embroidery ; her
white chemisette open at the throat, the
white sleeves, the long silk apron, the
scarlet dress — ah ! a noble maiden in a
noble costume ! Everyone admires her,
and the honours of the wedding are
divided between the peasant bride and
the noble lady.

At last the dancing is over, and the
feasting begins. High and low, everyone
from chateau or village — master
and servant, noble and peasant, all are
there. Every door is shut, except the

one where the feast is held. The cider
runs liberally, and the singing goes on,
the sad and melancholy singing of the
Breton.

But good-night to you, good people !
The pretty conceits of your courtship are
ended, and, alas ! in our own days are fast
disappearing altogether. The toil and
hardships remain still, but most of the
poetry has flown never to return.

CHAPTER XII.

Bride and bridegroom have settled down
at last; lovers love on, and friends are
happy in each other's society. They are
dancing at the Chateau. The drawing-room,
ball-room, and dining-room are
dazzling with light — flowers and beauty,
soft-toned voices and sweet perfumes,
good will and tenderness, comfort and
peace are all there. Why should sorrow
come and mar the beauty of faces and dull
the bright eyes ?

A loud ring: is heard at the 2:ate. It is
cold, fearfully cold, outside, so the ring is

answered quickly by the ready servants of
the hospitable nobleman, and two men
looking like Breton peasants, and jjen-hach
in hand, enter. They ask to speak to the
marquis, and he, suspecting who they are,
hurries out.

Come in, come in, dear friends,' he
cries, as he recognises them, 'come in and
be welcome by all. What ! and have you
returned to France, you emigres condemned
to die if you touched once more the
soil of your fatherland ? Come in — come
in and see your old friends — happy —
still.'

The two men follow the marquis, and
accompany him to the door of the ballroom.
They gaze on the scene in silence
for a few moments, but their faces are sad
and solemn. The dancers cease dancing,
and, approaching the travellers, wait for
them to speak.

You are dancing here,' one of them
says at last. ' Do you then not know the
news ?'

'The news? What news ?'

'The news from Paris.'

Xo.'

The king is dead.'

The king ? The king dead ?'

On the scaffold.'

A cry of horror escapes every breast.
The king dead, murdered, and by his
subjects! Can such a thing be possible?
Those men and women, so gay a moment
before, look blankly into each other's faces.
Is royalty at an end ? Is that vile crew
in Paris, reigning over France, and are
they in its power? No, not so long asa
port remains free in Brittany. They
will not run the risk of Cling into such
hands and of being soiled by contact
with the murderers of their king. And

to-moiTow, tomorrow at dawn more nobles
will have left France — to avenge their
king and their country.

Meanwhile the two gentlemen, who have
retired with the marquis and the more
serious men of the party, are considering
their powers of resistance. The newcomers
break into two pieces on their knee
the sticks they carry, which contain dispatches
from the king's brother and plans
of a future campaign ; and once more the
famed room opens to receive the conspirators.
A De Poncalec is there, and a
De Carnoet, and many others, sitting perhaps
on the very seats their fathers have
used. Will the Breton be for ever ready
to resist oppression and tyranny under
whatever name they present themselves ?
or will not the failure — the terrible failure
of a generation before — tell him to beware
? But faithful and true, brave

VOL. I. s

and loyal, he considers life inferior to
duty.

On the morrow the guests found themselves
scattered far and wide, only a small
number remaining at the Chateau — those
determined to plan a rebellion and those
who clustered round the invalid Comtesse
de Kerguennec, whom the bad news had
prostrated anew.

Very few in number were the nobles
left in Brittany at that time, and on these
devolved the care of calling the peasants
to arms. On this decision being taken, the
marquis sent for Ivon, who, with his influence
over others and his greater means,
would prove a most powerful ally. And
Ivon came.

The marquis was alone, his friends being
busy travelling here and there to promote
the end in view : and it was as well.

I von,' he said, ' you have heard of those
infamous doings in Paris — heard that the
king has been murdered ?'

I have, master,' and Ivon looked stern
and hard.

I have resolved to side with those
determined to avenge him.'

Ivon kept silent, and the marquis went
on — rising up in his impatience to act,
and not paying much attention to the man
he was addressing.

And, Ivon, I want your help. We
must, every man of us, unite against these
miserable wretches ; we must fall in with
the plans of the late Marquis of Reverie, —
now those of the Comte de Puisaye. I
will see that you all have arms ; you will
be brave and follow us, and hold your
own against those who attack you?'

'If they come and attack us, master.'

s2

The tone of the answer fell unpleasantly
on the marquis' ear, and he faced Ivon
with a froAvn.

'Do you doubt that they will?' he asked
him, sharply.

I believe that, if we remain quiet, they
will not attack us.'

'What do you mean?' cried the marquis
; ' would you refuse to join those who
are ready to fight for royalty?'

We shall lose everything if we do,' was
the peasant's reply.

Ah, has the love of money so taken
hold of your heart that you had rather
act the coward's part than risk what you
possess ? Many are there fighting at this
very hour for priest and king — and you,
Ivon, you hesitate ?'

The man said nothing; not even the
anger of his seigneur could force him to
fight if he had determined not to do so,

and the marquis went on : ' You ! not fight,
Ivon !'

Monsieur le Marquis, I did not say I
would not fight ; I said if we were attacked
I would. We are too weak, master ; against
the republicans we can do nothing, and if
I may say so, Monsieur le Marquis, it
would be better if the two gentlemen, just
returned from England, left you. They
are known for what they are, and they will
bring trouble upon you. You should send
them away at once.'

The marquis looked at him, and replied,
haughtily,

You may act the part of a coward, if
you like, but you will scarcely persuade
me to do so. Will you or will you not
influence the peasants to fight? But, of
course, to fight only when our plans of
resistance are ripe.'

If they come to attack us, we will fight ;
we will not leave the parish.'

And this is all you will do for us, for
God and the throne ?'

For you, master, I will sive up my
life.'

I do not want your life, man, but your
devotion to the cause I serve.'

We cannot leave the parish ; if they
come and attack us we will fight.'

The marquis's anger and disgust were
fast getting the better of him, and he was
on the eve of calling hound and cur the man
he had always petted and admired, when
Ivon calmly repeated his warning :

Master, I entreat yoa to send those
men away — they will be your ruin ; I feel
they will be your ruin. Soldiers have
been seen leaving Vannes, and nobody
knows where they are going ; they may becoming
here, master. I entreat you, send

the men away and save yourself and your
Chateau from ruin. I am ready to defend
you, master, to defend you with my own
life ; but you must send those men away.'

Soldiers have left Vannes, do you
say ?' interrupted the marquis. ' How
lon^^ ao:o ?'

'The day before yesterday.'

And Who told you ?'

I know.'

Who told you ?' repeated the marquis,
fiercely.

Some one from Vannes who saw them.'

The marquis paused a moment; angry ashe
was at the turn the conversation had
taken, he was not so rash as not to
feel his danger if he were suspected of
harbouring returned emigres. But he
thought I von even able to tell him a falsehood
to secure his own peace and money,
and he went on :

If they left the day before yesterday,
they would have reached us ere this, supposing
they were coming here. Is it the
truth you are telling me ?'

I want you, master, to save yourself; it
is the truth I am telling you.'

Very well, I begin to see that you are
afraid of the Bleus, and that is why you
refuse to join us in our plan of resistance.
I have done with you ; if anyone had told
me Ivon was a coward, I could not have
believed it.'

The man laughed darkly, and repeated,
while going away :

^ If the soldiers come, we will fight ; if
they come, we will fight ; but we won't
leave the parish.'

He was almost out of the marquis's hearing
when the latter called him back. In
his heart he had already forgiven him,
and the important communication could

not be allowed thus to fall to the ground.

Ivon returned, his face as stern and
hard as at the beginning of the interview,
and the marquis said to him:

'Ivon, if what you tell me about these
soldiers is true, I feel I have not explained
myself properly and have been unjust.
Of course some men must remain at
home, but some will have to go. There is no
need for you to leave L — — ; but the young
men who refused to serve the Republic, and
who would be shot like dogs if found,
ought not to refuse to serve in the army
of the king. I hope you will not set
yourself against this.'

No, master, no.'

Well then, come and see my friends,
they must all be told your news ; it may
prove of the utmost importance to them,

and no doubt they had better leave L

at once.'

They had better ^o, Monsieur le
Marquis.'

I am afraid the comtesse is too ill to
be moved.'

I will remove her in my arms to our
cottage, if she will let me. I have thought
of it all.'

Then you really think the thing
serious ?'

I believe you are in danger, master.'
The marquis looked at Ivon, but
nothing could be read on his rigid and
dogged face. On reaching the room
where his guests were assembled, he told
them of Ivon's warning and of his own
fears, and at once the position was understood
by them. One and all, according
to Ivon's advice, prepared for flight —
all except the comtesse. Surely if soldiers
came they would not arrest her ; the
comte and all the others must hide,

and Renee also. But Renee refused to
leave her, and the comte, unwilling to
resist lier wishes, hoped he could manatee
to watch over her unseen when the time
came.

Everybody was busy at the Chateau
now; servants ran to and fro ; horses and
carriages were got in readiness for a
sudden start, and the marquis, with Renee
and with Ivon — the only one he could
trust entirely of his own household — went
from room to room and carried away
unseen what was considered most precious.
Pictures, vases, gold and silver, swords,
diamonds, and all the accumulation of
centuries in fine-art and fine workmanship
were there, and it was hard work
to choose, hard work to dismantle the
rooms, hard work to carry everything to
those hiding-places of generations before.
Once there, however, they were safe.

The secret remained hid in the bosoms of
those two the marquis had trusted ; Ivon
and Renee alone were answerable before
him and before God for the safety of part
of his fortune.

The short winter day was drawing to a
close ; the marquis had bid farewell to
his friends and was pacing up and down
his mansion, deprived of its most beautiful
ornaments, and looking desolate in his
eyes. In the sick-room with the comtesse
were together for awhile before separating
for the night the comte, the Chevalier
de Valvourgs, and the two De Carnoets.
The silence succeeding to so many days
of pleasure, and the animation that had
prevailed during the day, seemed strange
to the few left behind, and was painful
to bear for the invalid. Her courage
had gone with the coming night, and
she now regretted she was endangering

those clear to her and who persisted in not
leaving her.

To-morrow,' she said, ' I will go to
Ivon's farm.'

Meanwhile, Ivon, who knew how to
reach the marquis without the help of
servants, passed silently from room to
room, looking out for him, and meeting
him at last, said quickly,

Monsieur le Marquis, fly at once ; the
soldiers are coming this Away ; there is no
doubt about it. I hear they left Tergo
last night — and — and — ' the peasant
seemed suddenly to be overcome by a
terrible agitation ; then went on : ' Do you
remember Guillemot the farmer ?'

^ Certainly.'

^ They have been fighting for some time
at Tergo, and yesterday the Bleus were
there. When told they were coming,
everybody rushed away, carrying their children

With them, and trying to separate,
so as not to attract attention. The soldiers
took away horses and oxen, cows and
sheep, corn and hay — everything they
could lay their hands on. The people
returned for the night to their houses, but
several were missing — among others, Guillemot
and his little girl six months old.
This morning, by accident, he was discovered
— he must have been seen crossing
a field — he had one of his legs broken by
a shot, and the soldiers had nailed his
head to the ground with a plough-share.
His little girl was found alive, still by
him. She had spent the whole night
there.'

The marquis, speechless with horror,
looked at Ivon. What ! could those
men thus murder a defenceless man with
XI child in his arms? Was it possible

that such savage deeds could take place
at a few leagues' distance from his
house? That Guillemot he had known
well as an honest, intelligent man. Were
all his people exposed to such treatment ?

I am grieved, I von, grieved at this
beyond what I can say. I hope you are
preparing yourselves, in case they come
to you. Can I do anything for you ?'

^ Give us all the arms you can ; the
people have dug holes, and have been
hiding their things all day — as we
have been doing here. It will be better
for us to run away too, if they come —
people are on the watch, and will let us
know. But you, master, go now; you
have horses and servants, go to Doua-money.
I hear there is an English boat
not far off cruising and waiting for those
very men who came to you.'

Then, as lie saw the surprise of the
marquis at finding him so well informed,
he went on :

We have to watch and be careful ; and
everywhere beggars, and men disguised as
beofsars, are finding: out news for us.'

And all this time we have been arousing;
ourselves here. I could never have believed
it — never have believed the danger
so serious and so near. But what about
the comtesse ?'

'They won't come to-night, and tomorrow
morning we will remove her.'

'Let it be so.'

Go now. Monsieur le Marquis ; for, if
they come, it will be for you.'

Thank you, Ivon ; I will see to it. I
must go to my friends now and tell them,
and advise them to flee.'

The peasant watched the marquis in
silence, and then said,

I will go and get your horse ready,
master. Which servant will you take ?'

^ Let it be Yean. Good-bye, Ivon, goodbye.
I have trusted you as few men
have ever been trusted by another. You
will be faithful to your master, even in his
absence ?'

You can trust me, master ; I will
watch over the Chateau as long as I live.'

God reward you, Ivon. God reward
you according to your desert. Now I
must go to the comte. How I wish they
could all leave at once. Good-bye, Ivon,
good-bye.'

Go, master, go, your horse will soon be
ready for you. And I also should like to
go to my house and see after things
there.'

Don't wait for me, Ivon, I can manage
now.'

But Ivon shook his head, and said,

VOL. I. T

I will first see you in safety, master.'

Ivon was wrong when he said the
soldiers would not come that night. Ashe
was on his way to the stables, and the
marquis had only just reached his friends,
a great noise was heard outside, and
cries of, 'Fly, fly, the soldiers are coming!'
reached him. The whole population had
left their homes and were calling out to
him on their way.

The gentlemen looked at each other.

All the men must have left the village ;
we cannot resist. Quick, marquis, they
are coming for you, no doubt ; we shall
manage,' said the comte.

But you and Renee — and the comtesse
'

'Her illness will account for our presence.
Do not hesitate.'

There is a hiding-place in the Chateau.'

Yes, but . of what use will it be when

those men are established here? Waste
no mere time. We will see to ourselves.
Chevalier, accompany the marquis a little
way ; but be on your guard.'

But you, Renee, who can watch over
you ?'

'The fewer we are the better. I am
sure my uncle is right. And you also,
Monsieur Rohan.'

Certainly,' replied Rohan, calmly. —
^ But not with the marquis,' he said to
himself, as he hurried out.

Hark !' cried the comte, suddenly.
What is that ?'

'The soldiers are here. It is the
'' Marseillaise !" '

The friends press each other's hands, and
the marquis leaves them. But on his way
he meets Ivon.

Hide yourself, master ; it is too dangerous
for you to go now.'

T 2

Renee and the comtesse remain alone,
they also hear the cries and the ' Marseillaise
;' and in silence and with beating
hearts they listen as the strains grow
louder and louder, fiercer and more fierce.

CHAPTER XIII.

^ Forward ! sons of France, the day of glory now is nigh !
To arms, citizens ! form your battalions !
Forward ! forward ! may their craven blood water our
furrows!'

And the refrain recurs again and again,
and the wild, overpowering air urges them
on. Noble hymn of war, grand ' Marseillaise,'
who can resist thy power ? Offspring
of enthusiasm — knell of the glory
of kings ! Yell of sanguinary fury —
heroic outburst of patriotism and liberty !
What does the Republic not owe to
thee ?

Forward ! forward !
To arms, citizens I'

And to its rhythmic cadence, their hearts
beating with force and fury, fall the
steps of those terrible battalions, those
saviours of their country ; those soldiers
of a day ; ill-fed, ill-clothed ; but ready for
any excess — nay, for any crime ; for any
self-sacrifice, for any degree of valour !
And ever victorious !

What would this horde of traitors, of slaves, and of kings

united against France ?
For whom these ignominious fetters ?
To arms ! may their craven blood water our furrows !'

And the strain pursues a king on his
way to death ; a king whose heart overflows
with indignation and righteous
wrath ; the best and most virtuous of the
Bourbon kings ! Alas ! one look upon the
past which has brought him on the scaffold,
one glance towards the future, he
lays his royal head low.

Forward ! forward ! may their craven blood "water our
furrow's !'

And the defenders of the Republic go
through the towns and villages, clothed in
rags, covered with dust and blood : — blood
from a woman's dripping head ! blood
from the heart of an aristocrat ! blood
from the body of a little child !

Forward ! forward !
To arms, citizens !'

And the same song leads men to glory [
And thousands of men come forward, leave
behind what makes life dear, and rush to
the frontier :

Tremble, tyrants, and you who fio'ht against your country,
Disgrace of the human race !

Against you all become soldiers !

Forward ! forward ! may their craven blood water our
furrows !'

Prussians, Austrians, they are your natural
enemies ; but the noblemen of France,
pitiless tigers who rend their mother's
bosom, what are they doing among these ?

Sacred love of country, guide and sustain our avenging arms,
To arms, citizens ! form your battalions !
Forward ! forward ! may their craven blood water our
furrows !'

But, mighty outburst of indignation
and wrath, noble ' Marseillaise,' wherefore
has the magic of thy power ceased ?
How is it that thy manly strains are no
longer taken up by thousands ? Ah ! in
thy wild justice thou hast forgotten that
there are loyal hearts that will cling to the
past ! will cling to it with all its faults and
virtues I Ignorant peasants with long,
streaming hair, iron frames and still more
iron wills, hear thee indeed — but answer
not ! In vain dost thou call on them !
In vain dost thou invite them to glory !
They will not hear, but will deal the first
blow at the Republic thou dost proclaim,
and to thy cry of defiance reply, ' Le roi est
mort, vive le roi'

Those at Ploermel were in hiding ; the
soldiers passed through a deserted village,
came to the Chateau, and, the butt-ends
of their guns striking sharply on the
threshold, they asked admittance in the
name of the Republic.

The trembling servant opened to them.

What will you here?'

'Thy master, the ci-devant Marquis '

My master is not here.'

He was here yesterday and this morning.
Take care how thou dost answer us.'

I know not where he is.' And he speaks
the truth.

Very well, we must visit the Chateau
for ourselves and see.'

They stop before the Comte de Kern


Who art thou, citoyen T

My name is Kerguennec'

What dost thou here ?'

I was on a visit here, but my wife fell
ill ; and I and my family are the only ones
left;

Thy wife ill ? Where is she ? Let us
see her.'

But your presence will terrify her ; I
entreat you, forbear.'

'We would judge for ourselves of the
truth of thy speech, citoyen. Lead us to
her.'

She is in bed and very ill.'

Beware how thou dost resist, or we
may find a prompt and quick remedy that
would cure her altogether.'

And a ferocious smile is on every face.

Allow me to go and forewarn her.'

^ Nay, nay, thou and thine order are all
deceivers ; we will go with thee.'

The comte goes to his wife's room and
knocks.

^ Renee,' he asks, ' Renee !'

And Kenee comes forth ; a beautiful,,
deadly-pale woman, but neither afraid
nor trembling. She shuts the door after
her and faces the soldiers.

Ma foi ! citoyen, thou hast a handsome
wife, but thou didst lie to us — she is not
ill!'

This is my niece, and not my wife.'

Gitoyenne^ what is thy name?'

Renee de Kerguennec'

Well, Renee de Kerguennec, thou art a
fine woman ; but it will go hard with thee
all the same if thy uncle has not told the
truth ! Where is the sick woman ?'

Renee, can you tell your aunt that she
must see these men ?'

She will see them.'

And Renee opens the door wide, for the
comtesse has been forewarned, and has
summoned all her strength to face the
ordeal. Pale and faint, she tries to sit upas

the soldiers stream into the room. Her
trembling, thin hands on the counterpane
clasping and unclasping, she looks towards
the soldiers with a sad, pitiful look while
they none the less go to her and ask her
roughly,

Art thou the wife of the citizen
Kerguennec ?'

Yes.'

'Where is theci-devaiit Marquis deL ?

Dost thou know ?'

I do not, indeed.'

How long is it since he left ?'

Not long.'

Where was he going ?'

^ I do not know.'

He has left here, thou art sure ?'

^ Yes, he must have left now.'

Left when he heard us ?'

'Yes.'

*Then he cannot be very far off,' said

the officer, addressing his men. ^ Unfortunately
we cannot run after him in this
darkness. Meanwhile, search the room and-see
if these aristocrats tell me the truth.'

The men looked under the bed, searched
everywhere, even between the mattresses
for might not the marquis be there, and
had they not already found one hiding
after that fashion ?

At last they leave the comtesse half
dead with fright.

Now search the house.'

The whole party disperses, and for a longtime
the noise of the butt-end of their
guns knocking against the walls and doors
and partitions is heard. But, wherever
the marquis is, they do not find him, and
they return to the room where they had
first met the comte.

Citoyen Kerguennec, listen,' said the
officer, opening a large paper. — ' " In the

name of the Republic one and indivisible,

the citoyen L is declared traitor to

his country, and condemned to death for
having held communication with and harboured
the enemies of France, foreigners
and emigres. All the property of the said
citoyen is declared forfeited and passes
into the hands of the nation to be used
for the benefit of the Republic — Long live
France ! Long live the Republic !" We
would leave men in the place tomorrow,
but, considering that thou art here, with
thy sick wife, and that thou art a lover
of the Republic, as we must believe, we
place the property in thy hands a few
days. See, then, that nothing is removed
thou answered for it with thy head.
Thou wilt go when the Republic has
replaced thee.'

The officer and his men then withdrew ;
and long was the noise that went on before

they retired to rest. Early in the morning,
however, they were heard leaving the
Chateau in silence.

As they passed through the empty
village, and searched the cottages, they
little dreamed of the danger in their
rear, for, what the song of the
Marseillaise ' could not do, the danger
the marquis was running had accomplished.
Of a common accord, and
with Rohan de Carnoet at their head, the
peasants had assembled for the work of
rescue, and had waited for the soldiers
all night. If these had brought out with
them any prisoner, neither their being
unprepared for war, unarmed, or in
smaller numbers would have stopped the
peasants from rushing upon their enemies,
and the players of the Soule would soon
have known how to bring them down
to the ground. Very different from the

gorgeously-dressed peasants did they look
now, with their goat-skin coats, the coarse
hair of which mixed unpleasantly with
their long, dark locks ; their thick shoes,
or sabots, half-filled with straw, their common
leather gaiters, and their broad, black
felt hats deep on their heads. No wonder
their enemies, when suddenly brought to
face such foes — who had watched for them,
lurking behind trees, and hedges, anddruidi-
cal monuments — called them savages. But,
such as they were, these had sworn in
their hearts, on that early morning, to
avenge the profaned sacredness of their
homes !

CHAPTER XIV.

Great was the astonishment of those left
at the Chateau to find that the marquis
was still there. But his flight had now
become imperative.

Farewell to you, farewell, for who
knows when friends who part thus will
meet again ? Farewell to those we hold
most dear ! Farewell to the beloved
country — since evil passions will drive
men like chaff" before the tempestuous
wind ; since even the noblest ideas must
be profaned by the vilest of men ; since
peace is not to be had on the earth ! Fare-vol.

I. u

well to the hearth that has seen us on our
mother's knee ; to the home where the
young bride has come and died, leaving
a perfume of remembrance behind her
to be treasured up and cherished ! Farewell
to the house of our ancestors,
which is doomed to be plundered and
sold and pass into the hands of the
stranger !

Now have we become like waifs upon the
earth, homeless, hopeless, and often poor.
Ah ! if only the mother-country could
profit by our tears ! But God knows
best.

Exile ! exile ! ah, thou art a bitter thing !
Who will speak to us the language we
love ? Who will hold out to us the hand
of companionship ? Who will weep with
us over the fall of our country, and be
indulgent over its sins ? Who will blend
their hopes with ours that it may some

day be o^reat again ? The bread of her
enemies must we eat ; the hand of her
enemies must we press ; the judgment
passed over her by her enemies must we
hear; their contempt and hatred must we
-contend with. Farewell, farewell and forever
! Who knows ?

And the gates of the Chateau shut
behind its master as they have shut behind
those who have enjoyed his princely
hospitality. Those days of laughter and
singing and mirth are gone ; now is the
horizon of sorrow stretching far and wide
before the marquis ; whether he goes north
or south, east or west, exile is before
him!

A dreary silence falls over the place.
The horse in the stable neighs in vain for
his master ; the servants weep in vain ;
they also must leave the home where no
master is left. The flowers droop and die

u2

in the rooms they have adorned — in the
hot-houses they have made brilliant.

Nature is lovely even in its deepest
recesses ; in its wildness and in its very
dreariness it has its charms ; but the habitation
of man, however beautifully designed
and adorned, requires life to make it bearable.
The sun's rays look out of place
when streaming on treasures that were
once carefully guarded against its scorching
light ; the silence is oppressive, the
atmosphere heavy — a nest without a bird,
an empty cage, a body from which the soul
has fled !

Those left in that desolate mansion
roamed about disconsolately, feeling so
much the more its depressive loneliness
that nothing in it belonged to them ; that
they were prisoners in it !

Then men came who took possession of
everything, made long lists of what had

made life pleasant, set a value of their
own on objects of inestimable worth to the
rightful owner. They lounged about in
the chairs where beauty had reigned ;
revelled in profane jests where the utmost
refinement had been, and made the noble
place resound with ribald and drunken
songs.

Then the walls of the old pile were
covered with large bills, bearing at the topa
device : — the eye of the law, and pikes
surmounted by the Phrygian cap with the
words :

Liherte^ Egalite^ Fraternity.

In the name of the Republic one and indivisible
this house and all the property it
contains, are declared national property to
be sold immediately to the profit of the
nation. Long live the Republic !'

Then followed a list of all valuables and
goods.

Let US go, let us go away at once now
we can,' cried the comtesse ; ' carry me,
drag me, but take me away. Oh ! that such
a calamity should have come in our day to a
friend we love ; that such a fate should be
threatening us also ! Why cannot I send
away my dear ones to spare them such a
sight, send them away out of the reach of
the depraved and wicked, or — die, to set
them free !'

Dearest,' replied the comte, * in your
presence does our safety lie; your weakness
will be our strength ; fear not what may
happen to us, but live ; the love that binds
us will still prove our salvation and our

joy-chapter

XV.

Home ! sweet home !' Ave cry even if during
our absence it has been all joy to us, and no
feelings of pain or sadness have visited us !
With what a delightful restlessness we roam
over every part dear to us— to the window
where the sun's rays are softest, and where
the view is we appreciate the most ; to the
room associated in our mind with pleasant
moments, with its easy chair where fancy-free
our sweetest dreams have come to us,
and its thick carpet our feet touch with
a comfortable sense of recognition. And

how fondly our heads are laid against the
pillow to which we have whispered our
dearest hopes !

How much dearer are those friends who
have returned home with us ! How we
like to recall thoughts had in common !
Do you remember this ? we ask, or — How
happy we were then ? — Have you forgotten
that sweet moment of laughter ?

And even if there has been sorrow, how
softened it is by the grateful feelings that
now fill the heart. Ah ! how wee cling to
things we love ! How we cling to our
earthly paradise !

And Renee was again at home, and
flitted from place to place. There the
chevalier had asked her to be his bride ;
there their hands had pressed each other
in the dance ; there she had heard of
Rohan's first exploit, and even now remembered

the sharp pain it had given her ;
there they all had been together listening
to some favourite music, or been captivated
by a loved voice. Oh ! how dear they
were those friends who for some time
now had lived with her, and had accompanied
her steps on the highway of
life.

And for them also her home was their
home on that day ; for them also the place
was full of reminiscences they cherished.
It was dear to them through its own
beauty and through the charm of her
presence. What captivating pleasure in
retracing each past event, each past dream !
The chevalier clung to her, met her glance
with rapture, heard her voice with ever
new delight. But Rohan was happier
away, happier where she was not. For
him it was the woods that they had trod

together that touched his heart, — the flower
gardens she had trimmed, — the view of the
sea they had admired together. But what
was he doing now at Kerguennec? he
asked himself.

Renee, let us stop here for ever,' said
the chevalier to her. ' Let us marry at
once and forget all about the wickedness
going on in the world.'

But then a gentle sigh would come.

Hush, hush, let us live at rest through
this day ; let us not wake up what
makes the heart tremble. Look at the
sea, how calm it is ! How, though it be
winter, the sun shines ! It may soon be
winter for us — yet should to-day the sun
of gratitude shine in our hearts and leave
us satisfied with what is. To-day let us
be happy and live. — Ah ! Monsieur Rohan,
where have you been ?'

To our woods ; the thick carpet of
grass and moss is still green, and the pine-tree
is as strong as ever, and there is a
crispness in the atmosphere that speaks of
strength that should be used — a reproach
to my indolent life.'

Ah ! men, you are all alike, always dissatisfied.
You cannot stop) awhile to contemplate.
Thoughts of action must come
in. How can men and women ever agree !
When happy, we would like to stop the
flight of time ; but you would speed it on.
The happiness of the present brings a safe
standing-place to us, but it is always with
you regrets and longings. Ah ! how great
is the ingratitude of men !' — And the sweet
words of reproach lost themselves in a
sweeter smile still.

The young chevalier said, softly,

'Renee, I am happy, but I long for

more happiness ; and low can I help
longing?'

Rohan looked at them both, and a great
pain shot through his frame. But he said
nothing. ' Regrets, longings,' had she said.
He had no right to regrets, no right to
lono^ino^s ! But he felt he could be brave
and strong, and even in his pain there was
the comfort of knowing this.

The comtesse, reclining in her chair,
welcomed the sea-breeze, which was felt
even indoors — welcomed the grand sight of
the Avaves rolling in majesty far away. She
would be better now ; this was the atmosphere
which to her was life, the view
which brought her nearer to her Creator.

'- 1 cannot sing like the lark,' she murmured
softly to herself, 'I cannot rise
through space like the eagle, but I can
praise God and be thankful — thankful for
peace and sympathy in love.'

And her eyes left space to rest on her
husband at a small distance from her.

'Dear friend, it is sweet to be at home
again, is it not?' she asked.
He rose and came to her.
'You feel better already, do you not?
You will soon feel stronger, and I am glad;
perhaps we also shall be able to go away.'

Oh, speak not to-day of going away. I
had for one moment forgotten. We are
at peace here. We shall so remain, shall
we not ?'

'Forgive me. I should not have said
it ; but our fate is linked with that of a
nation, and troubles will come to us, even
though that nation's welfare were our last
thought and care. Better face the truth,
and get accustomed to it than lull ourselves
into a false sense of security. Besides,
dear wife, love will follow you
wherever you are ; love is the one" thug

we have from Heaven that is faithful unto
death. Be very courageous ; we all love
you,' he added, smiling, and stroking her
hair gently. 'Let us join hands, and give
each other strength. You will be strong,
will you not?'

Strong ! strong ! Ah ! it is easy for
the healthy to speak of strength, easy
when life courses rapidly through one's
veins, and the warm blood rushes to one's
cheeks ; easy to dance and whirl round
and round when the head is not sick ; to
talk loud and rapidly when the tongue
is not tied by feebleness ! Dear friend,
ask me not to be strong ; let me shelter
my weakness in your strength, hide my
poor aching head in your bosom ! If sorrow
comes, it is you Who will save ; T
am but a burden and your care. Therefore,
let me shut my eyes to what may
come, enjoy the present awhile by your

side. As long as you are near, I am safe
—and this is such a happy day l'

And in the evening, when brought together,
Renee sang their sweet and homely
melodies, and they all thought also— this
has been such a happy day.

END OF THE FIRST VOLUME.

LONDON : PRINTED BY DUNCAN MACDONALD, BLENHEIM HOUSE.

OF THE
U N I Verity
or ILLINOIS



B75G

A BRETON MAIDEN.

VOL. II.

ei

''^^^.

i?Y OFFICE N v

BY

A FRENCH LADY

AUTHOR OF "TILL MY Wedding-day.'

A troubled record
A simple record and serene."

Swinburne.

IN THREE VOLUMES.
VOL. IL

LONDON :

HURST AND BLACKETT, LIMITED,

13, GREAT MARLBOROUGH STREET.

1888.
All Rights Reserved.

B75C

A BRETON MAIDEN.

CHAPTER I.

Time went on, and for a while they Avere at
peace at Kerguennec, but anxiety returned.

During their stay at L , a note had

reached the chevalier from his uncle. ' Send
me Thurio for news,' it said, ' if you can
spare him. Do not delay.' And the chevalier
had sent his man to Provence at once.

In spite of happiness and pleasure, the
chevalier had never passed a day without
pondering over this note, and trying
to imagine what it meant. He had

VOL. II. B

spoken of it to Renee, and as time passed
and Tliurio did not appear, and no news
came, they both feared that something
serious had happened. Now and then the
young chevalier would speak of rushing
away and going to Cahors, but it was
difficult to leave her he loved — so difficult
that he could not do it.

On the other hand, Renee would not
advise him to go. Not that she would not
have spared the sunshine of his presence
she was ready for this, or any self-sacrifice
— but from the very beginning she had
dreaded his leaving Brittany ; a kind of
intuition told her he should beware of
returning to Provence ; and the long absence
of Thurio increased a thousandfold
fears so terribly justified in those days.

Therefore she did not advise him to go,
although she would willingly have risked

the journey herself; although the kind
words written by her relation that was
to be, had touched her heart, and she
could but wish him well ; although she
too considered it an unfeeling thing to
leave the old man to go through all those
troublous times alone, when his own generosity
of heart had prompted him to advise
his nephew to stop where he was sure of
happiness.

They had written letters, carefully-worded
letters, and he might not have
guessed their purport ; yet they had at
least told him plainly that they were anxious
for news from him. How was it, then,
that no answer came ?

Renee, I shall have to go.'

Ah, wait yet awhile ; Thurio will
return, and if not — if not — how could you
expect to return to me? When he had

B 2

failed, how could you succeed ? If he has
fallen into the hands of your enemies,
how can you hope to escape ? Wait a
while, — wait a while yet.'

And to Rohan de Carnoet she would
say,

Help me to detain him, I have a foreboding
that if he leaves us we shall never
see him again. I fear his uncle maybe
either dead or dying ; of what use
would his presence be to him ? And,
even if it were, would it not be risking
two lives instead of one ? He must not
leave us.'

He will not leave you, mademoiselle,
if I can prevent it. Love has such
presentiments, although they may not
become true ; but how can one bear to
part with one's dearest in such a case?
Be sure that I will do my best to keep
him, for his own sake and for yours.'

Tell me,' lie asked De Valvourgs one
day, ' are those enemies, — or that enemy
your servant spoke of one day to us —
much to be feared ?'

The one enemy I know of need not
have been feared in ordinary times,
but now of course all is changed, and
every kind of evil may be expected. You
know, I am the son of the only sister of my
uncle, but his father was one of a large
family, and if I died there would be many
to claim the inheritance. My uncle often
spoke to me of the trouble it would have
been to him if I had not come into the
world; for he never took to those relatives.
One of them, a cousin of mine,
mortally offended him. I was young
then, and very hot-tempered, as you can
imagine, and having witnessed his insulting
manner towards my uncle in a certain
emergency, I followed him and asked him

to go back and apologise ; and the end
was — well, he received the thrashing
Thurio spoke of.'

And that man lives ?'

He is not dead, to my knowledge.'

And he lives where ?'

He lives — why, yes, he lives close to us
at Cahors.'

Rohan de Carnoet looked grave.

I suppose he would know of your
being here ?'

No, I should not think he would ; my
uncle is not likely to have told him ; and
unless Thurio chattered -'

Thurio may have boasted of your good
luck. Does he know these people who
would profit by your death ?'

Oh, dear, yes ! he has known them all
his life.'

Would he be on his guard with them ?'

Yes ; but we southerners are not always

watchful over our tongues ; they
often run away with our good judgment.
Besides, I never hid myself

'They would not injure Thurio?'
I think not ; why should they ?'
If he told anyone of your anxiety to
hear from your uncle, they might rely on
your coming, if they prevented him from

returning to you — and then But all

this is a very imaginary scheme of evil-doing
which I suppose we really have no
right to indulge in. It is sufficient, however,
to me to know these things in order to see
that you are not safe when once in Provence.
Thurio's delay speaks for itself, and
only increases the importance of your
uncle's discreet note. It is my belief that
you can do no good, and that perhaps
your uncle may now be — dying or even —

dead '

Oh, no, no ! dead without a word tome

! It is impossible, De Carnoet, impossible
! He was very fond of me ; I was his child
of adoption, the son of his beloved sister;
he would have sent me a word to say that
he was ill. He cannot be dead ; it is monstrous
to me to think of it. It cannot be
that I should never see him. De Carnoet,
I wish to Heaven you had not said this !'

But you know it is only a supposition ;
I know nothing about it, no more than
you do yourself, but we are bound to look
on all sides in this time of anxiety.'

Yes — for her sake ; but for her, nothing
would keep me here now. For her sake I
try to still my conscience, although it is
often difficult '

Then you Avill wait for Thurio's return,
or for news ?'

I will wait,' the young chevalier replied.
But he was dejected and sad.

A man of warm affection, with a lively

conscience and imagination, it was hard
for him to be so tried ; but De Carnoet
knew what now would have to be guarded
against — his rushing madly away from
them some day unknown to them all, and
thereby increasing the danger of losing his
life.

They were all seated one afternoon by a
huge fire, talking quietly and listening to
the howling wind outside, when a servant
came in and said that a man of foreign
appearance had just been brought by a
peasant to the gates ; he came from Provence,
he said. The man was there — would
Monsieur le Chevalier see him ?

See him !' In a moment De Valvourgs
had started to his feet. ' See him ! of
course, of course, but where?' he went on,
turning to his friends.

Here, here — bring him here at once,
Mathieu.'

Ah, I shall hear at last !' cried the
young chevalier, in an ecstacy of surprise
and joy.

But his face turned pale with disappointment
as the stranger was brought
before him, for he was not one of those
people he had known at Cahors, but a
dark-looking man with black, piercing
eyes, thick mouth, and lowering brows.

Who sent you here ?' De Valvourgs
asked him.

'My master, who is watching by the
bedside of Monsieur le Comte de Cahors.'

Watching ! My uncle in bed ! He is
ill, then ? — Speak ! What is your message ?
Who is your master ? What is the matter
with my uncle ?'

'My master is Monsieur Robert de
Cahors.'

Monsieur Robert de Cahors ! I do not

remember the name of Robert. It is
strange. Where is it he lives ?'

With the comte now ; he lived till
lately in the south of the Gironde.'

And now at — Cahors ! How long has
he been there ?'

For five weeks.'

Five weeks ! Then Thurio must have
seen him.'

Who is Thurio ?'

My servant. Were you there with
your master all the time ?'

1 was.'

And you did not see anyone coming
from me to my uncle ?'

No one.'

The chevalier, astonished and distressed
went on,

What is it you have to tell me ?'

Only this : that Monsieur le Comte
wants to see you before he dies.'

Before — he dies ! Then he is very ill ?
Have you seen him T

'No.'

Never ?'

Never.*

'What is he ill of? Have you any
idea?'

I am not sure.'

When did you leave Cahors ?'

About twelve days ago.'

Twelve days, and you did not see
Thurio at Cahors?' Then, turning to
his friends in his distress, 'What shall
I do ? Advise me. Shall I go at
once r'

But the comte, seated away from the
glow of the fire, which lighted up in fitful
rays the messenger's features and gave
them a strange expression of restlessness,
asked the man,

Do you bring any sign or any proof so

that we may believe your message to be
true and coming from the Comte de
Cahors?'

• Believe my message to be true !' exclaimed
the man, with a laugh, ' that you
may do as you please ; it is not an easy
matter to travel in these days, and many
were asked to come before me who refused.
I accepted, because the reward was better
to me than my life, as it happened ; but
now I have done what I was asked to do,
and I shall leave you at once.'

What ! Do you mean to say that you
came on an errand of such importance
without any token to prove the truth of
your assertions, without a written word,
were it only, " Come," and a signature ?
Do you mean to say that we must believe
the first-comer so ? I suppose you know
that if travelling is difficult for such as you,
it is almost impossible for Monsieur le

Chevalier? And yet he is to go thus —
on the strength of a verbal message?'

Monsieur le Chevalier is free to do ashe
pleases.'

Can you not tell us more, — give us some
particulars that would help to make the
thing more reliable? You knoAv that
every man values his own life ; surely
you would not ask any friend of
yours to risk his life thus? How do
you know that the Comte de Cahors is ill?
You have not seen him, you say; then
what post do you fill at Cahors, may I
ask ?'

A dark frown came on the man's
face.

The post I fill has nothing to do withall
this. But that the comte is ill I know,
because my master told me, and because I
have seen the doctor go once or twice
every day.'

Once or twice every day !' cried the
chevalier, ' and that twelve days ago.
Good heavens ! then he may be dying ; he
may be dead.'

'I did not mean every day exactly,
but once or twice a day for a few days.'

'- How many ?'

• Three days, I think.'

And that was twelve days ago ? Are
you returning at once ? Would you take
me with you, and help me to reach Cahors
in safety?'

The man stared at him, and then said,

'It is a strange thing that you ask
there, Monsieur le Chevalier ; but though
I am a poor man I value my life too. What
price would you jay for the risk your
presence would make me run ?'

Ah ! truly everything must be a question
of price with you,' interrupted the
comte. ' Is your master rich?'

The man moved restlessly away from the
light of the fire ; then replied, in a sullen
tone,

'Yes, very rich.'

Richer than I am, perhaps ?'

The man eyed him sharply to try and
guess if there was any hidden meaning in
the words uttered, and did not answer at
once. The comte repeated his question :

Is he richer than I am. do you think ?'

'How am I to know?'

By what is offered to you. If you tell
me how much this journey was paid to
you, I may judge what I could give a
trusted servant for the same service.'

He is rich, but he is not generous,'
replied the man, eyeing the comte all the
time.

'Well, I am rich and generous; name
your sum and enter my service. AVill you
do that ?'

'Enter your service to do what?'

'First, to travel with Monsieur le Chevalier.
Name your price — but only to be
paid when he is safe at Cahors.'

Comte,' interrupted the chevalier, ' I
will find my way, I '

Hush ! let me secure this good fellow's
services first ; then we will see what you
can do. Do you, accept my proposal?
Speak, how much do you want?'

The man laughed a queer, cunning
laugh, and said :

You are deep, Monsieur le Comte, but
some men there are in the world who have
to be deep every day of their life in order
to taste bread, and you will not catch
me. I will neither go with Monsieur le
Chevalier nor betray my master to you,
were you even more generous than you
say.'

Perhaps the reward offered you already

VOL. II. C

for your services is above what I could
give,' replied the comte, changing the
tone oi bonhomie he had adopted till then,
and speaking more sternly and haughtily.
'When a fortune, a large one, is at stake,
and only the life of a man between it and
those who want it, the generosity of a
third person must be great indeed to make
the covetous relinquish it.'

A wicked look came over the man's face.

And in that neither shall you catch
me ; in my country we do not catch flies
With vinegar.'

Then your message is a false message
you acknowledge that?'

What ! what do you say ? False ! my
message — why ? AVhat makes you say
that? It is as true as that I am alive. I
swear it on my mother's head — I have
delivered it as it was given to me.'

As it was given to you. Then there

remains to know who gave it, and for what
motives.'

My master gave it ; I know nothing of
his motives.'

Are you quite sure ?'

What would be his motives ? He is
taking care of a dying old man who wants to
see a nephew he loved more than anybody
else in the world ; and he sends me to
tell that nephew. What, then, can his
motives be, but to please the old man ?
And if he forgot to join some trifling thing
to it to make you believe me — what, I ask
again, what of that ? Is not a nephew
who has been petted and made rich to
come and see the men that have made him
so — when he is sent for, even if he is too
ill to write a letter ?'

I see, with pleasure, that you know
some particulars about the family ; it is

such proofs as these I wanted from you,

o2

to see if you really came from Cahors.
Do you know any of those nephews or
cousins that were not made rich by the
comte?'

My master ' and then he stopped

as if afraid of saying something wrong.

Your master is one, you would say.
Well, it is praiseworthy of him to be so
considerate and kind, for, if I am told
the truth, he will get nothing of this
fortune.'

'• Oh, will he not ?' And the expression
of the man's face betrayed him, and even
the chevalier, who in his grief-was ready
to believe everything, caught that flitting,
cunning smile. There was a moment of
silence.

My man,' went on the comte, ' I am
afraid I have not been civil to you ; you
must be hungry and thirsty, and after such
a long and anxious journey must want rest ;

vnll you go with my servant? he will
attend to you to-night.'

No ; I shall not stop here to-night, I
must go back. I shall sleep in the next
town, it will be so much gained on my
journey back,'

I am sorry you refuse my hospitality,
but sou may go. Good-evening.'

The man seemed embarrassed, and asked
at lasts

Will Monsieur le Chevalier go to
Cahors ?'

What can that be to you ? You have
delivered your message for which you
were paid, or will be paid — Avhat else do
you require?'

I must take back an answer to my
master.'

You shall have no answer to take back.'

'But, sir, I have to bring an answer
back ; I cannot go like this.'

You shall have no answer to such an*
untrustworthy communication. Give us
proofs of what you say, and then shall
you have an answer, but not before.'

^ I have no proofs,' cried the man, getting
angry, 'and if a nephew that has
been made rich cannot take the trouble of
coming to see his dying uncle, so much
the worse ; I wash my hands of him.
It is shameful, — it is abominable ; he does
not deserve his uncle's fortune to be
his. I am going, and glad to go, too.
Good-night.'

And the man, in his fury, looked for the
door first one way and then another
till the chevalier himself opened it for
him. As he passed, he said between his
teeth,

'No, not worthy of such a fortune, a
coward, a downright coward, who can't
even risk a journey for it.'

A painful silence fell upon all after the
man's departure, each was busy with his
OAvn thoughts and his own fears. It was
Renee who spoke first.

Chevalier, that man is not trustworthy
; do not believe him.'

No, I am afraid he is not ; but one can
gather this from what he said : that my
uncle's life is in peril.'

Why,' asked the comte, ^ should we
speak of what the man said he believed ?'

I did not mean that he was ill, but that
he was in the hands of villains.'

Your fortune may be, De Yalvourgs,
but not your uncle. If villains had had
any power over him, you would have
received some proofs to make you goto
him ; they evidently have not forced
him to write to you. I believe there
is something wrong, but it is not his
life they want, but yours. It would not

serve their ends if he were the only one to
die, if I understand aright.'

The only one !' cried the chevalier.
But how do you know I am not the only
one left now, or that it is not in the power
of those villains to have it so ? I will go ;
I must see for myself. I cannot bear this
suspense and anxiety any more. De Carnoet,
you may be right ; perhaps my uncle
is no more. But what, then ? How did
he die ? See what happened to the Marquis
de L 's property — am I a ruined

man also ? Renee ! Oh ! Renee, how can
I hesitate to go and clear up this mystery ?
I must ; for I have no right to you, if
if I am ruined. Better for me to die a
quick death ; for now I could not live
away from you all : to lose Renee would
be death to me, a slow, lingering death.
You must bear with me, I must go. Say,
dear Renee, is it not right I should ?'

She went to him with extended hands
and a sweet, sympathising face.

No, chevalier, you shall not go. Did
I not tell you before there was enough
money for both, if we lived in peace here,
and were you not willing lately it should
be so ? Let us live in peace then — in less
than three years now we shall have plenty
and do not leave me. News will come
in time, if you wait. Do not leave me.'

He seized her hand and carried it to his
lips, and tears came to his eyes.

Leave you ! leave you ! Ah, God knows
how little I wish to leave you — but — but,
Renee, duty is there, I fear — duty to you
as well as to the old man from whom 1
hold everything — even the delight of knowing
you. Renee, was not that villain right
am I not a coward?'

Coward is a misplaced word here,' said
the comte, quietly. ' We all know that

your hesitation has nothing to do with
cowardice ; life is a gift we all have to
treasure, for it is given to us but once ; and
some lives are so bound up with the happiness
of others, that to risk them wantonly
would be to act as an unfeeling coward.
But this is not the question that ought
to trouble us ; common people will use
strong words, we have nothing to do
with such. Our consideration should be
whether it is possible to apply to anyone
for news, or if another man cannot be
sent.'

'Yes, another can be sent,' exclaimed
Rohan ; ' and that is the only solution I
can see to this difficulty.'

But that man, who shall it be ?'

• I will go.'

'You!'

Yes, you will trust me ; you know that
I shall do all that can be done ; that I

shall be quiet and prudent for your sake —
for the sake of all ; and I think a servant
unless it be one like Thurio, who knows
all about his master — could not manage to
get at the truth so easily as a gentleman
would. De Valvourgs, you will give me all
possible information, and I feel sure I can
manage to be back here in a short time.
At all events, I shall take some one with
me, in order to send you news in case of
delay. All my plans are ready in my head,
and I long to go. I will start at once, and
try to trace that fellow as far as the next
town. I will take horses — and shall overtake
him on his way; he did not notice
me, I know ; I never spoke. I shall
follow him unknown to himself. It is all
settled in my mind. — Therefore, now let us
be up and doing, and let everyone help me
to get ready,' he added, cheerfully.

My dear Rohan ' began the comte.

You shall never expose your life forme,'
cried De Valvourgs ; ' I will not allow
such a sacrifice.'

Sacrifice ! And who would miss me
if anything happened to me? While
you '

AYe should all miss you,' the comtesse
exclaimed.

Renee said nothing, something had
struck cold to her heart ; and a sense of
helplessness fell upon her ; she remembered

that her cousin De L had said to her

once, ' In case of trouble, Rohan it is who
must take care of you all ; Rohan who
must stop with you and help the comte.'
Though she had never spoken to anyone
about it, she had reckoned on him inwardly
; she knew that, if anything happened,
soldiers or mob must be kept away, for
that it might kill her aunt to have to face
them again. She knew that the peasants

waited but for the "word from Rohan.
Must he go, then, and leave them ? True,
it was for the chevalier's sake, and she
ought to feel thankful.

But, Renee,' said the chevalier, ' you
do not speak ; tell him that he makes
a mistake, and that it is my duty to go
not his.'

She hesitated ; and then said, not looking
at either of the young men, but going
to her aunt and kneeling down by her,

If — if anything happened here — if we
were attacked, we must '

We must die,' exclaimed her aunt.

No, no, dear aunt, not die ; but '

Only you want your friends to be round
you,' interrupted the chevalier, quickly,
and Rohan is a host in himself here ; I
could not replace him ; — you all know that
as well as I do. My dear Rohan, you will
stop here ; it is decided, your place is hereby

our friends as plainly as mine is by my
uncle ; and I am going. I felt sure Renee
would know best. Only, Rohan, I must
not adopt your plan ; instead of following
that man, I mean to avoid him ; and my
belief is that we exaggerate the dangers I
may run. We have grown timid at hearing
of so many things unheard of before.
That a man cannot travel in France without
being arrested and put to death, is to

my mind '

Oh ! chevalier,' cried Renee, starting
lip pale and agitated, ' do not go, not now,
not after what I have said — not when you
decide because of what I have said. Do
sou not see that, if anything happened to
you, your blood would be upon my head ?
Save me from this fearful responsibility
and remorse. It is like my having pronounced
your sentence of death. I did
not intend it — I had no idea of it. I cannot,

cannot let you go — now less than ever.
Leave, oli ! leave your uncle's life in God's
hands, and give up all thoughts of your
fortune — I do not want your fortune, weare
rich without it. — You will listen tome,
will you not, and yield to me ?' Then,
tears coming to her eyes, ' You must,' she
repeated. ' Am I not your affianced bride ?'

And she hid her face in her hands and
wept bitterly.

Renee, Renee,' said the chevalier,
much distressed, ' what can I do ; I did
not mean to bring any such sorrow to
you '

'• Listen, listen !' cried the comte, suddenly,
and a faint, weak echo of the
Marseillaise ' came to them.

Rushing to the windows they saw a
man with a hurdy-gurdy and a monkey
in the coui^-cThonneiir ; the servants were
laughing at the monkey's pranks while

he played the hated tune. The man,
seeing; them at the windows, took off his
cap with a great flourish ; the chevalier
hesitated but one moment, then cried :

It is Thurio !'

Ah, saved, saved! Oh, God, I thank
thee !' murmured Renee to herself, her
hands pressed tightly on her bosom in
deep gratitude.

CHAPTER 11.

It was Tliurio. He rushed upstairs without
waiting for the servant to announce
him, burst unceremoniously into the room,
crying,

I am back, I am back, Monsieur le
Chevalier !'

And with the most extravagant gestures
of delight, falling on his knees before his
master — hurdy-gurdy, monkey, and all, he
seized one of his hands and kissed it, while
the tears ran down his cheeks.

'I am back, I am back !' he repeated.

^ My good fellow, my good fellow, get

VOL. II. I)

lip, get up ; let us hear what it is you
have to say. Get wp, my good man ; getup
now !' the chevalier kept on saying,
himself greatly moved.

Just then the monkey, perched on the
man's shoulder, began to agitate his arms
so wildly and shake his head at his master
so vehemently, that in that moment of
excitement the pent-up feelings of emotion
burst forth in peals of laughter.
Thurio rose to his feet, nodded friendlily
at his monkey as if well pleased with him,
took him on his left arm and began to
admonish him solemnly.

You are in good company now, sir,' he
said to him, ' and must be on your best
behaviour and put on your best manners ;
not those of the tavern, sir, not those of
the tavern !'

But the monkey, imitating his every
gesture, shook his little fist closer and

closer to this masters face, and moved
his little head up and down as if impatient
of the lecture. Thurio went
on :

You clever little fellow, you dear little
beast. Doesn't he well understand all that
is said to him then? I wouldn't part
with him for anything now, that I
wouldn't !'

The sight of that strong man, whom they
knew to be brave and dauntless, with his
swarthy cheeks still wet with tears of affection
for his master, and showing his kind
heart even with his monkey, was not
devoid of a certain pathos that touched
deeply those who, but a short while since,
were in such sad anxiety.

Ah, my lord, you little know what he
is, and what he can do ; if I were to tell
you '

But the chevalier, fearing one of his

D 2

long-divided sjDeeclies, interrupted him
quickly, saying,

You will tell us all about him soon, I
am sure we shall all be very glad to hear
how clever he is ; but my uncle, Thurio,
what about my uncle, what news have you
of him?'

'He is well, very well.'

Well ?'

That is, no, — he is ill. But what I
mean is that he is well, in good hands,
that is, good as long as it lasts. There is
nothing to fear so far, nothing so long as
you live, my dear master. They won't
let him die before you, if they can
help it. He is well cared for, indeed
he is ; it is you who are in the way, —
who always were in the way. But the
difficulty I had in reaching' him! Fortunately
the first thing that happened
to me on leaving here was that I got

into prison. — All through my fine manners,
Monsieur le Chevalier; yes, I
very nearly paid for my fine manners
with my neck; — not that they would
have been paid too dearly, coming from
you, Monsieur le Chevalier, but I knew
my duty did not lie that way, and that I
had better keep my neck for a time at least.
So I cried to the officials : " You make a
strange mistake, I am no lord at all ; that
ring — I had put on your ring. Monsieur
le Chevalier, just to have it safe — that
ring I bought for nothing of a dying aristocrat."
You go to Tortoise and ask for a
poor farmer there and see if he had not a
son once — a good-for-nothing son, Monsieur
le Chevalier; but you made me what I am,
for which I am thankful to you ; and my
father he had made me what I was, and to
my being his son I owe my escape, for
which I am very thankful to him also.

Then I bought this monkey and hurdy-gurdy
and the man's papers all in a lump,
for the poor wretch was in prison for steal-ins:
a loaf of bread, — and how Ions; he will
remain there no one knows, though the
prisons are full enough, to be sure, with his
betters. But his papers suited my appearance,
and he was most anxious about his
monkey ; so I paid him well, you may be
sure, and I hope he has got out of prison
by this time. But at Cahors they would
not let me go in ; they would not hear me
when 1 first presented myself as a friend ;
they would not believe that I could be a

friend of the honoured comte, they

So I had to devise all kinds of things;
but days passed away and I could do
nothing ; then I grcAv fearfully angry,
and ashamed too for having no better
success, and said to myself, "You should
have let your neck go, since you are not

clever enoiigli to use your head for your
master's service.

I knew that Monsieur le Conte was
ill, for I had seen the doctor go in ; I
had followed him on his return and tried
to pump him. But he only said, shaking
his head dolefully, " He is ill, he is very
ill." And, when I tried to ask for more
particulars about his illness, he faced
round like a tiger and asked me if I was a
spy, and what I wanted of a man like him,
who, thank heaven, was well enough
known in the place. I had only to ask
all the relatives of his patients that had
died in his hands, I should soon know what
he was, who he was — the first doctor
there. He was not to be spied upon and
asked questions of; if I wanted to know
anything, I was to ask them at the Chateau.
If I was a friend of the Republicans there,
I must be a Republican too ; but he was

not going to be followed ! So I gave him
np ; but the others were just as obdurate
as ever, and I could not imagine where the
comte could be. I tried the servants, but
they were all new to the place, and would
not listen. Those at the Chateau keep
matters close, I can tell you ; they are not
likely to betray themselves ; they '

Who do you mean by " they " ?'

Laurie and Gonzales, and Pietro, and
a number of cousins and nephews and
nieces, — old and young, ugly and pretty,
great and small ; they all surround him,
and never leave him. Ah ! if you knew, if
you only knew how they try to make him
love them and forget you, and make him
write a new will in their favour.'

And is he forgetting me ? Why have I
no news from him, if he can write ?'

Ay, ay. Why, indeed ! Ah ! my poor
master, they will have your life before

long, if they can ; but we won't let them,
that we won't. I don't know how many
kinds of death I have seen you go through
during the last fortnight ; but they will
find we are more clever than they are, —
though they are clever enough. You
must knoAv that they are all devoted to
the powers that be, — all Republicans. It is
to them, to their republicanism, your uncle
owes his life to this day ; he is ill, but not
so much as all that, — not so much as they
make out. And then they make out that he
has gone over to the Republic. You and I
know how that can be ! But the people
there believe it : and you know the comte —
^' Let them, let them," he says ; " it does
no one any harm, if it does no good." Ah !
he is up to all their tricks, I can tell you,
and as clever as ever.'

But why did he not write ?'

He has written. There, wait a little,

my lord, wait a little ;' and the good
fellow, taking hold of his hurdy-gurdy,
unfastened a little hiding-place carefully
managed at the bottom, and drew from it a
letter.

At last ! at last !' cried the chevalier,
seizing it, and opening it with eager and
trembling hands. ^ Do you know the contents
of this letter, Thurio ?'

'Yes, my lord, all by heart; you see I
might have lost my instrument. But I was
determined not to lose my life, and it was
safer I should be able to tell you everything
written down in it ; besides, I can
make things much plainer to you, I fancy,
if you let me help you.'

Is there anything — can I read it aloud
to my friends here, do you think ?'

Oh ! certainly,' and a broad grin came
over his face. ' Now, you be quiet and goon
the instrument there, and sit still, and

listen too, little man,' he added, speaking
to his monkey, who seemed quite willing
to have a nap now. And the chevalier
read as follows :

I will tell you a story. There was
once a man who had fallen amongst
thieves, and clever and sharp ones
they were ; they knew that he did not
carry his purse in his pocket, and therefore
they said : '' Why kill him ? What pleasure
would there be to us in his death ? Nowe
will ransom him, but do it so that
there will be no escape for him." They
therefore invented an easy lie and came to
him. "We love you," they said, " and will
therefore put you under the protection of
a great idol with many heads and many
feet. Say that you worship the idol." — ■
"But I know of no such idol." — "Say all
the same that you worship it, for, if not
you must die."

" Friends," the man cried, " I worship,
I worship the idol with many heads and
still more feet, if it pleases you."

'And noah, that man being helpless in
their hands, they surrounded him and
watched him, and fed him, and put him
to bed, and told him when to awake and
when to go to sleep again. This went on
for many days, till one of the thieves said
to him :

" There is somewhere in the world an
ugly duckling, of which you wished to
make a swan ; send for Jim, so that he
also may worship the great idol, and be
saved."

But the man said : " Not so ; my
ugly duckling is a handsome swan now,
and with strong wings, and he can fly
where he pleases ; and he must fly faraway
to please me."

Then they said : " Should not the swan

come and see you, who were so kind to
him?"

'• Nay, nay," the man said. " He is
free, let him so remain. Why should
there be two prisoners in the same
nest?"

Then the thieves consulted together,,
and said : " We will kill the swan."

But the man who had fallen among thieves
overheard them, and therefore he said to
one who was free to go about : " Run
fast, and tell the swan to fly away north,,
where eggs are ready for him in a nest.
Run fast, and mind he flies quickly, quickly
away, as quickly as his strong wings
can carry him. And tell him that he has
the blessing of the old man who watched
over his growth into a handsome swan ; and
that, as soon as he is gone forth, he must
write or send the trusty messenger they all
love." So ends the story; but the swan

must fly, and fly at once, and not hesitate
at all, — no, not hesitate at all.'

This is my uncle's writing, it is from
him,' said the chevalier, surprised. ' Why
has he so written V

Not to compromise the bearer of the
message, or the swan, or himself, perhaps.'

Yes, yes, I see ; lout why must I fly,
and so quickly ?'

He tells you all about it. The fact
is, my lord, that, as I told you, or was
going to tell you, — I had all the trouble in
the world to get at him, so much of a
prisoner is he, in spite of all the care they
take of him. But Suzon — that is the
monkey, my lord — he can climb and tap
at windows ; so I appeared one day as a
beo;(rar with him, and I sent him to all the
windows I could think of at the Chateau
de Cahors. But I had to persevere even in

this, and at last the curate appeared, and I

took off my hat and bawled out for a

Sou at the top of my voice, and he heard

me and recognised me. But he was far

too clever to say anything about it. He

only displayed a great desire to see the

little creature nearer ; so I got near him one

day — but he was never a moment left alone.

However, it so happens that I can climb,

as well as Suzon. I climbed up, therefore,

at night; and he wrote this, and sent

me away as fast as he could. He is well,

but if you die — as they wish you would,

and say you shall — then must he yield

himself up to them entirely ; then, perhaps,

he will have to die also, to make them rich

all the sooner. So that his life is in your

hands, as it were, l^j making a Republican

of him they saved the property, you see.

But, if you could only be brought to

the scaffold as a suspect, what then?
Who are you now but a nephew, like
some of them? What more ric^ht have
you to the property than they? You see,
they are safe. So, my lord, we must go,
indeed we must; and my joy at seeing
you, and the thought of your danger, and
of going away again ; — of course, you see,
it all upset me when I first came. We
must got ready, for of course T go with you.
Your uncle wishes you to go to England.
The difficulty will be to find a ship
for England. — Pitt they say it is who has
managed to got up a war with France. —
But money will help us. It always does
me. Now we must get ready to go at
once. You must believe what Monsieur
le Comte tells you ; your life and his are
both in peril. It is a common thing in
these days to find rich relatives sent to
the scaffold on the simple accusation of

suspect. Suspect means anything, — above
all, it means death. Come, my lord, get
ready at once.'

But do you not consider me safe here,
Thurio ? I cannot understand it. My
uncle did once.'

Then the man became more and more
serious and earnest, and went on,

'Times are changed, times are changed,
Monsieur le Chevalier. "We are nowhere ;
you do not see a single man of our stamp
anywhere; noblemen and courtiers have
alike disappeared from France. And the
poverty ! and the ugliness of all the doings
of the people ! Oh, monsieur, my
dear master, times are indeed changed!
Those who used to be servants are at
the top of the tree now, but they are
drunk with vanity and pride, and want to
put their former masters under their feet.
And your uncle, Monsieur le Chevalier,

VOL. II. E

he made it look all a joke in that letter of
his ; but it is not a joke for him ; it will go
hard with him if you die, believe me. And
these people here, and your beautiful
betrothed ! Do you fancy that her beauty
Avill save her? My lord, my lord, if you
only had seen what I have seen ! I entreat
you to believe your uncle and follow his
advice. There is nothing of the past left for
us, nothing, nothing, nothing ! Everything
is new, and oh, so bad, so bad ! And — and,
monsieur, we must go at once, too, because
of your friends here.'

I suppose you are right, I feel that you
speak the truth !' and turning to Renee,
You see, it was in my destiny to leave
you,' he said, with a sad smile.

Ah ! but what a difference, chevalier,'
she exclaimed. ' We know now that
where you go you will not be beset with
danger at every step. We know that you

will be among friends — hospitable people
and then, and then — it is not I now,
who send you away ! Forgive me if this
looks selfish in me ; but can you fancy my
feelings now if you had left before Tlairio
came? How could I have borne your
absence ? And, if anything had happened
to you, I must have died of horror and
grief! But now we shall hear from you,
and you will hear from us ; there is constant
communication between England and Brittany.
And you will find many of your
former friends there. We shall all think
of you, and it will be such a blessing to
know that you are safe from all those
people's wicked schemes.'

Yes, but you '

'Ah, fear not, we shall fight it out
here. Has not the whole of La Vendee,
our nearest neighbours, risen ? So shall
we, if need be ; and, with this anxiety the

less on our minds, we shall be all rights
believe me. How long will you want to
rest, Thurio ?'

Rest ! mademoiselle, not one moment.
I don't want to rest at all, I hurried
here full speed. I was so afraid of
anything happening to me, of anybody
coming before me.'

'Ah, by-the-by, some one came from
Provence, a dark-looking man ; do you
know anything about him T

From Cahors ?'

Yes, from the comte, asking Monsieur
le Chevalier to go and see his uncle '

'And — and — would you have gone, my
lord, would you have gone?' asked Thurio^
aghast.

I am afraid I was going.'

Before I returned?'
'Yes, Thurio, yes. The man said he
came from the comte, you see.'

Then — oh, had you gone, I should
never have seen you again — never,
never ! I don't know the man you speak
of, but you can judge now if he came from
Monsieur le Comte — if he was sent by him.
You see now that it was to deceive you

that — that But make haste, Monsieur

le Chevalier ; let us be gone. Even now
he may have betrayed you at the next
town ; even now soldiers may be on their
way to arrest you, or spies about the path
we must follow, for — for you must die,
and that soon, for them to inherit your
possessions — soon, for fear that the idol of
a day may fall, and they lose their chance.
Let us hurry, let us be gone ; your life,
your uncle's, these friends' lives are
risked by your delay. Believe me — believe
me, my dear master, come — come now at
once.'

The man had become so terribly in earnest,

so restless, so excited that the chevalier
was moved at last, and preparations
were made in haste for his departure. But
his heart yearned after Renee. To leave
her whom he might never see again ; to
leave her when he could feel that her affection
for him was increasing daily ; to leave
all the promises of love behind, and go
forth alone and unchecked by the presence
of her who had been his strength and
mainstay of late ; — to leave her he loved !

Renee, oh, Renee, say before I go that
you care for me, — that you will be faithful
to me !' he cried, full of anguish. ' If you
knew how I dread exile away from you ; if
you could but imagine for one moment
what it is to me to part from you, for I
love you with all my soul ! Will you remember
me? Renee, when I am away
will you remember me ? — Never, never
forget me ? I will think of you at every

hour of the day, — every moment of my life !
Oh, that I could take you away with me !
that I could have married you before —
marry you now and take you away with
me ! We could be happy together even
in a foreign land ; I believe that With love
one can be happy anywhere. Comte, if I
stopped to-night, — tomorrow, would it be
possible ? Renee, would you — would you
be my wife now, at once ? Would you ?
Say.'

Chevalier, it is not possible ; it cannot
be !' said the comte.

But if — if you could get everything
ready and I returned to you soon? If
you could let me know, then — then I
would come. Say, Renee, will you think
of this ? Then I would go away cheerfully,
I would even bless this day, I would
look back to it with delight all my life !
Say, Renee, can it not be?'

I will be faithful to you, chevalier,
faithful unto death,' she answered, sadly ;
let us wait for better days.' And, seeing
his deep disappointment, she went on more
tenderly still : ' You will return to me ; no
one knows how soon it may be, and then
then '

Then ?'

Then I will be your wife,' she replied,
in a low voice.

Ah — my wife, my wife ! I shall return,
and you will love me still, and you will
wait for me, and then be my wife indeed !'
And he kissed her forehead and murmured,
God bless you ! God bless you ! — And,
Eolian, I trust her to you, I trust her to
you. You will take care of her, will you
not, and never leave her? You are not
going away ; you will stop here, you are
not going away?' he asked again.

No, I am not going away ; I shall stop

in Brittany whatever happens. I will do
my best for — for your future wife, I pro-raise
you this ; I will protect her to the
best of my power.'

You swear it, Rohan, you swear it ?
you will protect her, whatever happens.'

^ Yes, I swear it to you — to the last drop
of my blood.'

'Rohan , Rohan , take the hand of my — wife
in yours here before me. With her hand
in yours, swear you will be faithful to her, —
faithful to me. You so friendly, so strong,
and so true ; I can leave her under your
care ; we have been friends for a long time
now, and I know she is safe with you.
You will be faithful to her and to me ?'

I shall be faithful, faithful to the end,
fear not !' Rohan replied, almost sternly,
her iino^ers resting; on his for one moment.

Then I will go now ; I have only to
say good-bye to you, comte. Ah, with

what different feelings I entered these
gates once ! How little I knew how I
should be attached to you all some day.
Comtesse, good-bye, good-bye, till I see
you all again.'

Good-bye,' the comtesse repeated, wistfully
looking at him, ' good-bye, till we see
each — other again, see each — other again !'
she went on repeating, and suddenly burst
into tears. ' I shall never, never see
you again, never ! but,' she went on, between
her sobs, ' but you will be happy
some day ; she loves you, she will be faithful
to you ! — Children, ah ! will you remember
me then when I am no more ? But
good-bye, good-bye — God be with you !'

I will return soon, very soon, as soon
as I can ; be comforted. Good-bye, goodbye
to all, good-bye.'

And thus did the young Chevalier de
Valvourgs leave the Chateau de Kerguen-

nec which he was, alas ! never to see again.
Fortunate was it for some of them that
the future was hid from them ! Fortunate
is it that it is hid from us all ! How else
could we be strong, how could we struggle
day by day to attain an object that proves
but a vain shadow when within our reach ?
How meaningless would be the terrible
earnestness of the days of our strength and
youth, and of every hour of our existence !
What inconceivable folly all this travail of
our souls — and yet, and yet, where is the
earnest soul that, looking back, does not
trace an improvement, a good thought, an
acquired knowledge, a moral step in advance,
to this struggle that has proved
vain to attain its object, or whose object
was vanity itself? Yet, the earnest soul
does not regret its past earnestness, does
not regret to have run after vain shadows,
for the path has been made safer

clearer, and more holy from the useless
briars cut down and trodden underfoot.
It is only the sluggard who sees the
lion at every corner of the streets, who
shrinks back into darkness and sinks
into disbelief, uselessness, and despair ; let
us strive on, the reward is sure, though
perhaps not what wee expected it to be !

CHAPTER III.

From the moment that France had declared
war against England, and England had too
readily seized the opportunity of launching
into that struggle of ' armed opinions ' —
that just and necessary war ' according:
to Pitt — France saw the whole of
Europe against her ; and with her frontiers
invaded on the east, an English fleet
in the Channel, an English fleet in the
Mediterranean, and two provinces in arms
on the west, became merely ' a large town
besieged on all sides,' — and her rulers

determined to save the Republic at any cost !
A million of men are called to arms.
"Woe to those shut within that vast camp,
to those considered the most cultured and
refined in France, for there is no room
left for culture and refinement ! Woe to
them ! for are not these who loudly call
for foreign aid, and who fill the enemies'
armies mustering against her, their brethren,
their relatives, and their friends ! Woe
to them ! for who would trust them to
wish well to the Republic that has taken
everything away from them ? Punished for
past sins they must be, for the sins of
their forefathers ! A sad inheritance !

"What was it that had happened to the
inhabitants of Kerguennec? A young
and loveable friend had left them, a young
fiance had left his affianced bride, and she
healthy, well, and strong, with a poetical

nature that delights in her surroundings
of beauty and grandeur, breathed the fresh
pure air ; gave the sun the chance of caressing
her cheeks ; adorned her rooms with
flowers; Hvedinan atmosphere of love and
good-will and gentleness, and of reverence
from all in the village. Did she forget
him who had received her plighted word ?
Oh, no, she thought of him daily, hourly ;
found tokens of his presence everywhere ;
talked of him to her uncle — to the comtesse ;
talked of him with his faithful friend
Rohan de Carnoet. She pitied him for
having been obliged to go away; pitied
him for living away in a foreign land ;
shuddered at the thought that cruel men
had plotted to take away his young and
bright life ; but — he was safe now. He was
safe, and there was satisfaction and comfort
in the thought. He, she had feared to see
die, was safe ! He, she had almost sent

on an errand of death, was safe ! And he
would return some day, yes, he would
return ; but it would be a long time, and
they would all grow old meanwhile, and
the flowers would pass away. — But so
would this reign of terror ; and she would
marry, go into the world with him, see
much society, perhaps a new king and a
new queen. She would bid adieu to the
beloved sea, to the dark rocks, to the soft
greensward. She would bid farewell to
the loving comtesse, so like a mother to
her. Oh ! how sad it would be !

Monsieur Rohan, hoar long do you think
this terrible state of things can last now?'

And Rohan, who knew that she was
thinking of the absent one, said, in his pity
for her,

Not long now, let us hope, not long ;
he will soon return to us ; we shall see his
bright face soon, and hear his joyous

laughter. How thankful we must be that
he is safe !'

Yes ; we cannot be too thankful.'

And I trust he will soon be able to
send us definite news ; and we can then
send him some also. We have boats that
know how to get near the English fleet ;
men who will risk much to help us, and
who can even go and see him ; and we are
very fortunate, after all, are we not ? And
time will pass away quickly, and all will
be right again, and — and you will be happy
then, mademoiselle.'

And Renee did not tell him that lie
felt very happy now, but she involuntarily
sighed. She could scarcely account for it.
She did not know that there was any
reason for it, but she sighed, and he
thought it was because of her sadness.

We should never cease hoping,' he said ;
hope is our main stair in life.'

VOL. II. F

And she, looking up at him as if there
was something else coming, said,

'Yes?'

But he, meeting her inquiring eyes fixed
on his, blushed slightly, and said, looking
away,

Do you not believe in hope ?'

Oh, yes ! oh, yes ! Does not everything
round us speak of it ? Why
should we be the only creatures of God
feeling hopeless? Would it not be ingratitude
?'

And we have so much to be thankful
for.'

We have. Our friends are safe, and
we have escaped so far.'

So far, and will escape still, never fear.'

But I have no fear here near — near our
men : why should I fear?'

Thus did Rohan try to comfort one who
was not sad, speak of hope to one who did

not despair, and of courage to one who
feared nothing. — Yet did they not understand,
for the bright love of one who had
loved them both was still between them
and with them ; and he was never out
of their thoughts, nor his name away from
their lips ; and to speak of him was to remember
past joys had in common, to feel
gratitude for his present safety, and to
hope for the future happiness of all.

One day, as she was alone in the woods,
she suddenly became aware of the presence
of a human being, and, turning round, she
started violently, and found herself face to
face with the man who had come from
alors.

He saw her start, and a conscious smile

came over his face, but she in her heartfelt

the grateful cry, ' He is safe, thank

God, safe.'

Then, as the man looked at her, and did

f2

not speak, her presence of mind returned
to her. What was the man doing there ?
Why had he come to her ? For she felt
sure his presence was no accident.

May I ask what you are doing here ?
These are private grounds, and belong to
the Comte che Kerguennec'

And is it not allowed to walk in the
private grounds of the Comte de Kern
?' he replied, in a tone of half
insolence.

But she replied, simply,

It is not allowed.'

I am sorry, but I thought we Avere
living in a free country in times of freedom
; besides, I saw no notice, how was
I to know this was a forbidden pleasure ?'

Here it is understood to be so.'

But these words, she was aware, had
nothing to do with her thoughts. How
could she ask the man what she longed to

know, — ask him what kept him in Brittany?
ask him what brought him to their neighbourhood
? And, though she felt sure that
he also had something to tell her, she only
said,

Did you not then return to the Comte
de Cahors ?'

Why should I ? my message being
delivered, 1 had nothing else to do with

k.'

Yet you are still here ?'

Yes, I like the place ; it is pretty
enough.'

And you live?'

Oh, somewhere there, yonder, it is
always easy to find hovels for such as I.'

Yonder,' she said, ' among our people ?'

'Whom do you call your people?'

The peasants of the surrounding
villages.'

Not among your people, then.'

Then the thought came to her that
he was a spy ; — there were so many men
about whose trade it was to sell their
fellow-creatures to the revolutionary tribunal.
Had he been watching for the
chevalier ? Why was he still near them ?
Did he not know that he had left Kern
But, as he seemed still unwilling
to speak, she quietly repeated to
him,

You understand now, do you not, that
these are private grounds, — you will not
come here again ?'

And if I did, what then ?' he began,
in a tone of scorn. But suddenly
changing his manner, and coming nearer
to her, he said, hurriedly, ' Yes, I
knew these to be your grounds and
your favourite walk ; I knew that I
should find you here, and I made a point
of meeting you to-day. For I know that

you are Monsieur de Valvourgs' affianced
wife, and I come to render you a service :
spies are on his track

Although she knew that her betrothed
was beyond the reach of his enemies,
although they had even had a message from
himself that it was so, the man spoke with
such a tone of certainty that for a moment
her heart failed her. Had the Chevalier in
his love tried to return to her, and was he
indeed being watched by spies ! But a
momentary reflection told her it was not
possible. What, then, what could be the
man's motives in telling her such a falsehood
?

He stood before her contemplating her,
and taking note of her every movement ; he
had seen her start ; he had seen the spasm
of pain that had passed over her face ; he
saw now that she was calm again, and
he went on.

His hiding-place is as yet only known
to me. Tell him to remain where he is ;
tell him that I am a friend, and only
anxious for him to go to Cahors ; that I
will help him ; that I regret I did not doit
before. Will you do so ? I will come
ao-ain when I know that he can leave his
hiding-place in safety ; I will come to you
here some day, at about this time for him ;
will that do ?'

And lie replied mechanically, her mind
full of suspicion and astonishment at this
man's ignorance, or affected ignorance of
the truth, ' Yes, yes.'

I know where he is,' the man went on.
^ He is near the dolmen of Yorick.'

'Ah ! is he?' she said, still wondering.

Will you go to him now, and give him
my message, the assurance of my goodwill.
Only he must not move, not to-day,
you understand.'

Then a kind of intuition came to the
young girl. True, the chevalier was safe,
but could there be somebody else in hiding?
— Where was the cure?' And as the

thought struck her she started Yes,

Monsieur Brevelaye was in hiding, and
very probably there. Then she replied,
quickly,

Thank you, I will, I will tell lira. Let
me go now;' and she was going, when,
turning quickly round : ' But who told
you?'

Oh, I guessed it from what was said
by some of those fellows yonder ; I told
you I live near here. I heard things
about it at the inn that put me on the
scent.'

Some of those fellows,' she repeated.

Yes, spies,' the man replied, darkly.

Ah ! I see. I will go at once.' And
she started, regardless of the man she left

behind, and only following up her apprehension
about the cure. It was evident
now to her that this was a spy bent
upon sending the chevalier to Cahors,
in order to further the success of his
enemies' scheme, and that, in watching
for him as he had watched for her, and
seeing he was no longer at the Chateau,
he might have detected Loik looking after
his brother. But the man could have
nothing to do with the cure. It must
be immaterial to him whether Monsieur
Brevelaye was in hiding or not. It was,
however, of the utmost importance that
Loik should be put on his guard. She therefore
did not go to the dolmen, near which
she knew of no hiding-place, but straight
to Loik's cottage.

Once at the door, however, and before
entering, some instinct made her turn
round, and she caught sight in the distance

of the man who had folloAvecl her, and was
now disappearing quickly. Her heart misgave
her. Had she been wrong in coming ?
She hesitated on the threshold, but she
knew it was too late now, and, rushing in,
she cried,

Loik ! Loik ! are you here ? Quick ;
listen.'

liOik came from his bed at her cry.
He looked haggard and worn, his eyes
were hollow and brilliant with feverishness.
His life had been terrible of late,
for he knew that he was being closely
watched. An immense pity rose in her
towards lira, but she had no time to
lose.

^ Loik, where is your brother ?' she asked.
Is he near the dolmen of Yorick?'

Loik started violently, though he knew
her to be a staunch friend; but before he
could speak she added,

If SO, this retreat is discovered, I fear.'
'Holy Virgin! he is there!' he cried
out ; and, without saying another word,
in a few long strides he reached the door.
Here, however, he paused, opened it quietly,
looked round for a while like one
unconcerned, made a false start to put
anyone on a wrong scent, and then went
straight on at full speed. He had only
just disappeared from sight, when he suddenly
uttered a fearful cry, like some wild
animal wounded to death. He had fallen
headlong into an ambush, and, when Renee
rushed to find out what had happened, she
was only just in time to see the last efforts
of the poor peasant to wrench himself from
the grasp of his captors.

She wrung her hands in horror at the
sight, for she felt she had fallen into some
snare. Was that spy bent on having the
cure also ?

Then slave had betrayed both him and
Lo'ik !

The thought flashed through her brain
that she could still save the cur, and she
rushed impulsively forward, but as quickly
came the conviction that she would be
followed, and arrested, and that all three
would be lost.

The soldiers were making Loik walk
towards the dolmen. What could she do ?
Run to the Chateau and fetch help ? but
to what purpose? Rohan was not there,
she knew ; the servants were not armed ;
it was simply bringing death to her uncle
and aunt. No, there was nothing to be
done ; but though she experienced a feeling
of dismay at finding herself alone, knowing
such men to be near, she could not take
herself away from the far-ofl* sight of that
patrol of soldiers dragging poor Loik forward
to betray his brother's retreat.

Loik, lie knew, had rather die. What
then ? Would not that spy come back to
her as one knowing of the hiding-place ? She
did not know ; but would they believe her ?
A movement of fear made her rush away
from the sight of the soldiers as if to hide
herself; then she stopped — better wait for
her fate than bring more sorrow to others.
At that moment a man ran quickly past
her, and said, in Breton,

'Do not weep ; he is safe.'

Weep ! She felt her face and kncAv then
that she had wept, unknowingly; but,
sitting: down where she had found herself,
she burst out in a fit of crying, which
was comfort and relief to her — the cure
was saved !

Then the thought of helping Loik with
a word urged her on again ; but as she was
walking, she saw the spy coming to her,
and then she regretted she had not

fled before. She stood still, waiting
for him.

That peasant does not speak French, it
seems, but I know you speak Breton ; you
must come therefore and act as interpreter,'
he said, coldly, to her.

God ! what shall I do !' the poor girl
cried aloud.

You must come ; you have no choice,'
he went on. ' Come with me.'

With you ! No !' she cried out, in
sudden repulsion, ' do not come near me, a

traitor, a

Keep all these sweet things for another
occasion ; believe me it is time lost,' he
replied, scornfully. ' Come, or '

Then she knew that she was in his
hands ; she needed not to be told what his
threatening meant — in those days when
the first lady in the kingdom was in prison
awaiting her doom, and hundreds of lovely

girls were dying on the scafFold — there
was no need for him to say more. She
followed him, thinking how other tender
women had been roughly handled by such
as he, — thinking of the ignominy of that
death to deserve which it was sufficient to
be high-born.

'They reached the soldiers. Loik, with
his two hands bound behind him, his head
bent down on his chest, his long hair falling
over his face, stood near the dolmen
of past ages.

Quick,' cried the captain, 'tell that dog,
who can't even speak like a Christian, that
unless he tells us at once — at once, do you
hear — where the ci-devant Chevalier de
Valvourgs is, we will shoot him dead hereon
the spot.'

The Chevalier de Yalvourgs !' she exclaimed.
' But he is not in Brittany.
This man here ' — pointing to the spy —

^ came to us, telling us his uncle was dying
at Cahors, in Provence, and wanted to see
him before he died ; and he is gone — he
left that very night.'

Gone !' cried the spy, ' gone !'

Is this the truth ?' asked the captain,
frowning.

It is the truth.'

'How is this? What is this trick you
are playing us, then ?' the captain cried,
sharply, turning round fiercely upon the
man. 'Have you brought us into some
ambush here? What does it all mean ?'

Who is that in hiding close here, then ?'
asked the other, rudely, of Renee, without
answering the soldier.

Who !' she answered, indignantly. ' Do
you ask me who is in hiding here ? How
can I know that there is anybody in hiding
at all ? What are you doing here in these
parts, where all is at peace ? Why do you

VOL. II. G

bring these men here and expose them to
be attacked, and for what? Will you
bring us civil war also ; do you wish us
to rise, as in La Vendee ? Sir — in God's
name, do not listen to that man. He came
to me this morning, and made me believe,
by false words of friendship, that there
was some one in danger here. He deceived
me, and he will deceive you. That peasant
is a harmless, hard-working fellow.'

'What has he been doing about here
then so much of late ? What work has
he to do here in the middle of the night ?'
interrupted the man, violently. And Renee,
in spite of her presence of mind, not knowing
how to reply, turned towards Loik, and
asked him in Breton :

'Tell me what to answer him, Loik?'

Then Loik. raising his head, replied, in
Breton, to her :

I was looking for a lost lamb.'

And, as Renee translated his answer, she
went on addressing the captain :

I conjure, I entreat you, let the poor
fellow go. Leave us before the men about
here hear of all this ; do not bring civil
war to us because of that man's false
accusations.'

Tell me, upon your honour, is that
the truth you said about the ci-devant
chevalier ?'

As I believe in God, the chevalier, my
betrothed, left Brittany the same night
that man came to him.'

'Where is your priest?' asked the man.

But the captain's patience was at an
end.

We did not come here for the priest,'
he cried, angrily, ' and have not been
entrapped into this affair for a priest.
Untie that man, and let us see how the
spy will like it and how he will clear 



self of such a bungling business before
the authorities.'

You have no right, no power over me f
the spy cried out, starting aside violently.
I shall make you pay dearly for this I
Here are my orders from the government,'
he went on, throwing a document out of
his pocket on to the ground. ' Cross over
this to me now, if you dare ! But if so
drawing quickly a pistol out of his pocket,
if so — she dies "first,' he ended, with a cry
of rage, pointing his pistol at Renee.

Renee, one moment overwhelmed by
surprise, had had time neither to cry out
nor move, before Loik, free now, had seized
the man's hand from behind, and, whether
accidentally or not, the pistol, turned close
towards the man's face, went ois and blew
half his head away, and he fell like a log
at Lo'ik's feet.

Then a ferocious contempt seized the
peasant.

Spy, coward !' lie cried, in this native
language, and with his foot spurned away
the body that had fallen almost upon him.

Let it be,' said the officer, ' I wash my
hands of this business. I am sick of following
spies and acting the spy with them !
A nice path to glory, forsooth !'

Then, calling out to his men, the small
patrol united and walked away, not even
giving a second look to the dead man
they were leaving behind. Renee hesitated
what to do, but Loik, bending down
quickly, picked up the spy's pistol and
looked with savage hatred at the ghastly
corpse.

Just then some one appeared from
behind the dolmen, and Renee started on
recognising Monsieur Brevelaye. It was
some time since she had seen him, and she
was struck by his appearance and the
strong resemblance be had to his brother.

He had allowed this hair to grow, and but
for his coarse and short priestly garment,
spoilt now by contact with wet earth, and
much torn, — would have looked like a
common peasant.

Loik, pistol in hand, looked at him With
the usual look of reverence and love ; and
his face lighted up with a sense of success.

^ You are safe,' he said, bending his head
before him.

Yes, the saints be praised ! But go
you quickly after these men, and see that
nothing happens to them ; the officer
behaved well ; I will look after this man.'

He is past looking after,' replied Loik,
with a smile of fierce hate that contrasted
strangely with the look that had just been
on his face.

He is gone to another world at a fearful
moment,' the priest replied. ^ But go,'
raising his hand as if to bless, ^ go, and the

Holy Virgin be with you ! Mademoiselle
he said, turning to Renee, ' I trembled and
prayed for you, let us rejoice that you are
safe. Shall I accompany you to the
Chateau ?'

No, there is no need ; I am not far
thank you.'

I shall be glad to hear you are safe at
home.'

I shall soon be ; you need not fear.'

And Renee went away, walking quickly ;
and, as she thought of those at home, an
immense longing seized her to know that
they were still living in peace together ;
that no threatening hand had been near
them. Oh ! to see the smile of love on
their faces, to hear their words of love ;
oh, to see them all, to see them all once
more ! And suddenly, as if realising at
last the danger she had run ; as thoughts
of imprisonment and even death flashed

before her, she fled away, running fast
and wildly, and only felt safe when Within
the gates of the Chateau.

It was barely two hours since she had
left for a walk that morning in perfect
peace of mind, but these two hours had
left their mark of anguish on her face ;
and, as she was hastily crossing the hall
to 2:0 to her room, she met Rohan of all
others, who, facing her, started, shocked
at the sight ; and as she stood, panting
for breath before him, unable to speak,
cried,

Good God ! what has happened to you ?'

Hush, say nothing here ; I will tell
you. My aunt must not hear. I — I —
Come with me. Yes, you had better know,
but you only. Come.'

And she passed quickly into an adjoining
room, and, standing by the door as if
to keep anyone from interrupting them,

she gasped out the story of her morning
adventure. Then seeing him turn deadly
pale, seeing him tremble before her with
inward emotion, she regretted having so
spoken out ; told herself she had been very
unguarded, and would almost have asked
him to forgive her, when Rohan de Carnoet,
able to speak at last, exclaimed,

You have gone through this ! You !
you have been insulted and threatened —

that man's pistol Oh, Renee !' — The

name escaped his lips like a sob. — ' Renee,
and I was not there — there, near you !
That man — where is he ? Dead, you say
but are you sure ? I must see him.'

'Yes, he is dead. Do not trouble about
him, and let us hope we shall hear no
more of this.'

But Rohan looked at her, and only
repeated :

Fired at you ! and I was not there.'

Monsieur de Carnoet,' she said to him,
ill her low, tender voice, ' it is past ; do
not think of it any more. Let me go now
and rest awhile, for all the traces of that
fright to disappear before I see my aunt.
Do not take it so to heart.'

But — but I cannot be always near you,
and if — if such a thing were to happen

again, if Good Heaven ! what am I

to do ? — If the chevalier '

Ah, we shall not tell him,' she interrupted
quickly, ' and the thing will
not happen twice, believe me. Why,
Monsieur de Carnoet, must I now comfort
you ? I should have thought I Alas the
one to be comforted.'

Yes, yes, forgive me. I feel stunned.
To think that such a thing could happen
here — to you, in your own home — your
friends close at hand ! To think that I

was on my way here while you were
exposed to — death !'

'But I am not dead, and you must
really try and comfort me, Monsieur
Rohan !'

Forgive me,' he said again, ' I cannot
speak. I can only admire you for your
courage, for — for '

'For being here.'

Yes, yes. But you must provide
against such things ; you must be armed in
future. You must knoAv how to defend
yourself. To be in such danger, and helpless,
utterly helpless !'

*Now, now. Monsieur Rohan, you are
upset and do not know what you say. Do
you really imagine that, if I had had a
pistol, I should have fired at that man?
Why, I should have been as bad ashe.'


'No, no, it would have been in self-defence!
You must be made secure
against such dastardly attempts. You
must not trifle with your life ; your life
does not belong to you, but to those who
love you. Your life belongs now to Monsieur
de Valvourgs. Your death would be
his death. I — what would he say to me?
How would he consider I had kept my
promise — my sacred promise to him ? No,
you must do all you can to make yourself
independent of such events — such attacks.
You must promise me — you are rash, you
should have returned here at once, and
not have gone to Loik ; you should '

Nay, nay, do you forget that Loik and
his brother are now safe? Do you not
rejoice ?'

Oh, you are right ; I shall never know
how to admire you enough. I do not
know when I shall learn to know you as

you deserve. I learn it every day. But
now you will yield in this, you will go
armed ? Remember my promise to De
Valvourgs, remember my promise and my
responsibility — how great they are.'

Well, well, I will — yes, to please you, I
will learn to use a pistol and go armed
in the woods, like some brigand of old ;
now, will that satisfy you ?'

Thank you,' he said, simply. And they
separated.

As Renee, in her room at last, was going
over the events of the morning, she thought
of one thing only — the way Rohan de
Carnoet had received her news. She told
herself that his love was as tender as a
brother's — but still she felt her heart beat
and her cheek grow red. She moved about
her room quietly, taking a new knowledge
of her surroundings. Unconsciously she
looked at herself in the glass, dreaming

before her own fair face, and wondered
that a man so brave should have been
so disturbed, that so courageous a man
should almost have wept.

CHAPTER IV.

'What will mademoiselle wear this evening
?' asked Renee's maid, breaking in
upon her dreams, as, seated in a deep
arm-chair, she forgot the flight of time.

The young girl raised her head, and
replied, with a happy smile on her lips,

To-night I shall wear the dress of my
jianqailles.''

Ah ! mademoiselle is right.'

A kind of reaction had set in. To the
momentary dread of death which Renee
had experienced, the happiness and glory
of life had returned. On that day when
death had been so near, she rejoiced more

than ever in earth and sky, in lover and
friends, and in her own loveliness. Suddenly,
and for the first time, a sense of
her own beauty had burst upon her. — And
this image was to follow her throughout
her life ; come to her when she had known
the power of beauty, and when she had
that beauty no more ; but never again as
it had come to her on that day, never
again with the same fulness of heart and
innocency of a noble and fresh girlhood.
The consciousness also that the happiness
of other lives depended on her, thrilled
her with joy, and for the first time she
adorned herself for others ! Was she not
right to rejoice? she asked herself; and
who more than she on that day when God
had shown such mercy to her.

As to the threats of wicked men, these
she could despise or provide against.
Rohan was riirht : she would learn to

defend herself; she would, if need be,
call around her all the tenants of her
estate ; she would be at their head, and
defy, if not the whole power of France —
even as that Breton duchess had done
once — at least the detachments of Bleus
sent now and then to make a display of
their power, and try their hand at governing
them ! Why should she and those
she loved be led to death like sheep to
the slaughter? What right had those
from Paris to interfere with them ? Yes,
if these men, with whom they had nothing
in common, came, she would resist —
resist to the last ; if need be, defend herself
as a man would defend himself — as
Rohan de Carnoet would defend her —
would defend his own mother. Yes, she
would protect herself and her invalid aunt,
and ensure her against the revolting sight
of those men they all hated ! — Full of

VOL. II. H

these thoughts, she came forward that
evening surrounded by an atmosphere of
youth and defiance.

But to Rohan her presence brought a
pain that shot through his heart. In contrast
with her supreme delight in life, hei*
universal good-will, her perfect freedom
from second thoughts, a horrible dread of
her death came over him, a more definite
feeling of her unconscious tenderness to him,
the beginning of misgivings too terrible to
contemplate — and which the dress she wore
only served to bring more surely home to
him.

On that day, which she had spent in a
dreamy state, refreshing both to mind and
body, with the prevailing sense of Wellbeing
and the thankfulness of escape ; on
that day when she had attended to her
toilet with care, and for the first time
thought of a harvest of admiration and

smiles, Rohan had taken the most decisive
step in his life, a step fraught with consequences
of the utmost importance to
himself and all around him.

To the feeling of bewilderment and
amazement with which he had listened to
the story of Renee's danger and escape,
had succeeded a kind of frenzy and mad
anger. The more he thought of the outrage
related so simply and almost childishly
to him, the more his indignation
grew ; the more he thought of what her
sufferings might have been, the more he
felt what would be the feelings of all,
if she were now no longer among them ;
and there arose in his heart an all-mastering
desire of avenging her. While in
Renee thoughts of her own defence must
perforce remain dreams, for him they had
a fierce reality.

Rohan found that to lie still and think

h2

would end in despair ; relief could be found
only in action — a blessed relief, an all-restoring
means of balance to bis mind —
and he had not taken one moment's rest
from the time he had parted from her.

But Avhen the evening came, and the
sight of her should have been comfort
and happiness, why did darkness fall
upon him? How was it that the glory
of life seemed gone ? Why did he lie still
under the rush of pain like one lost ?

He dare not rejoice with her ; he dare
not come near her ; he dare not consult
her; for, if his hand met hers, it trembled;
if his eyes met hers, a flood of life rushed
over him ; — and she was his friend's, — the
Chevalier de Yalvourgs' affianced bride.

As he stood there, thinking of his
loneliness and of his dread, one there was
who thought he read his heart, and who
felt for him.

While Renee shone with unusual brilliancy,
Rohan's father, ignorant of the
events of the morning, contrasted painfully
the glorious freedom of Renee with
the gloomy looks of his son. Circumstances
had made him lead a contemplative
life, and the study of his son's
character had been a delight to him.
Thus it was that he had been watching
the growth of the intimacy between
the young people, and that he alone
now feared a dreadful mistake had been
made.

He felt, as he watched Renee that night,
that a deeper womanhood had come over
the girl. There was that in her wish to
shine and to please he had never seen in
her before, — a soft, caressing tenderness
of manner which seemed to look for some
special object, and meanwhile to be cast
abroad for everyone to profit by. She

was free, more free, if anything, than
before with Rohan ; but he shrank from
her advances.

Monsieur che Carnoet wondered if it
would not be better for him to speak to
his son ; if it would not be right to put
him on his guard ; if it would not be right
even to send him to join his friends abroad ?

He felt the delicacy of the task, and
that there was danger in interfering.
But still it was better and safer to
warn him, to advise him, to help him
to take a decision at once. Could anything
be gained in such a case by waiting?
His son, he knew, Avould meet him as a
brave man should, and not hesitate to
tear from his bosom the love that had no
right there. It was a difficult duty, but
honour, as well as the happiness of his
beloved son, demanded it of him.

Rohan,' he said, as they were parting

for the night, ' if you do not mind, come
to me before you go to your room.'

Certainly, sir ;' and they both entered
Monsieur de Carnoet's room.

sit do^vn, sit down, Rohan,' said his
father. ' Let us have a talk together like
old friends, as we have always been ; I am
anxious about you.'

'Anxious! There ia no need, believe
me, sir.'

The two men looked at each other, as
one does when new difficulties or new
thoughts have arisen to break down the
barriers of the past ; when the heart is full,
though as yet the lips have not spoken.
They were much alike — both tall men, with
the same round head, the same dark eyes
full of soft fancies, the same strong chin
and firm mouth speaking of resolution and
dauntless courage ; men who could love
deeply, and who could hate deeply, but to

whom love came more easily than hatred.

Is there no need of anxiety, Rohan ?
I see you engaged in a warfare that may
prove a fierce trouble to you.'

In a moment, Rohan, who had all the,
evening been like one under a spell, found
his energy returning to him, and he spoke
out.

Then you have been told, sir, though I
had asked that no one here should hear of
it. But it is as well that you should hear.
Yes ! yes, it is as well. — And is it not just
and honourable? Is it not our bounden
duty that we who are strong should unite
to protect the weak?' — Carried away by
his own eagerness and never noticing his
father's surprise, he went on : 'Is it not
outrageous to think that those dearest to
US are to be carried off at the will of the
first miscreant, — threatened with loss of life
loss of life by the most abject ? If the

sacredness of our homes is to be trampled
underfoot, are we to look on and standstill
? Indeed ! indeed !' he added, clenching
his hands, ' had I had the command of men
able to fight, however few, I would have
gone forward ; I would have, for such a
dastardly outrage . . . . '

Rohan,' interrupted his father, ' what
has happened ? What are you alluding
to?'

'Do you not know?' cried Rohan, in
surprise. ' Did you not hear what made
me call our villagers round me, and organise
them for the defence of those we love ?
This fierce trouble, this warfare you spoke
of — do you not know what called it forth ?
Surely, sir, you must have known that
only a most powerful motive could have
made me act as I have done. I am
fully aware, believe me, of the importance
of the step. But tell me, do you not

know of the wrong inflicted upon Renee —
upon Mademoiselle de Kerguennec? Do
you not know that she was approached by
a vile spy ; spoken to, made to run the risk
of betraying Monsieur Brevelaye's hiding-place,
and of delivering him into the hands
of his enemies? She was insulted and
threatened with death, and that too here !
here ! — at a few yards from her father's
home, close to those who love her, close
to those bound to guard her and watch
over her. Do you not know that to
a mere chance she owes her life and
is still among us? And you speak of
warfare — why, sir, I shall give even to my
last drop of blood to avenge this outrage ;
yes, I would have gone had it been the
meanest of our peasant-women, I . . . .
But fear not, for alas ! all we can do is
to keep on the defensive ; all we can dois
to protect, to form a living defence

round our homes. I have no intention of
fighting for any other cause ; I will raise
no standard, fight neither for king nor
kindred of kings, only — only for the safety
of our homes. Our men are justly indignant
and angry, and will bear no
more ; Monsieur Brevelaye they mean to
have when they like and in full daylight.
Our forefathers fought for the independence
of Brittany ; we, their poor descendants
will fight for defenceless women and
priests ! These we will watch over ; these
we have resolved to guard from evil, and
we will die rather than yield ! We '

Rohan, I knew nothing of all this ;
tell me what it is that happened to Renee.
I gather enough to understand your indignation
and approve your measures ; but
tell me everything.'

And Rohan began to tell his father,
starting off now and then in his indignation,

moved by honourable anger and unconscious
love. Monsieur de Carnoet
listened in silence. No need was there
now for the father to ask if his son loved
Renee de Kerguennec ; every word, every
movement told him the fact. But he saw
that Rohan knew not as yet of the depth
of his love. Was it worth while telling
him? worth while to open his eyes altogether
? — He feared not.

How many men have you got ; what
arms, what ammunition have you ?'

'Do not think me mad to hope to avenge
a wrong with so few men ; do not laugh at
us — it seems, indeed, a mockery of justice
to fight on its side with such means. It is
a desperate struggle, I know ; but do not
despise us because we are so few ; valour
will make up for numbers. We are but
fifty men as yet ; still fifty men can do
much ; there is everything to urge them

on — love and religion and respect of their
masters. It is not as in former times,
when a Du Guesclin could command arose
and powerful armies even to fight with the
king of France ; but our enemies will have
yet to reckon with us, will have yet to passover
our bodies ere they reach you, my
mother, those at Kerguennec, her I have
sworn to defend and protect.'

Could Monsieur de Carnoet now ask
his son to leave Brittany in order to save
himself from sorrow ? Alas ! there was no
help for it ; the brave heart must struggle
against its own pain and trial.

Then a thought struck him.

Rohan, if I understand aright,' he said,
that spy being dead now — that spy benton
entrapping the chevalier — do you not
think that it would be as well to ask De
Valvourgs to return here ?'

Rohan's eyes opened wide upon his

father ; the blood rushed to his face and
back to his heart adam, leaving him deadly-pale.


The chevalier to return here now !' he
repeated.

You do not think he would be safe?'

Safe ! No, I do not think he would be
safe.'

Had he not forgotten the chevalier, had
he not thought himself all sufficient to
avenge his friend's future bride ?
- ^ I thought,' went on the father, ' that it
would be one security the more for those
you have to defend. If Monsieur Breve-laye,
relying upon you, means to live in
broad daylight, why not De Yalvourgs ?
It would at least be one more man, it
would be Renee's natural protector.'

'The chevalier here, now,' repeated Rohan
again — this with a heavy sigh. — 'You
may be right, sir. Yes, it would be one

more man, and we want everybody we
can find to help us. Yes, she might be
safer under his care. But we must consult
Mademoiselle de Kerguennec ; she
might think, like you — she might wish — '
Then, after a pause : ' Father,' he cried,
abruptly, ' I will have no such responsibility
; speak yourself to her, and
arrange it between you. What you do,
I will accept ; but my decision remains
the same. Yes, let him come and take
care of her ; I will stay with my men — be
with them in time of danger — watch over
her and over him, if need be. But see toit
yourself And now I suppose we must
separate. Good-night, sir.'

Their eyes met for one moment ; though
Rohan spoke still of courage — discouragement
was in his tone and face. The
father would not part with his son
thus, and he spoke to him of many

things, spoke to him of former days.
I had never any chance of being brave
like you, Rohan,' he said, ' and naturally
with me bravery is always allied to sorrow.
I can scarcely ever ponder over noble
deeds but I mourn for him who does them.
Those heroic souls who sacrificed themselves
for the sake of others, did they not
feel the sadness of their own self-sacrifice ?
Were not their hearts rent by the thought
of grief and sorrow, even while the deed
was being accomplished ? I fear it is so ;
I fear that the man who gives up his life
for another is fully aware of the greatness
of the sacrifice. He who gives up his
happiness feels the same. No doubt, from
Jesus Christ downwards, self-sacrifice has
been accompanied by a soul's agony. It
is strange that, being called as we are
to great things, this should be our portion
in the fulfilment of an unselfish duty.

But, yet, herein stands our greatest privilege
— herein it is that we differ from the
beasts that perish.'

Then as Rohan said nothing, but looked
like one helpless, although inwardly preparing
himself for the struggle, his father
went on,

Our dear Brittany has never lacked
self-denying and heroic souls; but, Romans
is it not enough for a family — in one century,
at least, — that a husband and father
should have given his life for his fellowmen
? What will this rising of fifty men
bring to you? It is treason, it is rebellion,
it is Pontcalec's fate over again ; it is
death '

'Is it ?' repeated Rohan, dreamily. ' I
am prepared, I am willing.'

But those who love you, my son '

The young man raised his hands with a
deprecatory gesture, and replied,

VOL. IT. I

^ Except for you, sir, and my mother — '
Then, unable to go on thus, 'Father !' he
called out of his poor, struggling heart,
Father, say that I have your consent for
what I have done ; even if I bring sorrow
to your grey hairs, even if I bring sorrow
to my dear mother's loving heart ! Say,
that it is just that a man in the strength
of his manhood should not trifle away his
life when women are insulted, and priests
are tracked like beasts of prey ! Say that I
have your blessing upon my undertaking !
Say that, whatever befalls us, you will not
reproach me even for — even for my death
if it comes ! Your blessing, your assurance
that I have your prayers will be
strength and wisdom and power to me.
Father, say that you approve of what I
have done and am ready to do !'

The father fell on his son's neck — as it
was said of one of old — his hair, that had

become grey because of the much thinking
of his own father's death, mixing with those
of the young man.

If it must be that my son also dies when
fulfilling the noble task of protecting the
weak, let God's will be done ! But if it
be that I am not called to drink of this
cup of bitterness, let God's goodness be
praised !'

Then the two men wrung each other's
hands and separated. And silence fell
over the Chateau ; not one was there who
eared to break it to tell of his anguish to
another. Monsieur de Carnoet, on his
knees, prayed with true Breton faith to
his God and to his saints, crying to them
to muster round his son and keep him from
enemies without and enemies within.

And Renee, whose fictitious happiness
had faded away before the coldness of
Rohan, was tremblingly wondering at

i2

the thoughts that would return, do what
she could to chase them away. — Monsieur
de Carnoet was right, a deeper womanhood
had come over her ; a wider horizon was
opening before her eyes ; things were acquiring
a new meaning, and new responsibilities
were springing up unbidden before
her astonished heart. It was delightful
to live, but that delight might be marred
not only by events from without over
which one could have no control, but
also by feelings that must be kept within
her own heart. She also on her knees
asked for God's guidance and mercy ;
she also, with clasped hands and looks
raised to Heaven, implored the Almighty
Creator of all to help her to be true, to
spare her, to spare him she was bound
to, and to give her strength and courage
to resist temptation. Long she prayed till
calm came, — and with it sleep.

Sleep, sweet maiden, for this night;
thy guardian angel will watch over
thee after thy earnest prayers, and relieve
thy trembling heart. May sleep come
over him also who knows now what he has
to fear near thee ; the blessed sleep from
God, may it rest over all !

CHAPTER V.

The next morning the Comtesse de Kern
was reclining on her couch on the
terrace of the Chateau ; she was profiting
by the exquisite spring weather, and, after
the manner of invalids, it was enough for
her to exist, her eyes looking before her,
her ear catching the familiar sounds, her
hand resting quietly before her.

The sea-breeze had not increased her
strength, but her gentleness and usual
cheerfulness forbade that anyone should
complain. She was the centre where
people met ; the one all-absorbent care of

her husband ; the occasion of a thousand
little deeds of kindness everyone in a
household is the better for. There, near
her couch, before her sweet, resigned face,
it was difficult for the evil passions of
envy, hatred, and malice to exist ; it was
easier for loving hands to join and hearts
to beat in unison.

Renee, dear child, tell me,' she said,
why you brought no flowers yesterday
from the woods ; I was expecting a large
basketful of lilies ; they are out, are they
not ?'

Yes, and I never saw such a quantity,
I never saw anything more beautiful ; one
scarcely knows where to put one's foot
down ; in some parts it is nothing but a
lovely carpet of deep green leaves and
sweet-smelling flowers.'

Yet you brought me none ?'

They will be better still to-day, dear aunt ;

I will smother you with them, you will see.'
Bring some ferns, too ; there are some ?'
Yes, I will go now, if you like.'
Nay, remain here, to sit still and dream,
for the present it seems enough — and to
have you near is so pleasant ; when the
sun gets a little warmer I shall go in, and
you then can go — the more fresh air you
get the better for your rosy cheeks. How
I remember this time of year here !
Comte, do you remember our first coming
to see Renee's father just after our
marriage ? How lovely the woods were —
just as you describe them, Renee ; what a
delightful visit it was, and how very happy
I felt ; how we roamed in those woods, they
were so exquisite after the town.'

But you are still happy, dearest ?' asked
the comte, soothingly ; ' you are still
happy though this tiresome weakness will
not leave you ?'

Happy ! oh, yes, very happy near you,
happy even in spite of weakness ; so do not
sorrow for my sake. This is an oasis in a
desert land, is it not ?' she added, with a
loving smile, looking up to his face.

An oasis in a land delivered up to wild
beasts, indeed it is.'

But they will not come here, so faraway
from any town T

Far away enough from their civilisation,
thank Heaven !'

Yes, and I feel such a sense of security
and peace ; it is so good to be here alone
as it were with God, nature, and those dear
to us.'

It certainly does not seem much to ask
to wish only to be left in peace.'

Renee, busy at her embroidery frame,
her head bent over the flowers opening
under her fingers, did not say anything.
They little knew how near sorrow had

been to them. But at that moment Monsieur
de Carnoet, who had been reading,
or looking at a book as if reading, came
near her.

Renee,' he said, ' come with me, we will
go and gather the lilies you want to
smother your aunt with. T should like
a walk.'

With pleasure,' replied Renee.

And, her head covered with a wide-brimmed
hat, a large basket in her hand,
and dressed in a simple plain girlish dress,
Renee was soon ready.

To which wood shall we go ?' asked
Monsieur de Carnoet, as soon as they
were alone. 'To the wood close to the
village ?'

Oh, no, not there !' And then, as if
afraid of having shown too much eagerness
in her refusal, she added, 'The lilies
are less lovely there.'

But Monsieur de Carnoet went on,

why, you are not afraid to-day, and
with me?'

She turned round quickly to look at him.

Renee, I know everything, and I think
Rohan was ri|]jht to tell me ; it would
not do for us all to be left, like the
comte, in ignorance of such an important
matter ; I even question the wisdom of
keeping it from your uncle, although we
all know the comtesse must hear nothing.
He is not likely to tell her.'

Monsieur Rohan told you ?'

Yes, and, moreover, you ought to
know that the villagers have revolted at
last and mean to be free.'

Free ?'

They mean to fight, if need be.'

Fight ! why, they have no arms !'

Some must be found ; we must see
what we can do. But it would be much

better if the comte knew ; he would help
us.'

Yes — well, you can tell him ; if we are
to resist in case of attack, we had better all
be united ; but what will your son do in
this ? Will he be at the head of our men ?
I always thought it would end so.' Then,
sighing deeply, ' It will be a desperate
struggle, I fear.'

But you do not object to it, you '

^ No,' she replied, calmly, 'I do not ; on
the contrary, I will do my best to help in
anything I can ; I acknowledge to no one
the right of taking my life away. But it
will be terrible, terrible ! and we are so
few.'

We shall find allies ; my men will join
yours, for one thing; we must not shrink
from consequences now — it is too late. I
felt sure you would think like him that
such things cannot be borne tamely ; we

must unite ; I am ready to act under his
orders, but we are few indeed to lead
our men in case of the struggle prolonging
itself — I wish we had also the Chevalier
de Yalvourgs.'

'Oh ! no ! no !' exclaimed Renee, quickly,
no, he must not come ; we are enough
without him. We must do without him.'

Monsieur de Carnoet looked at her
searchingly", and she blushed under his
gaze.

If you knew,' she went on, excitable,
if you knew what I feel, — how very, very
thankful I was to know that he was out
of the reach of that vile spy ! — the relief,
the thankfulness ! You can scarcely know
what it was.'

Yes, but the spy is no more, and surely
the plans of those bent on injuring him
must now be all broken up. Also, since
we mean to resist, and protect Monsieur

Brevelaye and you weaker ones, we can
look after him also. Besides, he is brave,
and would be a great acquisition to our
little band of devoted men ; moreover,
Renee, he is your natural protector.'

I had rather die than call him back to
protect me,' she said, firmly.

• Yet he would not thank you, Renee,
for having died and taken away from him
all that makes life worth anything.'

'Men can always comfort themselves,'
she replied, sadly. Then suddenly : ' Is
it by the advice of your son, Monsieur de
Carnoet, that you speak to me of calling
back the chevalier to us ? I am astonished
indeed ' — seeing a look of acquiescence
on Monsieur de Carnoet's face — 'for, like
me, he had understood the danger of his
being here. But does he also want him to
come ?'

I believe he does.'

It is strange,' she said, looking dreamily
away. ' It cannot be because he wants his
help. I should not think he would doubt
his own courage; and I should have thought
he felt himself sufficient without the chevalier
to '

He does not doubt his own courage ;
but tell me if, at the head of our little
band, he is engaged fighting, for instance ;
and you, meanwhile, at the Chateau are
exposed to harm, what could he do ?'

We must learn to defend ourselves,
then. Yes, my uncle must be told. I
will tell him, if you like. Perhaps it will
be as well I should do so myself; and we
must all be prepared to sell our lives
dearly. But do you think those men will
return ?'

I believe they will.'

What makes you think so ?'

They know the way, for one thing ; and,

if that spy was of any importance, they
will avenge his death.'

I do not think he was ; the captain
behaved as if he despised him as he
deserved.'

Yes, the captain ; soldiers have their
own ideas of honour, and it is a mean
thing for a soldier to come and lie in wait
for anyone. I was glad to hear there
were such men as he left in France. But
the interest of the soldier is not that of a
government, whatever that government
is, and they may wish to see further into
this affair. Who took the commission
Rohan told me the man threw on the
ground ?'

Lo'ik did ; he took it up at the same
time as his pistol.'

Ah, I should like to see it ; will you
come at once to Loik ?'

'And the lilies?'

We will send some of the women to
gather them. Come to Lo'ik and let us
see what this warrant was ; it may
guide us, and show us whether we are
wrong to wish for the chevalier to return
or not.'

'You are certainly wrong,' replied
Eenee, ' but let it be as you like since you
think we require his help ; I give way, do
as you wish.'

And she walked on, seemingly careless
of the fate of either men, but vexed at
heart, though of a vexation she could not
have explained to herself. The chevalier
was safe out of the hands of his enemies ;
what was the use of bringing him back
where his life would be in danger? And,
if Rohan wanted his help, why had he
not spoken to her and explained how it
was he had so changed his mind. True
woman that she was, those little particular.

IT K

lars occupied her more than the rising
of the peasants itself. The outcome of
it all was, that she felt miserable and
unhappy.

When they reached the village, however,
an unusual sight arrested them. The
door of the church, that had been closed
for nearly two years, stood wide open ; men,
women, and children were pressing in —
women with tears running down their
faces, children with wondering looks, and
men stern and impassible.

No bell had called them to the service,
and this they missed sadly, but the great
silence helped to make the ceremony they
were going to, a more impressive one still.
For they were about to hear mass again
in their church, not because permission
had been given them from Paris to re-open
its doors ; not because it had been granted
to them to hear their beloved priest in

peace ; but because they had forced those
doors open on their own responsibility ;
because the men were about to ask God to
bless their arms and their efforts to protect
themselves from the rulers that tyrannised
over them. Each man within those walls
where no one had prayed for so long — each
man there who bent the knee before the
altar so poorly decorated, was offering up his
life in exchange for the safety of his little
ones, his wife, his priest, and his seigneur.

Did you know of this ?' murmured
Renee. ' Did you bring me here on
purpose ?'

No, I did not. What will you do ?

Do ! Follow them ; I am glad and
proud of their courage.'

I will go with you.'

At their approach, the crowd opened

before them.

Bless you, bless you, mam'zelle ! Bless

k2

you, monsieur !' was heard on every side y
as she entered the church among them.

She sav Rohan standing by the altar,
dressed in the Breton dress, and Monsieur
Brevelaye in his priestly garments,
his hands folded before him, and looking
at the crowd pressing on. And when
everyone was in, standing there before him,

My dear brethren,' he said, ' you all
know the importance of the step you have
taken ; you all knoAv that we have separated
ourselves from the rulers in France ;
but, unless we ask God and His holy angels
to guide us and watch over us, we shall
succeed in nothing. Let us all pray,
therefore, to the Almighty for His guidance
and His help, and for His blessing upon
our doings.'

Then, going aside, he began saying the
mass before the kneeling croAvd devoutly
answering and crossings themselves in true

abasement of soul before their Omnipotent
Creator and God, and His multitude of
angels guarding round His throne.

Then Monsieur Brevelaye went to the
pulpit to preach. But as the peasant-priest
looked at the poor people, his own
people, assembled there ; as he remembered
their love and devotion to him, and
thought of the trials before them, he felt
for one moment overcome ; and, seeing his
emotion, they bowed down their heads
and wept aloud. Then at last he spoke to
them with the eloquence of an overflowing
heart • he spoke to them of future trials ; —
and of future joys, but these only after
they had reached Heaven ; joys they knew
little of at any time ; joys they were to
expect less than ever now, but in Heaven
at last there would be joy. And, having
finished his sermon, admonished them and
comforted them, he said,

Brethren, now let us separate in peace
and faith, and in parting let us sing
the canticle of " Paradise," where I
hope some day all here shall meet again
together.'

And the people began with him and
sang as follows :

Jesus ! bow great is the happiness of souls when before

their God and loved by Him !
I find that time is short, and light our troubles, while

thinking night and day of the glory of Paradise.
When I raise my eyes towards Heaven, towards

Heaven my fatherland, I would I could fly

there like a dove.
When comes the hour of death, then shall I leave this

painful flesh, the enemy of Jesus.
I long with joy for the last passage, I long to see

Jesus, my true Spouse.
As soon as my chains are broken, I shall rise to

Heaven like the lark ;
I shall pass by the moon ; 1 shall tread under foot

the sun and the stars.

When I am far from earth, this vale of tears, then

shall I look back towards my country, my

Basse-Bretagne ;
Then shall I say : Farewell to thee, my country,

farewell to thee, place of suffering and painful

burdens ;
Farewell, poverty; farewell, affliction ; farewell, troubles
; farewell, sins !
I shall no longer fear the evil spirit ; now that the

hour of my death is past, I shall no longer fear

to be lost.
Like a wrecked ship my body has taken me here, in

spite of wind and rain and freezing fog ;
Oh, death ! thou art the porter which opens to me

the castle on the rocks of which the waves have

broken my ship, —
On whatever side I turn, all I see will fill my eyes

and my heart with a thousand delights :
I shall see the doors of Paradise open expecting me,

and the holy saints waiting to receive me.
I shall be received in the palace of the holy Trinity,

in the midst of honours and of harmonies ;
And there truly shall I see God the Father, with His

Son and Holy Spirit.

I shall see Jesus with a look of tenderness place

on my head a beautiful crown.
Your bodies are happy," Jesus will say, ** they were

treasures hidden in holy ground.
You are in my court like white rose-trees and lilies ;

or may-trees in the angle of a garden ;
You are in my Paradise like rose-trees which lose

their flowers when the time comes, but bloom

again."
For light sufferings, for short anguish, we shall be

greatly rewarded by God, our true father.
She will be lovely to see, the blessed Virgin, with the

twelve stars which form her diadem.
We shall see also the legions of angels and archangels
who sing the praises of God, harps in

their hands night and day ;
We shall see also, full of glory and grace, our fathers

and mothers, our brethren, the men of our

country ;
Virgins of all ages, holy women of all conditions,

women and widows crowned by God.
Choirs of cherubim carried on their small wings, so

sweet and pretty, fly above our heads ;
Fly above our heads, like a swarm of sweet-smelling
and harmonious bees in a field of flowers.

O, unequalled delight ! while I think of thee, I love
thee ! thou comforts my heart in the pains of
this life'*

The singing ceased, and the priest, having
pronounced his blessing, men and
women left the church in silence.

Renee and Monsieur de Carnoet stood
by the door, resolved to show the people
that they were of one mind with them,
Renee saying many a good word to the
saddest, the poorest, or the most fearful
ones ; and they looked at her as on the
face of an angel.

Then Monsieur Brevelaye and Rohan
followed, but Renee and Rohan's eyes did
not meet.

It is finished, you see, mademoiselle,'

Translated from the Breton into French by Monsieur
de la Villemarque.

he said at last. ' There is no looking
back now.'

It is well,' she replied. ' Better so ;
those poor people cannot do without
prayer.'

They have nothing else,' replied Monsieur
Brevelaye, ' but their noble courage
to endure.'

Monsieur le Cure,' Renee said, ' we
have agreed, Monsieur de Carnoet and myself,
that it were better my uncle should
know of the disposition of the people. ^
Would it not be as well if you came with
us to the Chateau ?'

I will do as you think best. Yes, it is
well Monsieur le Comte should be told by
any one of us able to explain matters ; he
might gather rumours of these doings, and
be angry.'

He might,' replied Monsieur de Carnoet,
'be very angry that it should have been

done without his knowledge, were it not for
the danger his niece ran yesterday. Go
therefore to him without hesitation. Yet
you must be careful for the comtesse's
sake. I want to speak to Lo'ik ; do not
wait for me.'

At that moment two little girls brought
the basket full of lilies to Renee, and as she
took them and their sweet freshness rose
to her, she bent her face down over the
flowers and her lips touched them. ' Sweet,
sweet flowers that grow so pure in the
shade,' she murmured Ioav to herself — -
'may I be ever like you.' And thus
loaded, she reappeared, graceful and smiling,
before her aunt, who, stretching out
her hands to receive them, cried with
gratitude and delight :

Ah ! this is just as it was when we
first came here : nothing is changed, nothing,
neither the lilies nor our love, comte !^

The comte came near lier, and kissed
Iter forehead ; then, being told of the visit
of Monsieur Brevelaye, left his wife to the
enjoyment of her sweet-smelling gift.

Great was the surprise and distress of
Comte de Kerguennec on hearing of the
events that had taken place, and of which
he had been kept in ignorance.

your wish to spare the comtesse, I
understand,' he cried, almost angrily, to
the priest and Rohan, ' but that such a
thing happening to my niece should be
hid from me ! Do you all forget that she
is dearer to me than a daughter ! Dear
for her own sake, dear for the sake of my
brother who when dying entrusted her to
my care.'

Then he paused, and, carrying his hand
to his head :

Good Heaven !' he exclaimed, ' that we
should have come to this ! That our

beloved ones should be in such peril
within the sight of their own gates ! That
those men should dare, dare to approach
them, and threaten them here, close to us !
My dear friends,' he added, with a burst
of indignation, 'have we grown so weak
and effeminate that we cannot avenge
ourselves? You are right, Rohan, you
are right. Let us fight it out, let
us see if the dastardly crew can resist
the old nobility of France ! Arms our
villagers shall have, and I will be
with them and with you. I should
have gone — yes, I should have left
France, had the health of the comtesse
allowed ; but, since it is not possible
since I am here, and since the villains
come to defy and insult us, I will
even join those who fight for God, for
home, and for royalty.' Then, turning to
Monsieur Brevelaye : ^ I would, Monsieur

le Cure, you had told me of your officiating
in the church to-day ; I wish I had
known it so that, like Rohan, I might have
stood by the altar, and, like you, called on
my people to reverence God and to fight for
liberty. I had almost forgotten that outrage
at L , when my poor, sick wife's

bed was searched by the miserable tools of
our infamous government ; the thought of
my cousin's safety being then uppermost
in my mind, I did not kill the first that
dared to approach her, but I will still
have my revenge ; only, poor, poor wife —
ah ! may she be spared, while we who are
strong, fight ; even the anxiety of the
thing would prove above her strength.
But Renee, our brave Renee is here still,
still among us. Heaven be thanked ! She
will give her aunt strength — Renee, our
brave Renee, will help us.'

At that moment Monsieur de Carnoet
joined them.

I hold a precious document here he
said ; * had I been told of such things, I
would not have believed it. Just listen.'

And he read how 'The undersigned' — here
followed full name and description — ' was entitled
to the services of the army to pursue
and seize and apprehend — First : any man,
woman, or child suspected of keeping up a
correspondence with the emigres abroad ;
Secondly : being an emigre returned to
France ; Thirdly : any priest not having
sworn allegiance to the Constitution.' Then
special instructions were given that he was
to bring to the Revolutionary Tribunal the
ci-devant Chevalier de Yalvourgs, who, for
divers offences, had deserved the last penalty
of the law. Every citizen was to lend his
help in any way and whenever he might be

required, or to be punished with death for
treason to the Republic.

They stood aghast before this monstrous
power f^iven into the hands of one man.
Why ! that man alone had had power to
send hundreds of his fellow-creatures to
the scaffold ; and he had been near them,
and had had Renee in his power !

But for his death, but for his death —
what might not have happened? These
men of Kero-uennec looked at each other

o

speechless.

Then the comte murmured a deep 'Thank
God,' and their hands clasped each other ina
strong, determined grasp.

Long live the king !' at last cried Monsieur
de Carnoet ; ' let us look to him to
bring back right and justice.'

Down with the Republic !' cried the
comte, lifting up his arm towards heaven.

Down with all cowards and traitors
cried Rohan.

And Monsieur Brevelaye, stretching his
hand over the document, exclaimed :

Power of the wicked, in the name of
God and all His angels, we defy thee.'

We defy thee,' they all repeated.

When, some time afterwards, the thought
of Renee and her aunt brought them to
the drawing-room, they found the comtesse
still as pleased as a child with her
flowers. She had made small bunches for
them, and, calling the gentlemen near her,
said,

Now, my pi^eux chevaliers come and
let me adorn your button-holes with the
emblem of simplicity and innocence.'

And they submitted to be adorned by
her hands, even the cure. The comte
then cried out :

VOL. II. L

'And thus are we still chevaliers of the
white cockade, and by the white cockade
shall we stand.'

The comtesse laughed happily ; but
Renee felt her heart beat, for she understood
the comte's meaning;.

To please her aunt, she sand; old songs
of royalty, and, to comply with her present
fancy, they all affected to mimic the stateliness
of a court, to pay homage to her as
to a queen. As she lay back, tired after
her unwonted exertions, but still in the
full enjoyment of the hour : -

My brave knights,' she said, ' I dismiss
you, but remember that every
chevalier must be true to God, woman,
and country.'

And they came playfully and bowed the
knee before her.

True, we swear to you, we shall be ;'
and in their hearts registered the vow.

Before separating, the comte found
means to say to his niece :

Renee, I know everything, and 1 am
proud of your courage.'

CHAPTER VI.

Proud of her courage ? What was it she
had done ? Was it then what men called
courage to speak the truth, and follow one's
will according to the impulse of the moment?
Then courage was but a small
thing ! By dint of thinking what might
have happened ; by dint of calling to mind
that pistol and the ghastly sight of the
man on the ground, Renee told herself it
would require what she had thought
to be courage to go through the ordeal
again ; to willingly go into the woods with
the thought of meeting him ; to accompany

him and to speak out as she had
spoken. But did men call ignorance of
the consequences of one's actions courage ?
And she sighed as she pondered.

For there loomed vaguely before her a
different kind of courage; a Avoman's
portion, something that differed from a
sudden volition of purpose ; an abiding,
inward strength that would be needed
every day and at every hour of the day,
and which must be hid from the sight of
men.

She felt lonely : she missed the chevalier's
bright looks and ever flowing talk ;
she missed his devoted care and love ; — she
missed his constant talk about Rohan de
Carnoet. The charm of a former friendship
had gone with him, and the soft hours
of the past seemed now to be, as far as
Rohan was concerned, like an idle tale.

Rohan was not often at the Chateau

now, and when there, to talk of light
things with her and the comtesse was irksome
to him. This she could see, and she
told herself that no doubt the more serious
thoughts that must now be his were in too
strong a contrast to that soft trifling of
former days. Ought she to blame him ?
Would it not be more worthy of her if she
shared such serious thoughts and put away,
like him, all longing for the joys that were
gone, as it seemed, never to return ?

Had the chevalier been near now, asking
her to be his wife, she fancied she would
have married him — so much did she feel
the want of laying her hand on a strong
arm ; of resting her head upon a manly
bosom ; of ridding herself of the depression
of spirits preying upon her. Why
not call him back and share his fate ?
But this she could not do. Uncertain
and perplexed, instinct told her she had

better go through this phase of her existence
alone.

The beautiful spring weather had been
followed by stormy and cold days. The
slate coloured, high-crested waves rolled
angrily under a leaden sky, and lashed
themselves into fury against the rocky
shore like the distant roar of cannon.
Large logs of wood, the remains of some
poor wrecked ship, lay tossed about by
the merciless waves, while a mass of
sea-gulls rejoiced in the storm and turmoil.
As she paced up and down on a
lower terrace of the castle, her face exposed
to the spray from the sea, which
now and then reached her, she wondered
if to the delightful spring of her life
there would come likewise a time of storms
and darkness.

Nothingmore lovely than the sight on fine
days from this raised headland; nothing

more terrible when the sea was at its
worst. The calm sea, with its tints of
azure or green or shadowy purple, losing
itself in the far-off horizon, with its ever-changing
boundaries ; the glory of sunsets
and their cortege of glowing colours ; the
white foam of the gentle waves lapping the
polished granite rock ; the solitude and
peace ; what a contrast with the boiling
surf at her feet, the horizon so near, and
the hovering sky touching the raging
billows whose thundering blows shook the
earth !

Had the ancestor who first besran the

o

castle, chosen this spot when the sea looked
at its best, or when the tempest broke
wildly against the promontory's rocky
sides? Was his mind animated by a
desire for peace away from the vanities of
the world, or was he driven there by angry
passions ?

Probably he Alas a fierce warrior, for the
oldest part of the castle was that where
dungeons and subterranean passages and
subterranean escapes were built. Those
times must have been terrible indeed when
such ways of defence and escape, and such
dark and dreadful dungeons, were, as it
were, accessories of life.

In the picture-gallery she often had
contemplated the faces of her ancestors ;
she had traced easily there the warlike
and defiant brow that could brook no nay ;
the determined mouth that spoke of an
indomitable will. Was she indeed the
descendant of such as these ? Why so
weak, then, at the first hour of trial?
Why so desponding? Had she inherited
the mildness noticed in the sweet faces of
the women of her house? Had the obedience
of centuries to their stern lords and
masters fallen upon her — a heritage of

patience, submission, and resignation ?

But as she tried to read her own heart
she found there both the will to resist and
the will to submit ; both the longing to
act and the longing to dream ; both the
inclination to hate and the inclination to
love. Yes, she could, she also, prepare
herself for war, but oh ! for the sweet converse
of love and the sweet days of peace !

Degenerated blood ? Was it true that,
after Louis XL and after Richelieu had
crushed the warlike nobility of France;
after Louis XIV. and XV. had demoralized
it in their Courts, that they had lacked
courage and wisdom to meet with the
troubles of the Revolution — that they had
called forth this very Revolution by their
vices ? So their enemies said.

Was she also one of those degenerate
souls ? She, who longed for soft words and
laughter, — for a life gliding smoothly in

pleasant places ; she, avIio blamed the one
ready to sacrifice his life for others ; blamed
him only because he no longer cared for
the sweet intercourse of friendship ; because
his look no longer met hers ; because his
smile no longer answered hers about
trifling things as it was wont to do ? How
was it she could not rise to the occasion,
go to him fearlessly as in the past, never
calculating the effect of her words upon
him, of his upon her, — join him in his new
pursuits, and prepare herself for war?
She could not. — He was cold and distant,
even as dien he first returned from Paris,
even as when, as a matter of course, he
had made room for the chevalier and
effaced himself.

He had never cared for her ! As long
as his friend had been there, friendship
for him had proved the attraction that
had kept him among them ; now the

chevalier was gone, he kept away. And he
it was who had asked for his return ; he
who knew of the perils of such a step !

Well, no, his friend would not return.
Not as long as it was in her power to keep
him away. She would not have Rohan de
Carnoet live altogether again with them ;
again, as he had done before, because of
the chevalier being there. Since he
wished to keep away, nothing should there
be to attract him.

Ought he not to have known that she
felt lonely in the chevalier's absence?
Ought he not to have been tender towards
the forsaken bride-elect? He had never
thought of her ; he had never considered
her pleasure ; — to please his friend he had
been charming, — his friend gone, he was
dull and morose. Since the unforeseen
event of the spy, he had been worse,
perhaps because of his anxiety towards

them all; but in former times he would
have spoken of his anxiety, and they would
all have acted with a common accord.

He did not care, he had never cared
for her ! — Then a flush would come over
her face. Why did she think so much of
Rohan de Carnoet ? And her heart beat
violently. ' Courage,' her uncle had called
her speaking fearlessly to the spy, from
whom she feared nothing; Avould it not
require more courage to hide her troubled
thoughts — more courage to hide the growing
anger at Rohan's cold and unfeeling
behaviour ?

Poor Renee, had it come to this ? Perhaps
she was not so very much to blame.
How could she realize Rohan de Carnoet's
anxiety about the civil war that he would
soon join in inciting ; realize the strong resolves
he had need of, to remain true to
himself and to his friend. No, he could

HO longer lend himself to the playful attentions
of an innocent friendship, and
must avoid the snare of close companionship.
But who could tell Renee what all
this cost him ?

However, it was once more as it always
is in love. While she was wholly the pi'ey
of her love, he was able now and then to
forget her and give himself body and
soul to the calls upon him from without.

He had his anxieties, and not the least
of these was to make himself one with his
men. The young chief was perhaps too
inclined to think of war as a display of
battle-fields and re ovular skirmishes ; he
could scarcely forbear from looking forward
to deeds of glory, and honourable
and straightforward fis^htino^ in the full
light of day.

Instead of this, what kind of war was
this going on in Brittany even at that

moment? A certain number of men from
different villages, or parishes, clustered
together, took the law into their own
hands, and being the weakest, and badly
armed, engaged in a savage guerilla
warfare.

For Rohan, this lying in wait, these
sudden and unexpected attacks, like the
spring of the tiger upon its victims ; this
seizing of the coach upon the highway
because of it being known to contain a
few guns or money, was most repulsive ;
yet would it be his duty to encourage it !
He had already tried his best to prevent
these murderous, treacherous assaults, but
his remarks had not been welcome, and he
knew it.

One day, for instance, as he was going
through a village he saw a number of
villagers, in a great state of excitement,
clustering closely round one of themselves,

and more agitated than was their wont.
Coming near, he saw that one of the men
was exhibiting a new gun, and that all,
in their eagerness and their hunger after
arms, were loud in their admiration of
the gun and of its possessor.

Rohan, having looked at it, said,

Why, Pierre, how did you come by
this gun ?' And the man, who knew pretty
well the objection of Rohan to their way
of fighting, exclaimed quickly,

It was quite fair, sir. quite fair.' Buta
side-glance at his friends did not escape
the young man.

Tell me,' he said, almost angrily.

'Well, sir, it was like this. I went to
sell my geese at the next market town.
On entering the gate, I noticed a sentinel
there. A lonely spot — I said to myself, a
lonely spot. And, sir, will you believe me,
while people were handling my geese, and

bargaining, and speaking of their being fat
or not, I could think of nothing else — it is
a lonely spot, I said all the time to myself

That looks very much like temptation
Pierre.'

^ I thought it inspiration, sir.'

'Well?'

Well, on my coming back I had to pass
the spot again, and it looked that lonely !
that lonely ! And '

Go on.'

It was quite fair, sir. He was armed,
the sentinel was, and I was not. He was
a strong man, but I was stronger ; and I
carried off the prize.'

There was a murmur of admiration at
these words, and a new handling of the
much-coveted gun. Rohan tried to hide
what he felt, and only said,

Poor fellow ! he was killed for that, no
doubt.'

VOL. ir. M

Killed ! of course, sir. We were two
men and only one gun. He would have
shot me, if I had not killed him. It was
quite fair, sir, quite fair.'

Fair ! But your first attack of him,
Pierre ?'

The man, noticing the tone of disapproval,
changed at once. His brows
hovered, and he replied,

Soldiers come to us in large numbers,
and attack us unarmed and butcher us !
Is that fair of them ?'

The men looked at each other, perfectly
satisfied with their companion's answer ;
and, seeing the embarrassment on Rohan's
face, smiled at each other, as if to say — he
had him there ! The man added :

Sir, we shall do nothing that is not
fair, but arms we must have.'

Yes, arms we must have,' they cried,

fiercely in chorus. ' Must we be slaughtered
because we have no arms?'

We shall soon have some ; be patient,
my men, we shall soon have some.'

So we shall, if only they come this way
and attack us.'

The villagers' wish was granted more
promptly than they expected. Rohan and
everyone who knew of the spy's death had
been wondering that nothing had come of
it. It seemed strange that the death of a
man entrusted with such unlimited powers
should have passed unnoticed by the
authorities that had sent him. Perhaps
they had owed their respite at Kerguennec
to the multiplicity of things those authorities
had to do in those exciting and
troublous times, but at last the day of
reckoning came.

The peasants had resolved to again hear

M 2

mass in their church, and it was Sunday
morning. The old bell-ringer, who had
groaned over the silence of his beloved
bells, and deplored that he could not ring
them even now, had got up as he was
wont to do in former times to ring the
Angelus but had sadly prepared himself to
go and clean the church instead.

The key was in the lock and he was at
the moment of entering when something
unusual arrested his attention, and he sav
a few Bleus stealthily making their way
towards the church. In a moment he
got inside and locked the door ; then he
ran quickly up the steeple and looked out ;
the village was entirely surrounded. ' Not
one of us can escape,' the old man said
to himself; then, with a kind of frenzy,
he seized one of the ropes, and suddenly,
in the silence of the morning, the church
bell gave a sound of alarm far and wide.

Louder and louder it rang as the
soldiers rushed to the door and tried to
force it open ; and the peasants, starting
from their cottages in terror, some only
half clothed and with the first weapons
that fell under their hands, rushed out
pele-mere — and before they had had time to
recover or strike a blow they found themselves
prisoners.

The soldiers laughed and the peasants
ground their teeth with rage, but above
the tumult and cries of rage, abuse, and
despair the bell went on louder and louder
till at last the good door gave way and the
old bell-ringer, roughly handled and pushed
about, but his face brilliant with delight,
appeared before soldiers and prisoners.

You dog of a Breton, what made you
ring that bell?' the officer said to him,
furious.

The man looked at him and never spoke.

Can't you speak, brute that you are ?
what made you ring that bell?'

At that moment a horseman flew past
the village and the eyes of the bell-ringer
shone under his bushy eyebrows. He had
not rung in vain.

But the captain, coming close up to him
sword in hand, cried savagely,

Speak, or ' and his meaning was

unmistakable.

Of what do you complain?' the old
man replied, ' are they not all your prisoners
; it was to wake them up for you.'

'How far can this bell be heard?'

I don't know ; it is so long since it was
ran: that I have forgotten.'

It will be longer still before you ring
it again. Bind his arms to begin with.
And you, slaves, go and stand by that
wall of the church. You, soldiers, be ready
to fire on them. — And now answer me ^

which one among you is it who murdered
the government envoy that came here a
fortnight ago ? I must have him ; — if not,
the village will be set on fire, and not one
stone left on another. Which of you was
it?'

The bell-ringer, who knew himself to bea
doomed man, unless rescue came, raised
his head, and cried :

I did it.'

You !'

Yes ; but listen, it was done in self-defence
; the man aimed at somebody '

Yes, a woman ; we shall know also how
to find that woman presently. What then?'

Then the old bell-ringer, looking at him
contemptuously, went on,

Yes, a woman — and I — not liking to
see a woman murdered, seized his weapon,
and the pistol went off accidentally in his
face.'

Accidentally ?'

Accidentally.'

A knowing pistol, to strike dead its
owner instead of his adversary, was it
not?'

'That is as monsieur pleases.'

Monsieur will soon see you in a place
where your tongue will cease to wag so
fast, believe me. Now you dogs there —
is what that man says true ? Did he commit
the murder, or did he not ? Answer
me !'

And the villagers, looking at the hell-finger,
and reading his thoughts of self-sacrifice,
replied with one voice,

He did.'

Very well, so far so good ; he will have
to answer for it, and that pretty quickly
too. Now for your priest, where is he ? I
have orders to bring him along with you
all; — you must have mass, you know; —

could not do without it, all ! ah I Where
is he ? — You won't answer ? I will make
you. Now, one by one come here.' And
a lad being brought before him : ' If you do
not answer I will have you shot dead,
there where you stand ; and the next, and
the next, and the next, in the same way
until one of you tells me, or brings him
to me, and I see him here, your priest.
Now do you hear, where is he ?'

But the lad did not understand French,
and he turned round to his friends, asking
what it was he had to do.

Don't you tell him to speak lies,' the
captain cried.

He can't speak French.'

Is that true ?'

Can't you see by his looks ?' the old
bell-ringer cried.

'Hold your tongue, or I shall not
even take the trouble of bringing you to

the scaffold. You next — translate what I
want to him.'

He asks for the cure — gain time,' the
next man told him.

Then the lad replied,

I saw him last night.'

Which, duly translated, called forth the
next question,
• 'Where?'

He was having his supper under a
tree.'

Where ?'

Yonder, on going up the hill on the
left ; he had bread and cheese, he '

But some misgivings came to the captain's
mind, and he looked round, as if not
sure of the wisdom of this somewhat slow
conversation.

You speak French ?' he said to the
other. ' Answer me and be quick. I do not

mean to remain for ever here. Where is
your cure?'

I do not know.'

'Will you answer me ?'

I do not know.'

'Fire!'

Two soldiers fired, and the man fell
down dead.

Now the next. Where is he — your
cure? Speak ; where is your priest? Mind
how you answer !'

Find him for yourself,' was the proud
reply.

You impudent hound !' And with hi
sword he struck the peasant across the
face, and the blood gushed forth. The
man staggered and fell on the church steps,
but not a cry escaped his lips.

Suddenly, with a cry of ' Vive le roi !'
some sixty peasants, rosaries round their

necks, with sticks or pitchforks and old
weapons in their hands, rushed impetuously
upon the soldiers; Rohan, who was
leading them on horseback, meanwhile
crying to the officer, in a voice ringing
with indignation,

Coward ! who kills defenceless men,
defend yourself

The officer turned towards him, but at
that moment the man who was wounded,
frightfully disfigured and with blood
dripping fast, sprang upon the officer and
seized him by the throat, and they both
fell struo:o:lino: under the horse's feet.
It had been the work of a moment, and
the fight was soon at its height. Discipline
was carrying the day, when Rohan rode
quickly towards the soldiers, shouting,
On, on, les gars ! Do you not want guns ?'
and from that moment in the mad fight
that ensued the strong peasants had the

best of it over their adversaries. The
latter, discouraged by the fall of their
officer, began to retreat, but first loaded
what guns they had left, made a stand,
and fired again.

Leave them,' said Rohan ; ' let us attend
to our wounded.'

He would have been obeyed had not a
piercing cry been heard, and, looking, they
saw a woman stretch her arms out wide
and fall to the around.

It was one of the poor women of the
village who, in her fright at the coming of
the soldiers, had gone to hide herself in a
thick hedge. Seeing them come towards
her, she tried, screaming wildly, to pass
them, and run towards her people ; but
one of the soldiers, either out of rage or revenge,
brutally passed his bayonet through
her body, and one of the others crushed
her skull with the butt-end of his gun.

This act of wanton cruelty decided the
fate of the otherwise brave soldiers, who
till then had only done their duty.

The peasants advanced towards the spot
where the woman had fallen. Husband,
father, and children kneeled down by
the body. Then, rising, they looked
at their friends. Not a word was said,
but they had understood each other. ' To
the last one — to the last one,' the husband
cried at last; and in a moment the whole
of the villagers had dispersed right and
left.

Rohan knew, and his father, who had
arrived with reinforcements, and Monsieur
Brevelaye knew what it meant ; but
the punishment of the cruel deed was
taken out of their hands.

We will go also,' said the men Monsieur
de Carnot had brought. He returned
alone, with his son and the cure, to

the village, to look after the wounded.

From that moment the soldiers were
lost. As they were hastening away, and
rejoicing at their escape, they came to a
road deep below high and thick hedges,
with trees which towered above their
heads ; and then they knew that their
enemies had followed them.

Fired upon from the right and left, they
stood still one moment, looked before and
behind them along the deep, treacherous
road, and feared that their last hour had
come.

Madly they rushed forward, in the hope
of escaping their foe, but he, stationed
along the road, had no need of cunning
to catch them; — to hire at them as they
passed was all he had to do. Many
were there left in the terrible hollow
path ; for every bush, every tree, every
solitary menhir concealed an adversary !

As those who still remained looked
back, they could see, as soon as one of
their number had fallen, peasants, two or
three, start forward, fall on the wounded
soldier, take his gun and cartridge-pouch,
and then disappear in their hiding places,
to follow the rest.

Halting or advancing proves equally
fatal to the doomed soldiers. Still, driven
by despair, the few that have escaped
press forward. Their eyes look in vain
for some open space where they can
make a stand — the Landes are too safe a
place for the children of the soil ; there is
no way of escape there from them. Instead
of the open space they have looked forward
to, their way is now through a
thick wood ; and they halt and hesitate.
Must they really enter it ? Instinct tells
them that none will escape. Then they
cry out of one accord to their invisible foe:

'We surrender.'

But a treacherous silence reigns around ;
a far echo only repeating, ' Surrender.'

'We are your prisoners,' they cry
out more loudly ; and the echo alone
replies ; the same ominous silence prevails.


They look at the dark wood before them.
No beauty do they see there ; no dainty
and sweet-smelling lilies ; no flowery path ;
but a foe lurking behind every tree. They
look back at the road they have come by,
and can only see the disarmed corpses of
their comrades lying there.

Whoever you are, men or devils, come
forward and fight us,' they cry. ' Ordo
you prefer murdering us to the last ?' —
'To the last,' comes back the merciless
reply.

And it seems to them as if a mocking
spirit has answered them. A wild im-vol.

II. N

pulse seizes them ; the dark wood attracts
them, and they rush madly forward.

But it is only to meet death one by
one, one by one, on the right and on the
left ; till the revengeful peasants have
had their own way, and not one of themis
left to tell the tale !

Then did the villagers retrace their steps,
and all armed, some carrying two guns,
to the village, chanting one of the war
songs of past ages : ' Heart for eye and
head for arm ! Nothing is better for the
corn to grow, than the crushed bones and
the blood of one's enemies !'

And the old bell-ringer rushed to the
steeple and his bells sent forth paeans of
joy. And Monsieur Brevelaye, who had
been praying fervently for the souls of
the departed men of the village, amidst
the sobs of women and children, rose to his
feet, and cried,

'My friends, let us praise the Lord and
rejoice.'

Nay, let us be thankful, — but why
rejoice,' said Rohan ; ' they are Frenchmen,
our brethren.'

They are the enemies of God,' replied
the priest, sternly.

N 2

CHAPTER Iii.

The tocsin had also awakened the inhabitants
of the Chateau, and terror had fallen
on the comtesse, so suddenly brought back
from a sense of security and jDeace. The
conte had found it impossible to leave her,
but he had called his servants together

a

and prepared himself for the worst.

Monsieur de Carnoet, having arranged
with him to act in concert in case of attack,
mounted his horse and went to reconnoitre
; it was he who flew past the village
as the bell-ringer was being questioned,
and, meeting Rohan hastening forward with

his men, he had gone further to find more
peasants to come to the rescue.

They were in the village now, even
the comte, who had at last persuaded
his wife it was safer for him to know
what was going on. Still mindful of
her, however, he turned to Rohan, and
said,

There is anxiety up there.'

And Rohan, whose whole heart was now
with Renee, mounted his horse and galloped
away.

Arrived at the Chateau, and finding all
the servants on the alert, he threw his
bridle to one of them and entered the
large hall where he had gone in first when
coming to Kerguennec with the chevalier.

Again and again had the remembrance
of that first moment come back to him of
late ; again and again had he pictured to
himself the beautiful girl walking leisurely

and gracefully from the further end of the
room to meet them. And he bemoaned his
own folly. How was it he had been so
blind as not to read his own heart aright ?
He could understand it now ; understand
how, knowing her to be intended for the
chevalier, and already affianced to him in
the mind of their mutual relatives, he had
had no thought of himself He had, in
fact, been carried away as everybody had
been, by the understanding that the marriage
must be.

Had Renee acted under the same influence
? He hoped not ; he believed not.
She loved her fiance he thought. Still
still if he had known, if it had been
possible — but it had not been possible.

Now, however, instead of the girl in all
her glorious beauty, he saw Renee pale
and agitated.

'Safe! Thank God!' and, carrying her

hands to her face, she tried to force back
the tears that would come.

'You are not wounded?' she asked
almost directly. ' You have escaped without
injury ? But what has happened, tell
me ? Shall I ever forget these hours of
suspense and agony? This enforced stay
here when you were fighting — you — I

mean, your father — all Tell me, tell

me ' and she stopped suddenly ; for

Rohan, struck dumb before her, his eyes
fixed on hers expressing such anxiety and
such thankfulness, had staggered back,
glad to take a firm grasp of whatever
obstacle met his hand ; and she noticed
his emotion. But, trying to conquer himself,
he said, as quietly as he could,

'You have been very anxious, I fear.'

Very anxious,' she replied, a little more
calmly. ' But your father, has he escaped ?'

'Yes. I wish that ringing could have

been avoided ; you would have known
nothing before it was over, and have been
spared all this anxiety. We tried, above
all things, to prevent the soldiers coming
here.'

Oh ! I never thought of their coming.

It was not that ; it was Oh ! you

don't know what it is to hear firing, and
have no idea of what is going on. If a
misfortune had taken place, if — death had

come But you say you have all

escaped ; and I am so truly glad. Besides,'
she added, trying to smile, ' you
must not imagine my aunt and myself so
hard-hearted as not to think a little of
sou in such an emergency. From the
moment we heard the bell, my aunt made
sure that you would hear it too ; and we
knew pretty well that you would act —
rashly, if there was any occasion for it.
How could we help wondering what was

goings on, and what the consequences might
be ? Oh ! I would not wish my worst
enemy to spend such terrible hours as we
did,' she exclaimed at last, carried away
by her past anguish.

'Thank you,' thank you. It is something
to know that we have friends to
think of us, when times of danger come,'
he said, looking at her. Then some impulse
he could not control came over him.
He held his hand out to her, and cried,
^ It is sweet to feel the hand of the living
dien one has escaped death.'

But as suddenly he dropped the hand
she had laid, impulsively also, in his, for he
knew that he was lying to himself; and the
remembrance of his promise to be true to
his friend came between them.

He knew that what he wanted was
to seize in his arms, and press to his
heart the girl he loved. He knew that

she was everything to him ; that he would
he were everything to her. Why, why,
could it not be so ? Why could he not
speak openly of his love, — of what he
felt ? Why could they not rejoice together,
when ignorance of what had been
going on had proved such agony to her ?
Ah ! what sweet happiness it could be.
What rapture to behold her face as the
face of the one he loved, to bask in the
light of her eyes, to be thrilled with the
sound of her voice and the touch of her
hand — to love her ever, ever, and ask her
to love him in return !

He had lied to himself; this it was
he wanted, and she, in her purity and
innocency, had trusted her hand as to the
hand of a friend. — Oh, if she knew, if she
knew ! Would she not despise him, would
she not hate him ? What if she had read

into his soul ? Was he to lose even the
solace of her presence by his folly ?

He had been faithless. Good Heaven !
that such a thing should have come to
him ! How terrible the struo^^ie before
him ; he had thought his own strong will
sufficient to conquer himself, and he had
failed, failed ! Ungenerous, contemptible !
But he knew now how his weakness could
betray him. '■ Cut off the right hand —
pluck out the right eye,' he murmured to
himself.

But she was standing there before him
troubled ; and he said, as one who tries to
comfort a child in sorrow and to amuse
it:

You see, you would not learn to shoot ;
if you had, you could have come and
fought for us.'

But the words jarred on her quivering

frame ; a cold sensation seized her heart ;
the momentary sympathy that had united
them fled ; they were strangers once
more. —

Let us go to my aunt,' she replied ;
^ she should hear what you have to say ;'
and they went on in silence.

The comtesse almost screamed With joy
when Rohan first entered :

So you are here among us still ! Oh,
what fearful, fearful times to live in ! Are
we safe now ? Tell me all you can.'

And Rohan told her all.

And the soldiers?' she asked.

They are gone, every one of them.'

'■ Gone. But will they not return ?'

No, not these.'

'Why, what can you mean ?'

They are all dead.'

Merciful God ! And are we living ina
land given up to such atrocities ? Why,

what have we clone that such things should
happen in our time? Why did not the
wicked suffer for the wickedness they had
worked out, instead of our having to suffer
for it? They ended their days in peace;
why should we be more afflicted than
others — what have we done to deserve it ?
Do we not love God ; do we not pray and
lead sinless lives ? Oh ! what have we
done, what have we done that we should
suffer thus ? What have we done more
than others ?'

Alas ! i^oor comtesse, how many thousands
of grievously-afflicted souls cried
thus to Heaven in those days. It is true
the sins of the fathers are visited upon the
children unto the third and fourth generation.


Rohan tried to comfort her ; he spoke to
her of the courage of the wounded villagers ;
of the courage of their wives, and how they

looked to Heaven for strength and comfort,
— Yes ! Paradise well mif^ht be considered
their place of rest, their reward
after life ; but earth, was it not a paradise
to her? Earth, where comfort and luxury
surrounded her; earth, where love was her
portion ? Yes, earth was Paradise to her,
and it was hard her paradise should be
spoiled by the wicked.

It was not that she murmured against
her fate, but that she did not feel in herself
the strength to bear with more pain.
It required real courage, weak and ill and
suffering as she was, to smother the rising
sob, and it was real pain to check the tears
that would come, and to laugh at her own
weakness instead. Not to make others
suffer because she suffered, not to give
pain because she felt so deeply for any
suffering was her study. She was determined
to be bright and cheerful at any

cost ; but she did not want to have more
sorrows to bewail in secret. Why should
she, an invalid for years now, be called
to hear also of murders and atrocities, and
be threatened with seeing; the lives of her
beloved ones endangered ?

My dear Rohan,' she said, her hands
clasped before her, ' if only I knew that
such wickedness could not reach my dear
ones ! Did not our relative the Marquis

of L think himself safe ? If only I

were strong and able to protect them, if
only I could stand on my feet and wield a
sword ; we women can do so little at anytime,
and when, too, one is ill and — '
But we are all strong men, you need
■ not fear what will happen to us ; and, as to
you and mademoiselle your niece, it is a
privilege to watch over you ; of what use
would our manhood be if not to protect
the weak?'

It would be better not to have need of
being protected — but I must not murmur.
Yes, we will trust to our brave defenders,
and feel brave also.'

Rohan then left the Chateau. The
comtesse bid him farewell, and exhausted
at last by the many emotions of the day,
she fell asleep.

Renee, alone with her own heart, was
going over, not the fearful events of the
day, but her interview with Rohan de
Carnoet ; when, a servant discreetly entering,
she for fear he might wake up her
aunt went to him out of the room.

What is it ?'

A man is here Who brings news from
Monsieur le Chevalier de Valvourgs.'

Ah ! make him come in.'

A shock passed through her frame. ^Yas
he coming back ? Would she be glad ?
Would it not be strength to her, and rest,

and peace ? Would it not be delightful to
feel secure by him, to have hin near, him
her husband ! — near her !
The man entered the room.

You have news for me ? Did you
leave Monsieur le Chevalier to come
here ? When is it you last saw him ?'
she asked, breathlessly.

Six weeks ago. I come from Toulon.'

^ From Toulon ? How is that ? Where
is the chevalier, then ?'

At Toulon. But here is his letter to
Mademoiselle de Kerguennec'

She took the letter in her hands,
astonished.

At Toulon ! What is he doing there ?
Why, he might have come to '

Then suddenly recovering: herself:
I thank you for the faithful delivery of
this letter,' she said. ' Can I do anything
for you ? Will you rest with us a while ? '

VOL. II. o

Yes, I should like to rest a night or
two,' the man said. ' Besides, I am to
take an answer to Toulon, if you will give
me one. Then I will go. Monsieur le
Chevalier made me understand I could
remain here a fear days. I came from
Toulon by sea purposely to bring this
letter to you. I came in one of the English
ships, and had to be landed in England
first. However, since I am able to fulfil
my errand, I am glad.'

Then Renee asked him :

Did you travel with Monsieur le Chevalier
from England ? Did he go to Toulon
by land or by sea ?'

There is no going by land now, mademoiselle,'
the man replied. ' It is not safe.
He went by sea, and found me at Toulon.'

She held the letter thoughtfully between
her fingers. It seemed to her so inconceivable
that he should have gone all that

distance from lier. Was this man a new
spy ? Could lie trust to what he said ?
Then, looking at the letter, after the outer
wrapper had been taken off:

'This is from him,' she said to herself;
and, leaving the man to the care of the
servants, she went to her room.

Then she looked at the letter long. It
was the chevalier's own writing — a clear,
bold, pleasant hand — and she seemed to
see him again before her.

What was it he, so far away, had to tell ?
How was it he had gone where danger was
near? So his love for his uncle had overcome
his prudence — and she tore the letter
open slowly.

It was a long letter ; and, sitting down
before her table, she read as follows :

My dear Mademoiselle and Fiancee,
I can see your eyes open wide

o 2

with astonishment on receiving a letter
from this port. You thought me still, no
doubt, in the fogs of hospitable England ;
while I am here in all the warmth and
beauty of our brilliant sun. I could not
resist the temptation of seeing Provence
again — exile is too terrible to bear; and
although, as we knew, I should meet many
of my former acquaintances in London, we
were all such dull, dispirited creatures
that there was no pleasure to be found in
each other's society. Moreover, there is a
fearful dearth of money among some of
the emigres and they play high to redeem
their fortunes ; but I am thankful to say,
thanks to my uncle's foresight, I was not
driven to that. Altogether, what with
thinking of you all day, and longing to be
near you, and exile, I was nearly dead,
when I found the opportunity of going to
the Mediterranean in an English ship.

Thurio and I embarked in high spirits and
full of expectation. But, alas ! when I
saw the dear land of Brittany in the
distance, how I wished I had been able to
come to you instead ! What a cruel war
this is which separates me from you ! However,
there was comfort in the thought
that I should soon see for myself what was
taking place at Cahors ; and the hope that
I should fid things better than Thurio
had led me to believe.

In time we reached Toulon and then
went on to Lyons, and I saw my dear uncle,
who is fairly well and safe under his disguise
of Republicanism. But it was he
who told me of what is really going on :
how there is hope of crushing at last that
odious government in Paris. Almost the
whole of Provence is for the regency and
Louis XV'IL, and there are many plans
afoot. The English fleet is here, and

some there are who advise us to ask for its
help. So, behold me, a once useless member
of the community, now trying my
hand at redeeming the affairs of France !
I am not lashing;. I belong; to that section
of moderate Republicans and Royalist
emigres Who mean to march on Paris and
re-establish royalty. We shall find allies,
and we think of joining hands with the
Vendeensns and all the revolted provinces.

I have not the slightest doubt that we
shall succeed.

We have re-established the church at
Lyons as it was before. We have had grand
processions, and have with much ceremony
carried there the relics of the Royalists
murdered by the Republic.

Tell Rohan that he ought to effect a
complete rising in Brittany, and thus to
strengthen our party ; if he could join the
Vendeensns, he would do well ; some of the

chiefs there are quite willing to act with
us. Just imagine, my dear Renee, what
you would feel if some day I reached Brittany
after having done great and wonderful
things ! Anyhow, I will join you
sooner or later had I first to bring down
this odious Republic that separates us.
Yes, it is a grand thing to think of, and I
am full of joy and hope and enthusiasm.
I will hold out my hand to my bride across
France, and through our victories reach
her at last — reach her when we have freed
our country from the vultures that prey
upon her and degrade her in the eyes of
the whole universe. It is a noble task, and
one you will understand ; I know I have
your good wishes for the success of our
enterprise. Oh, how I long to be near
you ! how I would hurry affairs here in
order to go and see your beloved face
ao-ain ! It is hateful to think of, but I

hind myself praying for the enemies of
France to be victorious, as it would so
greatly help us.

I do hope we shall soon begin to act ;
it is strange how slowly everything goes
on, how difficult the communications, and
how great the fear of danger. But, once
having begun, we shall Ain ; we shall seethe
poor Queen again on the throne with
her son. Poor, poor woman, in prison all
this time — a widow, and how made a
widow, good heavens !

Therefore, my dear and beloved Renee,
pray for us in this our enterprise, and look
for the day when your fiance will come to
sou with joy, having secured joy for many
besides. This will be a glorious time for
us all ; and if you could but think how I
long for it you would pity me.

My uncle, who is one of the most
ardent anti-revolutionists, begs of me to

send you his most humble respects. He
is as full of fun as ever, and the greatest
amusement is produced among us by his
affected Republican manners and speech.
*' They would make a Republican of me,"
he says, " and now the thing clings to me
like the shirt of Nessus." You would be
surprised what an enormous number of
people there are who abhor the Revolution
; the government must fall.

If the English accept our proposal, and
Admiral Hood enters Toulon and holds it in
the name of Louis XVII., we shall march
on Paris, feeling safe in our rear. Yes,
and I will join the most ardent ; for who
can have a better incentive to light than I ?
And I will fight with a will, believe mein
order that I may join you all the sooner
in a land of freedom and security. May that
day come soon ; may we soon be united,
and see joy and prosperity all around us !

I hope you are well, and have not been
troubled on my account. If there was a
general rising in Brittany, you would be
safe in the midst of your armed countrymen
; and I shall hope to hear that it is
so. It is only by adopting extraordinary
measures that we can crush our enemies.
Let me hear by the messenger, a man you
can trust, born on our own estate; tell me
all your news. I hope Rohan is well; I
repeat that he ought to strengthen our
hands by a rising en masse ; advise him, —
urge him to do so. Let us surround those
men at Paris, so that there may be for
them no escape.

'My love to all; to the comte and comtesse
particularly, whom 1 long to see again.
Your ever true and \oYmg fiance

Louis de Valvourgs.'

Renee sat with the letter open before

her in a kind of dumb amazement. The
chevalier, that gay and pleasant companion,
taking upon himself to rule the
destinies of France ; to conspire ; to lose
himself in such schemes ! How changed
he must be ! And a smile came on her
lips — had he learnt geography since he
left her? Join the Vendeensns in the west
of France to crush the Republicans ! Had
she read aright ? Then he would come to
her — how much more easy, she thought,
to have simply come to her from England
since he was running all the risks he knew
of.

He was just the same as ever ; she could
fancy his bright smile and follow his active
movements ; his sunny and sympathetic
nature could not contemplate disenchantment
and defeat. While they in Brittany
walked circumspectly and hesitatingly
counting the cost at every step taken for

their own defence, lie was pjoing to marli
on Paris and save then:i all !

Should she urge on Rohan to effect a
rising and join him in his scheme? No,
they had enough sorrow as it was ;
they wanted no more. Besides, Rohan
would not run the risk. But the chevalier
knew no fear ! And the English, those
enemies who were fighting the French
fleets even in the colonies ; the English to
enter into Toulon, one of the first ports of
France ! How full of trust and hope he
must be. She feared he was too amiable
to see the dark side of things, too amiable
for a conspirator. Hospitable though the
shores of England might be for individuals
; were not the English relentless in
war ? and it did seem strange to put the
French fleet of the Mediterranean in their
keeping.

Renee did not know much of treason

and the world, but this she knew — that
the Republicans were fighting hard to keep
the English out of France, — the English
and all their other enemies. Were those
Provencal and other large towns of the
south inviting the enemy in?

What Avould Rohan de Carnoet sav to
this letter with its bold schemes ? Rohan
was brave, but his bravery looked like
timidity by such doings. The chevalier
did not seem to consider the hardship and
toil his plan must cause ; to think of the
men that would be killed or wounded on
this march to Paris ; whereas Rohan counted
every life. Besides, had he not to watch
over them, — over the comtesse, over her?
What a difference between the two men ;
and she wondered they could ever have
been friends.

But this letter she had to answer.
Strange, though the chevalier was coins

all those great things, as he said, to join
her all the quicker, the letter had not
touched her heart. Whether it had
startled her, whether she could not share
his enthusiasm, whatever it was — the
reading of the letter had not moved her
heart. No, not even with the fear of
what the consequences of such an enterprise
might be for him. It was so difficult
to believe in such an undertaking, — so difficult
to believe the chevalier to be in such
terrible earnest j

However, the impression left by the
letter was pleasant. She felt better ; it
cleared her brow for a while, it brought
back smiles to her lips ; but only for a
while. How could she answer it ? how
could she do it without throwing cold
water on his daring project and his bright
hopes ? He was so happy, so full of life
under the brilliant sun of the south ; why

should she tell him she could not share his
enthusiasm? She was, like Rohan, a Breton,
and she felt intuitively that it was not in
them to launch into great enterprises, but
only to toil on and labour and defend
themselves inch by inch. How could she
answer his letter ? She must wait and
answer according; to the impression it
left on the others. And she longed for
her people to return.

And when, serious and anxious, they
came back, late in the evening, she felt,
as she offered her letter to be read, like
a child who has been amusing itself with
wild stories and is sure to be blamed.

I have a letter,' she said, ' a letter from
the chevalier.'

Indeed ! indeed !' cried everyone.
Where is he and what is he doing? Still
in England, no doubt. What does he say ?'

You must judge for yourselves,' she

replied, shyly holding out the letter to her
uncle.

Nay, nay, Renee, we would not read
your letter in full conclave.'

But you must ; it is important you
should.'

Why? Does he ask you again to leave
us ?'

No, uncle,' she replied, seriously enough ;
'and, if he did, could I go to him? But
he does not ask me. You must read the
letter, I cannot explain it to you ;' and, as
Rohan was going away as if he was not
wanted, she added : ' Please do not go,
Monsieur Rohan, you must hear also what
he has to tell you.'

And, going a small distance from the
group of men, she for the first time felt
her heart beating. She watched their
countenances, and started when her uncle
exclaimed :

Toulon in the hands of the English !
this is a terrible mistake. The chevalier is
young, much too young for this work !'
Then, seeing Renee greatly agitated, holding
out her hand for her letter : ' I am sorry,
child, very sorry for this ; I wish our dear
friend were safe over in England or here.
This is the beginning of sorrow. My poor
Renee, I am very sorry for you.'

Renee felt the tears coming to her
eyes ; she was really attached to De Yale
and could not bear to hear him
blamed.

He is of a brighter and more hopeful
disposition than we are,' she murmured.

Yes, but such men are not fitted for
holding the helm of a nation in times like
these. However, Renee, I do not wish
to pain you. I ought to have refrained
from speaking so plainly. It took me by
surprise.'

VOL. ir. P

So it did me,' she answered, sadly, ' I
am sorry too. But what shall I answer
him?'

That it is not in our power to effect a
rising in Brittany. Is it not so, De
Carnoet ?'

It is so.'

But Rohan, looking at Renee's sad face,
said :

Could we not tell him of what is going
on here, all the same ?'

What is going on ?' she said, quickly,
looking up at him.

Monsieur de Puisaye is trying to unite
under one leadership all the different bands
of men who have been fighting ; he has
opened, under the care of the priests,
registers in all the parishes for men
able to fight to enter their names. The
men who have refused to serve the Republican
army in France and who would

Ibe eliot as deserters if found, and also
many desperate characters have come
forward, and the number increases everyday.
As soon as the union is likely to be
effected, he will ^o to London and ask the
government there for help.'

For help !' she repeated, her eyes opening
wide ; ' then shall we be placed as
Toulon is, and the blame we thought the
chevalier deserved '

Xo, no,' replied the comte, quickly, ' we
do not intend to let the English land here.'

But you expect them to give you help.'

'Yes, money and arms.'

I don't quite see the difference,' she
went on, hesitatingly. ' I think that such
news is just what will encourage the
chevalier.'

'Well, don't buoy up his hopes too
much, Renee,' her uncle said, 'for I
assure you I do not believe in all this

p2

coming to pass, and — I do not approve of
it. I cannot help it ; I do not approve
of asking an enemy's help ; stories of
ancient times, and even the fables we learnt
as children, should teach us better. Besides,
De Passage is not at the end of his
troubles. I repeat I do not believe in his
success, so do not tell the chevalier he has
much, or rather anything, to expect from
this quarter — do not make any illusory
promises.'

'Oh, 1 won't promise anything,' she
said, smiling a little now, ' but will only
tell him the truth.'

And then she left them.

'AVhat a fatal blunder that Toulon
business is,' she heard Monsieur de Carnoet
say. ' But, poor child, poor child ! I
am sorry for her.'

Ariji, seeing the cloud on his son's face,
the father sighed sadly.

CHAPTER VIII.

Rohan had told Renee the true state of
things in Brittany. Each community had
.at first risen only in self-defence — each
small group doing its very best; but, in
any general upheaving, human passions
are sure to come sooner or later into
play. This revolt of the peasants was
more a reaction against the town-people
than anything else. For centuries they
had toiled on amid great hardships to feed
the others, their reward being small at
any time ; of comfort they had none, and
of pleasure only that which they found
among: themselves and in their old institutions.

They liacl revolted at first when
the towns, which had never done anything;
for them before but despise them, insisted
upon imposing on them the new ideas
(most of them did not even understand the
language in which they where framed) and
then tried to rob them of their unique
consolation in their sad, monotonous life
their priest. But now they had found
out their strength and turned, like oppressed
slaves, against their old masters.

They cut off the supplies, seized upon
the convoys of goods, destroyed bridges and
communications, murdered mayors who had
taken the offices filled by the seigneurs,
revenged themselves upon those who had
dared to come and buy the estates of these
seigneurs or the property of the clergy.
They where merciless towards all prisoners.

They chose as chief, one of themselves,
Jean Cottereau, and where soon known

under the name of ' Chouans,' probably
because of their rallying call being the
cry of the screech-owl.

These were the bands the Comte de
Puisaye relied upon, and was making
strenuous efforts to unite. The tenants
of the Comte de Kerguennec — after their
check of that Sunday morning, taking
the law into their own hands — had joined
the Chouans. It was a system of take and
give ; help me to-day and I will help you
tomorrow ; and it served them well.

The Commune had now become aware
of the danger, and that it was no longer
a few gendarmes they must send into
Brittany to put down the rebels, but large
detachments of soldiers ; and a war of
extermination began.

They determined to root out and destroy
the seigneurs and the priests, who
were at the bottom of the mischief To bea

relative of an emigre was death ; to be
called by a once great and good name,
death ; not to cry loudly when called upon
at any moment, ' Vive la Publique !'
death ; to look delicate and well-bred,
death. The priest, dead or alive, was paid
for like merchandise. Was it to be wondered
that the peasants revenged themselves
on their prisoners ?

The inhabitants of the village and the
Chateau could not expect to live forgotten
of the Commune. Fully aware of the
danger they were in after that unfortunate
skirmish, the comte would have been glad
to emigrate in his turn with all dear to
him, if the comtesse had been able to travel.
But to take the comtesse to some sea-port
and wait there till communications could be
established with the English ships cruising
in the channel, and till these could manage
or would choose to send for them, was out

of the question. It was only extreme care
that could save her from long and dangerous
fainting-fits ; and the fatiguing journey
would have killed her.

To Renee the comte proposed that she
should go, even at this last hour, to join
Madame de Carnot, who had been prevailed
upon by her husband to go away
with friends, when it was thought that a
month or two would see everything fall
back into its proper place again. He regretted
deeply now not to have married his
niece to the chevalier, according to the
wish of perchance; she, at all events, would
have been safe over the water, and the
chevalier would never have embarked in
his mad enterprise ; Renee would not have
allowed it, had he wished to do so after
their marriage. There was a feeling in
the mind of all now that, amiable as the
chevalier was, Renee was superior to him

in understanding and intellect. But Renee
could not and would not part from all
those she held dear upon earth, and refused
to move.

Thus the bond of union was drawn
closer still between uncle and niece, aunt
and friends ; and the trembling comtesse,
fully aware of the self-sacrifice her illness
entailed upon those she loved, tried
to look bravely at the trials to come, and
her loving ways became more and more
endearing.

Renee answered the letter of her fiance
neither giving him hope nor blaming him.
It was a difficult letter to write, and she
was glad when it was finished. As to her
companionship with Rohan, it had become
a calm enjoyment ; for he was ever the
same towards her, and as ready for any
sacrifice as to give her help in small matters.

The crisis brought on by the anxiety of
that morning had left them both, as it
were, thankful to breathe in peace in each
other's presence and wait for events.

What caused the delay of the Commune
in its act of revenge and why nothing
more was heard from that quarter, no one
knew ; but the summer was going, and
peace and happiness still reigned supreme
at Kerguennec ; and Renee gathered roses
instead of lilies, and adorned the dear
home of her forefathers with them. But
her own presence Alas the most lovely
ornament there. Flitting about the place,
looking after everybody's comfort with the
thoughtfulness of a loving heart, she made
their delight and was happy in herself;
this lull in the storm, this treacherous
calm before the tempest giving her
no sign that it would ever cease. The

heavens were blue, and fruit and flowers
were abundant, and the world was good
and very fair to her.

Why should our sky always seem dark tous
? she thought. Does not the sun shine
after the storm, and the earth feel refreshed?
Why not be thankful for moments of sunshine
in our lives ? are they not also a promise
of good things to come ? — And Renee's
heart sang sweetly to her of hope and love.

Ah ! beauteous and radiant Hope, divine
charmer, the companion of every step we
take in life ; who, with thy magic wand,
disperses every cloud, removes far away the
narrow bounds of our horizon, and who,
spreading a veil with a thousand flattering
and gorgeous hues before the dark years of
the future, makes us long to live when we
would long to die — who art Thou ?

Why do men call thee treacherous ?
Art thou not rather as true as the Giver of

all good tidings ; one of His most precious
gifts which neither the wicked, nor misfortunes,
nor even faults can deprive us of?
A blessed gift which the righteous reveres,
for he believes in the eternal duration of
all that is great and good and beautiful ;
which the guilty clings to, as the only
treasure left to him in this world. Sweet
Hope ! let us ever embrace and cherish
thee, cling to thee throughout the sad
days of our life, and believe thee to exist
even beyond the dark valley of death, even
in the realms of eternity !

For some time past the heat had been
intense, when a change came suddenly;
thunder was in the air; thick and fantastic
and changing clouds swept across the
lowering sky : birds flew straight away
to a place of shelter, forgetting to sing ; a
hush was over all nature, and the heart of
man felt oppressed.

Yet on that day the Comte che Kerguen-
nec felt a strange sense of rest come upon
Lin. Wandering slowly about his beautiful
home, he admired the many lovely
things brought together there, looking at
each separately and in turn, as if to take
a long farewell of all — a long farewell
mixed with no bitterness. He looked at
the different views offered from the various
windows of the Chateau, the sea, the bay,
the verdant and far-away hills, with a sense
of gratitude for their beauty. Then he came
to the wife he almost worshipped — the
wife so gentle, so loving, so deeply attached
to him. Except for her weak health, no
sorrow, not a moment's pain had there
been between them since they had married
; one in thought as well as one in
feeling were they, and on that day, when
a peace that passed his understanding was
upon him, the same peace rested on her also.

He stretched out his hand and she let
hers rest in it, happy in the very quietness
and regularity of the beating of their
hearts.

Dearest,' he said, ^ this day has something
solemn in its peacefulness to me.
Looking at the spectacle of this grand
nature around us, I could fancy myself
facing the gloriously-adorned portal of
Heaven, under the influence of some great
Amen, and waiting for the signal of an all-enthralled
harmony. Dearest, to the soul
of man is not often given such absorbing
fancies — what can it portend ? of what can
it speak ?'

It speaks of the reward of a good conscience,
my lord,' she answered, sweetly,
her eyes lost in his dreamy eyes ; ' it portends
all that is refreshing in a good man's
nature ; and the happiness of this said goodman's
wife,' she added, playfully.

Does it, wife ? — But if the omen were
one of sorrow ?'

Nay, my dear Breton husband, why
always look for omens? There alone do
we not ao^ree.'

He smiled too, no doubt thinking of
some past discussions he felt no wish to
renew, and went on :

But suppose it was — separation ?'

Oh,' she sighed, with a troubled face,
'why speak of separation?' Then, suddenly
and eagerly : ' Tell me, tell me, is
there any meaning in your speaking that
Avoid to me ? Have you come to some
decision — is there some grief hid from me T

No. There has been no resolution
taken by me to part from you ; only, I
thought, if it had to come — if, according
to the ways of Providence, we were called
to part, and I went first '

She interrupted him no more ; her very

life seemed suspended on the utterance of
his lips.

'If I go first, I want you to remember
low we are living in Renee's home
till she is twenty-one, but that at my
death it is hers ; I want you to remember
how happy she would feel to keep you
here.'

But the hand resting on his, dropped
aside, and he, starting to his feet, seized
in his arms the fainting form of his
beloved wife. She recovered strength
enough to look up at him, however, and
even to say,

You would Lavish me to remain herewith
her after you are ?'

And, as he inclined his head slowly, she
murmured low,

'So let it be, if it is God's will. — But,

for the present, you live ; let us think

of that only.'

VOL. II. Q

But he went on.

Why should men so fear sudden
death? I do not. Will God judge us if,
when the body racked with pain, our sense
of the goodness of the Lord fails us, and
murmuring comes ; or are the meaningless
hopes and beliefs of a mind crushed by
its diseased body of so much value that
the soul should be saved thereby? I am
ready to die at any moment — at anytime.
My life is all before me, with
its trials and enjoyments and failures ; all
I wish is to be able to say before being
called away : " Into Thy hand I commit
my spirit." — Therefore, dearest, has this
profound peace that has come upon me
brought me no sense of fear, no omen of
evil things to come — though a Breton,' he
added, smiling. ' Do you not agree with
me?'

Yes, yes ; but — to part !'

Ah ! but it would be for so short, for
so very short a time, clearest.'

Meanwhile, in a wood at a small distance
from Kerguennee, a large detachment
of soldiers were having their mid-day meal
in silence. They had started before daybreak,
taking a long circuitous route that
the object of their journey should not be
known ; and now men and officers were
having their last rest before the attack.
The wood that sheltered them was thick
and overgrown with brushwood ; it had
been fortunate for them they had found
that place of shelter against the heat, and
of safety against their foe. They start refreshed
and rested, and go with renewed
strength to the work they have to do.

But a man young and active kept a

q-2

strict and severe watch for miles round
Kerg'uennec ; and the arrival of the soldiers
had not escaped his vigilance.

In a moment the news spread like wildfire,
from chateau to village, from church
to manoir ; men fleet of foot, and knowing
every pass of their own country, sent freshmen
on, as they lay exhausted after having
delivered their message ; and suddenly and
before the soldiers had yet moved, hundreds
of peasants peopled the woods, the
moors, and solitary places. Their rosaries
round their necks ; the guns they had
wrenched from the grasp of their enemies
in their hands, they advance. No military
music is there to accompany their steps,
no joyous fanfare of trumpets to increase
their ardour. They wear no badge, — no
military dress. The large gaelic breeches
and the round black felt hat is the same
as it has been for centuries ; the same as

in the days of the brave Breton duchess
and the valiant Duguesclin \ and the
few words of rallying are the same. As
in the days of the tyrannical French
kings, they advance silent, solemn, grim
as destiny.

But their mode of warfare has changed ;
they are no longer protected by their
knights covered with armour, who take
on themselves the most dangerous part of
the fighting and glory in their danger;
these are asleep, and will no longer, sustaining
their efforts, rush to the rescue,
join blow to blow, fall Avhere they fall and
win where they win. They are alone, or
nearly so ; those who should lead them are
in the courts of the enemies of France,
forgetful of the brave men in their own
country, — and, alas ! forgetful till too
late.

Where are these soldiers going ? It is all-important

to ascertain this, for then only
will they knoAv where to post themselves
to the best advantage on the way the Bleus
must follow; then will every bush become
a snare, every thick hedge a fortress, every
wood witness a work of extermination.

Rohan is there, between two roads, one
of which leads to Kerguennec ; and with
clenched hands he waits. Ah ! it will cost
those men dear if they choose the latter —
and in his heart he knows that they will
do so.

Officers and soldiers rise to their feet ;
in their hearts also they know that a hard
task is before them. They also are brave
and determined, and, moreover, well-disciplined.
They know now the fate of
those that preceded them to the village
of Kerguennec, and are willing it should
be their fate too, if they do not succeed ;
but succeed they mean to do.

They cannot form in order of battle
amidst the brushwood ; and perhaps it is
as well for them. But once out of it they
fall into ranks and advance in small
columns, with loaded guns, ready to fire.
They no longer try to hide the end they
have in view; they go openly forward,
cross the plain, cross the narrow causeway
towards the Chateau de Kerguennec.

God !' is the cry that escapes from
two brave men. '0 God! watch over those
we love, watch over the weak and helpless!'

The soldiers advance. They look terrible
enough those columns bristling with guns,
each man on the alert ; but, coming to a
narrow path cut between two steep and
woody hillocks, they hesitate, for they
have had to do before this with the
tactics of the peasants. Still they have
seen no trace of the enemy as yet, and
they go on.

In a moment a perfect rain of bullets
falls among them, and every aim from
the invisible foe strikes home. To reply
is useless ; better reach the other end
of the path first. They escape, but
not all, and reach the open. Their foes
are before them, try to force them back
into the murderous narrow path, and fora
long time the way is disputed. But the
troops are determined to die there to the
last man rather than be driven into that
pass again, and force their way on.

The peasants, always at a disadvantage in
the open, disperse, but only to fight after
their own fashion, and wait for them in
the next wood. The soldiers pause ; ah !
if the sobs of men's hearts could be heard,
what would these not tell ! Hundreds
of peasants are there, where Renee de
Kerguennec gathered the first lilies of
the valley, and Rohan de Carnoet, who

helped her to fill her basket more than
once, is there ! — And many of them must
die!

Advance, however, the soldiers must ;
they cannot retreat even if they wished
to do so. But the roads they traverse
are covered With their dead and dying
valour, despair — nothing avails. They
make a stand, fire into the bushes, into
the trees, but they neither hear a fall
nor a sigh nor a groan. They search the
wood — their adversaries have disappeared.
This ominous silence, this treacherous
death, tells on their courage ; with some,
reason even is affected — their arms become
useless in their trembling hands.
How long will this go on ? they will be
exterminated to the last man ! But at
length the wood is passed; their ranks
are thinned ; but still they advance.

Suddenly a cry of exultation escapes

their lips. — Kerguennec ! Kerguennec ! —
They are close to its walls ; having succeeded
so far, they are saved. Stow is the
advantage on their side ; now their enemy
will show himself !

But their cry of relief is answered by
shouts of rage ; a multitude climbs up the
hill after them, falls on their rear, and
the fight is desperate and long. Rohan is
among the foremost, and seems endowed
with superhuman strength. His father is
near also ; both try to pierce the living
barrier that is between them and those
they hold so dear. If they could but
enter the Chateau, join the men they know
to be waiting there with the comte, and
protect the poor, trembling women to the
last.

At that moment an officer holds out a
flag of truce. Hands still uplifted to

strike, or butt-end of guns raised on hif^li,
wait ; and a strange and solemn silence
reigns for one small moment. ' We come
to arrest the citoyen Kerguennec ; let him
come forward, and you are all free.' A
loud and derisive and furious laugh answers
him ; and the hight begins afresh and with
renewed vigour.

Suddenly Rohan's father reels forward
stunned from a blow on the head, and
falls senseless to the ground. But Rohan
does not see him ; wounded also, he has
scarcely strength left to parry the blows
when a strange idea rushes through his
mind. He moves back, falls like one
dead among the dying, strips a coat
from the corpse of a Republican near
him, dresses himself with a feverish
hand, and rising up, now exposed to the
blows of his own men, joins his enemies.

The tumult and disorder help him ; he
touches with his hands the walls of the
Chateau, almost wishes he could kiss them
With his lips, so thankful is he to be
near. At that moment the door, broken
through by the sappers' axes, gives way;
and, the soldiers rushing in, he is dragged
one of the first into the interior among
them.

But, as the soldiers repulse those at the
gate, they find themselves faced by fresh
foes. The comte is there at the head of
a small band of brave men, and the victory
remains still undecided. He is very pale,
with a strange, far-off smile of peace on
his lips, but he fights bravely.

Not long; some of the soldiers have
had time and opportunity to reload ; they
fire, and, struck mortally, he falls down
hit Rohan's feet. Rohan, horror-stricken,

bends clown towards him ; his eyes meet
the comte's dying look.

My wife ! Renee !' he murmurs ; while
the whole mass of soldiers, pressing forward,
pass over dead and dying and
enter the hall so dear to memory — conquerors.


They spread over the Chateau in their
rage to seize upon anyone there. The
comte is dead, they have seen him fall ;
but they may be able to bring some of
his friends to the tribunal instead of
him — a daughter, a wife, anyone. They
pass from room to room ; flowers there are
and open instruments of music ; a large
straw hat thrown carelessly on a table ;
an embroidery-frame with silks ready for
work ; — all the signs of life. The sweet
perfumes of the chambers tell of refined
elegance ; the ornaments, of purity of taste ;

ease, beauty, comfort on all sides — but
where are those that lived there, those
women so delicate ?

The nest is warm, but the birds have
flown,' say the soldiers. ' But what of it?
we have the Chateau.' And, forgetting
the living and the dead, they give themselves
up to rejoicing.

Loud and long were the sounds of
revelry. They knew that they could not
be attacked where they were, and that the
peasants would not move that day ; for was
not their lord stretched among the dead
whom they would bury on the morrow? —

The storm so long suspended in the
skies had broken forth at last, and enormous
and mighty waves leaped against
the walls of the Chateau, shaking it to
its very foundation, as if they also were
bent on its ruin. The wind blew through
galleries, crashing the open doors to.

or shaking them as with violent and
invisible hands. Now and again an old
wall fell down with a loud crash, while the
thunder rolled above as if threatening
utter destruction to the old castle, and
the vivid flashes of lightning showed
the angry sea and the dark country
around.

The soldiers listened for a while with awe
to the voice of the tempest, and rejoiced
they were housed for the night after their
terrible day. And their prisoners heard
it too. Twenty-seven men were there shut
up in a small room ; no bread or water had
been given them — hunger and thirst will
tame them, the officers had said. And
they were there bearing with thirst and
hunger and the sense of defeat. ' God !
open to us thy Paradise — or — let us be
revenged !' they pray.

And, besides these, others there were

into whose hearts each peal of thunder,
each shock of the waves sent a thrill of
pain and fear. In the ' Threshold of Death
the comtesse, Renee, and the cure were refuged.
The comtesse — on a couch carried
there in a hurry, and exhausted with her
sobbing — seemed at every new peal of
thunder ready to pass away. The cure
was in prayer ; on him depended at this
hour the safety of those two women ; and
he listened with crushing anxiety, but for
noises different from those of the storm.

Renee, looking at the rush of the
furious waves, wondered if the fate of the
Chateau was sealed. — ' Woe ! woe to Kern
— Was it a dream? Did these
two near her, hear it even as she did, or
was it her excited imagination alone that
reproduced the moaning sounds? Woe
to Kerguennec ! and the tower shook
and vibrated like a ship struck by the

strong waves in the hour of peril. Would
it resist the gale, or crumble over them ?
Would the waters reach them, and carry
them far, far away, where all that had
been dear was not ; where there was no
friend near — or bury them within the very
sight of the walls ?

How long, God! how long these
hours of distress ! Where were their
defenders — the comte, Monsieur de carnot,
Rohan ? Where were the strong
and manly, who held heart and life in
their hands — would they never see them
again ? What had happened ? How was
it none came ?

Oh ! they cannot be gone, they cannot,
cannot all be gone !' Renee shuddered ;
and, one look into the loneliness of grief it
would be, she cried : — Take me, God !
take me also to Thee.'

The priest had told her of the means

VOL. II. R

of getting into the cave underneath, supposing
the soldiers came to this ruined
part of the Chateau. She could brave
the wind, and the wet, and the horror
of such a descent, — but her aunt? All she
could do was to hope that she would be
in a swoon, if they were forced to avail
themselves of that last refuge.

Neither Monsieur Brevelaye nor Renee
cared to speak, and the comtesse only
now and then moaned in pain. Night
came on and darkness, and the tempest
still raged. The cure had expected his
brother, and became more and more
alarmed as time passed on. Lo'ik and the
curate knew where they were. What could
prevent his brother from bringing them
news ; and how could he himself dare to
move without knowing what had taken
place ?

During a lull in the tempest, the noise
of the soldiers had reached even them.
They knew that their friends were defeated,
and that the soldiers were rejoicing. One
way of escape out of the Chateau there
was — the cure had passed it many a time
himself, but he could not guide them
without a light ; besides, it was beyond
the comtesse's strength even to think of
it. So there they must remain till their
fate was decided.

How slow those dark hours ! How long,
how long that night ! And yet, at last,
it had passed away. The first speck of
light appeared on the horizon, the storm
had ceased, the sky was clear, though the
waves rushed on still before falling to rest.
With that pale, white light, hope returned
to them. Eenee saw the end of their
terrible trial. At last, at last, the day

had come ; at last they would know ; at
last this awful suspense would cease !

Better die, better die,' she murmured
to herself, ' than be left alone and desolate.
What can be death, a quick death, compared
with the night we have just spent?'
But hope whispered to her young heart
that all could not be lost, that their friends
could not be all dead ; her eyes were fixed
on the sky that became clearer and clearer,
and a smile trembled on her lips. ' It will
be sweet to be all together again after this,'
she said to herself And already she saw
the flowers and her beloved home, and life
was as before, with its many joys. Blessed
light of the morning, how glad weary eyes
are to see thee, and weary hearts to
welcome thee !

Suddenly far-off cries reached them,
and firing. They looked at each other

startled. And all three, joining their
hands, cried :

God ! help our friends ; help those
we love !'

CHAPTER IX.

The hours of darkness, that had seemed so-long
to the poor women and the fugitive
priest, had been but too short for those
bent on the work of rescue.

The first care of the peasants, when the
gates of the Chateau had been shut against
them, was to look after their dead. On
that day, however, there was no priest to
perform the burial service, and the dead,
meanwhile, were taken into the church
and put near the wounded. The latter,,
among whom was Monsieur de Carnoet,
were entrusted to the women's care. The
blow he had received on the head, and

from which he had fainted, had left no
serious traces after it. Easily recognised
and tenderly administered to, he recovered
quickly, and after a while,
memory returning to him, his terrible
anxiety about his son and those at the
Chateau brought him back to full consciousness,
and he asked what had become
of those he had left there. No one knew.
That the Chateau was in the hands of the
soldiers was all they could tell him, and
that the comte and Rohan must either be
dead or prisoners was certain.

He got up from the straw bed he had
been lying upon and looked for the men ;
but those who had fought during the day
were sleeping, and the others who had
come attracted by the news, and who had
not done anything as yet, were taking
shelter against the fearful storm. At last
Loik came, and the two men, on seeing

each other, knew instinctively that the
same wish was in their minds.

Have you any news, Loik ?'

None, none at all.'

But our people at the Chateau, what
will become of them ?'

The men are dead or prisoners ; the
ladies are in the care of my brother, and
safe.'

Then Monsieur de Carnoet remembered
that the ' Threshold of Death ' had been
spoken of when they were taking measures
for the defence, as a last place of safety
for the helpless women in case of defeat.

Do you mean to say that the poor
comtesse is there in that room, on such
night? It will kill her.'

The peasant made the sign of the cross
devoutly, and murmured :

God's will be done ! I could not help
them in this storm ; and, with the soldiers

on the watch, to have carried the comtesse
away was impossible. But they are at
least safe ; they will not fall into the
hands of the soldiers. My brother is
there ; he knows the secret, and they
can all escape. Though how Madame le

Comtesse can bear with the wet cave '

And the stern peasant's face looked almost
tender.

Loik, what can be done for the comte
and my son?'

'They must be rescued,' he replied,
promptly. ' I have been busy about it
while you were unconscious, and have
found a few men willing to come with me.
I know of a passage that will take us
into the interior of the Chateau. Once
there, we will fall on the Republicans, kill
the miscreants, and then look for Monsieur
le Comte and your son, and go to the
ladies. Maybe they will all be able to

sleep in their own beds to-night. God
grant it ! God grant it, sir !'

You are a good fellow, Loik,' Monsieur
de Carnoet replied. ' I will go with you ;
I feel strong enough now, — a little faint
only, — but you have some bread, no doubt,
to give me ?'

Yes, bread we have, and only bread,'
the man replied. ' We had all to feed
on bread and water to-day after our
hard work. Life is sad, master, life is
sad for such as we.'

Life is sad in these days for everyone,
Loik ; but we have all the same end in
view ; we shall rest some day from our
labours and sorrows.'

Amen ! and may it be soon !' replied
the peasant, crossing himself again.

But now to work. Call the men, and
let us see them and speak to them. They

had better come into the church, the storm
is terrible.'

Yes.' And, going to the church steps,
Loik gave the cry of the Chouans three
times ] and men, starting from all kinds
of sheltering corners and places, came forward
silently.

They entered the church, where a few
small tapers were burning close to the
dead. The rest of the building was lost
in gloom. It was a ghastly sight to see
in the semi-darkness the dead forms of
those once strong men lying on the cold
stones, and the feeble light of the tapers
flickering in the wind that rushed through
the open door, and lent a strange, lifelike expression
to their faces. There was not one
of those men but had felt sure of going to
Paradise after death, and yet not one on
whose face feelings of cano-er or hatred

would not be traced. They had died fighting
and cursing their enemies, and the
sad tale could be read in their clenched
hands and set teeth. Yet many of those
enemies were their brethren — Bretons
speaking the same tongue and possessed
of the same virtues as they • Bretons of
the town who carried with them the inheritance
of many centuries of loyalty,
purity, and bravery ; who had parted from
the ignorant villagers in their youth — or
perhaps their fathers had done so before
them. These had been foremost in adopting
the ideas of liberty.

These thoughts passed rapidly through
Monsieur de Carnoet's mind as he looked
at the dead, and the cry arose in his heart,
Lord ! how long !' — But the comte
and his son were now threatened victims,
unless God had already taken them to
Himself, and these he must look for and

save, if it was in the power of man to save
them. Fifty men fresh and strong were
ready. It was enough. Each knelt for a
few minutes in prayer by the dead, passed
a few grains of his rosary through his
fingers, and rose to his feet prepared to
start.

Loik, will it take us long to go through
that passage ?'

An hour.'

An hour ! It is a long time ! And
you are sure the coming out can be done
safely?'

Quite safely ; the passage ends in a
subterranean strong-room which will hold
us all. But I will go forward ; I know
the place so well that I need no light, and
if all is right I will return to you, and
you can follow. Don't be afraid ; we shall
fall upon our enemies before they know
that we are in the Chateau near them. — ■

God grant we may destroy them all.'

Amen, and Amen,' replied the men all
together, with fearful earnestness.

After we have exterminated them, we
will look for Monsieur le Comte and
Monsieur Rohan and the ladies and our
cure, who are waiting for us to help them.
Remember all of you that if we don't save
them they will die on the scaffold.'

Yes, we must save Monsieur le Comte
and my son, the cure and the ladies, and
I will go with you ; but, were you prisoners
instead of them, I would go all the
same to try and save any one of you. You
know that I speak the truth ; you know
that no Carnoet has ever failed the poor
and oppressed.'

Bless you, sir, bless you, do we not
know ?' they cried, interrupting him.

We will therefore fight to the last, and.

having done our duty, we can but die.'
We can but die,' they cried out pointing
to the dead, ' and be even as they.'

The little band started in the violent
rain, the lightning playing round them ;
but they went on undismayed. When at
the entrance of the secret passage, hid
in a hollow near that very dolman where
the spy had taken Loik, they plunged into
the darkness one by one. They went
on for half-an-hour, and then Loik left
them, and ran on ahead. They listened
long, but no other noise did they hear
than their own breathing. Monsieur de
Carnoet felt his heart beating violently,
for, if the soldiers discovered Loik and
the passage, the doom of all was sealed.
Still, like his companions, he cared little
about death.

It seemed a long, long time before

they heard the returning steps of Lo'iky
who told them there was no danger.
They went forward in single-file, feeling
the wall on both sides. The thick atmosphere
was telling even on their iron
frames, when at last a feeble light was seen
in the distance; and, pressing forward
quicker and quicker, they at last reached
in safety the room Lo'ik had spoken of

Once there they arranged their arms,
and looked around them. Then Loik left
them once more under the care of Monsieur
do Carnoet, and went on to see if
the enemy was on the watch. But the
soldiers were otherwise occupied, and,
except a few sentinels posted here and
there, no precautions had been taken
against a surprise.

Gliding noiselessly along on his naked
feet, Loik reached a gallery where a sleepy
sentinel was marching up and down. Lo'ik

knew that they must pass that gallery.
Waiting therefore till the sentinel should
be close to him, he sprang forward,
drove his knife into him, and the man
fell down dead without a groan. Having
thus cleared his way, he was about to
go on when he recognised, close by, one of
his sad Breton songs, and, going towards
the sound, he found the place where all
the prisoners were. He understood now
why a sentinel had been placed there.

The key was in the lock, and the darkness
inside was so great that only those
touching the door knew that somebody
had entered. Loik told the poor bewildered
peasants who he was, and they
pressed round him in the eagerness of
despair, and only too gladly joined him.

They came out noiselessly, and went to
where the others were, and such arms as
could be spared were given them.

VOL. II. s

There were two doors in the room, both
leading by passages into the hall where
the soldiers were drinking. Through one
of these Loik had been. The wine found
in the cellars of the Chateau had been
welcome to the exhausted soldiers, and
the officers were, like their men, more
or less intoxicated. Songs, cheers, and
boasting were heard on all sides.

Loik, with half the men, went through
one door ; Monsieur de Carnoet, with the
rest, through the other. Unperceived, they
approached silently and noiselessly nearer
and nearer, — relentless as fate. Had
any of the soldiers then come out of the
room, they must have discovered that they
were being taken as in a trap ; but none
came — and suddenly, in the middle of an
uproar caused by two soldiers fighting,
the doors leading into the hall were burst
open, and the peasants streamed in.

To depict the tumult, the rage, and the
cries of revenge — how everything, every
knife or chair, became a weapon in the
hands of furious men ; how they clung to
each other even in the agony of death,
is impossible. One advantage the Bleus
gained upon their foes, they managed to
draw near one of the doors which, in the
fury of the fight, Lo'ik's men had forgotten
to guard ; and it was when they were
rushing out into the corridors and outside
galleries, that the cries of the battle had
reached the fugitives in the tower.

Some of the soldiers tried to escape by
throwing themselves from the old ruined
battlements, or out of the windows ; but
their assailants pursued those that were
left from room to room, from refuge to
refuge, till at last they came to the
place where the comte had fallen.

While the fight was at its height a

s 2

drunken soldier from among those who
had escaped from the hall seized a light,
and, rushing up a wide flight of steps
before him, ran from room to room with
the cries and laughter of a maniac, setting
fire to everything that would burn. Ina
moment curtains and draperies were
in a blaze ; and unrestrained in his work
of destruction, and finding another staircase,
he went doAvn. He was at last seized
and killed, though no one as yet knew the
mischief he had done.

The body of the comte had been discovered
where the prisoners said he had
fallen, and was brought with reverence
into the hall ; but Rohan was nowhere to
be found. Distracted with grief, Monsieur
de Carnoet left his men and roamed about
the rooms, till suddenly coming to the
second story, he found himself facing a
most fierce and destructive fire.

At his cries every man rushed up, but
only to see that with the high wind still
prevailing, nothing could be done to quench
the flames ! Horror-stricken, they seized
upon whatever they could save, and, leaving
the rest to its fate, hurried out into
the open air. Monsieur de Carnoet in
despair, and calling out his son's name,
was the last to leave, and that only when
the thought rushed through his mind that
Rohan might be in the tower with the
comtesse and Renee. He reached the
tower ; the ladies and the cure were there,
but not Rohan, and the unfortunate father,
returning near the fearful fire, called again
on the son he so loved, and whom he
feared he had lost for ever.

Rohan, — already wounded, — while bending
to see after the comte, received a thrust
from a bayonet. The blood rushed from the
wound, and he fainted away. The pouring

rain, however, revived him so far that
after a while, he was able to remember
where he was and what had taken place ;
but as soon as he tried to move, his wounds
bled afresh, and he had only just strength
and presence of mind enough to crawl for
shelter under a low, wooden gallery running
along the wall, where some light
faggots of wood had been brought. Making
his way as well as he could, he lay down
sheltered from the rain, and staunched somewhat
the blood flowing from his wounds.

The noise of the tempest as well as the
light came to him as through a mist. He
longed for the help of those men whose
cries he could hear, — the help of any
human hand. Ah ! to die thus alone ! nota
friend's voice, not a friend's hand near !
Would he die forgotten? Who would
weep for him ? Oh, how the longing to
live struggled against the enfeebled ]towers

of life, how the coldness of death seized
upon his heart and made him long for the
warmth and the strength of the living !

And there, in that slow agony, a sweet
presence came and hovered round about
him with a look of pity on her lovely face ;
an apparition-like form that had no voice,
and yet whose sympathy was felt ; an
angel free from mortal pain and whose
soft radiance shed a light of gladness
around the wounded man's head ; a
shadow through which he could see his
past life when, as a living man, he handed
roses and lilies to a beautiful woman he
loved ; when, as a living man, he heard her
voice and joined in her songs ; when, asa
living man, he felt the warmth of love
come to his heart and abiding there.

And then, Avhen the cries reached him,
a feeling of weariness so great, a longing
for man's face so overpowering that he

determined to try and rise. He staggered up,
unable at first to understand the meaning
of the fearful cries, and, standing clutching
at the wall, he listened long, till the cries
ceased and he heard only one voice calling
out :

Eolian, Rohan ! In God's name, answer !'

And the once strong man recognised his
father's voice, and tried to reply, butin
vain ; and his very weakness startled
him.

But he must go towards that voice which
calls him. He leaves his retreat ; and the
Chateau in flames bursts on his enfeebled
sight. The Chateau, the Chateau on fire
so much he can conceive, then, suddenly
Renee, where is she ?

For him the arrangements of the morning;
before the fio-ht are a blank ; one
thought and only one is there now to
recall the last powers of life, the flickering

breath that is almost gone — the Chateau
on hire, and Renee there. He creeps along,
making his way slowly into the house, and
reaches the large hall. The embroidery-frame
is in its place, the low couch on
which the comtesse reclined, the chair he
himself had sat in so often near her. The
roses are still fresh in their vases, and
everything seems so much as it used to
be that he lingers there, the past coming
back slowly to him, the present seeming
far away ! He goes to the table and rests
his hand on it. A wine-glass is there and
some wine, and he stretches out his hand
and drinks, and feels glad that he has
done so.

Little by little, he is conscious of a
new discomfort — the smell of burning.
And suddenly the noise of the fire
startles him, and the flames burst into the
room ! He starts back. ' Renee,' he cries.

But the utterance is new and strange to
him, and there is no one to answer.

Renee, Renee,' he calls again, gazing
on the flames that are advancing nearer
to him. Then he thinks he hears her in
the noise of the crackling fire ; he fancies
he hears a laugh ; he seems to see her
floating through the white smoke, such
as she appeared to him a short while
since. A fearful hallucination takes hold
of him. She is there where the volumes
of smoke are the densest ; she is safe
there, sheltered from the fierce fire; and
he advances and falls back with a cry.

Meanwhile the flames, which have crept
at first small and light, from curtain to
curtain, which have played fitful and free
among the flowers, and lapped eagerly
the water that kept them fresh, have
become the nnghty conquerors of the old
Chateau of the Kerguennecs. Who will

dare to dispute it with them? Powerful
they rise, mingle, and increase, and everything
is play to them ! — Vases and statues,
pictures and ornaments, soft lace folds and
dresses, and jewels and books, all is food
for them : they go to them, search for them
in closets and rare cabinets — up and downright
and left, but ever forward, ever increasing
on their march, and annihilating
everything under their cruel welcome. They
dance with the varying wind, they fly from
the sound their touch has called forth from
a bell ; they sway to and fro, graceful
and light ; they reproduce themselves
before a large mirror, admire themselves,
go forward to kiss their image, and destroy
by their burning caress. Mocking,
they ask, ' Where are those who gloried
in this beautiful place? Where is all
that made it so precious and so dear?
Where are the many objects brought

there together by loving hands, and in
the course of centuries ? The small tokens
of affection and the swords of the great and
strong men, the silk in daily use, and the
tapestry of those far-ois women of past
ages ? Where is the portrait of the sweet
maiden who called forth love in many a
knight's heart, and where that of the sweet
maiden of to-day?'

All is welcome to the devouring flames,
and they grow grand from the very destruction
they work. Now to ceilings and rafters,
wainscoting and sculptured images; nowt
roofs old with age and the wear and tear
of time — till glorious they rise towards
the sky, and challenge the morning sun !

Rohan, yielding before the fire, has seen
it all. He goes further and further back
before the falling wreck, till, in the agony
of his soul, a cry rises supreme — ' Surely,

God of mercy, such a fate was not lies !'

The thought has saved him. Suddenly

the remembrance of the tower flashes

before his mind. He falls, trembling, on

his knees, hymns of thankfulness rising
in his heart. She is safe, safe ! — and he
is willing to die. But love is strong, even
stronger than death ; his heart beats with
fresh force, and he forgets his weakness. —
He must see her, hear her, and then

And he guides himself through the
falling burning wreck, and reaches the
tower at last. He hears voices ; he sees a
form carried away safely past him ; a face
so dear that life is nothing compared with
the joy of seeing it; and he would have
fallen at Renee's feet, had not his father
received him in his arms.

Monsieur de Carnoet carries his son to
the sofa the comtesse has just left, and
Renee, at the sight of the pale and haggard

face, the burnt clothes, utters a cry of
pain and falls on her knees by him. She
seizes the hand that hangs helpless ;
clasps it in hers tenderly, softly presses
her face against it, and bathes it with her
tears.

She longs, ah ! how much, to see him
open his eyes again ; she longs to meet his
gaze, to see him open his lips, and say that
he still lives.

Oh ! that we should find him thus —
thus,' she murmurs.

Better thus than lost,' the father
replies.

And Renee gets up trembling ; she has
forgotten herself — she does not cry, nor
weep, but, when they have done all they
can, she kneels down again and watches
for the flickering breath to return ; and
at Last a kind of sob escapes his lips.
Life is near ; at any moment he may now

open his eyes. She calls him, in a low
voice and tenderly. But the father, who
has recovered from the first shock, remembers
what Renee is to the man helpless
there. What would the effect of seeing
her close to him at such a moment be ? —
Would it not be death ?

Renee, dear Renee,' he says, ' Rohan
will return to consciousness soon, and
would it not be better if — if he were then
alone with his father?'

She rises suddenly to her feet, and asks,

Will he recover? — do you say that he
will recover?'

Please God he will.'

Greatly agitated, she seizes his arm,
and cries low to him,

Monsieur de Carnoet, do not tell him
I was here helping you. Oh ! what is it
that has come over me ? What is this
feeling of distress ?' she goes on, plaintively.

monsieur de Carnoet, have pity
on me ; do not tell him — do not tell him.'

And, bursting into a flood of tears, she
kneels down by the wounded man again,
presses her face lovingly to his hand, and
then rushes away.

Monsieur de Carnoet looks after her.

Is it so ? are my fears ' and then,

looking at his son — ' Wake up, wake up,
for there is still in the distance of years
for thee one of the most precious of God's
gifts here below — the love of a pure, noble,
and hiofh-minded woman.'

CHAPTER X.

The flames of the Chateau were still
fierce, and the wind still carried away,
but more fitfully now and at smaller distances
thrush the air, the lighter debris
of what had once been ; and, though
the men bearing away the comtesse had
gone out of their way to avoid the sight,
fragments floated on her as she passed.
She looked at them sadly, but without
tears.

To Monsieur de Carnoet had fallen the
sad task of speaking of the dead, and
she knew now that the comte was killed.

VOL. II. T

But to the kind of numbness that had
fallen on her at first ; to the more terrible
grief when the full understanding of
her loss had come to her, had succeeded
a quiet acquiescence in her fate. He was
gone, he who was joy and life to her;
he had left her, but not for long ; and
she was willing to go also. — ' It will befor
so short, for so very short a time,'
he had told her ; and a sad, sad smile
of resignation rested on her lips.

All the words he had said to her that
day were with her now, and she rejoiced
that a foretaste of everlasting peace had
come to him before his death ; had come
to him even as it was now with her —
she was ready to die, ready to pass away.
Frail and tender plant, she had clung
in her weakness to the noble stem, and
to it she owed whatever of strength
and beauty there had been in her ;

I

away from him, her flowers crushed
in the dust of sorrow, she was willing
that the feeble roots which still linked
her to earth should also be wrenched
away.

They took her to the Manoir, put her
in Madame de Carnoet's bed, and, as she
lay there, she murmured to herself: — 'God
is good. I shall die in comfort and peace,
though all that was dear to me while he lived
is gone.' — With eyes shut, she waited for
the summons to come, not even caring
whether it would be long in coming.
Feebly did her heart beat, and feebly
rested her hand where it had first fallen
when she was put to bed ; no movement betrayed
that life was there, no wish was
there in her to retain life. He was gone,
and she would go to him — in 'so short, so
very short a time.' And Renee she had
forgotten.

T 2

How different the feelings of the feeble
and ailing woman, willing and ready to
die, from those of the strong, healthy girl
who still looked to life for happiness.
What could resignation to die mean to
the active mind, the ready eye, the quick
elastic step ? How could the looking forward
to death bring a sense of content
and peace of mind? Far from shutting
her eyes, as her aunt had done, while
passing the blackened walls of the castle
she stood still where they could best be
seen.

Everything, everything was gone from
her, and the past lay there. The home
of her forefathers was no more ; their
name would disappear from the earth with
her: past deeds of glory, past deeds of
cruelty perhaps, they were all there, buried
together ! What are we, what are we poor
creatures of a day, with our longings and

struggles ? Those men of her House, she
could fancy them all ; their pictures still
where they had hung so long, were before
her eyes, though she now gazed at
the crumbled walls. Why had they lived,
why was she the only one left, — left even
after her home, their home Alas gone ?

No doubt their own sorrows and joys
had been their first care, even as her
own sorrows and her own joys were her
first care now. They were gone. God,
who had seen the first of the race, now
saw the last.

And she had lost everything, everything!
Her uncle was dead, and the
man she loved so tremblingly that she
dared not acknowledge it, lay dying too.
And he was nothing to her j at the first
sign of his return to consciousness his
father had sent her away, never thinking
of what it would be to her to see him open

his eyes ; nevers thinking of the long, weary
way before her in her loneliness.

And she was now going to his house ;
to their hospitality she would owe to rest
in peace. Had she any right there ? Was
it honourable she should remain under the
roof of the man who made her regret to be
betrothed to another?

Once in the room where they had
brought her, she stood reluctant to touch
the things around her — to, as it were, take
for a time possession of them ; she had no
right to be there ; and noah, even more
than when she saw the Chateau on fire,
did a sense of utter desolation fall on her.
She had no home; she had no right to
Rohan de Carnoet's home.

Standing near the door and hiding her
face in her hands, she wept bitterly and
long ; she wept not only for the loss of

the uncle she had loved, not only for
the loss of her home, but because she
was faithless to the man she had promised
to marry, because fate brought her to live
near him she was bound to avoid — because
Rohan had always been so cold to her.

At that moment she heard some noise
outside. She went to the window, and saw
Rohan being; brought in. Her heart beat

O CD

strangely ; her first impulse was to rush
to him, but suddenly she stopped ; — no,
she was nothing to him, — he was nothing
to her. On his father devolved the
task of nursing him ; she had no right
to be there near him ! Yet she was
in his home, must remain in his home
till her aunt — left her. She would be
strong ; her most intimate thoughts and
feelings she would hide. A lonely woman
she would go through the martyrdom of

unheeded love, lie would sacrifice herself
to her plighted word.

That pain which made her heart throb as
if it would break, no one should ever know
of it ; although everything for her was
changed, she would be for all the same
Renee as before ; she would bear in silence
with her secret — for what would her humiliation
not be if Rohan were to upbraid her
for her faithlessness.

She would face those she deceived, laugh
when her heart bled — And for the first
time Renee tasted of the bitterness of life.

But her aunt she had left too much
alone, and she went to her. She found her
in that same peaceful state, and looking
as if she was passing away. To remain
alone now, now, Renee felt she could not,
the loneliness of the life before her was too
awful to contemplate. Her aunt was the
only link that bound her to earth, the only

being that could attach her to the world ;
she must hear her aunt's voice, she must
meet her look, were she to bring her back
from heavenly visions to earth's sorrowful
realities.

Aunt,' she murmured low, ' you feel
better now — calmer?'

Renee !'

And the invalid looked at the young
girl with the dream of a better land still
on her face.

Speak to me, aunt ; tell me '

Ah ! Renee, yes, it is peace, peace.'

And Renee sighed deeply.

Tell me more, tell me all,' she went on,
in a whisper.

He calls me ; he is saying again — '' It
is for so short, so very short a time." —
And I am going to him.'

Renee could bear no more.

Oh, aunt !' she cried, suddenly, ' do not, do

not leave me ! do not leave me here alone,
alone upon earth ! Dear aunt, have pity
on me. Live, oh ! live still for my sake.
Think also of me, also of me ! What am
I to do when you are gone ? Remember
that there are no convents left where I
could go and hide. But, you near me, I
have a home still. Your presence is my
strength and my help and my protection.
You gone, oh ! where, where can I go !
Think of me, of me also, even if by so
doing you lose years of Paradise — even if
uncle is waiting for you. Think of my
loneliness, of my utter desolation. Live,
oh ! live for me, live for me !'

And she fell on her knees, hiding her
head low in her hands and sobbing aloud.

The comtesse heard her ; a look of pain
crossed her face ; in deep distress she gazed
long at the head braved in misery near

her bed. She saw the girl convulsed
with sobs; she realized the loneliness that
would be her lot. But she wished to go
she wanted to join him who had been,
and was still, everything to her. She
longed to lose her hold of life ; she longed
for the peace of death.

Renee,' she murmured, ' rise, child ;
take courage. God will find you friends.'

But Renee heard her not ; all the billows
of grief had passed over her head ; there
was no hope left — no hope, no hope left ;
but despair only.

Speak to me, Renee, speak to me.'

But she could not speak. Her uncle
was dead, and her home burnt to the
ground, and her aunt dying, and Rohan
was a stranger to her, and she was left
desolate !

Renee, do not weep,' the sweet voice

of lier aunt went on, ' do not weep. I had
forgotten ; in my happiness, selfishness had
come to me ; I had forgotten, I had forgotten.
— But rise, Renee ; for your sake I
will live, I will try to live ; he will wait forme,
will approve of my remaining here for
you. — Dear child, rise and help me to live!
Help me to live for your own sake ; there
will be some comfort left still for us in
our mutual love. Renee, I could give you
nothing more precious than this time away
from my beloved. Help me to live, Renee,
poor Renee, poor child, to live for your
sake.'

Renee rose up ; she pressed her aunt in
her arms, unable still to speak. She put
her head like a child to its mother's
bosom and wept there long ; then at last
she said,

God will reward you, aunt ; God will
reward you a thousandfold for this your

great and willing sacrifice. Oh ! do not
leave me, do not leave me !'

But her aunt, who was exhausted by
their night of sorrows, lay there almost unconscious.
Renee attended to her eagerly,
and she said, gently,

It is a poor staff you are relying on,
dear child ; but we will both try to get
very strong. Let us now think of rest,
we have both sad need of it, have we
not? Come with me; lie there close tome
; do not let me go, Renee, do not
let me go, since you have need of me ;
I will try to live for you, I will try, dear
child. But come and rest now, we have
need of rest.'

We have, we have, — if only we can find
rest.'

Renee, we shall find rest ; it is only
to the burdened conscience that rest is
refused.'

And to the faithless Renee murmured
to herself.

Exhausted, they slept. And dreams
of Heaven came to them, dreams of the
uncle there, and of angels, and of a brilliant
sun, and of lovely flowers, and of
Jacob's ladder uniting Heaven and earth
in an immutable bond of love ! Fighting,
and burning, and killing, and all the
agonies of war — all was far, far away
from the two women whose hearts beat
for others, and whose thoughts were
of love ; and far from her who was
ready even to give up the happiness of
Heaven for the good of another In peace,
they lay under Rohan's roof, and as yet
unknown to him, who would have had
no dearer wish on earth than to keep them
there for ever.

His wounds were not mortal, and he
had been in no danger but what could

arise from extreme exhaustion. At last
the moment came when he had to be
told of the presence of the comtesse and
of Renee in his home. It was well his
father had chosen his time to tell him,
for the young man had not the strength
to bear the news unmoved ; his joy and
fear, his thankfulness and anxiety for a
time overwhelmed him.

She was brought to him, the girl he
loved and must avoid, brought into his
home ! Hoar could he hide his true feelings
under the veil of hospitality ? How could
he see her in the familiar places of his
childhood, in the familiar places where
his mother had loved him, and refrain
from taking her to his heart ? Oh ! it
was hard, hard that the trial should be
made so much beyond what he could
bear; it was hard — yes — but, withal, so
sweet !

They both dreaded the time when they
should meet, when he would have, as an
invalid, to join the life in common ; they
dreaded it — but in their inward souls looked
forward to it. Was he, in his convalescence,
to refuse to be brought daily in
contact with her ? Could she, in his weak
state, refuse him, and that too in his own
home, the many little cares an invalid
requires ?

They met, and the first moment was pure
delight. — Oh ! the treacherous calm of these
days, when a man's strength has become
like that of a little child, and he feels weak
and loving; and life opens again before
him with a new sense of joy, and a new
understanding of hope on earth !

To go and fight and kill an adversary
if need be, nerves one for a needed
struggle; but to be at home, the object
of tender cares, to live in contact with

sweet womanhood, would it be wonderful
if one partook of womanly feelings, and of
woman's weakness also ? — And the danger
was great.

But Providence came to the rescue
according to its own ways. One day
Renee was seated just outside the grounds
on a seat erected on a height from whence
beautiful and far-oiF views were seen. Surrounded
by miles of heath and gorse in
bloom wherever she looked, in the distance
or at her feet, she could see every
hollow place, every slope adorned with
diversity of culture or different kinds of
trees, while here and there huge granite
rocks, the ' bones of Brittany,' some with
large patches of yellow lichens, some altogether
bare, pierced through the soil.
This lovely landscape lay enclosed between
two arms of the sea, shining under the
sun with a dazzling line of light ; and above

VOL. 11. u

all, our blue vault the sky, pure and
cloudless.

The seat had been erected by the Car-poets,
and many a traveller went out of
his way to climb the height and gaze
for a while around. As Renee sat entranced
before the lovely sight, she heard
the noise of horses passing below the knoll.
She rose to her feet to see who it could
be. There were two horsemen, and one of
them, happening to raise his head towards
her and attracted by the graceful outlines
of the girl against the sky, set spurs to his
horse and galloped up to her.

He took off his hat and bent low on
his saddle as if to ask for some direction.
She started, for it was Monsieur de
Trogleff.

He stood there one moment, amazed
at her exceeding beauty. Her severe

mourning lent her a stateliness he had
never dreamt of before, and set off the
pure complexion and perfect oval of her
face.

Though perplexed by his looks, she was
the first to say :

Monsieur de Trogleff, you here ! I
thought you were in Spain.'

I landed only yesterday in Brittany.
But, mademoiselle, please excuse my surprise,
I did not know you were at the
Manoir.' Then, jumping down from his
horse : 'And may I know — ought I to ask
you — this mourning ?'

Did you not hear of what happened tous
at Kerguennec ?'

No, I know absolutely nothing. I entreat
you, tell me.'

There is no Kerguennec left now, —
and my uncle is dead.'

u2

Good heavens ! and I knew nothing; of
all this ! To see you in trouble, in sorrow
thus, is terrible, terrible ! How can I
express to you what I feel ? I, whose life
has been darkened by one bitter disappointment,
though T can never, never dare
to think of you '

But, Monsieur de Troo;leff, you were
going to the Manoir, were you not?
Would it not be better if you come at
once. Monsieur de Carnoet will tell you
all that has taken place. Only be very
guarded before my aunt, please.'

'She lives?'

'Yes, wonderful though it seems, my
poor aunt still lives.' And in her heart
Renee almost reproached herself for that
life which had been given to her. ' Come,'
she said.

They walked in silence, he leading his
horse by the bridle. He introduced her

to his friend ; and when they had reached
the Manoir, she rang and left him to the
care of a servant.

As soon as he found himself in the
presence of Monsieur de Carnoet, all his
fiery ways re-asserted themselves.

What is this, what is this I hear from
Mademoiselle de Kerguennec — her uncle
dead, her chateau destroyed ?'

And Monsieur de Carnoet told him all
that had taken place.

But you, why again in Brittany ? Do
you not know the danger to you and to
your friends T

I shall not remain here. Yes, I know ;
but I am dispatched from the Prince at
Verona ; I am come to raise an army for
the Royal cause. Too long have you
borne with those miscreants ; too long
allowed them to beard you in your very
houses, to take your wives and daughters

from you, to burn down accumulated
treasures of centuries. It is outrageous,
it is — forgive me, — it is pusillanimous ; it
is suicidal ; it should not be in a country
like this where everyone is devoted to the
royal cause. I will raise the cry, '' No
quarter." I will organise the attack as
well as the defence. We will protect our
homes ; re-establish royalty ; in the midst
of our armies we will defy the villains

that would govern us ; we will '

My dear sir,' interrupted Monsieur de
Carnoet, with a smile, 'I see you are just
the same as ever — and, shall I say it ? — a
little too precipitate in your judgment and
measures. But, tell me, are you not acting
with the Comte de Puisaye? He is in
England; the powers there favour him,
and will grant him supplies ; he will return
and take the command of the forces he has

tried to unite. But you speak of raising
armies also '

No, my authority does not come from
the same source. I will in no way be
dependent on his efforts ; I will '

Then will the Royal cause be lost, if
there is division.'

De Puisaye acts too slowly ; De Puisaye
is not to be trusted.'

You mistake, De Puisaye is intelligent,
careful, and clever ; he has made his way
at the Court in London. Besides, should
we not all unite? Will it be as ever?
Too much talk has always been the ruin
of our party.'

Trust me, trust me. Monsieur de Carnoet
; you will see me in no time with an
army round me. I shall call everyone
under the Royal standard. I will protect
you '

Nay, nay ; leave us alone, we ask
for nothing else.'

Do you object to my coming here ; to
my coming to see the comtesse and Mademoiselle
de Kerguennec ?'

The ladies under my roof are free,
Monsieur de Trogleff, free to receive their
friends and do what they please, still I
would prefer their being left unnoticed
just now. There are rumours afloat of
the name of Mademoiselle de Kerguennec
having been mentioned by those we most
dread. She should live hidden here, as
it were ; no attention should be drawn
to the home that shelters her. When once
those people threaten '

'Threaten Mademoiselle de Kerguen-
nec ! Threaten her ! I will not hear of
it. Monsieur de Carnoet. She shall be
protected. I will raise an army to
watch over her ; behind living hearts

devoted to her, she will be safe. I will
defend her with my blood. Have you forgotten
that I love her? My life is hers
to dispose of. I will die for her, if need
be.'

Ay, and many more are there willing
to die for the noble damoiselle, peasants
and seigneurs love. But again, I beg,
moderate your ardour, study more closely
the times, and the means at your command ;
and, above all '

Where is the Chevalier de Valvourgs ?'
In Toulon.'

Ah ! Why there, and not near his
betrothed ?'

He knows best.'

'Ah! if Mademoiselle de Kerguennec
were my betrothed ; if it had been given
to me to speak to her when I first thought
of her ; if T could now call her mine '

At that moment Rohan came into the

room, his pale face paler still, the large scar
on his forehead looking red and angry.
But he said nothing, and Monsieur de
Trogleff felt checked.

Monsieur de Carnoet, turning to his son,
said,

Monsieur deTrogleiF comes from Verona,
with powers from the Prince, and full of
schemes for our sake.'

For our sake !' repeated Rohan, slowly,
looking at their visitor.

I am sorry to see you were seriously
wounded,' interrupted Monsieur de Trog-
less. ' I hope you will unite with me to
punish the miscreants who dared to attack
Kerguennec ; and, when we are in force,
we will put down this infamous government
that respects nothing.'

I hope you will ; my ambition does not
go so far,' replied Rohan, in a not very
encouraging tone.

Would you be satisfied to stop here,
and be trampled upon rather than act ?'

What do you mean ?' asked Rohan.
^ We certainly have not gone out of our
way to fight our enemies, but when they
came — our people did their best.'

Monsieur de TroglefF looked at him, and
seemed to think their best had been very
little.

Yet Kerguennec is lost,' he said.

Yes ; and the comte, who defended it,
is dead.'

In fact you give me no encouragement,'
Monsieur de TrogleiF said, laughing
uncomfortably. ' Yet, I shall pursue
my own schemes, and hold by the orders
I have received from the Prince.
Could I see Madame le Comtesse tomorrow
?'

Rohan rang the bell and asked a servant
to inquire. Yes, Madame la Comtesse

would see Monsieur de TroglefF on the
morrow.

And on the morrow Monsieur de TroglefF
came again to the Manoir.

END OF THE SECOND VOLUME.

London : PRINTED BY DUNCAN Macdonald, BLENHEIM House.

OF THE
UN Diversity
or ILLINOIS

V.3

VOL. III.

BY

A FRENCH LADY

AUTHOR OF "TILL MY Wedding-day.

A troubled record . . . .
A simple record and serene."

Swinburne.

IN THREE VOLUMES.
VOL. Il

LONDON :

HURST AND BLACKETT, LIMITED,

13, GREAT MARLBOROUGH STREET.

1888.

AH Rights Reserved.

B75G
V.3

A BRETON MAIDEN.

CHAPTER I.

Strange as it may seem, Renee's pleasure at
seeing Monsieur che TroglefF was evident ;
all her vivacity returned, she was eager for
news, took interest in the world at large
and discussed the possibility his schemes.
His visit was a long one, and, finding himself
thus welcomed, he soon returned.

In fact, to the grief of Monsieur de Carnoet,
who feared his presence would bring
sorrow to them, and, in spite of the ill-disguised
anger of Rohan, his visits multi-vol.

III. B

plied themselves, so that soon not a day
passed without his coming ; he had always
something to tell or something to consult
about. How could Rohan reconcile Renee's
cheerful ways and lively talk, with her
anxiety about the chevalier and the remembrance
of sorrow that seemed to weisrh hero



down of late ? What was it that made her
so welcome this visitor? She had never
cared for him before ! Often when he
heard her soft laughter in answer to
her visitor's remarks, Rohan would look
at her. With her head raised from her
work, her eyes fixed on Monsieur de
Troo-leff in all innocence, and her face
beaming with pleasure, she seemed to forget
the rest of the world ; but, if by chance
she met Rohan's gaze fixed on her, a slight
flush would come on her face, her tone
grow cold, and all her fun and entrain
disappear.

What was it that had come over her ?
Could she prove faithless to her fiance and
learn to love that man ? Impossible ! as
well believe her capable of any treachery.
How could even the thought of such
a thing come to him about her? But
why that anxious blush ; why so unhappy
or dispirited as soon as Monsieur de
TroglefF was gone ?

Rohan thought of it all in vain ; he
could come to no solution.

And yet, was it not as one might
naturally have expected ? The restraint
Renee was usually under was so great,
that it could not but tell on her ; she
had found herself of late given to fits
of irritability that were beyond her
control ; she had even felt angry —
angry without a cause, as she told
herself, and angry with Rohan of all
men !

b2

Thus to the restraint had been added misgivings
and remorse. She reproached herself
for her maidenly ways ; cried bitterly
over her injustice towards one to whom
she could have nothing to reproach, and
idiom she really admired, she told herself
Her relief in presence of the man
who had known her years before, and
who could share her thoughts of the past
without entering into the depth of her
feeling about some of them — was it to be
wondered at ? With him she felt free, she
could speak of everything that could interest
her, without danger of exposing the
hidden secret of her soul. Their conversation
on the past and the future had nothing
to do with the inner life. She was
aware of the comfort she experienced in
his presence, and prized it enough to be
vexed with Rohan if one of his looks came
and destroyed it.

How changed, how very different she
was! She acknowledged it to herself;
and asked herself why she could not be
as in former times ? But no OTievino;
over the truth could cure the pain or
effect a change. As time went on, and
Monsieur de Trogleff's visits became more
and more part of her life, all her vexatious
feelings about Rohan increased ; so much
so indeed that it became apparent to all
she had some grievance against him.
Monsieur de Carnoet wondered. Had he
misjudged her that night in the tower
when by Rohan ? Had he misunderstood
her meaning? — As to Rohan, his agony
became more intense, but. Spartan like,
he could smile, even while he felt his
terrible grief poisoning the very springs
of his existence.

If Monsieur de Carnoet wondered at the
meaning of Rente's words in the tower,

she had never forgotten them, and often
acted so as to try and make him forget them.

One day he said, playfully,

Renee, I have to complain ; I am not
satisfied with you.' And, as she raised
her head in deep surprise, ' Are we ?' he
went on, turning to his son.

What can you possibly mean, sir?'

Why, Renee at Kerguennec would
crush us with flowers ; we found them
everywhere ; even adorning our bed-rooms,
and I would slyly turn them out during
the night. Yes, yes, it was so ; but now
see how grudgingly she uses them ! I
look in vain all round for any here,,
though the garden and hot-houses are
still full of them;

Oh ! is that all ?' exclaimed Renee,,
relieved ; for, in what she called her guilty
conscience, the words of Monsieur de
Carnoet had almost frightened her. ' I&

that all? Is that why you are so dissatisfied
with me ? But you see I — I did
not think '

stake care how you answer,' he went
on, in the same playful manner. ' Now — '

But she did not know what to answer,
for in fact she had so repeated to herself
that she was a stranger at the Manoir ; that
she Avould soon be gone and missed by
no one, that she had gathered flowers but
with a diffident hand.

I am waiting,' persisted Monsieur de
Carnoet.

What shall I say ?' she asked, turning
to her aunt.

Dear child, hoar can I know?'

Then, looking down at her work, while
a deep blush covered her face, she answered,
trying to smile :

Would it not have been taking a liberty
in your house. Monsieur de Carnoet T

There ! I expected as much ; I knew
as much. It is why I would have you
confess your wickedness before us all.
Eenee, did I not know you when sou were
quite a little child? Have I not nursed
you on my knee ? Have I not been the most
intimate friend of your father, and of your
uncle, and have I not ever been received
by them as if their home was my home ?
But you — ah ! Renee, this is hard, that
you still consider yourself a stranger here.'

No, oh ! no, not a stranger,' the young
girl replied, tears coming to her eyes.
^ No, I like to be with you ; you knoAV
that ; and who else in the world ?'

We have nothing to do with the world
just now; the question is to remain between
us, and be settled between us alone.
Why, having a young lady passionately
fond of flowers with us, do we find flowers
nowhere ?'

I will, in future, bring some, if you
like;

'Oh, do you call that a straightforward
answer ?'

Thus urged, she said, sadly :

I could not bring myself to it. I — I
did not think it redit. — I will now '

My dear child,' Monsieur de Carnoet
said, going to her on seeing her pain,
do try to consider yourself at home with
us ; do let us see your dear old self going
about, and looking to everything, as in
the past. We have no lady here able to
help us poor bachelors — no lady but you ;
do not neglect us. We want your usual
forethought and kindness. You .are nota
stranger to us, but one we love. You
must take Madame de Carnoet's place.'

She gave him a quick, frightened look,
as if to read the meaning of what he said ;
then replied :

'■ You speak out of the kindness of your
heart. I quite see what you mean, and
how you want me to forget the past and
feel at home ; but it is too soon, and —
and '

And what, Renee ?'

Tint courage came to her suddenly.
She wiped her eyes, raised her head, and
said, smiling :

No, I will say no more ; you are
an extremely hard man to please, I
consider. If you want flowers, you shall
have some, there ! but my reasons for
waiting for your leave — well — you will
have to look for it.'

Very well, mademoiselle,' he answered,
in the same tone, ' and so I will. Do you
think me so very unreasonable, Rohan ?'

But the young man got up, and replied
in the same tone also :

Sir, I beg to be excused ; I will not

bear to be so catechised by yon ; it is
monstrous in these days of liberty. Mademoiselle,
may I go and help you to gather
some flowers ? It will be like past times,
and will, no doubt, please this very exacting
gentleman here.'

Yes,' answered Renee, promptly, though
she blushed deeply again, ' yes, come and
show me where they are.'

That is hypocrisy, Rohan ; do not be
deceived ; she knows as well as you do. I
would not go with her if I were you ; I
have seen her stop before those beds for
hours.'

For hours ! Oh, Monsieur de Carnoet !'
For a few half-hours, if you prefer.'
Well, well, never mind ; there is my
mother's basket, mademoiselle. We will
go and fill it.'

With beating heart Renee left the room
with him. It would be so much like old

times — too much so, for old times could
never be again ; and the same thought was
present to their mind as they went on
through the flowers side by side and
silently. Rohan could not speak ; he had
thought that the teasing of his father,
though meant in all kindness, had pained
Renee, and he had wanted to make amends
to her for it ; but now he felt as if he had
overtasked his strength. At last, however,
he said :

'You are not vexed with my father,
are you ?'

Vexed with him ?' she replied, quickly.
' I could not be that ; why do you
ask ?'

I thought you were pained, and that
he made too light of your past sorrows.'

And you asked to accompany me. to
beg for my forgiveness, did you?' she
asked.

I thought you would be glad to go
away for a while.'

So that was all ! A feeling of kindness,
of pity had prompted him to come with
her, — that was all. He would have done
the same for any other guest, she told
herself. And she nerved herself to her task.

Well, now we are among the flowers,
let us make the most of our time, and
bring back plenty. Alas ! they will soon
leave us. There, look at this one, and this,
and this ;' and, laughing with some tinge
of bitterness, she cried : ' Is it not like old
times ? Is not this like old times?'

He caught the discontented note, and
looked at her sadly.

Old times, do you say ? No, it is not ;
for you were happy then.'

Yes, truly, I was.' — A fool's paradise,
she mused to herself; and she felt herself
getting hard.

The chevalier ' Rohan began. But

she interrupted him quickly.

We will leave the chevalier Avhere he
is for the present ; we must wait for news
from him before we speak of him. Why
should you remind me that we do not know
what has become of him ?'

Oh ! I did not mean to displease you ;
I thought '

^ We will not speak of him,' she repeated.
^ I do not wish it ; it is too painful to me.'

Forgive me ; I will not in future.'

You will do well. There, just see
what a splendid geranium.'

It was too much for her to bear ! Rohan's
coldness she must put up with while
under his roof; but hear him speak again of
her Chance as he used to do, hear him praise
him, regret him, see him Ions; for him !
At least she would have her own voice in
the matter, and speak on that subject

when she pleased. And she showed her
irritation.

We have enough, let us go in now.'

Poor Rohan ! He felt her to be cruel
to him. Oh ! why could he not speak
out, and tell her, tell her how he yearned
for her presence ; how he yearned fora
loving word, a tender look. — She had
never one for him ! But it was well, it
was better thus ; it was strength to him,
it was as it should be ; and he followed
her without a word.

Renee re-entered the room noisily, in a
way unlike that she had left it. She
went to Monsieur de Carnoet, showed
him her flowers, and kept on saying : —
This one Monsieur Rohan chose ; it is
his taste ; this he called my attention
to. Now, don't you admire them ?'

And Monsieur de Carnoet also noticed
her irritable dissatisfied way of speaking.

Well, well, Renee, if you are pleased ?'
Of course I am pleased, why should
I not be ? Now, come and help me. Monsieur
Rohan ; come and see if we can
arrange them to satisfy your father.' And
Rohan, an obedient slave to an arbitrary
taskmaster, helped her, and went wherever
she sent him. At last, unable to bear with
the strain any longer, Renee threw the
remaining flowers away on the table,
rushed to her room, and there burst into
an hysterical fit of weeping.

She wanted to go, she wanted to go
away ; she could not bear it any longer,
she told herself; — she could not bear it ;
she could not, she would not. — Long did
she weep ; till, ashamed of himself, she
rose up, and tried to efface the traces
of the tears, but that was not possible. To
send word that she had a head-ache was
a resource forbidden her, for her aunt

would have missed her too much, So
slowly and reluctantly, she returned to
the drawing-room. She sat with her
friends at dinner ; she tried to speak as
if nothing had happened, and they did
the same. When suddenly she burst out :

Please, please forgive me all, please
forgive me. I do not know what has come
over me of late. Monsieur Rohan, I was
so peevish and unpleasant with you, I do
hope you will forgive me. I have no
right to be so, when you are so kind, — both
of you so truly kind to me. What should
we do, my poor aunt and myself, without
you, — without your generous hospitality ?'

'Say no more, Renee,' interrupted Monsieur
de Carnoet, ' say no more, I beg of
you. Your misfortunes Ave cannot alter,
but our hearts are true to you ; and you
know, if things were reversed, how happy
you yourself would be to give us hospitality

VOL. III. c

in your own home. Do not let the past
troubles weigh so on you ; do not deprive
us of the thankfulness we experience in
being of some use to you and your dear
aunt. Remember that we are almost
like one family, and that your presence
is. necessary to us. Do try to be happy
with us, Renee, do try, dear child.'

Renee hung her head low.

I will, I will,' she murmured. ' Forgive
the pain I give when those fits are
upon me ; forgive me, have patience with
me. Let us hope they will pass away.
Forgive me,' she said again. — And, in her
heart, she cried : ' Oh ! what is this, what
is this that has come over me?'

CHAPTER II.

Monsieur de Trogleff was a man full of
reckless energy, and lie succeeded in calling
round him the most discontented and
most disconsolate of the peasants, who,
unable to judge of what the princes and
emigres abroad were contemplating, knew
but one thing, that they were ruined ; that,
whereas once they had a house and sheep
and cattle, they now had to live in holes,
and run the risk of being killed like dogs
if met by any Republican soldiers.

Monsieur de Trogleff did not stop to
consider the feelings that brought those
men round him ; with the white cockade

c 2

pinned to their black felt hats they became
soldiers for him, soldiers in the right cause.
He congratulated himself on their warlike
spirit, and thought to rival the Comte de
Puisaye in his task of organisation. In
his fiery ardour he even refused to understand
how he was putting the lives of the
friends he was visiting in jeopardy.

Again and again did Monsieur de Carnoet
try to show him how the powers he
defied were increasing daily in strength,
and how dangerous to his household his
visits were. For the Manoir might have
remained ignored by the soldiers, so retired
was it, had it not been that his men attracted
the Republicans.

But, instead of being convinced, he
tried to secure Renee's applause and
sympathy. Loud was his blame of the
false security that had betrayed Kern

into the hands of its enemies ;
loud was he in his arguments that a
stronger defensive force would have repulsed
the invaders.

Carried away by his impetuosity and
boldness of speech, Renee was almost won
over to his views, and one day, in the
presence of Monsieur de TrogleiF, she even
tried to persuade Rohan.

I wish,' she said to him, ' you could
agree with us. and see the thing in the
same light as we do ; for I think Monsieur
de Troo:leff to be rio^ht. The isolation we
were left in, with only our servants to
defend us, may indeed have caused our
ruin. It may bring us to the same fate
again here.'

Mademoiselle,' replied Rohan, sadly,
seven the most courageous may be defeated
— such is the fortune of war ; and

the wages of defeat are hard. The
comte was satisfied with our means of
defence. Though we had nothing to oppose
successfully to numbers, many gave up
their life in the struggle ; many devoted
souls, even in dying, regretted the fate
of Kerguennec. They were fewer than
their enemies, but they fought bravely. I
see no strength in a multitude of strange
men brought together near our home.
The will fight, for all Bretons are courageous
and fight well ; but to remain
ignored by our enemies was safer, for
now our fate depends on your men. Monsieur
de Trogleff. — However, I have no
wish to discuss the subject ; the danger
has been brought to us, and we therefore
shall face it.'

You will not see that you are safer
now ?' exclaimed De Trogleff.

^1 will not,' replied Eolian, sternly. ' I

refuse to see it. I must leave it to the
future to decide. I am thankful my health
has returned to me ; you have brought
undisciplined men here, and I will help
you to train them ; but I will not discuss
the matter further with you.'

In vain did Monsieur de Trogleif try to
argue ; Rohan remained firm and silent,
and, Avhen Monsieur de Trogleif had left,
he said to Renee :

Forgive me ; I would I could agree
with you in this, but I cannot, I cannot.
If you knew how much I have your

safety at heart ' Then he stopped

suddenly.

Say no more,' she replied, humbly, ' say
no more ; ought I ever to forget that the
doings of the brave men who died or were
wounded in our service should be above
the criticisms of a daughter of Kern


Monsieur de TrogiefF's plans, however,
were soon to receive their first check, and
unfortunately prove that Rohan was right.

One day the comtesse, in the small
oratory of the Manoir, was alone with
Monsieur Brevelaye, her confessor. Her
sins were those of worldliness, she told
him ; she had guessed that Renee was
no longer attached to the chevalier,
and she thought the change of feelings
to be owing to Monsieur de
TrogiefF's influence. Now, though she
admired Monsieur de Troglefl" for the
display of courage he made before
them, she preferred the chevalier as a
husband for her dear Renee ; and it
was this she had to confess — that she
balanced in her mind the worldly advantages
as well as the personal qualifications
of the two men, and could find
faults in her neighbour she had no right

to discover there. To her, a woman
"before whom the portals of Heaven were
open, it was a sin to try to see the failings
of others, even though it were for
her clear niece's sake ; a sin, for, through
the weakness of our human nature, we can
never judge our neighbours aright. Yet
she could not prevent herself from dwelling
on what displeased her in this old
acquaintance and lover of Renee's.

The cure gave his penitent sister absolution
; and before separating there were
some moments of confidential talk, and
the comtesse spoke openly to the only
man who really knew of the most intimate
thoughts and feelings of her soul.

God will forgive you, my sister, such
thoughts ; He knows that, however holy
one may be, it is the trial of His saints, as
long as they are in the world, to be influenced
by its ways, its wants, and its

sins. This change in mademoiselle your
niece is sad, very sad; but it is well I
should be warned of it, and see if her
feelings can in any way be influenced not
to forget Monsieur le Chevalier.'

You do not care for Monsieur de
Troo'lefF as a husband for her ?'

'Monsieur de Trogleff, no doubt, has
great qualities, but not those of a homelike
nature, and I should say that life
would be happier for her if she adhered
to her plighted troth.'

So I think, and it is painful to me to
see the ascendancy he is getting over her.
But he is a good man, is he not ?'

He is very brave, I believe.'

'The trouble he takes in organising a
defence on our account would prove, no
doubt, that he loves her.'

The cure shook his head sadly.

You do not believe that he acts entirely
for this alone ?'

Xo, not altogether. He is ambitious, I

fear.'

It may be so.'

Otherwise perhaps he would see more
clearly that to bring idle and unsettled
men round them is scarcely to protect
those whom he says he wishes to protect.
Instead of being surrounded by
friendly faces, every one of Which we
know, we are surrounded by men ever
changing, and always strangers to us.
Consequently, may not the fear of treason
be great ? It is said that there are many
spies about us, false Bretons, wearing the
costume and speaking the language of our
people; and I, for one, believe it, and
certainly feel less secure.'

He paused, and there was silence,— the

comtesse terrified to find low very suddenly
she saw the matter in the same
light ; he looking round him as if taking
a deeper insight into his own life. — What
scenes he had had to 2^0 through since
the beginning of these troubles, and what
a life of anxiety he had lived ! The
abodes he had to visit, the sinners he had
to comfort, the places where he had to
speak of his God — what a contrast with
the small altar loaded with rare flowers
that shed their sweet perfume around, the
golden cross adorned with costly gems, the
image of the Virgin with her Son in her
arms, the candlesticks brought from the
Holy Land in which tapers were burning !
All here was peace and holiness and purity,
reflected in the face of the woman before
him.

And he, the peasant's son, could taste of
these inner joys, and long for them to be

his portion for ever. But, once out of the
Manoir, the evil passions of men would face
him again as well as the squalor of poverty
and want.

Have you any chance of influencing
Monsieur de Troglefl", so that he could
call his men together elsewhere?' the
comtesse asked after a time.

'None whatever, none; and he would
tell you that no better place than our
forests could be found for them.'

As the cure was speaking, the shrill call
of the Chouans was heard, though it was
morning. He started violently, like one
called out of a dream, while the comtesse
became fearfully pale ; and Renee, who had
been waiting in the next room for her,
knocked at the door, asking if she could
come in.

Will you kindly look and see if there
is anything the matter?' the cure asked

her, quickly. ' I dare not show myself,
for your sake and for mine.'

She opened the window, but saw only
two Breton peasants, who were looking
down a long avenue, the end of which
was lost in the distance. The men approached
the Manoir, still looking back
now and then. They stopped at the
door, and asked to see Monsieur Bred


Monsieur Brevelaye, meanwhile, put out
the tapers, covered the altar carefully, put
the precious jewels back in their place of
safety, shut the shutters, and left the oratory
to come and consult with the comtesse
and Kenee as to the wisdom of crowns; to
the men, and perhaps thus betraying those
who had received him.

There was no hurry in his demeanour,
and yet a strange sensation was over him.
He lived in the midst of dangers, was

accustomed to meet danger, and expert in
avoiding it ; but he had experienced nothing
as yet like this strange fear that was steal-ins:
over him. He asked himself if it was
not caused by the sudden call from the
peace he had tasted, or whether the presentiment
was sent to him in mercy — the
education of the priest had not eradicated
in him presentiments and omens. Besides,
Monsieur Brevelaye was endowed neither
with great physical strength nor indeed
with great physical courage ; his bringing-up
had, as it were, quenched all the fire
out of him. He had also learned for years
now to depend on his brother, and was,
moreover, well aware he could not defend
himself if once in the hands of evil-doers.
All this unnerved him. The long-expected
end — almost hoped-for and yet dreaded —
had it come to him at last ?

Renee had jxone to see the men herself;

from them lie heard that they knew of
Monsieur Brcvelaye's being at the Manoir
and had been sent to him. This was
strange in itself, for the cure, who had
escaped death so far through the greatest
prudence, never beforehand told anyone
but his brother of his Whereabouts. Monsieur
de TroglefF, however, knew through
the comtesse of his coming to the Manoir
on that mornings. and so far his fears were
relieved.

After having hesitated a while, he came
doAvn and faced the two men, who spoke
to him in Breton.

They began by saying that, first of ally
they wanted to warn him ; they had seen
several men watching the Manoir, and
had heard his name mentioned as they
passed.

They must have been unwary spies,'
said the cure, quietly, ^ not to have noticed

your presence when they thus named
me.'

ewe had followed them in silence, attracted
by their curious and suspicious
demeanour.'

Where was it you met them ?'

At the end of the large avenue.'
A straight avenue is a strange place
for spies.'

Still must one pass there to come to
the Manoir.'

Not necessarily,' the priest replied.
Then, having seen those men and heard
them pronounce my name, you came to
advise me of the danger ; had you no other
reason for coming here ?'

Certainly ; Monsieur de TroglefF sent us
for you ; he is now near a dying prisoner,
who declares he has important revelations
to make if a priest can be found to come
and give him absolution, and Monsieur de

VOL. III. D

TroglefF wants to know if you care to come.
He is watching by the dying man himself,
in the hope that, if you do not come, he
will tell him at the last moment, before he
passes away, what those important revelations
are.'

Monsieur Brevelaye, hesitating still,
said :

Did Monsieur de TrogleiF give you any
pass-word by which I can know if you
really come from him ? You must excuse
me ; you know that my life is in peril.'

We know the pass-word for the day ;
he gave it us ; it is — " Men and country." '

It is well, I will go ; but those you said
were watching, where are they ?'

'We do not know now.' And they
looked towards the avenue, now silent and
solitary.

Mademoiselle, you hear what these
men says if anyone calls for me, you

know where I am gone.' And, going
to her : ' Loik will soon be at Ydeuc's
cottage ; send for him. I was to meet him
there in an hour's time from now.'

'Why not wait till then?' she said,
hurriedly, in the same undertone.

No, I believe it is all right ; I will go.'

And, accompanied by the men, he left
the Manoir.

We will not go by the avenue, but this
way,' he said before her ; and he took his
companions through the village.

Once there he walked thoughtfully on,
stopping now and then to speak to the old
people at their cottage doors, or to pat
the children's heads. The women's respectful
curtseying, the bright though shy
looks of the children when looking at him,
the ' Bless you, Monsieur le Cure ' of the
old men went to his heart as it had rarely
done before. These people were not his

D 2

own parishioners, — their priest had gone
long since, and he had replaced him near
them when forced to leave Kerguennec —
and now they loved him and cared for
him, and he felt loth on that morning to
go away from them.

One of his companions, however, urged
him on.

'That man will have time to die before
we arrive, if you don't hurry,' he
said.

I suppose you are right ; yes, let us
go on.'

Do you know the man who is ill ? Or
rather, have you seen him?' he added.

It was well for them he changed his
question so quickly, for he had rather
startled them ; however, there was nothing
compromising in telling him that they had
seen him ; and they said so, while a look
of intelligence passed between them, and

almost a sneer of contempt at his simplicity.


^ And lie is very ill?' the cure went on.

Dying ; there is no hope, I should say,'
answered one.

Is he a Frenchman?'
^ Yes, a Frenchman.'

And you are Bretons, I see ; where is
your birth-place ?'

We come from the Cotes du Nord ;
does not our accent tell you so ?'

Yes. And you have enlisted in our
armies ?'

*Yes.'

I am glad ; all the remaining hopes of
the princes and of our holy religion are
centred in us now. It is truly a great call
for men of any degree to join in such a
crusade against the wicked ; an immense,
invaluable privilege.'

So we think.*

Have you many friends ? Will you
not do your very best to attract them
and make them join us in this holy
cause?'

We are many already.'

'All Bretons?'

'AH Bretons.'

I am truly thankful to hear you say
so. In these days of troubles, it is a
blessing to feel the true heart of a Breton
beat near one ;' Monsieur Brevelaye went
on, betraying the workings of his mind —
to feel oneself in the hands of Bretons.
A Breton traitor I could never understand
; and yet, yet, it has been proved
that such can exist. Did you hear of
what happened to the last ?'

Oh ! yes, we heard. You tortured
him,' replied one of the men, quickly.

I ! Good heavens ! I tortured him,
do you say ?'

You — I meant your ' He stopped,

and Monsieur Brevelaye held back on
seeing the dark cloud on the man's brow.

But they walked on, as if not seeming
to heed him or notice his agitation ; and
he, ashamed of himself for his momentary
fear, and thinking he had made some mistake,
joined them again.

They had passed the most isolated part
of their way, and were close to the forest
and the friendly levies ; and Monsieur
Brevelaye, relieved of his suspicions, was
breathing freely again, when suddenly
some men sprang from behind the trees,
seized him, bound a thick scarf tightly
round his face, eyes, and mouth, so that
he could neither see nor cry out; his
hands, roughly brought behind his back,
were tied firmly together, and he felt
himself lifted up in the arms of men, and
carried away. He was kidnapped in the

very sio-ht, as it were, of those said to be
brought together there to protect his helplessness.
His first thought was for the
sorrow of the brother who loved him.

Meanwhile, Renee had sent to the village
for Lo'ik, and she would have thought no
more of the occurrence of the morning
had not her aunt told her of Monsieur
Brevelaye's feelings in the matter of the
camp now in the course of formation in
the forest. She was, at the time, looking
vaguely in the distance, when she noticed
some men at the end of the avenue, and,
though she had seen this before, the fears
so often expressed by Rohan suddenly
filled her with alarm.

Aunt, we are no longer alone here, no
longer safe,' she murmured low. And the
two women looked at each other with
pale faces, and felt their hearts beating
with dread.

Then Renee cried :

I must speak to Monsieur de Carnoet ;
he ought to know of this. Aunt, let me
gc and fetch him.'

^ Send for him, dear child ; I feel nervous
to-day,' said her aunt.

When Monsieur de Carnoet was told of
the Chouan call, which he had not heard,
and of Monsieur Brevelaye's hesitation,
he looked grave.

I wish you had sent for me ; I would
have gone with him,' he said.

But we — alone — here ' said the

comtesse, hesitatingly.

Then Monsieur de Carnoet's brow darkened.


He felt that she was right in her fears.
But that it should have come to this ;
that those he had brought to his home
should no longer feel or really be safe
there !

Loik came in just then.

Strength and courage and cold determination,
they all knew Loik to possess,
and, moreover, a clear sense of right and
duty. Of the two brothers, he was by far
the superior, though education had done
nothing for him ; but he was filled with a
most bitter hatred of the Republicans, and
from this hatred sprang a harsh, revengeful,
unforgiving spirit that nothing could
quell or soften.

He looked at those round him, and in
his anxiety he was the first to speak.

'You sent for me ! Monsieur le Cure is
not where he promised to be — where is he
gone to?'

Mademoiselle will tell you,' said Monsieur
de Carnoet, ' how two men came for
him this morning, and how he left with
them; she was with him all the time.'

He turned brusquely, almost roughly,

towards her, and waited for her to speak.

The sight of Lo'ik made Renee understand
that the cure was really in danger, and
that no time should be lost, so she said
quickly, looking at the clock :

It is now nearly an hour since Monsieur
le Cure left with two strangers in
Breton dress and of Breton speech, who
said they were sent by Monsieur de
Trogleff, and gave the right pass-word —
'men and country." But he hesitated
long, and could not bring his mind to
trust them. They left at last for Monsieur
de TrogleiF's camp.'

An hour ago ? — Two strangers in
Breton dress ? — Why did he not wait
for me ?'

I proposed it, but he would not.'

Loik looked at her, anguish depicted
upon his countenance, and answered, a&
if speaking to himself alone :

Is he doomed — is he doomed at last ?'

Then, recovering quickly from his first
stupor, and becoming practical at once, he
asked Monsieur de Carnoet :

Could you send news of all this to
Monsieur de Trogleff ?'

Yes, at once ; are you not going
there?'

No, no, I must first see where my
brother is ; I will follow his track on the
high-road as far as I can. But I must go
now — I must go.'

God be with you and help you, Loik,'
the comtesse said.

His eyes filled ; but, unable to answer,
he simply crossed himself, and the next
moment was gone.

They followed him with their eyes till
they saw him disappear, conscious that the
same thought was in their minds ; but each

apart in communion with this own heart
waited silently to hear of a result which
they felt must have its bearing on their
lives.

As they were still lost in thought, a
courier, riding fast, brought a message to
Monsieur de Carnoet — a letter With a black
seal. His hand closed on it quickly, for
fear the comtesse should see it ; but it had
not escaped her.

monsieur de Carnoet, you have some
news you should read at once,' she said,
Shall we leave you, or '

I will see what it is ; excuse me if I

read it here. Ah ! the Queen ' and

he stopped, afraid of saying more.

The Queen ! — What news, what news
of her ?'

Alas ! she is no more.'

'Dead?'

She died — like the king, her husband.'

merciful God!'

'Poor, poor queen !' Monsieur de Carnoet
went on ; ' ought we to grieve over
her death ? Nine months a prisoner, nine
whole months in the power of the hideous
crew that watched over her every movement
! Should we grieve that her trial is
over ?'

She too was a widow,' added the comtesse,
sadly, ' and her son they had taken
away from her. Ah ! poor, poor woman,
what a burden hers was to bear, what a
long agony !'

It is a trite saying that misfortunes or
bad news never come singly. As the two
women and their friend were speaking of
the unfortunate queen, and lamenting over
her fate, an extraordinary rumour and
noise was heard without ; the noise of a
great multitude, and cries that rose to

heaven. Monsieur de Carnoet, goings
quickly through the avenue to the highroad,
beheld the most heart-rending sight.

On the same day as that of the queen's
death, the Royalist armies of Poitou and
Anjou, known as the Yendeens, were defeated;
and, but for the slowness of the
Republican armies, would have been utterly
destroyed.

The peasants Who, since the beginning of
the Revolution, had resisted the Republic
and kept it in perpetual fear, were now
fugitives, numbering one hundred thousand
men, women, and children. They
were going from place to place, closely
followed by their enemies, and were hastening
through Brittany as far as Granville,
in the hope of meeting there with
the help promised from the English who
were arming at Jersey.

It was this army, or rather this

emigration of peasants, that was passings
encumbered with women and children, old
men and wounded. Carts and wao^o-ons
contained whatever they had been able to
save from their homes. These homes were
now occupied by the Republicans, and
they themselves were dying from hardship,
privation, and starvation. Thence the
mighty cry of anguish that rose, as their
helpless sick fell by the wayside, where
they must be left to die.

These once peaceful, hard-working, and
simple-minded people had risen like Brittany,
their close neighbour, but had risen
en masse. On the day when the Republic
had called all the young men to fight in
its armies, from six hundred villages at
once the bells had rung ; men armed with
sticks rushed on gendarmes, on soldiers and
cannons, and had refused to serve against
Royalty.

This had been their beginning;, but what
had they not accomplished since ! The
thonojht of the terrible struggle they had
sustained, of the mighty effort of men
untrained to war, unprovided for war;
of the large number of prisoners they had
made, and dragged after them, was overwhelming
to those who contemplated them
in their defeat and despair.

They had asked for no help, only forcing
their OAvn noblemen to come and head
them ; they had fought their fight alone,
bearing all the burden of the wear. They
were conquered now and ruined; all their
valiant chiefs were dead or wounded, and
none came to the rescue.

Oh ! the cruelty of defeat ! They were
hungry, and thirsty, and worn ; they were
hopeless, and in tatters. Who cared for
heroes in such a plight ? Heroes that
shed tears over their dying wives, and

VOL. III. E

daughters, and little ones ! Neo, though they
had held high the standard of Royalty, they
were to find no friend, no helping hand,
no leader to guide them ; they went hither
and thither, fighting and dying, till the
last fell victims of the bloodhounds who
served the government.*

The cries passed away in the distance.
The two feeble women listened to them
with awe ; and, as the comtesse kissed
her niece for the night, she murmured,
low :

Ken^e, there is no news from Monsieur
Brevelaye ; no news from his brother.'

Waterman wrote, after Iiis victory over the peasant
loyalists, to the Comte du Salut Public : ' According
to your orders, I have crushed the children under the feet
of horses, and massacred the women. I cannot reproach
myself for having made a single prisoner ; I have exterminated
everybody. The roads are strewn with corpses ; in
some places they form pyramids. At Seventy the shooting
of men goes on all day, for every minute men come to give
themselves up,'

'Aunt dearest,' the young girl replied,
with hands folded in prayer, ' we are
under the protection of God; what can
poor, weak women like us do to alter the
will of men ? Let us trust in Him to the
last.'

E 2

CHAPTER III.

At first, it was easy enough for Loik to
follow the traces of the priest and his two
companions, for a woman had told him
which way they had taken, and he soon
discovered the marks of their footsteps
on the high-road. It comforted him somewhat
that they had gone that way, where
they would be sure to meet with people
coming to the village. The road, frozen
during the night, had thawed in different
places, and his brother's footsteps, which
he knew so well, were plainly discernible.
So he went on with a lighter heart, telling
himself that his anxiety usually made him

look on the dark side of tidings, and
blaming himself for it. He reached the
spot where his brother had been carried
off, and stopped suddenly.

What was the meaning of those many
new footprints surrounding those of his
brother? Why were his brother's no
longer to be seen, while deep traces
were left by others ? What conclusion
would he arrive at, but the only one possible
: the men had walked heavily loaded ?
What could he imagine but what had
really taken place ? That his brother had
been arrested by several men and carried
away. — His worst fears were realised.
AVhat had he better do ? go to the camp
and fetch help, or try to make out
first where his brother was ? Would
it be wiser to bring many men with
him to the spot where he actually stood
and hunt the forest with them, or follow

alone the traces he could discover, and
then return to ask for help ? He looked
for some one on the road to speak to ; but
there was nobody, and the longing; to reach
his brother became so strong in him that
he turned into the forest.

There it was no longer possible to
follow the footsteps, for the leaves were
thick on the ground ; and if not leaves, then
frozen grass or moss which gave no sign.
But he could see a green leaf torn here
and there from a branch, or even small
twigs broken as if men had forced their
way through a path too narrow for them ;
and it was sufficient for him. And there
came a moment when even these marks
ceased, and he felt puzzled. Had the^deft the
small path ? Had they ceased to carry their
prisoner ? It must be so ; they must have
cut through some opening for themselves
and made their prisoner follow them. He

looked long, but lie had lost all trace. He
was far in the heart of the forest now;
the time he would waste if he was forced to
return was great, and might be of the
utmost importance. He walked up and
down, right and left, through the thick
brushwood, but to no purpose, and he
well-nigh lost his own way.

As he was there, helpless and miserable,
a sudden inspiration seized him. Why was
it those men had come through a forest,
part of which was occupied by the peasants
their enemies ? What could be their
destination ? Where was it they were taking
his brother ? — And he started, for he now
felt sure he knew. Looking at the sun
to guide himself, and little heeding which
path they had taken, he struck right across
the brushwood and thicket, clearing every
obstacle in his way and walking fast and
fiercely on.

At last lie reached the outskirts of
the forest, and there paused. The view
from where he stood would have arrested
any lover of nature ; for the woods
ceased abruptly, and beyond lay fields and
rich meadows with a winding river, along
the course of which willows and poplars
and tall reeds grew in abundance. At the
horizon was a chain of hills which on the
right almost joined the forest, and between
forest and hills, nestling as it were in the
hollow thus formed, was an abbey, once
rich and powerful, though now in ruins.

Warlike monks had inhabited it in
past times. The tesselated pavement of
the hall had resounded under the clanging
of armour, and the many mutilated saints
on the walls all had a martial look little
in accordance with the humility of a Latin
inscription still visible over the immense
mantel-jHcce : ' Whosoever will be chief

among you, let him be your servant.' And
what was left of the once exquisite windows,
where many an escutcheon still appeared
in various colours, showed that pride
and worldly rank and privileges had not
been extinguished in their breasts. Monks
were living in the abbey when the Revolution
broke up their retreat, who, when told
that vows no longer existed, and that
they must leave, and go into the world,
had resisted to the last ; and several of
them had been executed as contumacious.
Since then, the abbey, after being sacked
and pillaged, used for granaries, stabling,
or for a halting place for passing troops,
had been left to take its chance.

The hills, close enough to have been
much used for walks or retreat by the
soldier monks, had once been carefully
planted with trees, which now were in
all the beauty of their stately growth.

Pines and oaks spread their thick branches
abroad, while the more tender birch, with
its lovely slender white stem, stood outwith
all its frail loveliness, against
the reddish and dark green of the pine-threes.


Loik, hiding himself, looked on, but the
view was nothing to him. He waited a
while, then his heart beat fast, for he had
guessed correctly. The soldiers were there,
and he saw two of them fetching water
at the well. They were, no doubt, busy
with their mid-day meal, and the dense
smoke that rose out of one of the chimneys
soon told him that he was right.
Though he had come fast through the
forest, the time the captors of his brother
had in advance of him, and the time he
had spent in following their traces, had
given them a good start ; they had reached
the abbey, and were now resting.

His brother must be there ; he could
be nowhere else, unless — unless his captors
had carried him straight to the next town ;
and of that he would make sure. At the
distance where he was, all was peace and
calm ; the noise of the soldiers from the
inside of the old abbey did not reach him
and but for that smoking chimney, and
for those two soldiers he had seen, all
would have been solitude. A strange feeling
of loneliness fell upon him. After
his quick, wild walk, and the excitement
that had buoyed him up, this calm and
peace crushed him with a sense of helplessness
and of desolation, as if a leaden
shroud had enclosed his whole being, and
condemned him for ever to inaction. He
felt his limbs relax ; the pangs of hunger
and thirst came ; he became discouraged
and despairing.

What could he do ? He could not cross

the plain without being seen ; to go nearer
to the abbey, he must go by the hills,
and those, to his tired frame, seemed faraway.
Besides, once there, he would have
to come down into the plain all the same
no, he could not reach his brother. For,
in the midst of the torture of his helplessness,
one thought rose paramount : his life
was his brother's life ; he dead, his brother
would die.

The sun was going down fast, the long
winter night would soon come ; and he
shuddered. He shuddered not for himself ;
he was too hardy and strong to fear a
night spent in the open air, but for his
brother, who would spend that night
in some dungeon alone, perhaps hungry
and thirsty, even as he was himself;
alone, but knowing that many were near,
ready to rend him in pieces rather than
in any way help him.

That brother whom he respected, honoured,
and loved ! The good priest so
amiable and tractable, so loving and grateful
to him. The priest who held the keys
of Paradise in his hands, whose words
could unlock the gates of Heaven ! The
brother he had played with as a child; kept
the flocks with ; loved as a lad ; worked
and laboured for, and for whom he had
endured untold privations. His whole world
was there — his past and present and future
life, his soul's love, his soul's hope — all
these centred in that brother; and he
was a prisoner, and tomorrow he would
die unless — he saved him.

But how could he save him ? He saw no
hope — no hope. And the insults, the ill-treatment,
the death his brother must
now be contemplating were all before
him, making his heart sink with pain,,
till he hid his face in his hands and

sobs shook his strong frame — ' Jesus, Maria,
Jesus, Maria; have pity, have pity; Jesus,
Maria, have pity upon the poor, persecuted
priest !'

Suffocated with his own anguish, he
raised his head to breathe. But what was it
that couki work such a sudden and fearful
change upon his countenance ? What
could change the sobs of pity into such
hard breathing of hate ? Would not the
angel of mercy, hovering near that living
soul convulsed with sobs out of his manly
love, take flight at the sight ? Those groans,
are they only groans of anguish ? What
is it that makes him search his breast as if
some weapon there contained the power of
life and death? What is it that changes
the sweet words of hope in God into the
harsh, deep curses of his own Breton
tongue ?

Two sentinels were now on duty, but it

was not these lie cared for ; not the movements
of these he followed.

Seated on a stone bench outside the
abbey were two men dressed in Breton
clothes ; the two spies that had betrayed
the cure into the hands of these soldiers who
would take him to the scaffold ! He was
sure of it, he could see it ; for they were
alone and the soldiers took no notice of
them. They sat there and talked to each
other. No elation was there in their
appearance ; one counted some money,
kept it in his hand for a while, then
returned it to his pocket. That could
not be the price of his brother's blood,
for only when delivered into the hands of
the Commune were the priests paid for.
But it was the money paid for another
sent to death before ; — the hunting of men
was lucrative in those days !

No doubt was there in his mind that

these men were bis brother's murderers.
His brother was there, and they would not
let go their prey before it was delivered
into safe hands.

By-and-by one of the men rose and began
walking, to warm himself, apparently
the soldiers were not likely to give him
a place round their fire — or was it to try
to get rid of his burdensome thoughts,
for he went about looking down ? For him
also nature had no charms ; the thought
of the past monks no attraction. He
walked on. But what could direct his
steps almost in a straight line towards
the peasant watching him ?

To see the fixity of Loik's gaze, to seethe
workings of expectation and hatred
depicted upon his countenance, might well
make one fear that the powers of evil can
force a fellow-creature into obedience and
subjection ! In Loik's mind there is no

surprise that the spy comes on nearer and
nearer towards him, as he lies crouched
there ready to spring on his prey ; for
nearer and nearer he must come, so that
there shall be no time left for cry or
struggle, so that the work of revenge maybe
done swiftly and silently. And from
the savage breast ejaculations that reach
no ear burst forth — ejaculations to all that
he has learnt to worship and to praise and
to fear — ' Sweet Jesus ! Maria ! Holy angels !
Holy saints! bring him! bring him!' —
What if these be symbols of love and
charity and forgiveness — should they not
be also symbols of justice and punishment
for heinous sins ! He thinks so.

And the man comes on. Will he enter
the forest? He looks towards it, he
pauses, and turns to look towards the
fast-setting sun ; and, whatever power
was watching over the two men, this

VOL. III. F

moment of hesitation lias saved him. For
Loik, breathlessly following his approaching
victim, had forgotten his brother ; and
when the man paused, the remembrance
of the prisoner rushed back upon him.
If the spy were to cry out, to struggle ; if
he, Loik, were to be Abounded, would not
all chance of savins; his brother be at an
end?

Darkness came on his face, the darkness
of angry disappointment and failure. To
have his hated enemy within his grasp, to
be ready to strangle him, and to be forced
to let him go ! To handle the hidden
pistol, the dangerous knife in his bosom,
to know of the death they can give, — and
remain still ! Why, why did he not come
to him, approach him nearer, nearer —
why, why ! could not he, Loik, go and
spring on him in the face of earth and
sky and ask the heavens to behold the

punishment of the craven, — the loathsome
and dastardly spy !

A feverish shudder went through his
frame when he saw his enemy turn away
from him ; a deep cry escaped his lips, and
he fell prostrate on the earth as if all the
contending forces in his soul had left no
strength within him for his task of love.

The cold it was that brought him back
to life. How long he had been there he
could not tell, but it was now dark, too
dark for him to hind his way in the
dense forest ; the only light that shone,
the only beacon for wanderers to go by,
was the light from the abbey, and it
attracted him also. To go where men were,
even though the men were his enemies ; to
go near the poor victim, who was watching
for the light to appear that would
light up his last day, was all he could do.

He left his place of concealment and

went down into the plain, creeping along-near
the trees, fearing that even a stray ray
from a star might betray him and his intent.
He reached the hills, and there he was safe
again, for the brushwood and briars were
thick, and offered many a secure hiding-place
from those below. It was a long
distance to the abbey, and the walking-was
hard, but at last the voices of human
beings reached his ears, and he could discern
that the place that had resounded
with the chanting of psalms and of holy
canticles was now echoing to the noise of
drinking songs and Republican boasts and
oaths.

Two sentinels he could perceive pacing
up and down outside ; the light that came
through!! the laro;e, broken windows lighting
up their paths, while all beyond lay
in darkness. What could he do ? Even
if he could reach the bottom of the hill

unperceived, how could he reach the abbey
without passing that ray of light ? And,
once there, how could he discover his
brother's dungeon ? For dungeons there
always were in those holy places of old ;
and they were associated in his mind withall
the dwellings of the mighty. He
crouched on the earth once more, and
waited. He saw the sentinels changed,
and he noticed that those who came
out of the place seemed less alive to
the slight noises that are always heard
in nature ; they did not lend their ears
to the gurgling of the distant waters,
or the cry of the birds of the night.
He made up his mind to come down into
the plain ; and, gliding on his hands and
feet, he waited for one of the sentinels
to reach the end of his beat. Then he
managed to hide behind a heap of rubbish
just outside the abbey. From there he could

see into the interior, but he must watch
his time. As he crouched there, his knife
in his hand, the sentinel passed him. Then
he looked in — the soldiers were drinking,
but his brother was not there. — His foot
at that moment slipped ; he thought his
end had come, but, fortunately, a new
son": was started at the same moment
inside, and the sentinel took it up, humming
it to himself, and did not notice
the noise.

Lo'ik left the mound of rubbish, and
reached a part of the abbey left in deep
darkness ; but no opening near the ground
could he see, no hole to give light and
air to the poor prisoner underneath. The
sentinel did not care to go as far as that
dark spot, and Lo'ik remained there long.
Suddenly his heart beat ; he felt hot and
cold. Through the air floated the deep
notes of the ' Miserere.' The sound came

from somewhere within the abbey walls
that Loik could not reach ; but it was
as if his brother had spoken to him, and
he determined to speak to him in return.
All his strength of body and mind returned
to him ; he eluded the sentinel
once more, went out of reach of his gun,
close to the hills, where he could easily
escape, and from there sent forth the shrill
cry of the Chouans again and again before
the soldiers had managed to come out,
and fire wildly on all sides. — His brother
would know now that he was not forgotten.
And, after the firing had ceased,
his loud cry rang out again, to re-assure
his brother. — Then he disappeared in the
forest. Now must he wait for the first
streaks of light that would guide him on
his way back to the camp.

'Hateful country,' exclaimed the sentinel.


Search said the officer to his men.
^ Fetch some torches, and see if we are
threatened. I always thought those Bretons
were afraid of the night, and never stirred
after sunset? What can this mean ?'

The prisoner, the prisoner, is he safe ?'
asked the spies, anxiously.

See for yourself, we have more precious
lives, — our own, to look after just now;
go and see for yourselves.'

But the spies did not care to go alone,
and waited.

'I see some dark form there yonder!'
cried one. look!'

But the moon, fast rising, showed them
only the waving shadows of the trees in
the distance.

Hateful, brutal country !' a soldier
grumbled. ' Not a moment's peace, nota
moment's security, in this place of
savages. How I should like to see them

all exterminated ; I would willingly give
half my pay for a whole year, though the
pay is small enough in these miserable
times.'

What could that cry have meant ?' went
on another. ' It is a signal ; Ave shall have
all the Chouans after us as soon as daylight
appears.'

No, we shall manage to give them the
slip, believe me ; try to sit up all of you,
and, as soon as we can see to put our feet
on the ground, we start ; I have no taste
for being shot at from behind hedges and
trees, any more than you have. But
now let us see after the priest ; he could
scarcely have escaped — but who knows !
some evil influence may have come to
his rescue.'

Indeed, no, the poor lonely prisoner
could scarcely have escaped unless some
very powerful influence had been at work ;

for, shut in a deep cellar, without light
and without any other opening than a
small, heavily-barred grating, seated on
the damp ground and his hands still tied,
was Monsieur Brevelaye.

Undo his hands ; how can you leave
him a whole night thus ! Brinoj him some
wine and bread ; why, don't you see that
his soul will escape you before you can
deliver up his body !'

This the officer said, turning to the two
men who had pressed behind to make
sure that their victim was still safe.
He might well thus show some compassion
to the helpless man who, tired
and hungry and desolate, with his hands
bound behind him, felt every moment as
if his heavy breathing Avould choke him or
return to him no more.

Once untied he almost fainted. The
officer, seeing his sad state, said :

Bring him along ; we can watch him as
well when he is with us.'

And as the shrill cry outside had ceased,
and nothing had been discovered, they
gave the cure some wine to drink and a
piece of bread to eat.

Then :

Nov, answer me, prisoner,' said the
officer to him, ' and don't trifle with me ;
you see I wish you no harm. Did you
hear that screech-owl cry just now ?'

The cure, who had looked up at him
from the moment he had spoken, felt his
limbs tremble under him. He well knew
the cry, well knew it to be his brother's ;
and the comfort it had been to him
God only could know. Could he betray
his brother !

Now, will you answer me, or shall I
send you back to your dungeon ? What
was that cry, and what did it mean?

Speak the truth, as you are bound by your
cloth.'

It was a cry that meant, " You are not
forgotten by those who love you." '

'Is that all?'

It is.'

And what do you mean by — not forgotten?'


That then' prayers will accompany me
to my last hour.'

You swear that is all ?'

To my firm belief that is all.'

And how many could there have
been?'

How many ?' repeated the priest, surprised.


Yes, how many men ? Out with it !'

Only my poor brother, only my poor
brother,' replied the priest ; and his head
fell on his chest, while hot, burning tears
came to his eyes.

The officer and soldiers looked at him
in silence. The man, after all this misery
would die in a day or two. No doubt he
had a mother as well as a brother — a
father. Had they not all mothers who
had wept at parting with them, and
fathers who had done their best for them !

There ! leave him alone, and give him
more to eat if he Avants it, and we will see
what his brother can do. Now let us
rest quiet a while and watch ; this has
disturbed us ; but perhaps it is as well, for
we shall return to the town quicker, and
be safer.'

And he again looked to see if the day
had begun.

It had beo:un enou<2:h to o:uide Lo'ik
through the forest, but the abbey was at
almost an equal distance from two towns,
and this had not occurred to him before.
He must follow the soldiers in order to

know Avhere they were going. Soon, in
fact, lie saw them muster in silence outside
the abbey, their prisoner and the two
men in the middle, and start. Then he
left his hiding-place and made his way to
the abbey in the hope of finding something
to eat and drink.

He entered the place so noisy during
the night, and in the midst of dirt and
disorder looked for what he could find,
and with eager hands seized on the almost
empty tin can of a soldier, the only thing left,
with a fcAV crusts of bread here and there on
the benches. It was not much, but he could
be satisfied with little at any time, and it
revived him. Then he started in pursuit.
By running fast ahead dien it was possible,
he could now and then get a glimpse
of his poor brother's pale face ; and it almost
broke his heart, while it nerved him also
to go on with his task. But they reached

their destination at last, the town of La
Roche-Bernard. There only a few people
came out at the noise of the soldiers, the
others beings' asleep, and Loik, seeing a poor
woman by the fountain, went to her and
asked her for a drink of water.

Poor, poor man,' she said, you seem
as if you wanted something better than
that. What have you come here for?
Followed the soldiers, have you ? What
is the priest to you? You are a Chouan,
I suppose. You had better hurry away, or
you will be massacred here. What is the
priest to you?'

He is my brother.'

Your brother ! Poor fellow !'

How soon, do you think, will they —
will they murder him ?'

Hush ! don't speak so,' cried the woman,
frightened, and looking round. ' Say —
execute him. — When will he be, when ?

Perhaps tomorrow, or the day after ;
unless they want to complete a number
to-day.'

Complete — a — number ?'

Yes, sometimes they like them to go by
twos, fours, and so on.'

Ah ! So — to-day — he may — !'

But it is not likely ; they must have time
to take his name doAvn, and his dwelling-place
; and there are many waiting already',
I believe. The prison is full.'

Many waiting — waiting ?'

'There, there, my poor man, ^'ou are
half dazed. But go, believe me, or, if
you are seen, you will have the whole
town after you. AYe hate you Chouans,
here ; you do us so much harm.'

To-day ! — to-day !' repeated Lo'ik. The
impossibility of his bringing succour
to his brother soon enough, paralysed
him.

But the woman, seeing some of her
neighbours in the act of opening windows
or doors, left him in a hurry ; and Loik,
looking after her, helplessly at first, suddenly
started away on his race for life or
death.

The day was almost gone when he
reached the Manoir, and, as he fell exhausted
on a seat, asked for Monsieur de
Carnoet. Both Rohan and his father came
to him at once.

Loik !' they exclaimed, at the sight of
his exhaustion, and of his soiled clothes
covered with thorns and earth and dust.
Loik ! what news ? Speak quickly.'

I came here at once ; it is nearer than
the camp. — My brother — Monsieur le Cur
is a prisoner at La Roche-Bernard. They
have murdered him, perhaps, already.'

Already ! Oh ! no, surely not !'

Can we go ? Can we save him?'

VOL. III. G

'We shall, if men and good-will can
do it.' And, turning to his father, ' Sir,
let me go; I know both Monsieur de
Masquerade and Monsieur de La Touche,
who are at the head of villagers who,
having been insulted and ill-treated by
the Republicans, are determined to punish
them for it. 1 will only take our men who
fought at Raganur with me, and see what
can be done.'

The father looked at his son, and
sighed.

'Must you go? Those men of Trog-
leiF's '

Nay, they are strangers ; they do not
know Monsieur Brevelaye as we do, who
have been his friends so long.'

'True. — Oh ! the misery of these days !'

But Loik broke in suddenly :

I must not stop here any longer. I
must find help ) I must go at once.'

Have you rested long enough ? can you
really start again ?'

Yes, I am ready ; come with me, sir ;
what you said was right. I entreat you
come with me ; our friends will help us if
we ask them ; but a moment lost may
-cost my brother his life — I entreat you,
some.'

Very well — see to the horses,' Rohan
replied ; then, turning to his father, ' Goodbye,
sir, I will return soon, perhaps in two
or three days.'

Good-bye,' repeated the father, sorrowfully.
' Rohan, do not forget us here. Do
not be rash ; remember your father's grey
hairs and the helplessness of his guests ; do
not be rash.'

Rohan, unable to speak at first, wrung
his father's hand ; then he said :

'Will you tell them — our friends, that

I could not say good-bye to them — time

g2

presses ; there are the horses ; — good-bye,
father.' And the young man was gone.

He had not the courage to face Renee
not the courage to risk one of those
softening moments when his heart was
wont to betray him. If he was never to
return — was it not as well she should
not know, she should for ever ignore what
Avere his feelings towards her ? It was
easier for him to face the danger of a
battle than now to face her who must
never know how much he loved her !

Silently through the night the Chouans
made their way towards the doomed town.
Early at daybreak they met the divisions
commanded by the friends of Rohan, and
with their numbers thus increased, marched
at once forward.

The town was defended by cannon, but
the Chouans, following the tactics of the

Vendeensns, which had always succeeded so
well, rushed wildly on the guns, silenced
them, and, after a most bloody fight, remained
masters of the place.

Loik fled from prison to prison, and at
last, finding his brother, fell prostrate at
his feet, crying :

Saved, saved ! thou man of God !'

But Monsieur Brevelaye, opening his
arms, could only say,

^ My brother !'

And the two men remained for a while
in a close embrace.

Meanwhile, Rohan, anxious to relieve
his father's fears, returned in haste to
the Manoir where all rejoiced together at
a victory which Alas one day to cost them
dear.

CHAPTER IV.

Thus Roche-Bernard had fallen, and revenge
had its way. The first care of the
peasants, after having set all the prisoners
free, was to rush to the Mairie and kill the
mayor ; then seize all documents, deeds, and
registers, and carry them to the spot where
the scaffold was erected en permanence.
To these they added all the coats of the
dead, all flags and cockades, hats, wigs,
and whatever recalled the hated Republic,,
and, having set Are to the heap, they
danced joyfully round the huge bonfire to
the sound of their songs. The toAvn was
sacked and pillaged, and, after a few

days, the peasants left in bands of tens and
tAventies, and returned to their villages as
they liked. It was their usual fashion.

Thus the town did not long remain in
the hands of the Royalists ; the civil and
military authorities assembled in council
and a new mayor was appointed. Then
the inhabitants, swearing an undying
hatred to the peasants, erected a new
scaffold — for things in those days generally
ended in the bringing of as many
people to death as possible.

The causes of their defeat being discussed,
the strength of the Royalists calculated,
and the result of their doings
written down, it behoved the authorities
to do their best and fight the fight anew ;
and they determined to crush their enemies.
Fresh measures were taken against
them, and the two spies, who, careful of
their life, as spies are wont to be, had

escaped unscathed, were called to tell what
they knew of the peasants and their
chiefs.

Tell us what you know of the place,
where those chiefs assemble, and where
you arrested that priest. Is it impregnable
?'

By no means — a simple mansion, a
manoir with its farmhouses at a small
distance.'

Easy of access ?'

'We went in, asked for the cure, and
the cure came to us ; it was no more
difficult than that.'

'Then, if we could know when those
men assemble, a cordon of soldiers could
surround the dwelling, and '

Not quite so ; it is guarded all round,
and our difficulty was to pass unnoticed
through their lines.'

Guarded ! Why did you not say so at

once, and not send us beating about the
bush in that fashion? You said it was
<3asy of access. Is that the way you give
your information? Tell us now what took
place when you asked for the cure ?'

'Our belief is that he must have been
saying mass ; he was a long time coming,
and at last appeared, accompanied by a
young girl. He took her for witness of
what we had to say to him ; and before
following us, as he thought, to go and
see a dying man, he had some conversation
with her apart. We have no
doubt whatever in our minds that he was
giving her orders, in case he were arrested,
for the fighting that actually took place
since. At least, it looked like it. Besides,
in the middle of the night, while
resting half-way, we heard their Chouan
call. Yes, there is no use trying to hide
it, she was at the bottom of it all, and it

was through her orders we Avere followed
and the town attacked.'

Of course it is easy enough to see; who
would liaA^e known about his being arrested
if she had not been told of it, since the
cure spoke to no one on the way — for he
saw no one else, you tell me.'

Only to say good-morning to the villagers
; but we were close to him, and
heard every word he said, and saw everyone
of his gestures. Xo, it is that young
girl who directed the men who attacked
us, I feel sure of it.'

And so do I. And who is she ?'
She is called Renee de Kerguennec'
Those Kerguennecs again ! Always
those Kerguennecs. I should have thought
that, with their comte dead and their
chateau burnt down, they would have
remained quiet.'

Where is she living, this Kerguennec ?'
asked the mayor.

With a comtesse, her aunt or mother,
at the Manoir, where we arrested the
priest.'

A nest of Chouans, a reguLar nest. We
must have that comtesse and that Hence,
to begin with.'

The mrl is a very handsome 2:irl.'

The mayor gave a low whistle and
looked pleased.

So much the better, so much the better,'
he said. ' I had rather see a fine head cutoff
than an ugly one ; besides, there is always
some spirit in those handsome women, and
they go to the scaffold as proud as Lucifer ;
no cringing, no falling down on their knees
and kissing the hand of the executioner,
and asking him to spare them, as I have
seen some do. We will have this handsome

girl, it will be a treat for us. — Those
brigades cannot learn. After the death
of Marie Antoinette, they should know
surely that male and female alike must
be punished when they fight against the
Republic ! — But they do not learn. —
That is the law, and, moreover, our imperative
duty here, where honest citizens
have been massacred, where men in authority
have not been spared, when it will
require years to repair the mischief done,
without counting the cannon taken away.
What would our rulers in Paris say if we
did not exterminate them ? We will do
so. But to begin with, as I said, let us
have that Renee and her comtesse too ;
let us have them both, and that as soon
as possible. That will check them a bit,
those Royalists ; they know pretty well
what they do when they allow handsome
women to take the lead. Why, what

did their kings always do ? — look at the

Pompadour, look '

But,' said one of the members, stopping
his flow of eloquence. ' But what of the
others ? If women encourage, men flo-ht.
And what of the chiefs ?'

Yes, I was comines to them. Well,
TrogiefF we know about, and if that one
could be brought to pay for his misdeeds ;
if he could be executed a thousand times
instead of only once, it would be all the
better. But what of the others? Do you
know the others, — their names ?'
One is Rohan de Carnoet.'
Rohan de Carnoet !' exclaimed an officer,,
rising to his feet in fury. ' I would give
ten years of my life to see him shot. He
it was I met, after I had conquered those
savages, and they had been forced to
accept their proper priest. He it was who
rushed upon me like a mad bull, all the

peasants a;2;ain taking heart at the sight,
and rushing on us in the same way.
But for him, we shoukl have had our own
way ; but for him, all would be at peace
now. He is the worst of rebels. He dead,
we should be at peace, — at least in this
neighbourhood. Give me enough men,
and let me march against him, nov that
I know where he is. I will brins; him to
you dead or alive, dead or alive ; I took
the oath to myself to do so a long time
since.'

Do you know if he was among the
attacking party ?'

Oh, yes, certainly, and one of the foremost,'
the spies replied. ' One of the most
valiant, — or rather, one should say, furious.
Moreover, he it was who put the priest
^Ylth great marks of respect into a carriage,
a stolen carriage, and who accompanied it
back to the Manoir, no doubt. We saw

it all with our own eyes as we were keeping
watch over the prisoners and ii^^hting
as much as we could.'

Rohan Carnoet be it. We wall see
to getting at him with soldiers ; but, meanwhile,
all means are necessary and proper
to success in war. You,' speaking to the
spies, ' you will receive power to arrest
him when or wherever you find him, and
power to acquire the necessary help. Only
don't you get into a trap again and bring
us an army here to get back your prisoner.
See that you get him unknown to anyone,
even to that Renee Kerguennec. Renee
Kerguennec ! I shall not sleep at peace
before we have her. Let us work diligently
to crush the rebellion here, and so deserve
the thanks of our brethren in Paris.'

But, after all,' interrupted one, looking
at the list of names just written up, 'we
have very few names for the mischief done,

and the expense and trouble caused;'
and he read: ' " TroglefF, returned emigre^
chief agent of the princes ; Rohan Carnot
general-in-chief; Brevelaye, seditious priest ;
Kerguennec, a d-devant countess ; Renee
Kerguennec, her niece or daughter" — It
only makes five, after all.'

Only five, but we shall find more ; the
prisoners that are made, must also pay for
the misery the others have caused ; they
must die, for peace to be established. Besides,
it shall not be said that, when I was
mayor, princes and English had it all their
own way here, in this part of Brittany, at
least. Traitors they all are, and only looking
for their own good, little thinking of the
good of France itself But I will save
France, — I will save the Republic that
danger, and Brittany that shame. No
prince, no foreigner here ! AYe will fight,
we will take the most stringent measures.

You men will start to-day, and will arrest
the chiefs where you can and how you can.
Spare nothing while we prepare for wear ;
and be sure you will be rewarded, even if
the peace of our country and your own
glory in participating in it, is not enough
reward for noble souls to be satisfied with !
I am ready to give up my fortune, my
reputation, and my life for it ! Yes, I Avill
luring all those brigands to the scaffold, or
may I go there myself if I do not succeed.
You all are my witnesses ; I Avill spare
nothing ; do the same ! Sacred love of
country, arm our revengeful soldiers !
Sacred love of country, guide us !

That Renee we must have. She is the
leading star, I can see it from here, as much
as Marie Antoinette was. The Republic had
no safety in Paris until Marie Antoinette
died ; we shall have none here as long as
that queen of the Chouans lives.'

VOL. III. H

And thus ended the first part of this
meeting of rulers ; the second, concerning
the measures to take, soon followed. But
the forces they had, were not enough to battle
with the increasing numbers of revolted
Bretons, so they were forced to apply to
Paris for help ; to write a long account of
what had taken place — an account where
Eenee played a great part, and where
Eolian did the same.

But what was going on meanwhile
among those doomed Royalists ? How
would they meet the danger that threatened
them ?

Monsieur de Trogleif had been furious
at what had been done without its being
even mentioned to him, and had sworn he
could see that Rohan meant to separate
himself from him and the princes he served.
But on second thoughts, since victory had

l3een achieved, he considered it best not *"
only to accept it as a fait accomjyh] but
to boast of the exploit at head-quarters,
in order to show how men were fighting
for the royal cause.

It would have been well indeed for
the cause if all dissensions had ended
thus.

Monsieur de Trogleff, therefore, not only
claimed the victory, but was loud in his
declarations of what he would do next ;
boasting that he would defy the whole
Republic, for he had success in his own
hands. And more peasants, attracted by
his promises, came forward.

Monsieur de Carnoet and his son disliked
the neighbourhood of their would-be
defenders, but felt that they could now
do nothing better than avail themselves
of their help.

Outlawed as they knew themselves to

h2

be, and their retreat discovered, they came
boldly forward and made one with them.
Renee also at times accompanied them,
showed her interest in the work, and won
all hearts to her. One day, as she was
among them, she noticed a man she seemed
to know, and remembered that she had
seen him at Ploermel.

Have I not seen you before ?' she asked
him. ' At Ploermel, was it not ?'

Yes, at Ploermel, mam'zelle. I remember
you well ; I used to work with Ivon,
and was long known as his right hand,
because I helped him in everything ; that's
how you came to see me often, and I to
see you.'

And you have left him ?'

^ Left him ! He it is who has left us.
Do you not know that he is a great man
now? Ivon is a rich man.'

How is that ? Well-to-do I know he

was ; but rich and great — I do not seem
quite to understand your meaning.'

Do you not know that he only wants
the title of marquis, now he has the house
of a marquis for his own ?'

I beg of you to speak more clearly.
You seem indignant — angry ; and your
words make me anxious without my
knowing why.'

Very well then, I will tell you. I von

bought the Chateau de L , and lives

there.'

^ Bought the Chateau ! Are you speaking
the truth ? Ivon ! that man my cousin
trusted of all others, in whom he had the
most implicit confidence. Are you quite
sure of what you say ? Is this possible ?'

You would soon see that it is possible
if you went there. You would see that all
the bills to sell the house are taken down,
and that he keeps the place up ; you would

see him going in and out — in and out, that
man Ivon. Yes, he lives at the Chateau
by himself, sleeps no doubt in his master's
bed, eats at his table, and drinks his wine,
and uses all his property as his own.
And then you would soon hear of citizen
Ivon proprietor, citizen Ivon the great
citizen Ivon the rich, citizen Ivon the
Republican. For he is the one to cry
loudest, " Long live the Republic !" —
And the Republicans pet him — when they
don't ill-use and rob him — and say that
they are proud of him. Ah ! it is a pretty
thing, a pretty thing to see.'

I remember that he grew restless before
we left Ploermel, and that he was reproached
for going to the Republican meetings. But
that he should have changed so — forgotten
his master thus, and '

'The property could not be sold for a
long time, but at last a man came from

the town and almost bought it ; but Ivon
bid over his head, and got it at last. Ah !
he is a cunning rogue, a cunning rogue ;
which does not prevent him from being
afraid for his life, the black-hearted villain,
and it serves him right. He scarcely

ever leaves the L grounds, where

there are big dogs at large ; and he makes
friends with the Republicans for his own
security. I know for certain, and I believe
he knows it too, that his death has been
decreed by some of the marquis's faithful
retainers ; but he is a cunning fellow — he
always was — and that giving of drink of
his to the first comer does no end of
mischief; — you know we all like good
drink, and he is generous with it. But,
although Ploermel is full of Republicans
now, and the Royalists have to hide themselves,
still there may be found one some
day who will have the courage to avenge

his old master. Ah ! I woukl not be in
Ivon's shoes, no, not for all his Chateau
and grounds, not I ! And what an existence
it is he leads now ; and his face, how
dark and gloomy it is ! You should see
his looks when one of his old friends says,
'-^Bonjour^ Monsieur Ivon^ proprietary ! Bon-jour,
Monsieur le Citoyen Marquis"" — If he
could kill us all, I believe he would,
and he clings to his new friends firmer
than ever. But there it is, and that's
the end of it ; the Chateau is sold to a
farmer, and a farmer that always made
believe he worshipped his master, and
always looked down upon us fellows, grinding
us down into poverty, as he always
made out, for his master's sake. He is a
disloyal turncoat, a miserable liar, a false
Breton, a false servant, a galloped! But
the Chateau is sold, and that's the end
of it'

Renee, her hand resting on Monsieur de
Carnoet's arm, looked up in his face sadly-after
the man had ceased.

'Are such things possible?' she murmured.


They are done everywhere, Ren(^e.
But I am sorry, I am sorry about this ; it
is always so sad to find out that one has
been deceived ; I was like the marquis, I
trusted I von.'

Turning to the man again, Renee said,

You say that Ploermel is in the hands
of the Republicans?'

'Yes, they are settled there now. That's
why I am here, that's why all true men
have left ; and only the old people are thereto
till the ground and toil for their new
masters.'

But you say Ivon lives alone ; where
are his relations — his father and mother
and sister?'

His parents won't see him ; or he won't
see them, I don't knoAv which ; but he lives

at L alone, and his parents are still at

the farm, which they work with his sister.'

Is not his sister married ? She was
engaged.'

Ah, mam'zelle, yes, she was engaged
but her betrothed was killed before her
eyes in one of our outbreaks. But they
never see each other — Ivon and she. I
went one day that way and saw the father,
and said to him, ^' Do you approve of Ivon's
conduct, master?" and he said, " Man, I
have no account to give to anyone of my
own feelings; you judge of other's doings
as you please ; I have nothing to tell you
about my son." And he would say no
more. But I could see his anger by his
dark and sullen looks ; only, as he has the
farm all to himself now, it is as well that,
with such a son, he should say nothing, do,

you see ? But his sister, lie won't speak
of him either. She just keeps her head
safe, that's all. So he lives all alone, there's
no denying that.'

And the man went on, unchecked by
Renee, till he had poured all his grievances
out.

A great man, Ivon ! It is shameful !
But he will pay for it as others who
have done the same thing have paid for

their sin, with their life. Ivon de L .

Ivon j^rojjrietaire f And this is what the
Republic brings us among other things,
and people are surprised we are not
pleased ! Instead of our marquis, instead
of monseigneur, we have the farmer Ivon
to obey and bow the knee to, and work for,
and be paid by. A pleasant change for
those who have seen him as much of a
peasant and as poor as themselves once !
Maire Ivon, it certainly is sure to be next,

for his name was put forward. Dead Ivon
the marquis, is more likely ! But he
always was proud ; he used to prowl about
to look at the grand ladies when they were
at the Chateau ; and he was spoken to by
them, so that he came to think himself
one of them, and became as vain as a
peacock, and ground us down more and.
more — the hard task-master that he was !
I daresay now he thinks himself as good as
they, as good as his master. I daresay
he would bully his master as he bullies
us. And we must cry, " Long live the
Republic," and be happy and all that —
No, I say no ! Better fight and starve ;
better be rebels to the last ! I work for

Ivon, Marquis Ivon de L ! Never,

never ! Till the ground for him ; keep
his flocks for him ; eat dry bread while he
feasts ! Never ! Long live the King ! and
may he come soon and change all this, and

put everything in its proper place again.
If not, if we can't bring the king to France,
well ! we will die chouans and rebels, that's
all!'

Renee left the man and returned slowly
to the Manoir.

How differently these things seem
when they reach us,' she said to Monsieur
de Carnoet. ' We hear of its being done,
and feel sorry, and soon forget all about it.
But now to fancy my cousin deprived
of his beautiful home for ever, even if
things are changed. For, I suppose, what
is sold is sold ; he could not recover the
Chateau even if a king reigned on the
throne ?'

Unless the Republic is utterly crushed,
I do not see how all the properties sold by
the Republic can ever be restored to their
rightful owners. That such a thing will
be asked by us is certain, if ever we gain

the ascendancy ; but as to its ever being
done '

No, I do not see how it can be. Oh,
Monsieur de Carnoet, I wish I were a man ;
1 wish I were strong and powerful and
rich. I would stir Heaven and earth toto
— but I am afraid Monsieur Rohan
would say I am foolish ; that what is done
is done. Rohan always discourages one so.'

Rohan wants the woman, the charming
and sweet and dear young lady we cherish,
to remain sweet and charming and in the
shade, now the sky is lurid with passion
and blood ! And is he not right ?'

Perhaps, perhaps. But do you not
feel any wish to avenge such deeds as that
of Ivon, for instance ?'

'- Do you know, Renee I still believe in
Ivon.'

Monsieur de Carnoet, this is incomprehensible
to me after what you heard.'

What can the man do with the property.
How do 3^011 know what he has
done such a thing for — if he does not think
of helping his master to recover it ? If, in
his faithfulness '

^ But remember how he had changed ;
remember how cross and ill-tempered he
was ; how angry because things did not goas
he wished ; because my cousin did not
listen to his advice.'

And did the event prove that he was
wrong ?'

But to think of Ivon doing such a
thing, running such a risk — the risk of
losing his life ; living all alone hated by
everybody ; why, it would indeed be the
height of self-denial and faithfulness ! But
I do not believe it ; I do not believe in
Ivon. I cannot believe in him.'

I think your cousin would not hesitate
to think him capable of such devotion.'

My cousin was always good-tempered,
and as amiable as a man can be ; he put up
with many things from his men he should
never have put up with !'

'Yes, but they all loved him, and Ivon,
I am sure, loved him.'

I wish I could believe you. It seems

too dreadful to fancy that man at L ,

and to imagine my cousin for ever deprived
of his rightful home, the house of his forefathers.'


And yet many will be ; even as you
yourself would have been, I have no doubt,
even had Kero-uennec not been burnt down.'

Well, if so, I am glad, I am thankful, I
am proud it was burnt down. Father than
see it so desecrated, and pass, with its
memories of centuries, into such hands, I
would burn it down myself. My poor
Kerguennec ! My dear home, we were
happy there, were we not ?'

And, softer feelings coming over her, she
looked up troubled at Monsieur de Carnoet.
How different it would be now! if only she
would go back a year or two, and it
were given her to read her heart aright
before making such an irretrievable mistake
! What after all did she care for
this war ? What was it to her but a thing
to while away the time, as it were — to fill
up hours made heavy with regrets and longings
? Give her back Kerguennec and the
power of speaking of her love, and how
soon she would have avoided a De TrogleiF,
and forgotten all his schemes.

VOL, III.

CHAPTER Y.

It was a cold December morning, and
everything seemed invigorated by the
purity of the atmosphere and the beauty
of earth and sky. The dense fog of the day
before had been frozen during the night,
and had left a veil of glistening lace upon
trees and underwood. The poplars and the
birches, with their white stems and light
airy branches, looked like silver trees
against the steel-blue sky ; the dark heather,
standing in relief against the reddish earth,
and covered also with that silvery film,

clothed the broken heights and hollows.
Here and there the hardy bramble shot its
clear-cut leaves close to the path of the
wanderer, while far, far away, further than
was ever dreamt of during the summer,
stretched this magical silver land with
its hills and valleys. Everything was
white, but everything kept its shape
even to the smallest twig — to the smallest
spray of heath. The ground was firm
underfoot, the air bright and crisp ; no
wind, no sun, everything was still, waiting
in suspense for the magic wand that
would disperse it all.

Renee, under the influence of the scene,
was that morning making her way home,
when she suddenly saw a man walking fast
before her, bent down as one fatigued or in
sorrow ; and she seemed to recognise him.
He walked so much faster than she did
that she lost sight of him, but on reaching

i2

the Manoir lie was told that Thurio had
come, and that he was in deep grief.

Her heart stood still ; it required a
strong effort to shake off the sense of
peace that had been with her a few moments
before, and to come back to the
reality of life, and to that gnawing pain
which left no rest.

Thurio, — and in sorrow. What news
was it he was bringing ? And as she stood
there, unable to move, her first moment of
self-consciousness was one of self-reproach.
Something terrible had happened to the
chevalier, and she had wished — oh, how
much — that he had been nothing to
her ! If he were now in that kingdom
where all that was hid stands revealed ;

if he could read her heart And a

blush of remorse covered her face, — one
moment before so pale, — to leave it paler
still.

But she must go and hear for herself of
that grief, of that deep grief of Thurio's ;
and she came in where, as it happened,
everyone — even Monsieur de TroglefF —
was assembled.

On seeing her so troubled, Rohan started
to his feet, held out his hand to her, and
would have led her to a seat ; but she
shook her head, and, standing where she
was, looked on, unable as yet to utter a
word.

Sit down, dear Renee, sit down,' said
Monsieur de Carnoet, cheerfully. ' You
heard that Thurio had sad news for us ;
but it is not so sad as would seem at
first. He is very fond of his master,
and very imaginative, as we all know ; I
don't believe myself it can be as bad
as he makes out. Sit down, Renee, sit
down.'

*Not as bad !' she murmured at last, and

sank rather than sat on the chair offered
to her.

They all looked at her, all noticed her
sad and weary looks ; but how little did
they understand the workings of her heart.

Monsieur de TroglefF's brow darkened
before her distress ; in his fervid imagination
he had made sure that she was almost
won to him. He had believed her ready
to forget her absent fiance ; he had familiarised
her with his own presence at all
hours of the day, and had fancied her to
be gained over to the schemes now so mucha
part of himself Had he made a mistake,
and did she not care any more for
him now than she had once done ?

And Rohan, divided between love and
duty, looked at her also with a sinking
heart, burying deep in his bosom the hopes
that would flit now and then before him :
for it was better so — it was better so.

And lie, conscious that everyone
thought of her ; knowing intuitively how
wrongly they read her thoughts ; how they
sill saw in her trouble the proofs of her
love for the chevalier, — despised herself for
the deceit she was forced to practise ; and
promised herself to accomplish her destiny.
Then she asked, suddenly,

What is it Thurio has to tell ? Speak,
Thurio, I can bear it.'

The man, much changed in appearance,
and no longer beaming over with self-satisfaction
and content, began:

Then you have not heard of the terrible
doings at Toulon ? I came fast, I know;
I had plenty of money. My poor master
always used to say, " Have plenty of money
about you, Thurio, always plenty of money,
and you will govern events." Alas ! alas !
I did not govern events, — such events ! I
could not do that, even plenty of money

could not do that, but I came fast to sou.
I was enabled to hire conveyances and
horses ; and you see I am here even before
the awful news has reached you.

Oh ! if you knew, if you only knew
what life has been at Toulon for some time
past. Fancy lukewarm Republicans afraid
of their fiercer brethren in Paris, and yet
friendly to all those proscribed by them.
Fancy them going hand-in-hand with all
the noblemen and the emigres that could find
their way back to France. Fancy Neapolitans,
Piedmontese, Spaniards, and Englishmen
pouring in, and with one accord,
with only one thought, — to reach Paris.
Fancy them, at first all at work with a will
fortifying town and forts against the advancing
armies ; then quarrelling — Royalists
and Republicans quarrelling, Frenchmen
with Frenchmen; English and Spaniards
quarrelling ; Royalists and Republicans

quarrelling, Proven9als,Piedmontese, Spaniards
and English all at variance. Brawls
in the streets among the lowest; fierce words
among the highest ; Spanish pride and
English pride striving who shall be
first ; and in the end, as ever, the English
carrying the day ! And then the
admiral stops those who where going to
fetch the Comte de Provence to make of
him the Regent. And then quarrelling
begin afresh. Oh, what a life, what a
life ! And my poor master went through
it in high places, and I went through it in
mine.

Discord and suspicions everywhere ; discord
and suspicions ; high words and dark
looks — hell on earth. And all the time
besieged, four months besieged by two
armies — one on the north and one on the
south. Besieged by armies that could not
help one another, and that it would have

been easy to dislodge before another joined
them. But quarrel we must, and disagree
in everything. And then at last what was
to happen, happens, and thirty thousand
men surround us. These do not quarrel
nor fight in the streets, nor stab each
other, nor speak of precedence ; they
advance closer and closer, nearer and
nearer, and our Little Gibraltar the fort
Eguillette which commands the port — the
fort everyone, and particularly the English,
have been bent upon making strong, the
fort Eguillette is attacked. A young man,
an artillery officer, a Corsican, by name
Napoleon Buonaparte, leads the attack ;
the English General O'Hara is taken, and
our Little Gibraltar the key of the port, is
lost!

Then you can fancy — but you cannot
fifteen thousand fighting men and all
the dense population, Provencal and

Piedmontese, and some of almost every
nation under heaven, slit between these
victorious armies of thirty thousand
determined Republicans. The English
fleet, the Spanish fleet, and the French
fleet — they were our only hope — those
combined fleets, they could give us bread,
and they would save us if we were beaten at
last. So it had been agreed, and so it had
been promised. But no ! Eguillette is
taken, the English fleet will be exposed to
its fire, and Admiral Hood — what does he
do ? What does he do? — can you imagine
the truth ? He takes all he wants in the
hottest hurry out of our arsenals — twelve
of our best ships — with him, and then, and
then — sails away before we have time to
recover, sails away carrying our hope of
rescue with him ; leaving us behind to be
destroyed ! But that is not all, ah ! that
is not all ! He that had received the town

in the name of Louis XYIL, to give it back
to the Royalists — sets fire first to every
French ship left, to yards, and arsenals,
and to what remained ! Sets fire to everything
!

Ah ! the cries of horror as the flames
burst forth and devour ship after ship !
the cries of indignation and of despair!
the curses that rise to Heaven against
him ! And the Republican army is ever
advancing, and the people crying in vain
for, help. Defenceless they throw themselves
into the sea, stretching their arms
towards the treacherous fleet — father and
son, and wife and daughter and little ones,
and armed and desperate men and ruffians ;
all with one cry for help or nth maledictions
on their lips, dying by hundreds !
But at last the Spanish admiral sends
boats — less hard-hearted, he can bear no
more with the fearful scene; and then

Admiral Hood sends boats also. But the
boats are not sufficient for the multitude ;
they sink and people perish, again and
again, again and again. And my master — '

^ And your master?'

I had seen him at first, and tried to
join him ; but I could not find him again
I could not find him. I waited and
waited, and looked and searched and looked,
but it was all in vain. The victorious
army came in, and the convicts it was they
found at work trying to save the last ships
of our fleet. The convicts — did not try to
run away, but showing themselves more
Frenchmen than the free Frenchmen, than
the armed Frenchmen — tried to put the
flames out and to save life !

^ How I made my escape, I cannot tell
you ; I do not know ; there Avere barely a few
hundred people left in the town when the victorious
army entered it, and — these were —

butchered. Oh ! that one should have
seen such things ! And my master, my
master he is lost, lost !'

The man, trembling in every limb, bent
his head down on his knees and wept.

Alas 1 Thurio had left out much. How
was it Admiral Hood set fire to the fleet
entrusted to him — set fire to it in cold
blood — as soon as the defeat of those who
had trusted him was certain ? Who can tell?
It could scarcely be through fear of the fleet
being sent after him by the victorious
Republicans ; for he must have known that
there were no officers able to manage it.
This was the hardship of the French navy,
that, all its officers being nobles, and all
the nobles in exile or dead, they had to
have officers who had never commanded
before. But even in England, in spite

of the anger against the French and their
Republic, there were not wanting noble-hearted
men who disapproved of the deed;
and Pitt was too great a man to have
ordered it. Fight an enemy's fleet by .all
means, thought France, but to set fire toit
in port !

Another admiral there was to be sent a
year or so later, to help the French Royalists
ao;ain ; and Admiral Warren's course
and humanity in the midst of great difficulties
can never be forgotten — neither is
his name in some grateful families to this
day.

It is pleasant, in the midst of so much
that was wrong, to dwell on the conduct
of a Breton captain from St. Malo, who
from the very beginning refused to agree
to the betrayal of the French fleet into
the hands of the English and Spaniards bj

the French emigres and their allies. He
was captain of the ship Patriae and he
had three others under his command, and
they were manned mostly by Bretons.
When summoned to join the English fleet,
he refused, and also refused to bring down
the tricolor flag. So these four ships
stood aloof, the flag bravely defying the
fifty-four vessels that could have crushed
them in a moment.

The English and Spanish admirals tried
persuasion, but Bouvet could not be persuaded
— he could but die, and die he was
resolved to do rather than betray his trust ;
the Republicans had given him his command
; to the Republicans he was answerable
for it. At last the admirals, with
a due sense of his heroic valour, gave him
leave to go with his four ships. With a
safe conduct from them, he passed the
Straits of Gibraltar and reached Brest two

days after with the four ships he had
saved.*

But for this, but for this one act of
loyalty, this regard for valour, what treachery
all round. Poor unfortunate France !

The cause of Royalty was once more lost.
A cry of execration rose all over France
against those ivho had called its most determined
enemies into its greatest port ; and
all the opprobrium fell on the noblemen,
the returned emigres. Had the Republicans
had another king to decapitate or
another queen, their fate was sealed. But
they had not, and all they could do Alas
to turn against the few Royalists still
abiding in their midst, and rend them to
pieces.

The deepest consternation fell on the

noblemen still in Brittany, and many left.

St. Malo illustrepar ses Mar ins (Charles Cunat).
VOL. HI. K

Where were those plans of joining hands
with the revolted south — what of those
plans for the future with English help !
Yet without the English they could do
nothing. English gold was keeping up
armies in the east against the Republic ;
English gold was to keep up an army
in the west, and strangle the monster
usurping the throne and its privileges
in Paris. In deep humiliation were the
French noblemen forced to acknowledge
that they had neither the power nor the
means at their command to keep up the
struggle ; to England they must trust,
even if she proved a broken reed.

Sadly did some give up the struggle,
and sadly did others go on with it. The
hope of royal France was low indeed in
those days, and perhaps was it why the
princes still kept aloof from their faithful
provinces, still hesitated to act and show

themselves, though it was hard for those
who jeopardised life and fortune for their
sake, who imperilled the welfare of their
families for their cause.

CHAPTER VI.

Deep consternation also fell on those
assembled at the Manoir. After awhile,
Monsieur che TroglefF said, ' On us Bretons
alone, now rests the whole weight of regenerating
the future, and of restoring
monarchy. There remains yet to see what
a brave people can do. Never shall it be
said that, because we are defeated in the
south, we are ready to give up the fight
in the west. We Bretons never yield till
death.' But there was no echo of his words
in the breast of any there ; and in Renee's
eyes, though raised towards him as the

first to speak, there was no response.
Better far accept the stern law of what is
than to risk a second Toulon !

Really, her thoughts were not dwelling
on this — the feelings of the heart are with
woman the first consideration. She can
do everything for love ; much for hatred ;
and refrain from everything through despair.
In the heart of the noble maiden
there was deep self-reproach for having
even wished never to have set eyes on
her bright and amiable betrothed. She
was too much of a Breton not to believe
in the power of thought over the
destiny of our fellow-men. What might
not her regret at being bound to him
have effected towards his unhappy fate ?
If he were dead, she would never forgive
herself. But was he dead? — Wherever
she looked there was sorrow, waiting, and
anxiety.

When they all had left, and her head
was resting close to her aunt's head, she
murmured :

Aunt, I did not love him enough ; I did
not love him enough.'

Her aunt, startled, moved her head from
her pillow to look at her, weeping so
bitterly.

Renee,' she said, in a low voice, 'you
do not mean that — that Monsieur de
Trogleif '

Renee lifted up her head suddenly.

Oh, aunt, surely you never thought
that I could forget myself so far — that — I
meant — that Monsieur de Trogleff could
ever he anything to me ?'

Yet alas ! she had forgotten herself
so far as to allow her heart to love
another.

I am glad, Renee ; I am most thankful.
It troubled me. I saw that the

chevalier was no longer the first in your
thoughts, and I wondered.'

And Renee, looking at her sweet, angelic
face, asked herself if she had not better
tell her everything. But she could not ;
she could not bring herself to such an
avowal about Rohan de Carnoet, and she
listened trembling, as the comtesse went
on :

'■ Dear child, Monsieur de Carnoet and
myself have had many a talk about you of
late ; and we both have come to the conclusion,
that you should leave us.'

No, no, not that ! How can I leave
you ?'

Madame de Carnoet would receive you
in England ; Monsieur de Carnoet would
take you there ; and if the chevalier still
lives, if he has been able to reach London,
you could be happy yet — except, except
for what you have just told me.'

And she looked wistfully at lier niece.

Renee, with open e3^es, met her gaze
and then said :

I cannot, I cannot leave you.'

My dear Renee, it is of no use, I feel
the end near. I shall soon leave you.'

'Aunt, aunt, do not speak so. Do not
leave me — do not leave me !'

It is the will of God ; it may be a few
days, it may be a few weeks, it may be a
very few months, but I am dying, Renee,
and you must face the truth. Monsieur
de Carnoet sees it like me, and, like me,
desires to know you are in a safe place away
from here. You must not stay, dear child.'

'I cannot leave you!' murmured poor
Renee, hiding her face in her hands ; ' I
cannot '

You will be happier when you are
away, when once you have broken with
this sad past.'

Ah, but even in its sadness there is
comfort ; even in its sadness there is joy
the joy of being near those I love.
Oh, aunt, aunt, what shall I do, what shall
I do?'

Renee, will you tell me what it is you
are hiding from me ?'

Renee became deadly pale, looked at
her aunt as one frightened, but could not
speak.

I will carry your secret with me to the
grave, Renee. What is it you fear? Have
I not been a mother to you ?'

A mother and a sister — you have been
everything to me !' the young girl cried,
clinging to the true friend that had always
so loved her since her mother's
death. 'You have been everything to me.
How can I forget it ! but I am afraid —
I am afraid — you so pure, you will be
ashamed of me.'

Nay, Rence, that cannot be ; I never
can be ashamed of you.'

Ah, but you do not know, you do not
know how I reproach myself for the fatal
influence my wishes and feelings may have
had over the chevalier's destiny — you do
not know how full of remorse I am.'

Renee, speak to me quietly, dear ; tell
me simply. Who is it you love ?'

Love ! love ! aunt, I — I have never
dared, even to myself, to pronounce the
word before.'

Tell me, Renee.'

And Renee, looking at her aunt, and
seeing there a sweet smile on her face,
said, low,

Do you not guess ? — Now you knoAV
that I am unfaithful, do you not guess ?'

I had rather you told me.'

At that moment Monsieur de Carnoet
and Rohan came in through the French

window. The two women's looks met, as
with a start, Renee's hand closed tightly
on the feeble hand she held in her grasp.
The comtesse returned the pressure ; and,
as Renee stood up facing the two gentlemen
now speaking to her, she said to
herself, mentally comparing Rohan with
the chevalier,

And I, also, wish it could be.'
When they found themselves alone
again, Renee approached her aunt timidly,
as if afraid ; but there was no displeasure
expressed on the sweet face, and only concern
for the child who had lost her v/ay.

And do you not blame me for my
inconstancy, for my faithlessness ?' Renee
asked her. ' Is it not unworthy of anyone
bound to another by honour as I am ?
Is it not cowardly ? Was it not my duty
to crush the first consciousness I had of
it, instead of falling a prey, as it were, to

the charm of it ? I am ashamed, deeply
ashamed of myself. But my punishment
is terrible . . . .'

Tell me more, child.'

My unsought love is not returned.'

The comtesse did not speak, and Eenee
went on :

To give my heart away so entirely,
and that to a man who does not care forme
! To do it when eno^ao^ed to be married
to another ! — But I will keep my
word, I Avill keep my word ; for this anxiety
about the chevalier has opened my eyes to
what remorse I may suffer all my life for
having; been unfaithful to him. I will
keep my word, I will marry him — and yet,
and yet, now, at times, I ask myself — if he
would desire it ! Fancy what it will all
be to him, if ever he knows — if ever I
have to tell him. — Oh ! that I should
have acted like the basest of women by

deceiving, by being unfaithful to the mani
had promised to love ! How could I doit?
Why did such a temptation come tome?
And you say you are going to — to
leave me — to leave me ! How can I live
alone, where can I go, what must I do ?
You tell me that in England I should meet
him — my betrothed. What can I do ? what
can I do ? Tell me — but keep me with
you to the last — to the last. If I must lose
you, — and I know life is now a weariness to
you. a weariness and sufferings if I must
lose you, at least let me remain by you to
the last. You see what you have been tome
— what you must be still, my refuge,
my only refuge, in my distress and
misery.'

Poor, poor Renee,' mused the comtesse
softly stroking her hair. ' Poor, poor
Renee, that the trial should have come to
you, and that events should make it so

much worse to bear ! You shall stay by
me to the end, child ; now, more than
ever, I want you near me — you want
me near you. We will still cling to one
another as long as God wills. Then,
Renee, then you must do what Monsieur
de Carnoet says ; you must go away if —
if it is still possible, for the difficulties of
the sea passage are terrible enough now to
make anyone shrink from it. But you shall
stay with me to the last. And now, dear
child, believe me, do not — see Monsieur de
TroglefF any more.'

Aunt, he has done me no harm that I
can see.'

If I were strong; enough, I would take
you away, hide you somewhere, like a
jewel I prize, dear Renee. I would do
even as Rohan would have done.'

Renee's face blushed deeply ; how could
her aunt speak of Rohan to her? But her

aunt seemed unaware of having done anything
wrong, and went on :

'He had the true feeing about you,
about your remaining unheard-of and unseen
in these days. I am sorry now I did
not strengthen his wish by approving it ;
but that was my weakness, child, I was
blind. We have all something to reproach
ourselves with ; it is so difficult to live in
the midst of difficulties, and always to do
right.'

'It is,' repeated Renee, with a sigh. 'But,
aunt, you once gone, tell me what about
the chevalier — if he lives — alas ! if he lives.
What ought I to do ? Marry him ?— tell
him? He is a man of honour; indeed,
indeed I am fully aware of his many merits
and my own unworthiness. He would
never tell Rohan, he would never bring
that flush of shame on my face, I know ;
he would spare me, and, seeing my helplessness

and loneliness, perhaps help me to
bear with my misery. What is it I must
call my dutij towards him now, aunt — what
ought I to do? I — I do not know! I
cannot see the light. I want to spare
him ; I dread the pain I shall give him.
I — loathe myself. What, what can I do ?
Where is my duty in all this ?'

Wait for events, dear. The chevalier
may be alive, or he may be dead. Providence
will guide you. Only — no, no
Renee, you must not marry him if you
feel that you do not love him.'

But the pain it would give him '

The comtesse raised her hands.

That, dearest, is the sad part of it.
But you can alleviate it by your pity
and '

And when he sees that I also live alone,
that I also suffer — we can be friends, can
we not, and comfort one another?'

The comtesse smiled a gentle smile.

Renee, child, your heart is very tender
towards the poor chevalier.'

'Ah, the sorrow I should cause — that
is what makes me feel for him.'

'Do as I tell you, wait for events ;
have courage to face the future with
peace in your soul. The only thing
you must consider, the only thing you
must abide by, whatever happens, is this
—do not marry unless you love, whatever
men may do or say.'

VOL. III.

CHAPTER VII.

If only Renee had known sooner of
the comfort it would be to tell her
aunt of what troubled her ! And how
thankful she was she had done so at last !
The two rarely left each other now. Every
moment of the comtesse's life was like a
gift from Heaven to the strong and healthy
girl ; while Renee's every word, every
gesture, every look was prized by the
invalid, as only dying people can prize
what they must soon bid adieu to
for ever. Thus power supplying weakness
with strength and activity ; gentle

advice comforting the raised heart —
they were sufficient to one another.
The young girl, kneeling down by the
patient, suffering one, her head on the
same pillow, would whisper her fears and
trembling, when a sign, a word, a look
would restore her courage.

Thus time flew, and alas ! too fast ; for
revenge and anger and all evil passions do
not Avait. Monsieur de Trogieff had found
it of the utmost importance for him to
have his own spies in the enemy's camp,
and learned with horror the plans that were
being made for the arrest of the two ladies
as well as that of the gentlemen.

The comtesse, they all knew, could
not be moved. But Renee must betaken
away at once. Monsieur de carnot
went to her, and, with the
utmost care, told her of what threatened
her and of the steps she must

l2

take to save her own life. But he was
unable to influence her.

I had rather live only a week more and
live that week near my aunt. Besides, I
almost wish for death was all Renee would
reply.

Rohan, you must go and try to persuade
her,' Monsieur de Carnoet said to his son ;
^ if you do not succeed, we must carry her
off against her will.'

So, with the understanding of everyone
but herself, Renee was suddenly sent by
her aunt through their own grounds with
a private message to Monsieur Brevelaye.
No one else was near but Rohan, she had
therefore to go with him.

He felt the difficulty of his task and
of the danger of this solitary walk ; she
too trembled before it. But both were
determined that nothing should occur to
betray the inward feelings that ought to

be hid, and nerved themselves for the
encounter. To speak at once of their
common danger was easy, for the subject
was foremost in both their minds.

Do you believe,' she asked, ' that we
all, really all of us, are, as it were, under
the sentence of death? All? You and
I — and '

Yes, all ; I am afraid there is no doubt
about it.'

Then you should — Monsieur de Carnoet
should go,' she cried, hastily.

'And you?'

But my aunt cannot be moved.'

So what you propose,' he said, with a
smile, * is that my father and myself should
go and take care of ourselves, while you — '

I see, I know ; but I cannot leave my
aunt, and go by myself.'

'My father would accompany you.'

Yes, yes, and return soon. Meanwhile

sou would be here exposed to
death.'

^ A man can always fight for his life.'

Yes, but you would still have my aunt
to look after.'

I am afraid — I am greatly afraid that
after you are gone '

A cry broke from her lips.

How can I leave her ! You see it like
me ! If one cared very much for one's
own life, it would be '

You should care for your life ; — your
life that can be made so happy after these
troubles are over.'

Happy ?' and she stole a look at his
face, a look he dare not answer, for fear of
betraying himself.

She loved the chevalier, of that he felt
sure, more sure now than ever, since those
bad news had come. How could he look at
her when he alluded to her happiness

with him? How could he look at her
when he spoke of her anxiety about him ?

And when would you have me go ?'

I would keep you for ever near me,
was his inward cry ; and willingly go to
the scaffold hand-in-hand with you, rather
than part one moment from you ! —

But that was madness and folly, and
he replied, as quietly as he could,

To-night, in a few hours.'

She started and stood still, and then he
looked at her ; he could not help himself
Her white, scared face, her parted lips,
the pain and sorrow the words gave, so
well depicted on her countenance — startled
him. She repeated :

To-night ! to-night ! It is impossible !'

To part from all she loved on earth,
soon, in a few hours ! Was it what was
asked of her ?

Remember what is at stake,' he said,

'remember that it is your life and my
father's life too. By taking him with you,
you can save him.'

Yes, save him, save myself. And you
and my aunt?'

It would be two lives saved.'

^ Lives ! lives ! — Are lives everything ?
Is not love — love of kindred — to
be considered ? Is not — is life everything?'


If by stopping you saved everyone, I
should say, stop ; but you do not.'

Always cold and calculating, always
cruel and unfeeling, she murmured to
herself. But the momentary anger passed
soon away.

To-night,' she repeated. ' Oh, I cannot
! I cannot ! Oh, have pity on me, —
I really, really cannot, cannot leave here,
no, not to-night.'

He could only use commonplace word

of comfort. His own misery, his own
<yrief, how hard it was to hide ! Yet to
see her so sorrowful and not to be able
to comfort her as he would !

It is a sad and stern necessity, he murmured
to himself. But better, ah ! better
than to see her die ! And, strength coming
to him at last : ' You must go,' he said,
firmly ; ' you must not make your aunt
responsible for your death, as she would
be if you remained here for her sake. You

must go — and — and We shall see

you again some day — perhaps — and the
comtesse — she will be in Heaven. But
you must go soon ; you must go now. Let
us return home and prepare for your departure
at once ; it is folly, it is weakness
to delay ! Come, come at once.'

And, in his agony at the thought of her
death, he held out his hand to take hers,,
and to lead her back to the house.

She let her hand fall in his, and for one
moment both stood silent ; both wishing
they could die thus, so that they
should never be parted. For one moment
their hands pressed each other for
very pain ; and all else vanished from
them — earth and sky, friend and foe,
life and death ; all was forgotten. — '• Oh !
that I could, oh ! that I could keep thee
near me for ever — near me for ever,' was
the cry of their souls.

But soon their grasp relaxed ; their
nerveless hands fell by their side, and
they turned towards home. They spoke
no more; but Renee knew that she
would go, and he knew it too.

I will go to-night, if you like,' Renee
said to Monsieur de Carnoet, almost coldly,
entering the room where he was.

Nay, not to-night, tomorrow morning

will be as well ; only Thurio must go at
once to prepare for us. Yes, we will start
tomorrow morning early.'

But tomorrow morning was to be too
late.

CHAPTER VIII.

If one wishes to realise the horrors of the
night, one should live in the country faraway
from all human aid. Not the summer
nights should one spend there, but the
dark, dreary, long winter nights, when the
oak's dead leaves still rustle on the dry
branches at every breath of air, and the
wind moans like a poor wandering spirit
looking for shelter from its tormentors.

Those long, long hours, how slowly
they drag their weary length along!
Not a star in heaven, but darkness —
darkness that can be felt, where uncanny

sounds or rustling of dry leaves tell the
fearful and attentive ear that there is life —
life for creeping and loathsome things innumerable
; that there is war going on in
the abysses of the deep blackness ! Is it
to be wondered that bygone ages should
have dreaded the powers of the night, and
endued them with unlimited sway over
the living ; — that imagination should have
created the evil and dreaded imps and
genii who have man for their victim, and
possess the earth when the sun has gone
down !

Rohan de Carnoet is a brave man, and
knows no fear. Yet, on this the last night
Renee de Kerguennec will pass under his
roof, strange noises seem to reach him.
Are the loud beatings of his heart caused
by the approaching separation, or by a
sense of dread unknown before? Is his
head clear enough to contemplate their

awful situation unmoved ? Or are there
powers beyond himself that make him
tremble ? Is there some unseen evil spirit
hovering; with wide outstretched wind's
over him ? Is death — that gory, repulsive
hideous death they have so often heard of
within the last few years — grinning horribly
and menacingly before him ? He does not
fear death — but the bonds, the helplessness,
the being seized by odious hands !

He starts up in terror : ' Marie Antoinette
has died ! God in Heaven, have
mercy ! have mercy ! have mercy ujDon
thee, Renee !'

He paces restlessly up and down his room;
gazes at his pistols long and with a lingering
look ; handles them with feverish hand — 'I
would — I would rather pierce her heart
with one of these — ' And he aims before
him in the darkness, — ' I would rather kill

her ; I would rather kill lier before she
leaves the sheltering walls of our home ;
I would rather see her stretched there,
there before fine.'

It is night still! Will the darkness last
for ever? — He wants to see her again
on her white palfrey, gracefully bending
to the quick movements of its playful
prancing ; to see the bright colours mantle
her cheeks as a mad course in the wind
can make them ; to see her when she
throws off her hat on the marble table
in the hall, her hair disarranged, her
curls escaping from their usual bondage —
he wants to see her fresh and pure from
the polluting touch of the wicked

Up and down, up and down he paces the
length of his room ; then he stands still and
listens to the wind moaning; thro u oh the
trees. But this is a familiar sound — what

dread should there be in it ? Still he leaves
his room, to go into the deep darkness, and
listens. What can there be to move, to
exist on such a night except the powers
of evil !

He walks slowly and carefully along the
paved court and looks back towards the
house. One thin ray of light alone flitters
through the strong closed shutters of a
window. He knows the light, and finds it
easier to breathe. Be the powers of darkness
ever so evil, they will disappear before
the remembrance of the face of an angel !
This is the comtesse's room, and Rence is
there at hand. And he watches.

Soon the next shutters open cautiously
not to wake up the sleeping
household, and a white form with a
golden light for its background comes to
the window. Renee it is, looking out,
looking out into the night, and, as he

gazes, he sees her clasp her hands fervently
as in prayer — and he feels that a
God of pity and mercy rules the night
also.

It was bitterly cold, and he saw her
shudder and go in, and close the shutters.
It was dark once more ; the light that
had illuminated for one moment his
suffering soul was gone ; sorrow came
back upon him with tenfold force. He
grew anxious, and, going into the house
again, crept slowly up the dark oak stairs,
made his way to the passage where the
room was, listened long, came closer to
the door, and lent an attentive ear.
Something had happened, for he could
hear the light steps of Renee ; he could
hear a soft murmur of voices too. They
were not asleep, — did they want any aid ?
But how let them know without frightening
them? He knocked gently at the

VOL. III. M

door, SO gently that they took the knock
for a sound of the night, and did not
answer. Then he called out:

Rohan is here, can he help you ?' and
he thought he heard somebody moving.
He had been heard this time, and Renee
came to him.

Is anything the matter ?' he asked, in a
low voice.

*My aunt has fainted twice to-night,' she
murmured, in answer.

Can anything be done ? Can I be of
any use ?'

'She is at rest now; we can only watch.
Thank you, thank you.'

And he left her slowly and grudgingly,
his feet lino:erino^ lon^x outside the room.
And Renee resumed her watch.

Strange,' she thought, ' he had no light,
and how was it he was there ? What can
have brought him? It is late, too ;' and

she looked at the clock. It was four
o'clock. She looked at her aunt as if she
would have liked to ask her to solve the
riddle ; but the pale, calm face was lying
helpless on the pillows. Renee gazed long
until sleep overcame her ; her head fell on
the back of her arm-chair, and she dreamt :
dreamt of angels ministering to her aunt,
and comparing their own faces with hers
with a smile of recognition and pleasure ;
dreamt that her uncle was there, just as
she had ever known him, and that he was
lifting his wife in his arms to carry her
up, even as she had always known him
to do. And it was peace again and happiness,
gentle, overflowing happiness, beginning
with every day and ending when the
time for rest came at night.

Then her dream changed suddenly,
and it became cold, cold, colder and
colder still. It was dark and she

m2

trembled, till a firm grasp, a strong hand
with the blood of life flowing freely
through its veins, and the warmth of life
making it welcome, seized her own, and a
beloved voice told her to come. And she
moved and found life back in a warm
embrace, and it was light ! Then she
started with a cry : ' Rohan ! Rohan !'

She was awake and trembling with the
delight of that one moment of happiness ;
and her aunt's eyes were fixed on her.

'- Dear Renee, what is it ? Were you
frightened ? You seemed to call for helps

Call ! did I call ?' And she added lower,
and with lips parted : ' Who was it I
called?'

And with a kiss of comfort the comtesse
replied,

Him you love.'

'Can one thus betray oneself?' asked
Renee in terror.

Dearest, do not marry him you do not
love

^ Poor, poor chevalier !'

Then the two women remembered that
this was to be their last day together on
earth, and tears came as they looked atone
another.

The comtesse said at last :

Not even your presence can keep
me back now, dearest ; my time for
leaving is decreed. I saw my beloved
husband during the night ; to-day I shall
pass away. We will say farewell, dearest,
when your hour for starting comes, for it
is well you should go now ; we know it is
God's will.'

Yes,' repeated Renee, ' God's will.'

And she thought of the cold and darkness
that had come over her not long since,
and she shuddered ; for was she not now
alone, alone in the world — alone — alone

except for that something warming her
heart, her concealed and untold love ? And
she smiled sadly.

The morning light came at last — slowly
and reluctantly, creeping on through cold,
freezing mists like a shivering mortal
who finds snow and broken ice under his
naked feet, — and it was day! Then the
preparations for the early journey were
began, Renee, kneeling by her aunt's
bedside, clasping her feeble hands in her
despairing grasp, and lost in hopeless misery,
listened to her blessing and her parting
words. Crushed with the real physical
pain of emotion, her heart beat as if it
would break its bonds, and heat Hew to her
face and back to her heart again, leaving
her cold and trembling.

Suddenly there was a loud ring of the
bell, and she started to her feet as if she
had heard the call of doom !

It was Monsieur de TroglefF — his foaming
horse trembling under him. He was
talking in a low tone to Rohan, but
his fierce gestures and his dark looks told
their own tale ; it was bad news. She
saw the stable open, and Rohan mount
his horse. She heard him say to the
servant :

Tell Monsieur de Carnoet I am coming
back directly ; I am going to see for myself.
Tell him not to move before I return ; tell
him he must wait for me.' And he was
gone.

His father was in the comtesse's room,
and Renee was still near her aunt. All
three waited long and in unbroken silence.

Then the galloping of a horse was heard.
It rushed into the yard, and Rohan jumped
down. For one moment he stood as if
bewildered, then he sent for his father.
But the comtesse said :

Make him come here ; we are all
ready.'

And as he came in :

It is bad news you bring us, Rohan ?'
his father asked.

'Yes, it is bad news.'

He looked at his father, then at the two
women.

It is bad news,' he repeated.

Tell us,' said the comtesse ; ' we can
bear it.'

We are cut off from the forest b}" a
large force.'

The Manoir was not a place to bear a
siege ; it was a fine mansion, easy of
access, with low, thick walls all round,
and an iron gate which could offer no
resistance. In front were the flower-gardens,
and beyond the wall on the left a
thick wood stretching far away. On the
other sides were kitchen-gardens and

orchards and fields and meadows ; and,
lower down, farms dotted here and there,
sheltered, till then a peaceful, loving population.
A rural scene and outlook, and a
modest habitation for men bearing a great
name.

^ Are they not at a long distance ?' asked
Monsieur de Carnoet.

'They are advancing fast.'

What is De Trogleff going to do for
us?'

He will try to pierce through the
soldiers and come back to us.'

How about those men in the villages —
we can meanwhile defend the Manoir with
them.'

There are two corps approaching ; weare
between them.'

'Then we are lost.'

Yet must we resist to the last,' said
Eolian.

Yes, to the last. What men have you
to fight with ?'

Our four hundred men posted in the
villages will soon be ready, and I am going
to join them. You, sir, remain here with
fifty men, and '

My dear Rohan, the one thing to do is
to prevent the soldiers breaking through
our weak lines of defence ; if they do that,
my fifty men will be useless. Better put
all our strength forward, and I will fight
with you.'

But, sir, the house cannot be left unprotected;
our — friends here — cannot be
left without defenders !'

Some we will leave them. — Ah ! there
is Loik ; his brother cannot be far. Loik
will head a few men here. We must prevent
the Bleiis from coming near. There
is no hope for mademoiselle to get through
their lines, Loik?'

'There is — no hope, monsieur. I will
take care of her.'

Monsieur de Carnoet looked at the comtesse,
whom even such news could not now
trouble on her own account ; then both
looked together at Renee, and she met
their gaze calmly.

'• You need not fear for me,' she said, ' I
am ready to do God's will.'

Renee,' said Monsieur de Carnoet, ' you
will be brave, will you not? Remember
that there are more terrible things on
earth than death.'

I shall be brave ; think not of me.'
Monsieur de Carnoet went to the comtesse,
pressed her thin fingers to his lips,,
and said :

• A blessing has your presence here been
to both of us — a blessing we have been
thankful for every day since you and
Renee came. But farewell now, farewell •

may we be worthy of following you where
you are going.'

But Rohan could not speak. He knelt
down by her bedside, and, her hand on his
head, she blessed him.

^ We know — we know,' she said, 'that if
those who love each other in this world
can no longer meet here, they will meet
in Heaven.'

He held out his hand to Rence and she
laid hers on it, and he pressed it to his
lips — the salutation common among the
great of the world in those days, but the
kiss of despair for him.

Rohan,' she murmured. Then she hid
her face in her hands and burst into tears.
When she raised her head again, Rohan
and his father were gone. She heard the
noise of their horses, rushed to the window,
and, looking at Rohan as he went away, she
murmured .*

Rohan, my love ! my love !' And falling
on her knees she prayed : ' God I
send him back to me ! send him back

to me !'

The were surrounded, and what could
four hundred untrained men do against
well disciplined and well armed soldiers ?
Monsieur de Trogleff had many men, it is
true, but the large number of Republicans
between them prevented their forces joining.
What he would try to do would be
to break through and reach the Manoir,
and come to the rescue of the small force
of the De Carnoets. Everything depended
on his succeeding.

Told by his scouts of the approaching
forces, De TroglefF had watched them
himself and had guessed their intentions.
Then the danger of the inhabitants of the
Manoir had at once been evident to him ;

and in his anxiety about them he had

foolishly thought of nothing else at the

time but of coming to warn them. After

that he had time to join his own men. He

and his men were safe in the forest now;

the Bleus knew of this and did not go

near, but merely guarded all the roads and

issues between the forest and the Manoir

on that side. The other corps watched in

the valley and in the villages on the

opposite side of the Manoir. The four

hundred men were thus between two fires.

If only they could dislodge those from the

valley, and throw them beyond the river,

De Trogleff might make his way through

the other force and help them ! But it was

a forlorn hope.

Rohan, we are all dead men, I fear.'
I should care nothing but for those
under our roof now.'

Which is best ?' he continued soon
after, ' to wait till they move or to go
forward at once ?'

As long as they remain still, it gives
time for De TroglefF to join us — if he ever
can join us.'

After a time there was a movement
among the troops on the side of the
valley, a sharp falling into ranks and a
quick march onwards.

Rohan pushed forward but found that the
peasants followed his horse with difficulty ;
so he jumped down, tied his horse to a tree,
and went with them on foot.

Monsieur de Carnoet still mounted on
his horse, as soon as the enemy was near
enough, rashly rode in front of his men,
and in a moment, and before these had had
time to help him, he was dragged from his
horse and made prisoner.

He stood surrounded by the soldiers, a
noble figure in his Breton dress, and with
as martial a look as general ever had — he
who had lived so quiet and inoffensive a
life.

'Who are you?' asked the officer in
command. But the prisoner was in no
haste to reply, and only looked at him
calmly. ' Answer me at once,' the officer
cried.

My name is Rohan de Carnoet, — what
will you with me ?'

Your death ! your death ! Chouan,
traitor, and rebel. Your death! Bind him
carefully, watch him with loaded arms ;
with your lives you answer for his life.
Ah ! ah ! so we have you at last.' Then he
spurred his horse on towards the rest of
the peasants led by Rohan.

Rohan had lost sight of his father, and

feeling he must be dead or a prisoner
threw himself on the advancing Bleus.

The officer leading the men, rushed
at him, but reeled from his horse ; Rohan's
pistol had shot him through.

Nevertheless, Rohan's attempted rescue
ended in failure ; he was surrounded, and
he and all his men made prisoners.

A sorry procession, they passed the place
where Monsieur de Carnoet, tightly bound,
was standing. He met the despairing look
of his son with a friendly nod and a
smile ; and, as he came nearer, seized an
opportunity to say quickly in Breton :

Hide thy name, hide thy name as thou
lowest me ! Let no one hear it. Try to
escape — and you, mes enfants as you value
your salvation, do not say who he is !'

The officer in command being dead, a
younger one had taken his place, who put

VOL. III. N

his most important prisoner, Monsieur de
Carnoet, under a special guard, and proceeded
with the rest of his troops towards
the Manoir.

The prisoners, all disarmed and huddled
together, knew that there Alas no chance
of resistance. Rohan, who had killed
the officer, was bound like his father,
and for him also there was no hope.
His eyes followed the small troop going
to the Manoir ; he, who one moment
before could fight valiantly, bent down his
head and shuddered. She was there —
she who was more than life to him ! In
his anguish his bonds seemed to grow
tighter and to cut into his flesh. Could
he not be free, free to rush to her rescue ?
Would they ever meet again? Would she
be with him on his way to the scaffold ?
Would he even then hide from her that

she was — oh ! so dear, so precious to him ?
She was there, and he still lived ! She
was there, and he had not died to save
her !

n2

CHAPTER IX.

Meanwhile Monsieur Brevelaye, Loik,,
and the few men Rohan had left as a
guard for the comtesse and Renee, remained
at their post stern and resolute
calmly looking forward to the moment
when they would be called to do their duty.
A strange picture these sturdy men
offer with their costumes of past ages,
and with guns ia their hands, waiting for
the approach of the hated foe, ready to kill
and — with steady looks facing the future
beyond the ken of men — ready to die.
They have no general, but a priest is

among them, one of themselves and with
the same duties and the same hopes.
No need is there to speak of courage, — there
are no cowards among them. They are
there by their own free will ; they expect no
praise and no earthly reward ; they will fight
and die, because two helpless women are
there, and they must defend them.

The firing ceased. — Who was victorious,
who the conquered? They would soon
know ; and not a man moved. At last
their strained ears caught a sound; a horse
was coming slowly up the small elevated
ground where the house was built, and the
Republican soldiers were following close
behind.

Eenee, on the watch, had seen the
soldiers were near.

Aunt, the Bleus are coming, ' she said.

'Renee, you must go, you must be
saved. Go alone and hide in the woods.

They will not go there, and you may be
able to escape. Do not hesitate.'

dear, dear aunt, I cannot leave you
here alone ! I cannot.'

Renee, you must leave me — we shall
meet in Heaven, child. Can any kind of
fear be left for the dying who does not
fear death ! Leave me, and God be with
you.'

I cannot, I cannot leave you ; I entreat
you to let me remain, to let me see you to
the last. No, I cannot go, I cannot,
cannot leave you.'

Then the comtesse, so weak and so ill, by
a supreme effort sat up suddenly in her
bed, her voice gaining a strength it had
long lost, and she said,

Renee, this is suicide ; you can do
nothing for me, and will only bring death
upon yourself by remaining. Would you
banish yourself for ever from the company

of those you love, and who love you?
Would you destroy yourself and renounce
the sight of God and His holy angels forever
? Go, go at once, I command you !
Leave me, leave me, leave me, Renee. I
command you to leave me 1' And as Renee,
with clasped hands and streaming eyes,
still resisted, ' You have no right to give
me such pain — no right to part us for ever.
I — I who gave up for you my longing to
die — my longing to join my beloved !
If you disobey me, we part — now — forever!
Do not imperil your soul — and
mine.'

Then Renee, falling on her knees by her
aunt, cried,

Bless me ! bless me and I will go ; let
me see your face full of love for me
again. Do not part from me thus in anger
in holy anger. Aunt, bless me and I
weill go.'

And the comtesse pressed the poor girl
to her bosom, saying low,

Farewell, my dearest child — farewell !
My dearest child, farewell ! farcAvell,
indeed !'

And Renee was gone.

Then the comtesse, struggling for breath,
still had the courage to send for Monsieur
Brevelaye, and say to him t

You know that I am about to die,
therefore send away these men ; send them
to their homes, everyone of them. Let
none of them remain ; I wish to be alone,
quite alone. Leave the doors open, so
that anyone may come in, but see that nota
single life is endangered for me. See
that no blood is shed for my sake. Make
the men go into the woods at once ; there
they are safe ; there they can defend themselves
if attacked, — but tell them only if
attacked, — otherwise they must not fight.

The soldiers are approaching — do you not
hear their footsteps ? Send our men away
quickly — all — all away ; see that there is
not a man left behind ; not one. I cannot
die in peace if one remains. Open the
doors wide. They are advancing — save
yourself also '

Monsieur Brevelaye, obeying, left her
room at once and told the men what the
comtesse had said; they listened with
dark looks, but yielded at last.

Meanwhile, Renee had reached the woods
unseen, and wandered on full of her uncontrollable
grief Then wearied she stood still
and listened. How was it no noise had
reached her ? What had happened ? Why
this strange silence? What did it all
mean ? Had the men at the Manoir given
up without a struggle? It was impossible !

How long the time seemed ! How was
it there was not a cry, not a shout, no

firing? What should she do? Had she
not better try to find out what had taken
place? Suppose, after all, Rohan was
victorious ! Suppose he were there — in the
house — waiting for her and calling her —
calling her ! For he cared a little for her — a
little he cared. — Why ! had he not come to
her during the night ! She Alas going in the
sand he Alas — pained. — He

^ Aunt — dear aunt ! What shall I do
alone, all alone in the world ? What
shall I do ?' she suddenly cried out. Then
faintness came over her ; she had no
strength to resume her walk ; she leaned
her head against a tree, and remained
there.

Suddenly a thought comes to her. — If
instead of the Republicans being prisoners
he — Rohan is their prisoner, if he ; if his
father is — wounded — dead. She starts up ;
she must know — at any cost she must find

out the truth. He a prisoner — dead — perhaps
! What is it that has happened? How
can she know ? How can she make sure
whether those who were in danger are safe ?
Shemustgo. And shelooks round. There
is no foot-path near ; she tries here and there
every semblance of a path ; but she has to
retrace her steps, and start afresh. She
sees a clearing a little way off through the
trees, forces her way through the brambles
and thorns to reach it ; but it is only the
bareness caused by the thickness of the
pines that grow there. She stands by a
kind of round open space shut in by thick
underwood on every side, and trembles.
She has lost her way ! How long will it
be before she can reach some one and hear
what has happened ?

She tries again and ao;ain to direct herself;
she has not the slightest idea whether
she is turning her back on the Manoir ; she

cannot guide herself in this entanglement
of briars, thorns, and thick underwood.
By-and-by, the trees seem to be fewer, the
undergrowth less difficult to penetrate; she
is evidently drawing towards the open. One
last effort, and she makes her way through
some interlacing low branches, and looks
out, and utters a cry.

A young Republican officer was before
her.

In her first frightened look, she saw a
strongly-built young man with an intelligent
face and ardent look, and holding
himself well and bravely.

They stood facing each other in the first
moment of astonishment ; then he asked :

One of the inmates of the house over
there, no doubt?'

'Yes.'

Thy name, citoyenne T

In Renee's heart the first reply was :

'By what right do yoa ask?' But intuitively
she felt he had the right so to
address her, and she said, simply,

My name is Renee de Kerguennec'

Taking the warrant out of his breast-pocket,
he opened it, and, pointing with
his finger to her name, said,

I thought so. Then, Renee de Kern
I am sorry, but I have against
thee a sad duty to perform.'

She looked long enough for her startled
eyes to see her name written down in full.

And yet thou art a beautiful girl,
Renee de Kerguennec. It seems a pity
thou shouldst also be a rebel. Renee de
Kerguennec, I would fain give thee thy
life. Come, give me a kiss — a good kiss,
Renee.'

She, indignant and angry, and pale with
the sense of the insult, her voice choking
with suppressed sobs said,

^ I am your prisoner, ready to go
where you will. But you have no
right to insult me ! No right ! no
right !'

Proud — proud of course ; yet, poor
girl ! poor girl ! so was Marie Antoinette
proud, and '

But Renee, moving before him, said
quickly,

'Which is the way? Show me, go
before, and I will follow you. I have lost
myself; if I had not, I would go to your
soldiers and give myself up to them. I
tell you I am ready to die — I am a willing
prisoner ready to go to the scaffold ; but
you have no right to keep me here, you
have no right to insult me '

Stay, stay one moment, Renee de Kern
he said, looking at her beautiful,
indignant face. ' Listen to me ; a kiss fora

life. It doesn't seem much, does it — a
kiss for a life ? But thou refuses it.
Listen It is of no use going in that
direction — that is not the way. Listen, and
perhaps thou wilt see how I came to offer
thee thy life, and be tender towards thee —
more than is my wont.'

And, as she looked helplessly for a way
of escape, he went on :

I came to that house — the Manoir, it is
called, is it not ? I came to arrest thee
and a comtesse — thy mother, was it ? No,
she was too young '

My aunt, my aunt. What has happened
? Tell me !' Renee cried, almost
forgetting herself ' How is she r — where
is she?'

I will tell thee.' And he looked round
cautiously and in silence, and then went
on :

I found all the doors open when we
came in, and feared some treachery — so
strange it seemed. I placed my men carefully
on the watch, and, followed by the
bravest, determined to go round the rooms
myself, loaded gun in hand. We entered
at last a large, handsome bed-room, and my
attention was drawn at once to the bed,
from whence inarticulate sounds were
heard. I went to see, and found a woman
dying. She had fallen on her face across
her bed, and she could not breathe. — I
put my gun on the bed and lifted her up
gently in my arms. It relieved her at
once. She took a long breath, and soon,
when she was better, murmured three
times, "Renee! Renee ! Renee !" — Her
head had fallen on my breast ; I moved it
so that my coat buttons should not hurt her.
I ought to have put her down at once on
her pillows, no doubt, but she seemed comfortable,

and her hand, falling on mine,
seemed so much like a soft, light caress that
I did not care to disturb her. She soon
opened her eyes and met mine. I was
afraid the fear would kill her outright ;
but no, she shoved no fear, and actually-smiled
— actually smiled : smiled at me
so accustomed to the frightened looks of
women, and such a smile — I felt as if my
hardened face relaxed into a smile too
answering her own. For an instant we remained
thus, looking at each other ; then
she said :

^ "A Republican?" and I answered very
low and as it came to me :

" Republicans have hearts sometimes ;"
And I felt then truly as if I had one. Then
she said, oh! so softly, "My brother!" and
an extraordinary expression of sweetness,
an angelic look came into her face ; and as
I gazed — forgetting where I was, what I was

VOL. III. o

doing, what T lead come for, what those
who sent me would say if they saw me
she passed away without a struggle.
With a gentle sigh, with that beautiful
seraphic expression on her face all the
time, she passed away. — Then I laid her
down gently ; closed her sweet eyes carefully.
A small crucifix there was on a table
near her and some flowers, and I put the
crucifix between her folded hands and
the flowers too; and I, with my men,
looked at her as one looks at an angel, so
beautiful she was. Then I shut the door
gently behind me, and left her sweet soul
in peace.'

As the man spoke Renee had not taken
her eyes from his face, and followed there
the emotions he had experienced. As she
heard of his true and unconscious kindness
towards the woman he had come to
arrest, and saw how far he was from thinking

lie had done a noble action ; as lie
thought of her aunt's peaceful death, — she
forgot he was the man she had despised
and shrank from a few moments before ;
she forgot her anger and indignation ;
and whether out of her own heart or
because of what he had said before, a
strange yearning came over her. She took
one step towards him, her eyes brilliant
with gratitude, and said,

You did this for my aunt — you — you
who were to arrest her, and conduct her to
the scaffold — you who were bound to be
hard to her by your office — you did this ?'
And, placing her two hands on his
head, she brought his face towards
hers and kissed him on both cheeks —
kissed him solemnly and fervently — murmuring,


May the remembrance of this, your
good action, accompany you throughout

o2

your life and be a blessing to you. And
may you never want a friend, or be left
desolate on your bed of sickness !'

I thank thee, I thank thee !' the young
man said, deeply moved, as she stood before
him. ' I thank thee ; but, after all this,
I hardly feel the heart to arrest thee.
Therefore — fly, fly for thy life, Renee
de Kerguennec, fly for thy life ! Try
to hide thyself carefully, for they are
bent on having thee. Change thy
dress, and dress like thy peasant girls.
Not but that thou wilt be always beautiful
— that thou canst not help ; and many a
swain will there be si«:hino' for thee. But
go now, Renee — fly for thy life, fly !'

And as she looked at him, scarcely
taking in that she was free, he went on,
more earnestly still :

Fly, and be quick ! And remember that
for this I should be degraded and shot —

But I had thy kiss, Kenee, and I promised
thee thy life for a kiss ! But fly now —
there, that way, towards the village. I
will keep watch over thee unseen as long
as I can ; there, that way !' And, parting
the branches for her, he looked after her
till she had disappeared ; then round him
again, cautiously and anxiously.

Had anyone been witness of what had
taken place, all had passed so gently, and
so quietly, their voices had been so low? He
searched the wood — no, there was nobody.

And not only had nobody seen him or
heard him ; not only was the young officer
to escape punishment for this, but the
blessing of Renee was to abide nth him
for ever. It remained in his heart like
a, shrine, where he offered up the
best actions of his life ; and, though he
was to become one of Napoleon's best

generals and see many things, the remembrance
of that kiss remained always
the most precious treasure his heart
possessed.

Often did he talk to his children of it
and to his grandchildren too. And for his
family also was the tradition of the young-soldier's
good action and its reward like a
looking up to higher and nobler things ina
world defiled by so many vile deeds ;
till one day, one of his grandchildren, a
young man of an upright and loving
nature — an artist striving after an ideal,
that of a beautiful, noble, and pure woman,
and never satisfied with what he produced
determined to go and see if there was a
Renee left in the world. And he came to
Brittany.

It was in these latter days when, as the
Breton poet says :

The castles are destroyed, and bare the country
remains ;
Of the shelterless bards the songs have ceased ;
The heroic breath of life dies in the heart of Brittany ;
For everywhere does worldly interest throw its icy
mantle !

Farewell, past and graceful manners of the cottage,
And the grand language sung by the poet ;
Farewell to the brilliant costume that made the men

more brave ; —
Usefulness for ever has eclipsed beauty.

God ! who created us either warriors or poets,
On the coast sailors, and on the fields shepherds ;
Let not our heads be bent under wild cravings,
Do not make of the Bretons a people of barterers.' *

But the young man found, living in
deep retirement, some families still faithful
to the white flag of royal France, and he
found also among them, not a splendid,
beautiful Renee such as he had dreamed
of, but a sweet, loving, and exquisitely
lovely one ; — and he loved her.

Brizeux.

And one day the young people who loved
each other, married. When at last alone
with his beloved, and longing for the first
kiss of his bride, he said :

Dearest, give me " the kiss of Renee,"
so that it may abide with us and our little
ones after us.'

And she brought his face close to hers,
pressed her lips on her bridegroom's
cheeks, and said :

May the remembrance of your good
actions accompany you throughout your
life, and be a blessing to you. And may
you never want a friend, or be left desolate
on your bed of sickness.'

And the young man said ' Amen,' and
pressed his young wife to his heart.

CHAPTER X.

But our Renee de Kerguennec was far from
the end of lier troubles, after she had left
the young soldier. And it is so among us ;
with some all is peace, while others are
overwhelmed with an ocean of woe. But
God, who watches over us, He abideth forever
and knoweth best.

Faithful to his promise, the young
officer had the troops withdrawn from the
village, in order, apparently, to surround
the Manoir. Tremblingly Renee looked
out when at the borders of the wood ; then,
passing swiftly the open space to the

nearest cottage, slipped in, and found herself
alone in the ruined interior. The fire
was extinguished on the hearth ; the wood
scattered about, and the traditional armchair
empty of its old occupant. She
went to the haJiut^ where she knew a girl
of about her own size kept her clothes ;
and fortunately the Sunday costume was
there. Undressing with feverish haste,
and hiding her own dress carefully, she
soon found herself looking like a peasant-girl
from Vannes, with the black dress,
open sleeves, and even the black hood of
mourning adopted by so many sisterhoods.
Thus she stood in the empty, desolate
place, not knowing what to do, and well
aware of her danger if any Bleu came in.
Suddenly the shuffling of naked feet on
the earthen floor made her look round,
and the woman of the cottage, amazed
and wondering, cried out, suddenly :

^ Do not stop there ; they Avould know
you, I feel sure ; come with me into
the cache I only came out to see if there
was a piece of bread left. But there is
nothing ; somebody must risk his life to
find some — we are starving. But come,
come.'

The love of life was strong in the
young girl, and great her power of hope,
and she followed the peasant.

When down in the cache and her eyes
were accustomed to the darkness, she
found herself with weeping women and
children, and old men looking blankly
before them, the image of despair, and an
immense pity seized her. Poor, Door
people, what was to become of them if
the soldiers remained long in the neighbourhood,
and what afterwards when they
would return to their homes wrecked of

A conical shape hole dug in the earth.

everything that made life possible for
them?

After a few moments, the word having
passed round who it was who had come in,
she heard a voice in the darkness.

Both Monsieur Rohan and his father
are prisoners.'

She started violently.

Both — do you say ? Where and when
did you see them ?'

With irons on their hands and feet,
guarded by the soldiers. Otherwise —
otherwise there would be a rush made for
them.'

Holy Jesus !' she exclaimed, ' do you
mean to say that there is no hope of rescue ?
No hope ?'

'None.'

^ Could you not assemble to-night ?
They have done so much for you — but
where are they?'

At the Manoir.'

^ Prisoners at the Manoir ? Oh, God of
mercy, have pity, have pity !' And, seated
on the stone where she was, she leaned her
face against the earthen wall and sobbed
aloud. ' And you can do nothing ? Where
are the others ? Where is Monsieur
Brevelaye and where is Loik? Is there
no one who would risk his life for his good
master ?'

Hush, do not weep so loud, you might
betray us ; there may be some one lurking
about.'

But — but — do you care so much for
life that you will not stir, any of you —
that you will do nothing?'

Our sons and brothers and fathers are
prisoners with them.'

Ah ! then there is no hope.'

None ! none whatever. They must
die.'

Renee started and fell prostrate on the
ground. But alas ! the grief of the
women there before her for their own woe,
seemed to deprive them of any feeling for
the girl they had long learned to love and
respect.

By-and-by, some one else entered the
cache and said :

Our prisoners are going off early tomorrow.'


Where ! where !' cried out Renee.

Ah ! who is this ? Mademoiselle here ?
We thought you lost or in hiding at the
Manoir.'

It was Monsieur Brevelaye.

Where are they taking them ?'

Loik is trying to find out ; he will tellus
when he knows.'

At that moment another voice came
through the narrow opening.

'The prisoners are going to Vannes.'

Loik, Loik, take me out, I must go, I
must go,' cried Renee aloud.

who is that? — You will betray your
place of refuge ! Do not speak so loud !
I cannot believe my ears.'

It is I, Renee de Kerguennec. Help
me out, Loik, help me.'

Loik came down and said, quickly :

I am going to Vannes ; if you can follow
me, come.'

Yes ! yes, I will.'

And thus the mighty leveller sorrow,
made these two companions on the long and
dreary way that led to Vannes, — through
muddy roads overhung by trees ; or in the
fields close to the hedges, by paths interrupted
by rough fences over which they
had to clamber. When the energy lent by
sorrow was spent, and poor Renee sank
exhausted, the peasant looked at her
passively and waited for her strength to

return, stolidly accomplishing that part of
his destiny which made him protector fora
while of her who had once saved his life.

On they went, sorrowfully thinking of
the poor prisoners, and doubting often and
sadly the use of their long and weary
course. But, hoping against hope, they
went on through the night until, Renee's
strength utterly giving way, they approached
a cottage which the young girl,
with her soiled skirts and thick muddy
shoes and her worn face, entered without
fear of attracting notice. Thankful for rest
anywhere, she crept inside the lit clos and
stretched on the miserable pallet, and shutting
the doors, slept. She slept as the young
sleep ; and, though sobs often broke forth
from her troubled breast, the sleep was
rest.

Meanwhile the sun came on slowly,
shrouded in the heavy fog his rays drew

from the earth. Higher and higher he rose
and brighter and brighter the earth looked ;
but still Renee slept.

Loik had not closed his eyes ; like a
good and faithful watch-dog, his looks
wandered from his mistress's place of concealment
to the door that might at any
moment be opened. He thought at last
he must wake her, for the sun was no^\'
high in the sky, and they would never be
able to reach Vannes before the soldiers,
and place themselves where they could give
the prisoners a last farewell. Nor could
they be of use to them, if they arrived
when they were once made fast in prison.

At that moment, however, his attentive
and trained ear caught a far-off sound
but too familiar to him : the tramp of
feet on the high-road. It must be the
Bleus.

^ Is there a cache near ?' he asked a

VOL. III. P

woman who had come in. ' Quick — our
enemies are coming.'

Jesus ! Jesus ! Maria !' cried the poor
trembling woman. ' Into, there is no hiding-place
but behind the beds — Jesus ! Maria !
Jesus ! Holy Virgin, help us now !'

Loik gently slid open one of the doors
of the bed, disclosing thus in that small
square opening the lovely head, with disordered
hair, resting on the coarse pillow.
A faint flush, the flush of sleep, was on
her cheeks ; and the peasant gazed and
hesitated to break upon her rest. But
would not those whose feet he heard fast
approaching ruthlessly tear the young girl
from her couch ? Would they not heap
humiliation upon her head, and — if she
were to be recognised — lead her to death ?
All this passed quickly through the peasant's
mind, and he called out to her :

Wake up, quick, wake up ! Our enemies
are here !'

Renee, disturbed out of lier deep sleep,
fixed wondering eyes on lier companion
and at lier surroundings ; then full consciousness
returned, and she knew what
had happened, and where she was
homer.

■a o

Hide there behind the bed ; get under
it, if they come and look,' said Lo'ik,
earnestly.

The peasants who had left, had drawn forward
the huge cupboard-like building — the
bed of these people — and behind was just
standing-room hid by the coarse serge
curtains. A dip under the planks forming
the bottom of the bed had already saved
others from death before her.

Renee stood and waited; and Loik went
out into the woods. The soldiers came, and

p 2

a loud knocking at the door announced the
arrival of the first detachment. They came
in asking roughly for drink, but nothing was
there to be had, and no one to be punished.
Only two trembling Avoman heard their
threats, and entreated God to save them.
The usual search began. ' They hide everything,
these savages, and in the most 
awkward places and ' They

battered-in the doors and broke the bed
panels where Renee had just been, and
looked up and down, but there was nothing
to be found.

More soldiers come ; more soldiers swear
that the inhabitants of such an inhospitable
place must die, and, not finding
anything else, are thankful at last to
staunch their thirst with water. These
pass on ; but others stop ; others search
the place so searched before, and a man's
voice is heard from the door :

Give me some water to drink ; it is
weary walking with irons on.'

Renee knew it to be Monsieur de Carnoet.
He, under whose roof she had lived such
peaceful days, was there, a prisoner, and in
irons.

But no one attended to his request ; for
he said :

The man who has no compassion for his
fallen brother must expect none when his
turn for suffering comes. I only ask for
water.'

Which thou dost not deserve, old
Chouan that thou art, who dearest to resist
the Republic'

They will soon give thee something else
to drink,' added another, roughly.

And soon wilt thou have no mouth to
drink with.'

Or rather one that will refuse to drink,'
said another with a coarse laugh.

Renee shuddered. Into what inhuman
hands had the unfortunate prisoner fallen I
She wished she could rush out of her ,
fall at his knees, and bring him
the water he asked for. Ah ! that the
heart should know such bitterness — she
must remain hid and bear with his agony
unknown to him.

These men went, and there was silence
as the noise of their tramp passed away.
Still in hiding, and faint from fear, compassion
and sorrow, Renee at last heard
Loik's voice : ' Come out now, they are
gone. But do you wish still to go to
Vannes ? We shall not be able to do anything
there; not even to see them.'

Yes, yes, we will go on to the bitter end !
How can we know but that we may do some
good.'

Loik shook his head and murmured :

^ There is no hope for them — no hope.'

At last Renee and her companion
readied Vannes, but too late to see the
sad procession pass by. All they were
able to do was to mix with the people in
the streets, and try to learn what they
could. They where told that the common
prisoners were as usual huddled together in
an unsheltered, walled yard, where they had
to sleep and live. But their chief, Rohan
de Carnoet, was in a separate prison ; and
so was another of the common prisoners,
who had killed the captain, and who was
to die for it.

This they gathered from the crowd
heaving to and fro. Renee felt she must
look for a hiding-place, and try to find
friends to help her to say a last farewell
to him who was everything to
her.

That — chief of the Chouans — that Rohan
de Carnoet, — ah ! she knew too well there

was no hope for him. But to see him
once more before his death, to tell him
all her love, and to wear his mourning
in her heart for ever — that she must
do.

Loik took her to some people well
known to the Royalists ; and Renee, humble
and forlorn, dependent upon even the
lowest for help, crossed the threshold of
the poor shop. Under her disguise, she
went from one to the other of those in
authority, and begged and entreated at the
risk of her own life for the boon.

Roughly was she received, and roughly
sent away — the men would be brought
into judgment next day, and then she
could see them, if she cared to. But she
could not get into the place where the
prisoners, with the mock show of justice,
were to be condemned to death.

She had little power of forcing her way

through a crowd, and little heart for the
struggle, poor Renee ! but at last she saw
Monsieur de Carnoet pass by. What was
there in his gaze that made her look again ?
a kind of triumphant smile, a kind of
joy ! It seemed impossible, and yet so it
was. With tears on her cheeks, her eyes
followed him till he disappeared ; and, left
alone in the crowd, she wondered still.
Was he glad to die ? Could he be — glad
to die? Could anyone rejoice that tomorrow,
tomorrow should be their last
day?

Don't look at me, but follow me,' said
the voice of somebody passing near her ;
you are attracting attention ; follow me,
but do not seem to know me.'

The woman to whom she had been entrusted
it was who spoke to her ; and raising her
eyes, she saw that people were staring at her.
Was it her tears that were betraying her,

or was it "her face? And she moved quickly
away.

And where do you come from, my lass T
a man asked kindly of her.

I — I come from Carnac,' she said,
hurrying fast.

Where are you going ?' And Renee,
who had failed utterly in her previous
endeavours, careless of self, replied,

I want — I must see my friend, the man
who is to die tomorrow. Can you help
me, — can you direct me?'

Which man ?'

They call him the Chouan chief; he is
to die tomorrow, they say,' she repeated,
tears streaming down her face.

Come along with me,' the man said
suddenly ; ' you should not say such things
aloud in the street. Come.' And, when
they had reached a more lonely spot, he
said: 'I will help you. I thought when I first

saw you you were no peasant-girl. I will
do what I can, but I am in hiding myself,,
here in the midst of our executioners. I
know the chief Rohan de Carnoet to be ina
separate prison. It is his privilege, and
he will be shot tomorrow.'

Shot ! Rohan shot ! Oh, God ! And
tomorrow.'

Hush, my poor girl, not one of our
families but has to weep. Take heart, and
make the sacrifice. I will help you to see
him to-day. Come in here and wait.'

The number of prisoners was so great
that those in the yards under the guard of
the soldiers had to trust for food to the
men and women who came to sell and
barter. And Renee saw a constant stream
of these going in and out of the gates. At
last a man came and said :

Are you the girl who was brought here
just now?'

Yes.'

Follow me then.'

And without any fear about herself;
without any thought of herself, and seeing
only friendly help when it might have
been treachery, she followed him. She
passed the prison door, and saw in the distance,
talking to some officer, the man who
had brought her there ; but her thoughts
were of Rohan, and, trembling with the
expectation of soon seeing him, she went
on, heedless of what might happen to her.

Fortunately the man was a real friend and
helped her in good faith, and soon she was
brought to the door behind which the
condemned chief was passing his last few
hours upon earth. She could scarcely
breathe ; she clutched at the wall, and
could almost have entreated the man not to
go on ; but the door turned slowly on its
hinges, and, seeing it open, she suddenly

sprang forward and falling on her knees,,
her hands stretched out, she gave a great
cry : ' Rohan !' And as suddenly, under
her strong emotion, she carried her hands
to her face, sobbing aloud. All her heart
was in the cry, all her life suspended in
the agony of the meeting. ' Rohan !' she
cried again.

A man advanced towards her; gentle
hands removed hers from her face ; and a
feeling kind voice asked :

'What is it, my child?'

Renee started up terrified.

You ! you !— Not Rohan ?'

'Why, Renee, you here, my dear child!
How was it you were allowed to come T
asked Monsieur de Carnoet.

'You!' she repeated, pressing the dear
hands to her lips while he kissed her brow.
Not Rohan ! But oh ! I am so thankful
to see you, to say farewell to you. I

had not looked for you ; it was Rohan — forgive
me for this — it was Rohan I sought !'
she repeated, choked with her tears. ' But
I am thankful, oh ! so thankful to see you —
you also — to say farewell to you, to you also !
They promised they would take me to the
Chouan chief, De Carnoet, and they made
a mistake, but I shall find him ; I shall tell
him I saw you.'

Renee, child, listen ; come here, so that
no one may hear. I am Rohan de Carnoet —
I am the Chouan chief. My son will be
incorporated into the Republican armies
and forced to fio-ht against his own like
the others. I — I — I am the Chouan chief.
Do you not understand, Renee ?'

She stared at him bewildered ; at last
she said :

You — took his place ?'
Renee, I have nothing dearer to me on
earth than my son, — he dead, I could but

-wish to die ; life would be an intolerable
burden — an intolerable burden. He is
young, and I pride in his youth, I glory in
his noble manhood. Could I see my son
murdered, and live ! Could I see my son
die, die before me ! I love him, Renee, even
as you love him; but more, more, child —
more. To-morrow, Renee, the chief dies
and Rohan lives. The chief dies a soldier's
death ! ! the mercy of the Lord ! a
soldier's death ! — You do not know what
that is to me — not that hideous monstrous
death. — And he, my son is free, my son
is saved, my son lives ! ! the mercy of
the Lord ! '

And Renee sees upon his face the same
look of thankfulness, the same look as of
triumph over death she has already seen.

^ May God receive you in His Paradise,'
she murmurs, and after a time she asks :
And where is Rohan ?'

^ Where ? Why, among the villagers ;
and he will be judged like them and
drafted into the army.'

• Did you see him among them ?'

Then a great fear rushes upon the man
so elated but one moment before, and he
cries :

I did not, I did not ; but I was glad,
for he would not have kept silent had he
been there ; he would have accused himself,
he would have told of my — deceit, and
both of us would be lost, both ! You ask
why he was not among the rest ? Ah !
Renee, my son escaped, depend upon it —
the villagers came to the rescue — and he
escaped. That is why he was not there ;
he escaped, my son escaped !'

But though the comforting words recurred
on his lips again and again ; though
he paced his cell repeating them loudly to
himself, his heart beat with new anguish.

Tell me, did you hear, if he had
escaped *

Then he stopped, for horror was on
Kenee's face. Had she not heard that the
peasant who had shot the officer would
also die, and — where, then, was Rohan ?
why was he not brought to judgment like
the rest? Had he been judged before or
after the others ? Was he — was he even
now dead? Who but Rohan could it
be?

I must find him ! I must find him !'
she cried, ' I must go now, and will tell you

I must go at once ' But the fastened

dungeon door was before her, and she
wrung her hands in vain. ' I will go soon
and I will tell you.'

Then her look met his, and she felt faint
and sick at the sight. Pale and dejected,
all light gone out of his face. Monsieur
de Carnoet was before her ; despair over-vol.

III. Q

whelming his soul. — Were they both to
die — both !

The door opened, and the man motioned
her out.

You must come at once and be very
quiet.' And, as she would have thrown
herself into her old friend's arms, he pulled
her quickly away. ' No, my own life is in
danger ; you must leave at once.'

And the door was shut upon the lonely
and desolate prisoner.

To die for his son ! From the first moment
of his arrest the thought had filled
his heart, and death had seemed welcome.
But now, now ! with that doubt that had
entered his soul, death came to him with
its cortege of despair and horror.

Death ! to leave this earth so dear, to
bid farewell to all that has delighted one's
heart ; to part with all we love ; to go
away alone — alone on the awful journey!

To feel the trembling soul recoil from the
new dissolution ! Death ! no more will the
light of day gladden the eyes ; no more
will the ear listen for loved sounds, the
hands feel for a loved pressure ! ! it is
horrible ! horrible to die ! horrible when
full of life to be near death, and feel his
icy touch already on the slowly beating
heart !

My son ! my son, and have T done all
in vain to save thee ; and must thou also
feel this pain, feel this failing of all joy,
this fainting of all courage ! Must thou
also kiss the spectre death ! Others, others
there are who are free ; others there are
who can sing and will enjoy life, and will
live to a good old age, and nurse their
grandchildren upon their knees ! Are they
better men ? Why should they live and
thou die ? Why should they live and thou
die?'

q2

Death had been to him like an opening
through which a long vista of his own life
appeared in brilliant and flattering lines.
Renee loved his son, and he loved her,
and the chevalier was high-spirited and
noble-hearted enough to see that Providence
had willed it so, and would yield.

He had paced up and down in his dark
and narrow cell, noting neither the darkness
nor the narrow bounds ; light and
space were in his breast. He would die
like a soldier, a ransom for his son's life ;
that life which he knew could be but a
glorious one. No thought of self had come
to him; his wife — his wife would understand
it all, and would bless him in her heart ;
and the happiness of her son would be a
comfort and strength to her in her affliction.

But now an accidental word had
broken the spell. What in his self-abnegation
his heroic soul had considered

to be a sacrifice lie saw now to be useless,
— to be no sacrifice at all! He
had been seized pistol in band fighting
against the Republic, and he deserved
the death according to an enemy's code of
laws. He had done nothing for his son —
nothing ; it was all a folly and a dream !

Then, as his exaltation fell lower and
lower, a piercing pain made him stagger ;
not only was his death no sacrifice for
his son, but his son also would be condemned
to die ; and he felt the feebleness
of his age, the feebleness of his aching
limbs, and the misery of despair. He would
die a useless death, and his son with him !

! Rohan ! Rohan, my son ! and I had
thought to save thee !'

Then do the narrow bounds of his
prison crush his soul and darkness grows
horrible. ! to go and be free ! to go and
cry out to everyone, ' Give me back my

son.' ! to be free to work for his rescue f
But the bonds of death hold him — the
death which has now become hideous and
abhorrent !

who will deliver from the dreaded
grave ! Who will deliver from the cruelty
of fate. ! it is so sweet to live : the
earth is so lovely ; the trees so green ;
the sky above so blue ; the heavens, where
the soul would soar, so pure and so alluring
! Life I life ! how precious, ! how
very precious thou art ! Life with its
communion of loving hearts ; life with its
intercourse with fellow-inn ; life with the
gaze of beloved ones answering one's
gaze ; life with the touch of a beloved
hand giving strength, and joy, and hope.

No burdened conscience is his, upright
and true he has lived ; no dark
page of selfishness towards his fellow-creatures
is there hidden in the secret

of his bosom ; no dark deed of cruelty to
his brethren. He has lived his honourable
life, and there is no remorse in him
and yet death, death now appears to him
wicked — monstrous ! Up and down, up
and down in the cell where the heaving
of his bosom has no eye-witness, where
his tears of rebellious despair and cries of
agony are not heard, the strong man
paces. — No escape is there ; he must die,
and he hates death — he hates death now.

How long will the agony last ! Can
he not conquer it ! Can he not — pray !
And suddenly he falls prostrate, crying,
Even so, God ! if it be Thy will. Even
so, God !' And the sacrifice of self is
accomplished.

CHAPTER XL

Meanwhile Renee roams outside bewildered
and terrified. People pass her and
look at her ; some pity her — though pity
was not of those days — as helplessly she
looks at the prison walls and always
returns to them. Suddenly she hears a
low voice pronounce her name — 'Renee.' It
is Lo'ik. To him in the street she is Renee
the peasant-girl. He takes her arm and
leans it firmly on his ; and they walk on,
till having taken refuge in their place of
retreat, he says to her :

I have just now found out where Monsieur

Rohan is ; we must try to save
him, mademoiselle, and I think we can.
He is in a different place from his
father, and where there are a great many
prisoners. People from the outside bring
things to them. I hear that they want
mattresses, and that some of the prisoners
buy them. We will send him one, — but
with clothes, ordinary clothes, hid inside, —
and he must try to change his dress
unseen, and escape. But you cannot go,
he must not be known for what he is ;
and your presence would betray him. He
is not yet condemned ; they are hesitating
if he shall be shot or — or

But we will yet save him. Stop here, do
not go about, you attract notice, and you
would injure the people here. My friend
-svill go to the prison as a seller of things,
and will tell him all about our plan. Hope
still, mademoiselle. But, tomorrow at

ten, when you hear shots from the Garenne
close by — you will know that Monsieur de
Carnoet has passed away. Pray, pray for
his soul.'

Then Loik left her, and in the back room
of the small shop, prayers, fervent, ardent
prayers, rose to Heaven. 'Thy will be
done,' is the last cry of helpless grief.
'Thy will be done — not mine.'

No sleep is there for her that night,
though the young frame is weary and the
heart sick. All night she spends in broken
prayers and cries. She knows that she has
seen Monsieur de Carnoet for the last time
and that Rohan she may never see.

The day breaks over the old town of Vannes
in a flood of light, the brilliancy of the
sun's rays bringing gladness to the living.
Birds sing with renewed delight, and the
sweet smell of earth and sea brings fresh
strength to young and old. Even in her

deep misery, Renee, for a moment, as she
gazes on the old towers and battlements,
and sees them bathed in the morning
liojht, feels the clinging to life of the
strong. But time wears on, and at ten
the dear friend of her youth is to pass
away ! On her knees, her face hid, in her
agony she listens to the ticking of the
clock as if listening to the numbered pulsation
of a life. Eight, nine, half-past nine
is it possible that a man full of life, of
love and generosity will soon — be dead!
Her heart stands still — those drumS' — are
they the drums to lead ?

Two men here come into the little room
where she is.

Stop here,' one of them says, and she
recognises Loik's voice.

She looks up and sees Rohan with him.
She starts to her feet, and exclaims :

He should have been told of this ! I

will go — He should have been told before
he dies !'

He has been told Loik replies.

'Thank God, thank God!' But at
the same moment a loud report is
heard. She utters a shriek, and cries :
she is dead! — dead !' and falls down on
her knees convulsed with sobs.

Rohan comes near her, greatly agitated.

Who is it, who is the man you say is
dead ? Who is it who has just been shot ?
Then he cries out suddenly again, seeing
the agony in the face raised before his,
Tell me, tell me who it is.'

She sees, as in a dream, Loik go in
and fasten the door, and put his back
against it ; she sees Rohan's face become
terrible in its anxiety, and she moans :

'They call him the Chouan chief — he
thought to save you — he thought to save
you. Oh, Rohan, Rohan !'

He has understood.

My father ! and I am here !' He rushes
to the door, but there meets Lo'ik. ' Let
me go. I see it all now. He made me
hide my name. I should be there, dead
there instead of him. They have no right
to kill him instead of me. He had no
right to take my name. Let me go !' And
he struggles with Lo'ik. ' It is justice !' he
cries, 'it is but justice; I led the men, not
he — let me go '

Rohan dearest,' murmurs Renee, in a
voice broken with sobs, and coming to
him, ' my dearest love, listen '

Rohan's eyes are on her face, startled.
He reads there her love, her unspeakable
love, and his whole frame shakes under the
consciousness of what is taking place ; but
at that moment of intense agony a strange,
incomprehensible revulsion of feeling takes
place in him towards her ; he draws back

instead of seizing the beseeching hands
stretched before him, and cries :

Am T accursed, — am I then accursed,
that in one day I should cause my
father to die and my friend to be betrayed?
Am 1 accursed of God and
men?'

Renee staggers as if struck by a blow ; her
hands convulsively press her bosom where
shame and grief have entered. Dazed and
stupefied she looks at his stern face, his
clenched hands, and wild despair ; he has
spurned her and his eyes are still upon her.
She reaches the door, pushes gently aside
Lo'ik too astonished to resist, and passes
out.

Then and only then does Rohan come
back to himself; he fixes despairing eyes
on the door that has closed behind
her. What has he done ! Shall he rush
after her, fall on his knees, and implore

lier to pity him and forgive ; implore
lier still to love him ? Alas ! this he cannot
do, his promise, his binding promise to the
chevalier is between them, written in letters
of fire. He must be faithful, though she
suffers.

I will watch over her unseen,' he murmurs,
' I will watch over her unseen.
Father, forgive thy son if to avenge thy
death is not his only care.'

CHAPTER XII.

Shall we never reach Ploermel ?' Renee
asks of lier companion, a rough villagery
who is helping her on her way. ' Shall we
never reach Ploermel ?' And weary and
heart-broken she goes on.

Renee had thought of the well-to-do
farmer, of Ivon her cousin had trusted, of
I von who it was said had bought her
cousin's Chateau — he would give her hospitality.
She plods on, dull instinct alone
guiding her as instinct guides the dying
beasts of the field to the spot where they
think they will find rest. There at Ploermel,

away from those who know her, she will
hide. There in solitude and darkness she
will die alone ! No mocking eye will gaze
on her pain ; no indifferent voice strike her
ear ; no idle comment fall like ice on the
burning wound.

^ Are we nearing Ploermel?' she asks
again after awhile. But suddenly she
draws back ; she has seen through the trees

the turrets of the Chateau de L , and a

flood of reminiscences rush upon her. How
long it seems since they were all so
happy there ! How many are now in
exile ! How many have died since !
Where is that Renee everyone seemed
willing to love ? Is it a dream ? Did she
know that poor girl so desolate, so lonely,
and — despised ? ' Poor thing, poor thing,'
she murmurs as if speaking of another
than herself, ' poor thing, hoar hard life
has been made to thee, poor, poor Rene !'

VOL. III. R

We are here at last,' says her companion,
breaking in on her thoughts. ^ It is here
Ivon lives, at the lodge. Shall we ring ?'

Yes.'

Meanwhile she looks at the gate which
seems to have suffered from an attempt at
fire, and wonders what it means — wonders
absently how long Ivon will keep her there
waiting. At last a face appears behind the
iron grating. It is Ivon, and in a gruff
voice he asks :

What is it ? Who art thou, making
such a noise at my gate ?'

It is your master s cousin. Open,
Ivon, open ; I am faint, tired, and '

I know no master ! I have no master !
Go away, I can do nothing for thee.'

But, Ivon, I am Renee de Kern
surely you will open to me,
Ivon ! Do not make me wait, I can no

longer walk, I must fall down here and die
if you do not receive me.'

'- 1 don't know thee, I don't know such
a name. Why come to me ?' grumbles
Ivon. But meanwhile he opens the door
and sees the girl, once the admiration
of all eyes, waiting with desolation
written on her face. He sees and yet he
says : ' I can give thee nothing, and thou
must not stop here ! Look, there are some
men following thee, who will be trying to
come in too.' Then raising his voice : ' I
don't know thee, and I can do nothing for
thee.'

But Renee stares at him and cannot
understand.

^ Are you afraid of these men outside,'
she says, in a low voice, ' that you speak so
to me?'

'I am afraid of nobody, but I won't be

R 2

pestered by every beggar. Now, go, I
can do nothing for thee ; dost understand
me ? I don't know thee, and I don't wish
to know thee.'

But still as in a dream she repeats :

Ivon, it is impossible that you can have
forgotten me ! Look at me well, am I not
the Renee you were proud to speak to ?
Is my disguise so good that you do not
know me? Is it possible that you should
have forgotten those days — forgotten Renee
de Kerguennec?'

At her name Ivon glances rapidly towards
her companion and refuses more
loudly to give her even a glass of water ;
repeating that he is a good Republican
and knows of nobody with such a name,
and that he does not wish to.

But she does not hear ; her misery is so
great that she cannot understand, and she
still persists :

^ I von — my cousin the marquis was good
to you and trusted you. If lie knew what
you are doing But say, would you
also receive him thus, your good master,
would you receive him thus, if hungry and
footsore he came now to you ?'

I know of no master ; I am my own
master,' shouts Ivon, ' and no marquis has a
right to come to the home of a true citizen
of the Republic, and endanger his wellbeing.'
And he looks at her defiantly,
and shuts the gate in her face.

Renee, faint and weary, carries her hand
to her head bewildered. Is she making a
mistake ? Is not that Ivon ? Is she not
Renee?'

At that moment the men who had
followed behind reach the house, and
begin a loud and furious knocking at the
gate.

Open, Ivon the rich, open.'

Go says Ivon to his wife, ' disappear,,
and — — -'

But lie has had no time to finish his
sentence, for the two men with coarse and
loud oaths are shaking the door, and he
opens it to them.

Ah ! ah ! Ivon the rich ! Ivon the marquis,
give us some drink from thy grand
cellars ; give us some wine and some of
the best too !' T

There is no more wine left ; everyone,
friend or foe, comes for wine. There is
none left, I tell you there is none left.'

We shall see to that, citoyen marquis.
Is it thus thou receives thy friends the
Chouans when they come?'

Chouans ! I never receive Chouans !
I am a true Republican.'

Then the men turn towards Renee.

Trying to smooth our bear the right

way, my pretty one ? What is it thou dost
want of him, eh ?'

I am hungry and thirsty,' replies
Renee.

Hungry and thirsty ! And he will not
give thee something to eat, the old treacherous
hound, he will not give thee some
wine to drink ? Go, tho u double-faced
trimmer, go and fetch some wine for the
pretty girl.' He goes on, stepping up to her,
I will see that he gives thee all thou
neatest ; my pretty one.' And he takes herby
the arm.

In a moment Renee was brought back
to the realities of life ; she snatched away
her arm, and cried,

How dare you ! how dare you ?'

Hallo ! What have we got here ? Let
me look at thee nearer.'

But Ivon, interfering:

She is a poor idiot nobody listens to,'
he said ; ' you both should have heard her
abuse me just now. Only give her a chance
and shell begin again.'

False, false-hearted villain !' cried Renee,
drawing back with strength renewed
for the moment through her very pain
and wretchedness. She was going, when
one of the men came near, and, his
hand dropping heavily on her shoulder,
said,

In the name of the Republic, thy
papers, citoyennef

She turned round and laughed in his
face.

sand thine, citoyen? Art thou in the
habit of carrying thy papers in thy
pocket ^'

Yes, and something else, too ; the names
of many who should be safely locked away.'

For instance, citoyen T

^ Show me thy papers

But she was roused — life she hated now,
but, yield like a sheep to be taken to the
slaughter, she would not. No, she would
fight the matter out, till forced to yield at
last.

My papers ?'

Thy papers ! Here are mine.' And
the man drew a pair of hand-cuffs out of
his pocket ; but before he could touch
her, Ivon had placed himself between
them.

'That won't do in my house, citoyen.
Wine you two came for, and wine you
shall get. Let the mad girl go ; everyone
knows she fancies herself a grand lady,
and that this is her madness. Come along
^vith me — or rather here is the key of the
best wine of the ci-devant marquis ; go and

taste it, that'll be better than stopping
that poor crazy girl for nothing. You will
only be laughed at when you get her to the
town.'

We shall have our eyes upon thy
friend, Ivon,' they said. ' But we'll go to
the cellar meanwhile. And thou, citoyemie,
stop here — or there are i^ome that will hind
thee, believe me, wherever thou dost hide
thyself.'

"When they had gone, Ivon looked at
her, and said, roughly :

Go, go to the farm, — my farm once ;
go, they will give thee bread there. They
hate me, brothers and sisters and father,
they all hate me. Tell them what took
place here ; tell everybody — dost hear ?
And out of hatred for me everyone will
help thee. Now go.' And he pushed her
out of doors.

His rudeness and his coarse severity-nerved
her to action. What was it that was
happening to her ? First one spurned her —
then another. First one rejected her love,
and now another refused her bread. What
had happened to the world that the noble
and generous should be thus sacrificed, and
the vile, treacherous servant should prosper
while denying his master ?

But she walked on, and at last reached
Ivon's former farm. She recognised his
sister and his father — now a tottering old
man — and going to them she asked the
sister :

Give me something to eat ; your brother
has refused me bread, — give me a
glass of water to drink !'

Refused you ?' repeated the sister,
sadly. Then, looking at Renee : ' Ah I
Holy Virgin, you here and in this state,

and he refused you. Come in, come in,
poor child.'

'Who is it?' asked the old man.

'A friend, father, — a friend called Renee.'

Renee — I do not remember. But it is
well.'

He is old and feeble ; say nothing to
him,' the woman said. ' Come, eat, poor
girl. So he sent you away from his door !
Holy Virgin ! have mercy upon his soul,
for the love of greatness and riches has lost
him.'

Renee, not forgetting the men's threats,
changed her costume for that of Quis
and hid carefully for some days.
Then she took upon herself the duties of
dairy-maid, and went through life sadly,
like one whose place is among the dead.
The farm had been already pillaged, and
she escaped further inquiries.

If any man had to suffer, it was I von,

the Marquis de L , as everyone called

him in derision. The butt of his friends'
sneers and of his enemies' threats, feared
by the one and hated by the other, he
never came near his old home, which was
safe because of the very hatred of his
brethren towards him — as he had truly
told Renee — and of the contempt he was
held in by the Republicans. Every one
of his former friends spoke of his covetousness
of former days ; recalled how he would
go round and round the Chateau, admiring
it and longing for what could not be his.
There had been nobody bold enough to
buy the castle, and I von had got it almost
for nothing, no doubt ; yet, how could the
dernier I von have the necessary sum by
him unknown to others ? And many had
come to the conclusion that he had robbed

Ms master first, in order to ruin him more
securely afterwards.

Renee remembered but too well the
trust of her cousin in the man, and how
he had helped to hide everything ; and she
loathed the very thought of the faithless,
dishonest time-server !

Time went on, and the night of the Jour
des Morts arrived, when, as everyone in
Brittany knows, as soon as the prayers of
the Fete des Saints are ended, the souls of
the departed return to earth ; and every
threshold, every shed, every loft — all the
places resorted to by the living are visited
by the spirits of the once living mortals.
They are everywhere, shuddering and
trembling ! One cannot see them, but
they are felt in the air, they pass like a
light cold wind and fill the white fog that
surrounds every homestead ! They even

hide themselves shivering in the beds with
the living ; and everywhere the table is laid
for them, for poor souls, they must take
food on that one night of their sojourn on
earth ! And, while the trembling mortals
listen in awe to every sound, the lament of
the dead is sung and the bells toll at the
midnight hour. A sad, sad night, when
all hearts remember those they have lost,
and pray for their souls.

And Renee could not sleep ; those mournful
voices of the night, those mournful
songs found too ready an echo in her heart.
She also thought of those that were gone,
and their names trembled on her lips in
her prayers.

Suddenly a strange groan reached her
ears. Shaking in every limb she listened.

These are groans of the living,' she told
herself. Bravely she opened the cottage

door and looked out. On a mound close by,
a large black form stretched on the ground
was visible even in the dark night. A soul
in distress indeed — but a human soul. She
soon distinguished a man kneeling — his
face against the earth, and stifling his
sobs.

Mother, thou wouldst have known me
better. Oh ! mother — art thou near ? Thou
wouldst not have been deceived.'

Renee, touched by the wailing cry, took
a few hesitating steps towards the prostrate
form. But the man had quick ears, and ina
moment was up and on his feet, facing
her. She drew back amazed and terrified
it was Ivon.

Neither could speak at first, but he was
the first to recover.

You will tell no one of this ? You will
tell no one?' Then in a moaning tone : 'They

gave you bread ; they gave you shelter out
of hatred for me ! Did I not tell you so ?
Did I not tell you that because they hated
me they would help you?'

It was in your power to give me shelter,
but you refused me. God will call you
to account, Ivon.'

I refused to give you hospitality, and I
was right — it was the only way of serving
you. Do you think that really I have forgotten
past days? Do you think '

Then he stopped suddenly. * I am not
myself to-night — my mother's soul is near
me.' And clutching her hands and looking
at her, ' You cannot — you will not
betray me, will you ? You will keep my
secret, though you are a woman — my secret
which is my master's secret. I,' and he
dropped his voice, ' I bought the property
to get it back for him ; I have had

VOL. III. S

papers sent to different men who will be
able to tell him when it is safe for him
to . . My master trusted me — trusted
me !' he went on, bursting into a loud sob.
I have not a friend ; I even fear my wife ;
I have none but enemies. Oh ! the life I
have to go through !'

I von, my brave and good Ivon, how
could I have so mistaken you ! Do not
fear my betraying you, poor, poor Ivon, I
cannot admire you too much. You will
be rewarded '

1 want no reward here, mam'zelle, but
only to succeed — only to live until he comes
and I can give him his property back. I could
not be such a vile creature as you thought.
My mother, she would have known, had
she lived, that I could not have betrayed
my master's trust. Ah ! it is hard, it is
hard to be hated and despised by everyone
; to find the hand of everyone against

Time. — But you will keep my secret, and I
shall be stronger now. — You will not betray
me?'

Fear not, Ivon, fear not, my dear good
Ivon.' And she held out her hands to
him. The poor man enclosed them in his
big rough hands and carried them to his
lips, and she felt his tears fall on them.

I could not have been so ungrateful,'
he murmured again, ' I could not ! — May
I come to you sometimes ? It Avill comfort
me.'

• Yes, my poor Ivon, yes, though I can
give you little comfort ! But wee can
talk together'of the past, it will do us both
good.'

I shall come tomorrow to the menhir
close by. But now I must go. My
mother has answered my prayers ! The
Holy Virgin be with you !' And Ivon
disappeared in the darkness.

s2

The revelation of Ivon's self-sacrifice
gave new life to Renee in those sad days.
Two or three times already had she met
with generosity and noble behaviour where
she little expected it. There was only one
—only one who gave no sign.

CHAPTER XIII.

Rohan had not come near her. One of
the most determined Chouan chiefs now,
he never rested. But it was not the death
of his father only which urged him on.
Had he not seen her he loved so dearly,
telling him of the love he longed for, and
had he not turned her away ! What feeling
was it that had urged him to pain the
only one in the world he loved ? He suffered
from what she might suffer ; he hated
himself for the grief he had caused her.

He knew where she was, and had seen
her again and again unknown to herself.

But what could lie say to her to excuse
himself? How could he tell her how her
suffering was his suffering ? He could not,
for it was better for them to remain apart ;
the chevalier had escaped from Toulon
and was in London, and the valued friend
of De Puisaye. He would soon land in
Brittany with forces from England, and
Re nee would see him and love him again
even as she had loved him once. Things
must remain as they were. Renee was safe
now in her hiding-place ; soon the Royalists
would be victorious, and then — and then
she would marry. To have seen her
but for one moment with her loving face
near his, her loving eyes speaking of pity ;
to have heard her call him ^ dearest — dearest
love ' — ah ! it was strength and power
and delight. But the delight must be
hid ; he had no right to the remembrance.
With such feelings as these in his heart,.

Rohan de Carnoet heard one day that
Monsieur de Trogleif also had discovered
where she was, and had been to see her ;
and that he was doing all in his power to
persuade her to come away with him to
England ' to meet the chevalier,' as he
said.

Renee had refused him, but with his
usual impetuosity he persisted and persisted
till she was almost ready to yield ;
for Rohan despised her and she could only
join her last friend in the world, her betrothed.


From the moment De Trogleif had appeared,
fears for her had come to Rohan, and
he had kept faithful watch lest she should
be persuaded at last. He had not forgotten
De Trogleff's enmity to De Valvourgs ; and
thought it curious that he now showed
such anxiety to bring together those he had
wished to see disunited. He hesitated long

what to do, but at last with beating heart
and pale face he went across the meadows
leading to the farm — determined that if she
would not receive him, he would force his
presence upon her. — He lifted the latch
and entered the cottage. As he stood
before her, a deep blush covered her face
and her limbs trembled ; while pale to the
very lips and with downcast eyes Rohan
spoke :

I come as a friend, a friend of past
years, to warn you and to advise you. You
are intending to leave with Monsieur de
Trogleif, and I entreat you — I beseech
you, not to do so.'

What ! Avould you prevent my going
to my fiance?' she replied, strengthened at
once by his words*

Will Monsieur de Trogleff take you to
him?'

'Ah !' she murmured low, ' I must trust

him, — no other is there left for me to trust.'
Then he raised his eyes to her face, and
a great anguish seized him at seeing her
so worn and unlike her former self. No
other was there for her to trust but that
man ! No other ! and she had called him —
Rohan her ' dearest, dearest love !' But
there in his bosom he held a letter from
her betrothed, a letter full of love for
her, and of hope, of happiness, and of
thanks for his care of her. A letter as
bright, as cheerful, as happy as ever. — He
would remain true to his friend to the end.
The chevalier is coming soon, I have a
letter here from'him ; why, therefore, should
you go now to find him ?'

But the misery of Renee only deepened.
He was coming, her bright young lover —
but she could never marry him ; she had
fought with her own heart, tried to tear
away from it the ever-recurring image of

Rolian, and lie had failed. The chevalier
was coming to her, and she must tell him
all — her love — her impetuous, half-unconscious
declaration of it to Rohan. She
must tell him all ! all !

Better go aAva}^ anywhere ; better
be under the keeping of that man who
said he loved her, but could not read her
heart aright. She would hide her thoughts
and her feelings from him — it would be
easy enough — and accept his services till
she was far avfay.

She answered not a word, and her
eyes fixed on space, seemed lost in the contemplation
of some inward object with
which her visitor had nothing to do.

You will wait for him here ?' he said
at last.

But she turned round quickly and
exclaimed :

No, no, I shall not !'

But if you go now, you will miss the
chevalier altogether.'

Monsieur Rohan, you have always been
as careful of your friend as a father of his
child ; and he ought to be thankful to your's

But I have no one to answer to but the
chevalier, and — you will wait for him
here.'

I tell you no, I shall not wait.'

Then he put one knee on the ground
before her, and with head bent :

In the name of the past, in the name of
our dear comtesse, I entreat you, I entreat
you, do not trust that man.'

But with head averted she still resisted
him.

I entreat you, in the name of my father
who loved you and is — no more '

She uttered a cry of pain. — Yes, his
father was gone, gone for ever; — but
the son had spurned her ! Then she looked

nt him, she met his eyes beseechingly benton
hers, as he repeated :

On my knees I entreat you, remain here.'

Renee, able to bear it no longer, hid her
face in her hands and wept bitterly.

Tell me that you yield to my entreaties,'
he asked again.

At that moment a well-known step was
heard outside ; a quick hand lifted the
latch of the door; but as quickly had
Rohan started to his feet, and facing
Monsieur de TrogleiF said quietly :

Mademoiselle de Kerguennec remains
at PloermeL'

Monsieur de Carnoet, your interference
!'

Is no worse than yours ! Monsieur de
Yalvourgs is coming with the army from
England ; you know that we expect them
daily.'

And daily do they put off their coming.

till all will be lost by the delay, and Mademoiselle
with the rest. I have to go to
London, and I will leave Mademoiselle with
the chevalier. Is it right she should live
like a servant here, while his house is
opened to her?'

Has he asked you to do so?'

^ Asked me? We are no such friends,'
replied the ever hasty De TrogleiF.

You are not friends ! And can Mademoiselle
go with a man who is not his
friend ?'

De TrogleiF bit his lip; but Renee now
came forward and said to him :

I have decided to remain, for the present
at least — I thank you much for taking
interest in my forlorn condition ; but the
people here are good to me, and I will remain
and wait for events.'

Wait for death rather ! And this is the
advice Monsieur de Carnoet gives you ?'

A man was sent to death through
another's unwise schemes.'

De Trogleif turned impatiently from
him and addressing Renee :

You are committing an irretrievable
mistake. It may be months before the
emigres are ready to land here ; and meanwhile
your hiding-place is daily exposed to
discovery .'

Monsieur de Valvourgs made me swear
solemnly to protect his fiancee' returned
Rohan. ' Once and once only I yielded too
easily to foolish plans. Now I yield to no
one ; I claim my right.'

Everything is ready, carriage and
horses,' the other exclaimed.

Then she suddenly realized that she had
almost started with him. There flashed
before her all that might have happened,
and a feeling of thankfulness arose in her

heart towards Rohan. Better, far better
trust herself to the chevalier's generosity
than to such a plan.

De Carnoet stood firmly by the door,
and said no more. Monsieur de Trogleff
looked at them both, and at last, with a
bow to her and a look of angry menace to
Rohan, went away.

*I thank you,' she murmured, after De
Trogleff was gone.

Do not be afraid ; Ivon is still able to
help you, for he hears everything, and,
were you threatened, would take you in at

L . He told me he had explained his

position to you, as he had already done tome,
when I told him what I thought of
his vile treachery. An active and intelligent
man, Hoche, is now at the head of
the Republican troops. It will go hard
with our party if it is still disunited ; but

Hoche tries this best to make atrocities
cease, and there is more security for you
than hitherto. Remain here in peace, and
soon '

I will do as you like,' she said, humbly.

I thank you, I thank you.' And then
Rohan broke off, for he felt it harder to be
stern now that De TrogleiF was no longer
present.

CHAPTER XIV.

There was joy all over Brittany ; De
Puisaye had been successful in London ;
and those deliverers, so long expected,
were coming.

Whatever the motives of Pitt for keeping
up a Continental war — to the Breton heart
he only meant to help the Royalist cause.
The English government had granted
everything asked for : — five English regiments,
cannon, some thirty thousand
muskets, and abundant ammunition. Also
about twenty thousand uniforms — the redcoat
of England for infantry; and for

VOL. III. T

cavalry, swords, pistols, saddles, boots,
shoes, everything that was wanting.

Yes, England was generous, lavish even ;
and the command of the fleet bearing all
this was entrusted to Admiral Warren,
whose humanity and courage can never
be too highly praised.

So the Bretons rejoiced ; every ruined
Chouan, whose only home now was the
cacJie^ rejoiced. The emigres filling some
of the regiments were the flower of the
nobility of France ; some had been in exile
for years, and they were coming to reconquer
their fatherland ; they were in
the waters of Brittany, and they also rejoiced.


One thing, however, was wanting — one
thing many had asked for — no Prince of
the blood had come forward to lead the
army that Alas to march on Paris and

crush the Republic ! Had a prince landed
at Quiberon, headed the chivalry of France
and the peasants, who, single-handed, had
behaved like heroes, — who knoAvs what
could have been achieved ? But no prince
came forward, and, meanwhile, chiefs and
generals quarrelled, and dissension was
everywhere ; — dissension that was to prove
more powerful in crushing the cause of
Royalty than the generosity of generous
England was to help it.

At last the fleet is in sight, and the coast
must be cleared for the landis. But
Carnac is in the hands of the Republicans,
and there on the Mont Saint Michel, that
ancient grave of the Druids, floats the
tricolor e flag. As long as it is there, the
fleet must remain away.

The Chevalier de Tinteniac, Rohan de
Carnoet and his men, and many other

T 2

bands of Chouans like this, go forth to
dislodge their enemies ; they climb the
tumulus under a withering fire, and the
defeated Republicans run down one side.
as, victorious, the Chouans reach the top
from the other. With eager and joyful
hands a white flag is hoisted. The
fleet will see it and know that the coast is
clear.

Some of the emigres in their impatience
once more to reach the soil of France, had
landed even before ; and among these one
as bright and as full of hope as ever. He
hears of Rohan being at Carnac, and hastens
there :

De Yalvourgs !'

De Carnoet !'

These are the only words the friends
can utter, as they grasp each other's hands.
Through untold trials and sorrows they

have been spared ! Though each has
seen the terrors of death near, they yet
live.

Renee was well when you last saw her ?'
asks the chevalier.

She was well,' replies Rohan, thanking
God that he is able to meet his friend's full
gaze.

De Valvourgs looks at him long, and
says :

De Carnoet, let us hope that one of us
mil remain to her '

But Rohan interrupts him ; in his loyal
heart, there, in presence of his rival and
friend, the noble Breton longs for death.
The still bright and joyous chevalier
shall not, through him, know of disappointment
and sorrow; the loadstar that
has guided him back to Brittany shall
not fail him at the last moment. Renee ina

terrible hour had tried to comfort him — -
him — Rohan ; but seeing her betrothed she
will love him.

That night the two friends kept watch
side by side, but how different their dreams.

The hope of seeing Renee and of a life
of happiness with her, unfolded a long
vista of fresh and joyful scenes to the
young chevalier. — jN'ot so to Rohan. His
eyes fixed on the many rows of memoirs
which cover the lonely and barren plain,
and which under the changeful rays of the
moon assumed fantastic shapes and seemed
to live, he thinks of the past ; — for is
not all his life in the past also ; what can
there be in the future for him ? And yet
this bold scheme for the restoration of
Royalty has been so far worked out with
a victory. Ought he not to rejoice?
Ought he not to silence in his heart any

other longing? Small item in this vast
creation, can he not bow down without
murmuring to his destiny ? No, though a
Breton, he cannot ; for love is stronger
than the power of destiny or the power of
death !

With the Chevalier de Valvourgs, who
was going back to his ship, he went to
Quiberon, and there, in view of the fleet,
for a moment his heart beats with pride
and hope. The coast was clear, and the
admiral directed the landing in person.

Then there was an outpouring of long-restrained
feelings among noblemen and
peasants. Immense crowds had come to
see their deliverers. Joy, thankfulness,
and enthusiasm filled every heart. The
Chouans fell on their knees before the
Bishop of Dol who was bringing back all
his clergy with him. Tears ran from every

eye. At last, at last had come those who
were to save them, and give them back
their liberty, their religion, and their king !

Alas ! the command of the army was divided,
and the two chiefs, the Comte d'Her-
willy and the Comte de Puisaye quarrelled.
De Puisaye wisely wanted to go forward
at once — the whole of Brittany being in
arms ready to follow him. But D'Hervilly
despised the Chouans. What were to him
those wild men, who had come to him in
tatters and hopeless, with the marks on them
of their long and awful struggle ? What did
he care for heroes footsore and hungry and
thirsty, who wept and knelt down in the
dust at the feet of their bishop ? And
he soon showed in what esteem he held
them.

The Royalists had to proclaim Louis
XVIII. as successor to Louis XVII. , — the

poor child of ten, dead twenty days before
the landing of this army that was to put him
on his throne, — and at that all important
moment D'Hervilly, proudly defiling with
his emigres into Carnac, had a high mass
sung there for him, while the poor Chouans
had somewhere apart a low mass said by
the Bishop of Dol.

But while these proud nobles disdained
to associate with their poor brethren
bound to the same cause ; while generals
and officers quarrelled among themselves ;
while the despised Chouans — many of
them now clad in the red coats of England
— continued to resist the advanced
columns of the enemy ; while the army of
emigres and English soldiers remained
inactive, massed up in a narrow peninsula
without resource and without a way of
escape, and imprisoned as it were behind

their own fort ; Hoche was advancing fast
at the head of thirteen thousand men, who
drove before them crowds of fugitives,
men, women, and children, flying away
from the cruelties of his relentless soldiers
cruelties he was powerless to prevent —
to that fatal Quiberon.

At last D'Hervilly thought fit to move,
but it was too late ; the brave Chouans
who had won and kept Carnac were cutoff
from the rest of the army and defeated.
The fort that protected the crowded peninsula
was taken. Then commenced a time
of untold horrors. Then was it that
Admiral Warren, who had been everywhere
while the fighting was going on, came
forward to try to save ; — in person directing
the boats ; with his own hand helping to
rescue the unfortunate people fired upon
and drowning.

Thousands of the emigres gave themselves
up to Hoche. They were shot, till
the soldiers, tired of the butchery, did
all they could to save. At Vannes, where
Monsieur de Carnoet had died, the Chevalier
de Valvourgs, with proud bearing
and head erect, was taken to die. Thurio
was with him, and had his life offered
to him.

You were a servant, and as such forced
to follow your master wherever he wished
to take you. Was it not so ?'

Forced ! never,' exclaimed Thurio, ' My
life is my master's ; he dies and I wish to
die with him.'

In vain had the chevalier tried to deceive
his devotion by sending him as a bearer of
the news of his death to Renee ; the good
fellow remained firm to the last.

I will follow you, my dear master.

Where you go, I must, as a faithful servant,
go also.'

And the same volley sent them both to
death.

The news of the defeat of Quiberon was
over all the land ; the fearful loss of life
caused every woman and child to be in
mourning and weep. And Renee also wept.

She humbled herself before the all-searching
glance of the Almighty. ' Lay
not my sin to their charge,' she prayed. ' I
have sinned ; let me alone suffer. Save
them both, and I will be faithful to my troth,
faithful unto death.'

But her prayers had not been answered,
though she did not know.

In the evening of the day that sent
the chevalier to his grave, horses
were heard outside. They stopped at

the cottage. Renee started ; she threw far
from her the coiffe she had crushed in the
agony of her prayers, and, with beating
heart, felt ready to welcome her betrothed.
Words of thankfulness and love were on her
lips ; but with a cry she drew back :

Monsieur de TroglefF!'

Had he returned to her again ? Was he
the only one to be saved ?

'The chevalier, where is he?' she asked,,
in a fainting voice.

Many of our friends have died,' he
answered.

Many ?' she repeated. ' Many ?'

You are free.'

God ! the chevalier — Free, do you
sav '

But others there are who love you.
Others there are who will care for you.
Come, both our lives are threatened, your

hiding-place is known. Later on you can
give way to sorrow ; now is the time to fly.
some

But she did not move. — Was Rohan dead
too ? — then she must die also. She heard
Monsieur de TroglefF and failed to see his
words were for her — then she must die also
was the only thought in her mind. But
Monsieur de Trogleff knew that to hesitate
now was fatal, and, seeing her in a kind of
trance, he resolved to carry her off against
her will. He took her hand in his and
tried to make her walk ; but after a few
steps she paused.

I cannot, I cannot,' she murmured, ' I
too must die.'

Still persisting, however, De Trogleff
was opening the door to call for help,
when a man rushed past him with a cry
of:

Renee ! Renee !'

And, without knowing what had happened
to her, she gave but a look at Rohan's
face, and the next moment was in his
arms.

Soldiers are on our traces. Monsieur
Brevelaye is here. Loik and Ivon are here.
Renee, be my wife at once and let us flee.'
Then, in a lower voice : ' Renee dearest,
our dear friend with his last free breath
wished it so ; let his memory be sacred
and a bond of love — Renee, Renee, tell
me, will you be my wife ?'

And she answered,

I will.'

THE END.

LONDON : Printed BY DUNCAN MACDONALD, BLENHEIM HOUSE.

-a

HURST & Blackett's

LIST OF New WORKS.

LONDON:
13, GREAT MARLBOROUGH STREET, VV.

[Q-

-i

EACH IN ONE VOLUME CROWN 8vo, 6s.

'Knight-errant' is marked by the author's best qualities as a writer of fiction, and
displays on every page the grace and quiet power of her former works." — Athenaeum.

"The plot, and, indeed, the whole story, is gracefully fresh and very charming; there
is a wide humanity in the book that cannot fail to accomplish its author's purpose"—
Literary World.

This novel is distinctly helpful and inspiring from its high tone, its intense human
feeling, and its elevated morality. It forms an additional proof, if such were needed,
that Miss Lyell has a mandate to write." — Academy.

A MODERN ENGLISHMAN.

"This is a very admirable work. The reader is from the first carried away by the
gallant unconventionality of its author. ' Donovan ' is a very excellent novel; but It is
something more and better. It should do as much good as the best sermon ever written
or delivered extempore. The story is told with a grand simplicity, an unconscious poetry
of eloquence which stirs the very depths of the heart. One of the main excellencies of
this novel is the delicacy of touch with which the author shows her most delightful characters
to be after all human beings, and not angels before their iivnQ.'"' standard.

A work of deep thought and much power. Serious as it is, it is now and then brightened
by rays of genuine humour. Altogether this story is more and better than a novel."
—Morning Post.

There is artistic realism both in the conception and the delineation of the personages;
the action and interest are unflagging sustained from first to last, and the book is pervaded
by au atmosphere of elevated, earnest thought." — Scotsman.

IN THE Golden DAYS.

"Miss Lyell has given us a vigorous study of such life and character as are really worth
reading about. The central figure of her story is Algerian Sydney; and this figure she
invests with a singular dignity and power. He always appears with effect, but no liberties
are taken with the facts of his life. The plot is adapted with great felicity to them.
His part in it, absolutely consistent as it is with historical truth, gives it reality as well as
dignity. Some of the scenes are remarkably vivid. The escape is an admirable narrative,
which almost makes one hold one's breath as one reads." — Spectator.

AVON BY Attaining.

The Dean's daughters are perfectly real characters — the learned Cornelia especially;

the little impulsive French heroine, who endures their cold hospitality and at last wins

their affection, is thoroughly charming; while throughout the book there runs a golden
thread of pure brotherly and sisterly love, which pleasantly reminds us that the making
and marring of marriage is not, after all, the sum total of real life." — Academy.

LONDON : HURST AND BLACKETT, LIMITED.



MESSRS. HURST AND Blackest

LIST OF NEW WORKS.

BANDOBAST AND KHABAR; Reminiscences op

India. By Colonel Cuthbert Larking. With twelve Illustrations,
from original Drawings by the Author. 1 vol. small 4to. 10s. 6d.

REMINISCENCES OF ETON (Kate's TIME).

By the Rev. C. Alli Wilkinson, M.A., Author of " Reminiscences
of the Court and Times of King Ernest of Hanover."
With Portrait of Dr. Kate. 1 vol. crown 8vo. 6s.
"Mr. Wilkinson book is thoroughly fresh and entertaining; it is crammed
full of good stories, and will be a joy to all Etenim." — OrapMc.

LADY HAMILTON AND LORD NELSON. An

Historical Biography based on Letters and other Documents in

the possession of Alfred Morrison, Esq., of Fonthill, Wiltshire.

By John Cord Jeaffreson, Author of " The real Lord Byron,"

<tec. 2 vols, crown 8vo, 21s.
Mr. Jeaffreson may be thanked for the new and favourable light which he has
been able to throw upon the public and private conduct both of Lady Hamilton
and of Nelson." — Globe.

It only remains for us to compliment Mr. Jeaffreson upon the reliable, painstaking,
thorough way in which he has dealt with the story of Lady Hamilton,
without offending the moral sense of his readers." — Academy.

FOUR MONTHS' CRUISE IN A SAILING

YACHT. By Lady Ernestine Edgcumbe and Lady Mary
Wood. With Illustrations. 1 vol. crown 8vo. 7s. 6d.
"The whole journey is recounted in such a way as to make the narrative

agreeable reading, and to intending travellers in the same track it contains many

useful hints and suggestions"— Tie Queen.

RECORDS OF SERVICE AND CAMPAIGNING

IN MANY LANDS. By Surgeon-general Munro, M.D., Cab.,

Author of " Reminiscences of Military Service with the cord
Sutherland Highlanders," &c. Dedicated by Permission to
H. R. H. the PRINCESS LOUISE. 2 vols, crown 8vo. 21s.
The story which Dr. Munro has to tell is one which never flags or ceases to
be instructive as well as interesting." — Spectator.

"These Records should be in the hands of every soldier, for the sake of the
information which they give and the spirit which informs them." — Globe.
Full of interesting notes on the army and army Mie.'"— Graphic.

EIGHTEENTH CENTURY WAIFS. By John

AsHTON, Author of ' Social Life in the Reign of Queen Anne,' &c.
1 vol. small Ito. 12s.
The matter contained in this book is always pleasing and instructive. There
is certainly not a dull page in the volume"— G'^ofte.

'• Mr. Ashtonhas produced a volume of light and pleasant character"— J/ornwy
Post.



NEW WORKS— Continued.

Shinar SKETCHES: With Notes on Indian

Field Sports. By J. Moray Brown, late 79th Cameron Highlanders.
With Eight Illustrations, by J. C. Dolman, Rei. 1 vol.
small 4to. 10s. cl.

"A glorious book. It is palpably the work of a true sportsman." — Horse and Hour.

"The Sketches are delightfully written, models of clear, bright, racy narrative,
and containing just those particulars that a sportsman wishes to know.' — Scotsman.

•' The author goes through the round of Indian sport, and writes in such a
pleasant fashion as to make his pages agreeable reading to all for whom the
subject itself has attractions ; the book has the additional advantage of some
spirited illustrations"' — The Field.

Mr. Moray Brown records his long experiences among big game in India with
capital spirit and style; there are some thrilling pages on pig-sticking and tiger-shooting."
— The World.

THROUGH CYPRUS. By Agnes Smith, Author

of " Glimpses of Greek Life and Scenery," &c 1 vol. demy 8vo.
With Illustrations and Map of the Author's Route. 15s.

The cheerful and observant authoress has much that is new to tell us.'"— Daily
Telegraph.

' Through Cyprus ' may be heartily commended to readers who are fond of
an entertaining and chatty narration of incidents of travel." — Scotsman.

REMINISCENCES OF THE COURT AND

TIMES OF KING ERNEST OF HANOVER. By the Rev. C.

A. Wilkinson, M.A., His Majesty's Resident Domestic Chaplain.

Second and Cheaper Edition. 1 vol. crown 8vo. With portrait of

the King. 6s.
"Mr. Wilkinson's descriptions of the Court balls, where even the ladies took
precedence according to military rank, of the characters he met with, and of the
Hanoverian clergy of those days, will be found decidedly interesting'' — Spectator.
An interesting book, which abounds in characteristic stories of the old king,
in anecdotes of many celebrities, English and foreign, of the early part of this
century, and, indeed, of all kinds and conditions of men and women with whom
the author was brought in contact by his courtly or pastoral office'' — St. James's
Gazette.

THE LIFE AND ADVENTURES OF PEG

Washington : With Pictures of the Period in which She

Lived. By J. Fitzgerald Molly, Author of " Court Life

Below Stairs," &c. Third and Cheaper Edition. 1 vol. crown 8vo.

With Portrait. Gs.

"Peg "Wofflngton makes a most interesting central figure, round which Mr.

Molly has made to revolve a varied and picturesque panorama of London life

in the middle of the 18th century. He sees things in the past so clearly, grasps

them so tenaciously, and reproduces them so vividly that they come to us without

any of the dust and rust of time." — G. A. S. in the Illustrated London News.

Mr. Molly's work has the merit at least of being from the first chapter to theast
without a single dull-psige."— Daily News.

CHAPTERS FROM FAMILY CHESTS. By

Edward Walford, M.A., Author of 'The County Families,' &c.
2 vols, crown 8vo. 21s.
' Chapters from Family Chests ' are a great deal more exciting and absorbing
than one half the professedly sensational novels." — Dail/i Telegi-apli.

"Mr. Walford's volumes abound in what is known as the romance of real life,
and are extremely interesting reading.' — Daily News.

NEW WOmiS—Co7itinued,

THE EGYPTIAN CAMPAIGNS, 1882 to 1885,

AND THE Events which led to them. By Charles Rote,

Barrister at-Law, of Alexandria. 2 vols, demy 8vo. Illustrated

by Maps and Plans. sos.

"Mr. Eoylehas done well in the interests of historical completeness to describe

not only the entire military drama but also the political events connected with

it, and whoever reads the book with care has gone a considerable way towards

mastering the difficult Egyptian question." — Athenaeum.

"The Egyptian Vasco has found in Sir. Boyle a most painstaking, accurate, and
judicious historian. From a literary point of view his volumes may be thought to
contain too many unimportant incidents, yet their presence was necessary perhaps,
in a complete record, and the most fastidious reader will acquit Mr. Boyle
of falling his pages with anything that can be called padding." — St. James's Gazette.

FOOTSTEPS OF JEANNE D'ARC. A Pilgrimage.

By Mrs. Florence Caddy, 1 vol. demy 8vo, With Map of Route. 15s.
"The reader, whatever his preconceived notions of the maid may have been,
will soon find himself in sympathy with a writer who, by the charm of her descriptive
style, at once arrests his attention and sustains the interest of her
subject." — Morning Post.

THE FRIENDSHIPS OF MARY RUSSELL

Milford : As Recorded in Letters from her Literary
Correspondents, Edited by the Rev, A. G, Estrange,
Editor of " The Life of Mary Russell Milford," &c. 2 vols, 21s.
"These letters are all written as to one whom the writers love and revere. Miss
Barrett is one of Miss Milford's correspondents, all of whom seem to be inspired
with a sense of excellence in the mind they are invoking. Their letters are extremely
interesting, and they strike out recollections, opinions, criticisms, which
will hold the reader's delighted and serious attention." — Daily Telegraph.

THE Bronze FAMILY, With Special Reference
to Patrick Bran well Bronze. By Francis A. Lei land. 2
vols. 21s.
"This book is so full of interesting information that as a contribution to literary
biography it may be considered a real success." — Academy.

Mr. Leland's book is earnest and accurate, and he has spared no pains to
master his subject and present it with clearness; the book is valuable, and should
be read by all who are familiar with the previous works on the family." — Graphic.

MEMOIRS OF A CAMBRIDGE CHORISTER.

By William Glover. 2 vols, crown 8vo. 21s,

"In these amusing volumes Mr. Glover provides us with the means of spending
a pleasant hour or two in his company." — Times.

These volumes contain a miscellaneous set of reminiscences, comments, and
anecdotes, written in a light and jocular style. Mr. Glover is always cheerful
and never didactic." — Athenaeum.

WITHOUT GOD: Negative Science and Natural

Ethics, By Percy Greg, Author of "The Devil's Advocate,"

"Across the Zodiac," &c, 1 vol. demy 8vo. 12s.

Mr. Greg has condensed much profound thought into his book, and has fully

succeeded in maintaining the interest of the discussion throughout." — Morning Post.

This work is ably written ; there are in it many passages of no ordinary power

and brilliancy. It is eminently suggestive and stimulating." — Scotsman.

PLAIN SPEAKING. By Author of " John Halifax,

Gentleman." 1 vol. crown 8vo. 6s.
"We recommend 'Plain Speaking' to all who like amusing, wholesome, and
instructive reading. The contents of Mrs. Craik's volume are of the most multifarious
kind, but all the papers are good and readable, and one at least of them
of real importance." — St. James's Gazette.



Published annually, in One Vol., royal 8yo, with the Arms beautifully
engraved, handsomely bound, with gilt edges, price 31s. ^d.

LODGE'S PEERAGE

AND BARONETAGE,

CORRECTED BY THE NOBILITY.

FIFTY-see NTH Edit ON FOR 1888.

Lodge's Peerage and Baronetage is acknowledged to be the moat
complete, as well as the most elegant, work of the kind. As an established
and authentic authority on all questions respecting the family
histories, honours, and connections of the titled aristocracy, no work has
ever stood so high. It is published under the especial patronage of Her
Majesty, and is annually corrected throughout, from the personal communications
of the Nobility. It is the only work of its class in which, the
type being kept constantly standing, every correction is made in its proper
place to the date of publication, an advantage which gives it supremacy
over all its competitors. Independently of its full and authentic information
respecting the existing Peers and Baronets of the realm, the most
sedulous attention is given in its pages to the collateral branches of the
various noble families, and the names of many thousand individuals are
introduced, which do not appear in other records of the titled classes. For
its authority, correctness, and facility of arrangement, and the beauty of
its typography and binding, the work is justly entitled to the place it
occupies on the tables of Her Majesty and the Nobility.

LIST OF THE PRINCIPAL CONTENTS.

Historical View of the Peerage.

Parliamentary Roll of the House of Lords.

English, Scotch, and Irish Peers, in their
orders of Precedence.

Alphabetical List of Peers of Great Britain
and the United Kingdom, holding superior
rank in the Scotch or Irish Peerage.

A Alphabetical list of Scotch and Irish Peers,
holding superior titles in the Peerage of
Great Britain and the United Kingdom.

A Collective list of Peers, in their order of
Precedence.

Table of Precedency among Men.

Table of Precedency among Women.

The Queen and the Royal Family.

Peers of the Blood Royal.

The Peerage, alphabetically arranged.

Families of such Extinct Peers as have left
Widows or Issue.

Alphabetical List of the Surnames of all the
Peers.

The Archbishops and Bishops of England
and Ireland.

The Baronetage alphabetically arranged.

Alphabetical List of Surnames assumed by
members of Noble Families.

Alphabetical List of the Second Titles of
Peers, usually borne by their Eldest
Sons.

Alphabetical Index to the Daughters of
Dukes, Marquises, and Earls, who, having
married Commoners, retain the title
of Lady before their own Christian and
their Husband's Surnames.

Alphabetical Index to the Daughters of
Viscounts and Barons, who, having
married Commoners, are styled Honourable
Mrs. ; and, in case of the husband
being a Baronet or Knight, Hon. Lady.

A List of the Orders of Knighthood.

Mottoes alphabetically arranged and translated.


"This work is the most perfect and elaborate record of the living and recently deceased
members of the Peerage of the Three Kingdoms as it stands at this day. It ia
a most useful publication. We are happy to bear testimony to the fact that scrupulous
accuracy is a distinguishing feature of this book." — Times.

"Lodge's Peerage must supersede all other works of the kind, for two reasons: first, it
is on a better plan ; and secondly, it is better executed. We can safely pronounce it to bethe
readiest, the most useful, and exactness of modern works on the subject." — Spectator:

A work of great value. It is the most faithful record we possess of the aristocracy
of the day"— Post.



PUBLISHED BY HURST & BLACKETT.

THE GOLDEN HOPE : A Romance of the Deep.

By W. Clark Russell, Author of "A Sea Queen," "The Wreck
of the Grosvenor," &c. 1 vol. Gs.

"Mr. Clark Russell is at his best in 'The Golden Hope,' which means that this
book of his is one of the finest books of its kind in our l&ng\xa.ge."— Academy.

A HOUSE PARTY. By Ouida. second Edition.)

1 vol. crown 8vo. 6s.

"The sketches of character are hit off with accuracy of observation and with a
firm and clear outline." — Daihj Telegraph.

ON THE SCENT. By Lady Margaret Majestie,

Author of 'Dita,' 'Once More,' ' Sisters-in-law,' &c. 1 vol.
crown 8vo. 6s.
"A bright and wholesome story." — St. James's Gazette.

WEEPING FERRY. A Novel. By George False.

2 vols.

"' Weeping Ferry ' is decidedly above the average of contemporary novels'" —
Saturday Review.

Mr. False's pages are simply and prettily written"— ^ScoismaH.

COULD HE DO BETTER? By Arthur A.

Hoffman. 3 vols.

"The writing is throughout careful yet easy, never tame and never affected,
and the structure of the story has compactness, proportion, and symmetry"—
Spectator.

THE SON OF HIS FATHER. By Mrs. Oliphant,

Author of " It was a Lover and his Lass," " Agnes," &c. 3 vols.
No previous work of Mrs. Oliphant better justifies her high position among
English novelists than her new book. It is difficult to speak too highly of the
truth, power, and pathos of this tale." — Morning Post.

Catherine. By the Author of '^ Lauderdale." 3 vols.

The author is really an able writer, and he has a good grasp of character"—
Academy.
A moving and animated story"— Daily Telegraph.

JACOBI'S WIFE. By Adeline Sergeant, Author

of ' No Saint,' ' An Open Foe,' &c. 3 vols.

"The story is one of powerful interest." — Illustrated London News.
"A thoroughly interesting story, and is worth reading in its entirety." —
Literary World.

A GREAT PLATONIC FRIENDSHIP. By W.

Button Bernard. 3 vols.
Mr. Bernard's story is free from digressive description, is brightly told, and ita
realism never degenerates into coarseness ; the story is from first to last exciting."
Morning Post.



PUBLISHED BY HURST & BLACKETT.

A FAIR CRUSADER; A Story of To-day. By

William Stall, Author of " Larry Lohengrin," " A Queer
Race," &c. 2 vols.

A BRETON MAIDEN. By A French Lady,

Author of " Till my Wedding-day." " 3 vols.

BORN IN THE PURPLE. By Maxwell Fox.

3 vols.

A NEW FACE AT THE DOOR. By Jane stanley,

Author of " A Daughter of the Gods." 2 vols.
"The tale is never dull, and has much to recommend it." — Morning Post.

THE SPORT OF CHANCE. By William Sharp.

3 vols.
'The Sport of Chance ' has 2^rima facie an undeniable advantage to start with :
i.e., it is unlike almost anything hitherto written in the shape of a novel in three
volumes. The author shows much skill in unravelling the tangled skein of a complicated
plot." — Morning Post.

SWEET IS TRUE LOVE. By Katharine King,

Author of " The Queen of the Regiment," " Off the Roll," &c.

2 vols.

It is in the tender sympathetic treatment of details that the writer is most
successful." — St. James's Gazette.

A DOUBLE WEDDING. By the Author of '' St.

Slave's," " Janita's Cross," &c. 3 vols.

"The tale is told with quaint and pathetic simplicity, and is in every sense a
charming story." — Morning Post.

The work is a combination of refined quiet humour and gentle pathos which
produce a delightful yvhole."— Whitehall Review.

THE GAY WORLD. By Joseph Hatton, Author

of " Clothe," &c. 3 vols.

"The chief characters all have a certain charm. One follows with genuine
anxiety the course of their career". — Globe.

The book is interspersed with many clever passages, hits of choice description,
and happy touches of character ; it is the ablest novel Mr. Hatton has
written"— ^carfe/ny.

CAST ON THE WATERS. By Hugh Coleman

Davidson, Author of " The Green Hills by the Sea." 3 vols.

"The every day events of the tale are all forcibly and graphically portrayed."
Morning Post.

The characters are well drawn in caricaturist's style, and the dialogue apt
and amusing'' — Scotsman.

IN BAD HANDS. By F. W. Robinson, Author

of " Grandmother's Money," " The Courting of Mary Smith," &c.

3 vols.

"The volumes are alive with touches of humour and pathos, and are pretty
sure to be welcomed by novel-readers." — Athenaeum

THE TREASURE OF THORBURNS. A Novel

By Frederick Boyle, Author of " A Good Hater," " Legends of
my Bungalow," &c. 3 vols.
The story is excellent in its way, more than sufficiently well written, and with
certain touches of fresh originality that lift it out of the pale of the commonplace."
— Literary World.

OF CHEAP EDITIONS OP

POPULAR MODERN WORKS.

ILLUSTRATED BY

Sir J. E. Millais, Sir J. Gilbert, Holman Hunt, Birket Foster,

John Leech, John Tenniel, J. Laslett Pott, etc.

Each in a Single Volume, with Frontispiece, price 5s.

I.— SAM SLICK'S NATURE AND HUMAN NATURE.

"The first volume of Messrs. Hurst and Blackett's Standard Library of Cheap Editions
forms a very good beginning to what will doubtless be a very successful undertaking.
'Nature and Human Nature ' is one of the best of Sam Slick's witty and humorous productions,
and well entitled to the large circulation which it cannot fail to obtain in its
present convenient and cheap shape. The volume combines with the great recommendations
of a clear, bold type and good paper, the lesser, but attractive merits of being well
illustrated and elegantly bound." — Morning Post.

II.— JOHN HALIFAX, GENTLEMAN.

"The new and cheaper edition of this interesting work will doubtless meet with great
success. John Halifax, the hero of this most beautiful story, is no ordinary hero, and
this his history is no ordinary book. It is a full-length portrait of a true gentleman, one
of nature's own nobility. It is also the history of a home, and a thoroughly English one.
The work abounds in incident, and many of the scenes are full of graphic power and true
pathos. It is a book that few will read without becoming wiser and better." — Scotsman.

This story is very interesting. The attachment between John Halifax and his wife is
beautifully painted, as are the pictures of their domestic life, and tho growing up of their
children; and the conclusion of the book is beautiful and touching." — Athenaeum.

Il— THE CRESCENT AND THE CROSS.

BY ELIOT WARBURTON.

"Independent of its value as an original narrative, and its useful and interesting
information, this work is remarkable for the colouring power and play of fancy with
which its descriptions are enlivened. Among its greatest and most lasting charms is its
reverent and serious spirit." — Quarterly Review.

"Mr. Warburton has fulfilled the promise of his title-page. The 'Realities of Eastern
Tr-cvel' are described with a vividness which invests them with deep and abiding interest;
while the 'Romantic' adventures which the enterprising tourist met with in hia
course are narrated with a spirit which shows how much he enjoyed these reliefs from
the ennui of every-day life." — Globe.

IV.— Nathaniel

JULIA KAVANAGH.

'Nathalie' is Miss Kavanagh's best imaginative effort. Its manner is gracious and
attractive. Its matter is good. A sentiment, a tenderness, are commanded by her which
are as individual as they are elegant. We should not soon come to an end were we to
specify all the delicate touches and attractive pictures which place ' Nathalie ' high among
books of its class." — Athenaeum.

v.— A WOMAN'S THOUGHTS ABOUT WOMEN.

BY THE AUTHOR OF "JOHN HALIFAX, GENTLEMAN."

"These thoughts are good and humane. They are thoughts we would wish women to
think : they are much more to the purpose than the treatises upon the women and daughters
of England, which were fashionable some years ago, and these thoughts mark the
progress of opinion, and indicate a higher tone of character, and a juster estimate of
woman's position." — Athenaeum.

This excellent book is characterised by good sense, good taste, and feeling, underwritten
in an earnest, philanthropic, as well as practical spirit." — Morning Fast.

VI.— ADAM GEAEME OF MOSSGEAY.

BY MRS. OLIPHANT.

'Adam Qraeme ' is a story awakening genuine emotions of interest and delight by its
admirable pictures of Scottish life and scenery. The plot is cleverly complicated, and
there is great vitality in the dialogue, and remarkable brilliancy in the descriptive passages,
as who that has read 'Margaret Maitland ' would not be prepared to expect?
But the story has a 'mightier magnet still,' in the healthy tone which pervades it, in its
feminine delicacy of thought and diction, and in the truly womanly tenderness of its
sentiments. The eloquent author sets before us the essential attributes of Christian
virtue, their deep and silent workings in the heart, and their beautiful manifestations in
the life, with a delicacy, a power, and a truth which can hardly be surpassed"— J/ormngr
Post.

VII.— SAM SLICK'S WISE SAWS AND
Modern INSTANCES.

"We have not the slightest intention to criticise this book. Its reputation is made, and
will stand as long as that of Scott's or Buller's novels. The remarkable originality of
its purpose, and the happy description it affords of American life and manners, still continue
the subject of universal admiration. To say thus much is to say enough, though we
must just mention that the new edition forms a part of the Publishers' Cheap Standard
Library, which has included some of the very best specimens of light literature that ever
have been written." — Messenger .

VIII.— Cardinal WISEMAN'S Recollections
OF THE LAST Four POPES.

A picturesque book on Some and its ecclesiastical sovereigns, by an eloquent Woman
Catholic. Cardinal Wiseman has here treated a special subject with so much generality
and geniality that his recollections will excite no ill-feeling in those who are most conscientiously
opposed to every idea of human infallibility represented in Papal domination."
Athenaeum.

IX.— A LIFE FOE A LIFE.

BY THE AUTHOR OF " JOHN HALIFAX, GENTLEMAN."

"We are always glad to welcome Mrs. Craik. She writes from her own convictions,
and she has the power not only to conceive clearly what it is that she wishes to
say, but to express it in language effective and vigorous. In ' A Life for a Life ' she is
fortunate in a good subject, and she has produced a work of strong effect. The
reader, having read the book through for the story, will be apt (if he be of our persuasion)
to return and read again many pages and passages with greater pleasure
than on a first perusal. The whole book is replete with a graceful, tender delicacy,
and, in addition to its other merits, it is written in good careful English." —
Athenaeum.

' A Life for a Life ' is a book of a high class. The characters are depicted with a
masterly hand ; the events are dramatically set forth ; the descriptions of scenery and
sketches of society are admirably penned; moreover, the work has an object — a clearly
defined moral — most poetically, most beautifully drawn, and through all there is that
strong, reflective mind visible which lays bare the human heart and human mind to the
very qovq:" —Morning Post.

X.— THE OLD Colet Suburb.

BY LEIGH HUNT.

A book which has afforded us no slight gratification." — Athenaeum.

From the mixture of description, anecdote, biography, and criticism, this book is very
pleasant t reading." — Spectator.

A more agreeable and entertaining book has not been published since Boswell produced
his reminiscences of Johnson." — Observer.



XI.— MARGARET AND HER BRIDESMAIDS.

BY THE AUTHOR OP " THE VALLEY OP A HUNDRED FIRES."

We recommend all who are in search of a fascinating novel to read this work : for
themselves. They will And it well worth their while. There are a freshness and originality
about it quite charming, and there is a certain nobleness in the treatment both of
sentiment and incident which is not often found." — Athenaeum.

XII.— THE OLD JUDGE ; OR, LIFE IN A COLONY.

BY SAM SLICK.

"A peculiar interest attaches to sketches of colonial life, and readers could not have a
safer guide than the talented author of this work, who, by a residence of half a century,
has practically grasped the habits, manners, and social conditions of the colonists he describes.
All who wish to form a fair idea of the difficulties and pleasures of life in a new
country, unlike England in some respects, yet like it in many, should read this book." —
John Bull.

XIII.— DARIEN; OR, THE MERCHANT PRINCE.

BY ELIOT WARBURTON.

"This last production of the author of 'The Crescent and the Cross' has the same
elements of a very wide popularity. It will please its thousands." — Globe.

"Eliot Warburton's active and productive genius is amply exemplified in the present
book. We have seldom met with any work in which the realities of history sand, the
poetry of Action were more happily interwoven." — Illustrated News.

XIV.— FAMILY ROMANCE ; OR, DOMESTIC ANNALS
OF THE ARISTOCRACY.

BY SIR BERNARD BURKE, ULSTER KING OP ARMS.

"It were impossible to praise too highly this most interesting book, whether we should
have regard to its excellent plan or its not less excellent execution. It ought to be found
on every drawing-room table. Here you have nearly listy captivating romances with the
pith of all their interest preserved in undiminished poignancy, and any one may be read
in half an hour. It is not the least of their merits that the romances are founded on factor
what, at least, has been handed down for truth by long tradition — and the romance
of reality far exceeds the romance of fiction." — Standard.

XV.— THE LAIRD OF NORLAW.

BY MRS. OLIPHANT.

"We have had frequent opportunities of commending Messrs. Hurst and Blackett's
Standard Library. For neatness, elegance, and distinctness the volumes in this series
surpass anything with which we are familiar. 'The Laird of Norlaw' will fully sustain
the author's high reputation. The reader is carried on from first to last with an energy
of sympathy that never flags." — Sunday Times.

'the Laird of Norlaw' is worthy of the author's reputation. It is one of the most
exquisite of modem noy els"— Observer.

XVI.— THE ENGLISHWOMAN IN ITALY.

BY MRS. G. Bretton.

"Mrs. Bretton had opportunities which rarely fall to the lot of strangers of becoming
acquainted with the inner life and habits of a part of the Italian peninsula which is the
very centre of the national crisis. We can praise her performance as interesting, unexaggerated,
and full of opportune instruction." — The Times.

"Mrs. Bretton's book is timely, life-ike, and for every reason to be recommended. It
is impossible to close the book without liking the writer as well as the subject. The work
is engaging, because real." — Athenaeum.



Evil— NOTHING NEW.

BY THE AUTHOR OF " JOHN HALIFAX, GENTLEMAN."

'Nothing New' displays all those superior merits which have made 'John Halifax
one of the most popular works of the day. There is a force and truthfulness about these
tales which mark them as the production of no ordinary mind, and we cordially recommend
them to the perusal of all lovers of fiction"' — Morning Post.

XVIII.— LIFE OF JEANNE D'ALBRET, QUEEN OF
NAVARRE.

BY MISS FREER.

"We have read this book with great pleasure, and have no hesitation in recommending
it to general perusal. It reflects the highest credit on the industry and ability of Miss
Freer. Nothing can be more interesting than her story of the life of Jeanne D'Albret
and the narrative is as trustworthy as it is attractive." — Morning Post.

XIX.— THE VALLEY OF A HUNDRED FIRES.

BY THE AUTHOR OF " MARGARET AND HER BRIDESMAIDS."

"If asked to classify this work, we should give it a place between 'John Halifax ' and
'The Cantons.' " — Standard.
"The spirit in which the whole book is written is refined and good." — Athenaeum.
"This is in every sense a charming novel— Messenger.

XX.— THE ROMANCE OF THE FORUM; OR, NARRATIVES,
SCENES, AND ANECDOTES FROM COURTS OF JUSTICE.

BY PETER BURKE, SERJEANT AT LAW.

"This attractive book will be perused with much interest. It contains a great variety
of singular and highly romantic stories." — John Bull.

"A work of singular interest, which can never fail to charm and absorb the reader's
attention. The present cheap and elegant edition includes the true story of the Colleen
-Illustrated News.

XXI.— ADELE.

BY JULIA KAVANAGH.

"raddle' is the best work we have read by Miss Kavanagh; it is a charming story,
full of delicate character-painting. The interest kindled in the first chapter burns brightly
to the close." — Athenaeum.

'•'AdMe' will fully sustain the reputation of Miss Kavanagh, high as it already ranks."
John Bull.

' Adele ' is a love-story of very considerable pathos and power. It s a very clever
novel." — Daily News.

Xxii— STUDIES FROM LIFE.

"These 'Studies ' are truthful and vivid pictures of life, often earnest, always full Oi right
feeling, and occasionally lightened by touches of quiet, genial humour. The volume is remarkable
for thought, sound sense, shrewd observation, and kind and sympathetic feeling
for all things good and beautiful." — Morning Post.

"These 'Studies from Life ' are remarkable for graphic power and observation. The
book will not diminish the reputation of the accomplished UMihov." Saturday Review.



XXIII.— Grandmother's MONEY.

BY F. W. ROBINSON.

"We commend ' Grandmother's Money ' to readers in search of a good novel. The
characters are true to human nature, and the story is interesting." — Athenaeum.

Xxii.— A BOOK ABOUT DOCTORS.

BY JOHN Corny Jefferson.

A book to be read and re-read; lit for the study as well as the drawing-room table and
the circulating library." — Lancet.

"This is a pleasant book for the fireside season, and for the seaside season. Mr. Jefferson
has, out of hundreds of volumes, collected thousands of good things, adding thereto
much that appears in print for the first time, and which, of course, gives increased value
to this very readable book." — Athenaeum.

XXV.— NO CHURCH.

BY F. W. ROBINSON.

"We advise all who have the opportunity to read this book. It is well worth the
study. ' ' — A theme.
"A work of great originality, merit, and power." — Standard.

Xxvi— MISTRESS AND MAID.

BY THE AUTHOR OF " JOHN HALIFAX, GENTLEMAN."

"A good wholesome book, gracefully written, and as pleasant to read as it is instructive.
' ' — .4 thence urn.

"A charming tale, charmingly told." — Standard.

"All lovers of a good novel will hail with delight another of Mrs. Craik's charming
stories"— /o/tn Bull.

XXVII.— LOST AND SAVED.

BY THE HON. MRS. NORTON.

'Lost and Saved' will be read with eager interest by those who love a touching story
It is a vigorous novel." — Thanes.

This story is animated, full of exciting situations and stirring incidents. The characters
are delineated with great power. Above and beyond these elements of a good novel,
here is that indefinable charm with which true genius invests all it touches." — Daily News.

Xxviii— LES Miserable.

BY VICTOR HUGO.
Authorised Copyright English Translation.

"The merits of 'Les Miserable ' do not merely consist in the conception of it as a
whole ; it abounds with details of unequalled beauty. M. Victor Hugo has stamped upon
every page the hall-mark of genius." — Quarterly Review.

XXIX.— BARBARA'S HISTORY

BY AMELIA B. EDWARDS.

It is not often that we light upon a novel of so much merit and interest as
'Barbara's History.' It is a work conspicuous for taste and literary culture. It is a very
graceful and charming book, with a well-managed story, clearly-cut characters, and
sentiments expressed with an exquisite elocution. The dialogues especially sparkle with
repartee. It is a book which the world will like. This is high praise of a work of art,
and so we intend it." — The Times.



XXX.— LIFE OF THE REV. EDWARD IRVING.

BY MRS. OLIPHANT.

"A good book on a most interesting theme"— Times.

"A truly interesting and most affecting memoir. 'Irving's Life' ought to have a niche
in every gallery of religious biography. There are few lives that will be fuller of instruction,
interest, and consolation." — Saturday Review.

Xxxi— ST. Slave's.

BY THE AUTHOR OF " .Tanta's CROSS."

"This novel is the work of one who possesses a great talent for writing, as well as
experience and knowledge of the world. The whole book is worth reading." — Athenaeum.

' St. Slave's ' belongs to a lofty order of Action. It is a good novel, but it is something
more. It is written with unflagging ability, and it is as even as it is clever. The author
has determined to do nothing short of the best, and has succeeded"— i/ommgr Post.

XXXII.— SAM SLICK'S TRAITS OF AMERICAN HUMOUR.

"Dip where you will into this lottery of fun, you are sure to draw out a prize. These
Traits ' exhibit most successfully the broad national features of American humour." — Post.

XXXIII.— CHRISTIAN'S MISTAKE.

BY THE AUTHOR OF " JOHN HALIFAX, GENTLEMAN."

A more charming story has rarely been written. It is a choice gift to be able thug to
render human nature so truly, to penetrate its depths with such a searching sagacity, and
to illuminate them with a radiance so eminently the writer's own." — Times.

XXXIV.— ALEC FORBES OF Howled.

BY GEORGE MAC DONALD, LL.D.

"No account of this story would give any idea of the profound interest that pervades
the work from the first page to the last." — Athenaeum.

"A novel of common merit. Sir Walter Scott said he would advise no man to try
to read ' Clarissa Harlowe ' out loud in company if he wished to keep his character for
manly superiority to tears. We fancy a good many hardened old novel-readers will feel
a rising in the throat as they follow the fortunes of Alec and Annie." — Pall Mall Gazette.

XXXV.— AGNES

BY MRS. OLIPHANT.

'Agnes" is a novel superior to any of Mrs. Oliphant's former works"— Athencmim.

Mrs. Oliphant is one of the most admirable of our novelists. In her works there
are always to be found high principle, good taste, sense, and refinement. 'Agnes ' is
a story whose pathetic beauty will appeal irresistibly to all vender a." 'morning Post.

XXXVI.— A NOBLE LIFE.

BY THE AUTHOR OF " JOHN HALIFAX, GENTLEMAN."

"Few men and no women will read 'A Noble Life' without feeling themselves the
better for the effovV'— Spectator.

A beautifully written and touching tale. It is a noble hook"— Morning Post.

' A Noble Life ' is remarkable for the high types of character it presents, and the
skill with which they are made to work out a story of powerful and pathetic interest."
—Daily News.

XXXVII— NEW AMERICA.

BY W. HEPWORTH DIXON.

"A very interesting book. Mr. Dixon has written thoughtfully and drew— Times.
"We recommend everyone who feels any interest in human nature to read Mr.
Dixon's very interesting hooker'— Saturday Review.

u

XXXVIII.— EGBERT Falconer.

BY GEORGE MAO DONALD, LL.D.

' Robert Falconer ' is a work brimful of life and humour and of the deepest human
interest. It is a book to be returned to again and again for the deep and searching
knowledge it evinces of human thoughts and feelings." — Athenaeum.

XXXIX.— THE WOMAN'S KINGDOM.

BY THE AUTHOR OF " JOHN HALIFAX, GENTLEMAN."

'The Woman's Kingdom ' sustains the author's reputation as a writer of the purest
and noblest kind of domestic stories." — Athenaeum.

' The Woman's Kingdom ' is remarkable for its romantic interest. The characters are
masterpieces. Edna is worthy of the hand that drew John Halifax." — Morning Post.

XL.— ANNALS OF AN EVENTFUL LIFE.

BY GEORGE Webb DASENT, D.C.L.

"A racy, well-written, and original novel. The interest never flags. The whole work
sparkles with wit and humour." — Quarterly Review.

XLI— DAVID ELGINBEOD.

BY GEORGE MAC DONALD, LL.D.

"A novel which is the work of a man of genius. It will attract the highest class of
readers." — Times.

XLII.— A Leave LADY.

BY THE AUTHOR OF " JOHN HALIFAX, Gentleman."

"We earnestly recommend this novel. It is a special and worthy specimen of the
authors remarkable powers. The reader's attention never for a moment flags." — Post.

'"A Brave Lady' thoroughly rivets the unmingled sympathy of the reader, and her
history deserves to stand foremost among the author's works." — Daily Telegraph.

Xlii— HANNAH.

BY THE AUTHOR OF " JOHN HALIFAX, GENTLEMAN."

"A very pleasant, healthy story, well and artistically told. The book is sure of a wide
circle of readers. The character of Hannah is one of rare beauty." — Standard.

"A powerful novel of social and domestic life. One of the most successful efforts of a
successful novelist." — Daily News.

XLIV.— SAM SLICK'S Americans AT HOME.

"This is one of the most amusing books that wo ever read." — Standard
'The Americans at Home' will not be less popular than any of Judge Halliburton's
previous works." — Morning Post.

XL v.— THE UNKIND Word.

BY THE AUTHOR OF *' JOHN HALIFAX, GENTLEMAN."

These stories are gems of narrative. Indeed, some of them, in their touching grace
and simplicity, seem to us to possess a charm even beyond the authoress's most popular
novels. Of none of them can this be said more emphatically than of that whi :h opens the
series, 'The Unkind Word.' It is wonderful to see the imaginative power displayed in
the few delicate touches by which this successful love-story is sketched ont"— The Folio.



XLVI.— A Ease IN JUNE.

BY MRS. OLIPHANT.
"'A Rose in June' is as pretty as its title. The story is one of the best and most
touching-which we owe to the industry and talent of Mrs. Oliphant, and may hold its own
with even ' The Chronicles of Carlingford.' " — Times.

Xlvi— MY LITTLE LADY.

BY E. FRANCES Pointer.
"This story presents a number of vivid and very charming pictures Indeed, the whole
book is charming. It is interesting in both character and story, and thoroughly good of
its kind." — Saturday Review.

XLVIII.— Phoebe, JUNIOR.

BY MRS. OLIPHANT.
"This last 'Chronicle of Carlingford' not merely takes rank fairly beside the first
which introduced us to 'Salem Chapel,' but surpasses all the intermediate records.
Phoebe, Junior, herself is admirably drawn"— Academy.

XLIX.— LIFE OF Marie ANTOINETTE.

BY PROFESSOR CHARLES DUKE Yonge.

A work of remarkable merit and interest, which will, we doubt not, become the most
popular English history of Marie Antoinette." — Spectator.

L.— SIR GIBBIE.

BY GEORGE MAC DONALD, LL.D.

• ' Sir Gibbie ' is a book of genius"— Pa?Z Mall Gazette.
■ This book has power, pathos, and humour." — Athenaeum.

LI.— YOUNG MRS. JARDINE.

BY THE AUTHOR OF " JOHN HALIFAX, GENTLEMAN."

Yoimg Mrs. Jardine ' is a pretty story, written in pure English." — The, Times.

There is much good feeling in this book. It is pleasant and wholesome." — Athenaeum.

Il— LORD Brandenburg.

BY AMELIA B. EDWARDS.

"A very readable story. The author has well conceived the purpose of high-class
novel-writing, and succeeded in no small measure in attaining it. There is plenty of
variety, cheerful dialogue, and general ' verve' in the book." — Athenaeum.

LIII.— IT WAS A LOVER AND HIS LASS.

BY MRS. OLIPHANT.

"In' It was a Lover and his Lass,' we admire Mrs. Oliphant exceedingly. It would be
worth reading a second time, were it only for the sake of one ancient Scottish spinster,
who is nearly the counterpart of the admirable Mrs. Margaret Maitland"— Times.

LIV.— THE REAL LORD BYRON— THE STORY OF
THE POET'S LIFE.

BY JOHN Corny Jefferson.

Mr. Jeaffreson comes forward with a narrative which must take a very important
place in Byronic literature ; and it may reasonably be anticipated that this book will be
regarded with deep interest by all who are concerned in the works and the fame of this
great English Does." — The Times.


