ILLS

FicOlf^NCE arden

L I E) R.ARY

OF THE

UN Diversity

or ILLINOIS

&25
J25ewi

vel

E^^

^■<.>/i-f >i

WITCH OF THE HILLS

BY

FLORENCE WARDEN

AUTHOR OF ' THE HOUSE ON THE MARSH, ' ETC.

IN TWO VOLUMES
VOL, I

LONDON

RICHARD BENTLEY & SON, NEW BURLINGTON STREET

publishers in ordinary to fer ilHajcstg tf)c ©ucm



I A WITCH OF THE HILLS

CHAPTER I

0^

^

Poor little witch ! I think she left all her
spells and love-philters behind her, when she
let herself be carried off from Ballater to
Bayswater, a spot where no sorcery more
poetical or more interesting than modern
Spiritualism finds a congenial home. What
was her star about not to teach her that
human hearts can beat as passionately up
among the quiet hills and the dark fir-forests
as down amid the rattle and the roar of the
town ? Well, well ; it is only in the grave

VOL. I I

that we make no mistakes ; and life and
love, God knows, are mysteries beyond the
ken of a chuckle-headed country gentleman,
with just sense enough to handle a gun and
land a salmon.

And the sum and substance of all this is
that the Desire hills are very bleak in
December, that the north wind sighs and
sobs, whistles and howls among the ragged
firs and the bending larches in a manner
fearsome and eerie to a lonely man at his
silent fireside, and that books are but sorry
substitutes for human companions when the
deer are safe in their winter retreat in the
forests, and the grouse-moors are white with
snow. So here's for another pine-log on the
fire, and a glance back at the fourteen years
which have slipped away since I shut the
gates of the world behind me.

The world ! The old leaven is still there
then, that after fourteen years of voluntary

almost voluntary — exile, I still call that
narrow circle of a few hundreds of not particularly
wise, not particularly interesting
people — the world ! They were wise enough
and interesting enough for me at three and
twenty, though, when by the death of my
elder brother I leapt at once from an irksome
struggle, with expensive tastes, on a stingy
allowance of three hundred a year, to the full
enjoyment of an income of eight thousand.

How fully I appreciated the delights of
that sudden change from ' ineligible ' to
'eligible!' How quickly I began to feel
that, in accepting an invitation, instead of
receiving a favour I now conferred one ! My
new knowledge speedily transformed a harmless
and rather obliging young man into an
insufferable puppy ; but the puppy was
welcomed where the obliging young man
had hardly been tolerated. Beautifully
gradual the change was, both in me and

in my friends ; for we were all well bred,
and knew how to charge the old formulas
with new meaning. 'You will be sure to
come, won't you ? ' from a hostess to me,
was no longer a crumb of kindness, it was
an entreaty. ' You are very kind,' from me,
expressed now not gratitude, but condescension.
A rather nice girl, who had been
scolded for dancing with me too often, was
now, like the little children sent out in the
streets to beg, praised or blamed by her
mother according to the degree of attention
I had paid her. I did not share the contempt
of the other men of my own age for
this manoeuvring mamma and the rest of her
kind, though I daresay I spoke of them in
the same tone as they did. In the first
place, I was flattered by their homage to
my new position, interested as it was ; and
in the second, in their presence we were all
so much alike, in dress, manner, and what

by courtesy is called conversation, that the
poor ladies might well be excused for judging
our merits by the only tangible point of
difference — our relative wealth.

In our tastes, our vices, real or assumed,
there was equally little to choose between us.
We knew little about art and less about
literature. In politics we were dogged and
illogical partisans of politicians, and cared
nothing for principles. Religion we left to
women, who shared with horses the chief
place in our thoughts. Nature having fortunately
denied to the latter animals the power
of speech, there was no danger of the two
classes of our favourites coming into active
rivalry.

In the intoxication of early manhood,
while the mind was still in the background
to the senses, the surface of things provided
entertainment enough for us. Characters
and even characteristics were merged in a

uniformity of folly without malice, and vice
without depravity. If we gambled, we lost
money which did no good while in our
hands ; if we gave light love, it was to ladies
who asked for no more ; if we drank, we only
clouded intellects which were never employed
in thought.

Looking back on that time from the
serene eminence of nine and thirty, I can
see that I was a fool, but also that I got my
money's worth for my folly, which is more
than I can say for all my later aberrations
of intellect. And if, on the brink of forty,
I find I can give a less logical account of
my actions and feelings than I could at the
opening of life, it is appalling to think what
a consummate ass I may be if I live another
twenty years ! I begin to wish I had set
myself some less humiliating task, to fill my
lonely hours by a mountain winter fireside,
than this of tracing the process by which the

idiot of five and twenty became the lunatic of
five and thirty. Well, it's too late to go
back, now that I have called up the old
ghosts and felt again the terrible fascination
of the touch of the now gaunt fingers. So
here's for a dash at my work with the best
grace I can.

I had been enjoying my accession to
fortune for about eighteen months, during
which I had devoted what mind and soul I
possessed wholly to the work of catering for
the gratification of my senses, when I fell for
the first time seriously in love, as the natural
sequence of having exhausted the novelty of
coarser excitements.

Lady Helen Normanton was the third
daughter of the Marquis of Castleford, a
beauty in her first season, who had made a
sensation on her presentation, and had attracted
the avowed admiration of no less a
person than the Earl of Saxmundham, such

a great catch, with his rumoured revenues of
eighty or ninety thousand a year, that for a
comparative pauper with a small and already
encumbered estate like mine to dare to
appear in the lists against him seemed the
height of conceit or the depth of idiocy.
But Lady Helen s eyes were bright enough,
and her smile sweet enough, to turn any
man's head. They caused me to form the
first set purpose of my life, and I dashed into
mv wooing with a headlong earnestness that
soon made my passion the talk oi' my friends.
1 had one advantage on mv side upon which
I must confess that I largely relied ; 1 was
good-looking enough to have earned the
sobriquet of ' Handsome Harry,' and I was
quite as much alive to my personal attractions,
quite as anxious to show then to the
best advantage, as any senile professional
beauty. It was agony to think that, having
already exhausted niy imagination in the

invention of devices by which, in the restricted
area of man's costume, I should
always appear a little better dressed than
any one else, I could do nothing more for my
love than I had done for my vanity. As a
last resource I curled my hair.

The boldness of my devotion soon began
to tell. The Earl of Saxmundham was fifty-two,
had a snub nose, and was already bald.
Lady Helen was very young, sweet and
simple, and perhaps scarcely realised yet
what much handsomer horses and gowns and
diamonds are to be got with eighty thousand
a year than with eight. So she smiled at
me and danced with me, and said nothing at
all in the sweetest way when I poured out
my passion in supper-rooms and conservatories,
and giggled with the most adorable
childishness when I kissed her little hand,
still young enough to be rather red, and told
her that she had inspired me with the wish

to be great for her sake. And the end of It
was that the Earl began to retreat, and that
I was snubbed, and that these snubs, being
to me an earnest of victory, I became ten
times more openly, outrageously daring than
before, and my suit being vigorously upheld
by one of her brothers, who had become an
oracle in the family on the simple basis of
being difficult to please, I was at last most
reluctantly accepted as Lady Helen's betrothed
lover.

My success gave me the sort of prestige
of curiosity which passionate earnestness, in
this age when we associate passion with
seedy Bohemians and earnestness with Methodist
preachers, can easily excite among a
generation of men who, having no stimulating
iron bars or stone walls between them
and their lady-loves, can reserve the best of
their energies for other and more exciting
pursuits. I was the respectable Paris to a

proper and perfectly well-conducted Helen,
the Romeo to a new Juliet. My wooing and
engagement became a society topic, the subject
of many interesting fictions. Spreading
to circles a little more remote, in the absence
of any Downing Street blunder or Clapham
tragedy, the story became more romantic
still. I myself overheard on the Underground
Railway the exciting narration of
how I forced my way at night into the
Marquis's bedroom, after having concealed
myself for some hours behind a Japanese
screen in the library ; how, revolver in hand,
I had forced the unwilling parent to accede
to my demand for his daughter s hand, and
much more of the same kind, listened to with
incredulity, but still with interest.

It was hard that, after the eclat of such a
beginning, our engagement should have continued
on commonplace lines, but so it did.
My love for this fair girl, being the first deep

emotion of a life which had begun to pall
upon me by its frivolity, had struck far down
and moved to life within me the best feelings
of a man's nature. I began to be ashamed
of myself, to feel that I was a futile coxcomb,
only saved from being ridiculous by being
one of a crowd of others like me. I gave up
betting, that I might have more money to
spend on presents for her ; less legitimate
pleasures I renounced as a matter of course,
with shame that the arms which were to
protect my darling should have been so profaned
; vanity having made me a 'master,'
love made me a man. Unluckily, Helen
was too young and too innocent to appreciate
the difference ; her eyes still glowed at the
sight of French bonbons, she liked compliments
better than conversation, and burst
into tears when one evening, as she was
dressed for a ball, I broke, in kissing her,
the heads of some lilies of the valley she was

wearing. The little petulant push she gave
me opened my eyes to the fact that no sooner
had I discovered myself to be a fool in one
way than I had straightway fallen into as
great an error in another direction. It
dawned upon me for the first time, as I sat
opposite to Helen and her mother in the
barouche on our way to the ball, what a
horrible likeness there was, seen in this half-light
of the carriage lamps, between Helen
with her sweet blue eyes and features so
delicately lovely that they made one think
of Queen Titania, with an uncomfortable
thought of one's self as the ass, and the placid
Marchioness, whose features at other times
one never noticed, so utterly insignificant a
nonentity was she by reason of the vacuous
stolidity which was carried by her to the
point of absolute distinction. Would Helen
be like that at forty ? Worse still, was
Helen like that now ? It was a horrible

thought, which subsequent experience unhappily
did not tend to dispel. My first
serious love had worked too great a revolution
in me, had made me conscious of needs
unfelt before, so that I now found that mere
innocence in the woman who was to be the
goddess of my life was not enough ; I must
have capacity for thought, for passion.

All this I had taken for granted at first,
while the struggle to win her occupied all my
energies ; but when from the mad aspirant I
became the proud betrothed, I had leisure to
find out that the beautiful, dreamy, far-away
eyes of my france in no way denoted a
poetic temperament, that her romance consisted
merely in the preference for a handsome
face to an ugly one, and in the inability
to understand that she, an Earl's daughter
and a spoilt child, could by any possibility
fail to obtain anything to which she had
taken a fancy. I was surprised at the

rapidity with which I, a man seriously and
deeply in love, came to these conclusions
about the girl who had inspired my passion.
I could even, looking into the future, foretell
the kind of life we should lead together as
man and wife, when she, fallen from the ideal
position of inspiring goddess to that of a
tame pet rabbit, bored to death by my
solemnity when I was serious, and frightened
by my impetuosity when I was gay, would
discover, with quick woman's instinct, that
the best of myself was no longer given to
her, and cavilling at the neglect of a husband
whose society oppressed her, would find compensation
for her wrongs among more frivolous
companions. So that, weary of frivolity
myself, my wife would avenge my defection.

I suppose almost every man, in the sober
hours which alternate with the paroxysms of
the wildest passions, can form a tolerably
correct forecast of his life with the woman

who likes to believe that she has cast him
into an infatuation whose force is blinding.
The picture is always with him, showing now
in bright colours, now in dark ; varying a
little in its outlines from time to time, but
remaining substantially the same, and more
or less accurate according to the measure of
his intellect and experience ; not at all the
picture of even an earthly paradise, but yet
with charms which satisfy human longings,
and make it hard to part with. So I, having
made up my mind that beauty, gentleness
and modesty, good birth and fairly good
temper were the only attributes of my future
wife on which I could rely, philosophically
decided that they formed as good an equipment
as I had any right to expect, doubled
my offerings of flowers and bonbons, and
transferred the disquisitions on art, literature,
religion and politics, in which I had begun to
indulge, to her brother.

Lord Edgar Normanton was a tall, fair,

broad-shouldered young man, who, while

joining in all the frivolous amusements of his

age and station, did so in a grave, leisurely,

and reflective manner, which caused him to

be looked up to as one capable of higher

things, whose presence at a cricket match

was a condescension, and who appeared at

balls with some occult purpose connected

with the study of human nature. I had

always looked upon his special friendship forme

as an honour, of which I felt that my

/ new departure, in deciding that I had sown

wild oats enough, made me more worthy.

It never occurred to me to ask myself or

anybody else whether his wild oats where

sown. It was enough for me that he was

glad when mine were. With the loyalty of

most young men to their ideals of their own

sex, I would far rather have discovered a

new and unsuspected flaw in Helen's char-vol.
I 2

after than have learnt anything to shake my
respect for her brother. Women, when not
considered as angels, can only be looked
upon as fascinating but inferior creatures,
whose faults must be overlooked as irremediable,
in consideration of their contributions
to the comfort or the pleasure of man.
One may argue about them, but, except as a
relaxation, one cannot argue with them.

Edgar was openly delighted at my engagement
with his sister, which he considered
merely in the light of a tie to bring
us two men closer together. Such a little
nonentity as I found he considered his sister
to be might think herself lucky to be
honoured by such a use.

This was the position of affairs when a
memorable shooting party in Norfolk, of which
both Edgar and I formed members, resulted
in an accident which was to bring my love affair
to an end as sensational as its beginning.

CHAPTER II

We were engaged upon that hospitable
abomination at a shooting party — a champagne
luncheon. Having made a very fair
bag for my morning's work, and being tired
with my exertions, I was inclined to think that
the serious business of the day was over forme,
and that I might take it easy as regarded
further effort. Edgar, who, since his discovery
that my fervour on the subject of his
sister had grown less ardent, was inclined to
assume more of the character of mentor
towards me than I cared about, had seated
himself on the ground beside me ; but I had
found an opportunity of changing seats, for

I felt less well-disposed towards him that
morning than I had ever been before.

The fact was that the gentle Helen had
snubbed me two evenings previously for a
demonstration of affection which I had carefully
prepared, lest she, too, should have
noticed the waning in my love. Upon this
I had retreated, with a very odd mixture of
feelings towards my france, and there had
been a reserve between us for the whole of
the evening, which Edgar somewhat unwisely
interfered to break. Looking upon myself
as the injured person, I had resented the
homily he felt himself called upon to administer,
and though I made my peace with
Helen next day, I avoided her brother.
He made two or three good-natured overtures
to me in the manner of an experienced
nurse to a froward child, but on the morning
of the shooting party I was still as far as
ever from being reconciled to the paternal

intervention of Edgar the Wise and the
Good.

The Ladies ! ' cried one of the party,
leaning lazily back on his arm and raising his
glass.

'Say "Woman"' I amended; 'it's more
comprehensive.'

Well, but *' The Ladies ! " ought to be
comprehensive enough for you just now,
Maude,' said some one, glancing mischievously
at Edgar, whose solemnity was increasing,
and scenting something warmer
than controversy.

Not now, nor ever ! ' said I, with more
daring than good taste. ' In 'woman" we
can secretly worship an ideal better than
ourselves. In "The Ladies" we must bow
down to creatures lower than ourselves,
whose beauty deceives us, whose frivolity
degrades us, and whom nothing more sacred
than our care and their own coldness protects

from the fate of fellow-women whom
before them we do not dare to name.'

Everybody looked up in astonishment,
and Edgar's red healthy face became purple
with anger.

A man who holds such opinions concerning
ladies is probably better qualified to
judge that other class which he has the
singular taste to mention in the same
sentence with them.'

Perhaps. It is easier to find mercy for
victims than for tyrants.'

Edgar rose to his feet with the ponderous
dignity of an offended giant.

If I had known your opinions on this
subject a little earlier, Mr. Maude, I should
never have allowed you to form an alliance
with my family

I rose too, as hot as he ; and secretly
alarmed and repentant at the lengths to
which my recklessness had carried me, I was

not ready to submit to the didactic rough-riding
of the man who had long ago himself
instilled into me his own supreme contempt
for the weaker sex.

Perhaps I, Lord Edgar, should have
thought the honour too dearly bought if I
had known that it involved my acceptance of
a self-appointed keeper of my conscience.'

Our host, Sir Wilfrid Speke, now interfered
to calm the passions which were rapidly
getting the better of us, and thrusting my
gun under my arm, he literally carried me
off, and marching me to a covert on the
slope of a hill where was a noted * warm
corner,' he told me good-humouredly to Met
the birds have it,' and left me to myself and
them.

I was in a very bad temper. Enraged by
the recollection of Helen's simpering coldness,
by her brother's recently-assumed
dictatorship, and by my own reckless want of

self-control a few minutes before, I was not
in the mood for sport. Was this to be the
result of my determination to take life more
seriously, that I discovered my france to bea
fool, my most honoured friend a bore, and
myself capable of undreamt-of depths of bad
taste and ill-temper? I would go back to
my old life of languid chatter and irresponsible
dissipation, I would content myself
again with my fame as the ' handsomest man
in town,' would accept my future wife for
what she was, and not for what she ought to
be, give her the inane, half-hearted attentions
which were so much more to her taste than
earnestness and devotion, and see thought
and Lord Edgar at the devil.

I felt much more inclined to shoot myself
than to open fire on the pheasants, but headlong
carelessness, and not tragic intention,
caused the accident which ensued. In getting
through a gap in a hedge, my gun was

caught by a briar as I mounted to the higher
ground on the other side ; I tried to free it,
and handling it incautiously, a sudden shock
to my face and right shoulder told me that I
had shot myself. I was blinded for the
moment, and trying to raise my right arm I
felt acute pain, and the next instant I felt the
warm blood trickling down my neck.

I tried to walk, but I staggered about and
could make no progress, so I leaned against
a tree and shouted ; but my head growing
dizzy, I soon found myself on the ground,
filled with one wish — that I might live long
enough for some one to find me, and receive
the last instructions by which I could atone
to pretty Helen for the vulgar earnestness of
my love.

My next recollection is of a dull murmur
of voices heard, as it seemed, in the distance,
then of pain grown suddenly more acute
as I was moved ; all the time I could see

nothing, and I had only just time to understand
that I was being carried along by
friends whose voices I recognised, when I
fell again into unconsciousness.

I recovered to find myself back at Sir
Wilfrid's ; a doctor was dressing my wounded
head and examining my shoulder ; there was
a bandage across my eyes, and on trying to
speak I found that the right side of my face
was also bound up. I passed the night in
some pain, and must have been for part of it
light-headed, as I discovered two or three
days later, when Edgar, much moved, told
me that I had implored everybody who came
near me to witness that I left all I possessed
to Lady Helen Normanton, and had begged
for the pen and paper I could not have used,
to execute my proposed will.

During the next few days Edgar hardly
left my bedside. My head and eyes were
still kept tightly bandaged, so that I could

neither see nor speak, nor take solid food.
Seeing me in this piteous condition, Edgar,
Hke the good fellow he was, decided that
sermons were out of season, and that I must
be amused. His humour, however, being of
a somewhat slow and cumbrous kind adapted
to his size, I took advantage of my enforced
silence to let him joke on unheeded, while
my own thoughts wandered dreamily away
to my life of the past few years, and to the
odd, quickly discovered mistake in which it
had lately culminated. I was surprised by
the persistency with which Helen's placid
silliness tormented me, fresh instances of it
coming every hour into my mind until I
began to ask myself whether the little blue-eyed
lady had really been born into the
world with a soul at all. And so, no longer
suffering bodily pain, I lay day after day,
very much absorbed by my own self-questionings,
and by strange dreams of a

new Helen, who came to me with the fair
face and soft eyes of the old, but with bright
intelligence in her gaze, whispering with her
delicate lips words of love and tenderness.

I woke up suddenly one night, still hot
with my sleeping fancy that this revised
edition of my france had been with me. I
had seemed to feel her breath upon my
cheek, even to feel the touch of her lips upon
my ear, as she told me my illness had taught
her how much she loved me. I thought I
was answering her in passionate words with
a great thrill of joy in my heart, when I woke
up and found myself as usual in darkness and
silence.

Edgar ! ' I called out ; ' Edgar ! '

He answered sleepily from a little way off,
Yes. Do you want anything ?'

No, thank you.'

A pause.

I say,' I went on a few moments later.

nobody has been in the room, have
they ? '

No, no-o-body,' with a yawn. ' At least,
I may have dozed, but I don't think '

No, of course not.' But I was horribly
wide awake by this time. Some of the
bandages round my head having been removed
for the first time the evening before,
I had liberty of speech again, of which I
seemed resolved to make the most. ' I say,
Edgar, there's a fire flickering in the grate,
isn't there ? '

Yes, why ? '

Well, if I can see that quite well, why on
earth do they still keep the bandages over
my eyes ? I know they were afraid of my
going blind. But I haven't ; so what's it for ? '

I don't know,' mumbled Edgar, rather
blankly. He added hastily, * I suppose the
doctor knows best ; you'd better leave them
alone.'

Oh yes.'

A long silence, during which Edgar,
under the impression that it was part of a
sick nurse's duty when the patient showed
signs of restlessness, pottered about the
room, and at last fell over something.

*I say, Edgar,' I began again, 'isn't my
face a good deal battered about on the right
side ? '

I heard him stop, and there was a little
clash of glasses. Then he spoke, with some
constraint.

Yes, a little. I daresay it will be sometime
before it gets all right. But you've no
internal injuries or broken bones, and that's
the great thing.'

The last statement was made so effusively
that it was not difficult for me to gather that
my face was more deeply injured than he
liked to admit.

*I know quite well,' said I composedly,

that I shall have to swell the proud ranks
of the plain after this ; I must cultivate my
intellect and my virtues, like the poor girls
whom we don't dance with ! I've lost a
finger, too, haven't I ? On my right hand ? '

'Only two joints of it,' answered Edgar,
with laboured cheerfulness.

What would poor Helen say to me if she
could see me now ? ' I suggested, rather
diffidently.

Say ! Why, what every true woman
would say, that she loved you ten times
better now you were disfigured than she did
when you were the counterpart of every
other good-looking popinjay in town ! '

This, uttered with much ponderous vehemence,
was by no means reassuring to me.
In the first place, it confirmed the idea that
my injuries would leave permanent marks.
In the second place, it led me to ask myself
whether, Helen's chief merit in my eyes

having been good looks, my chief merit in
her eyes might not have been the same.

As I said nothing, Edgar, now fully awake,
came nearer to the bed, and said solemnly :

You do Helen injustice, Harry.'

And you taught me to do her injustice,
Edgar.'

At first he said nothing to this, and I
knew that he understood me. But presently
I felt his hand laid emphatically on my left
shoulder, and he began in a low earnest voice :

Look here, old chap, that's not quite fair.
I may have inveighed against the intellectual
inferiority of women scores of times when
you encouraged me by feeble protest. I may
have spoken of my own sister as an example
of the sweet and silly. When you saw her
and became infatuated about her I listened
to your rhapsodies in silence because I couldn't
endorse your opinion that she was an angel.
But I was glad you had taken a fancy to the

child, and I knew that you might have done
much worse. Well, my opinions have undergone
no transformation. The women of the
middle class, whom it is now the fashion to
educate, the women of the lower class, who
have to work, may be considered as reasoning
creatures, varying, as men do, in their
reasoning powers. But the women of the
upper classes, pur sang, who are equally above
education and labour, may be ranked all together,
with the exception of those whom
alliance with the class below has regenerated,
as more or less fascinating idiots, whose minds
are cramped by unnatural and ignorant prejudices,
and in whom an occasional ray of
intelligence disperses itself in mere freaks of
art, of philanthropy, or of religion.'

Then, if you are logical, you may end by
marrying a barmaid.'

I think not. Barmaid are young women

who, by the exacting demands of their call-vol.
I 3

ing, are bound to be healthy, active, intelligent
and shrewd. Consider how such a woman
would be thrown away in the ridiculous and
empty existence led by our wives ! How she
would laugh at the shallow interests of the
women around her, and despise her do-nothing
husband ! Without counting that she
might be demoralised by her new position, and
add the mistakes of a parvenue to the foibles
of the class into which she was admitted ! '

Then, on the whole, you will '

Remain single, or take for wife the usual
fool of my own class, who will have the usual
fool of her own class for a husband.'

But, Edgar,' said I, after a short pause,
I am not so calm as you are, and my mind
is less well-regulated than yours. I want
something in my wife that you would not
want from yours. The docile acceptance of
my love would never content me ; I want it
returned.'

But this view of the case had the effect of
irritating Edgar, who naturally resented the
idea of any other nature having deeper needs
than his own.

'It is unreasonable to expect, from our
physical and mental inferior, powers equal to
our own,' he said, in a tone of dismissal of
the subject.

'Then how am I to expect from Helen
the power of looking at my disfigured face
without horror, when I am by no means sure
that I could have felt redoubled devotion if a
similar accident had happened to her ? '

Women are different from us, and not to
be judged by the same rules. Beauty — of
some sort — is a duty with them, while everyone
knows that an ugly man makes quicker
progress with them than a handsome one.*

'Well, I should like to judge what sort of
progress with them my ugliness is likely to
make. Give me a looking-glass.'

But he would not. He said the doctor
had forbidden me to use my eyes yet, that
my face was still unhealed, and the bandages
must not be moved. And finally he declined
to talk to me any longer, and told me to goto
sleep.

I was not satisfied. I knew that I was
getting well fast, that there was no need to
keep me in bed, and I felt curious as to the
reason of my still being kept so close a prisoner.
So I found an opportunity when I had
been left, as they thought, asleep, to remove
the bandage from my eyes with my left hand.
My sight seemed as good as ever, but the
skin round about my right eye seemed to
be tightly drawn. The window-blinds were
down, and as evening was coming on there
was only light enough to distinguish dimly
the objects in the room by the help of the
flickering flame of the fire. I got out of bed
and walked to the toilet-table, but the 

had been taken away; to the mantelpiece,
with the same result. I grew impatient,
angry, and rather anxious. There was a
hand-glass in my dressing-bag, if I could only
find that ; I remembered that I had left it in
the dressing-room. I dashed into the room,
and as that, too, was darkened, I turned to
draw up the blind. By that movement I
came face to face with a sight so appalling
that, of all the misfortunes my accident has
ever brought upon me, none, I think, has
given me a shock for the first moment so
horrible. I saw before me the figure of a
man with the face of a devil.

The right eyebrow, the right side of the
moustache were gone, and the hair as far as
the back of the right ear. The whole of this
side of the face, from forehead to chin, was a
puckered drawn mass of blackened shrivelled
skin, distorted into grotesque seams and furrows.
The right end of the eye and the right

corner of the mouth were drawn up, giving to
the whole face a sinister and evil expression.

After a few moments' contemplation of
my new self, I turned away from the glass,
feeling sick with disgust and horror. In the
first shock of my discovery, no reflection that
I was looking upon the fearful sight at its
worst, and that the healing work was still
going on underneath the scarred and desiccated
skin, came to console me.

My back turned upon my own image, my
stupefaction gave place to rapid thought. I
saw in a moment that the old course of my
life was at one blow broken up, that I must
begin again as if I had been born that day.
I must go away, not only from my own
friends, but from the chance of coming in contact
with them again. I must leave England.
Also, since if I were to make my resolution
known I should be Inundated with kindly
meant dissuasions, I must breathe no hint of

my intention until I was quite able to carry
it into execution. I was sure that no one but
the doctor, and perhaps Edgar, had seen my
face in its present condition, and that no description
could give to others any idea of its
appearance. I felt that my bodily health and
strength were all that they had ever been,
and that nothing but the wish to keep the
knowledge of my disfigurement from me as
long as possible had prompted the doctor's
orders to me to remain in bed and to retain
the bandages. It now, too, occurred to me
that delay might bring some slight modification
of my hideousness, and I resolved tolet
nature do what little she could, and not to
set out on my travels until the mask which
now covered one-half my face had fallen off,
and disclosed whatever fresh horrors might
be underneath. Then I would, without letting
any one see my face, start for some German
Spa for the benefit of my health ; before

I had been away three months I should be
forgotten, and free to wend my way wherever
I pleased. This idea, to a man to whom life
had begun to present something like a deadlock,
was not without charm. Society was a
bore, love a delusion ; now was the chance to
find out what else there was worth learning
in life.

I heard Edgar s voice in the distance, and
had only time to rush back to bed, put on
the bandages round my face, and turn on my
side as if asleep, before he came into the
room.

As I heard Edgar creaking softly about the
room, giving the impression, even as I lay
with my eyes shut, unable to observe his
elaborate movements, of great weight trying
to be light, my heart smote me at the thought
of deceiving him with the rest. ' The elephant,'
it had been a joke between ourselves
for me to call him ; and like a great elephant
he was, huge, intelligent, gentle, not without
a certain massive beauty, with keen feelings
of loyalty, and a long slow-smouldering
memory, with inclinations towards a laborious
and somewhat painful sportiveness.
Rebel against his sententious homilies as I

occasionally might, he was a good old fellow,
and I was fond of him. I moved a lite to
show him I was awake, and then said :

Hallo, Edgar, is that you ? '

Yes. How do you feel ? '

Oh, ever so much better. I shall be getting
up soon now.'

Well, you mustn't be in too great a hurry.
You have been patient so long, it would
be a pity to destroy your credit just at the
last.'

I am only waiting for my face to heal
now, of course. But, I say, Edgar, it will
take a long time for that to get all right.
Why, part of my cheek was completely blown
away. It will be months, at least, before I
dare show myself. I think I shall go to some
German baths, and, you know, I don't know
how long I may have to stay there. In the
meantime '

In the meantime, what ? '

Your sister — Helen — must know that she
is free.'

But supposing she doesn't want to be
free ? Supposing '

Supposing she has a fancy for being tied
to a death's-head ? No, Edgar, she must be
released at once. I want you to write a
letter from me to her, if you will. The
sooner it is over the better for both of us.'

I suppose Edgar felt that my attitude
was not one of pure resignation, for he made
no further effort to dissuade me, but went
instantly in search of pens and paper. He
was so very submissive, however, in taking
this step, which I knew to be distasteful to
him, that I was quite sure, before the letter
was half written, that he was ' up to ' something.
So, when it was finished, I was
mean enough to insist on his leaving it with
me, together with the directed envelope ;
and after reading it carefully through myself

as soon as I was alone, I made the housekeeper
fold it and seal it up in my presence,
and directed her to get it posted at once.
The letter said :

My Dearest Helen — You have no doubt
long ago heard the reason of my silence, and forgiven
me for it, I am sure. I am sorry to tell
you that my head [I felt an odd shyness of
saying " my face "] has been injured so seriously
that it will be a long time before I can return to
town ; I am going straight to Germany as soon
as I am able to leave here, and cannot yet tell
when I shall be in England again. Under these
circumstances, although I know that you would
overlook my new imperfections with the same
sweetness with which you have forgiven my older
defects, I feel that I cannot impose again upon
your generosity. I therefore set you free, begging
you to do me one last kindness by not returning
to me the little souvenirs that you have from time
to time been good enough to accept from me.
And please don't send me back my letters, if you
have ever received them with any pleasure.
Burn them if you like. I will send back yours if

you wish ; but, as no woman will ever look with
love upon my face again, your womanly dignity
will suffer but little if you let me still keep them.
There are only eight of them. And there is a
glove, of course, and a packet of dried flowers, of
course, and the little silver match-box. All these
I shall insist upon keeping, whether you like it or
not. They could not compromise anybody ; the
little glove could pass for a child's. You will
trust me with them all, will you not ? You see
this isn't the usual broken-off match with its
prelude of disastrous squabbles and wrangles.
Some jealous demon who saw I did not deserve
my good fortune has broken my hopes of happiness
abruptly, and released you from a chain
which I am afraid my ill-temper had already
begun to make irksome to you. Forgive me
now, and bear as kindly a recollection of me as
you can. God bless you, Helen. I shall always
treasure the remembrance of your little fairy face,
and remember gratefully your sweet forbearance
with me. — Yours most sincerely and affectionately,
Henry Littleton Maude.'

I hoped the child would not think this

letter too cold and formal. My heart
yearned towards her now with a longing
more tender than before ; I felt oppressed
by the necessity of foregoing the shallow
little love which, as the handsomest man
about town, I had begun to consider far
beneath my deserts.

Two days later I received an answer from
Helen. I waited until I was alone to read
it, for I still guarded my face carefully from
all eyes but the doctor's. The touch of the
letter, the sight of the sprawling, slap-dash
handwriting which it delighted Helen to
assume, in common with the other young
ladies of her generation, moved me ; for I
could not but feel that this was the last
billet ' by any possibility to be called ' doux '
which I should ever receive. I opened it
with an apprehension that I should find the
contents less moving than the envelope.
I was mistaken.

My Dearest Harry — I am afraid you have
a very poor opinion of me if you think I care for
nothing but personal attractions. You have
always been most kind and generous to me, and
you need not think because I am not intellectual
myself I do not care for a man who is intellectual
and all those things. I am coming down to see
you myself and then if you wish to give me up
you can do so — but I hope you will not throw me
over so hastily. I am so sorry for your accident
and that it has made you so ill, but I do not
mind what else it has done. — Believe me, dearest
Harry, with best love, hoping you will soon be
quite recovered, yours ever lovingly,

Helen.'

Childish as the letter M'-as it touched me
deeply. Edgar must be right after all ;
I had misjudged a simple but loyal nature
that only wanted an emergency to bring its
nobler qualities to the surface. I told him
about the letter, and added that it made
giving her up harder to bear.

Why should you give her up ? ' said he

eagerly. ' You see she herself will not hear

of it;

Because she does not understand the
case. I am disfigured past recognition ; she
would shrink with horror from the sight of
me. It would be a shock even to you, a
strong unromantic man, to see what I have
become.'

'You are too sensitive, old fellow. However
shocking the change in you may be,
you cannot fail to exaggerate its effect on
others.'

We shall see.'

A few days later, when the horror of my
new appearance was indeed a little mitigated
by the falling off of the withered outer skin
which had covered the right side of my face,
I tried the effect of my striking physiognomy
on Edgar.

Whether he had expected some such
surprise, or whether he was endowed with

a splendid insensibility to ugliness, he stood
the shock with the most stolid placidity.

Well ? ' said I defiantly, looking at him
from out my ill-matched eyes in a passion of
aggressive rage.

Well ? ' said he, as complacently as if
I had been a turnip.

I hope you admire this style of beauty,'
I hurled out savagely.

I don't go quite so far as that, but it's
really much better than I expected.'

You are easily pleased.'

He went on quietly. ' The chief impression
your countenance gives one now is
not, as you flatter yourself, of consummate
ugliness, but — forgive me — of consummate
villainy.'

What ! '

You are preserved for ever from the
danger of being anything but strictly virtuous
and straightforward in your dealings,

VOL. I 4

for no one would trust the possessor of
that countenance with either a secret or a
sovereign.'

This blunt frankness acted better than
any softer measures could have done ; it
made me laugh. Looking again at myself
in a glass, for I was now up and dressed,
I noticed, what had escaped me before in my
paralysed contemplation of the change in my
own features, that the drawing up of the
right-hand corners of my mouth and eye,
together with the removal of every vestige
of hair from that side of the face, had given
me the grotesquely repulsive leer of a satyr.
To crown my disadvantages, the left side
of my face, seen in profile, still retained its
natural appearance to mock my new hideousness.


But I think I see a way out of all difficulties,'
Edgar went on, more seriously.
You will advance objections, I know, but

you must permit your objections to be overruled.
Accident can be combated by artifice,
and to artifice you must resort until nature
does her work and relieves you from the new
necessity.'

We fought out the question, and at last
I very unwillingly gave way, and submitted
to the adoption of a false eyebrow, a false
moustache, and a beautiful tuft of curly false
hair much superior to my own, to hide the
bald patch left by the accident.

Rather elated by this distinct improvement,
assumed for the reception of Helen's
promised visit, and encouraged by assurances
that my own hair would soon grow
again and enable me to discard its substitutes,
I was ready to believe that the
discoloration and disfigurement still visible
were comparatively unimportant, and that
the repellent expression, which no artifice
much abated, might indeed affect strangers,

but would not, in the sight of my friends,
obscure their long-established impression of
my amiability and sweetness.

Sir Wilfrid and Lady Speke had by this
time gone up to town, leaving the place,
with many kind wishes for my early and
complete recovery, entirely at the disposal of
myself and my unwearied nurse Edgar. So
a day was fixed for the arrival of Helen and
her mother. On that eventful afternoon
Edgar settled me in a small sitting-room on
the same floor with the room I had been
occupying, before starting for the station.
The blinds were drawn, and I sat with
my back to this carefully-softened light. I
wished, now that the ordeal was getting so
near, that I had not let myself be dissuaded
from my intention of sneaking quietly away
without showing my disfigured face to anyone.
What was the use of my seeing the
child again ? I did indeed long foolishly fora

few last words with her since she had
shown unexpected depth of feeling towards
me in my misfortune ; but it could not end,
as Edgar still obstinately hoped, in a renewal
of our engagement, which I persisted in
regarding as definitely broken. The meeting
was only for a farewell. I was ashamed
of the artifices I had used to conceal the
traces of my accident, and I was feeling half
inclined to tear off my false ornaments and
present myself in my true hideousness, when
the arrival of my visitors luckily stopped me.
The room where I sat was at the back of
the house, so that I had no warning of the
return of the carriage until I heard Edgar's
voice. I sprang up with one last look of
agony at my reflection in the glass, which
seemed to me at that moment a ghastly
caricature of my old self, and then sat nervously
down again, feeling like a doomed
wretch with the executioner outside his cell.

The door opened, and Edgar bounded upto
me, dragging Helen, who seemed shy and
nervous, forward on his arm.

Here he is, NelHe. Getting well fast,
you see. Where is mother ? I must fetch
her up.'

I saw in a moment through the dear clumsy
fellow's manoeuvres. He prided himself on
his strategy, fancying he had only to leave us
together for us to have a touching reconciliation.
But I knew better. I saw her turn
pale and cling to her brother's arm, and I
said hastily —

No, no. Lady Castleford is not far behind,
you may be sure. I am glad to see you,
Lady Helen ; it is very kind of you to come.
It is easier '

Helen has come to persuade you to get
well in England among your friends instead
of going abroad to be ill among strangers,'
said Edgar, cutting me short. * He's getting

on well, Isn't he, Helen ? Come, he's well
enough to have his hand shaken now.'

He drew her forward, to my inexpressible
pain, for I saw the reluctance in her face.
Before I could attempt a protest, a reassuring
word, she had held out her hand, which I
timidly took. Then she lifted her eyes to
my face for the first time. For the first and
last time I saw the expression of the most
vivid, most acute emotion on the fairy face.
The muscles were contracted, the pupils of
the eyes were dilated with intense horror.

I am very glad ' she began.

Then, before she could finish her sentence,
even while I still held her little hand in mine,
she fell like a crushed flower unconscious in
her brother's arms.

Poor fellow ! How contrite, how miserably,
abjectly humble and despairing he was
when he appeared later in my room, to which
I had fled, like a wounded beast to its den,

when little Helen's unwilling blow gave me
my social death-warrant. I was able to laugh
then, and to tell him truly that my only regret
was for the pain the injudicious meeting had
caused poor Helen.

It was you who dictated her letter to me
I said.

Edgar did not attempt to deny it.

She ought to be ashamed of herself,' said
he, reddening with indignation.

No, we ought to be ashamed of ourselves.
I for my vanity in thinking there was any
charm in my dull personality to compensate
for the loss of the only merit I could have ina
girl's eyes ; you for your generous idiocy in
carrying that mistake farther still. Are they
gone ? '

Yes. My mother wanted to see you,
but '

That's all right. And now, old fellow,
you mustn't make any more blunders on my

account ; you must let me make my own. I
leave England in a few days.'

'Well, I suppose you must do as you like.
I'll come and see you off.'

No,' said I firmly. ' I shall say goodbye
to you here, Edgar. I have very particular
reasons for it, and you must give way
to me in this.'

He tried to change my mind ; he wanted
to know my reasons ; but he was unsuccessful
in both attempts. I knew how obstinate he
was, and that if I once allowed him to go with
me to town, he would be sure to subject me
to more painful meetings in the endeavour to
persuade me to remain in England. Luckily
for me, the very next day the Marquis telegraphed
to his son to join him immediately
in Monmouthshire ; and no sooner had Edgar
left the house, with the sure knowledge that
he should not see me again, than I fulfilled
his fears by instant preparation for my own

departure. I had discarded all disguises, and
contented myself by masking my face as much
as possible with a travelling cap and a muffler;
on arriving in town I went to an hotel in
Covent Garden, where I was not known, and
by the evening of the following day I had
provided myself with the outfit of a Transpontine
villain, a low-crowned, wide-brimmed soft
hat and a black Spanish cloak.

In this get-up, which, when not made too
conspicuous by a stage-walk and melodramatic
glances around, is really a very efficient disguise
both of form and features, I knew myself
to be quite safe from recognition anywhere,
and having decided to start from Charing
Cross for Cologne by way of Ostend on the
following morning, I devoted the evening of
my second day in town to a last look round.

It was Saturday evening ; a week of fog
having been succeeded by a week of rain, the
pavements were now well coated with black
slimy mud, in which one kept one's footing
as best one could, stimulated by plentiful
showers of the same substance, in a still more
fluid state, flung by the wheels of passing
vehicles.

Oh, wisely-governed city, where there is
work for thousands of starving men, while
thousands of men are starving for want of
work ! If a boy can keep a crossing clean ina
crowded thoroughfare, could not an organised
gang of men, ten times as numerous and

twice as active as our gentle scavengers, save
the sacred boots, skirts, and trousers of the
respectable classes from that brush-resisting
abomination, London mud ? I respectfully
recommend this suggestion to my betters
with the assurance that, if it is considered of
any value, there are plenty more where that
came from.

Starting from Covent Garden, I made my
way through King Street, Garrick Street,
Cranbourne Street, Leicester Square and
Coventry Street, into Regent Street, and was
struck by a hundred common London sights
and incidents which, in the old days, when
my own life was so idle and yet so absorbing,
had entirely escaped my notice. Oxford
Street, Bond Street, Piccadilly, St. James's
Street, I made the tour of them all ; past the
clubs, of many of which I was a member,
brushing, unrecognised, by a dozen men who
had known me well, into Trafalgar Square,

where the gas-lamps cast long glittering lines
of light on the wet pavement, and the spire
of St. Martin's and the dome of the National
Gallery rose like gray shadow-palaces above
in the rainy air.

I dined at a restaurant in the Strand, and
then, growing confident in the security of my
disguise, I thought I would take a farewell
glance at an old chum who had run Edgar
pretty close in my esteem. He was an actor,
and was fulfilling an engagement at a theatre
in the Strand. When I add that he played
what are technically called 'juvenile ' parts
that is to say, those of the stage lovers —
my taste may seem strange, until I explain
that Fabian Scott was the very worst of all
the fashionable 'juveniles,' being addicted to
literary and artistic pursuits and other intellectual
exercises which, while permissible and
innocuous to what are called ' character '
actors, are ruin to 'juveniles,' whose business

requires vigour rather than thought, picturesqueness
rather than feeling. So that
Fabian, with his thin keen face, his intensity,
and some remnant of North-country stiffness,
stood only in the second rank of those whom
the ladies delighted to worship ; and becoming
neither a great artist nor a great popinjay,
gave his friends a sense of not having done
quite the best with himself, but was a very
interesting, if somewhat excitable companion.
For my own part I had then, not knowing
how vitally important the question of his
character would one day become to me,
nothing to wish for in him save that he were
a little less sour and a little more sincere.

The stage-door was up a narrow and dirty
court leading from the Strand. At the opening
of the court stood a stout fair man, who
looked like a German, and whose coarse,
swollen face and dull eyes bore witness to
a life of low dissipation. He was respectably

but not well dressed, and he swung the cheap
and showy walking-stick in his hand slowly
backwards and forwards, in a stolidly swaggering
and aggressive manner. I should not
have noticed him so particularly, but for the
fact that he filled the narrow entrance to the
passage so completely that I had to ask him
to let me pass. Instead of immediately complying,
he looked at me from my feet to my
head with surly, half-tipsy insolence, and gave
a short thick laugh.

Oh, so you're one of the swells, I suppose,
who come hanging round stage-doors
to tempt hard-working respectable women
away from their lawful husbands ! But it
won't do. I tell you it won't do ! '

I pushed him aside with one vigorous
thrust and went up the court, followed by the
outraged gentleman, who made no attempt
to molest me except by a torrent of abusive
eloquence, from which I gathered that he

was the husband of one of the actresses at
the theatre, and that she did not appreciate
the virtues of her lord and master as he considered
she ought, but that, nevertheless, he
persisted in affording her the protection of
his manly arm, and would do so in spite of
all the d d ' masters ' in London.

At this point the stage-doorkeeper came
out of his little box, and informed the angry
gentleman that if he went on disgracing the
place by his scandalous conduct his wife's
services would be dispensed with ; ' and if
there's no money for her to earn, there'll be
no beer for you to drink, Mr. Elmer,' continued
the little old man, with more point
than politeness.

The threat had instant effect. Mr. Elmer
subsided into indignant mumbling, and went
down the court moraine

had forgotten myself in interest at the
rout of Mr. Elmer, to whom I had taken a

rabid dislike, and was standing in the full, if
feeble light of the gas over the stage-door,
when an inner door was thrust open, and the
next moment Fabian Scott was shaking my
hand heartily.

Hallo, Harry ! I am glad to see you
again. I was afraid you were going away
without a word to your old friends ; but you
were always better than your reputation. Got
over your accident all right — eh ?'

As well as could be expected, I suppose.
I start for Germany tomorrow.'

Ah ! ' By this one exclamation he signified
that he understood the case, and knew
that my mind was definitely made up. Actors
are men of the world, and I felt the relief of
talking to him after the stolid and obstinate
misapprehension with which dear old Edgar
persisted in meeting my reasons for saying
good-bye to society. ' It was good of you
not to go without coming here,' he went on,

VOL. I 5

appreciating the fact that my visit must have
entailed an effort.

To tell the truth, I meant to see you
without your seeing me ; but I got interested
in a moral victory just obtained by your doorkeeper
over an eloquent visitor, and so you
caught me.'

Scott glanced at the swaggering Elmer.

Drunken brute ! ' said he, with much
disgust. * His wife — a hard-working little
woman, who acts under the name of Miss
Bailey — has had to bring her child to the
theatre with her to-night, for fear he should
get home before her and frighten the poor
little thing. Look ! here they come. One
wonders how a wild beast can be the father
of an angel.'

Scott was an ardent worshipper of beauty ;
but I, a cooler mortal, could not think his
raptures excessive when he stood aside to
make way for a slim, pale, pretty woman, to

whose hand there clung a child so beautiful
that my whole heart revolted at the thought
that the tipsy ruffian a few paces off was her
father. Both mother and child were shabbily
dressed, in clothes which gave one the idea
that November had overtaken them before
they could afford to replace the garments of
July. The little one was about eight years
old, a slender creature with a flower-like face,
round which, from under a home-made red
velvet cap, her light-brown hair fell in a
naturally curly tangle. Something in her
blue eyes reminded me of the childlike charm
of Helen's. Scott stopped them to say
good-night, effusively addressing the child as
his little sweetheart, and telling her that if
the boy who gave her an apple last Sunday
gave her another the next day, he should
find out where he lived and murder that
boy.

Beware, Babiole, of arousing the jealousy

of a desperate man,' he ended, folding his
arms and tossing back his head.

The child took his outburst quite seriously.

If he offers me another apple I must take
it she answered in a sweet demure little
voice. ' It would be rude to refuse. But
you needn't be angry, for I can like you too.'

'Like me too!' thundered Scott, with
melodramatic gestures. 'Heaven and earth !
This is how the girl dares to trifle with the
fiercest passion that ever surged in a human
breast ! '

If you're fierce I shan't like you,' said the
little one, in her measured way. * Papa's
fierce, and he frightens me and mamma.'

Will you like me, little madam?' I ventured
; and, knowing that my disfigured face
was well concealed, I held out my hand. * I
will love you very gently.'

I made my voice as soft as I could, but
the deep tones or the sombre black figure

frightened her. The quaint matronly demeanour
suddenly gave way to a child's
fright, and she hid her face in the folds
of her mother's black cloth jacket. Then
mamma began to rebuke in a voice and
manner oddly like the child's ; and Fabian
seized Babiole and lifted her up to kiss
her.

'And now will you give me a kisses' said
he to her.

'Yes, Mr. Scott.' She gave him a kiss
with the same demure simplicity.

And will you promise to kiss nobody but
me till you see me again ?'

Really, Mr. Scott,' interrupted the mother
rather tartly, ' you shouldn't put such ideas
into the child's head. They'll come quite
soon enough of their own accord.'

She had one eye upon her husband, who
was waiting farther down the court ; and the
wifely desire to be ' at him ' seemed to put a

little extra vinegar into her tone. With a
hasty goodnight to Fabian, and a frosty
little bow to the unknown black figure, she
said, ' Come, Babiole,' and hurried away
with the child.

Scott put his arm through mine, and we
followed them slowly back into the Strand,
where, amidst the throng of people who had
just poured out of the theatres, we soon lost
sight of them. We did not go far together,
for Fabian had an appointment to supper ;
but before we parted, he, more ready-witted
than Edgar, had talked me into a promise
that, when the summer came round and he
had a chance of a holiday, I would let him
know where I was, that he might invite
himself to come and see me.

You don't think I shall come back among
you again, then ?' I said curiously.

I don't know. The taste for wandering,
like all other tastes, grows with indulgence.

Good-bye, Harry, and God bless you whereever
you go.'

I wrung his hand, scarcely able to speak.
His words were a prophecy, I knew ; and at
the moment of taking this last outsider's look
at the scenes of my old life, it seemed to me
that a dungeon-door had swung to on youth
and hope and happiness, shutting me in forever
to a very lonely solitude.

'Good-bye, good-bye, Fabian,' said I, and
I walked hastily away lest I should keep on
wringing his hand all night.

For three hours more I walked about the
London streets, unable to tear myself away
from them, sneaking again past the clubs,
with a feeling of gushing affection towards a
score of idiotic young men and prosy old
ones who passed me on the pavement on their
way in or out, devoured by a longing to exchange
if only half a dozen words with men
whom I had often avoided as bores. Near

the Steps of the Carlton I did try to address
one quiet old gentleman whom, on account of
his rapacity for papers, I had cordially hated.
A ridiculous shyness made me hoarse ; and
on hearing a husky voice close to his ears in
almost apologetic tones, he started violently,
cried, * Eh, what ? No, no ! Here —
hansom!' and I retreated like one of the
damned.

I got into Grosvenor Square, passed
through a throng of carriages, and saw the
bright lights in a house where they were
giving a birthday dance to which I had been
specially invited months before. Helen
would be there, I knew ; I felt a jealous
satisfaction in remembering that old Sax-dunham
was away, nursing his gout at
Torquay. What of that ? There were
plenty of other men to step into my shoes.
At first I thought I would stay, and walk up
and down the square for the chance of one

more look at her. How well I knew how
she would come down the steps, in a timid
hesitating way, half-dazzled by the lights she
had just left, poising each little dainty foot a
moment above the next step, flit into the
carriage like a soft white bird, and drop her
pretty head back with a sigh, 'Oh, I'm so
tired, mamma!' her white throat curved
gently above the swansdown of her cloak,
the golden fringe of curls falling limply
almost to her eyebrows. I must wait — I
must see her again ! What ! On the arm
of another man ! The blood rushed into
my head as these incoherent thoughts rose
rapidly in my mind ; all the passions of my
life, of my youth, dammed up as they had
suddenly been by my accident and its fatal
consequences, seemed to surge up, break
through the barriers of resignation and resolve,
and make a madman of me. I was
not master of myself, I could not count upon

what I should do if I saw her ; seeing my
way no more than if I had been blind or
intoxicated, I turned away, and finding
myself presently in silent Bond Street, I
got into a hansom and went back to my
hotel.

I fancied that night that sooner or later I
should end by suicide ; but In the morning I
had to pack, to buy things for my journey,
and to set out on my travels. The worst
wrench was over ; before I had left England
a week, I was almost a philosopher.

For five years I lived a wanderer's life,
and found It fairly to my liking. I hunted
the boar In Germany, the wolf In France,
went salmon-fishing In Norway, shot two
tigers In India ; got as far as California in
search of adventures, of which I had plenty ;
passed a fortnight with Red Indians, whom
on the whole I prefer in pictures ; and began
to acquire a distaste for civilisation, mitigated

by enjoyment of meetings once a year with
Edgar and Fabian Scott.

I retained the lease of a shooting-box and
of a few miles of deer-forest by the Dee-side,
between Ballater and picturesque little Loch
Muick. Larkhall, as the house was called,
became, therefore, our yearly rendezvous.
On our second meeting, the party was increased
by a new member, Mr. William
Fussell, a gentleman who was ' something in
the City.' I never could quite make out what
that something was, but it must have been
some exceedingly pleasant and lucrative profession,
since Mr. Fussell, while constantly
describing himself as one of the unlucky ones,
was always in spirits high, not to say rollicking,
and was gifted with powers of enjoyment
which could only be the result of long and
assiduous practice. I had met him at a
German hotel, where I had been struck by
the magnificent insolence of his assertion that

he had acquired a thorough command of the
German language in three weeks, and by the
astonishing measure of success which attended
his daring plunges into that tongue.
He was serenely jolly, selfish, and sociable,
pathetically complaining of his wife's conduct
in letting him come away for his holiday by
himself, and enjoying himself very much
without her. He was so envious of my good
fortune when I said that I was going boar-hunting,
that I invited him to accompany
me ; and as he showed much pluck in a
rather nasty encounter we had with an infuriated
boar, and much frankness in owning
afterwards that he was frightened, 1 forthwith
invited him to Scotland, and he accepted the
invitation, as he did all good things which
came in his way, with avidity.

At the third of our yearly meetings a fifth
and last member joined us. This was a
clever young Irishman, of good family, small

fortune, sickly body, and still sicklier mind,
to whom accident had put me under a small
obligation, which I was glad to repay by
enabling him to visit the Highlands, to which
his doctor had prescribed a visit. He had
been making an exhaustive and strictly philosophical
Inquiry into the iniquities of Paris,
in the corruption of which he appeared to
revel ; Indeed, he was clever enough to find
so much depravity in every spot he had
visited, that I wondered what repulsive view
he would be able to take of our sweet-scented
fir-forests, and the long miles of the rippling
winding Dee ; or whether, in the absence of
labyrinthine mazes of dirt and disease, vice
and crime to explore and minutely expose, he
would pine and die.

Except these two, I had, during those five
years of wandering, made no new friend.
My appalling ugliness, mitigated as It was
by time, had, together with the reserve it

taught me, to a great degree isolated me.
But perfect independence has its pleasures,
and I was not an unhappy man. Until the
end of the fourth year I had not even a
servant, and I avoided all women ; at that
point, however, I yielded to the fatal human
weakness of attaching to one s self some fellow-creature,
and engaged as my personal attendant
a cosmopolitan individual, whose
qualifications for the post consisted in the
fact that he had been a lawyer's clerk in
England, a cow-boy in Mexico, had had
charge of a lunatic at Naples, and was a
deserter from the Austrian army. Plain to
begin with, deeply marked with smallpox,
and disfigured by a sabre-cut across the nose,
he was even uglier than I, a fact which
seemed, from the frequency with which he
alluded to it, to gratify him as much as it did
me. His name was John Ferguson, but it
did not occur to me to connect his name with

his origin until the time came to prepare for
my fifth annual visit to Scotland.

I should have thought one plain countenance
about you was enough, sir, without
your wanting to see them at every turn,' he
said ill-temperedly, when told to pack up.

I suppose you come from Auld Reekie
yourself, then, since you're so reluctant to go
back to it ? '

Well, sir, and where's the harm of being
born there, provided you get away from it as
early as you can, and never go back to it till
you can help ! '

Why, Ferguson, that's spoken like a true
patriot.'

Indeed, sir, I hope I am wise enough not
to hold a place the better for having produced
such a poor creature as myself,' said
John, who could always give a good account
of himself in an argument.

But once established at Larkhall, Ferguson

found himself so comfortable that, at the
end of the fortnight's visit of my friends, he
again made objection to packing up, which
I was in the mood to listen to indulgently.

It seems a pity like to leave the place till
the shooting season's over, don't it, sir ? ' he
hazarded one morning.

Yes, Ferguson, perhaps it does.'

The Continent wouldn't run away if it was
left to look after itself a few weeks longer,
would it, sir ? ' he went on.

No, Ferguson, perhaps it wouldn't,'
said I.

'Shall I leave the packing till tomorrow,
sir ? ' he then asked.

Well, yes, I think you may.'

From which it is clear that Ferguson had
already been shrewd enough to assume a
proper authority over his nominal master.

I had become a little weary of wandering,
and although I by no means intended to give

up the nomadic life which I had led for five
years, I thought a couple of months' rest
would be a pleasant change ; I could be on
the move before the cold weather set in.
But September passed, and October and
November came, and it grew very bleak ;
and still I stayed on, finding a new pleasure
in the changed aspect of the gaunt hills, in
seeing the snow patches grow larger and
larger on Lochnagar, in outstaying the last
of the late visitors, and in finding a spot
where solitude needed no seeking.

The railway runs from Aberdeen to Bal-later.
One morning, arriving at the little
station for my papers, I found a train just
starting, and was seized by an impulse to pay
a short visit to the granite city. A feeling
left by my wandering life made it always
difficult for me to see a train or a boat
start without me. So I sent a boy to Lark-hall
with a message to Ferguson, who, with

VOL. I 6

a lad under him, constituted my entire household,
took my ticket and started. It was
past five when I reached Aberdeen ; after a
sharp walk to the brig o' Balgownie and
back, I hired a private room at an hotel, and
dined by myself. Making inquiries about
the theatre, I learnt that the entertainment
that week was very poor, and further that it
had been so badly patronised that it was
doubtful whether the unfortunate players
would get their meagre salaries. I was
glancing at the yellow bill which advertised
Rob Roy as a Saturday night attraction,
when I read the names of Miss Bailey and
Miss Babiole Bailey.

I got up at once and walked quickly down
to the little theatre.

I REMEMBER Very little of the performance
that night, except the painful Impression produced
upon me by the sight of the effort
with which a tall spectre-like woman, with
sunken hollow face and feeble voice, in whom
I with difficulty recognised pretty Mrs.
Elmer, dragged herself through the part of
Diana Vernon. Babiole I utterly failed to
distinguish. Looking out as I did for my
little eight-year old fairy, with gold-brown
hair curling naturally in large loose rings
over her blue eyes, I could not be expected
to know that an awkward sparrow-legged
minion of the king, wearing high boots, a

tabard, and a parson's wide awake pinned up
and ornamented with a long white feather,
was what five years and a limited stage wardrobe
had made of the lovely child.

I waited for them at the stage door a
long time after the performance was oversaw
the rest of the little company come out
in twos and threes, one or two depressed and
silent, but most of them loudly cursing their
manager, the Scotch nation in general, and
the people of Aberdeen in particular. Then
the manager himself came out with his wife,
a buxom lady who had played Helen Macgregor
with a good deal of spirit, but who
seemed, from the stoical forbearance with
which she received the outpourings of her
husband's wrath at his ill-luck, to be a disappointingly
mild and meek person in private
life. ' But what will they do. Bob ? I
believe the mother's dying,' I heard her
protest gently. ' Can't help that. We must

look out for ourselves. And Marie will
make a better juvenile at half Miss Bailey's
screw,' said her husband gruffly. Last of all
came Mrs. Elmer, thinner and shabbier
than ever, leaning on the arm of an overgrown
girl a little shorter than herself, whose
childishly meagre skirts were in odd contrast
with the protecting old-fashioned manner in
which she supported her mother, and whispered
to her not to cry, they would be all
right.

I made myself known rather awkwardly,
for when I raised my hat and said, ' Mrs.
Elmer, I think,' they only walked on a
little faster. The case was too serious with
them, however, for me to allow myself to be
easily rebuffed. I followed them with a long
and lame speech of introduction.

Don't you remember — five years ago — ,
in the Strand, when you were acting at the
'' Vaudeville "—Mr. Fabian Scott ?'

Babiole stopped and whispered something
; Mrs. Elmer stopped too, and held
out her hand with a wan smile and a sudden
change to a rather effusive manner.

I beg your pardon, I am sure. I remember
perfectly, Mr. Scott introduced you
to me as a very old friend of his. You will
excuse me, won't you ? One doesn't expect
to see gentlemen from town in these uncivilised
parts. Babiole, my dear, you remember
Mr. '

Maude,' said I. ' It is very good of you
to remember me at all, after such a longtime.
But I couldn't resist the temptation of
speaking to you ; one sees, as you say, so
few beings up here whom one likes to call
fellow - creatures. Miss Babiole, you've
'' growed out of knowledge." I suppose
you haven't seen much of our friend Fabian
lately, Mrs. Elmer ?'

No, indeed. I went on tour at the end

of the season when I first had the pleasure

of meeting you, and we have been touring
ever since.'

Don't you get tired of the incessant
travelling? I suppose you seldom stay
more than a week at each place ? '

Sometimes only two or three nights. It
is extremely fatiguing. In fact, I am going
to take a rest for a short time, for I find the
nightly work too much for me in my present
state of health,' said she, with a brave
attempt to check the tremor in her voice,
which was unspeakably piteous to me who
knew the true reason of the * rest.'

If you are going to stay in Aberdeen, I
hope you will allow me to call upon you. I
live near Ballater, forty miles away in the
country, so you may guess how thankfully I
snatch at a chance of seeing a little society.'

At the word * society ' Mrs. Elmer
laughed almost hysterically.

I am afraid you would find solitude
livelier than our society,' she said, with a
pitiful attempt to be sprightly.

Well, will you let me try ? '

Really, Mr. Maude, when we are in the
country we live in such a very quiet way.
Of course it's different when one is in town
and has one's own servants ; and these
Scotch people have no notion of waiting at
table or serving things decently.'

I know, I know,' I broke in eagerly.
I'm used to all that myself. Why, I live ina
tumble-down old house with a monkey and
a soldier for my household, so you may judge
that I have got used to the discomforts of the
North.'

I saw Babiole stealthily shake her mother's
arm, and move her lips in a faint 'Yes, yes,'
Reluctantly, and with more excuses for
having let the agent-in-advance take lodgings
for them which they would not have

looked at had they known what a low
neighbourhood they were in, Mrs. Elmer at
last consented that I should call and take tea
with them next day.

I went back to my hotel and engaged a
room for the night. The poor woman's
sunken face haunted me even in my sleep ;
and I grew nervous when half past four
came, lest I should hear on arriving at the
bare and dirty-looking stone house which I
had already taken care to find out, that she
was dead. However, my fears had run away
with me. On my knocking at the door of
the top flat of the little house, Babiole opened
it, pretty and smiling, in a simple dress of
some sort of brown stuff, with lace and a red
necklace round her fair slim throat. She
had not seen my face before by daylight ;
and I saw, by the flash of horror that passed
quickly over her features and was gone, how
much the sight shocked her.

I was afraid you would forget to come,
perhaps,' she said, in the prim little way I
remembered, as she led the way into a small
room, in which no one less used to the shifts
of travel than I was could have detected the
ingenious artifices by which a washhand-
stand became a sideboard, and a wardrobe
a book - case. The popular Scotch plan
of sleeping in a cupboard disposed of the
bed.

Mrs. Elmer looked better. Whether
influenced by her daughter's keen perception
that I was a friend in time of need, or
pleasantly excited at the novelty of receiving
a visitor, there was more spontaneity than I
had expected in her voluble welcome, more
brightness in the inevitable renewal of her
excuses for the simplicity of their surroundings.
To me, after my long exile from
everything fair or gentle in the way of
womanhood, the bare little room was

luxurious enough with that pretty young
creature in it ; for Babiole, though she had
lost much of her childish beauty, and was
rapidly approaching the * gawky ' stage of a
tall girl's development, had a softness in her
blue eyes when she looked at her mother,
which now seemed to me more charming
than the keen glance of unusual intellect.
She had, too, the natural refinement of all
gentle natures, and had had enough stage
training to be more graceful than girls of her
age generally are. Altogether, she interested
me greatly, so that I cast about in my mind
for some way of effectually helping them,
without destroying all chance of my meeting
them soon again.

Babiole brought in the tea herself, while
Mrs. Elmer carefully explained that Mrs.
Firth, the landlady, had such odd notions of
laying the table and such terribly noisy
manners, that, for the sake of her mother's

nerves, Babiole had undertaken this Httle
domestic duty herself. But, from a glimpse
I caught later of Mrs. Firth's hands, as she
held the kitchen-door to spy at my exit from
behind it, I think there may have been
stronger reasons for keeping her in the
background when an aristocratic and presumably
cleanly visitor was about.

Babiole did not talk much, but when, in
the course of the evening, I fell to describing
Larkhall and the country around it, in
deference to poor Mrs. Kilmer's thirsty wish
to know more of the rollicking luxury of my
bachelor home, the girl's eyes seemed to
grow larger with intense interest ; and, after
a quick glance at my face, which had, I saw,
an unspeakable horror for her, she fixed her
eyes on the fire, and remained as quiet as a
statue while I enlarged on the good qualities
of my monkey, my birds, my dog, and the
view from my study window of the Muick

just visible now between the bare branches
of the birch-trees.

I should like to live right among the hills
like that,' she said softly, when her mother
had exhausted her expressions of admiration.

Would you ? You would find it very
lonely. In winter you would be snowed
up, as I shall most certainly be in a week or
two ; and even when the roads are passable
you don't meet any one on them, except,
perhaps, a couple of peasants, whose language
would be to you as unintelligible as that of
wild animals going down into the village to
get food.'

But you can live there.'

Circumstances have made me solitary
everywhere.'

She looked up at me ; her face flushed,
her lips trembled with unutterable pity, and
the tears sprang to her eyes.

Custom had long since made me callous

to instinctive aversion, but this most unexpected
burst of intelligent sympathy made
my heart leap up. I said nothing, and began
to play with the table-cloth.

Mrs. Elmer, in the belief that the pause
was an awkward one, rushed into the breach,
and disturbed my sweet feeling rather uncouthly.


I am sure, Mr. Maude, no one thinks the
worse of you for the accident, whatever it
was, that disfigured you. For my part, I
always prefer plain men to handsome ones ;
they're more intelligent, and don't think so
much of themselves.'

Babiole gave her mother an alarmed
pleading look, which happily absorbed my
attention and neutralised the effect of this
speech. I could have borne worse things
than poor Mrs. Kilmer's rather tactless and
insipid conversation for the sake of watching
her daughter's mobile little face, and I am

afraid they must have wished me away long
before I could make up my mind to go.
Babiole came to the outer door with me, and
I seized the opportunity to ask her what they
were going to do.

Mrs. Elmer doesn't look strong enough
to act again at present,' I suggested.

The girl's face clouded.

No. And even if she were, you see '

She stopped.

Of course. Her place would be filled
up.^'

Yes,' very sorrowfully. Then she looked
up again, her face grown suddenly bright
and hopeful, as with a flash of sunshine,
But you needn't be afraid for us. Mamma
is so clever, and I am young and strong ; we
shall be all right. We should be all right
now if only '

'If only?'

'Why, you see, you mustn't think it's

mamma's fault that we are left in a corner
like this ; you don't know how she can save
and manage on — oh! so little. But whenever
she has, by care and making things do,
saved up a little money, it — it all goes, you
know.'

The sudden reserve which showed itself
in her ingenuous manner towards the last
words was so very suggestive that the true
explanation of this phenomenon flashed upon
my mind.

'Then somebody else puts in a claim,' I
suggested.

The girl laughed a little, her full and
sensitive red lips opening widely over ivory-white
even teeth, and she nodded appreciation
of my quick perception.

Somebody else wants such a lot of things
that somebody else's wife and daughter can
do without,' she said, with a comical little
look of resignation. And, encouraged by

my sympathetic silence, she went on, ' And
he has so much talent, Mr. Maude. If he
would only go on painting as poor mamma
goes on acting, he could make us all rich — if
he liked. And instead of that '

Babiole !' cried her mother's voice, rather
tartly.

'Yes, mamma.' Then she added, low
and quickly, with a frightened glance back
in the dusk, towards the door of their room,
'It's high treason to say even so much as
this, but it is so hard to know how she tries
and yet not to speak of it to any one. I
don't mean to blame my father, Mr. Maude,
but you know what men are '

It seemed to occur to her that this was an

indiscreet remark, but I said 'Yes, yes,' with

entire concurrence ; for indeed who should

know what men were better than I ? After

this she seemed as anxious to get rid of me as

civility allowed, but I had something to say.
VOL. I 7

I gabbled it out fast and nervously, In a
husky whisper, lest mamma's sharp ear should
catch my proposal, and she should nip it in
the bud.

Look here, Miss Babiole ; if you like the
hills, and you don't mind the cold, and your
mother wants a rest and a change, listen. I
was just going to advertise for some one to
act as caretaker in a little lodge I've got —
scarcely more than a cottage, but a little
place I don't want to go to rack and ruin.
If you and she could exist there in the winter
it is a place where peat may be had for
the asking, and it really isn't an uncomfortable
little box, and I can't tell you what a
service you would be doing me if you would
persuade your mother to live in it until —
until I find a tenant, you know. In summer
I can get a splendid rent for the place, tiny
as it is, if only I can find some one to keep
it from going to pieces in the meantime. It's

not badly furnished,' I hurried on tenaciously,
' and there's an old woman to do the
housework '

But here Babiole, who had been drinking
in my words with parted lips and starlight
eyes like a child at its first pantomime,
dazzled, bewildered, delighted, drew herself
straight up, and became suddenly prim.

In that case, Mr. Maude,' said she, with
demure pride that resented the suspicion of
charity, ' if the old woman can take care of
the house, surely she doesn't want two other
people to take care of her.'

But I tell you she's dead ! ' I burst out
angrily, annoyed at my blundering. ' There
was an old woman to look after the place,
but she was seventy-four, and she died the
week before last, of old age — nothing infectious.
Now, look here ; you tell your
mother about it, and see if you can't persuade
her to oblige me. I'm sure the

change would do her good ; for it's very
healthy there. Why, you know the Queen
lives within eight miles of my house, and
you may be sure her Majesty wouldn't be
allowed to live anywhere where the air
wasn't good. Now, will you promise to try?'
She said ' Yes,' and I knew, from the low
earnest whisper in which she breathed out
the word, that she meant it with all her soul.
I left her and almost ran back to my hotel,
as excited as a schoolboy, longing for the
next morning to come, so that I could go
back to Broad Street, and learn the fate of
my new freak. Any one who had witnessed
my anxiety would have decided at once that
I must be in love with either the mother or
the daughter ; but I was not. The promise
of a new interest in life, of a glimpse of
pleasant society up in my hills, and the fancy
we all occasionally have for being kind to
something, were all as strong as my pity for

the mother, my admiration for the daughter,
and my respect for both.

I was debating next morning how soon it
would be discreet to call, when a note was
brought to me, which had been left 'by a
young lady.' I tore it open like a frantic
lover. It was from Mrs. Elmer, an oddly
characteristic letter, alternately frosty and
gushing, but not without the dignity of the
hard-working. She said a great deal ceremoniously
about my kindness, a great deal
about her friends in London, her position
and that of ' my husband, a well-known artist,
whom you doubtless are acquainted with byname.'
But she wound up by saying that
since her health required that she should
have change of air, and since I had been so
very kind that she could scarcely refuse todo
me any service which she could conscientiously
perform, she would be happy to act
as caretaker of my house, and to keep it in

order during the winter for future tenants,
provided I would be kind enough to understand
that she and her daughter would do
all the work of the house, and further that
they might be permitted to reside in a
strictly private manner.

Strictly private ! ' I laughed heartily to
myself at this expression. The dear lady
could hardly wish for more privacy than she
would get with four or five feet of snow piled
up before her door. I was quite light-hearted
at my success, and I had to tone down my
manner to its usual grave and melancholy
pitch before I knocked again at their door.

Mrs. Elmer opened the door herself, thus
disappointing me a little ; Babiole's simple
confidences, which I liked to think were the
result not only of natural frankness, but of
instinctive trust in me, were pleasant to listen
to than her mother's more artificial conversation.
We were both very dignified, both

ceremoniously grateful to each other, and
when we entered the sitting-room and began
to discuss preliminaries in a somewhat pompous
and long-winded manner, Babiole sat,
quiet as a mouse, in a corner, as if afraid to
disturb by a breath the harmonious settlement
of a plan on which she had set her heart.

At last all was arranged. It was now
Monday ; Mrs. Elmer and her daughter were
to hold themselves in readiness to enter into
possession by the following Friday or Saturday,
when I should return to Aberdeen to
escort them to Larkhall Lodge. I rose to
take my leave, not with the easy feeling of
equality of the day before, but with deep
humility, and repeated assurances of gratitude,
to which Mrs. Elmer replied with mild and
dignified protest.

But, in the passage, Babiole danced lightly
along to the door like a kitten, and holding
up her finger as a sign to me to keep silence,

she clapped her hands noiselessly and nodded
to me several times in deliciously confiding
freemasonry.

I worked hard for it,' she said at last in a
very soft whisper, her red lips forming the
words carefully, near to my ear. ' Good-bye,
Mr. Maude," she then said aloud and demurely,
but with her eves dancing And she
gave my hand a warm squeeze as she shook
it. and let me out into the nipping Scotch air
in the o^loom of the darkening afternoon, with
a new and odd sense oi a flash of brightness
and warmth into the world.

Then I walked quickly along, devising by
what means that cottage, which mv Quilt soul
told me was bare of a single stick, could be
furnished and habitable by Friday. And a
cold chill crept through my bones as a new
and hitherto unthought-of question thrust
itself up in my mind :

What would Ferguson sav ?

I MADE a hasty tour of the second-hand shops
in Aberdeen, being wise enough to know that
if she were to find the cottage too spick and
span, ]Mrs. Elmer would in a moment discover
my pious fraud. Having got together
in this way a very odd assortment of furniture,
I was rather at a loss about kitchen utensils,
when I was seized with the happy inspiration
of buying a new set of them for my own service,
and handing over those at present in use
in my kitchen to Mrs. Elmer. Not knowing
much about these things, I had to buy in a
wholesale fashion, more, I fancy, to the advantage
of the seller than to my own. However,

the business was got through somehow, the
things were to be sent on the following day,
and I sneaked back to Ballater by the 4.35
train, wondering how I should break the
news to Ferguson, and wishing that by some
impossible good luck the immaculate one
might have committed in my absence some
slight breach of discipline which would give
me for once the superior position. If I could
only find him drunk ! But though second to
none in his fondness for whiskey, nobody but
himself could tell when he had had more than
enough ; so that hope was vain.

It was not that I was afraid of Ferguson ;
far from it. But his punctuality, his unflagging
mechanical industry, his many uncompromising
virtues made him a person to be
reckoned with ; and it would have been easier
to own to a caprice inconsistent with one's
principles to a more intellectual person than
to him.

It was getting dark before the train stopped
at Ballater, a few minutes before six. I had
to go through the village, over the rickety
wooden bridge — for the new one of stone was
not built then — and along the road which lies
on the south side of the Dee. The hills were
on my left, their bases covered with slim
birch-trees, whose bare branches swayed and
hissed like whips in the winter wind ; on the
right, below the road, ran the crooked turbulent
little stream of Dee, now swollen with
late autumn rains, swirling round its many
curves, and rushing between the piles of the
bridge till the wooden structure rocked again.
Would those two delicate women be frightened
away by the cold and the loneliness from
the nest I was building for them, I wondered,
as I turned to the right to cross the little
stone bridge that arches over the Muick just
before that stream runs into the Dee. I
stopped and looked around me. There was

a faint white light over the western hills
which enabled me to see dim outlines of the
objects I knew. Just beyond the bridge was
the forsaken little churchyard of Glenmuick,
which not even a ghost would care to haunt,
where now a cluster of gaunt bare ash-trees
thrust up spectral arms from the ground among
the mildewed gravestones. The lonely
manse, a plain stone house shadowed by
dark evergreens, stood back a little from the
road on the opposite side. A mile away,
with the rushing Dee between, the spire of
Ballater church stood up among the roofs of
the village, flanked by fir-crowned Craigen-
darroch on the north, and the Pannanich
Hills on the south. Straight on my road lay
between flat Lowland fields to a ragged fringe
of tall firs behind which, on a rising ground,
the shell of an old deserted dwelling, known
as Knock Castle, served in summer as a
meagre shelter for the Highland sheep in

sudden storms. At this point the road turned
sharply to the left, the fringe of fir-trees growing
thicker upon the skirts of the forest ; a
few paces farther this road divided into two
branches which struck off from each other in
the form of a V, the southernmost one leading
to Larkhall through a mile of hr-forest.
Would the very approach to their new abode
through this dark and winding road depress
the poor little women into looking upon the
cottage as a prison, after the life and movement
they were used to ?

The private road which led through my
own plantation to the house was divided
from the public thoroughfare by no lodge,
no gate, but ran modestly down between
borders of grass, which grew long and rankin
the summer time, for about half a mile,
until, the larches and Scotch firs growing
more sparsely to the south, one caught wider
and wider glimpses of broad green meadows

where two or three horses were turned out
to find a meagre pasture. Here the drive
was carried over a Httle iron ornamental
bridge, which crossed a stream that was buta
thread in the warm weather ; and leaving
the grass and the trees behind, one came
upon a broad lawn which ran right up to the
walls of the house, flanked to the north by
more grass and more trees, which shut out
the view of the stables and of the unused
cottage. To the south the land made a
sudden dip, and the hollow thus formed was
laid out as a garden, while the great bank
that sheltered it formed a succession of
terraces from which one caught glimpses of
the rushing Muick between the birches that
lined the banks of the impetuous little
stream.

The house was a most unpretentious
building, in the plainest style of Scotch
country-house architecture, with rough

cream-coloured walls, a tiled roof, small
irregular windows, and a mean little porch.
It was only saved from ugliness by a
growth of ivy over the lower portion and by
a freak of the designer, whereby one end
was raised a story above the rest, and the
roof of this portion made to slope north and
south, instead of east and west, like that of
the rest of the building. At the back the
firs and larches rose to a great height, the
house seeming to nestle under their protection
whenever the winter storms burst over
the bleak hills around.

Ferguson was glad to see me, and welcomed
me back with a cordiality which
made my mind easier on the subject of the
announcement I had to make to him. I
went up to my room and, finding everything
prepared for me, told him I was
ready for dinner. Instead of going downstairs,
he only said, ' Yes, sir ; it is

coming up,' and knelt down to pull off my
boots.

All right,' said I ;' I can do that. I'm
very hungry.'

No doubt of it, sir,' he answered, but did
not stir. ' The fact is, sir, that knowing you
would come home hungry, and maybe very
much fatigued, and that to be in the kitchen
serving dinner and up here attending upon
you at the same time is a moral impossibility,
I made bold to ask an old and very respectable
female that was staying in the village to
give me a little help — just for this evening,
sir. She is very clean in her ways, sir, and
a most respectable and God-fearing body.'

I jumped at the news, and congratulated
him upon his forethought with great heartiness.


I have no more objection to seeing a
woman's face about the place than you have
yourself, Ferguson,' I said cordially ; ' in fact

I have just given permission to two poor
ladies to pass the winter in the cottage at
the back, and I want you to help me to put
the place straight a bit for them. They
come in on Friday. I don't want the place
to fall to pieces with dry rot for want of
some one to live In It.'

Ladies won't keep the dry rot out of a
place, sir,' answered Ferguson, with dry
contempt. ' However, you know best, sir,
what kind of cattle you like to harbour in
your own barns, and I daresay they'll be
snug enough till the snow comes.'

This dark suggestion was but the echo to
my own fears. I was so anxious to secure a
co-operation in my plan, not merely perfunctory,
but zealous, knowing well, as I did,
the highly-sensitive mood In which the elder
at least of my new tenants would arrive, that
even after this scantily-gracious speech I
humbled myself more than was meet.

VOL. I 8

By the bye, Ferguson,' I began again
after a short pause, during which he helped
me on with my coat, ' I'm thinking of having
the Httle north room upstairs fitted up for
you, as a sort of — sort of housekeeper's
room, butler's room, you know.' Mine was
such a nondescript household that it was not
easy to find a designation for any of the
apartments, but I wished thus neatly to
intimate that if my mayor of the palace had
matrimonial intentions, his do-nothing king
would not stand in his way. ' Now that my
household is becoming larger, I daresay you
would like to have some place where you
and Tim and Mrs. — Miss — what did you say
her name was ? could sit in the evenings.'

Neither Mrs. nor Miss anything did
I say was her name,' answered Ferguson,
with grave deliberation. ' Plain Janet, sir ;
she leaves titles to her betters. And the
kitchen does very well for me, sir, and for

Janet too if you care to engage her as housekeeper,
after due trial of her capabilities.'

Oh, if she satisfies you she will satisfy
me.'

None the less I should wish you to see
her, that you may understand it was for your
better service and not for my own pleasure
that I introduced her here. I have no
opinion of women, sir, until they are past
the age for frivolity, and I'm not handsome
enough to go courting myself.'

Whether this was a warning to me not to
be beguiled into a fatal trust in the power of
my own beauty, and an obscure hint that in
his opinion I was in danger of making a fool
of myself, Ferguson's face was too wooden
to betray ; but the manner in which he gave
his services towards putting the cottage in
order was unsatisfactory, not to say venomous.
He veiled his displeasure with my new
freak under an officious zeal for the comfort

of the coming tenants, which was much
harder to deal with than stubborn unwillingness
to work for them would have been.
My assurances that one was an invalid and
the other a child only supplied him with
fresh forms of indirect attack. He was
surprised that I did not have one of the two
rooms on the ground-floor fitted up as a bedroom,
as invalids cannot walk up and downstairs
; he was kind enough to place in one
of the upper rooms, which he persisted in
calling 'the nursery,' a small wooden horse
of the primitive straight-legged kind, a penny
rattle, and a soft fluffy parrot ; and when I
impatiently pitched the things out at the
door he seemed dismayed, and said ' he had
thought they would please the wee bairn.'

That old beast took all the pleasure out of
the little excitement of furnishing. On the
morning after my return, he took care to
present to me the respectable Janet ; he had,

indeed, not overrated her magnificent lack
of meretricious charms ; for in the wooden
face and hard blue eyes I recognised at once
the features of my faithful attendant, additional
wrinkles taking the place of the sabre-cut.
She was his mother. As, however,
neither made any reference to this fact,
I treated it as a family secret and made no
indiscreet inquiries.

The eventful Friday came. I was in the
cottage as soon as it was light, making for
the last time the tour of the two bedrooms,
kitchen, and sitting-room, trying all the
windows to see that they were draught-tight,
passing my hands along the walls ina
futile attempt to find out if they were
damp. In the sitting-room I stayed a longtime,
moving about the furniture, a secondhand
suite, covered with dark red reps ;
I was disgusted with the mournful bareness
of the apartment, and wondered how I could

have been so stupid as to forget that women
liked ornaments. I went back to my house
and ransacked it furtively for nicknames,
without much success. First, I reviewed
the pictures : a regular bachelor's collection
they were, not objectionable from a man's

point of view, but for ladies . No, the

pictures were hopeless, with the exception of
huge engravings, ' The Relief of Lucknow,'
and ' Queen Philippa Begging the Lives of
the Burgesses,' which, though perfectly innocuous
to a young girl's mind, were not
exhilarating to anybody's. Besides, fancy
being caught by Ferguson staggering under
the burden of those ponderous works of art !
I had not known before how meagre were
the appointments of my home ; my five
years of wandering had given me a traveller's
indifference to all but necessaries, so
that, as I looked round the study, where I
spent nearly all the time that I passed

indoors, I saw little that could be spared.
It was a comfortable-looking room enough,
with its three big windows, two looking
south over the terraced garden and the
wooded valley of the Muick, the remaining
one east over the lawn and the drive, and
more trees. The west wall of the room was
filled from floor to ceiling by book-shelves of
the plainest kind ; these were filled, not with
the student's methodically-arranged collection
of sombre and well-worn volumes, not
with the ' gentleman's ' suspiciously neat and
bright ' complete sets ' in morocco and half-calf,
which to remove seems as improper as
to scrape ofT the wall-paper would be ; but
with the oddest of odd lots of literary ware,
in a dozen languages, in all sizes and all
varieties of binding and lack of binding, no
two volumes of anything together, and not a
book that I didn't love among them, from
Montaigne, in dear dirty paper covers,

hanging by a thread, to Thackeray in a
beastly edition de luxe.

On the north wall was the fireplace — wide,
high, old-fashioned and warm — with a discoloured
white marble mantelpiece, decorated
with fat bewigged Georgian cupids. Above
it hung an old cavalry sword with which my
father had cut his way through the Russians
at Inkermann. Close to the fireplace, and
with its back to the book-shelves, stood my
own especial chair — big, roomy, well worn —
covered with dark red morocco, like the rest
of the furniture. A reading-table stood in
the corner beside it, and on the right hand
was a bigger table, piled high with books and
papers, cigars, bills and rubbish. There was
a writing-table in one corner, at which I never
wrote ; a sofa covered with more literary
lumber ; two cabinets crammed with curiosities
collected on my travels, tossed in with
little attempt at arrangement ; a card-table on

which Stood a quantity of old-fashioned silver,
such as tall candlesticks, goblets, a punch-bowl
and a massive last-century urn. A
stuffed duck, a Dutch tankard, a pair of elk's
horns, and a bust of Dante surmounted by a
fox's brush, occupied the top of the bookshelves.
A high plain fourfold screen, as
dark as the rest of the time-worn furniture,
hid the door ; and close to the screen a dog-kennel,
with the front taken out and replaced
by a strong iron grating, formed the winter
home of a large brown monkey, which I had
bought at a sale with the fascinating reputation
of being dangerous, but which had belied
its character by allowing me to bring it
home on my shoulders. To-to, so called
for no better reason than that my collie,
whose favourite resting-place was now well
defined on the goatskin hearth rug, was
named Ta-ta, had from our first introduction
treated me with such marked tolerance that

I, in my loneliness, had begun to feel a sort of
superstitious fondness for the brute, and
fancied I saw more reason and affection in
his blinking brown eyes than in any of the
Scotch pebbles which served as organs of
vision to my Gaelic neighbours. When I
first bought him it was mild enough for him
to live in the yard ; but when the weather
grew cold, and he was brought into the kitchen,
he got on so ill with the powers there
that I had to take compassion upon him and
them, and remove To-to to the study, where
he justified his promotion by the reserve and
gravity of his manners, his only marked foible
being a furious jealousy of Ta-ta, whose 
was just beyond the utmost tether
of the monkey's chain. Rarely did an evening
pass without some skirmish between the two.
Perhaps Ta-ta, seeing me smile over the book
I was reading, and anxious to share my enjoyment,
even if she could not understand the

joke, would incautiously get up and wag her
tail. Whereupon To-to would dash across
the hearth rug and assist her, and much unpleasantness
would follow, the dog barking,
the monkey chattering, the master swearing
all three members of the menagerie trying
to come off conqueror in the mede. Or else
To-to would fall from the top of his kennel
to the floor, with a loud noise, and would lie
stiff and still on the rug, as if in a fit ; and
then the simple Ta-ta would walk over to
investigate the case, and the monkey would
seize her ears and twist them round with jabbering
triumph. I kept a small whip to
separate the combatants on these occasions,
but I only dared use it very sparingly ; as,
though its effect upon To-to's coarser nature
was salutary in the extreme in reducing him
to instant love and obedience, as the boot of
the costermonger does his wife, the gentler
Ta-ta would look up at me with such piteous

protest in her dark eyes that I felt a brute for
the next half hour.

From this room, the scene of most of my
domestic life, I took a pair of silver candlesticks
and a Dresden cup and saucer. Into
the unused drawing-room, which I had had
fitted up years ago in the Louis Quinze style,
I just peeped ; but there was nothing very
tempting in white and gold curly-legged furniture
tied up in brown holland on a cold
polished floor, so I locked the door again,
and carried away my prizes to the cottage,
where they certainly improved the look of the
sitting-room mantelpiece.

I had no sort of carriage more convenient
than a Norfolk-cart, so on my way to Aberdeen
I ordered a fly to be at Ballater Station
on my return with my new tenants. Both
the ladies were already dressed for their
journey, and we started at once, Mrs. Elmer
hastening to inform me that she had sent

most of her luggage to some friends in London,
to account, I fancy, poor lady, for having
only one shabby trunk and two stage baskets.
Babiole sat very quietly during the railway
journey, looking out of window at the now
dreary and bleak landscape ; and I spoke so
little that any one might have thought I
would rather have been alone. But, indeed,
I was only afraid, from the happy excitement
which glowed in the faces of both talkative
mother and silent daughter, lest their bright
expectations should be disappointed by the
simplicity and desolation of the place they
persisted in regarding as a palace of delights.
'It's a very homely place, you know,' I
said solemnly, after being bantered in a
sprightly manner by Mrs. Elmer upon my
artfulness in building myself a fortress up in
the hills where, like the knights of old, I
could indulge in what lawless pranks I
pleased. ' And I assure you that nothing

could possibly be more simple than my mode
of life there. Whatever of the bold bad
bandit there may have been in my composition
ten years back has been melted down
into mere harmless eccentricity long ago.'

Ah ! you are not going to make me believe
that,' said Mrs. Elmer, with a giddy
shake of the head. ' Why, the very name
Larkhall betrays you.'

I believe the dear lady really did think the
name had been given in commemoration of
high jinks ' I had held there ; but I hastened
to assure here that ' lark ' was simply the
Highland pronunciation of 'larch,' a tree
which grew abundantly in the neighbourhood.
However, she only smiled archly, and seeing
that the imaginary iniquities she seemed benton
imputing to me in no way lessened her
exuberant happiness in my society, I left my
character in her hands, with only a glance at
Babiole, who seemed, with her eyes fixed

on the moving landscape, to be deaf to what
went on inside the carriage. I was rather
glad of it.

When we got to Ballater the little shed of
a station was crowded by rough villagers, all
eagerly enjoying the splendid excitement of
the arrival of the train. A dense, wet Scotch
mist enveloped us as we stepped on to the
platform, chilled by our cold journey ; still,
they both smiled with persistent happiness,
which grew rapturous when we all got into a
roomy fly which Mrs. Elmer called ' your
carriage.' They were charmed with the village,
which looked, through the veil of fine
rain, a most depressing collection of stiff stone
and slate dwellings to my blast eyes. They
were delighted with the cold and dreary
drive. They pronounced the dark fir-forest
through which we drove ' magnificent ' ; and,
finally, after a hushed and reverential silence
as we went through the plantation, both were

transfixed with admiration at the sight of my
modest dwelling. Mrs. Elmer even went sofar
as to admire the ' fine rugged face ' of
Ferguson, who was standing at the hall door
scowling his worst scowl. I did not risk an
encounter with him, but led the ladies straight
into the cottage, where a peat fire was glowing
in each of the lower rooms. We went
first into the sitting-room ; a lighted lamp was
in the middle of the table, the tea-things were
at one end. I glanced from mother to daughter,
trying to read their first impression of
their new home. Mrs. Kilmer's eyes, sharpened
by sordid experience to hungry keenness,
took in every detail at once with critical satisfaction,
while her lips poured forth commonplaces
of vague delight The climax of her
pleasure was the discovery of the cup and
saucer on the mantelpiece. By the way in
which her thin face lighted up I saw she was
a connoisseur. In looking at it she forgot

me and for a moment paused in her enraptured
monologue.

Bablole took it all differently. She
seemed to hold her breath as she looked
slowly round, as if determined to gaze on
everything long enough to be sure that it
was real ; then, with a little sob, she turned
her head quickly, and her innocent eyes,
soft and bright with unspeakable gratitude,
fell on me.

You must have been for years an object
of horror and loathing to your fellow-men to
know what that look, going straight from
soul to soul with no thought of the defects of
the bodily envelope, was to me. Perhaps it
was because my life had so long been barren
of all pleasures dependent on my fellow-creatures
that I could neither then, nor later
that evening when I was alone, recall any
sensation akin to its effect in sweetness or

vividness except the glow I had felt after
VOL. I 9

Babiole's girlish confidence to me at the
door of the Aberdeen lodging. I suppose
I must have stood smiling at the child
with grotesque happiness, for Mrs. Elmer,
turning from contemplation of the cup and
saucer, drew her thin lips together very
sourly.

And now I will leave you to your tea,'
said I hastily. * I told Janet to put everything
ready for you.'

Thank you, Mr. Maude, you are too
good. We require no waiting on, I assure
you,' broke in Mrs. Elmer, with rather tart
civility.

Oh no, I only told her to put the kettle
on in the kitchen,' I protested humbly. And,
with ceremonious hopes that they would be
comfortable, I retreated, Babiole giving my
fingers a warm-hearted squeeze when it came
to her turn to shake hands. The child was
following me to let me out when her mother

interposed and came with me to the door
herself.

She took my hand and held It while she
assured me that she was so much overpowered
by my distinguished kindness and
courtesy that I must excuse her If, in the
effort to express her feelings adequately, she
found herself without words. I'm sure I
wished she would, for she went on in the
same strain, making convulsive little clutches
at my fingers to emphasise her speech, until
both she and I began to shiver. She did
not let me go until Bablole appeared behind
her, flushed and smiling, in the little passage.
Then Mrs. Kilmer's fingers sprang up from
mine like an opened latch and, dismissed, I
raised my hat and hurried off.

I had not gone half a dozen yards when I
met Janet on her way to the cottage ; she
curtseyed and told me, in answer to my
question, that she was taking some tea

to the ladies. After a moment's hesitation
I turned and followed her, proposing to
ask them whether they would like some
books.

Janet opened the door quietly without
knocking, and went into the kitchen on the
left, while I stood on the rough fibre mat
outside the sitting-room, having grown
suddenly shy about intruding again. I
heard Babiole's clear childish voice.

Oh, mamma, if only papa doesn't find us
out, how happy we shall be here ! Mr.
Maude is a good man, I am sure of it ! '

As good as the rest of them, I daresay,'
answered her mother in tones of pure
vinegar. * Understand, if you ever meet
him when I'm not with you, you are not
to speak to him. It makes me ill to look
at his hideous wicked face. There's someone
in the kitchen, run and see who it
is.'

And the poor Beast, thinking he had
heard enough, and afraid lest Beauty should
catch him eavesdropping, slunk away from
the door-mat and made his way home with
his tail between his legs.

Those unlucky few words that I had overheard
created a great breach between me
and my tenants, and, moreover, brought on
in the would-be philosopher a fit of misanthropical
melancholy. I could not get over
the poor little woman's cynical hypocrisy for
some days, during which I never went near
the cottage ; and if I met either mother or
daughter in my walks or rides, I contented
myself with raising my hat ceremoniously,
and giving them as brief a glimpse of my
wicked hideous face ' as possible. Ha !
ha ! I would show them whether or not I
was dependent on their society, and how

much of selfish libertinism there had been
in my wish to house them comfortably for
the winter ; a pair of idiots !

But this noble pride wore itself out in a
fortnight, at the end of which time I began
to think it was I who was the idiot, to
nourish resentment against a pair of helpless
creatures who, too poor to refuse an offer
which saved them from brutality and starvation,
had seen enough of the dark side of
human nature to put small faith in disinterested
motives, and had no weapon but
their own wits wherewith to fight their natural
enemy — man. Besides, my solitude had
grown ten times more solitary now that,
sitting alone in my study at night, with Toto
languidly stretching himself on the kennel
in front of me, paying no attention tome
whatever, and Ta-ta, who really had
capacities for sympathy, lying asleep on the
rug at my feet, I knew that, not a hundred

yards away, there were slender women's
forms flitting about, and girlish prattle going
on, by a little modest fireside that was a
home.

So I suddenly remembered that I ought to
call and ask them if they found their new
home to their liking. Anxious, for the first
time for five years, to make the best of a bad
business, so far as my person was concerned,
I exchanged the coarse tweed Norfolk suit I
usually wore for a black coat and gray
trousers I used to wear in town, which,
though doubtless a little old-fashioned in cut,
might reasonably be supposed to pass muster
in the wilds, and even to give me a rather
dashing appearance. But, alas ! It did not.
It showed me, on the contrary, how far I had
slipped away from civilisation. My hair was
too long, what complexion I had left too
weather-beaten, while the seamed and scarred
right side of my face looked more hideous

than ever. I changed back quickly to my
usual coat, scarcely acknowledging to myself
that some sort of vague wish to live once
more the life of other men was disappointed.
I found Mrs. Elmer and her daughter in
their outdoor dress ; they had been driven in
by a snow shower, one of the first of the
season. The sitting-room looked now cosy
and habitable, if a little untidy, the habits of
the touring actress being still manifest in a
collection of unframed cabinet photographs —
not all uncalculated to bring a blush to the
Presbyterian cheek — which stood in a row on
the mantelpiece. It occurred to me that old
Janet might have let out the fact that I
turned back with her to the cottage and,
perhaps, overheard something to my disadvantage,
for Babiole looked frightened and
shy, and Mrs. Kilmer's manner was almost
apologetically humble. There was constraint
enough upon us all for me to make my visit

very short, but as I left I formally invited
them to dine with me on the following
evening.

With what shamefaced nonchalance I told
Ferguson that day to have the drawing-room
opened and cleaned on the following morning!
With what stolid lowering resignation he
extracted my reason for this unparalleled
order ! However, he made no protest. But
next morning, while I was at breakfast, he
entered the room in his usual clockwork
manner, but with a glow of pleasurable
feeling in his cold eyes.

If you please, sir, Janet would be obliged if
you would step into the drawing-room and see
if you would still wish to have it prepared for
the party this evening.'

Party ! I could have broken his neck.
But I only followed him in an easy manner
into the hall. It was full of blinding smoke,
which was pouring forth from the open door

of the drawing-room. I dashed heroically
into the apartment, only to be met with a
denser cloud, which rushed into my mouth
and made my eyes smart and burn. Some
winged thing, either a bird or a bat, flapped
against the walls and ceiling in the gloom.
Janet was choking at the fireplace, in great
danger of being smothered.

What is all this ? ' I choked angrily,
getting back into the hall.

Nothing, sir,' answered Ferguson, with
grim delight. ' Nothing but that Janet lit
the fire to air the room in obedience to your
orders, and that the chimney smokes a little.
Would you still wish to have the room got
ready, sir ?'

But he had gone too far ; he had roused
the lion.

Come in here,' I said, in a tone which
subdued his happiness ; and he followed me
back into the room. ' Now t-t-take the tongs,'

I continued, as haughtily as coughing would
permit, ' and r-ram it up the chimney.'

Cowed, but exceedingly reluctant, he
obeyed, and I would not let him relax his
efforts until, smothered with soot and dust,
dry twigs and blackened snow, he pulled
down upon himself a sack, a couple of birds
and other obstacles which, some from
above and some from below, had been
deposited in the unused chimney.

Now,' said I, purple in the face but content,
'you can delight the fire.'

And, satisfied with this moral victory and
the prestige it gave me in the eyes of the
whole household — for Tim and the out-door
genius who gardened twelve acres and
looked after four horses had both enjoyed
this domestic scandal from the doorway —
I marched back to my cold coffee and congealed
bacon.

There were no more difficulties, though,

at least none worth mentioning. It is true
that on returning from my morning's ride I
found the hall so stuffed up with furniture
that I had to enter my residence through
one of the study windows, five feet from the
ground ; and that I had to picnic on a
sandwich in the study instead of lunching
decorously in the dining-room ; but these
discomforts might be necessary to a thorough
cleaning, and could be borne with fortitude.
At six o'clock my guests arrived, and, having
left their cloaks in a spare-room opened for
the occasion, they were led to shiver in the
drawing-room, which still smelt of smoke and
soap and water. Mrs. Elmer, with chattering
teeth, admired the painted ceiling, the
white satin chairs bright with embossed roses,
the pale screen, and all the fanciful glories of
the room, the magnificence of which evidently
impressed and delighted her. Babiole seemed
unable to take her eyes off two oil-paintings,

both portraits of the same lady, which, in
massive gilt oval frames, occupied a prominent
position at the end of the room
opposite the fireplace.

Babiole is fascinated, you see, Mr.
Maude,' said her mother, with the little
affected laugh which gave less the idea of
pleasure than that of a wish to please. ' If
she dared she would ask who those ladies
are.'

They are both the same, mother,' said
Babiole, so softly, so shyly, that one could
think she guessed there was some story
about the portraits.

Mrs. Kilmer's eyes began to beam with
a less artless curiosity.

'Would it be indiscreet to ask her name ?'

Her name was Helen.'

Ah, poor lady ! She is dead, then ?'

No, I believe she is alive.'

Babiole glanced quickly from the pictures

to my face and pressed her mother's hand, as
that lady was about to burst forth into more
questions. I don't know that my countenance
expressed much, for my feelings on
the subject of the original of the portrait had
long ceased to be keen ; but I think the little
one, being very young, liked to make as
much as possible out of any suggestion of a
romance. I took the girl by the arm and
led her to the end of the room, where the
portraits hung.

'Now,' said I, 'which of these two
pictures do you like best ? '

Babiole instantly assumed the enormous
seriousness of a child who is honoured with a
genuine appeal to its taste. After a few
moments' grave comparison of the pictures,
she turned to me, with the face of a fairy
judge, and asked solemnly —

Do you mean which should I love best, or
which do I admire most as a work of art ?'

This altogether unexpected question, which
came so quaintly from the childish lips, made
me laugh. Babiole turned from me to the
pictures, rather disconcerted, and Mrs. Elmer
broke in with her sharp high voice —

Babiole understands pictures ; she has
had a thorough art education from her father,
Mr. Maude.'

'Oh yes,' said I, wondering vaguely why
mothers always show up so badly beside their
daughters. Then I turned again to the girl.
I didn't know how clever you were. Miss
Babiole. Supposing I had two friends, one
who had known this lady and loved her, and
the other who was a great art collector.
Which portrait would each like best ?'

Babiole decided without hesitation. ' The
art collector would like this one, and the one
who had loved her would like that,' she
said, indicating each with the glance of her
eyes.

But the art collector's is the prettier face
of the two,' I objected.

Yes ; but it isn't so good.'

I was astonished and fascinated by the
quickness of the girl's perception.

You ought to grow into an artist,' I said,
smiling. ' The pretty one was in the Academy
this year, painted by a famous artist. I heard
it was a wonderful portrait, and I commissioned
a man to buy it for me. The other is
an enlargement, by an unknown artist, from
half a dozen old photographs and sketches,
of the same lady five years ago.'

And is it exactly like her — like what she
was, I mean ?'

No ; she was prettier, but not so — good.'

I used the word ' good ' because she had
used it, though it was not the word I should
have chosen. I wanted her to say something
more, for she was still looking at the pictures
in a very thoughtful way ; but at that
VOL. I 10

moment Mrs. Elmer, skipping lightly along
the polished floor in a way that made me
tremble for her balance, thrust her head between
us, and laid her pointed chin on her
daughter's shoulder.

And what are you two so deeply interested
about ?' she asked playfully.

Babiole put her tender little cheek lovingly
against her mother's thin face, and I began
talking about art in a vague and ignorant
manner, which incautiously showed that I
disliked the interruption. Ferguson came to
my rescue with the solemn announcement of
dinner.

From Mrs. Kilmer's rather critical attitude
towards the different dishes, I gathered
that she prided herself on her own cookery,
and Babiole ingenuously let out that mamma
had once superintended a very grand dinner
of some friends of theirs — ' Oh, such rich
people ! ' — and it had been a great success.

Mamma seemed a little uneasy at this indiscretion,
but hastened to add that they were
such dear friends of hers that when they were
left in a difficulty by the sudden illness of
their man-cook — a man who had been in the
first families, and had come to them from
Lord Stonehaven's — she had overwhelmed
them by the offer of her services.

I think all ladies should learn cooking,
Mr. Maude ; and, indeed, many do now.
The lessons are very expensive, certainly ;
but one never regrets either the time or the
money when it is once learned,' said she.
Servants never understand how things
ought to be done unless there is some one
able to give them a little guidance.'

To all this conversation Ferguson listened
with the amiability of an enraged bear restrained
by iron bars from making a meal of
his tormentors.

Babiole had little attention to spare for

any one but Ta-ta, with whom she had struck
up a rapidly ripening friendship.

'Ta-ta has taken a fancy to you,' I said,
smiling. * She always likes the people I
like,' I added, with the common fatuity of
owners of pet animals.

Upon this Mrs. Elmer piped out ' Ta-ta,
Ta-ta, Ta-ta ! ' until, to stop her, I beckoned
the dog to her side of the table. But the
collie, seeing that she had nothing better
than a raisin to offer, merely sniffed at it,
avoided the threatened caress, and slunk
back to her old place by Babiole, in whose
lap she rested her head contentedly.

While her mother was still laughing shrilly
at this misadventure, the child asked if they
might see my monkey.

Shall I take you to my study now,' said
I, ' and show you how an old bachelor passes
his evenings ?'

Is the monkey fond of you too, Mr.

Maude?' asked Babiole, as I opened the
door for them.

I flatter myself that he is. At least I
can boast that he flies at any one whom he
suspects of doing me harm. Two months
ago a doctor was attending me for a swelling
on my neck. He came day after day, and
To-to treated him with all the courtesy due
to an honoured guest, until he decided one
day that the swelling ought to be lanced, and
took from his pocket a case of instruments.
He had scarcely opened it when To-to,
chattering and grimacing, sprang across the
hearth rug with such violence that he broke
his chain, and fastened his teeth in the
doctor's hand.'

What a savage brute ! ' exclaimed Mrs.
Elmer.

Babiole thought it out as we crossed the
hall, and then spoke gravely —

But the monkey was wrong, for the

doctor never meant to hurt you,' she said,
In her deliberate way.

I suppose you gave him a good beating,'
said Mrs. Elmer.

No, I didn't. I scolded him till we were
alone together, for the sake of the doctor's
feelings. But when he was gone I sneaked
up to To-to's kennel and stroked him and
gave him a beautiful bone. The scolding
was for the mistake, you know, and the bone
for the devotion.'

We entered the study, Mrs. Elmer first,
I last. The alarmed lady, on coming round
the screen, was close to the monkey before
she saw him. To-to only blinked up at her
composedly, with no demonstration of hostility
; but to my horror and amazement, no
sooner did he catch sight of Babiole, who
came up to him bravely by my side, with her
little hand cordially outstretched towards him,
than he made a savage spring at her, his

teeth and eyes gleaming with malice. I was
just in time to draw her back in my arms, so
that he fell to the ground instead of fastening
on her poor little wrist. Mrs. Elmer
screamed, Ta-ta began to bark and make
judiciously-distanced rushes at the monkey ;
while Babiole recovered herself, very pale,
but quite quiet, and I, strangely excited, gave
To-to a sharp blow.

Oh, don't ! ' cried the child ; but then,
smiling archly, though the colour driven
away by the little fright had not yet come
back to her cheek, she added, ' but you will
give him a bone as a reward when we are
gone.'

'Do you think so?' said I, in a rather
constrained voice. Then, seeing that Mrs.
Kilmer's eyes were fixed curiously upon me,
I added, ' The first mistake, you see, was
excusable ; there was a reason for it. But
this attack was unprovoked.'

Yes,' said Babiole naively ; ' for how
could I do you any harm ?'

'Yes, how indeed ?' said I.

But even as I said this, and looked at her
blue-eyed face, I thought that perhaps the
monkey might prove to be wiser than either
of us, unless I grew wiser as she grew older.

The rest of the evening passed pleasantly
enough in the ransacking of my cabinets of
curiosities ; Mrs. Elmer, who proved to bea
connoisseur of more things than china,
took delight in the value of the treasures
themselves, while Babiole pleased herself
with such as she thought beautiful, and enjoyed
particularly the stories I told about the
places I had found them in, and the ways in
which I had picked them up. She grew
radiant over the present of a Venetian bead
necklace, such as can be bought in the Burlington
Arcade for a few shillings ; but when
I told her it was a souvenir from a woman

whose child I had saved from drowning, her
joy in her new treasure was suddenly turned
to reverence. How did I do it ? It was a
very simple story ; a little boy of four or five
had slipped into one of the canals, and I,
passing In a gondola, had caught his clothes,
or rather his rags, and handed the choking
squalling manikin back into the custody of a
black-eyed, brown-skinned woman, who had
insisted, with impulsive but coquettish gratitude,
on presenting me with the beads she
wore round her own neck.

Wasn't she in rags, too, then ? ' asked
Babiole.

Oh no, she was rather picturesquely got
up.'

'Then, I should think, she was not his
mother at all.'

Perhaps not. But all mothers are not
like yours.'

I know that,' cooed the girl, tucking her

hand lovingly under the maternal arm.
Then, after a pause, she said, ' What a lot
of nice places and people you must have
seen in all the years you have travelled
about, Mr. Maude.'

How old do you think I am, then ? ' I
asked, struck by something in her tone.

She hesitated, looking shyly from me to
her mother.

'No, no,' said I. 'Tell me what you
think yourself.'

She glanced at me again, then suggested
in a small voice, ' sixty ? '

Both Mrs. Elmer and I began to laugh ;
and the child, blushing, rubbed her cheek
against her mother's sleeve.

How much would you take off from that,
Mrs. Elmer ? '

'Why, I'm sure you can't be a day more
than forty-five.'

She evidently thought I should be pleased

by this, the good lady flattering herself that
she had taken off at least five years. My
first impulse was to set them right rather
indignantly, but the next moment I remembered
that I should gain nothing but a character
for mendacity by telling them that I
should not be thirty till next year. So I
only laughed again, and then Babiole's voice
broke in apologetically.

I only guessed what I did, Mr. Maude,
because you are so very kind ; you seem
always trying to do good to some one.'

Here's a subtle and cynical little observer
for you,' said I, glancing over the child's head
at the mother. ' She knows, you see, that
benevolence is the last of the emotions, and
is only tried as a last resource when we have
used up all the others.'

Babiole looked much astonished at this
interpretation, which she understood very
imperfectly, and Mrs. Elmer shook her head

in arch rebuke as she rose to go. They went
upstairs together to put on their cloaks, but
Babiole came flying down before her mother
to have a last peep at the portraits which had
fascinated her. I followed her into the ,
where lamp and fire were still burning,
and she started and turned as she saw
my reflection in the long glass which hung
between the pictures.

Well, are you as happy at the cottage as
you thought you would be ? ' I asked.

Oh, happier, a thousand times. It is too
good to last,' with a frightened sigh.

Don't you miss the constant change of
your travelling life, and the excitement of
acting ? '

She seemed scarcely to understand me at
first, as she repeated, in a bewildered manner,
'excitement!' Then she said simply, 'It's
very exciting when you miss the train and
the company go on without you ; but it's

dreadful, too, because the manager might
telegraph to say you needn't come on at
all.'

But the acting ; isn't that exciting ? '

It's nice, sometimes, when one has a part
one likes ; but, of course, I only got small
parts, and it's dreadful to have to go on with
nothing to say, or for an executioner, or an
old woman, with just a line.'

And don't you like travelling ? '

I like it sometimes in the summer ; butin
the winter it's so cold, and the places all
seem alike ; and then the pantomime season
comes, and you have nothing to do.'

What do you do then ? What did you
do last winter, for instance ? '

We went back to London.'

'Well?'

But Babiole had grown suddenly shy.

Won't you tell me ? Would you rather
not?'

I would rather not.'

At that moment Mrs. Kilmer's voice was
heard calling, in sharp tones, for ' Babiole ! '

Here we are, Mrs. Elmer, taking a last
look at the pictures,' I called back, and I led
the child out into the hall, where her mother
gave a sharp glance from her to me, and
wished me good-night rather curtly. I stood
at the door to watch them on their way to
the cottage, as they would not accept my
escort ; and through the keen air I distinctly
heard this question and answer —

You want to get us turned out, to spend
another winter like the last, I suppose. What
did you tell him about your father ? '

Nothing, mother, nothing, indeed ! — — '

The rest of the child's passionate answer
I could not catch, as they went farther away.
But I wondered what the secret was that I
had been so near learning.

I ENJOYED that evening so much that I was
quite ready to go through another preparatory
penance of smoking chimneys and
general topsyturveydom to have another Hke
it. But Fate and Ferguson ruled otherwise.
I mentioned to him one day that I
proposed inviting the ladies again for the
following evening, and he said nothing ; but
when I made a state call on Mrs. Kilmer that
afternoon, she brought forward all sorts of
unexpected excuses to avoid the visit. Circumstances
had made me too diffident to
press the point, and I had to conclude, with
much mortification, that the sight of my ugly

face for a whole evening had been too distressing
to their artistic eyes for them to
undergo such a trial again. They, however,
invited me to dine with them on Christmas
Day, but I was too much hurt to accept the
invitation. It was not until long afterwards
I found out that, on learning my intention of
giving another ' party,' my faithful Ferguson
had posted off to the cottage and informed
Mrs. Elmer that his poor mother was so ill
she could scarcely keep on her legs, and now
master had ordered another ' turn out,' and
he expected it would ' do for her' altogether.
I only knew, then, that when I told him
there was to be no 'party,' his wooden face
relaxed into a faint but happy smile, and that
my feet ached to kick him.

That winter was what we called mild up
there, and it passed most uneventfully for
my tenants and for me. We saw very little
of each other since that chill to our friendship

; but I soon began to find that the little
pale woman, who was too acid to excite as
much liking as she did pity and respect, had
no Idea of allowing the obligations between
us to lie all on one side. Under the masculine
7^^gime which had flourished in my
household before the Irruption of Mrs.
Elmer, her daughter and Janet, the art of
mending had been unknown and Ignored,
and the science of cleaning my study had
been neglected. With regard to my own
raiment, the Brass Age, or age of pins,
succeeded the Bone Age, or age of buttons,
with unfailing regularity ; and when, with
Janet, the Steel Age, or age of needles came
In, I sometimes thought I should prefer to
go back to primitive barbarism and holes In
my stockings rather than hobble about with
large lumps of worsted thread at the corners
of my toes, — which was the best result of a
process which the old lady called ' darning.'

VOL. I II

The road to Ballater was for weeks impassable
with snowdrifts ; no possibility of
replenishing one's wardrobe even from the
village's meagre resources. At last, being
by this time lamer than any pilgrim, I boldly
cut out the lumps in my stockings, and thereby
enlarged the holes. This flying in the
face of Providence must have been an awful
shock to Janet, for she related it to Mrs.
Elmer with some acrimony ; the result of
this was that the active little woman overhauled
my wardrobe, and everything else in
my house that was in need of repair by the
needle ; she tried her hand successfully at
some amateur tailoring ; she hunted out
some old curtains, and by a series of wonderful
processes, which she assured me were
very simple, transformed them from crumpled
rags into very handsome tapestry hangings
for a draughty corner of my study ; she
carried off my old silver, piece by piece, and

polished it up until, instead of wearing the
mouldy rusty hue of long neglect, it brightened
the whole room with its glistening
whiteness. I believe this last work was a
sacred pleasure to her ; Babiole said her
mother cooed over the tankards and embraced
the punch-bowl. The way that woman
made old things look like new savoured of
sorcery to the obtuse male mind. Ferguson
would take each transfigured article, neatly
patched tablecloth, worn skin rug, combed
and cleaned to look like new, or whatever it
might be, and hold it at arm's length, squinting
horribly the while, and then, with a sigh
of dismay at the disappearance of the old
familiar rents, cast it from him in disgust.
The climax of his rage was reached when,
one evening at dinner, surprised by an unusually
savoury dish, I sent a message of congratulation
to Janet. Like a Northern
Mephistopheles, his eyes flashed fire.

I diana know, sir, ye were so partial to
kickshaws,' he said haughtily, with the strong
Scotch accent into which, on his return to his
native hills, he had allowed himself to relapse.

I saw that I had made some fearful
blunder, and said no more ; but I afterwards
learned from Babiole, as a great secret, that
her mother had prevailed upon Janet to
yield up her daily duties as cook as far as
my dinner was concerned ; and my heart
began to melt and soften as the winter wore
on, towards the strictly anonymous little chef
who had delivered me from the binding
tyranny of haggis and cock-a-leekie.

When the snow melted away from all but
the tops of the hills, and there came fresh
little sprouts of pale green among the dark
feather foliage of the larches, a change came
over the tiny household of my tenants.
From early morning until the sun began
to sink low behind the hills Babiole was

never to be found at the cottage. Sometimes,
indeed, she would dash in at midday
to dinner, as fresh and sweet as an opening
rose ; but more often she would stay away
until evening began to creep on, taking with
her a most frugal meal of a couple of sandwiches
and a piece of shortbread. Even
that was shared with Ta-ta, whom I encouraged
to attend the venturesome little maiden
on her long rambles ; the dog would follow
her now as willingly as he did me, and could
be fierce enough upon occasion to prove a
far from despicable bodyguard ; while I
generally contrived to be about the grounds
somewhere when she started, and, having
noted the direction she took, I went that
way for my morning ride. Often I passed
them on the road, the girl walking at a sort
of dance, the dog leaping and springing
about her. At sight of me, Ta-ta would
rush to her master, barking with joy ; then,

seeing that I would not take the only sensible
course of allowing her to follow both her
favourites together, she would run from the
one to the other, in delirious perplexed
excitement, until by a few words and gestures
I let her know that her duty was with the
beauty and not the beast.

Sometimes I would see the two climbing
up a hill together, the collie not more sure-footed
than the child. Sometimes as I passed
there would be a great waving of handkerchief
and wagging of tail from some high
cairn, to show me triumphantly how much
more they dared than I, trotting on composedly
some hundreds of feet below. I was
always rather uneasy for the child, wandering
to these lonely heights and along such
unfrequented roads without any companion
but the dog ; but her mother, with the odd
inconsistency which breaks out in the best of
us, could fear no danger to the girl from

coarse peasant or steep cliff, while against
the wiles of the well-dressed she put her
strictly on her guard. As for the child herself,
I could only tell her to be careful of
her footing on rugged Craigendarroch, the
nearest, the prettiest, the most dangerous of
our higher hills : to tell her not to wander
whithersoever her fancy led her would have
been like warning a star not to mount so
high in the sky.

Then as evening fell and I began, like
any old woman, to grow anxious, I would
hear Ta-ta's tired step in the hall outside
my study, and a scratching at my door which
gave place to a piteous sniffing and whining
if I did not immediately rise to let her in.
Then with a gentle wag of the tail she would
trot up to the hearth rug and lie down, giving
a sideways glance at To-to, who would hop
down from his perch and make a grab at
her tail to punish her for gadding about, and.

finding that appendage out of reach, would
sneak quietly back again and resume his
hunt for the flea who would never be caught,
to try to persuade us that his fruitless attempt
had been a mere inadvertency. How hard
Ta-ta would try, when a nice plate of gristle
and potato at dinner time had revived her
flagging energies, to describe to me the
events of the morning's walk ! And how
the sound of a bright childish laugh from the
kitchen would stimulate her remembrance of
that jolly run up-hill! I knew, though I
said nothing, that Babiole used to come
across to find her mother, busy with my
dinner ; and I could guess, from the altercations
I often heard, that the hungry girl
stole her share, and laughed at any one who
said her nay. The dining-room always grew
too hot when that bright laughter penetrated
to my ears, and I would say carelessly to
Ferguson —

You can leave the door open.'

He knew, you may be sure, why I liked
to sit In a draught while March winds were
about ; but the stern Scot, however much he
might still cherish enmity against the diabolical
cleverness of the mother, had had a
corner of his flinty heart pulverised by the
blooming child.

And so the cold spring passed into cool
summer, and I began to notice, little as I saw
of her, a change in the pretty maiden. As
the season advanced, her vivacity seemed to
subside a little, her dancing walk to give place
to a more sedate step, while her rambles were
often now limited to a climb up Craigen-
darroch, which formerly would have been a
mere incident in the day's proceedings. I
remarked upon this to Mrs. Elmer ; for she
and I had now, in our loneliness, become
great chums.

Oh, don't you know ? ' said she, with

her grating little laugh, ' Babiole's in
love!'

'In love!' said I slowly. *A child like
that!'

Oh, it's not a first attachment by any
means,' said she, making merry over my surprise,
as she swung her little watering-pot
with one hand, and put her head on one side
to admire a row of handsome gladioluses
which she had reared with some care. ' Her
first, what you may call serious passion, was
at seven years old, two whole years later than
my earliest love. By the bye, Mr. Maude, I
really must beg you to let me make some cuttings
from your rose-trees ; I have two excellent
briars here, and I flatter myself I can
graft as well as any gardener.'

you can do everything, Mrs. Elmer,'
said I gravely, with honest gratitude and
admiration. 'You can make cuttings from
every tree in the garden, if you please, and

they will all hold their heads the higher for
it

The poor lady liked a little bit of simple
flattery, and indeed it by no means now seemed
out of place. The Highland air had brought
the pink colour back to her wan face, and
brightened her eyes, so that one now noticed
with admiration the extreme delicacy of her
features ; while the rest and the relief from
worry had softened both her careworn expression
and the haggard outline of her face.
She now, with coquettish sprightliness, tapped
my shoulder and shook her head to show me
that she had no faith in my blandishments.

Don't talk to me,' she said, but with a
smile which contradicted the prohibition ;
I'm too old for compliments, a woman with
a grown-up daughter ! '

Now I was quite glad to go back to the
subject suggested by her last words.

Who is the happy object of the young

lady's preference ? ' I asked, trying to speak
in a tone of badinage, though indeed I thought
Bablole much too young and too pretty to
bestow even the most make-behave affection
on any one north o' Tweed, or south of it
either, for that matter.

It's one of the young Duncan, at Fir
Lodge ; the pretty-looking lad with the curly
fair hair

I gave a little ' loch !' of disgust. A great
freckle-faced lout of a boy — I knew him ! I
remembered, too, that the Duncan had joined
heartily in a scandalised murmur, far-off
sounds of which had reached my ears, at the
enormity of my bringing play-acting folk to
my Highland seraglio. With very few more
words I left Mrs. Elmer, more put out than
I cared to show. However, after looking
angrily at the rhododendrons in the drive fora
little while, I happily remembered that the
annual visit of my four oddly-assorted friends

was due within a month, and that then I
should have something more Interesting to
occupy my mind than the flirtations of a couple
of children. ' And after that,' I said to myself,
' I think I shall set off on my wanderings
again for a little while, and the Elders can
remain here until they, too, are tired of it, and
so we shall avoid any wrench over the breakup.'
That the break-up must come I knew,
and, on the whole, I felt that it had better
come early than late — for me, at any rate.

I climbed up Craigendarroch next day,
and every day for a week after ; I never met
any one, and every time I was alarmed by
the steepness of those rocks to the south,
where a poor young fellow who was out fern-hunting
fell down the perpendicular cliff one
summer's day, and was found a shapeless,
lifeless heap four days after on the side of the
hill. He was a stranger, and might have lain
there till his bones whitened on the rocks and

ferns among the young oak-trees, if a couple
of Ballater lads had not stumbled upon his
body in their Sunday walk, and called out all
the village to see the sight. And these made
the most of the excitement in a singular way,
holding a highly decorous and Presbyterian
wake, settling themselves in a business-like
manner like a flock of crows on the broken
ground around the stone on which the deadman,
scarcely more silent and unconcerned
than they, held his mournful levee. This
incident had already given a tragic interest
to the south side of the pretty hill ; and
although Babiole knew the place well, and
was as sure-footed and nimble as one of its
native squirrels, I felt anxious every day
when there was no answer to my call of
Ta-ta ! Ta-ta ! ' and was not satisfied until
I had made the circuit of the hill, pushed my
way through the barriers of uprooted firs with
which the gales of early spring had encumbered

the hillside on the north, and going on
in that direction, came to the bare and almost
precipitous slope which forms the southern
wall of the Pass of Ballater.

On my eighth visit I heard a faint bark
from the ridge of hill to the north-west of the
pass ; considering this as a clue, I made my
way down Craigendarroch, across the meadows
round Mona House, a white building of
simplest architecture, flanked by a garden
where straight rows of bright flowers looked
quaintly picturesque against a dark background
of fir and hill. Crossing the road
which ran at the foot of the ridge, I began
to climb. A rough steep path had here been
worn among the bracken, and was widened
at every ascent by falls of loose soil and
stones. I knew what a pretty little nook
there was at the top, just the place where a
lovelorn maid would delight to make a nest.
The path grew steeper than ever towards the

top, and led suddenly to a grassy hollow, one
wall of which was a perpendicular gray cliff,
broken by narrow and inaccessible ridges on
which slender little birch-trees contrived to
grow. On the opposite side the mossy
ground sloped gently, and the wild rabbits
scurried about among the stumps of fallen
pines.

I had only gone a few steps along the soft
ground when I caught the sound of a light
girlish voice ; it came from the miniature
chasm at the foot of the cliff. I wondered
who the child was talking to. But as I came
nearer, hearing no voice but hers, I supposed
she must be reading aloud.

Oh no, Frederick,' at last I was close
enough to hear, ' I love you passionately, with
the love one knows but once. But it is impossible
for me to do as you wish. You
speak to me of your father ; you urge upon
me that he would forgive my lowly birth, that

he would welcome to his ancestral halls the
woman of your choice, whoever she might
be. But do not forget that I too have pride,
that I too have a duty to perform to my
parents.' Then came a change of tone, and
a sort of practical parenthesis, hurried through
quickly like a stage direction : ' I don't mean
my father of course, because he was so clever
that he had to think of his art and wasn't like
a father at all' Then her tone became sentimental
again : ' But my mother — mamma is
worthy to have all the wealth of kings
showered at her feet. She is beautiful, and
clever, and good ; Mr. Maude — indeed everybody,
admires and loves her. No, Frederick,
I will not allow my mother to become a mere
mother-in-law.'

The bathos of the conclusion upset my
gravity ; I came close to the edge of the pit
and looked down. The little maid was not

reading, but was sitting by herself on a tree-vol.
I 12

trunk among the stones, with the dog asleep
on the edge of her frock, having in a world of
her own, and holding converse with the people
there. I crept away as quietly as I could and
went back home in an amused but rather rapturous
state : the next time I saw my goddess,
though, she was devouring slice after slice of
bread and jam with prosaic ravenousness at
the kitchen door.

And I concluded that at fourteen, even
with a face like a flower and a voice like a
bird's, ' the love one knows but once ' and
perfect peace of mind are not incompatible
things.

It was Fabian Scott who, being by his profession
less of a free agent than any other
member of my Httle circle of friends, fixed the
date of their yearly visit. As soon as he made
known to me the first day when he would be
free, I summoned the rest, and not one of
them had ever yet failed me. Fabian wrote
to me this year, giving the fifteenth of
August as the day on which the closing of
the theatre at which he was playing would
leave him free.

The news of the expected arrivals quickly
reached the ears of Mrs. Elmer, who came
skipping along the garden towards me one

morning about a week before the visit, and
attacked me at once with much vivacity.

Aha ! ' she began, ' and so we were to be
left in ignorance of the gay doings, were
we ? '

If you allude to the meeting of half a
dozen old fogeys on the fifteenth, Mrs.
Elmer, I assure you I was coming to the
cottage to tell you about it. But we shall
be about as sportive as a gathering of the
British Archaeological Association, and as we
shall be out on the moors all day, I am afraid
you won't find the place much livelier than
usual. I think,' 1 added, coming to the pith
of the matter with some feeling of awkwardness,
'that you had better keep Miss Babiole
more — more with you, while — while the
gentlemen are here. Or — or if you would
like a trip to the seaside we might see about
a couple of weeks at Muchalls or Stonehaven,
and that would give us an opportunity of —

of having the cottage whitewashed, you
know,' I finished up, with a sudden gleam of
tardy inventive genius.

The fact was, I had begun to tingle at the
thought of the merciless 'chaff' — as much
worse to bear than slander as the stigma
of fool is than that of rogue — which the
importation of my fair tenants would bringdown
upon me. Besides, though my four
visitors were all old friends, and very good
fellows, yet a pretty face may work such
Circe-like wonders, even in the best of us,
that I thought it better that our bachelor
loneliness should be, as before, untempered
by the smiles of any woman lovelier than
Janet. But Mrs. Elmer, at my hesitating
suggestion, grew rigid and haughty.

Of course, Mr. Maude,' she said, ' if you
wish now to make use of the cottage my
daughter and I have done our best to keep
in order for you, we shall be ready to pack

Up at any time. We can go tomorrow, If
you like. I have no doubt that I shall be
able to find an opening for the autumn
season with some company.'

No, no, no ! ' interrupted I emphatically
and with some impatience, ' Pray do not
think of such a thing. There is plenty of
room in my own place for all my friends.
My sole object in making the suggestion I
did was to prevent your being pestered with
the attentions of a lot of rough sportsmen,
who, when they were tired of shooting, would
find nothing better to do than to worry you
and Miss Babiole to death. And you remember,'
I ended, as a happy thought, ' how, when
you came here, you insisted on privacy.'

One may have too much even of such a
good thing as one's own society,' said she,
with an affected little laugh. ' I think I could
bear a little attention now, with much equanimity,
even from a sportsman who "could

find nothing better to do." Of course, I
could expect no more than that from gentlemen
of such rank as your guests,' she added,
rather venomously. ' But for a change even
that might be acceptable.'

Good heavens ! The woman would not
understand me.

But Babiole ! ' I suggested quietly.

Babiole is only a child ; but even if she
were not, a daughter of mine would be
perfectly able to take care of herself, Mr.
Maude.'

After this snub, I could only bow and
take myself off, spending the interval before
my guests' arrival in schooling myself for the
approaching ordeal.

The first to arrive on the fifteenth were
Lord Edgar Normanton and Mr. Richard
Fussell, the latter, anxious to make the most
of his annual taste of rank and fashion,
having lain in wait for the former at King's

Cross, and insisted on bearing him company
during the entire journey. I met them at
Ballater station at 2.15 in the afternoon, and
was sorry to hear from Edgar, who never
looked otherwise than the picture of robust
health, and who was, moreover, getting fat,
that he was far from well.

I tell his lordship that he should take
rowing exercise. Nothing like a good pull
every day on the river to keep a man in
condition,' urged Mr. Fussell, who was fifty
inches round what had once been his waist,
and who seemed to radiate health and
happiness.

They informed me that Fabian Scott had
also travelled up by the night mail, but in
another compartment ; so I went to meet
the train, which came into Ballater at 5.50,
and found both Fabian and Mr. Maurice
Browne disputing so violently that they had
forgotten to get out. Fabian had indeed

taken advantage of the stopping of the train
to stride up and down the confined area of
the railway carriage, gesticulating violently
with his hatbox, rug, gun, and various other
unconsidered trifles. I guessed that they
could only have travelled together from
Aberdeen, for there had been no bloodshed.
They had been having a little discussion
on realism in art, of which Maurice Browne
was an ardent disciple. They were still hard
at it, in terms unfit for publication, when I
mounted the step and put my head in at the
window. Excitable Fabian, with his keen
eyes still flashing indignation with ' exotic
filth,' shook my hand till he brought on
partial paralysis of that member, while he
fired a last shot into his less erratic opponent.
No, sir,' he protested vehemently, ' I
deny neither your ability nor your good faith,
nor those of your French master ; but I have
the same objection to the fictions of your

school, as works of art, as I should have to
the performance of a play written by cripples
for cripples. It would be a curiosity, sir, and
might attract crowds of morbid-minded
people, besides cripples ; but it would be
none the less a disgusting and degraded
exhibition, antagonistic to nature and truth,
to which the feeblest '' virtue victorious and
vice vanquished " melodrama would be as day
unto night. With minds attuned to low
thoughts, you seek for low things, and
degrade them still further by your treatment.
You have a philosophy, I admit, sir, but it is
the philosophy of the hog.'

And, having poured out this persuasive
little harangue with such volubility that not
even an Irishman could get in a word edgeways,
Fabian allowed himself to be enticed
on to the platform, and began asking me
questions about myself with childlike affection.
Maurice Browne followed, somewhat

refreshed by this torrent of abuse, since the
aim of his Literary ambition was rather to
scandalise than to convince. He was tall,
thin, and unhealthy-looking, with a pallid
face and pink-rimmed eyes, and an appearance
altogether unfortunate in the propagator
of a new cult. I believe he was, on the
whole, fonder of me than Fabian was. My
disastrous ugliness appealed to his distaste
for the beautiful, and having once, as a complete
stranger, very generously come to my
aid in a difficulty, he felt ever after the
natural and kindly human liking for a fellow-creature
who has given one an opportunity
of posing as the deputy of God. These two
gentlemen, with their strong and aggressive
opinions, formed the disturbing element in
our yearly meeting, and, each being always
at deadly feud with somebody else, might be
reckoned on to keep the fun alive. Both
talked to me, and me alone, on our way to

the house, with such sly hits at one another
as their wit or their malice could suggest.
Fabian raved about the effects of descending
sun on heather and pine - covered hills,
Maurice Browne bemoaned the stony poverty
of the cottages, and opined that constant intermarriages
between the inhabitants had
reduced the scanty population to idiots.
Then Fabian told me how many inquiries
had been made about me by old acquaintances,
who still hoped I would some day
return from the wilds, and Maurice instantly
tempered my satisfaction by asking me if I
had heard that the Earl of Saxmundham
was going to divorce his wife. The question
gave me a great shock, not so much on
account of the blow it dealt at an old idol
still conventionally enthroned in my memory
as the last love of my life, as because I knew
how much distress such a report must cause
to poor old Edgar.

I was quite relieved, on entering the
drive, to meet my stalwart friend and his
faithful companion, both very merry over
some joke which had already made Mr.
Fussell purple in the face. On seeing us
they burst out laughing afresh. I guessed
what the joke was.

Deuced lonely up here, isn't it ? ' said
Mr. Fussell to me. ' No society, nothing
but books, books, — except for one short
fortnight in the year. Eh, Maude ? '

Eh ? eh ? what's this ? ' said Fabian.

His only books are woman's looks,' and
I wonder they didn't teach him the folly of
bringing a band of gay and dashing cavaliers
to read them too,' said Edgar.

Fabian turned slowly round to me, with a
look of extreme pain, and shook his head
mournfully.

Oh, what a tangled web we weave,' he
murmured sorrowfully, and then began to

dance the Highland fling, with his rug
tyrannise over his shoulder.

Maurice Browne gravely cocked his hat,
pulled down his cuffs, buttoned up his coat,
and requesting Edgar to carry his bag,
proceeded up the drive with his hands in
his pockets, whistling.

In fact the whole quarter had given
themselves up to ribald gaiety at my expense,
and my explanation that I had merely given
a poor lady and her daughter shelter for the
winter in an unused cottage only provoked
another explosion. It was understood that
at these bachelor meetings all rules of social
decorum should be scrupulously violated, so
there was nothing for it but to join in the
mirth with the best grace I could.

You know who it Is,' I said, half aside,
to Fabian, hoping to turn him at least Into anally.
' It's poor little Mrs. Elmer, the wife
of that drunken painter.'

But Fabian was flinty. Turning towards
the rest, with his expiring Romeo expression,
he wailed : ' Oh, gentlemen, he is adding
insult to injury ; he is loading with abuse the
bereaved husband of this lady to whom he
has given shelter for the winter ! '

Which winter ? How much winter ? '
asked the others.

The more they saw that I was getting
really pained by their chaff the worse it
became, until Fabian, stalking gravely upto
Ferguson, who stood on the doorstep,
pointed tragically in the direction of nowhere
in particular, and said, in a sepulchral voice —

'You are a Scotchman, so am I. I have
been pained by stories of orgies, debaucheries,
and general goings on in this neighbourhood.
Tell me, on your word as a fellow-countryman,
can these gentlemen and myself, as
churchwardens and Sunday-school teachers,
enter this house without loss of self-respect ? '

I cinna kea about self-respect, gentlemen
; but if you don't come in, ye'll stand
the loss of a verra good dinner,' answered
Ferguson, with a welcoming twinkle in
his eyes.

I am satisfied,' said Fabian, entering
precipitately.

And the rest followed without scruple.

At dinner, to my relief, they found other
subjects for their tongues to wag upon ; for
Maurice Browne, never being satisfied long
with any topic but literary ' shop,' brought
realism up again, and there ensued a triangular
battle. For Edgar, who, now that
he had passed the age and weight for
cricket, had grown distressingly intellectual,
was an ardent admirer of the modern
American school of fiction in which nothing
ever happens, and in which nobody is anything
in particular for long at a time. He
hungrily devoured all the works of that

desperately clever gentleman who maintains
that *a woman standing by a table is an
incident,' and looked down from an eminence
of six feet two of unqualified disdain on the
battle, murder, and sudden death ' school on
the one hand, and on the * all uncleanness *
school on the other. Not at all crushed by
his scorn, Fabian retorted by calling the
American school the * School of Foolish
Talking,' and the battle raged till long past
sundown, Mr. Fussell and I watching the
case on behalf of the general reader, and
passing the decanters till the various schools
all became 'mixed schools.'

At this point a diversion was created by
a fleeting view caught through the door by
Fabian, of Janet carrying dishes away to
the kitchen. He heaved a sigh of relief,
and, with upturned eyes, breathed gently,
I would trust him another winter ! '

I had bought a piano at Aberdeen, as
VOL. I i^

Fabian had spread a report that he could
play, while all my guests nursed themselves
in the belief that they could sing. The
instrument had been placed in a corner of
my study against the wall. But the Philistinism
of this so shocked Fabian that he
instantly directed its removal into the middle
of the room. This necessitated a re-disposal
of most of the furniture. The centre table
was piled high with my private papers.
Fabian looked hastily through these, and,
observing, ' I don't see anything here we
need keep,' tumbled them all into the grate
where the fire, indispensable as evening
draws on in the Highlands, was burning.
Mechanically, I saved what I could, while
Fabian's subversive orders were being
carried out round me. After a few minutes'
hard work, all my favourite objects were out
of sight. Maurice Browne was reclining
comfortably in my own particular chair, and

most of the rest of the seats having been
turned out into the hall as taking up too
much room, I had to sit upon To-toss kennel.
The curtains were also pulled down in
deference to a suggestion of Browne's that
they interfered with the full sound of the
voice, but I wished they had been left up
when the caterwauling began.

Mr. Fussell led off with * The Stirrup
Cup,' in deference to his being the eldest of
the party, and also to purchase his non-intervention
when the other performers
should begin. It was some time before he
got a fair start, being afflicted with hoarseness,
which he attributed to the Highland
air, and the rest unanimously to the Highland
whiskey. When at last he warmed to his
work, however, and said complacently that
he was ' all right ' now, they must have heard
him at Aberdeen. He had a good baritone
voice, the value of which was discounted by

his total ignorance of the art of singing, his
imperfect acquaintance with both the time
and the words of his songs, and his beef
that the louder one shouted the better one
sang. When at last, crimson and panting,
but proud of himself, he sat down amid the
astonished comments of the company on the
strength of the roof, Maurice Browne wailed
forth in a cracked voice a rollicking Irish
song to the accompaniment of * Auld Robin
Gray ' ; Fabian followed with no voice at all,
but no end of expression, in a pathetic love-song
of his own composition, during which
everybody went to look for some cigars he
had in his overcoat pocket. I refused altogether
to perform, and nobody pressed me ;
but I had my revenge. When Edgar, strung
up to do or die, asked Fabian to accompany
him with * The Death of Nelson,' and rose
with the modest belief that he should astonish
them with a very fine bass, the first note was

a deep-mouthed roar that broke down the
last twig of our forbearance, and we all rose
as one man and declared that we had had
music enough. Poor Ta-ta, who had been
turned out of the room at the beginning
of the concert for emulating the first singer
by a prolonged howl, was let In again,
and relief having been given to everybody's
artistic yearnings, we ended the evening
with smoke and peace.

Next morning we were all early on the
moors, where we distinguished ourselves in
various ways. Fabian, who worked himself
Into a fearful state of excitement over the
sport, shot much and often, but brought
home nothing at all, and thanked Heaven,
when calmness returned with the evening
hours, for keeping his fellow-creatures out
of the range of his wild gun. Maurice
Browne made a good mixed bag of a hedgehog,
a pee-wit, and a keeper's leg, and then

complained that shooting was monotonous
work. Edgar worked hard and gravely, but
was so slow that for the most part the grouse
were out of sight before he fired. Mr.
Fussell did better, and attributed every
failure to bring down his bird to his 'd — d
glasses,' upon which Fabian hastened to ask
him if he meant the glasses of the night
before.

However, everybody but the keeper who
was shot, declared himself delighted with the
day's sport ; but on the following morning
Fabian and Maurice Browne seceded from
the party and amused themselves, the former
by sketching, the latter by learning by heart,
by means of chats with ostler and shopkeepers,
the critique scandaleuse of the
neighbourhood ; in the evening he triumphantly
informed me that the morals of the
lowest haunts in Paris were immaculate,
compared to those of my simple Highland

village. I am afraid this startling revelation
had less effect upon me than a little incident
which I witnessed next day.

I had been congratulating myself upon
the fact that, though all my visitors vied
with each other in attentions to Mrs. Elmer,
who had become, under the influence of this
sudden rush of admirers, gayer and giddier
than ever, they looked upon Babiole, as her
mother had prophesied, merely as a little
girl and of no account. But on the morning
referred to, I came upon Fabian and the
child together in my garden at the foot of
the hill. He was fastening some roses in
the front of her blue cotton frock, and when
he had done so, and stepped back a few
paces to admire the effect, he claimed a kiss
as a reward for his trouble. She gave it
him shyly but simply. She was only a child,
of course, and his little sweetheart of six
years ago ; and the blush that rose in her

cheeks when she caught sight of me was no
sign of self-consciousness, for her colour came
and went at the faintest emotion of surprise
or pleasure. As for Fabian, he drew her
hand through his arm, and came skipping
towards me like a stage peasant.

We're going to be married, Babiole and
I, as soon as we've saved up money enough,'
said he.

And the child laughed, delighted with this
extravagant pleasantry.

But, though I laughed too, I didn't see
any fun in it at all ; for the remembrance
that the time would come when this little
blossom of youth and happiness and all
things fresh and sweet would be plucked
from the hillside, was not in the least amusing
to me. And when this young artist proceeded
to devote his mornings to long
rambles with ' the child,' and his afternoons
to making sketches of ' the child,' I thought

his attentions would be much better bestowed
on a grown-up person. But as Mrs. Elmer
saw nothing to censure in all this I could not
interfere. It spoilt my yearly holiday forme,
though, in an unaccountable fashion ; and
when at the end of a fortnight my guests
went away, no regrets that I felt at their
departure were so keen as my ridiculous
annoyance on seeing that Fabian's farewell
kiss to his little sweetheart left the child in
tears.

With the departure of my summer visitors,
a gloom fell upon us all at Larkhall. Mrs.
Elmer missed her admirers and grew petulant
; Babiole had discovered some new-haunt,
and was never to be found ; while I
felt the wanderer's fever growing strong
upon me again. Fabian Scott had cleared
up the little mystery concerning the husband
and father of my tenants. It appeared that
Mr. Elmer, while neglecting and ill-using
his wife without scruple when she was under
the same roof with him, was subject to strong
fits of conjugal devotion when two or three
months of hard work, away from him, gave

him reason to think that she would be in
possession of a few pounds of carefully-gleaned
savings, while he, her lawful and
once adored husband, did not know whereto
turn for a glass of beer. During the
winter before I found them in Aberdeen
some friends with whom both mother and
child had taken refuge from his drunken fury-had
had to pay him a heavy ransom for their
kindness, besides exposing themselves to the
inconvenience of having their house mobbed
and their windows broken whenever the
tender husband and father, having exhausted
the tribute paid to keep him in the public-house,
bethought himself of this new way of
calling attention to his wrongs.

Fabian told me that a few weeks back he
had been accosted in the Strand by Mr.
Elmer, who was looking more tattered and
dissipated than ever. This gentleman had
experienced great concern at the total disappearance

of his wife, had asked Fabian's
advice as to the best means of finding her,
and had finally let out his conviction that
she was ' doing well for herself,' in a tone of
bitter indignation. Fabian had said nothing
of this meeting to Mrs. Kilmer, being, both
for her sake and for mine, anxious not to
touch those strings of sentiment which, in
the better kind of women, sound so readily
for the most good-for-nothing of husbands.

Already Mrs. Kilmer had begun to allude
with irritating frequency to the talents and
noble qualities of her ' poor husband,' whom
it was the fashion among us all to consider
as the ' victim of art,' as if art had been a
chronic disease. This fiction had gone on
expanding and developing until the illustrious
artist, to whom absence was so becoming,
had eclipsed the entire Royal Academy,
and had become to his wife a source of
legitimate pride which, if touching by its

naivete, was also wearisome by its excess.


Between proud reminiscences of her husband
and happy memories of her late flirtations
with Mr. Fussell and Mr. Browne,
Mrs. Elmer was rather disposed to treat me
and my modest friendship as of small account.
So the worm turned at last, by which I
mean that I spent my days deer-stalking,
grouse-shooting, and salmon-fishing, and my
evenings with To-to, Ta-ta, and my books.
This estrangement helped me to make up
my mind to leave Larkhall for Italy before
the winter came on, and a sharp frost in the
last days of October sent me off to Aberdeen
to make inquiries about my proposed journey.
I would install Mrs. Elmer and her daughter
at the Hall, if they cared to remain, so that,
at any rate, they would be housed out of
harm's — that is, Mr. Kilmer's — way for the
winter.

Janet had particularly entreated me to be
back early, as there had been ghostly noises
of late in the region of the drawing-room ;
and though her braw laddie, John, was ample
protection against bodily intruders, yet, in the
case of wraiths, though I only rented the
place, and therefore could have no family influence
with the spirits of departed owners, I
was likely, through my superior social standing,
to get a better hearing from the phantoms
of gentlefolk than the staunchest man-servant
could hope to do.

It was past six, and already dark, when I
came back and went into the study, attracted
by sounds of a very elementary performance
on the piano. But there was perfect silence
as I entered, and no human creature to be
seen. Ta-ta, however, was hovering about
near the piano, now replaced in its original
position in a corner against the wall. I suspected
the identity of the musical ghost, and

quietly seated myself by the fireplace to see
what would happen. First, Ta-ta ran excitedly
backwards and forwards between me
and the other side of the table ; then slight
sounds as of stealthy creeping feet and hands
were followed by a fleeting apparition of a
female figure on all fours between the table
and the screen.

What are you running away for ?' I asked,
very gently.

Babiole was so much startled by the voice
that she reappeared involuntarily, on her feet
this time, from behind the screen.

I beg your pardon, Mr. Maude, indeed
I'm very sorry,' she began, 'I didn't think
you would be in so soon.'

And what have I done that you should
be so sorry to see me ? '

Oh no, I didn't mean that. I'm not
sorry to see you, I'm always glad to, only we
never do now, you know, and I thought

perhaps you would be angry at my coming
into your study,' said she, recovering confidence,
as she saw that I was not displeased.

Oh, so you took advantage of my being
away to do what you thought I should not
like?'

I spoke playfully, but Babiole hung her head.

Well, what have you got to say for yourself?'


After a few moments' silence she raised her
head, staring before her with the fixed and
desperate earnestness of a sensitive young
creature who thinks the slightest blame a
terrible thing to bear.

I don't believe it was so very wrong,'
she said at last. * I was so very careful ; I
took off my boots that I had been out on the
hills in, and put on clean shoes, not to hurt
the carpet ; and I just put down the notes so
lightly I could not have hurt the piano, and I
washed my hands before touching the books.'

The books ! What books have you been
touching ? '

Oh, I took down several ; but I couldn't
read all, because they were not English.'

This was satisfactory as far as it went;
but then the best English authors are considered
scarcely more suitable reading for
the young person ' than the worst French
ones.

And which do you like best of the English
ones ? '

I like one I found yesterday, all letters
from different people, with the s's like f's.'

I poked the fire into a blaze, and led the
girl back to the book-shelves.

Now, show me which one you mean.'

She hesitated, and looked at me, at first

suspecting some trap. As I waited quietly,

she at last timidly touched a volume of Tie

Tattler. I pointed to a modern 'popular

novel,' with a picture-cover and popular
VOL. I 14

title, which was among the lumber of the
shelves.

Have you read that ? '

Yes,' indifferently.

Didn't you like that better than TAe
Tattler ? '

Oh no ! ' indignantly.

'Why not ? It is all about an actress.'

'An actress!' contemptuously. 'It isn't
like any of the actresses I've ever met. Ita
silly book.'

Is there any other book you like ? '

Oh yes. I like these.' She passed her
hand lovingly over a row — not an unbroken
row, of course — of solid-looking calf bound
volumes, full of old-fashioned line engravings
of British scenery, the text containing a
discursive account of the places illustrated,
enlivened by much historical information,
apocryphal anecdote, and old-world scandal.
And Jane Eyre, and this.' ' This ' was an

illustrated translation of Don Quixote, ' Oh,
and I like Clarissa Harlowe and that book
with the red cover.'

'Ivanhoe ? '

*Oh yes, Ivanhoe she repeated carefully
after me. Evidently, as in the case of Domi
Quixote, she had been uncertain how to pronounce
the title.

And these ? ' I pointed, one by one, to
some modern novels. ' Don't you like any
of these ? ' Already I began to be alarmed
at the extent of her reading.

'Yes, I like some of them — pretty well'

Why do you like Don Quixote and Ivanhoe
better ? '

She considered for a long time, her blue
eyes fixed thoughtfully on the shelves.

I think I feel more as if they'd really
happened.'

But when you were reading Armadale,
didn't you feel as if that had happened } '

Oh yes,' with a flash of excitement.
One night I couldn't sleep, because I thought
of it so much.'

Then you thought as much about it as
about Ivanhoe ? '

Ye-es, but ' A pause. ' I thought

about Ivanhoe because I wanted to, and I
thought about Armadale because I couldn't
help it.'

I went on asking her what she had read,
and I own that I dare not give the list. But
her frank young mind had absorbed no evil,
and when I asked her how she liked one
famous peccant hero, she answered quite
simply —

I liked him very much — part of the book.
And when he did wrong things, I was always
wanting to go to him, and tell him not to be
so wicked and silly ; and then, oh ! I was so
glad when he reformed and married Sophia.'

But he wasn't good enough for her.'

Ah, but then he was a man ! ' Her tone
implied ' only a man.'

'Then you think women are better than
men ?'

I think they ought to be.'

'Why?'

Well, men have to work, and women
have only to be good.'

I was surprised at this answer.

That is not true always. Your mother
is a very good woman, and has had to work
very hard indeed.'

But mamma's an exception ; she says so.
And she says it's very hard to work as she
does, and be good too.'

I could scarcely help laughing, though it
was pretty to see how innocently the young
girl had taken the querulous speech.

'Well, and then I'm a man, and I don't
have to work.'

Perhaps that's why you're so good.'

I was so utterly astonished at this naive
speech that I had nothing to say. The blood
rushed to the girl's face ; she was afraid she
had been rude.

How do you know that I am good,
Babiole ? ' I asked gently.

But this was taxing her penetration too
much. '

I don't know,' she answered shyly.

Why do you think people are better when
they don't work ? '

She looked at me, and was reassured that
I was not offended.

'Well, sometimes when mamma has been
working very hard — not now, you know ; but
it used to be like that — she used to say things
that hurt me, and made me want to cry. And
then I used to look at her poor tired face and
say to myself, '' It's the hard work and not
mamma that says those things ; " and then,
of course, I did not mind. And when

you have once had to work too hard, you
never get over it as you do over other
things.'

What other things ? '

Oh — fancies and — and things Hke that.'
Love troubles ? '

She looked up at me with a shy, sideways
glance that was full of the most perfectly unconscious
witchery.

Yes, mamma says they're nonsense.'

She liked nonsense, too, once.'

Babiole looked up at me with the delight
of a common perception.

'Yes, I've often thought that. And then
all men are not like '

She stopped short.

Papa ? '

She shook her head. ' One mustn't say
that. One must make allowances for clever
people, mamma says.'

You will be clever, too, some day, if you

go on reading and thinking about what you
read.'

No, I don't want to be clever ; it makes
people so selfish. But,' with a sigh, ' I wish
I knew something, and could play and sing
and read all those books that are not
English.'

Shall I teach you French ? '
^ Will you? Oh, Mr. Maude!'
I think she was going to clap her hands
with delight, but remembered in time the
impropriety of such a proceeding. Four
o'clock next day was fixed as the hour for
the first lesson, and in the meantime I made
another journey to Aberdeen to provide
myself with a whole library of French
grammars and other elementary works.

At four o'clock Babiole made her appearance,
very scrupulously combed and washed,
and wearing the air of intense seriousness
befitting such a matter as the beginning of

one's education. This almost broke down,
however, under the glowing excitement of
taking a phrase-book into one's hand, and
repeating after me, ' Good-day, bon-jour ;
How do you do ? Comment votes portez-vous
? ' and a couple of pages of the same
kind. Then she wrote out the verb ' To
have ' in French and English ; and her
appetite for knowledge not being yet
quenched, she then learnt and wrote down
the names of different objects round us, some
of which, I regret to say, her master had to
find out in the dictionary, not being prepared
to give off-hand the French for ' hearthrug/
letter-weight,' and 'wainscoting.' We then
went through the names of the months and
the seasons of the year, after which, surfeited
with information, she gave a little sigh of
completed bliss, and, looking up at me, said
simply that she thought that was as much as
she could learn perfectly by tomorrow. I

thought it was a great deal more, but did not
like to discourage her by saying so. I had
much doubt about my teaching, having been
plunged into it suddenly without having had
time to formulate a method ; but then I was
convinced that by the time I felt more sure
of my powers my pupil's zeal would have
melted away, and I should have no one to
experimentalise upon. As soon as I had
assured her that she had done quite enough
for the first lesson, Babiole rose, collected
the formidable pile of books, her exercise-book,
and the pen I had consecrated to her
use, and asked me where she should keep
them. We decided upon a corner of the
piano as being a place where they would not
be in my way, Babiole having a charmingly
feminine reverence for the importance of
even the most frivolous occupations of the
stronger sex. After this she thanked me
very gravely and prettily for my kindness in

teaching her, and hastened away, evidently
in the innocent belief that I must be anxious
to be alone.

What a light the bright child seemed to
have left in the musty room ! I began to
smile to myself at the remembrance of her
preternatural gravity, and Ta-ta put her fore-paws
on my knees and wagged her tail for
sympathy. I thought it very probable that
Mrs. Elmer would interfere to prevent the
girl's coming again, or that Babiole's enthusiasm
for learning would die out in a day or
two, and I should be left waiting for my
pupil with my grammars and dictionaries on
my hands.

However, she reappeared next day,
absolutely perfect in the verb avoir, the
months, the seasons, and the pages out of
the phrase-book. When I praised her she
said, with much warmth —

I could have learnt twice as many

phrases if I'd known how to pronounce
them ! '

In fact, beginning to learn at an age when
she was able to understand, and impelled by
a strong sense of her own deficiencies, she
learnt so fast and so well that her education
soon became the strongest interest of my life,
and when my fear that she would tire had
worn away, I gave whole hours to considering
what I should teach her, and to preparing
myself for her lessons. As winter drew on,
the darkening days gave us both the excuse
we wanted for longer working hours. From
three to half-past six we now sat together
in the study, reading, writing, translating.
When I found her willing I had added Latin
to her studies, and we diligently plodded
through a course of reading arbitrarily
marked out by me, and followed by my pupil
with enthusiastic docility.

All thoughts of leaving Ballater for the

winter had now disappeared from my mind.
I was happier in my new occupation than I
remembered to have been before, and as I
saw spring approaching, I regretted the short
days, which had been brighter to me than
midsummer.

I mustn't keep you indoors so long now,
Babiole,' I said to her one afternoon in the
first days of April. ' I have been making
you work too hard lately, and you must go
and get back your roses on the hills.'

I saw the light come over the girl's face
as she looked out of the window, and, with a
pang of self-reproach, I felt that, in spite of
herself, the earnest little student had been
waiting eagerly for some such words as
these.

O — h — h,' she whispered, in a long-drawn
breath of pleasure, ' it must be lovely up
among the pine-woods now ! '

I said nothing, and she turned round tome

with a mistrustful inquiring face. I went
on looking over an exercise she had written,
as if absorbed in that occupation. But the
little one's perceptions were too keen for me.
She was down on her knees on the floor
beside my chair in a moment, with a most
downcast face, her eyes full of tears.

Oh, Mr. Maude, what an ungrateful little
wretch you must think me ! '

I was so much moved that I could not
take her pretty apology quietly. I burst out
into a shout of laughter.

Why, Babiole, you must think me an
ogre ! You don't really imagine I wanted to
keep you chained to the desk all the
summer ! '

She took my hand in both of hers and
stroked it gently.

I would rather never go on the hills
again than seem ungrateful to you, Mr.
Maude.'

Ungrateful, child ! You don't know how
your little sunbeam face has brightened this
old room.'

Has it, really ? ' She seemed pleased,
but rather puzzled. 'Well, I'm very glad.
but that doesn't make it any the less kind of
you to teach me.'

There has been no kindness at all on my
side, I assure you.'

She shook her head, and her curly hair
touched my shoulder.

Yes, there has, and I like to think that
there has. Nobody knows how good you
are but Ta-ta and me ; we often talk about
you when we're out together, don't we,
Ta-ta?'

The collie wagged her tail violently,
taking this little bit of affectionate conversation
as a welcome relief to the monotony of
our studies.

Well, I shall leave Ta-ta with you,

then, to keep my memory green while I'm
away.'

Away ! Are you going away ? '

Yes. I am going to Norway for the
summer.'

I could not tell exactly when I made up
my mind to this, but I know that I had had
no intention of the kind when Babiole came
into my study that afternoon. She remained
quite silent for a few minutes. Then she
asked softly —

When will you come back, Mr. Maude ? '

Oh, about — September, I think.'

The place won't seem the same without
you.'

'Why, child, when you are about on the
hills I never see you.'

No, but — but I always have a feeling that
the good genius is about, and — do you know,
I think I shall be afraid to take such long
walks alone with Ta-ta when you're not here ! '

My heart went out to the child. With a
passionate joy in the innocent trust one little
human creature felt towards me, the outcast,
I was on the point of telling her, as carelessly
as I could, that I had not quite made up my
mind yet, when she broke the spell as unwittingly
as she had woven it.

Oh, Mr. Maude,' she cried, with fervent
disappointment ; * then your friends — Mr.
Scott — and the rest — they won't come here
this year ? '

No,' said I coolly, but with no sign of
the sudden chill her words had given me, ' I
shall invite them to Norway this year.'

Before April was over I had installed Mrs.
Elmer as caretaker at Larkhall, and, with
Ferguson at my heels, had set out on my
wanderings again.

VOL. I

If I went away to appease the restlessness
which had attacked me so suddenly, to persuade
myself that the secret of happiness forme
lay in never remaining long in the same
place, I succeeded badly.

It was not until I was three hundred miles
away from them that I began fully to appreciate
the joys of domestic life with To-to and
Ta-ta, the comfort of being able to keep my
books together, the supreme blessing of sitting
every evening in the same arm-chair.
I was surprised by this at first, till I reflected
that the very loneliness of my life was bound
to bring middle age upon me early. There

was a period of each day which I found it
very hard to get through ; whether in Paris,
enjoying coffee and cigarette at a cafe on
the boulevards, or in Norway, watching the
sunset on some picturesque fiord, when
the day began to wane I grew restless,
and, referring aimlessly to my watch again
and again, could settle down to nothing
till the last rays of daylight had faded
away.

My four friends, when they joined me for
our yearly holiday, all decided that something
was wrong, but that was as far as they could
agree. For while both Fabian and Edgar
said that it was ' liver,' the former recommended
camel-exercise in the Soudan, the
latter would hear of nothing but porridge and
Strathpeffer. And though both the fat Mr.
Fussell and the lean Mr. Browne leaned to
the sentimental view that love and Mrs.
Kilmer were at the root of my malady, the

latter suggested that to shut Mr. Elmer up
with a hogshead of new whisky and then to
marry his widow would quench my passion
effectually, while Mr. Fussell, with an indescribable
smile, told me to go back to Paris
and * enjoy myself; and, if I didn't know
how, I was to take him.

I did none of these things, however, but
after my friends had returned to England, I
wandered about until late October. But when
the days grew short again, the home-hunger
grew irresistibly strong, and I went back to
the Highlands, as a gambler goes back to the
cards. Of course I knew what took me
there, just when the hills were growing bleak,
and the deer had gone to their winter retreat
in the forests. I wanted to see that girl's
face in my study again, to hear the young
voice that rang with youth and happiness
and every quality that makes womanhood
sweet and noteworthy in a man's mind. She

might conjugate Latin verbs or tell me her
young girl love affairs, as she had done sometimes
with ringing laughter, but I must hear
her voice again.

So I arrived at Ballater without warning,
and leaving Ferguson at the station to order
a fly and come on with my luggage, I walked
to Larkhall in the dusk. There was a lamp
in the study ; I could see it plainly enough,
for the blind was not drawn down. I saw a
figure pass between the window and the
light ; in another minute the front door
opened, and Ta-ta rushed at me, leaping
on to my shoulders, and barking joyously
; while Babiole herself, scarcely less
fleet of foot, seized both my hands, crying
in joyous welcome —

Mr. Maude ! Mr. Maude ! Mr. Maude ! '

I said, ' How are you ? I hope you are

quite well. Isn't it cold?' But, indeed, no

furnace-fire could have sent such a glow

through my veins as the warm-hearted
pressure of the girl's hands.

Do you know, I have a sort of feeling
that I knew you were coming to-day ? The
Scotch believe in second sight ; perhaps ita
gift of the country. I've had all day a
presentiment that something was going to
happen — something 7iice, you know ; and just
now, before you were near enough for me to
hear your step, some impulse made me getup
and look out of the window. And, Mr.
Maude, don't you believe mamma if she
says Ta-ta moved first, because she didn't ;
it was I. There's always something in the
air before the good genius appears, you
know.'

And she laughed very happily as she led
me in and gravely introduced me to her
mother. Both had been knitting stockings
for me, and I thought the study had never
looked so warm or so home-like as it did

with their work-baskets and wools about, and
with these two good little women making
kindly welcoming uproar around me. To-to
broke his chain, and climbed up on my
shoulder, snarling and showing his teeth
jealously at Babiole. The delighted clamour
soothed my ears as no prima donna's singing
had ever done. That evening I could have
embraced Mrs. Elmer with tenderness.

Next day I was alone in the drawing-room,
the ladies having given up possession
of the Hall and returned to the cottage, when
I heard footsteps at the open door and a
voice —

May I come in, Mr. Maude ?'

Certainly.'

I was busy putting up two paintings of
Norwegian scenery in place of the portraits
of Lady Helen, which were on the ground
against the wall. On seeing my occupation,
Babiole uttered a short cry of surprise and

dismay. I said nothing, but put my head on
one side to see if one of my new pictures was
hung straight. At last she spoke —

Oh, Mr. Maude ! ' was all she said, in a
tone of timid reproach.

swell'

You're not going to take her down after
all this time ?'

You see I have taken her down.'

Oh, why ?' It was not curiosity ; it was
entreaty.

Don't you think she's been up there long
enough' •: ::: -

If you were the woman and she were the
man you wouldn't say that.'

What should I say ? '

You would say, " He's been up there so
long that, whatever he's done, he may as well
stay there now." '

That would be rather contemptuous tolerance,
wouldn't it ? '

But the picture wouldn't know that ; and
if the original should ever grow sorry for all
the harm she — he had done, it would be something
to know that the picture still hung there
just the same.'

The story must have leaked out, then —
the first part through Fabian, probably, and
the rest through the divorce court columns of
the daily papers. I said nothing in answer
to the girl's pleadings, but I restored the
portraits to their old places with the excuse
that the landscapes would look better in the
dining-room.

Our studies began again that very afternoon.
Babiole had forgotten nothing, though
work had, of course, grown slack during the
hot days of the summer. She had had another
and rather absorbing love affair, too,
the details of which I extracted with the
accompaniment of more blushes than in the
old days.

We shall have you getting married and
flying away from us altogether, I suppose,
now, before we know where we are.'

No,' she protested stoutly, ' I'm not going
to marry ; I am going to devote myself to art.'

Upon this I made her fetch her sketchbook,
after promising ' not to tell mamma,'
who might well be forgiven for a prejudice
against any more members of her family
sacrificing themselves to this Juggernaut.
The sketches were all of fir and larch-tree,
hillside and rippling stony Dee ; some were
in pencil, some in water-colour ; there was
love in every line of each of the little pictures,
and there was something more.

Why, Babiole, you're going to be a great
artist, I believe,' I cried, as I noticed the
vigour of the outlines, the imaginative charm
of the treatment of her favourite corners of
rock and forest.

Oh no, not that,' she said deprecatingly.

If I can be only a little one I shall be satisfied.
I should never dare to draw the big
hills. When I get on those hills along the
Gairn and see the peaks rising the one behind
the other all round me, I feel almost as if I
ought to fall on my knees only to look at
them ; it is only when we have crept down
into some cleft full of trees, where I can peep
at them from round a corner, that I feel I can
take out my paper and my paint-box without
disrespect.'

But you can be a great artist without
painting great things. You may paint Snowdon
so that it is nothing better than a 's
copy, and you may paint a handful
of wild flowers so that it may shame acres
of classical pot-boilers hung on the line at the
Royal Academy.'

Babiole was thoughtfully silent for some
minutes after this, while I turned over the
rest of her drawings.

Drawing-master's copy!' she repeated
slowly at last. ' Then a drawing-master is a
man who doesn't draw very well, or who
isn't very particular how he teaches what he
knows ? '

Yes, without being very severe I think
we may say that.'

That is not like your teaching, Mr.
Maude.'

What do you mean ? '

Why, all these months that you've been
away I've had a lot of time to think, and I
see what a different thing you have made of
life to me by teaching me to understand
things. Last year I thought of nothing
when I was out on the hills with Ta-ta but
childish things — stories and things like that.
And now all the while I think of the things
that are going on in the great world, the
pictures that are being painted, the books
that are being written.'

And the dresses that are being worn ? ' I
suggested playfully, not at all sure that the
change she was so proud of was entirely for
the better.

*Well, yes, I think I should like to
know that too,' she admitted, with a
blush.

And you want to attribute all that to my
teaching ? '

'Yes, Mr. Maude,' she answered, laughing
; ' you must bear the blame of it all.'

Well, look here ; I've re visited the world
since you have, and, believe me, you are much
better outside. It's a horrid, over-crowded,
noisy place, and, as for the artists in whom
you are so much interested, you must worship
them from afar if you want to worship them
at all. Painters, actors, writers, and the rest
the successful ones are snobs, the unsuccessful
— sponges. And as for the dresses,
my child, there was never a frock sent out of

Bond Street so pretty, so tasteful, or so becoming
as the one you have on.'

But Babiole glanced down at her blue
serge gown rather disdainfully, and there
shone in her eyes, as brightly as ever, that
vague hunger of a woman's first youth for
emotions and pleasures, which every morning's
sunshine seemed to promise her, and
whose names she did not know.

Ah,* she said gaily, ' but everybody
doesn't speak like that. I shall wait until
your friends come in the summer, and see
what they tell me about it.'

My face clouded, and, with the pretty
affectionately with which she now always
treated me, she assured me that she did not
really want any advice but mine, and that, as
long as I was good enough to teach her, she
was content to read the lessons of the busy
world through my eyes.

Meanwhile, however, I was myself, through

those same eyes of mine, learning a far more
dangerous lesson, and one, unluckily, which I
could never hope to impart to any woman.
I had no one but myself to thank for my
folly, into which I had coolly walked with
my eyes open. But the temptation to direct
that fair young mind had been too strong forme,
and, having once indulged in the pleasure,
the few months away had but increased
my craving to taste it again. This second
winter we worked even harder than the first.
Babiole, with her expanding mind, and the
passionate excitement she began to throw
into every pursuit, became daily a more fascinating
pupil. She would slide down from
her chair on to a footstool at my side when
discussion grew warm between us concerning
an interesting chapter we had been reading.
She would put her hand on my shoulder with
affectionate persuasion if I disagreed with
her, or tap my fingers impatiently to hurry

my expression of opinion. How could she
know that the ugly grave man, with furrows
in his scarred face, and already whitening
hair, was young and hot-blooded too, with
passions far stronger than hers, and all the
stronger from being iron-bound ?

Sometimes I felt tempted to let her know
that I was twenty years younger than she,
growing up in the belief of her childhood
on that matter, innocently thought. But it
could make no difference, in the only way in
which I cared for it to make a difference, and
it might render her constrained with me.
After all, it was my comparative youth which
enabled me to enter into her feelings, as no
dry-adust professor of fifty could have done,
and it was upon that sympathy that the bond
between us was founded. In the happiness
this companionship brought to me, I thought
I had lulled keener feelings to sleep, whenas
spring came back, and I was beginning

again to dread the return of the long days,
an event happened which made havoc of the
most cherished sentiments of all three of us.

The first intimation of this revolution was
given by Ferguson, who informed me at
luncheon, with a solemnly indignant face,
that a 'verra disreputable-looking person'
had been pestering him with inquiries for
Mr. Maude, and, after having the door shut
in his face had taken himself off, so Ferguson
feared, in the direction of the cottage, to
bother the ladies. My butler's dislike of
Mrs. Elmer had broken down under her
constant assistance to Janet.

I saw that Jim was about the stable, sir,
so I have nae coot he helped the gentleman
wa' safe eno',' added Ferguson grimly.

I thought no more of the incident, which

the butler had reported simply because up

among the hills the sight of an unknown face

is an event.

VOL. I 16

But at four o'clock Babiole did not appear;
I sat waiting, looking through the pages of
Green's Short History of the English People,
on which we were then engaged, for twenty
minutes ; and then, almost alarmed at such
an unusual occurrence, I was getting up to
go and make inquiries at the cottage when I
heard her well-known footstep through the
open hall-door. Even before she came in I
knew that something had happened, for instead
of running in all eager, laughing
apology, as was her way on the rare occasions
when she was a few minutes late, I
heard her cross the hall very slowly and hesitate
at the door.

Come in, come in, Babiole ; what's the
matter ? ' I cried out impatiently.

She came in then quickly, and held out
her hand to me as she wished me good-afternoon.
But there was no smile on her face, and
the light seemed to have gone out of her eyes.

What is it, child ? Something has happened,'
said I, as I drew her down into her
usual chair.

She shook her head, and tried to laugh,
but suddenly broke down, and, bursting into
tears, leaned her face against her hands and
sobbed bitterly.

I was horribly distressed. I tried some
vaofue words of consolation for the unknown
evil, and laid my hand lightly on one heaving
shoulder, only to withdraw it as if seared by
the touch. Then I sat down quietly and
waited, while Ta-ta, more daring, set up a
kindly howl of sympathetic lamentation,
which happily caused a diversion.

I ought to be ashamed of myself,' she
said, sitting upright, and drying her eyes.
I don't know what you must think of me,
Mr. Maude.'

I don't think anything of you,' I said at
random, being far too much distressed by her

unhappiness to think of any words more
appropriate. ' Now, tell me, what is the
matter ? '

I was in no hurry for the answer, for I
had already a very strong presentiment what
it would be.

Papa has found us out ; he's at the cottage
now.'

But he was even nearer, as a heavy tread
on the stone steps outside the front door at
this moment told us. Babiole jumped up,
with her cheeks on fire and her lips parted,
rather as if prepared for the onslaught of a
mad bull.

Hem, hem, no one about! And no
knocker ! ' we heard a thick voice say imperiously,
as my town-bred visitor stumped
about the steps.

Look here, Babiole ; I think you'd better
go, dear. Run through the back door, and
comfort mamma.'

There was no use disguising the fact that
our visitor's arrival was a common calamity
She made one step away, but then turned
back, clasped my right hand tightly, and
whispered —

Remember, you don't see him at his
best. He's a very, very clever man, indeed
at home.'

Then she ran lightly away, without looking
at me again, half-conscious, I am afraid,
poor child, that her apology was but a lame
one. I rose, and went to the hall to invite
my visitor in.

Mr. Elmer's appearance had not improved
with the lapse of years. He was dressed in
the same brown overcoat that he had worn
when I made his acquaintance seven years
ago. It had been new then, it was very old,
worn, and greasy now ; still, I think it must
have been in the habit of lying by for long
periods, out of its owner's reach, or it could
scarcely have held together so well. Mr.
Elmer wore a round-topped felt hat, a size
too large for him, with a very wide and
rather curly brim, from under which his
long fair hair, which had the appearance
of being kept in order by the occasional

application of pomatum rather than by the
constant use of the comb, fell down over a
paper collar in careless profusion. The
same change for the worse was apparent
in the man himself. His face was more
bloated, his look more shifting, the whole
man was more sodden and more swaggering
than he had been seven years ago. If it had
not been for the two poor little women so
unluckily bound to him, I would not have
tolerated such a repulsive creature even on
my doorstep ; but for the sake of making
such terms with him as would rid us all of
his obnoxious presence, I held out my hand,
which he, after a moment's hesitation, took
and dropped out of his fat flabby palm, with
a look of horror at my scarred face.

'Will you come in?' said I, leading the
way into the study, which he examined on
entering with undisguised and contemptuous
disappointment.

Have you come far to-day, Mr. Elmer?'
I asked, handing him a chair, which I inwardly
resolved for the future to dispense
with, having sentimental feelings about the
furniture of my favourite room.

Yes, well I may say I have. All the
way from Aberdeen. And it's a good pull
up here from the station to a gentleman
who's not used to much walking exercise.'

He spoke in a low thick voice, very
difficult to hear and understand, his eyes
wandering furtively from one object to
another all the time.

Did you have much difficulty in finding
the place ? '

Oh yes. She had taken care to hide
herself well.' And his face slowly contracted
with a lowering and brutal expression.
' She thought I shouldn't find them
up here. But I swore I would, and when I
swear a thing it's as good as done.'

I hope you found your wife and daughter
looking well.'

Oh, theyx^ well enough, of course ; trust
them to get fat and flourishing, while their
husband and father may be starving ! '

Now this was laughable ; for whatever
defects Mr. Kilmer's appearance might have,
the leanness of starvation was not one of
them.

They were by no means fat and flourishing
when I first met them, I assure you,'
I said gravely.

The brute turned his eyes on me with
slow and sullen ferocity.

That was not my fault, sir,' he whispered
with affected humility, being evidently far
too stupid to know how his looks belied his
words. ' They had been away from me for
some time ; my wife left me because I was
unable to support her In luxury, the depression
in art being very great at this moment.

sir. She took my child away from me to
teach her to hate her own father, and to
bring her up in her own extravagant notions.'

'She has cured herself of those now,'
I said ; ' she lives on the barest sum necessary
to keep two people alive. It is, unfortunately,
all I can spare her for her kindness
in taking care of my cottage.'

This was true. I had often regretted
that the poor lady's inflexible independence
had made her refuse to accept more than
enough for her and her daughter, with the
strictest economy, to live upon. Now, I
rejoiced to think that she had absolutely no
savings to be sucked down into the greedy
maw of the creature before me. My words
were evidently the echo to some statement
that had been already made to him. Naturally,
he believed neither his wife nor me.

It's an astonishing thing, then, that a
woman should leave her husband just to

come and live like an old alms-house woman
in a tumble-down cottage fifty miles farther
than nowhere ! '

I said nothing ; indeed, I could not share
his astonishment.

He went on with rising bluster, and
louder, luckier voice.

And look here, if I hadn't heard this
great talk of your being such a gentleman, I
don't know whether I shouldn't feel it my
duty to call you to account.'

I rose to my feet, unable to sit still, but at
once sat down again, afraid lest I might not
be able to resist the advantage a standing
position afforded for taking him by the collar
and removing him to the flower-beds outside.


You are at liberty to satisfy your marital
anxiety by making any inquiries you please,'
said I, and looked at the door.

Don't be affronted, it was only chaff,'

said he. ' I know it's my daughter you're
after. I saw her sneak out of here just as I
came in by the back-way, as if ashamed to
look her father in the face.'

You d d scoundrel ! Get up and get

out of the house,' I hissed out in a flash of
uncontrollable rage.

He got up, and even made one slow step
towards the door ; but he did not go out,
nor did he seem afraid of me. He turned
deliberately when he was close to the screen,
and began to swing his walking-stick in the
old way I remembered, regardless of the
consequences in a room crowded with furniture
and ornaments. Then he looked into
his hat, and passed his hand thoughtfully
round the lining. I was still at a white heat
of indignation, but to lay violent hands on
this stodgy and unresisting person would
have been like football without the fun.

Look here,' he said, when we had stood

in this unsatisfactory manner for some moments.
His eyes were fixed upon his hat,
round which his podgy hand still wandered.
You're not taking me the right way. You
don't like me, I can see. Well, one gentleman
isn't bound to fly into the arms of
another gentleman first go-off. Not at all ;
I don't expect it. I may like you, and I
may not like you ; but I don't fly at your
throat and call you bad names by way of
introducing myself, even though I do find
my wife and daughter hiding away under the
shadow of your wing, as it were, from their
own husband and father.'

Here he looked up at me sideways with a
slow nod, to emphasise the little lesson in
good breeding which his example afforded.

Perceiving some show of reason in his
words, and some touch of more genuine
feeling in his manner, I said, ' Well ! ' and
leaned against the chimney-piece. With

this encouragement he stepped back to the
hearth rug again, and while To - to half-strangled
himself in futile attempts to get
at his trousers, he addressed to me the
following discourse, with the forefinger of
his right hand upraised, and the dusty point
of his cane planted deeply in a satin cushion
which Babiole had embroidered for my
favourite chair.

Look here,' he said, and for once his dull
round eyes met mine with the straightforwardness
of an honest conviction. ' Fullgrown
women are the devil. Either they're
good or they're bad. If they're bad — well,
we need say no more about them ; if they're
good, why — the less said about their goodness
the better. But a young girl, before
she's learnt a woman's tricks — and especially
if she's your own flesh and blood — why that's
different ! And my little girl, for all she
shows none too much affection for her father

(but that's her mother's doing), she's a Httle
picture, and I'm proud of her. And if

any infernal cad of a d d gentleman was

to be up to any nonsense with her, and

so much as to put his hand on her

pretty little head — look here, Mr. ,
I'd make a d d pulp of him ! '

And Mr. Elmer gripped my coat with a
fierceness and looked into my face with a
resolution which, in spite of the coarseness
which had disfigured his speech, warmed my
heart towards him. For, instead of the
contemptible sodden cur of a few minutes ago,
it was a man, — degraded by his course of
life, but still a man, with a spark of the right
fire in his heart, — who stood blinking steadily
at me with a persistency which demanded an
answer.

I freed my coat from his grasp, but without
any show of annoyance, and answered
him simply at once.

You won't have to make pulp of anybody
while your daughter lives at Ballater, Mr.
Elmer. I have watched her grow from a
child into — into what she is now, something —
to us who love her — between a fairy and an
angel ; and no father could take deeper
interest in his own child than I do in her.'

Deeper interest,' repeated Mr. Elmer
dubiously ; ' No ; I daresay not. But,
excuse me, Mr. — Mr. '

Maude.'

Yes, Mr. Maude, no offence to you, but
you're a man yourself, you know.'

After the contumely with which he had
treated me, the admission seemed quite a
compliment. I made no attempt to deny it,
and this reticence emboldened him.

Now, why don't you marry her yourself?'


To have the wish which has been secretly
gnawing at the foundations of your heart

suddenly brought face to face with you is
a startling and confounding experience. I
think no convicted ruffian can ever have
looked more guiltily ashamed of himself than
I, as I felt the hot blood mount to my head,
and my brain swim with the first full consciousness
of a futile passion. Of course,
the man before me put the worst construction
upon my evident confusion ; he repeated ina
louder and more blustering tone —

Why don't you marry her ? '

In the first place,' said I quietly, 'she is
scarcely more than a child, Mr. Elmer.'

That's not much of a fault, for she won't
improve as she loses it. Besides, you needn't
marry her at once.'

In the second place, I am quite sure she
wouldn't have me.'

Why not ? She seems to like you.'

She does like me, as a beautiful girl may

like a grandfather, battered and scarred in
VOL. I 17

war, or a homeless cur which she has picked
up and which has grown attached to her.
To be frank with you, Mr. Elmer, nothing
but my ugly face prevents me from becoming
a suitor for your daughter ; but that obstacle
is one which, without any undue self-depreciation,
I know to be one which makes
happy marriage impossible for me.'

I don't know,' said Mr. Elmer, in a
tone of generous encouragement ; ' good
looks don't always carry it off with the
women. Look at my wife, now : well, to be
sure, she was proud enough of getting me ;
but, do you think the feeling lasted ? No, I
might have been a one-eyed hunchback, sir,
before we'd been man and wife three months !
There's no knowing what those creatures will
like, let alone the fact that they never like
the same thing more than a week together —
barring a miracle.'

And Mr. Elmer looked at me, with his

head a little on one side, as if expecting that
the narration of his experience would conclusively
affect my views on matrimony. As
I said nothing, however, being, indeed, too
much involved in a whirlpool of doubts and
longings and miserable certainties to have
any neatly-turned phrases ready with which
to carry on the conversation, he presently
cleared his throat and went on again.

You see,' he said, with an odd assumption
of paternal dignity, which covered some
genuine feeling as well as some genuine
humbug, * it isn't often that I can spare the
time to take a journey as long as this.
Therefore, when I do, I like to see something
for my trouble. Well, and what I
mean to see this time is one of two things :
either I leave with the knowledge that my
daughter is engaged to be married to an
honourable gentleman who is able to support
her, and willing to be good to her, or I leave

with my daughter herself, and I put her in
the way of earning her own Having on the
stage, which is a more honourable position
than playing housekeeper to any gentleman
in the land.'

And you would take her mother with her,
of course ? ' I said, as easily as I could, with
a sudden gloomy misgiving that Babiole,
happy as she was among the hills, would
snatch at the chance of rushing into the
conflicts of the busier life in which she took
such an ominous interest.

Oh, she can do as she likes,' answered
Mr. Elmer with a sudden return, at mention
of his wife, to sullen and brutal ferocity of
look and tone.

I was horror struck at the possibility of
my little fairy choosing to leave the shelter
of the hillside under the protection of this
man, whose caprice of paternal pride and
affection might, I thought, at any moment of

drunken irritation or disappointment, change
to the selfish cruelty with which he had
treated his hard-working wife.

Will you give me till tomorrow morning
to think about it, and to speak to Babiole,
Mr. Elmer ? ' I asked, after a few moments'
rapid thought. ' In the meantime we will do
our best to make you comfortable, either
here or at the cottage. Of course, I cannot
prevent your saying what you please to your
daughter, but I hope you will, in fairness tome,
let me plead my own cause unblessed by
one word from you. The subject is one I
know she has never dreamed of, and it will
surprise and may even startle her very much.
So that I may ask so much of you, and beg
you to rely on my discretion.'

Mr. Elmer seemed pleased with the
success of his diplomacy, and he offered mea
fat, pink, lazy hand to shake.

Say no more, sir ; between gentlemen

that is quite sufficient. And I should like to
add, sir, that if everything should turn out
as we both desire, you need have no fear of
being put upon by your wife's relations, whatever
Babiole's mother may say. The votaries
of Art, sir, are used to poverty, and need not
blush for it. But I should be glad to think
that my devotion to it had brought only its
dignity, and not its penalties, upon my
daughter.'

I shook his hand heartily, almost feeling,
for the moment, so deep was his own conviction,
that this greasy person with the
paper collar — whose language and sentiments,
like an unturned musical instrument,
could rise and fall to such unexpected heights
and depths — was really treating me with a
generous condescension for which I ought to
be grateful.

I accompanied him to the door, and
watched his ponderous figure making its way

I

to the cottage, near the entrance of which I
saw his wife waiting for him ; then I whistled
to Ta-ta, who had followed the stranger fora
few steps in order to get a better view of
his retreat, and, taking my hat, went down
the drive for a walk. It was past five, and
the April sun was shining out a fair goodnight
to the hills after a day of rain ; faint
tufts of pale green were showing on the dark
foliage of the larch-trees, and the daisies in
the soft grass were beginning to take heart
at the death of winter. One could think
better in the fresh spring-scented air than
between walls of solemn books. As for that,
though, my plan of action was already decided
on, and contemplation of it, even under
the inspiration of the perfume of the firs, and
the babble of the water over the stones of
the Dee, resulted in no improvement on my
first idea. This was no less than to make
a formal proposal to Babiole, which she must

accept on the clear understanding that it was
to form no tie upon her, but which would
satisfy her father and allow her to remain
still in the safe shelter of this nook among
the hills. The girl was only fifteen, much too
young for any serious love-ventures of her
own, so that I argued that my engagement
to her would be merely a most loyal guardianship
which would reach its natural end when
the handsome young prince should break his
way through the enchanted forest and wake
her up with the traditional kiss. Hope for
myself, I can assuredly say, I had very little ;
and, if this modesty seems excessive in a man
in the very prime of life, who, moreover, had
already some sort of assured place in the
esteem of the girl he loved, I can only say
that there was a balance against me in the
books of the sex which I was paying off to
this one member of it, and, therefore, in proportion
as I had felt myself to be too good

for the rest of those I had met, so I felt that
Babiole Elmer was too good for me. The
matter was arranged in my own mind with
very little trouble, and I was eager to unfold
it to her. I had half expected to find her in
the road through the fir-forest, knowing that
after the day's rain the little maid must be
thirsting for a long draught of the fresh
sweet air — but no ; I passed through it and
out into the open country, over the stone
bridge of Muick, skirted the Dee and crossed
it again by Ballater Bridge into the village,
without a glimpse of her.

The sun was getting low behind the hills
when I reached the western foot of Craigen-
darroch, and, without a pause, began to climb
between the glistening branches of the budding
oak-trees up to the top. I had no
distinct purpose in coming so far, and the
faint bark of my own dog, which reached my
ears as I was ascending the bare and rocky

space which separates the oak-grown lower
slope from the fir-crowned summit of the hill,
caused me to stop suddenly in surprise and
excitement so sharp and so sudden that all
the blood In my body seemed to rush to my
head, and my heart to continue its action by
unwonted, tumultuous leaps.

I pulled myself together, not without some
consternation at the phenomenon.

I came up the hill too fast,' I said to
myself, and crept up the slabs of rock that
now formed a wet and slippery footway
among the firs, with a sensation of horror at
the thought of Babiole's trusting her little
feet on such a treacherous path.

At the top, a little way beyond the cairn,
I came upon her suddenly. She was sitting
on the trunk of a fallen tree, looking out to
the western hills, across the slopes of which
were lying dense, cloudlike mists, white
against the blackness of the darkening hillsides.

The last red rays of the sinking sun
threw upon her face a weird unnatural glow,
and caused her moist eyes to glisten like
strange gems in the sun-lit marble of her
still features. The wild sweet sadness of
her expression, like that of a gentle animal
who has been stricken, and does not know
why, brought a lump into my throat, and
caused me to halt at some distance from her
with a feeling of shy respect.

Ta-ta, who sat by her side, with a senses
nose on the young girl's knee,
saw me at once, but merely wagged her tail
as an apologetic intimation that I must
excuse her from attendance on me, as she
had weightier business on hand than mere
idle frisking about my heels.

But the movement in her companion
attracted Babiole s attention ; she turned her
head, saw me, and started up.

The spell was broken ; she was in a

moment the sweet smiling Babiole of everyday.
But I could not so soon get over the
shock of the first sight of her face : I had
seemed to read vague prophecies in the wide
sad eyes. I smiled and held out my hand,
but I left it to her to open the conversation.

It's very nice up here, isn't it, Mr. Maude?'
Babiole said, after a few seconds' search for
an opening remark.

But it's much too late for you to be out
here by yourself.'

Yes. I had forgotten it was so late,'
she said humbly, with a sensitive blush at
my mild reproof. ' Poor mamma wanted to
be quiet, and told me to go out ; so I came
here.'

She was winding about her the thick plaid
she always carried when the weather was
cold ; and this, when adjusted Highland
fashion across the shoulder, made her, in

conjunction with the knitted Tam-o'-Shanter
cap she wore, a most picturesque and appropriate
figure among the dead heather and
the fir-trees.

You look Hke Helen Macgregor,' said I,
smiling.

She smiled back brightly, but shook her
head.

I haven't courage enough for myself,
much less enough to inspire anybody else
with,' she said rather sadly.

Courage is a thing you can't measure
until you have to use it. What makes you
think you have none, Babiole ? I feel sure
you have a great deal.'

She began to laugh, in the shyest, sweetest,
prettiest way ; and, putting her hand on
the stout stick I carried, she twisted it round
and round in the earth, and looked up in my
face affectionately.

Yes, yes, I know. That is the way you

always teach me. You told me I was intelligent
and industrious, until I began to be
both ; and I daresay, if you were to tell me
long enough, — in your own kind way, helping
me on by your own strong wish, — that I
was brave, why I should become so. But
I'm not now.'

Tell me how you know that'

'Well, to-day I only heard of something
that — that would be very hard to bear, and I
broke down altogether.'

What was it ? '

No answer.

Was it something your father said ? '

She looked up with a flash of inquiry in
her eyes.

'Was it something about your going
away from here ? '

She answered by a look only ; a look that
was timid, mournful, affectionate, and that
had yet another element ; for behind all this

tenderness and softness, there danced the
restless yearning of an eager young spirit.

Well, and haven't I heard certain people
talking about the interesting things that goon
in the world, and hinting that Ballater
was a slow and tiresome old place, where
nothing ever happened worth mentioning ? '

She blushed and hung her head a moment,
and then began her defence in a very meek
voice.

'I don't think I've really ever spoken so
ungratefully as that about dear old Ballater.
It's quite true that I should like to see a little
more of the big world outside some day, but
I think I could be content to hear what you
care to tell me about it for a year or two
longer first. The fact is, Mr. Maude,' she
went on, looking up at me with an altogether
irresistible smile of affection and sympathy,
I could make up my mind to leave the hills,
but I can't make up my mind to leave you.'

What an opening ! I began to shiver and
quake and to give signs of such unmistakable
nervousness that Babiole evidently thought I
was going to be taken with a fit of some sort.
She looked helplessly around, and I gave a
laugh like a schoolboy who comes too early
to his first ball.

I'm not ill, Babiole ; I have something to
say to you.'

Upon this she became nearly as much
disturbed as I, and the colour left her sensitive
face, as she sat mutely down on the tree-trunk
again to hear me.

I — don't want you to — go away — either
Babiole,' I jerked out slowly and unsteadily.
' You are very young, and I think
you can afford to wait before seeing the
world, — if you are not tired of this place and
the people in it. Everybody here likes you,
I may say, loves you ; and, at any rate, if the

life is not very exciting, it has no great cares.

VOL. I 18

But your father, who does not know us so
well as you do, is reluctant to leave you here
without some sort of — of formal guarantee
for your safety.' Babiole looked up at me
from time to time in bewildered expectancy
of something new and awful.

Safety ! ' she echoed in an amazed
whisper.

'Yes. Girls, when they grow to your
age, must have a — a responsible guardian,
you know. How old are you ? '

I shall be sixteen in July.'

Well, you see, in a few years you will be
old enough to be married, and your father is
naturally anxious to see you well provided
for : established, you know, settled — in fact,
married.'

Babiole was growing calmer. On reflection,
of course there was nothing so alarming
in the mention of a woman's natural end as
to justify the horror which one is accustomed

to consider maidenly ; but I was surprised at
the time to find that she listened to me so
quietly. I thought it would have helped me
more if she had shied at the subject, so to
speak ; some little show of emotion of one
kind or another would have spurred me onto
make a better business of the whole thing
than I was doing. Her eyes, instead of
being raised from time to time inquiringly to
mine, were now fixed on the last faint glow
of sunlight behind the hills; but she said
nothing, and I had to go on.

He is so bent upon it, in fact, that he says
that, young as you are, he will only let you
remain here looser on one condition.'

She looked up quickly, with a change of
expression which I took for that of vague
apprehension.

What condition ?'

You must be engaged — affianced — to someone
he approves of before he leaves you.'

Babiole began to laugh. ' But papa must
know that that is ridiculous. I am not a
princess, to make so much fuss about. Besides,
I am old enough, mamma says, to stay
with her if I like.'

We can't complain of your father for
thinking so much of you. And there is a
very simple way of satisfying him, if you
really do care to stay any longer at the old
cottage. Remember, your father could easily
persuade your mother to go away with him
if he were bent on having you ; and then the
old life for her would begin again.'

The girl rose to her feet in great excitement.


What is the simple way ?'

You can become engaged to me.

I had not prepared her in the least, after
all. She did not start or speak, but I could
see by her face that she was utterly surprised.
I was afraid of a hasty refusal, and now

screwed up to the pitch of daring, I hurried
on without further hesitation.

You know, Babiole, I am not asking you
to marry me now, or at any future time.
That must be for a handsomer, more dashing
fellow than I. But I want you to understand
that I am your guardian up to the time when
the dashing young fellow turns up ; and till
then we will be just as we have always been.
You understand, child, that there is to be no
binding tie on you at all, nothing new except
the understanding that I am answerable to
your father for your safety and happiness.
Now, are you willing to have me ?'

I tried to put the question as a joke, but I
was much moved.

She put her hand into mine without at
first answering, but her eyes were full of tears
before I had ended.

I will do whatever you wish, now and
always, Mr. Maude,' she said so sweetly, so

softly, that at once I began to realise the
peril to myself of what I had done, as a great
yearning seized me to draw the little creature
into my arms, and tell her what a poor chance
it was that she would ever find among the
fair-featured sons of men a slave so docile as
I would be for just the right to cherish her.

I wish I had, now.

Then, however, I only said, ' That's right,'
in a strangled voice ; and we began to go
down the hill together. But I discovered
that this explanation, which was to have been
so small and simple a thing, had already
changed in some degree the character of our
intercourse. Babiole gave me her hand to
help her down, as freely and simply as she
had often done before ; but it seemed to me
now that it was the hand of a fair young
woman, instead of the hand of a child. It
was some change in the girl herself, and not
in me, I felt sure, for I had been fully

conscious of my own love and my own
longings ever since, on my return from Norway,
I had found her still with the sweet
flower-face, but with the form and shy proud
manner of a budding woman. I considered
this phenomenon as we crossed the wild bare
slope beneath the fir-trees, and as we found
our way through the growing darkness of the
oak-branches, with the silver water shining
before us in the distance, and the mist
gathering about us as we went down. There
was no touch of coquetry about her manner
whereby I could take courage, but a very
pretty gravity which seemed to denote that
even such a poor thing as a temporary and
make-believe engagement to marry demanded
that one should put away childish things and
talk about the affairs of the nation.

We both enjoyed that walk back to Lark-hall
very much ; she, because of the delicious
new sense of importance which our secret

understanding gave her; I, because there
was now a Hnk, however frail, between us,
and because I was already deep enough in
the mire to feel that there was but a maimed
poor creature in my place when she was out
of my sight. It was dark when we got into
the drive, and Mr. and Mrs. Elmer were
both about, peering into bushes, and calling
their daughter in a futile way, rather to fill
up the time when their tete-astute palled, than
because they really expected to find her
under a rhododendron or a laurel.

I told you she was all right,' said the lady
sharply, as we came up.

'Aha! Where have you been ?' asked
her husband with ponderous roguery.

On Craigendarroch, papa,' answered
Babiole simply, letting her arm remain in
mine, this being the straightforward way I
had chosen of making known the result of
our meeting.

Mrs. Elmer was eager to break up the
party, and insisted that Babiole's boots must
be wet, and that she ought to come and
change them. But the artist had something
to say first.

She won't catch cold. She's been too
well employed, haven't you, Bab ?' he asked,
seizing her by the arm, with a laugh that set
her blushing.

I hastened to put a stop to this inquisition.

'She will tell you all about it presently.
I think she had better go with her mother
now, while I speak to you, Mr. Elmer.'

He let her go, being in high good
humour, consequent upon the discovery and
appropriation of some whisky in his wife's
cupboard. I told him that his daughter had
consented to become engaged to me, and
assured him that I would do my best to make
her happy. He grew a little maudlin over
the hardship of parting with an only daughter,

which, though rather far-fetched, was to be
expected ; but he was genuinely glad that
she was well provided for, and took care to
point out to me with some shrewdness that
his pride in his daughter was perfectly disinterested,
as he had been so long a waif and
stray upon the world that the world was considered
by his relations as bound to support
him, even if he had not been, as he was, too
proud to accept from any man more than a
mount when he was footsore, or a drink when
he was thirsty.

I began to feel quite sorry for the poor
beggar, and the feeling was increased later, in
spite of his causing me to pass a most uncomfortable
evening. They all came in to
see me after dinner. Mr. Elmer watched
Babiole about with great pride, tried her
voice at the piano, on which he performed
with some taste, and declared that it was good
enough for grand opera. On the other hand

he missed no opportunity of snubbing his wife
with ferocity, begged her not to skip, and
advised her to leave her juvenile ways to her
daughter. Poor Babiole spent the evening
in torture. At each word of extravagant
praise to herself she blushed uncomfortably;
at every unkind speech to her mother the
tears came to her eyes. In the climax of her
misery I bore a most unwilling share.

I was bidding them all good-night on the
doorstep, and was shaking hands with
Babiole, when Mr. Elmer, who had several
times during the evening disconcerted us
both by tactless reference to the supposed
excited state of our feelings, said jocularly,
that that was not the way sweethearts parted
when he was young. Ready to satisfy him,
but afraid to offend or frighten Babiole, I
laughed awkwardly and hesitated, while the
young girl blushed and tried, for the first
time, to withdraw her hand from mine.

Don't be affected, Bab,' said her father
roughly.

I would have let her go, but at the sharp
words she shivered, and put up her face with
a sob of sensitive terror to mine. I stooped
and kissed her, and if she shrank from the
touch of my trembling lips, or the contact of
my hideous face with her fair cheek, at least
she felt none of the burning bitterness which
seemed to turn my very heart to gall, and the
caress of my hungry lips into a sting. For
the remembrance of the last fair girl I had
kissed, of the languid indifference which had
left her cold to my devotion, rushed into my
brain and gave added venom to this second
and more severe misfortune. She drew away
from me with a new timidity, and ran down
the steps after her mother, while Mr. Elmer
smoked a last cigar with me in the garden, and
called upon me to condole with him, which,
in the disturbed state of thought and feeling

I was In, I was ready enough to do. For
when he pitifully dilated on the life his acid-tempered
wife had led him, on the coldness
with which she had always repelled instead of
encouraged him, on the martyr-like airs with
which she had received his every attempt to
reform, I felt that I was ready to side with
the most worthless man living against the
most worthy woman, and listened sympathetically
; and when he pointed to the
dutifully subdued fear which shone in his
daughter's eyes, in answer to the gaze of his
own affection, I listened in silence to his
cynical conclusion : —

Women, they make you pay by the nose
either way, sir. If they're not honest, they
take it out of your pocket ; if they're honest,
they take it out of your heart. But rob you,
one way or another, they all will to the
end.'

And he went off to the cottage in a meek

and maudlin manner, which made his subsequent
conduct a most bewildering surprise.
For, on the following morning, Mrs. Elmer
was not to be seen, and, on her next appearance
in public some evenings later, it was
evident that her husband had made a forcible
appeal to her memory of old times by giving
her a black eye. In the meantime Babiole
was wild, shy and unapproachable by either
her father or me. This state of affairs being
untenable, and his wife's very small provision
of whisky exhausted, Mr. Elmer in the
course of the afternoon took a dispirited farewell
of us, armed with a note to the stationmaster
at Aberdeen, which I explained would
obtain him a free railway-pass to London.
He thanked me for my courtesy, but was by
no means disarmed by it. In the midst of a
sentimental leave-taking, he suddenly flashed
up into ferocity as I reminded him that his
wife and daughter were well and safe with

each other, which must be some comfort in
the prolonged absence from them which the
claims of Art forced upon him.

Well and safe ! ' he repeated, his face
resuming the brutal lowering look which had,
under the amenities of social intercourse,
sunk into a placid animal contentment.
Yes, I should hope so. For I can tell
you it would be a bad time for those who
had anything to do with it when my little
girl was anything else but well and safe.'

The man was in earnest, — genuine brutal
earnest. Without again offering me his hand,
and with merely a nod by way of last salutation,
he left me in the study, where we had
been holding this last interview, with impulsive
abruptness. I sat down and looked at
the fire, glad the man was gone, and thinking
no more of him, but of his fair little daughter,
and of the best means of effacing the uncomfortable
impression made by this violent and

unwelcome irruption into our old harmonious
intercourse.

I had been occupied thus about ten
minutes, disturbed by no sound but the
dashing of the rain of a sharp April shower
against the windows, when the hall-door was
pushed open again, and the hoarse gruff
voice I had hoped to hear no more broke
upon my unwilling ears again.

Come, no nonsense, aren't you safe with
your own father?' I heard Mr. Elmer say
angrily, to the accompaniment of plaintive
pleadings and protests from Babiole, whom,
the next moment, he dragged in before me.
He had not waited for her to put on a hat,
but had thrown over her head her mother's
mackintosh, which he now pulled off, leaving
her pretty brown hair tumbling in disorder
about her eyes. She was pitifully shy and
unhappy, poor child, and she shrank back
with crimson cheeks as her father drew her

arm firmly through his, and brought her
close up to me as I stood, in great anger
and perturbation, on the hearthrug.

Mr. Maude,' he said, ' you will excuse a
father's solicitude.'

He had been making up that opening ashe
came along I felt sure, from the pompous
effect with which he produced it. He raised
his hand as I was bursting into an angry
protest, and continued —

You have obtained my daughter's consent
and my consent to becoming her
affianced husband.' This, too, was a studied
phrase, brought out with pedantic decision.
' On that understanding I leave her
and her mother in this neighbourhood
with confidence, and I call upon you to
swear '

But here Babiole broke away from him,

and retreating quickly to the other side of the

table, out of reach of the rough paternal arm,
VOL. I 19

she cried out, with burning cheeks and
flashing blue eyes —

Papa, you are insulting Mr. Maude, and
I can't listen. He has been the best friend
we ever had ; nobody knows how good he
is ; and now for you, who ought to thank
him, — honour him for what he has been tous,
— to talk as if you mistrusted him, as if
we mistrusted him, — Oh, it is too horrible !
I can't bear it ! How can we stay here after
this ? How, if we do stay here, can we
look him in the face? He is the best man
in all the world, and the kindest, and the
cleverest ; and oh ! you might have trusted
him, and not have brought this shame upon
us ! '

And the poor child crouched down upon
the nearest chair, and turned away her head
to hide her falling tears.

Her father listened to this outburst with
unmoved pompous stolidity ; but as she

sank down, he looked from her to me with
a proud and satisfied glance, as much as to
say, ' Do you observe my daughter's exquisite
sensibility ? This is one of the results of a
parent's devotion to Art.'

Mr. Elmer, let me walk down the
drive with you,' said I hurriedly, quite
unmanned and nerveless at the sight of
the girl's distress. ' Surely, we can arrange
everything to your satisfaction by
ourselves.'

There I differ from you,' said he, doggedly
holding his ground, determined to
carry through to the end his own more
dramatic plan of settlement. * I am a father,
Mr. Maude, and a father's sense of his duty
to his child must be respected. I am not
insensible that you have so far shown yourself
quite the gentleman.'

Babiole, so to speak, curled up at this.

And therefore I have permitted this

engagement. But I must have it plain that
I hold you responsible for my little girl's
happiness, and that if anything goes wrong
with her, it is you — you, Mr. Maude — who
will have to answer for it to me ! '

He spoke with savage earnestness which
impressed me, and struck terror into his
daughter, whom he kissed with genuinely
passionate tenderness on both cheeks.

'Good-bye, Bab,' said he; 'be a good
girl, and don't grow too like your mother.
Don't be too sweet to the man you fancy till
he's your husband, and you'll have more
sweetness to spare for him then. Don't
believe your mother when she says your
father's nothing but a blackguard, for he'll
do more for you at a pinch than any of
your beaux. Good-bye, child. God bless
you ! '

She kissed him, trembling, with timid
affection answering to his tenderness —

'Good-bye, papa,' she said, and added ina
whisper, ' Won't you some day Hve with
mamma and me again ? We would try to
make you happy, and I am learning to
understand all about Art.'

'Ah, well, some day perhaps,' he said
hastily, and disengaged himself from her
twining arms.

I thought he was going out without
any further greeting to me, but close to
the door he stopped, and giving me a
stolid frown, jerked his head slowly back
in the direction of his daughter ; then,
with a menacing nod to remind me of
his warning, he left the room and the
house. A minute later I saw him blubbering,
— there is no other word for it, — like a
great overgrown child as he went down the
drive.

I waited at the window on purpose to
give Babiole time to recover enough serenity

to bridge over the awkwardness of the situation.
The startling necessity of the case
restored her to full self - command much
sooner than I had expected. After a very
few minutes, during which I heard her sobs
die away like a child's into silence, I ventured
to turn round, and found her with red
swollen eyelids and a very sad little face,
but perfectly calm. She rose from her chair
in quite a dignified way, and said —

We have kept you from your work, I am
afraid, Mr. Maude,' with the odd primness
which I could remember as one of her earliest
characteristics.

'Not at all. I — I was not busy,' I
answered, with frozen stiffness.

For the moment I dared not speak to her,
except under this ridiculous mask of frigidity ;
such a lot of indiscreet emotions were bubbling
up in me, ready to burst into rash
speech at the first opening. She seemed a

little dismayed by my coldness, and hung her
head in what I knew to be shame at her
father's clumsy show of mistrust.

Well, you shall have a little peace now at
least,' she said, without looking at me, as she
crossed to the door.

And to-day's lessons ? ' I asked rather
abruptly.

I think I will ask you to excuse me
to-day,' she said in a trembling voice.

'Certainly,' said I, with an involuntary
bow, which caused her to look up and redden
at this unusual ceremoniousness.

The old footing was, for a time at least,
completely destroyed.

Good-afternoon, Mr. Maude,' she said.

'Good-afternoon,' I repeated.

But, as she took another step and reached
the screen, her shy glance met mine ; impulsively
she stretched out her hand. I
seized it, and for one brief minute we looked

Straight into each other's eyes with the
frank confidence of our old friendship :
the next, she had broken away, and I was
left alone with silent To-to and sympathetic
Ta-ta.

END OF VOL. I

G. C. 6^ Co.

Printed dy R. & Clark, Edinburgh.

E MlIxlxS

RiQ^ENCE ^RDSN

- jia««!«JBLrfi^saiife;;

LI B RAR.Y

OF THE

University

Of ILLINOIS

-T^^^»^ ^7f; \yf^:::-:^''

BY

FLORENCE WARDEN

AUTHOR OF 'THE HOUSE ON THE MARSH,' ETC.

IN TWO VOLUMES
VOL. II

LONDON
RICHARD, BENTLEY & SON, NEW BURLINGTON STREET
Pufalisi}{;rs in ordinary to ^cx iHajtstg tfje ©ticcn


CHAPTER XIV

That visit of Mr. Kilmer's, — hard as I tried,
and, as I believe, Babiole tried, to cheat myself
into believing the contrary, — spoiled the
old frank intercourse between us for ever. It
was my fault, I know. Dreams that stirred
my soul and shook my body had sprung up
suddenly on that faint basis of a spurious tie
between me and the girl I had before half-unconsciously
loved. Now my long-torpid
passions stirred with life again and held Walpurgis

Night revels within me. Our lessons
VOL. 11 20

had to be laid by for a time, while I went
salmon-fishing, and tried to persuade myself
that it had been long neglect of my rod that
had caused forgotten passions and yearnings
to run riot in my blood in this undisciplined
manner. But it would not do. Tired out I
would drag my way home, eat a huge dinner,
and sink half-asleep into my old chair. I instead
of my falling into stupid, happy, dreamless
slumber, the leaden numbness of fatigue
would settle upon my limbs, while the one
figure whose growing ascendancy over my
whole nature I made these energetic efforts
to throw off, would pass and repass through
my mind's dull vision, the one thing distinct,
the one thing ever-recurring, enticing me to
follow It, eluding me, coming within my grasp,
escaping me, and so on for ever.

Then I tried a new tack : the lessons were
resumed. But we were both more reserved
than in the old days, and I, at least, was constrained

also. It was not the old child-pupil
sitting by my side ; it was the woman I wanted
to cherish in my bosom. The old free correction,
discussion, were exchanged for poor
endeavours by little implied compliments, by
mild attempts at eloquence, by appeals to her
sentiment when the subject in hand allowed
it, to gain her goodwill, to prepare her for the
time, which must come, when I should have
to entreat her to forget my hideous face and
try to love me as a husband.

I knew I was making hopeless, ridiculous
mistakes in my conduct towards her ; that the
change in my manner she took merely as an
acknowledgment that she was now in some
sort ' grown-up,' and answered by a little
added primness to show that she was equal
to the requirements of the new dignity. I
felt that eight years' neglect of the sex threw
a man a century behind the times with regard
to his knowledge of women, and I was growing

desperate when a ray of light came to mein
the darkness of my clumsy courtship. I
would consult Normanton, who was in the
swim of the times, and who might be able to
advise me as to the prudence of certain bold
measures which, in my desperation, from time
to time occurred to me. Neither Babiole nor
I ever spoke about her father's visit, but the
attempt to go on as if nothing had happened
never grew any easier, and I welcomed the
visit of my four friends, which took place
rather earlier in the year than usual.

It was in the beginning of July that they
all dropped in upon me in their usual casual
fashion, and we had our first dinner together
in a great tempest, excited by Edgar's announcement
that this was his last bachelor
holiday, as he was going to be married. I
listened to the torrents of comment that, by
long-standing agreement among us, were
bound to be free, with new and painful interest

; at any rate, I reflected that the private
advice I was going to ask of Edgar later
would now have the added weight of experience,
and would, therefore, be more valuable
than it could have been in the old days of his
unregenerate contempt for women. To hear
my Mentor browbeaten on this subject was
not altogether disagreeable to me, for I had
a keen memory of his somewhat lofty tone of
indulgence to me in the old times.

And — er — what induced you to take this
step ? ' asked Fabian, in an inquisitorial tone,
which implied the addition, ' without consulting
us.' He was holding a glass of sherry in
his hand, and he looked at it as if he thought
that his friend's unaccountable conduct had
spoilt its flavour.

Edgar blushed and looked conscience-stricken.
I feasted my eyes upon the sight.

Well, I believe there is always a difficulty
about giving a satisfactory account of these

things, — an account, that is to say, which will
satisfy the strict requirements of logic'

*We expect an account consistent with
your own principles, often and emphatically
laid down. If you have not sinned against
those, you will be listened to with indulgence,'
said Fabian dogmatically. ' You shall be
judged under your own laws.'

Come, that's rather hard upon him,'
pleaded Mr. Fussell.

Edgar dashed into his explanation in an
off-hand manner.

I met her at a tennis-party.' Maurice
Browne, who hated muscular exercise, groaned.
She wasdressedin light blue flannel.' Fabian,
who had been at Oxford, hissed. Edgar
stopped to ask if this conduct were judicial.

*As a set-off against your advantage of
being judged by your own laws, we claim the
right to express our feelings each in his own
manner,' explained Fabian. * Go on.'

*We entered into conversation.' Dead
but excited silence. ' I found she had read
Browning,' — Murmurs of disgust from Fabian,
of incredulity from Browne ; placid and vague
murmur, implying ill-concealed non-apprehension,
from Mr. Fussell, — ' but did not understand
him.' Explosion of mirth, in which
everybody joined. ' I offered my services as
some sort of interpreter.' Sardonic laugh
from Browne. ' Merely on the assumption
that a bad guess is better than none.' Interpellation
from Fabian, ' 'Tis better to have
guessed all wrong, than never to have guessed
at all.' Edgar continued : ' After that we
met again,' — deep attention, — 'and again.'
Murmurs of disappointment. 'At last we
became engaged.'

A pause. Fabian drank a glass of champagne
off hastily, and rose with frowns.

It seems to me, gentlemen, that a taste
for Browning and blue flannel, which is all

our honourable friend seems to be able to put
forward in favour of this lady, is a poor equipment
for a person who (unless our honourable
friend has gone back very far from his often-declared
views on the subject of matrimony)
is to be his guiding genius to political glory,
the spur to his languid ambition, the beacon
to his best aspirations, — in fact, gentlemen,
the tug-boat to his man-of-war.'

'And as no girl reads Browning except
under strong masculine pressure,' added
Browne gravely, ' our friend the man-of-war
must make up his mind that other and perhaps
handsomer vessels have been towed
before him, with the same rope.'

Is the lady handsome ? ' asked Mr. Fus-sell.


Edgar hesitated. ' She has an intelligent
face,' he said.

Upon this there arose much diversity of
opinion ; Fabian holding that this was consistent

and even praiseworthy, while Maurice
Browne and Mr. Fussell agreed that to deliberately
marry a woman without positive
and incontestable beauty ought to disqualify
a man for the franchise as a person unfit for
any exercise of judgment. When, however,
Edgar, after allowing the controversy to rage,
quietly produced and passed round the portrait
of a girl beautiful enough to convert the
sternest bachelor, there was a great calm, and
the conversation, with a marked change of
current, flowed smoothly into the abstract
question of marriage. Edgar was not only
acquitted ; he changed places with his judges.
Every objection to matrimony was put forward
in apologetic tones.

For my part, when I speak bitterly of
marriage, of course I am prejudiced by my
own experience,' said Mr. Fussell, with a sigh
that was jolly in spite of himself. He was
separated from his wife, — everybody knew

that ; but he ignored — perhaps even scarcely
took in the significance of — the fact that he
had previously deserted her again and again.

Maurice Browne averred that his only objection
to marriage was that it was an irrational
bond ; men and women, being animals with
the disadvantage of speech to confuse each
other's reason, should, like the other animals,
be free to take a fresh partner every year.

This was received in silence, none of us
being strong enough in natural history to
contradict him, though we had doubts. He
added that a book of his which was shortly
to be brought out would, he thought, do much
to bring about a more logical view of this
matter, and to do away with the present
vicious, because unnatural, restrictions.

Mr. Fussell, the person present whose
private conduct would the least bear close
inspection, was sincerely shocked, and wished
to speak in the interests of morality, when

Fabian broke in, too full of his own views to
bear discussion of other people's.

Marriage,' he asserted in his excitable
manner, ' for princes, for dukes, for grocers,
and, in fact, the general rabble of humanity,
is not a choice, but a necessity, according to
the present state of things, which I see no
pressing need to alter. But for the chosen
ones of the earth — the artists,' — involuntarily
I thought of Mr. Elmer, — 'by which I, of
course, mean all those who, animated by some
spark of the divine fire, have obeyed the call
of Art, and given their lives and energies to
her in one or another of her highest forms, —
for us artists, I say, marriage is so much an
impediment, so much an impossibility, that I
unhesitatingly brand as mock-artists those
fiddlers, mummers, and paint-smugglers who
prefer the vulgar joys of domestic union to
the savage independence and isolation which
Art — true Art — imperatively demands. The

wife of an artist — for as long as the pure soul
of an artist remains weighted by a gross and
exacting body, as long as he has dinners to
be cooked, shirt-buttons to be sewn on, and
desires to be satisfied, he may have what the
world calls a wife ; that wife must be content
with the position of a kindly-treated slave.'

At this point there arose a tumult, and
somebody threw a cork at him. He
wanted to say more, but even Browne, who
had given him a little qualified applause,
desired to hear no more ; and amid kindly
assurances that hanging was too good for
him, and that it was to be hoped Art would
make it hot for him, and so forth, he sat
down, and I, perceiving that we were all
growing rather warm over this subject, suggested
a move to the drawing-room, into
which I had had the piano taken.

A little figure in pale pink stuff sprang up
from a seat in the corner as we came in, letting

a big volume of old-fashioned engravings
fall from her arms. It was Babiole, who had
been too deep in her discovery of a new book
to expect us so soon. She gave a quick
glance at the window by which she had prepared
a way of escape ; but seeing that it was
too late, she came forward a few steps without
confusion and held out her hand to Fabian,
who seemed much struck with the improvement
two years had brought about in her
appearance. Then, after receiving the greetings
of the rest, she excused herself on the
plea that her mother was waiting for her at
tea, and made a bow in which most of us saw
a good deal of grace, to Maurice Browne,
who held open the door for her.

As Browne then made a rush to the piano,
I lost no time in taking Edgar on one side
under pretence of showing him an article in a
review, and in unburdening myself to him
with very little preface. I was in love, hopelessly

in love. He guessed with whom at
once, but did not understand my difficulty.

She seems a modest, intelligent little girl ;
she has every reason to be grateful to you,
even fond of you. Why should you be so
diffident ? '

I explained that she was beautiful, romantic,
inexperienced ; that her head was still full
of silky-locked princes and moaned castles, or
with creatures of her fancy little less impossible
; all sorts of dream-passions were seething
in her girl's brain I knew, for I understood
the little creature with desperate clearness of
vision which only seemed to make her more
inaccessible to me. If I could only conquer
that terrible diffidence, that overwhelming
awe that her fairy-like ignorance and innocence
of the realities of life imposed upon me,
I felt that I could plead my cause with a fire
and force that would surmount even that
ghastly obstacle of my hideous face ; but then.

again, fire and force were no weapons to use
against the indifference of childlike innocence;
and to ask her in cold blood to marry me
without making her heart speak first in my
favour would be monstrous. She had looked
upon me till lately as she would have looked
upon her grandfather, and this unsatisfactory
affection had given place lately to a reserve
which was even more unpromising. Edgar
listened to me, did not deny the enormous
fascination of a young mind one has oneself
helped to form, but thought that I should
resist it, and was rather indignant that I had
not taken the opportunity of her father's visit
to rid myself of mother and daughter together.
He inclined to the idea that the two
unlucky women were imposing on my generosity
and were determined to make ' a good
thing' out of me, and it was not until I
had spent some time in explaining minutely
the footing upon which we stood to one

another that his prejudices began to give
way.

At this point I perceived that Maurice
Browne was playing at chess with Mr. Fus-sell,
while Fabian had disappeared. When
the game was over, they insisted on our joining
them at whist. Before we had played
one game I began to grow nervous at Fabian's
long absence, and Mr. Fussell, who was my
partner, took to leaning over the table as soon
as I put down a card, and with one finger
fixed viciously in the green cloth, and his
starting eyes peering up into my face over
his double eyeglass, saying in a sepulchral
voice —

Did you see what was played, Mr.
Maude ? '

I had trumped his trick, revoked, and done
everything else that I ought not to have done
before the missing Fabian came back in a
tornado of high spirits, and with a tiny white

Scotch rose at his buttonhole. Now there
was only one Scotch rose-bush in the garden,
and it grew by the porch of the cottage and
was Babiole's private property. When the
hand was played out I got Fabian to take my
place, for my fingers shook so that I could
not sort my cards.

While I had been arguing with Edgar the
necessity of delicacy in making love to a
young girl, Fabian had dashed into the breach,
and now bore the trophy of a first success on
his breast.

VOL. II 21

/U-O

I BELIEVE that Edgar, In the innocence of his
heart, thought that Fabian's headlong flirtation
and flaunting success with the girl I
loved in such meek and forlorn fashion formed
a salutary experience for me.

For while the young actor invariably
sloped from fishing excursions, and disappeared
from picnics, and had a flower which
I absolutely recognised in his buttonhole
every day, Edgar contented himself with
preaching to me a philosophical calm, and
ignored my pathetic insinuations that he
might do some unspecified good by ' speaking
to ' Fabian. Indeed, that would have been

a delicate business ; especially as I had announced
myself to be the girl's guardian, and
she was thus undeniably well provided with
protectors. All the consolation I had was the
reflection that this flirtation could only last a
fortnight ; but as it was my guests themselves
who fixed not only the date but the duration
of their stay, even this comfort was destroyed
by their agreeing among themselves to extend
their visit by another ten days. When I
learned that this was upon the proposal of
Fabian I took a stern resolution. I invited
Mrs. Elmer and her daughter to join us in
all our expeditions, so as to establish an effective
check upon the freedom of their intercourse.
The result of this was that Mrs.
Elmer abandoned herself to a rattling flirtation
with Mr. Fussell, while Fabian walked off
with Babiole to ea-ther flowers, or to climb hills,
or to race Ta-ta, in the most open manner, and
Edgar laughed at my annoyance, and talked

about hens and ducklings to me in an exasperating
undertone.

I think he began to believe that I was
entering prematurely into the doddering and
senile stage — this straight, wholesome, handsome
fellow, who disdained the least pang of
jealousy of the girl who was fortunate enough
to have secured his magnanimous approval.
If he had been branded with a disfiguring
scar, he would have renounced the joys of
love with such staunch, heroic, ' broad-shouldered
' fortitude, that there would have been
quite a rush for the honour of consoling him ;
it was not in him to find anything deeper
than lip-compassion for feverish and morbid
emotions. I admired his grand and healthy
obtuseness, and wished that he could bind
my eyes too. But I saw plainly enough the
radiance of unnatural exaltation of feeling
which lighted up the young girl's face after
a walk with Fabian, and I knew that the

hectic enthusiasm of his artist temperament
was kindling fires in the sensitive nature,
which it would be danger to feed and ruin to
extinguish. With a morbid sensibility of
which I was ashamed, I could look into the
girl's glowing blue eyes as I shook her hand
and bade her good-night, and feel in my own
soul every emotion that had stirred her heart
as she roamed over the hills with Fabian that
day.

It was near the end of the third week of
my visitors' stay, that I waited one night for
Fabian's return from the cottage, to which he
and Mr. Fussell had escorted the two ladies,
who had dined with us. Mr. Fussell had
returned, and gone into the house to play
cards. Fabian came back sixteen minutes
later. There had been a proposal to extend
my visitors' stay still further, and upon that
hint I had determined to speak. I was leaning
against the portico, as we called the porch

of the house, to distinguish it from that of the
cottage. I had smoked through two cigars
while I was waiting, but at the sound of his
footsteps I threw the third away. Fabian
walked with a long swinging step : off the
stage the man was too earnest to saunter ;
crossing a room, eating his breakfast, always
seemed a matter of life or death to him ; and
if he had to call a second time for his shaving-water,
it was in the tones of a Huguenot
while the Saint Bartholomew was at its
height. I had always looked upon him asa
very good fellow, impetuous but honourable,
doing intentional harm to no one. But
I knew the elasticity of my sex's morality
where nothing stronger than the sentiments
is concerned, and I knew that his impetuosity
was kept in some sort of check by his
ambition. His restless erratic life, and
his avowed principles, were antagonistic to
happy marriage, and I knew that he was in

the habit of satisfying the besoin d aimer by
open and chivalrous attachments to now one
and now another distinguished lady ; and this
knightly devotion to Queens of Love and
Beauty, though It makes very pretty reading
in the chronicles of the Middle Ages, Is not,
in the Interest of nineteenth century domestic
peace, a thing to be revived. So, although
I had miserable doubts that the steed was
already stolen, I was determined to lock the
stable door.

Lovely night,' said he. ' I like your
Scotch hills at night ; and, for the matter of
that, I like them In the daytime too.'

Fabian always sank the fact that he was a
Scotchman, though I burned just now with
the conviction that he was tainted with the
national hypocrisy.

I suppose you will be glad to get back to
the hum and roar again by this time, though,'
I said as carelessly as I could.

Fabian had none of Edgar's serene obtuseness.
H e looked at me to find out what I meant.

*Well, you know, we were thinking of
imposing ourselves upon you for another
week, if you have no objection.'

This show of civility was the first shadow
on our unceremonious intercourse. In spite
of myself I was this evening grave and stiff,
and not to be approached with the customary
affectionate familiarity. There was silence
while one might have counted twenty. Then
I said —

That was yoz^r proposal, was it not ? '

I spoke so gravely, so humbly, that my
question, rude as it was in itself, could not
offend.

Why — yes,' said he in a tone as low and
as serious as my own. ' What's the matter,
Harry?'

Will you tell me, honestly, why you want
to stay ?'

His big burning eyes looked intently into
my face, and then he put one long thin hand
through his hair and laughed.

Well, after all that you've done to make
our stay agreeable, that's a queer question to
ask;

I put my hand on his shoulder and forced
him to keep still.

Look here, Baby, I don't want to insult
you, you know ; but are you staying because
of that little girl ?'

He drew himself up and answered me with
a very fine and knightly fire —

Do you take me for a scoundrel ?'

No ; if I did you would never have
touched the child's hand.'

Then what do you mean ?'

Simply this, that I know Babiole better
than you do, and I can see that every word
you say to her strikes down deeper than you
think. She is an imaginative little — fool if

you like ; she believes that the romance of
her Hfe is come, and she is beginning to live
upon it and upon nothing else.'

Fabian considered, looking down upon the
grass, in which he was digging a deep symmetrical
hole with his right heel. At last he
looked up.

I think you're wrong ; I do indeed,' he
said earnestly. ' You know as well as I do
that my trotting about with her has always
been as open as the day ; that it was taken
for granted there was no question of serious
love-making with a mere child like that. I'm
sure her mother never thought of such a thing
for a moment.'

Now I knew that Mrs. Elmer, on principle,
scoffed so keenly at love in her
daughter's presence, by way of wholesome
repression of the emotions, that she would be
sure to think that she had scoffed away all
danger of its inopportune appearance.

My dear boy, I acquit you of all blame
in the matter. The mother we can leave out
of account ; she is not a person of the most
delicate discrimination. But I tell you I
have watched the girl '

'That is enough,' interrupted Fabian abruptly,
and with off-hand haughtiness. ' Of
course, if I had understood that you were
personally interested in the little girl '

I interrupted in my turn. ' I am interested
only in getting her well, that is — happily —
married.'

Fabian bowed. 'You are anticipating
your troubles with your ward, or pupil, or
whatever you call her,' said he lightly,
though he was angry enough for his words
to have a bitter tone. ' However, of course
I respect your solicitude, and Babiole and I
must, for the next few days, hunt butterflies
on separate hills.'

And shaking me by the shoulder, and

laughing at me for an old woman, he went
into the house.

But he was obstinate, or more interested
than he pretended to be. I know that it was
he who next morning at breakfast put up
Fussell and Maurice Browne to great eagerness
for the extension of their stay. When I
regretted that I had made arrangements forgoing
to Edinburgh on business on the date
already settled for their departure, Fabian
glanced up at my face with a vindictive
expression which startled me.

This was the last day but one of my
visitors' stay. We all went on the coach to
Braemar, having taken our places the night
before. As we all walked in the early morning
to Ballater station, from which the coach
starts, I overheard Fabian say to Babiole —

We shan't be able to see much of each
other to-day, little one. Your maiden aunt
disapproves of my picking flowers for you.

But ril get as near as I can to you on the
coach, and this evening you must get mamma
to invite me to tea.'

Maiden aunt ! ' she repeated, evidently
not understanding him.

They were behind me, so that I could not
see their faces ; but by a glance, a gesture,
or a whisper Fabian must have indicated me ;
for she burst out —

Oh, you must not laugh at him ; it is not
right ; I won't hear anything against Mr.
Maude.'

Sh ! Against him ! Oh dear, no ! ' And
the sneer died away in words I could not
hear.

They had fallen back, I suppose, for I lost
even the sound of their voices ; but I heard
no more than before of the monologue on
the New Era in literature to which Maurice
Browne was treating me. He was the
pioneer of this New Era, so we understood ;

and there was so much more about the
pioneer than about the era in his talk on
this his favourite subject, that we, who were
quite satisfied to know no more of the inmost
workings of his mind than was revealed by
the small talk of daily existence, seldom
gave him a chance of unburdening himself
fully except when our minds, like mine on
this occasion, were deeply engaged with
other matters.

On the coach Fabian sat next to Babiole,
who looked so sweet in a white muslin hat
and a frock made of the stuff with which
drawing-room chairs are covered up when
the family are out of town, that Maurice
Browne, in a burst of enthusiasm, compared
her to a young brown and white rabbit.
Fabian had brought his umbrella, so I told
myself, for the express purpose of holding it
over his companion in such a manner as to
prevent me, on the back seat, from seeing

the ardent gaze of the man, the shy glances
of the girl, which I jealously imagined underneath.
Everybody declared that it was a
beautiful drive ; I had thought so myself a
good many times before. The winding Dee
burnt its way through the valley in a blaze of
sunlight on our left, past the picturesque
little tower of Abergeldie, with its rough
walls and corner turret ; past stately, romantic
Balmoral, whose white pinnacles and
battlements peeped out, with royal and
appropriate reserve, from behind a screen of
trees, on the other side of the river, far
below us. Near here we found our fresh
team, standing quietly under a tree, by a
ruined and roofless stone building. Oddly
frequent they are, these ruinous farms and
cottages, in the royal neighbourhood. As
we drew near Braemar the scenery grew
wilder and grander. Between the peaks of
the bare steep hills, where little patches of

tall fir-trees grow on inaccessible ledges on
the face of the dark-gray rock, we caught
glimpses of Lochnagar, with its snow-cap
dwindled by the summer sun into thin white
lines. We passed close under steep Craig
Clunie, where the story goes that Colonel
Farquharson, of Clunie, hid himself after
the battle of Culloden, and heard King
George's soldiers making merry over their
victory in his mansion, which, in common
with all old Scotch country-houses, is called
a castle. As the castle is three-quarters of a
mile from the Craig, Edgar opined that the
Colonel must have had sharp ears. Then
he scoffed a little at the obstinate ignorance
of the Highland gentlemen who would
hazard an acre in defence of such a futile
and worthless person as Charles James
Stuart. Edgar had advanced political
notions, which, in another man, I should
have called rabid. I said that if it had been

merely a matter of persons, and not of
principles, I should have backed up the
Colonel, since I would sooner swear allegiance
to a home-born profligate than to one
of foreign growth ; but then I own I would
have English princes marry English ladies,
and I feel a sneaking regard for Henry the
Eighth for having given his countrywomen
a chance, and thereby left to the world our
last great sovereign by right of birth. Queen
Elizabeth.

That umbrella in front of me had made
me cantankerous, I daresay ; at any rate, I
disagreed persistently with Edgar for the
rest of the way, and called Old Mar Castle
a mouldy old rat-hole merely because he was
struck with admiration of its many-turreted
walls. We had luncheon at the Fife Arms,
where we were all overpowered by Mr.
Fussell, who, having been allowed by the

coachman to drive for about half a mile as
VOL. II 22

we came, became so puffed up by his superiority,
and so tiresomely loud in his boasts
about his driving that, Fabian being too
much occupied with Babiole to shut him up,
and nobody else having the requisite dash
and disregard of other people's feelings, we
all sneaked away from the table, one by one,
as quickly as we could, and left him to finish
by himself the champagne he had ordered.
These three, therefore, spent the hours
before our return in the neighbourhood of
Braemar together. While keeping within
the letter of his promise to have no more
tHe-astute walks with Babiole, Fabian thus
easily violated the spirit of it ; since Mr.
Fussell, being too stout and too sleepy after
luncheon to do much walking, suggested
frequent and long rests under the trees,
which he spent with gently-clasped hands,
and a handkerchief over his face to keep the
flies off.

The rest of us took a beastly hot walk to
the Falls of Corriemulzle, and I wondered
what I could have before seen to admire in
them. Coming back, Mrs. Elmer chased
Maurice Browne for some indiscreet compliment.
A tropical sun would not have taken
the vivacity out of that woman ! and Edgar
fell through a fence on which he was resting,
was planted in a bramble, and said ' Damn '
for the first recorded time in the presence of
a lady. That is all I remember of the expedition.


For the return journey, as Mr. Fussell had
retired into the interior of the coach for a
nap, being the laziest of men when he was
not the busiest, I took the box-seat by the
coachman, and was thus spared the sight of
another tête-à-tête. After dinner that evening
Fabian disappeared as usual in the direction
of the cottage, and on the following day,
which was the last of my visitors' stay, he

threw his promise to the winds so openly that
I began to think he must have made up his
mind to let his principles go by the board, and
make love seriously. In that case, of course,
I could have nothing to say, and however
much I might choose to torment myself with
doubts as to the permanent happiness of the
union, I had really no grounds for believing
that his vaunted principles would stand the
test of practical experience better than did
the ante-matrimonial prattle of more commonplace
young men.

On the morning of my guests' departure
the house was all astir at five o'clock in the
morning. There was really no need for this
effort, as the train did not leave Ballater till
8.25, and my Norfolk cart and a fly from
Macgregor's would not be at the door before
half-past seven. But it was a convention
among us to behave to the end like schoolboys,
and, after all, a summer sunrise among

the hills is a thing to be seen once and remembered
for ever.

So there was much running up and downstairs,
and sorting of rugs and collecting of
miscellaneous trifles (I declare if they had
been professional pickpockets I could not
have dreaded more the ravages they made
among the more modern and spicy of the
volumes in my library), and there was a
general disposition to fall foul of Edgar for
the approaching vagary of his marriage,
which would break up our Round Table
hopelessly.

I look upon this as a '' long, a last goodbye
" to Normanton,' said Maurice Browne,
shaking his head. ' No man passes through
the furnace of matrimony unchanged. When
we see him again he may be a better man,
refined by trial, ennobled by endurance ; but
he will not be the sine. He will be a phoenix
risen from the ashes of the old '

Or a wreck broken up by the waves,'
added Mr. Fussell.

I looked out of one of the eastern windows
at the red sun-glow, in which I took more
pleasure than the Londoners, perhaps because
I considered it as a part of my Highland property.
To the left, standing in the long wet
grass, shyly hiding herself among the trees,
was Babiole ; I went to another window
from which I could see her more plainly, and
discovered that her little face was much paler
than usual, that she was watching the portico
with straining eyes ; in her hand, but held
behind her, was a red rose, that she drew out
from time to time and even kissed. I think
she was crying. It was half-past six o'clock.
I turned away and went back to my friends,
who were already deep in a gigantic breakfast.
From time to time I went back, on
some pretext or other, to the window : she
was always there, in the same place. The

fourth time I looked out she was shivering ;
and her hands, red with the cold of the morning,
were tucked up to her throat, red rose
and all. I went up to Fabian, who I am
sure must have been at quite his third chop,
and touched him on the shoulder.

There's some one waiting outside, — waiting
for you, I think,' said I, in a low voice,
under cover of the rich full tones of my true
friend Fussell, who was waxing warm in the
eloquence of his farewell to Scotch breakfasts.

Fabian got up at once and went out. I saw
the child start forward, crimson In a moment,
and the tears flowing undisguisedly ; and with
a choking feeling at my throat I turned away.

Hallo, why you're not eating, Harry,'
cried Maurice presently. ' You must be in
love.'

Another of 'em ! ' groaned Fussell.

No,' said I hastily. ' The fact Is I had
something to eat before you came down.'

There was a roar at my voracity, but their
own appetites were too vigorous for them to
disbelieve me. I remember clearly only this
of our final departure for the station : that
Fabian turned up late, dashing after us down
the drive in fact, and leaping up on to the
Norfolk cart beside me. And that his eyes
were dry, but that the front of his coat, just
below the collar, was wet, perhaps with the
dew. Nevertheless, if Edgar had not been
behind us, I should have felt much inclined,
when we drove along the road by the Dee,
just where the bank is nice and steep, to give
a jerk of the reins to the left, pitch my artistic
friend out into the river's stony bed, and take
my risk of following him.

Life seemed to move in a somewhat slow
and stagnant manner for several days after
the departure of my guests. I scarcely saw
Babiole, and never spoke to her, a great shyness
towards each other having taken possession
of both of us. Mrs. Elmer, upon
whom I made a ceremonious call when I
could contain my anxious interest no longer,
was stiff in manner, haughty and depressed.
She had evidently been informed of my
opposition to Fabian's intention of extending
his stay, and I soon learnt, to my great
surprise, that she considered me responsible
for the destruction of Babiole's first chance —

and the only one she is likely to have, poor
child, living poked up here,' of ' settling
well

*Oh,' said I, raising my eyebrows, and
putting into that one exclamation as much
sardonic emphasis as I could, while I kept
my eyes fixed upon the cat and my hands
much occupied with my deer stalker, ' and
may I be permitted to learn how I have done
this?*

It is useless to put on a satirical manner
with me, Mr. Maude,' said the lady with
dignity ; ' I am perfectly aware that it was you
who objected to Mr. Scott's remaining here
long enough to make proposals for my
daughter, and that, in fact, you interfered in
the most marked way with his courtship of
her.'

And are you ignorant of the fact, madam,
that to interfere with a man's courtship is
the very way to increase its warmth, and

that if my interference, as you call it, could
not screw him up to the point of proposing,
nothing ever would ? '

Mrs. Elmer dropped into her lap the
work which she had snatched up on my
entrance, and at which she had been stitching
away ever since, as a hint that she was busy
and would be glad to be left alone ; at the
same time being, I think, not sorry to vent
her ill-humour on some one.

'You are using very extraordinary expressions,
Mr. Maude,' she said acidly. ' If
her mother was satisfied with the gentleman's
behaviour, I really don't see what business
you had in the affair at all.'

Do you forget that her father has made
me responsible for the care of her ? that she
is certainly under my guardianship, and
nominally engaged to me.'

Nominally ! There it is. To be engaged
to a man who acknowledges that he never

means to marry you ! There's a pretty
position for a girl, as I've said to Babiole
scores of times ! '

My heart leaped up.

You've said that to Babiole ! ' I echoed,
in a voice of suppressed rage that brought
the little slender virago at once to reason.

'Well, Mr. Maude, with all respect to you,
the position is something like that,' she said
more reasonably.

It is not at all like that,' I answered in
my gravest and most magisterial tones. ' If
your daughter could by any possibility overcome
a young girl's natural repugnance to
take for husband such an unsightly object as
accident has made me, I should be a much
happier man than I am ever likely to be.
But she could not do so ; there is such a
ghastly Incongruity about a marriage of
that sort that I could scarcely even wish
her to do so.'

Mrs. Elmer's eyes had begun to glow with
the carefully but scarcely successfully subdued
interest of the match-making mamma. This,
however, gave place to uneasy disappointment
as I went on —

*A11 the same I take an interest in your
daughter's happiness quite as strong as if it
were a more selfish one. It was that interest
which prompted me to prevent the prolonging
of a flirtation which might have serious
consequences for your sensitive and impressionable
little daughter.'

Serious consequences ! ' stammered Mrs.
Elmer. ' Do you mean to say that Mr.
Scott, your friend, is a dishonourable man ? '

No,' said I, ' I would not say anything so
severe as that. But I am certainly of
opinion that Mr. Scott had no more serious
intention than to fill up his time here
pleasantly by talks and walks with a pretty and
charming girl. Lots of pretty and charming

girls accept such temporary devotion for
what it is worth, and their regrets, when the
amusement is over, are proportionately light.
But I know that Babiole is not like that, and
so I did all that my limited powers of
guardianship could do to lessen the danger.'

But he may still write and propose,'
murmured the dismayed mother. ' Even if
his intentions were not serious while he was
here, he may find he cannot get on without
her!'

I wanted to shake the woman, or to box
her ears, and ask her how she had dared
wittingly to expose her daughter to the misery
of hanging on to such a hope as this.

I don't think it's likely,' I said drily ; and
questioning my face with doubt in her eyes,
the match-maker tried another tack.

After all, Mr. Maude, it may be for the
best,' she began in a conciliatory tone. ' It
was I, rather than Babiole, that was so hot

Upon this match, not understanding that my
poor child had any chance of a better husband.
For my part, I don't see that you have
any reason to talk about yourself in the desponding
manner you do, and if you will only
trust for a little while to my diplomacy, and
speak to her when I give you the word that
it's the right moment '

I interrupted her by standing up suddenly,
and I can only hope my face did not express
what I thought of her and her miserable
diplomacy.

You will oblige me by saying not one
word to your daughter on the subject of me
and my impossible pretensions,' I said authoritatively,
but with a sickening knowledge
that my demand would be disregarded. * I
am sensitive enough and humble enough on
the score of my own disadvantages, I admit.
But I am not a miserable wreck of humanity
who would take what perfunctory favours a

woman would throw to him, and be satisfied.
I am a man with powers of loving that any
woman might be proud to excite ; and no girl
shall ever be my wife who does not feel of
her own accord, and show, as an innocent
girl can, that I have done her a honour in
loving her which she is bound to pay back
by loving me with all her might.'

And much excited by my own unexpected
burst of unreserve, but somewhat ashamed
of having rather bullied a poor creature who,
however she might assume the high hand
with me, was after all but an unprotected and
plucky little woman, I held out my hand
with apologetic meekness and prepared to go.
Mrs. Elmer shook my hand limply and
showed a disposition to whimper.

Don't worry yourself and don't bother —
I mean — er — don't talk to the child. It will
come all right. She's hardly grown up yet ;
there's plenty of time for half-a-dozen princely

suitors to turn up. And what do you say to
taking her once a week to Aberdeen and
giving her some good music lessons ? It
will distract her thoughts a bit, and do you
both good.'

This suggestion diverted the little woman's
tears, and her face softened with a kindly
impulse towards me.

'You are very good, Mr. Maude, you
really are,' she said in farewell as I left
her.

And though I was grateful for this amende,
I should have been more pleased if I could
have felt assured that she would not, in default
of Mr. Scott, tease her daughter with
recommendations to get used to the idea of
myself in the capacity of lover.

Of course after this interview I was more

shy than ever of meeting Babiole, and even

when, on the second evening afterwards, I

saw her standing in the rose garden, apparel.
II 23

gently waiting for me to come and speak to
her, I pretended not to see her, and after
examining the sky as if to make out the signs
by which one might predict the weather of
the morrow, I turned back to finish my cigar
in the drive. But the evening after that
I found on my table a great bowl full of
flowers from her own private garden, and on
the following afternoon, while I was writing
a letter, there came pattering little steps in
the hall and a knock at my open study door.

'Come in,' said I, feeling that I had gone
purple and that the thumping of my heart
must sound as loudly as a traction engine in
the road outside.

Babiole came in very quietly, with a
bright flush on her face and shy eyes. Her
hands were full of tiny wild flowers, and
among them was one little sprig carefully
tied up with ribbon.

I found a plant of white heather this

morning on one of the hills by the side of
the Gairn,' said she quickly. ' You know
they say it is so rare that some Highlanders
never see any all their lives. It brings luck
they say.'

Why do you bring it to me then ? ' I
asked, as she put the little blossom on the
table beside me. ' You should keep luck for
yourself, and not waste it on a person who
doesn't deserve any.'

She had nothing to say to this, so she
only gave the flower a little push towards me
to intimate that I was to enter into possession
without delay. I took it up and stuck it in
the buttonhole of my old coat.

It has brought me luck already, you see,
since this is the first visit I have had from
you for I don't know how long,' I said, looking
up at her, and noticing at once with a
pang that she had grown in ten days paler
and altogether less radiant.

She blushed deeply at this, and sliding
down on to her knees, put her arms round
Ta-ta, and kissed the collie's ears.

Ta-ta has missed you awfully,' I went on ;
she told me yesterday that you never take
her out on the hills now, and that her digestion
is suffering in consequence. She says
her tail is losing all its old grand sweep for
want of change of air.'

Babiole smoothed the dog's coat affectionately.


I haven't been out much lately,' she said
in a low voice ; ' there has been a great deal
to do in the cottage, and here too. I've
been hemming some curtains for Janet, and
helping mamma to make pickles. Oh, I've
been very busy, indeed.'

And I suppose all this amazing superabundance
of work is over at last, since you
can find time to come and pay calls of ceremony
on chance acquaintances.'

She looked up at me reproachfully. My
spirits had been rising ever since she came
in, and I would only laugh at her.

I'm sure it is quite time those curtains
were hemmed and those pickles were made,
so that you can have a chance to go back to
Craigendarroch and look about for those
roses you've left there.'

Roses ! Oh, do I look white then ? '
And she began to rub her cheeks with her
hands to hide the blush that rose to them.

Has your mother said anything to you
about Aberdeen and the music lessons ? '

*Yes.' She looked up with a loving
smile.

I had turned my chair round to the fireplace,
where a little glimmer of fire was burning
; for it was a wet cool day. Babiole had
seated herself on a high cloth-covered footstool,
and Ta-ta sat between us, looking from
the one to the other and wagging her tail to

congratulate us on our return to the old terms
of friendship. The sky outside was growing
lighter towards evening, and the sun was
peeping out in a tearful and shamefaced way
from behind the rain-clouds. The girl and
the sun together had made a great illumination
in the old study, though they were not
at their brightest.

Well, and how do you like the idea ? '

It is quite perfect, like all your ideas for
making other people happy.'

I'm afraid I don't always succeed very
well.'

This she took as a direct accusation, and
she bent her head very low away from me.

Has your mother been talking to you,
Babiole.^'

Yes ' — as a guilty admission.

What did she say ? '

Oh, she talked and talked. That was
why I didn't like to come and see you. You

see, though I told her she didn't understand,
and that whatever you thought must
be right, yet hearing all those things made
me feel that I — I couldn't come in the old
way. And then at last I missed you so —
that I thought I would dash in and — get it
over.'

From which I gathered that Mrs. Elmer
had babbled out the whole substance of our
interview, and coloured it according to her
lights, so I ventured —

Didn't you feel at all angry with me for
something I said — something I did ? '

A pause. I could see nothing of her face,
for she was most intent upon making a beautifully
straight parting with my ink-stained
old ivory paper-knife down the back of
Ta-ta's head.

I had no right to be angry,' she said at
last, in a quivering voice, ' and besides — I am
afraid — that what you said will come true.'

And the tears began to fall upon her busy
fingers. I put my hand very gently upon
her brown hair and could feel the thrill sent
through her whole frame by a valiant struggle
to repress an outburst of grief.

'You are afraid then that ' And I

waited.

*That he will never think of me again,'
she sobbed ; and unable any longer to repress
her feelings, she sat at my feet for
some minutes quietly crying.

I hoped that the distress which could find
this childlike outlet would be only a transient
one, and I thought it best for her to let
her tears flow unrestrainedly, as I was sure
she had no chance of doing under the sharp
maternal eyes. I continued to smooth her
hair sympathetically until by a great effort
she conquered herself and dried her eyes.

I am a great baby,' she said indignantly ;
as if I could hope that a very clever accomplished

man, whom all the world is talking
about, would be able to remember an
ignorant girl like me, when once he had
got back to London.'

'Well, and you must pull yourself together
and forget him,' I said — I hope not
savagely.

But there came a great change over her
face, and she said almost solemnly —

No, I don't want to do that — even if I
could. I want to remember all he told me
about art, and about ideals, and to become
an accomplished woman, so that I may meet
him some day, and he may be quite proud
that it was he who inspired me.'

So Mr. Scott had known how, by a little
dash and plausibility, and by deliberately
playing upon her emotions, to crown my
work and to appropriate to himself the credit
and the reward of it all.

But after this enthusiastic declaration

the light faded again out of her sensitive
face.

It seems such a long, long time to wait
before that can happen,' she said mournfully.


And a remarkably poor ambition to live
upon, I thought to myself.

'And do you think Mr. Scott's approbation
is worth troubling your head about If,
after all his enthusiasm about you, he forgets
you as soon as you are out of his sight ? ' I
asked rather bitterly.

Cut at this suggestion, corresponding so
exactly with her own fears, she almost broke
down again. It was In a broken voice that
she answered —

I can't think hardly about him ; when I
do it only makes me break my heart afterwards,
and I long to see him to ask his
pardon for being so harsh. He was fond of
me while he was here, I couldn't expect more

than that of such a clever man. And he has
sent me one letter — and perhaps — I hope —
he will send me another before long.'

He has written to you ? '

Yes.' As a mark of deep friendship forme
she not only let me see the envelope
(preserved in a black satin case embroidered
with pink silk) but flourished before my eyes
the precious letter itself, a mere scrap of a
note, I could see that, and not the ten-pager
of your disconsolate lover.

I was seized with a great throb of impatience,
and clave the top coal of the small
fire viciously. She must get over this. I
turned the subject, for fear I should wound
her feelings by some outburst of anger
against Mr. Scott, who must indeed have
worked sedulously to leave such a deep
impression on the girl's mind.

'Well, you will have to be content with
your old master's affection for the present,

Bablole,' I said, when she had put her
treasure carefully away.

'Oh, Mr. Maude!' She leant lovingly
against my knee.

And if the worst comes to the worst you
will have to marry me.'

She laughed as if this were a joke in my
best manner.

Didn't your mother say anything to you
about that ? ' I asked, as if carrying on the
jest.

Babiole blushed. ' Don't talk about it,'
she said humbly. ' I lost my temper, and
spoke disrespectfully to her for the first time.
I told her she ought to be ashamed of herself,
after all you have done for us.'

Evidently she thought the idea originated
with her mother, and was pressed upon me
against my inclination. Seeing that I should
gain nothing by undeceiving her, I laughed
the matter off, and we drifted into a talk

about the garden, and the croup among Mr.
Blair's barefooted children at the Mill o'
Sterrin a mile away.

According to all precedent among love-lorn
maidens, Babiole ought to have got
over her love malady as a child gets over the
measles, or else she ought to have dwindled
into ' the mere shadow of her former self
and to have found a refined consolation in
her beloved hills. But instead of following
either of these courses, the little maid began
to evince more and more the signs of a
marked change, which showed itself chiefly
in an inordinate thirst for work of every
kind. She began by a renewed and feverish
devotion to her studies with me, and
assiduous practice on my piano whenever I
was out, to get the fullest possible benefit
from her music lessons at Aberdeen. This,
I thought, was only the outcome of her expressed
desire to become an accomplished

woman. But shortly afterwards she received
her mother of the whole care of the cottage,
filling up her rare intervals of time in helping
Janet. Walks were given up, with the exception
of a short duty-trot each day to Knock
Castle or the Mill o' Sterrin and back again.
When I remonstrated, telling her she would
lose her health, she answered restlessly —

Oh, I hate walking, it is more tiring than
all the work — much more tiring And one
gets quite as much air in the garden as on
Craigendarroch, without catching cold.'

She was always perfectly sweet and good
with me, but she confessed to me sometimes,
with tears in her eyes, that she was growing
impatient and irritable with her mother. I
had waited as eagerly as the girl herself for
another letter from Fabian Scott, but when
the hope of receiving one had died away, I
did not dare to say anything about the sore
subject.

About the middle of December she broke
down. It was only a cold, she said, that
kept her in the cottage and even forced her
to lay aside all her incessant occupations.
But she had worked so much too hard lately
that she was not strong enough to throw it
off quickly, and day after day, when I went
to see her, I found my dear witch lying back
in the high wooden rocking-chair in the
sitting-room, with a very transparent-looking
skin, a poor little pink-tipped nose, and large,
luminous, sad eyes that had no business at all
in such a young face.

On the fifth day I was alone with her,
Mrs. Elmer having fussed off to the
kitchen about dinner. I was in a very
sentimental mood indeed, having missed my
little sunbeam frightfully. Babiole had
pushed her rocking-chair quickly away from
the table, which was covered with a map and
a heap of old play-bills. By the map lay a

pencil, which the girl had laid down on my
entrance.

What were you doing when I came in ? '
I asked, after a few questions about her
health.

The colour came back for a moment to
her face as she answered —

I was tracing our old journeys together,
mamma's and mine ; and looking at those old
play-bills with her name in them.'

The occupation seemed to me dismally
suggestive.

You were wishing you were travelling
again, I suppose,' said I, in a tone which fear
caused to sound hard.

Oh no, at least not exactly,' said the
poor child, not liking to confess the feverish
longing for change and movement which had
seized upon her like a disease.

I remained silent for a few minutes,
struggling with hard facts, my hands clasped

together, my arms resting on my knees.
Then I said without moving, in a voice that
was husky in spite of all my efforts —

Babiole, tell me, on your word of honour,
are you thinking about that man still ? '

I could hear her breath coming in quick
sobs. Then she moved, and her fingers held
out something right under my averted eyes.
It was the one note she had received from
Fabian Scott, worn into four little pieces.

Look here, dear,' I said, having signified
by a bend of the head that I understood,
do you think a man like that would be likely
to make a good husband ? '

Oh no,' readily and sadly.

But you would be his wife all the same ?'

Oh, Mr. Maude ! ' in a low trembling
voice, as if Paradise had been suddenly
thrown open to mortal sight.

I got up.

'Well, well,' I said, trying to speak in a
VOL. I 24

jesting tone, ' I suppose these things will be
explained in a better world ! '

Mrs. Elmer came in at that moment,
and the leave-taking for the day was easier.

Won't you stay and lunch with us, Mr.
Maude ? I've just been preparing something
nice for you,' she said with disappointment.


Thank you, no, I can't stay this morning.
The fact is I have to start for London this
afternoon, and I haven't a minute to lose.'

Babiole started, and her eyes, as I turned
to her to shake hands, shone like stars.

'Good-bye, Mr. Maude,' she faltered,
taking my hand in both hers, and pressing it
feverishly.

And she looked into my face without any
inquiry in her gaze, but with a subdued hope
and a boundless gratitude.

Mrs. Elmer insisted on coming over to the
house to see that everything was properly

packed for me. As I left the cottage with
her I looked back, and saw the little face,
with its weird expression of eagerness,
pressed against the window.

It was an awful thing I was going to do,
certainly. But what sacrifice would not the
worst of us make to preserve the creature we
love best in the world from dying before our
eyes ?

I ARRIVED at King's Cross at 8.15 on the
following morning, and after breakfasting at
the Midland Hotel, went straight to Fabian
Scott's chambers, in a street off the Hay-market.
It was then a little after half-past
ten.

Fabian, who was at breakfast, received me
very heartily, and was grieved that I had not
come direct to him.

'What would you have said,' he asked, 'if
I had gone to have breakfast at the Inver-could
Arms in Ballater, instead of coming onto
you ? '

'That's not quite the same thing, my

impetuous young friend. You didn't expect
me, for one thing, and London is a place
where one must be a little more careful of
one's behaviour than in the wilds.'

No, that is true, I did not expect you ;
though when I heard your name, I was so
pleased I thought I must have been living
on the expectation for the last month.'

Out of sight, out of mind, according to
the simple old saying.'

I was looking about me, examining my
friend's surroundings, feeling discouraged by
the portraits of beautiful women, photographs
on the mantelpiece, paintings on the walls,
the invitation cards stuck in the looking-glass,
the crested envelopes, freshly torn, on
the table ; the room, which seemed effeminately
luxurious, after my sombre, threadbare,
old study, gave no evidence of bachelor
desolation. It was just untidy enough to
prove that ' when a man's single he lives at

his ease,' for an opera hat and a soiled glove
lay on the chair, a new French picture, which
a wife would have tabooed, was propped up
against the back of another, and on the
mantelpiece was a royal disorder, in which a
couple of pink clay statuettes of cigarettes,
by Van der Staten, showed their piquant,
high-hatted little heads, and their refilled,
high-lifted little skirts above letters, ash
trays, cigarette cases, 'parts' in MS.,
sketches, a white tie, a woman's long glove,
the 'proof of an article on 'The Cathedrals
of Spain,' and a heap of other things. In
the centre stood a handsome Chippendale
clock, surmounted by signed photographs of
Sarah Bernhardt and a much admired
Countess. Fresh hothouse flowers filled
two delicate Venetian glass vases on the
table, long-leaved green plants stood in the
windows. I began to suspect that the
feminine influence in Fabian Scott's life was

Strong enough already, and I felt that any
idea of an appeal to a bachelor's sense of
loneliness must straightway be given up.
There was another point, however, on which
I felt more sanguine. Fabian had no private
means, his tastes were evidently expensive,
and he had had no engagement since the
summer. Having made up my mind that to
marry my little Babiole to this man was the
only thing that would restore her to health
and hope (about happiness I could but be
doubtful), I could not afford to shrink from
the means.

I had been listening with one ear to
Fabian, who never wanted much encouragement
to talk. He treated me to a long
monologue on the low ebb to which art of all
kinds had sunk in England, to the prevailing
taste for burlesque in literature, and on the
stage, and for ' Little Toddlekins ' on the
walls of picture galleries.

I thought burlesque had gone out,' I
suggested.

He turned upon me fiercely, having
finished his breakfast, and being occupied in
striding up and down the room.

Not at all,' he said emphatically. ' What
is farcical comedy but burlesque of the most
vicious kind ? Burlesque of domestic life,
throwing ridicule on virtuous wives and
jealous husbands, making heroes and heroines
of men and women of loose morals ?
What is melodrama but burlesque of incidents
and of passions, fatiguing to the eye
and stupefying to the intellect ? I repeat,
art in England is a dishonoured corpse,
and the man who dares to call himself an
artist, and to talk about his art with anymore
reverence than a grocer feels for his
sanded sugar, or a violin-seller for his sham
Cremona, is treated with the derision
one would show to a modern Englishman

who should fall down and worship a
mummy.'

All which, being interpreted, meant that
Mr. Fabian Scott saw no immediate prospect
of an engagement good enough for his
deserts.

Well, even if art is in a bad way, artists
still seem to rub on very comfortably,' I said,
glancing round the room.

Fabian swept the place with a contemptuous
glance from right to left, as if it had
been an ill-kept stable.

One finds a corner to lay one's head in,
of course,' he admitted disdainfully ; ' but
even that may be gone tomorrow,' he added
darkly, plunging one hand into a suggestive
heap of letters and papers on a side table ashe
passed it.

Bills ? ' I asked cheerfully.

He gave me a tragic nod and strode on.

You should marry,' I ventured boldly.

some girl with seven or eight hundred
a year, for instance, with a Httle love of art
on her own account to support yours.'

Fabian stopped in front of me with his
arms folded. He was the most unstagey
actor on the stage, and the stages off I ever
met. He gave a short laugh, tossing back
his head.

A girl with seven hundred a year marry
me, an artist! My dear fellow, you have
been in Sleepy Hollow too long. You form
your opinions of life on the dark ages.'

No I don't,' I said very quietly. ' I
know a girl with eight hundred a year, who
likes you well enough to marry you if you
were to ask her.'

These rapid modern railway journeys —
A heavy breakfast — with perhaps a glass of
cognac on an empty stomach ' — murmured
Fabian sofdy, gazing at me with kindly
compassion.

She is seventeen, the daughter of an
artist, an artist herself by every instinct.
Her name is Babiole Elmer,' I went on
composedly.

Fabian started.

Babiole Elmer ! Pretty little Babiole ! '
he cried, with affectionate interest at once
apparent in his manner ; * but,' he hesitated
and flushed slightly, ' I don't understand.
The little girl — dear little thing she was,
I remember her quite well, with her coquettish
Scotch cap and her everlasting blushes.
She was no heiress then, certainly.'

A bitter little thought of the different
manner in which he would have treated her
in that case crossed my mind. ' I've adopted
her. I allow her eight hundred a year
during my life, and of course afterwards '

I nodded ; he nodded. It was all understood.
Fabian had grown suddenly quiet
and thoughtful, and I knew that Babiole had

gained her precious admirer's heart. He
liked her, that was my comfort, my excuse.
His face had Halted up at the remembrance
of her ; and as she would bring with her
an income large enough to prevent his being
even burdened with her maintenance, I felt
that I was heaping upon his head too much
joy for a mortal to deserve, and that he
accepted it more calmly than was meet. It
is a curious experience to have to be thankful
to see another person receive, almost
with indifference, a prize for which one
would gladly have given twenty years of life.
She is a most beautiful and charming
girl,' he said, after a pause, in a new tone of
respect. Eight hundred a year and 'expectations
' put such a splendid mantle of dignity
on the shoulders of a little wild damsel ina
serge frock. ' Do you know, I thought,
Harry, you would end by marrying her
yourself! '

I only laughed and said, oh no, I was a
confirmed bachelor. But it was in my mind
to tell him how much obliged I felt for his
contribution towards my domestic felicity.

I presently said that I had some business
to transact, that I had to pay a visit to my
lawyer. This young man's complacent beatitude
since he had discovered a not unpleasant
way out of his difficulties was beginning to
jar upon me furiously. So we made an
appointment for the evening, and I took
myself off.

When I made my excuse to Fabian I
really had some idea in my mind of calling
upon a solicitor and having a deed drawn up,
settling ;soo a year on Babiole. But I
reflected, as soon as I was alone, that I
should make a better guardian than the law,
and that I should do as well to keep control
over her allowance. I would alter my will
on her wedding-day, just as I must have

done if it had been my own. A trace of
cowardice strengthened this resolution, for I
look upon a visit to a lawyer much as I do
upon a visit to a dentist, with this difference,
that the latter really does sometimes relieve
you of your pain, while the former relieves
you of nothing but your money.

So I found myself wandering about my
old haunts, glancing up at the windows of
clubs of which I had once been a member,
and feeling a strong desire to enter their
doors once more, and see what change eight
years had brought about in my old acquaintances.
I had long ago lost all acute sensitiveness
about my own altered appearance ;
there was so very little in common between
the 'Handsome Harry' of twenty-four and
the scarred gray-haired backwoodsman of
thirty-two, that I looked upon them as two
distinct persons, and I remained for a few
moments confounded by my exceeding

astonishment, when a familiar voice cried,
Hallo, Maude ! ' and I found my hand in
the grasp of an important-looking gentleman,
who, as a slim lad, had been one of my
constant companions. He now represented
a small Midland town in Parliament, in the
Conservative interest, seemed amazed that
I had not heard of his speech in favour of
increasing the incomes of bishops, and
confided to me his hopes of getting an
appointment in the Foreign Office when ' his
party ' came into power again. I said I
hoped he would, but I inwardly desired that
it might not be a post of great responsibility,
for I found my friend addle-patted to an
extent I had never dreamed of in the old
days, when we backed the same horses and
loved the same ladies. He insisted on taking
me into the Carlton, where I met some
more of the old set, who all seemed glad to
see me, but with whom I now felt curiously

out of sympathy. It was not so much that
my politics had veered round, as that, living
an independent and isolated life, I was not
bound to hold fast to traditions and prejudices,
like these men who were in the
thick of the fight. I had gone into the club
seeking distraction from my thoughts, trying
to reawaken my old sympathies. I went out
again after an hour of animated and friendly
talk with my acquaintances of eight years
ago, more solitary, more isolated than ever.
Yet when they had tried to persuade me
to come back to life again, being all of
opinion that existence by one's self in the
Highlands was tantamount to a state of
suspended animation, I had answered it was
not unlikely that I might do so.

For the game must be carried on still
when Babiole was married ; but not with the
old rules.

I had another interview with Fabian

that evening, for we dined at the Criterion

together. It was arranged that he should

spend Christmas at Larkhall with me, and it

was tacitly understood that he would use this

opportunity of assuring Miss Elmer that her

image had never been absent from his mind,

and that he could have no rest until she had

promised to become his wife at an early date.

I left King's Cross by the nine o'clock

train that night, having decided on this

course suddenly, when I found I was in too

restless a mood to be able to get either sleep

or entertainment in London. Arriving at

Aberdeen at 2.15 on the following afternoon,

I caught the three o'clock train to Ballater,

and got to Larkhall before six. It was quite

dark by that time, and the lamp was shining

through the blind of the sitting-room window

at the cottage. I knocked at the door, which

was opened by Babiole ; she held a candle

in her left hand, and by its light I saw her
VOL. II 25

eyes and cheeks were burning with excitement.


I knew your knock,' she said tremulously,
as she gave me a hot dry hand, ' though I
did not expect you so soon.'

Here Mrs. Elmer rushed out of the
sitting-room, fell upon me, and insisted upon
my sitting down to tea with them.

And how have you been since I left ? ' I
said to the girl.

Don't ask, Mr. Maude,' interrupted
her mother. * I'm sure you would have felt
flattered if you could have seen her. She's
been just like a wild bird in a cage, never
still for two minutes, and half the time with
her face glued to the window, cold as it is ;
as if that would make you come back any
faster.'

Babiole hung her head ; she may have
blushed, poor child, but her cheeks had been
so hot and burning ever since my entrance.

that no deepening of their colour could be
noticed. I concluded that she had given no
hint to her mother of her surmises concerning
the object of my journey.

'Well,' said I, 'leading such solitary lives
as we do up here, of course the absence of
one person makes a great difference. In
fact, my own solitude has begun to prey
upon me so much, that — that I rushed up to
London on purpose to try to find a friend to
spend Christmas up here, and make things
livelier for us all'

Well,' said Mrs. Elmer, ' that is an idea,
to be sure. I confess I have been eaten up
with wonder at your suddenly going off like
that, and have been guessing myself quite
silly as to the reason of it'

And did Babiole guess too ? ' I asked
lightly, looking at the girl, who sat very
quietly, with her eyes fixed upon my face.

Oh no, she has given up all such childish

amusements as that,' said Mrs. Elmer rather
sadly. ' There would never be so much as a
laugh to be heard in the place now if I didn't
keep up my spirits.'

Well, she must open her mouth now, at
any rate. Now, Babiole, can you guess
who it is who is coming to spend Christmas
with us ? '

In an instant the strained expression left
her face, a great light flashed into her eyes,
and seemed to irradiate every feature.

I think you have guessed,' said I gently.

She got up quickly and opened the sideboard,
as if looking for something ; but I
think, from the attitude of her bent head,
and from the solemn peace that was on her
face when she returned to us, that she had
followed her first impulse to breathe a silent
thanksgiving to God.

'Will you have some quince-marmalade,
Mr. Maude ? ' she asked, as she came back

to the table with a little glass dish in her
hand.

And she leaned over my shoulder to help
me to the preserve, while her mother, who
had guessed with great glee the name of my
Christmas visitor, was still overflowing with
exultation at the great news. For she did
not once doubt the object of his coming,
which, indeed, I had suggested by a delicate
archness in which I took some pride.

Shortly after tea I rose to go, being
tired out with my two rapid and sleepless
journeys. Mrs. Elmer bade me good-night
with kind concern for my fatigue.

Indeed, I don't think travelling agrees
with you, or else you tried to do too much in
your short visit, for you look drawn, and
worn, and ill, and ten years older than when
you started,' she said solicitously.

Yes, I'm getting too old for dissipation,'
I said lightly.

Babiole was standing by the door ; she
was watching me affectionately, and had
evidently some private and particular communication
to make to me, by the impatience
with which she rattled the door-handle. At
last I had shaken hands with Mrs. Elmer
and had got out into the passage. The girl
shut the room door quickly and threw herself
upon my arm, giving at last free rein to her
excitement and passionate gratitude. The
gaze of her pure eyes, shining, not with
earthly passion, but with the ecstatic light of
a dying saint, who sees the heavens opening
to receive him, struck a new fear into
my heart. The happiness this child-woman
looked for was something which
Fabian Scott, artist though he was, with
splendid verbal aspirations and chivalrous
devotions, would not even understand. As
she poured forth soft whispering thanks for
my goodness — she knew it was all my doing,

she said ; she had even guessed beforehand
what I was going to do — I felt my eyes grow
moist and my voice husky.

My child,' I whispered back, 'don't
thank me. It hurts me, for I am not sure
that I am not bringing upon you a great and
terrible misfortune.'

Don't be afraid,' she said, shaking her
head with that far-off look in her eyes
which told so plainly that she saw into a life
which could not be lived on earth ; * you
think I am romantic, fanciful ; that I expect
more from this man than his love can
ever give me. Oh, but you don't know,' and
she looked straight up into my face, with that
piercing dreamy earnestness that made her
see, not the yearning tenderness of the eyes
into which she looked, but only the kind
guardian's mind to be convinced. * You
don't know how well I understand. He
would never have thought of me again if you

had not gone to him and said — I don't know
what, but just the thing you knew would
touch him, with pity or with pride that a poor
little girl could love him so.' I almost
shivered at the dreary distance which lay
between this surmise and the truth. ' But I
don't mind ; I know that I love him so much,
that when he knows and feels what I would
do for him, it will make him happy. You
know,' she went on more earnestly still, 'it
isn't for him to love me that I have been
craving and praying all this time, it was for a
sight of his face, or for a letter that he had
written himself with his own hand.'

She took my sympathy with her for
granted now, and poured this confession out
to me quite simply, feeling sure that I understood,
as indeed I did to my cost. But after
this I thought it wise to try to calm down
this exultation of feeling, by certain grandmotherly
platitudes about the difficulties of

married life, the disillusions one had to suffer,
the forbearance one had to show, to all of
which she listened very submissively and
well, but with an evident conviction that she
knew quite as much about the matter as I did.
Then I bade her good-night, and she stood
in the porch, wrapt up in her plaid, until I had
reached my own door, for I heard her clear
young voice sing out a last ' good-night ' as I
went in.

Poor little girl ! She could not know how
her gratitude cut me to the heart.

soothe

ten days before Christmas we spent
on the whole happily. Mrs. Elmer burst
into tears on my informing her of the allowance
I proposed to make to her daughter,
and sobbed out hysterically, ' My own child
to be able to keep a carriage ! Oh ! if poor
mamma could have known !'

This announcement, when made to Babiole
by her mother, was the one drawback to her
happiness. She implored me to change my
mind, little guessing, poor child, what other
change that would have involved. I was
very angry with Mrs. Elmer for spoiling the
girl's perfect bliss by this vulgar detail, which

it had been necessary to impart to the mother,
but which I had particularly desired to withhold
for the present from the daughter's more
sensitive ears. I had hard work to comfort
her, but I succeeded at last by reminding her
that she was under my guardianship, and
that it was my pride to see my ward cut a
handsome figure in the world.

I almost think, if it does not sound farfetched
to say so, that the girl enjoyed those
ten days with me, prattling about her lover
and endowing him with gifts of beauty and
nobility and wisdom which neither he nor
any man I ever met possessed, more than
the fortnight of feverish joy in his actual
presence which followed. Not that Fabian
was disappointing as a fiancd ; far from it.
He had the gift of falling into raptures
easily, and he fell in love with his destined
bride as promptly as heart could desire. But
the imaginative quality, which formed so

important a feature of the young girl's
romantic passion, caused her at first to
shrink from his vehement caresses as at a
blow to her ideal, while on the other hand
the light touch of his fingers would send a
convulsive shiver through her whole frame.

How did I know all this ? , I can scarcely
tell. And yet it is true, and I learnt it early
in Fabian's short visit. As the savage knows
the signs of the sky, so did I, living by
myself, study to some purpose the gentle
nature whose smiles made my happiness.

When Fabian left us at the end of a
fortnight, it was settled that the wedding
was to take place in six weeks' time at
Newcastle. I had a prejudice against my
ward's being married in Scotland, where I
conceived, rightly or wrongly, that a certain
looseness of the marriage-tie prevailed. On
the other hand, I would not let her go to
London to be married, being of opinion that

such a bride was worth a journey. So Mrs.
Elmer having some relations at Newcastle,
she and her daughter spent there the three
weeks immediately preceding the ceremony.
I missed them dreadfully during those three
weeks, and was not without a vague hope
somewhere down in the depths of my heart
that something unforeseen might happen to
prevent the marriage. But when I arrived
at Newcastle on the evening before the
appointed day, Fabian was already there,
everybody was in the highest spirits ; and
Mrs. Kilmer's Newcastle cousins, rather
proud of the position in ' society ' which
they were assured the bride was going to
hold, had undertaken to provide a handsome
wedding breakfast.

I gave her away next morning, in the old
church with Its crowned tower which they
now call a cathedral. I think perhaps she
guessed something more than I would have

had her know in the vestry when the service
was over, when I asked her for a kiss and fell
a-trembling as she granted it ; at any rate she
turned very white and grave in the midst of
her happiness, and thenceforth dropped her
voice to a humble half-whisper whenever she
spoke to me. She had been married in her
travelling dress, an innovation rather alarming
to Newcastle ; but she looked so pretty in her
first silk gown — a dark brown — and in the
long sealskin mantle that had been my wedding
present, that I think some of the damsels
at the breakfast decided that this fashion was
one to be followed.

The bride and bridegroom left us early,
more, I think, because Fabian found both
breakfast and speeches heavy than because
there was any need to hurry for the train.
I having no such excuse, and being treated asa
great personage with a Monte-Christo-like
habit of dowering marriageable maidens, was

forced to remain. I made a speech, I forget
what about, which was received with laughter
and enthusiasm. The only things I remember
about the people were the strong impression
of dull and commonplace provincialism which
their speech and manner made upon me, and
that on the other hand, a little quiet maiden
of seventeen or so, who wore a very rusty
frock and was awkwardly shy, astonished me
by quoting Tacitus in the original, and
proved to be quite an appallingly learned
person.

When I could get away I bade farewell to
Mrs. Elmer, who touched my heart by crying
over my departure. She had made arrangements
to stay in Newcastle with an aunt who
was getting old, and who felt inclined for the
cheap charity of discharging her servant and
taking the active and industrious little woman
to live with her. Mrs. Elmer was to take
care of Ta-ta till my return. Outside the

door Ferguson met me with my old portmanteau
ready on a cab. In five minutes I
was off on my travels again.

I was out of England altogether for four
years, during which, among other little expeditions,
I traversed America from the southernmost
point of Terra del Fuego to the land of
the Eskimos. I heard nothing of Babiole or her
husband, nor did I make any efforts to hear
anything about them, being of opinion that a
man and his wife settle down to life together
best without any of that outside interference
which it is so difficult for those who love them
to withhold, when they see things going amiss
with the young household. At the end of
four years, I had said to myself, they will
have obtained a rudimentary knowledge of
each other's character. Babiole will be a
woman and will no longer see the reflex of
the divinity in any man ; the experiment of
marriage will be in working order, and one

will be able to judge the results. I had not
forgotten them, indeed I had thought of them
continually. I had taken care that Babiole's
allowance was regularly paid ; but my second
sentimental disappointment having found me
some sort of a misanthrope, had cured me of
my misanthropy ; and a freer intercourse with
men and women, and a particular study of
such married couples as I met convinced me
that the mutual attraction of man and woman
towards each other is so great that merely
negative qualities in the one sex count as
virtues in the eyes of the other, and that a
husband and wife who will only abstain from
being actively disagreeable to one another
are in a fair way towards attaining a gentle
mutual enthusiasm which will make the
gravest of human lives seem fair. Now
Babiole could never be actively disagreeable
to anybody ; and surely not even a disappointed
artist, and no artist is so disappointed
VOL. II 26

as he who is all but the most successful, could
be actively disagreeable to Babiole.

But my philosophy had weak points, which
I was soon abruptly to discover.

It was in the month of March that I came
back to England and put up at the Bedford
Hotel, Covent Garden. Fabian and his wife
lived in a flat at Bayswater, the address of
which I had taken care to obtain. Although
I was much excited at the thought of seeing
them, I was by no means anxious to anticipate
the meeting, which I had decided should
not take place until tailor and hatter and
hair-dresser had done their best to remove all
traces of barbarism. My beard I had decided
to retain, but it must be now the beard of
Bond Street, and not that of the prairies. In
the meantime I took a solitary stall at the
theatre where Fabian was playing, with some
vague idea of gaining a premonitory insight
into the course of his matrimonial career.

A keen sensation of something which I
regret to say was not wholly disappointment
shot through me as I perceived that, so far
from having acquired any touch of the comfortable
and commonplace which is the outward
and visible sign of an inward domestic
tranquillity, Fabian was leaner, more haggard
than ever. He had grown more petulant
and irritable, too, as I gathered from his
annoyance with a large and lively party of
very well dressed people who sat in one of
the boxes nearest the stage, and who, without
transgressing such lax bonds of good breeding
as usually control the occupants of stalls and
boxes, evidently found more entertainment in
each other than in the people on the stage.

I glanced up at the box, following instinctively
the direction of Fabian's eyes, and
saw an ugly but clever-looking young man
very much occupied with a pale sad-faced
lady ; two very young men and two other

ladies, both with the dead-white complexions
and black dresses which have been of late so
popular with the half world and its imitators,
formed the rest of the occupants.

Before the end of the first scene in which
he was engaged, Fabian had recognised me,
and in the pause between the acts a note from
him was brought to me by one of the attendants
asking me to ' go and speak to Babiole,
and to come home to supper with them.'

Speak to Babiole ! Why, then, she must
be in the theatre ! I got up and peered about
with my glasses ; but though I could see well
into every part of the house, I could discover
no one in the least like my little witch of the
hills. After a careful inspection, I decided
that she must be one of three or four ladies
who were hidden by the curtains of the boxes
in which they sat. In this belief I had resumed
my seat and given up the search when,
just as the curtain was rising upon the next

act, and I glanced up again at the people
who had excited Fabian's wrath, a look, a
movement of the pale sad-looking lady suddenly
attracted my attention. I raised my
glasses again in consternation ; for, changed
as she was, with all her pretty colour faded,
the bright light gone from her eyes, the soft
outlines of her little face altered and sharpened,
there was now no possibility of mistaking the
melancholy and listless lady who was still
absorbing the attention of the clever-looking
man beside her for any other than my old
pupil.

Through the remaining two acts of the
piece I scarcely dared to look at her ; everything
seemed to indicate the total failure of
the match I had made. I wanted to escape
for that night any further indictment than my
fears brought against me, but I was scarcely
outside the theatre after the performance
when a hand was laid upon my shoulder in

the crowd, and Fabian, who had hurried
round to meet me, led me back into the
building and presented me to his wife. The
young fellow who had been so devoted in the
box was with her still, together with one of
the ladies in black. Fabian's manner to me
was as emphatically cordial as ever, and
showed no trace of a grievance against me ;
but Babiole's was utterly changed. She was
talking to her companion when she first caught
sight of me, as I passed through the swinging
doors with her husband, and made my way
toward her among footmen and plush-enveloped
ladies. The words she was uttering
suddenly froze on her lips, and the last vestige
of colour left her pale face as if at some sight
at least as horrible as unexpected. Before I
reached her she had recovered herself, however,
and was holding out her hand, not indeed
with the old frank pleasure, but with a very
gracious conventional welcome.

Fancy, my dear,' said Fabian, ' the villain
has been in the country two whole days without
thinking of calling upon us. These
sneaking ways must be punished upon the
spot, and I pronounce therefore that he be
immediately seized and carried off to supper

I protested that I was too tired to do anything
but fall asleep.

Well, you can fall asleep at our place
just as well as at yours. And that reminds
me that you had better sleep there. We've
plenty of room, and we can send the boy for
your things.'

Thanks. Its awfully kind of you, Scott,
but I couldn't do that, I have an appointment
at '

There that second excuse spoils it all. A
first excuse may awaken only incredulity, a
second inevitably rouses contempt. You shall
sleep where you like, but you must sup with
us.'

You will bring Mr. Maude with you in a
hansom, then, Fabian,' said his wife, who had
not joined in the discussion, 'for Mrs. Capet
is coming with me.'

Fabian, who had been only coldly civil to
Mrs. Capet, the lady in black, looked annoyed,
but had to acquiesce in these arrangements.
We saw the ladies into the brougham, Fabian
gave a curt good-night to the clever-looking
young man, and then we jumped into a hansom
and drove towards Bayswater.

I confess I wished myself at the other end
of the world, especially as I began to think
that, while my hostess certainly was not
anxious for my society, my host was chiefly
actuated in his obstinate hospitality by the
desire to show that he bore me no malice.
Thus when he congratulated me on being
still a bachelor it was in such a magnanimous
tone that I found myself forced to express a
hope that he did not envy me my freedom.

I must not say that I do,' said he, with
more magnanimity than ever. ' Still it is but
frank to own that personal experience of marriage
has confirmed my previous convictions
instead of reversing them. In short, to put It
plainly, I found soon after my marriage, as all
men in my position must sooner or later find,
that I had to choose between being my wife's
ideal of a good husband or my own ideal of a
good artist. I found that a good woman is
twice as exacting as a divine Art ; for while
Art only demands the full and free exercise of
your working faculties in her service, a woman
insists on the undivided empire of your very
thoughts ; she must have a full, true, and particular
account of your dreams ; you must
not run, jump, sneeze, or cough but In her
honour.'

And you chose the Art, I suppose,' I said,
trying not to speak coldly.

My dear boy, I really had no choice.

Bablole and I each wanted a slave ; but while
I demanded a fellow-slave in the labours of
my life, this pretty little lady only wished fora
human footstool for her pretty little feet.'

But I cannot understand. Babiole was
always as submissive as a lamb, a dog, anything
you like that is gentle and docile.'

My dear Maude, at the time you speak
of she was un wedded. Now just as the
horse, in himself a noble animal, corrupts
and depraves every man with whom he
comes in contact, from the groom to the
jockey, so does intercourse with man, the
king of creatures, speedily destroy in woman
all the traces of those good qualities with
which, in deference to the poets, we will
concede her to have been originally endowed.'


I know nothing about that,' said I
bluntly, 'but if Babiole EUmer has been
anything short of a perfectly true-hearted

wife, I will stake my solemn oath that she
has been harnessed to a damned bad husband.'


I was cold and wet with overmastering
indignation, or I should not have blurted
out my opinion so coarsely. Fabian was
on fire directly, gesticulating with his hands,
glaring with his eyes, in his old impulsive
style.

Do you mean to accuse me of telling you
lies ? Do you mean to insinuate that I have
not treated your ward as a gentleman should
treat his wife, especially when she is the
adopted daughter of his best friend ? Do
you think I should dare to look you in
the face if I had failed in my duty towards
her?'

If you were one of the 'common rabble
of humanity " you despise so much, I should
tell you you had failed in your duty very
much. As you belong to a clique which

considers itself above such rules, I tell you
frankly that Art wouldn't suffer a jot if you
did neglect her, while this poor child does ;
and that if you were to act like Garrick,
write like Shakespeare, and paint like
Raphael, it wouldn't excuse you for the
change between your wife on her wedding
day and your wife to-night.'

You are very severe,' said Fabian, who
was shaking with excitement and passion.
If you are really so lost to a man's commonsense
as to take it for granted already that
the fault is all on one side, you must pardon
me if I set your remarks down to the ravings
of infatuation.'

There was a pause. This thrust told, for
indeed a great wave of bitter and passionate
regret at the loss beyond recall of my pretty
witch of the hills was drowning my calmer
reason and making me rude and savage
beyond endurance. We had just self-control

enough left to remain silent for the remaining
few minutes of the drive, both quaking with
rage, and both ashamed, I of my explosion,
he, I hope, of the lameness of his explanations.
The hansom stopped at the mansions,
on the third floor of one of which Mr. and
Mrs. Scott lived. I jumped out first, raised
my hat, and excusing myself coldly and
formally, was hurrying away, when Fabian,
regardless of the cabman, who thought it was
a dodge, and hallooed after him, followed meat
a run, put his arm through mine, and
dragged me back again.

Can't quarrel with you, Harry,' he said
affectionately, ' Say it's all my fault if you
like, but hear both sides first. Come income
in I tell you.'

And having given vent to his feelings ina
volley of eloquent abuse to the shouting
cabman, he tossed him his fare and led me
into the house.

Curiously enough, the emotion which
seemed to choke me as I mounted the
stairs and stood outside the door of Babiole's
home, disappeared entirely as soon as the
door was opened to admit us. For there,
standing in the little entrance hall, at the
open door of the drawing-room, was the slim
pale lady with pleasant conventional manners,
and the pretty little meaningless laugh of a
desire to please. We followed her into the
room, which was charmingly furnished, lighted
by coloured lights, scented by foreign perfumes,
and hung with drawings and engravings
of which the mistress of the house was
very proud. She was so lively and bright,
criticised the piece in which her husband was
playing so unmercifully, and said so many
witty and amusing things during supper, that
I forgot Babiole in Mrs. Scott, and was only
recalled to a remembrance of her identity by
an occasional gesture or a tone of the voice.

If I had not seen her in the theatre first
I might have thought she was a happy wife,
as, if I had not remembered the round rosy
cheeks and sparkling eyes of the Httle maid
of Craigendarroch, I might have admired the
piquant delicacy of the small white face before
me, in which the gray eyes looked abnormally
large and dark.

After enjoying myself greatly, though not
quite unreservedly, I had risen to take leave,
when Fabian, suddenly remembering that he
had some proofs to send off which were
already overdue at a publisher's, asked me if
I would mind waiting while he finished correcting
them. It wouldn't take a minute.
He had his hand upon the door which led
from the dining-room to the little den he
called his study, when his wife, in almost
terror-struck entreaty, rushed towards him
and begged him to leave it till next day.

I can't, Bab ; they must go by the first

post, and you know very well I shan't be up
in time to do them.'

I'll do them for you,' she said eagerly.

No, no, don't tease,' said her husband
authoritatively, ' take Mr. Maude into the
drawing-room and play him something,' and
he pushed her off and left the room.

She turned to me with a smiling shrug of
the shoulders, and said playfully, ' See what
it is to be a down - trodden wife.' Then,
leading the way into the drawing-room, and
seating herself at once at the piano, she
dashed into a lively waltz air. But it suddenly
occurred to me that she was possessed
with some strange fear of being alone with
me, and this idea broke the spell of her
brilliant manner, and reduced me to shy and
stupid silence.

I HAD sat down in a low chair near the piano,
and I remained looking at a rug under my feet
as my hostess went on playing one bright piece
after another with scarcely a pause between.

I know very well,' she said at last, 'that
you don't care for any of this music a bit.
Men call it rubbish, and affect to despise it,
just as they do high-heeled boots, dainty
millinery, and lots of other pretty frivolous
things.'

I don't despise it, I assure you. It is

very inspiriting, at least — it would chime in

well with one's feelings if one were in high

spirits.'

VOL. II 27

Still I know you are ascribing my change
of taste in music to a great moral deterioration.
But listen '

She broke off in a gavotte she was playing,
and sang ' Auld Robin Gray ' so that every
note seemed to strike on my heart. In the
old time among the hills Babiole used to sing
it to me, in a wild, sweet, bird-like voice that
thrilled and charmed me, and made me call
her my little tame nightingale ; but the
song I heard now was not the same ; there
was a new ring in the pathos, a plaintive
cry that seemed to reach my very soul ; and
I listened holding my breath.

When the last note was touched on the
piano, I raised my head with an effort and
looked at her ; almost expecting, I believe, to
see tears in her eyes. She was looking at
me, curiously, with a very still face of grave
inquiry. As she met my gaze she looked
down at the keys, and began another waltz.

Don't play any more,' I said abruptly.

She stopped, and seeming for a moment
rather embarrassed, began to turn over the
leaves of a pile of music on a chair beside her.

You have learnt to sing, I suppose,' I said
quietly. ' You know I am a Goth in musical
matters, but I can tell that.'

And of course you are going to tell me
that my fresh untutored voice gave sweeter
music than any singing-master could produce,'
said she, with almost spasmodic liveliness.

Indeed I am not. Your singing to-night
not only struck me as being infinitely better
than it used to be from a musician's point of
view, but it expressed the sentiment of the
sone with a vividness that caused me acute
pain.'

I had risen from my seat, and was standing
by the piano. She shot up at me one of
her old looks, a child's shy appeal for indulgence.


You have learnt a great deal since I saw
you last ; you have become the accomplished
fascinating woman it was your ambition to
be. I have never met any one more
amusing.'

'Yes,' she said slowly; 'I have fulfilled
my ambition, I suppose.' For a few minutes
she remained busy with the leaves of the
music, while I still watched her, and noticed
how the plump healthy red hands of the
mountain girl had dwindled into the slender
white ones of the London lady. Then she
leaned forward over the keyboard, and
asked curiously, * Which do you like best,
the little wild girl whom you used to teach,
or the accomplished woman who amuses
you ?'

I like them both, in quite a different
way.' If I am not mistaken her face fell.
To tell you the truth, I now find it hard
to connect the two. I love the memory of

the little wild girl who used to sit by my
side, and make me think myself a very wise
person by the eagerness with which she
listened to me, while I laid down the law
on all matters human and divine ; and I
have a profound admiration for the gracious
lady whom I meet to-night for the first time.'

Admiration ! ' She repeated the word
in a low voice, rather scornfully, touching
the keys of the piano lightly, and looking
at me with a dreary smile. Then she turned
her head away, but not quickly enough to hide
from me that her eyes were filling with tears.

A great thrill of pity and tenderness for
the forlorn soul thus suddenly revealed drew
me nearer to her, and I said, leaning towards
the little bending figure —

I did not mean to pain you, Babiole.
You cannot think that, caring for you as I
used to do as if you had been my own child,
I have lost all feeling for you now.'

She turned quickly towards me again,
biting her under lip as she fixed her eyes
wistfully, eagerly, upon my face. Then with
tears rolling down her cheeks, she laid her
head on my arm, and clinging to my hand,
to my sleeve, began to sob and to whisper
incoherent words of gladness at my coming.

My child, my child ! ' I said hoarsely,
with a passionate yearning to comfort the
fragile little creature whose whole body was
trembling with repressed sobs. I got into
a sort of frenzy as she went on helplessly
crying, and eloquence soon ran dry in my
efforts to comfort her. ' Look here, child,
this won't do any good. Hold up your head,
Babiole ; for goodness sake don't go on like
this, my dear, or I shall be snivelling myself
in a moment,' I said, with more of the same
matter-of-fact kind, until she presently looked
up and laughed at me through her tears.

There now, you've quite spoilt yourself

by this nonsense,' I continued severely. ' Go
and put yourself to rights before your husband
comes in.'

And I led her to the looking-glass with
my arm round her, feeling, though I did not
recognise the fact at the time, a great relief
in this little demonstration of an affection
which was growing every moment stronger.

Do you know,' she asked presently, as
she turned her head away from the glass
before which she had, by some dexterous
feminine sleight of hand with two or three
hairpins, arranged her disordered hair, ' why
Fabian had proofs to correct to-night ? '

I confessed with shame that my male
mind had been content with the reason he
had given.

He wanted to leave me alone with you,'
she explained, ' because he knows what a
strong influence you have over me, and he
hoped that you would give me a lecture.'

A lecture ! What did he want me to
lecture on ? '

Oh, on my general conduct, I suppose ;
on my acquaintance, intimacy with people he
dislikes ; on my taking part in amateur
theatricals ; on a lot of things — on everything
in fact.'

But if your husband can't induce you todo
what he wishes, what chance have I, an
outsider ? '

Oh, Mr. Maude, dear Mr. Maude, have
you been so long among the hills as to think
like that ? Or is it that life was a different
thing when you took an active part in it ?
It's only in books that husbands are husbands,
and wives are wives.'

She had sat down on the sofa beside me,
but I was not going to be talked over like
that. Her words had roused in me the
instinctive antagonism of the sexes, and I
got up and walked up and down, an occupation

which demanded some care amidst the
miniature inlaid furniture with which the
small room was somewhat overcrowded.

'You know, my dear,' I began rather
drily, looking at the ceiling, which was not
far above my head, ' when things get so
radically wrong between husband and wife,
as they seem to be between you and Fabian,
the fault is very seldom all on one side.'

But it is in this case.'

Are you sure ? '

Yes, quite sure.'

You think you are not to blame in the
least ? '

In this, no.'

'And that all the fault lies on poor Fabian's
side ? '
'Oh no.'

Well, on whose side does it lie then ? '
On yours.'
I stopped short in front of her, and looked

down on the little Dresden china figure,
sitting with clasped hands and crossed feet in
exasperating demureness on the sofa below me.

Do you know that you are a confoundedly
ungrateful little puss ? '

No, I'm not,' she answered passionately,
raising her head and meeting my gaze with
eyes full of fire. ' I think of you by day and
by night. I read over the books I read with
you, to try to feel as if you were still by my
side explaining them to me. I talk to you
when I am by myself, I sing my best songs
to you, I almost pray to you. But just as
the heathen beat their gods and throw them
in the crust when they lose a battle, so I,
when things go wrong with me, find a consolation
in accusing you of being the cause.'
She laughed a little as she finished, as if
ashamed of her temerity, and anxious to let
it pass as a joke. But I held my ground
and looked at her steadily.

'That is very flattering,' said I, more
moved than I cared to show, ' but it is
nothing in support of your accusation.
Women, the very best of you, think nothing
of bringing against your friends charges
which a man '

She interrupted hastily, ' I brought no
charge.'

You only accused me of deliberately spoiling
the lives of two of my dearest friends.'

No, no, not that ; I only said that you
brought about our marriage.'

Which then seemed to you the climax
of earthly happiness. Remember, you married
him with your eyes open, content not
even to expect him to be a good husband.
You admitted that yourself. Is it my fault
that your love has proved a weaker thing
than you thought ? '

Weaker ! ' This was apparently a new
idea to her. She now spoke in a humbler

tone. ' How could I know,' she asked
meekly, ' what strong things it would have
to conquer ? I thought all men were something
like you — at heart, and that to please
them one had only to try. Oh, and I did
try so hard ! '

The poor little face was drawn into piteous
lines and wrinkles as she sighed forth
this lament.

But what has he done, child ? '

She shook her head. ' Nothing. If I
could have seen before marriage a diary of
my married life as it would be, I should
have thought, as I did, that I was going into
an earthly paradise. There is nothing wrong
but the atmosphere, and there is only one
thing wanting in that.'

He does not care for you?' I scarcely
did more than form the words with my lips,
but the answering tears rolled down her
cheeks again at once.

Not a bit. At least, not so much ass yoz^
care for To-to or — Janet. And it isn't his
fault. He is perfectly kind to me in his
fashion, admires the way I have worked to
please him, is grieved that I am dissatisfied
with the result. Only — he did not take me in
of his own accord, and so I have remained
always — outside. That's all ! '

She spread out her little hands, and
clasped them again, with a plaintive gesture
of resignation.

And — and if I seem ungrateful you must
forgive me ; I've never been able to tell it
all to any one for all these four years.'

I was stricken with remorse, but I dared
not give it the least expression for fear of
the lengths to which it might carry me.

I made another journey among the gipsy
tables and the pestilent bric-a-brac, and
returning sat down, not on the sofa beside
her, but in a chair a few feet away. I took

a book up from a table by my side ; I remember
that it was Marmion, and that it had
very exquisite illustrations.

How about these friends, then, whose
intimacy your husband disapproves of ? '

Oh, those ! ' contemptuously. ' One
doesn't open one's heart quite wide to such
friends as those.'

Then if you care about them so little,
why not give them up and please your
husband ? '

One must be intimate with somebody,'
she said entreatingly, * even if it's only a
tea-drinking and scandal-talking intimacy.'

But why with these particular people ? '

Because we all have a particular grievance
: we all have bad husbands. At least
no, Fabian's not a bad husband,' she corrected
hastily ; ' but we are all dissatisfied
with our husbands.'

Perhaps the husbands of those ladies I

saw with you at the theatre — forgive me if I
am making a rude and ridiculous mistake —
are dissatisfied with them ? ' I suggested,
very meekly and mildly.

I daresay they are,' she answered, flushing.
' The less a man has of domestic
virtues, the more he invariably expects from
his wife.'

I am not surprised that Fabian shrinks
from the thought of your looking as they do.'

You mean that they make up their faces ?
Mr. Maude, Mr. Maude, listen. A woman
must have something to live upon, to live
for. If through her fault or her misfortune,
there Is not love enough at home to keep her
heart warm, she will — I don't say she ought,
but she does — look about for a make-shift,
and finds it In the admiration of some lad
younger than herself, who is ready to give
more than he ever hopes to receive. The
boys like dyed hair and powdered faces,

they think it "chic." But my friends are
not the depraved creatures Fabian would
Hke to make out.'

I was horribly shocked at her defence
of these ladies, for it showed a bitter knowledge
of some of the world's ways that jarred
on the lips of a woman of twenty.

I should not like to see you consoling
yourself like that.'

She looked at me frankly, and her face
relaxed into a faint smile as she spoke.

You need not be afraid ; now you are
back in England, I don't want any other
consolation. I can't forget that there is
goodness in the world while I can see you
and hear from you. You are going to settle
in town ? ' she added quickly and anxiously.

No, I had not thought of doing so. I

am going back to Lark ' Before I could

finish the word she was at my feet, kneeling
on a cushion and leaning over the arm of my

chair with her face distorted by strong
excitement.

No, no, not Larkhall ; you must not go
back to Larkhall,' she whispered earnestly
Promise me you won't go there, promise,
promise.'

Why, what's the matter ? Where should
I go but to the only home I have had for
eleven years ? '

'Yes, but it isn't safe now. If I tell you
why you will only laugh at me.'

No, child, I should be ungrateful to
laugh at any proof of your interest in me.'

She put her hand on my arm, earnestly
pressing it at every other word to give emphasis
to her warning.

My father — you remember him — he is
dissatisfied with my marriage. He says you
promised to be answerable for my happiness,
and he shall make you answer for breaking
faith with him.'

VOL. II 28

But I have not '

I know. I told him that, I told him
everything ; that I was dying, like the idiot
I was, for the love of a man who didn't care
for me. He has taken to drink — much
worse than before — and he is impatient,
savage, and won't listen to reason. He will
do nothing but repeat, again and again,
''He said he would answer for it, and he
shall." '

But he doesn't even know I have returned.'


He said you were sure to fly back to the
old nest, and — listen, Mr. Maude, for I know
this is true ; he has gone up there to lie in
wait for you. And remember, a man who
has one crazed idea and won't listen to anything
but his own mad impulses, is more
dangerous than one who is angry with good
cause.'

Poor fellow, I think he has good cause.'

But, Mr. Maude, you don't know what
ridiculous things he says ! '
What things ? '

He says that you ought not to have consulted
my caprices, but to have married me
yourself straight away ! '

She began to laugh as she finished, but I
stopped her.

He is quite right. So I ought to have
done. Unluckily, there was one thing in the
way.'

Babiole, who was still on the cushion at
my feet, leaning against the arm of my
chair as she used to do in the Highlands,
was looking interested and deeply surprised.


One thing in the way ! ' she echoed softly,
looking into my face with earnest scrutiny.
'What — before I fell in love with — Fabian ?'

Yes, long before that.'

She hesitated, and her eyes slowly left my

face, while her brows contracted with a
puzzled expression.

What was it ? ' she asked at last, in a
whisper.

I was in love with you.'

I could see very little of her face, buta
shiver passed over her. For a moment I
wondered, sitting quietly back in my chair,
what she thought.

Didn't you ever guess anything of it,
child, when we had that odd sort of half-engagement
? ' I asked, in a most loyal tone of
indifference.

She raised her head and looked at me
modestly and solemnly.

I should as soon have thought,' she said,
in a low unsteady voice, ' that the Archbishop
of Canterbury was — in love with me.'

Aha ! ' I said with a ridiculous cackling
laugh. ' Then I shouldn't have had much
chance.'

The next moment I knew better. She
rose without another word, as the sounds of an
opening and shutting door reached our ears.
But as she did so she cast upon me one quick,
shy, involuntary side-glance, and I knew
that my scruples about my ugly face had
been worse than thrown away.

The next moment Fabian came into the
room.

I LEFT London for Ballater the very next
day ; and having sent Ferguson on in advance
to prepare the place for me, I found
Larkhall just as I had left it four years
before, down to a newspaper which had been
lying on my study table. But the spirit of
home had deserted the place ; Ta-ta was still
at Newcastle. To-to recognised me indeed,
but with more sulky impatience at my absence
than pleasure at my return. The cottage
was shut up and empty ; I got the key from
Janet after dinner, and wandered through
the unused, damp-smelling little rooms.
The furniture had been left, by my orders.

just as it had been during the occupation of
Babiole and her mother. But I found that
instead of recalling the child Babiole, as I
had seen her so often flitting about the
sitting-room, or, in the latter days, leaning
back, languid and listless, with glistening
dreamy eyes, in the rocking-chair by the fire,
it was the pale little London lady with pretty
conventional manners and worn weary face
that I was trying to picture to myself in the
uninhabited rooms. I came out again,
locked the door carefully, and finished my
cigar in the porch. It seemed to me a remarkably
odd thing that Babiole's degeneration
from the faultless angel she used as a
child to appear, into a mere soured and
sorrowful woman who looked six or seven
years more than her age, had deepened my
interest in her, while my knowledge that she
had been lost to me through nothing but my
own diffidence had changed its character.

To get the better of the unhealthy and
morbid state of mind into which I now found
myself falling, I began to break through my
old habits of retirement, and to avail myself
of such society as Ballater and its neighbourhood
afforded. The hot weather had begun
early this year, and the summer residents
were already established before my arrival.
I was a sort of ' great unknown ' concerning
whom there were floating about many interesting
and romantic stories ; therefore I
found no lack of eager acquaintances as soon
as I cared to make them. Prominent among
these was a certain Mr. Farington, a Liverpool
solicitor, who, after having made a
yearly retreat to the Highlands each autumn,
had now retired from business and taken the
lease of a large house at the foot of Craigen-
darroch. He had been married twice, first
to a lady of dazzling pecuniary charms who
had left him one daughter, and after her death

to a large and handsome lady who gave mea
strong impression of having had doubtful
antecedents. This second wife had a numerous
family, ranging from five years old to
fifteen, between whom and their half-sister
was fixed the gulf of her mother's fortune.

At a very early stage of our acquaintance
the eldest Miss Farington, who was a good-looking
young woman of three and twenty,
with a strong sense of the importance attached
to an income of fifteen hundred a year, had
honoured me by a marked partiality for
which I, in my new sociability, at first felt
grateful. It was pleasant to find some one
who could pass an opinion, even if it was nota
very original opinion, on a picture, a book,
or a landscape, and Miss Farington could
always do that with great precision. Perhaps,
too, it flattered my vanity to be appealed to
as the one representative of high civilisation
amidst barbarian hordes. But when it became

plain even to my modest merit that the
lady proposed to annex me, I grew suddenly
coy ; and I then found to my surprise that,
diffident as my disfigurement had made me, I
was still, like the rest of my sex, humble only
to one woman, and mightily fatuous as regarded
the rest. But if Miss Farington was
merely what one calls 'a nice girl,' with no
particularly conspicuous qualities of alluring
sweetness or captivating vivacity, she had
one virtue which would not have shamed an
ancient Roman — an indomitable resolution
that would not know defeat.

I am not making an idle boast ; I am recording
a fact when I say that that girl laid
siege to me with a skill and patience which
filled me alternately with admiration, gratitude,
and alarm. She learned my tastes, she
studied my habits, she mastered my opinions,
until I began to think that if a person who
apparently knew me so well could like me

SO much, I must be an infinitely more amiable
man than I had ever supposed. This frame
of mind naturally led me to look kindly on
the lady who had enabled me to make such
a pleasing discovery, and I knew myself to
be softening to such an extent that I felt that,
unless Mr. Farington should leave Ballater
before the summer was over, I should be ' a
gone coon' before autumn. If she held on
until the evenings grew cold and long, until
the winds began to howl about lonely Lark-hall,
and to bring swirling showers of dead
leaves to the ground with the hissing sound
of a beach of pebbles under the retreating
waves of a wintry sea, then I felt that I
should give way, that I should see in Miss
Farington's prosaic gray eyes pleasant domestic
pictures, in her erect figure and sloping
shoulders an attraction which to a lonely
man, when the deer stalking and fishing
seasons were over, were quite irresistible.

I had had one plaintive little letter from
Babiole, In which she entreated me, in rather
stiff and stilted language, out of which peeped
a most touching anxiety, to beware of her
father, who, she assured me, was more desperate
and dangerous in his intentions to dome
harm than she had even dared to suggest
when face to face with me. I wrote back ina
clumsy letter as stiff as her own, but not so
touching, that she need have no fear, as her
father had settled down quietly at Aberdeen.
I dared not tell her the truth, which I
had found out through Ferguson — that Mr.
EUmer had indeed come up to the Highlands
with the avowed Intention of doing me some
desperate harm ; but that, having availed
himself too freely, through his daughter's
generosity, of his favourite Indulgences, he
had had an attack of deliriiiiii tremens, and
had been placed under restraint in the county
lunatic asylum.

Babiole's letter I carried about with me,
and sometimes — for loneliness among the
hills would make a sentimental fool of the
most robust of us — I fancied that the little
sheet of paper, In spite of Miss Darlington
and the domestic pictures, burnt Into my
heart.

It was In the middle of August, while the
weather was still — everywhere but In the
Highlands — insufferably hot, that I received
a letter from Fabian which gave me a great
shock. His wife had been very ill, he said,
and although she had now been declared out
of danger, she recovered strength so slowly
that It had become imperative to send her
away somewhere. Mrs. Elmer, who was
now with her, having suggested her old
home in the Highlands, the doctor had
agreed warmly, and Fabian therefore begged,
as an old friend, that I would lend his wife
and her mother the cottage for a short time.

adding that he was sure I would look after
my little favourite until, in a few days' time,
he could rejoin her.

I took this letter up to Craigendarroch,
and had first a cigar and then a pipe over it.
To refuse Fabian's request was impossible ;
to lend the cottage and go away myself would
be inhospitable and suspicious ; to lend it and
stay would be dangerous. With the last
whiffs of tobacco an inspiration came. I
swung back home, wrote back to Fabian
that Larkhall itself, the cottage, the garden,
the stables, and every toothed about the
place were entirely at Mrs. Scott's disposal,
together with all the live stock, human and
otherwise ; and that she had only to fix the
time of her arrival and Mrs. Kilmer's.

The letter finished and put in the bag, I
had a glass of sherry ; and fortified by that
and by an heroic sense of duty, I sallied forth
in the direction of the Mill o' Sterrin, in

which neighbourhood Miss Farington, who
did everything by rule, was always to be
found district-visiting on a Thursday.

I suppose no man with ever so little brain
or ever so little heart, who has deliberately
made up his mind to propose to a girl, sees
the moment approaching without a certain
trepidation. I own that when I saw the
moment and Miss Farington approaching together,
although I had very little doubt about
her answer, and very little enthusiasm about
the result, I had a thumping at my heart and
a singing in my ears. With the memory of
Babiole and the thought of her visit in my
mind, not even the sherry would cast a
glamour over those exceedingly sloping
shoulders, which seemed almost to argue
some moral deficiency, some terrible lack of
some quality without which no woman's
character is complete. In the meantime,
she was bearing down upon me, and I was

Still without an opening speech. But she was
not.

What a treat to see you in this part of
the world, Mr. Maude,' said she, holding out
her hand. ' I confess I did you the injustice
to think you would forget your promise.'

Promise ! ' I repeated vaguely. ' I am
afraid I must confess '

You had forgotten ? ' she said smiling.
Really this is too bad.'

At least, you see, I hadn't forgotten that
this is the way you always walk on a Thursday,'
said I, with a look that was intended
to convey much.

And had forgotten my beautiful site fora
new school ! '

However, she was more pleased with me
for what I had remembered than angry for
what I had forgotten.

At any rate you can come and see it
now,' she said, and turning back she led the

way towards a broad meadow in the valley
of the Muick, with a fair view of the little
river and of the hills beyond, which would
have been a very good site for a school, if a
school had been needed.

'An awfully nice place for it I agreed,
as she expatiated upon the merits of a rising
ground with drainage towards the
river, and shelter from the woods above.
And if the school ever gets built, I
expect there will be only one thing it will
want.'

Go on, though I know what you are going
to say,' said she.

Scholars,' I finished briefly.

Miss Farington nodded. 'They will come,'
she said confidently, ' if the thing is properly
organised.'

Organisation was her hobby. If that little
affair came off, my library would be partly
catalogued and partly burnt, and To-to would

VOL. II 29

be organised into the stable-yard. Still I did
not flinch.

'Think,' said she enthusiastically, 'what it
would mean ! To plant the first footing of
knowledge, civilisation, refinement, among
these peasants ! To give them eyes to seethe
beauty of the nature which surrounds
them ! To give them resources for refined
enjoyment when winter closes the door of
nature to them ! To widen their knowledge
of the world, and teach them that " linter den
Bergen sind such Lute ! " Oh, Mr. Maude,
if building and starting this school were to
cost ten thousand pounds, I should say the
money had been well spent if in it but one
single Highland boy were taught to read ! '

Rather appalled by the thought of the
lengths to which such a boundless enthusiasm
might carry her, I murmured something to
the effect that it would be rather expensive.
Whereat she turned upon me —

And can you, Mr. Maude, who profess to
revel in Montaigne and Shakespeare, delight
in Charles Lamb and Alfred de Vigny, deny
such pleasures to your humble neighbours ? '

But my humble neighbours wouldn't read
Shakespeare or Montaigne, nor even Winkle
Collins nor Dumas the Elder. They'd read
the Bow Bells novelettes. And as to teaching
them to admire their own hills, why they
love them more than you do, for Nature isn't
to them a closed book in winter as it seems
to you.'

I was on the wrong tack altogether, as I
felt, when by good luck the lady herself
brought me to more congenial ground.

Then I suppose I mustn't expect much
help from you, Mr. Maude,' she said, rather
stiffly.

'Yes, you may indeed, you may expect
every help,' I said, rushing at the opportunity,
and growing hot over it. ' It's true I

that — I don't much care — I mean I'm not
deeply interested in Highland children, except
as scenery, you know, picturesqueness
and all that ; but — er — but for you — in a
plan of yours, that is to say, I should be
delighted to do whatever lay in my power.'

During this lame performance Miss Farington
listened with a perfectly stolid face,
but with a heightened colour which told that
she knew, in vulgar parlance, what I was
driving at. Now that I was coming to the
point, however, she did not mean to have any
humbugging about.' At least, some such
determination as that, rather than maiden
coyness, seemed to prompt her next speech.

I don't think I quite understand you, Mr.
Maude.'

This was a challenge. I took it up.

I think. Miss Farington, you must have
noticed my growing interest in '

In my plans ? No, indeed I haven't.

Don t you remember your saying the other
day that It seemed a pity to waste good
drainage and sanitary regulations upon people
who were never ill ? '

I — I only mean that my interest in — erin
drainage was swallowed up in my interest
in you.'

It was the very last way in which I should
have chosen to introduce a declaration of
love, but with a girl too much absorbed in
the progress of humanity to encourage that
of the individual man, there is nothing for
you but to take what opening you can get.
It was all right, at any rate, for she smiled
and gave me her hand, the glove of which I
respectfully kissed, noticing at the time that
it smelt of treacle, and wondering how it had
acquired that particular perfume. It occurred
to me, even as I stood there trying to think
of something to say, that the little boys she
had been teaching must have been eating

bread and treacle, and imparted its fragrance
to their lesson-books.

'You have surprised me very much, Mr.
Maude,' she said. 'Are you quite sure that
I deserve this honour?'

Perhaps the question was not so insincere
as it seemed to me, for she looked pleased,
though not at all agitated. But I felt, as I
reassured her with some conventional words,
that my heart would have gone out more to
the emptiest - headed little fool that ever
giggled and blushed than to this most intelligent
and matter-of-fact young woman. And
I fell to wondering, as we began to walk
back together, why the sentimental and the
practical were so oddly divided in the feminine
mind that a girl could glow with enthusiasm
while talking about impracticable plans
for making her neighbours uncomfortable,
and listen quite coolly to a proposal to pass
her life with the man she had made no secret

of liking best. I had an awkward sense of
not knowing what to talk about, and I asked
her how she liked Larkhall. She had evidently
considered that matter well already,
and was quite prepared with her answer.

I think it only wants the south wing
raised a storey, and the drawing-room enlarged
by taking in that space between the
outer wall and that row of lilacs and guelder-roses
at the back, to make it one of the
pleasantness of the country houses about here,'
she replied promptly.

I felt a cold shiver up my back, perceiving
that even my study might be already
doomed.

But I like it even as it is because it is
your home,' she added, with a touch of human
feeling for which I felt grateful.

Thank you,' I said, and I took her hand
again. I hesitated about using her Christian
name, and decided not to. ' Lucy ' seemed

such an inappropriate appellation for Miss
Farington ; she ought at least to have been
Henrietta.'

I will try to make you like it still more,'
I said, quietly and sincerely, upon which she
went the length of returning the pressure of
my fingers on hers.

But she could not keep long away from
those confounded plans. As we drew near
the grounds of Larkhall, and could see the
stables and one corner of the roof of the cottage,
she stopped short and said pensively —

I've often thought, Mr. Maude, what a pity
it is that cottage should be kept empty, when
it is so nicely furnished too. Your housekeeper,
Mrs. Janet, took me over it one day.'
Perhaps it was anger at the thought that this
young lady had mentally disposed of all my
property prematurely, perhaps annoyance
that she should have intruded in the cottage
at all, which helped to augment the sudden

fury which seized me at this suggestion. She
went on, quite unaware of what she had done.
Now I was thinking what a charming convalescent
home a place like that would make
for poor widows in reduced circumstances

who '

Unfortunately I am too selfish to give upto
strangers the accommodation which has
always been reserved for my friends.'

Miss Farington might be cold, might be
prosaic, but she was not stupid. She saw at
once she had gone too far, and hastened to
apologise with very maidenly humility.

I am afraid you will think I care more
for my plans than for the great happiness and
honour you have just done me. But indeed,
Mr. Maude, it is not so. It is only that I
never find any one to sympathise with my
efforts but you, and so I tax your patience too
much in my delight at meeting some one who
is kind to me.'

Be kind to me too, then,' I suggested,
venturing, now that we had got among the
trees of the garden, to put my hand Lightly
on her waist. She understood, and with a
real blush at last, she let me kiss her. ' I
have been a hermit a long time,' I said in a
low voice, ' and I have fallen out of the ways
of the world and of women. But if you will
only have patience with me, and not be too
much frightened by my uncouth ways, I will
make you a very good husband ; and I promise
you it shall be your own fault if I do
not make you happy.'

I am sure of it,' she said simply, with a
confidence which was flattering, if still astonishingly
prosaic.

I led her round the garden, gathered for
her my best roses and fastened them together,
while she critically surveyed the front of the
house.

It wants a coat of whitewash, doesn't it ? '

I suggested, anxious to show her that I was
not too conservative.

Ye — es, and the ivy wants trimming.
Why don't you put it in the hands of the
painters, Mr. Maude?'

What, and go away — already ! Surely
that is too much to expect,' I ventured,
looking down into her eyes, which, if not
boasting any poetical attractions of ' hidden
depths,' were very clear and straightforward.


Oh no, I don't mean that ; but you could
come and stay nearer to us. The people at
Lassie Villa are just going to leave, I know.'

I am bound here for a little while, as one
of my oldest friends has just asked me to give
shelter to his wife and her mother for a few
weeks.'

Indeed ! Oh, they will be some people
to know. Have I ever heard of them ?'

I don't know. The mother's name is

Mrs. Elmer, the daughter's — Mrs. Scott.
She has been ill, I believe.'

Mrs. Elmer ! Why, surely those are
the people who used to live at the cottage !
Oh, I have heard about them and your kindness
to them. People said ' She hesitated.


Well, what did they say ? '
Oh, well, they said you used to be very
fond of — the daughter.'

So I was ; so I am. But you need not
be jealous.'

She laughed, a bright clear laugh, scarcely
without a touch of good-humoured contempt
at the suggestion.

'I jealous! Oh, Mr. Maude, you would
not seriously accuse me of such a paltry feeling
! It would be unworthy of you, unworthy
of me.'

I felt, when I had taken my fiancee home
and formally received her parents' sanction

to our engagement, that I was myself unworthy
to Hve in the intellectual and moral
heights on which she flourished. But I
could creep after her in a humble fashion,
and do my best to make her love me.

And in the meantime my loyalty to my
friend and my friend's wife was strengthened
by a new and sacred bond.

I SUPPOSE no man ever tried harder to be
deeply, earnestly, sincerely in love than I
tried to be with Miss Farington ; and I
suppose no man ever failed more completely.
I believe now that to any other woman I
have ever met, being a man by no means
without affectionate impulses, and being also
in a most propitious mood for sentiment, I
should have been by the end of the week a
submissive if not adoring slave. I wanted to
be a slave ; I was even anxious to become,
for the time at least, the mere chattel of somebody
else, a gracious and kindly somebody,
be it well understood, who would give me

the wages of affection in return for my best
efforts in her service.

But Miss Farington's heart and mind were
far too well regulated for her to tolerate, much
less seek, such an empire over the man who
was to be her lord and master. She despised
sentiment, and meant to begin as she intended
to keep on, neither giving nor accepting an
unreasonable amount of affection. Respect
and esteem, and above all, compatibility of
aim, she used to say, not harshly, but with an
implied reproach to my own more vulgar and
sensual views, were the only sure foundation
of happy married life ; and I felt that so long
as there was an unrepaired pig-stye within a
mile of Larkhall, I was an object of comparatively
small importance In my fiancee s eyes.
And the worst of It was I couldn't contradict
her. Reserving all her philanthropic projects,
she was on other matters the incarnation
of common sense ; and I soon found that

it was the vague reputation for intellect which
any man gets in the country who likes his
books better than his neighbours, which had
attracted her attention to my unworthy self.
She was disappointed with her bargain
already ; I was sure of that : but having made
it, she was not the woman to go back from
her word. She even had the good taste, on
finding that her ' plans ' palled upon me, to
drop them out of her conversation to a great
extent, but I had a shrewd suspicion that they
would be let loose upon me again with full
force as soon as she should be installed as
mistress of Larkhall. I was secretly resolved
however, since my lady-love declined to rule
me in the right woman's way — through her
heart — to assert my supremacy of the head
in a startling and unexpected manner so soon
as I should be legally the master.

In the meantime we jogged on with our
engagement, and I found in my daily walks

with Lucy, and in luncheons and teas at her

father's, no charm strong enough to make

me for a moment forget the fact that in a

few days Babiole would be under my own

roof.

For I had decided that not honour enough

could be done to my guests at the cottage ;

and, Ferguson and old Janet joining in the

work with a heartiness which made me love

them, we turned out the whole house from

garret to basement, and for a week there was

such a sweeping and garnishing as never was

known. We had only just got it in order

when Fabian's telegram came announcing that

they were off, and for the next forty-eight

hours nobody could stop to take breath. The

stable-boy had insisted on erecting at the

entrance a lop-sided triumphal arch which,

after having required constant renewing of

its branches for a day and a half, having been

put up much too soon, had to be taken down
VOL. II ^o

at the last moment, as it was found that a
carriage could not drive under it without either
the arch carrying away the coachman, or the
coachman carrying away the arch. They
were to break the journey by spending one
night at Edinburgh, and I had proposed to
meet them at Aberdeen on the following day.
But Miss Farington's uncle having come to
Ballater on purpose to annoy me — I mean on
purpose to meet me — I was forced to attend
a most dull luncheon at Oak Lodge where I,
in absence of mind, made myself ver)- objectionable
by expressing a doubt whether any
lawyers would be found in heaven.

They made me stay to tea, though I'm
sure nobody wanted me, and I was dying to
get away. It was nearly six before I could
leave, and I rushed to the little station just as
the passengers were streaming out of the train.
I knew that Babiole was among them, and I
came upon her suddenly as I got through the

door on to the platform. She was leaning
on her mother, pale, thin, wasted so that for
pit' and terror I could not speak, but just
held out my arm and supported her to the
carriage which, by my orders, was waiting
outside. As we drove off she leaned
against her mother and held out her hand
to me.

Ao^ain — after four years. to be back with
you under old Craigendarroch,' she said,
almost in a whisper, with moist eyes.

Yes, yes. we'll set you up again as none
of your London doctors could do.' I said
huskily.

She smiled at me, still keeping my hand.
swill you, Mr. Maude .^' she asked half
doubtingly, like a child.

See what marriage has done for her ! *
broke in Mrs. Elmer half mournfully, half
tartly. * She wouldn't be satisfied till she'd
tried it. and look at the result.'

At that moment a yelping and barking
behind us attracted our attention, and the
next moment poor old Ta-ta, released from
the van in which she had been travelling,
overtook the carriage, and tried to leap up
from the road to lick my face.

Ta-ta, old girl, why, we're going to have
the old times back again,' I cried, much
moved ; and after a drive in which only Mrs.
Elmer talked much, we all reached Larkhall
in a more or less maudlin condition, overcome
by old recollections.

All the men and boys about the place had
assembled in two rows at the entrance, and
gave us a hearty cheer as we drove past.
Ferguson was standing at the door, and
I vow his hard old eyes were moist as he
insisted on helping the little lady out himself.
Janet, in a cap which rendered the wearer
insignificant, made a respectful curtsey to
Mrs. Scott as she came up the steps, but

threw her arms around her as soon as she
was fairly inside the hall.

Mrs. Elmer and I were rather afraid of
the effects of fatigue and excitement on a
frame scarcely convalescent, but the pleasure
of being back among the hills was such a
powerful stimulant that within half an hour
of going upstairs to the big south bedroom,
which had been aired and cleaned and done
up expressly for her, she flitted down again
with quick steps, and with a faint stain of
pink colour showing under the transparent
skin of her thin cheeks.

I was just outside the front door, where I
had been hovering about with an unlighted
cigar between my lips, when I caught a
glimpse of soft white drapery in the heavy
shadows of the old staircase. I went back
into the hall and looked up at her, as she
stopped with one hand on the bannisters,
smiling down at me but saying nothing.

She wore a transparent white dress that
looked like mush only that it was silky,
with a long train that remained stretched on
the stairs above her as she stopped.

I thought it was an angel flying over my
staircase,' I said gently.

And all the while it was only a silly moth
that had singed its wings in the big bright
candle you had warned it to keep away from,'
she answered gravely, after a pause.

The wings will grow again, and when it
goes back to the light '

We won't talk about going back yet,' she
broke in with a little shiver. ' I want to forget
all about London for a little while, and
try to feel just as I used to do here. I
wouldn't bring Davis with me. Poor mamma
is going to be my nurse, and you to be my
doctor, and I am going to take Craigen-
darroch after every meal.'

You must be ready for one now, one

meal, I mean, not one mountain. Where is
poor mamma ? '

Oh, she's gone to talk to Janet. She
thinks I am still waiting for her to do my
hair. But she shall see that I am not an
invalid any longer.'

But as she spoke, the light died out of her
eyes, and I saw the fragile white hand, the
blue-veined delicacy of which had alarmed
me, suddenly clutch the bannister-rail tightly.

'You mustn't boast too soon,' said I, as I
ran up the stairs and supported her.

She recovered herself in a few moments,
being only very weak and tired, and she
suddenly lifted her face to mine quite
merrily.

Shall we take Froude tomorrow, Mr.
Maude ? Or shall I prepare a chapter of
Schiller's Thirty Years War ? ' she asked,
just in the old manner. ' Or a couple of
pages of Ancient History ? '

I think,' I answered slowly, while my
heart leapt up as a salmon does at a fly, and
I honestly tried not to feel so disloyally,
unmistakably happy, 'that we'll do a little
modern poetry, and that we'll begin with
The Return of the Wanderer." '

I was leading her slowly downstairs, when
Mrs. Kilmer's high piercing voice, coming
towards us as the door of the housekeeper's
room was opened, suddenly broke upon our
ears.

Well, I must go and congratulate him.
I'm sure I always said that a nice wife was
just the one thing he wanted.'

Who's that ? ' asked Babiole quite sharply.

Why, don't you know your own mother's
voice ? '

Yes, yes, but who is she talking about ?
Who is it wants a nice wife ? '

I suppose most of us do, only we are not
all so lucky as a certain young actor I know,'

I said brightly ; but my heart beat violently,
and I felt Babiole's fingers trembling on my
arm.

She asked me no more questions, and I
took her into the dining-room to admire the
roses with which we had loaded the table.
But when her mother joined us a moment
later, brimming over with excitement about
my engagement, Babiole nodded and said,
Yes, mother, I've heard all about it,' and
offered no congratulations.

As for me, the remembrance of my
france this evening threw me into a reckless
mood. ' Let us eat and drink, for tomorrow
we — marry Miss Farington ' was the kind
of thought that lay at the bottom of my
deliberate abandonment of myself to the
enthralling pleasure the mere presence of
this little white human thing had power to
give me. Mrs. Elmer and I were very
lively both at dinner and afterwards in the

Study, where we all went merely to look at
To-to, but where Babiole insisted on our
staying. She did not talk much ; but on the
other hand, her face never for a moment fell
into that listless sadness which had pained
and shocked me so much in London. When
at last she was so evidently tired out that
we had reluctantly to admit that she must goto
bed, she let her mother see that she wanted
to speak to me, and remained behind to say —
I want to see this lady you are going to
marry. For I'm not going to congratulate
you till I see whether she is sweet, and
beautiful, and noble, and worthy to — worship
you, Mr. Maude,' she ended earnestly.

She is a very nice girl,' said I, playing
with To-to with unconscious roughness,
which the monkey resented.

A nice girl for you ! ' she said scornfully.
She must be more than that, or I will forbid
the banns. I was afraid you would think it

Strange that I didn't say something about it,'
she went on, after a moment's pause, rather
nervously ; ' but when I heard it — just now —
I prayed about it — I did indeed — just as I
used to for myself and Fabian.'

A fear evidently struck her here that the
reminiscence was ill-omened, for she hastened
to add, ' But then I didn't deserve to be
happy — and you do. Good-night,' she concluded
abruptly, and drawing her hot hand
with nervous haste out of mine she left me.

The next day came a reaction from the
excitement of her arrival, and Babiole was
not able to leave her room until late in the
afternoon. I had paid my duty-call at Oak
Lodge in the morning, and had been disconcerted
to find that common sense and
philanthropy had grown less attractive than
ever. Lucy expressed her intention of calling
upon Mrs. Scott that very afternoon, and
when I explained that she was tired and not

likely to make her appearance before dinner-time,
my philanthropist said she would drive
round to Larkhall in the evening. From
this pertinacity I concluded that Miss
Farington was perhaps not so entirely free
from human curiosity and perhaps feminine
jealousy as she would have liked me to
suppose. At any rate she kept me with her
all day, an unquiet conscience having made
me exceedingly docile ; and it was six o'clock
before I got home.

I went straight into the drawing-room,
where Babiole, lying on a sofa before one of
the windows, was enjoying the warm light of
the declining sun.

Better ? ' said I simply, coming up to the
sofa and looking down. All the energy and
animation of the evening before were gone
now ; but to me Babiole never lost one
charm without gaining a greater ; she had
been fascinating in a lively mood, she was

irresistible in a quiet one. She gave me
her hand and answered in a weak voice —

'Yes, I'm better, thank you.'

'What have you been thinking about so
quietly all by yourself? I don't fancy you
ought to be allowed to think at all.'

I've been thinking about poor papa.
Have you heard anything more about him .^ '

'Yes, he's all right, I believe, settled
down in Aberdeen. I don't think you'd
better try to see him though. It might set
him worrying again on the old subject,
which perhaps he has forgotten.'

She shook her head. ' You don't know
papa as mamma and I do. He wastes his life
so that people despise him, and believe that
he cares for nothing but the day's enjoyment.
But they are wrong. He is fierce and sullen,
and he never forgets. He came up here to
see yoti, and to do you harm ; and he will
never rest until at least he's tried to.'

Well, he and I were very good friends,
and there is nothing I should like better
than to meet him and make him listen to
reason — as I'm sure he would do.'

He — he might not give you the chance.'
I was pleased by her solicitude for me,
but I showed her how very far-fetched her
fears were, and assured her, moreover, that
if Mr. EUmer, with the brutal ferocity which
had been ascribed to him, should ever go sofar
as to attack me personally, he would
probably find his match in a man who lived
so hardily as I.

CHAPTER XXII

I DID not mention Miss Farington's
threatened visit until the very moment
when, after dinner, as we were all turning
out for a walk round the garden, I caught a
glimpse of her little pony carriage between
the trees of the drive. Babiole, wrapt in a
long shawl of Indian embroidery which I had
taken a fancy to in a bazaar in Calcutta, and
had sent home to her, was standing by a
rose-tree and choosing the flowers which I
was to cut. Mrs. Elmer, with characteristic
vivacity, was running little races with old
Ta-ta, whose failing energy was now satisfied
with such small performances as these. The

dog Stopped short to bark at the carriage, to
which Mrs. Elmer now directed my attention.

Oh yes, it's Miss Farington, I think ;
she said she might come round this evening.'

'What! Miss Farington? Your young
lady ? And you could forget that she was
coming ! Oh, naughty, naughty ! ' cried Mrs.
Elmer.

Babiole's face had flushed from chin to
forehead.

We must go and meet her,' she said
quietly, setting the example of going up the
steps which led from terrace to terrace to the
house.

Reminded of my duty, I hastened up to
the lawn, and was just in time to help my
visitor out of the little carriage. She wore
a gray dress, a dark blue jacket, a brown hat,
and black silk gloves — a costume in which I
had seen her often before, but which had not
struck me as being a hideous combination

until I saw it straightway after looking at a
figure which, seen in the soft evening shadows
which had begun to creep up under the trees,
had left in my mind an intoxicating vision of
rich colours and soft outlines, like the conception
of an Indian princess by an Impressionist
painter.

Lucy Farington's manner suffered as
much by contrast with Mrs. Scott's as her
dress had done. Never before had she
seemed so matter-of-fact, so brusque, so blind
and deaf to everything that was not strictly
useful or severely intellectual. On finding
that Mrs. Scott took but a tepid interest in
the subject of artisans' dwellings, and had no
acquaintance with the writings either of Kant
or Klopstock, she glanced at me, who had
never been bold enough to avow the whole
depth of my indifference to the one and my
ignorance of the other subject, with an expression
of scarcely disguised contempt.

VOL. II 31

I'm afraid Henry and I shall scarcely find
in you a warm sympathiser with our plans,
Mrs. Scott,' she said with rather a pitying
smile. ' But of course we must not expect
you London ladies to condescend to take an
interest in cottagers ; and it is only we poor
country girls who, for want of anything better
to do, have to improve our minds.'

We were all in the drawing-room now, to
my great regret, for I felt that if we had
remained in the garden we might have dispersed
ourselves, and I might have been
spared hearing my france s unaccountable
outbreak of bad taste. Babiole answered
very quietly.

You have misunderstood me a little, I am
afraid, Miss Farington,' she said. 'It is
not that my mother and I don't take an
interest in cottagers ; but that, having been
cottagers ourselves, and having known and
visited cottagers rather as friends than as

patrons, we can't at once jump into the habit
of considering them wholesale, as if we were
poor-law guardians.'

And as for improving one's mind,' broke
in Mrs. Elmer, who was growing exceedingly-irate
at the persistent manner in which the
philanthropist ignored her, ' you must blame
Mr. Maude if she is not learned enough, for
it was he who educated her.'

This bold speech made a great sensation.
Miss Farington drew herself up. Babiole
shot at me an eloquent involuntary glance
from eyes which were suddenly filled with
tears ; while I confess that if I had been
called upon to speak at that moment I should
have gone near to choking. In the meantime
Mrs. Elmer went on undaunted.

I suppose it's very old-fashioned to think
that one's studies ought to be with the object
of giving pleasure to other people. But I'm
sure it's pleasant to hear a girl play a nice

piece of music than to hear her talk about
books that most of us have never heard of.'

I love music — good music said Lucy
coldly. ' No study is more refining and more
profound than that of the great masters of
harmony. I had no idea, Mrs. Scott, that
you were an accomplished amateur. Will
you not give me the pleasure of hearing
you ?'

I am afraid I am not a very scientific
student,' said Babiole, as she walked towards
the piano, which I opened for her.

She looked so pale and tired that I suggested
in a low voice that she had better not
play to-night. She glanced at Miss Farington,
however, and I, following the direction
of her eyes, saw that vi\y france was watching
us in a displeased manner. I therefore beat
a retreat from the piano, and Babiole began
to play. She was a good performer, and
though not one of phenomenal accomplishment,

she seemed to me to give something of
her own grace and charm to the music she
interpreted. She was nervous this evening
on account of the critical element in the
audience ; but I thought she played with
even more of sympathy and of power than
usual. She had chosen one of the less
hackneyed of Mendelssohn's ' Songs without
Words,' and when she had finished I thanked
her heartily, while Miss Farington chimed
in with more reserve.

*I am afraid,' said Babiole, 'that it is not
the sort of music to give you great pleasure,
but I can't play much by heart, and that is
one of the few things I know.'

Of course,' agreed Miss Farington
readily, ' I acquit you of such a terrible
charge as an enthusiasm for the shallow
sentimentalism of the '* Lieder one Worse."
Some day, I hope, in the day-time, you will
let me have the pleasure of hearing you play

something you really like. It is really very
good of you to have received me at all so
late, but I had heard so much about you that
I really must plead guilty to the childish
charge of not being able to control my impatience
to see you.'

And Miss Farington took leave of the
two ladies and sailed out of the room, followed
meekly by me. I was in no affectionate
mood, having been astonished and disgusted
by her undreamt-of powers of making herself
disagreeable.

I want you to come and spend the day
at Oak Lodge tomorrow, Henry,' she said
in a kinder tone than she had used during
the evening, as soon as she was seated in the
pony-carriage. ' I have some designs of a
new church to show you, which I think even
you will like ; and my Uncle Matthew is
most anxious to see more of you than he had
a chance of doing yesterday.'

Thank you ; it is very kind,' I answered
rather coldly ; ' and of course I shall be happy
to come and see you tomorrow as usual if
you will let me. But I couldn't spend the
whole day at Oak Lodge, because, you see,
I have guests to consider.'

And can't they spare you for a single
afternoon ? ' asked Lucy with a hard laugh.
I shall really begin to feel quite jealous.'

You need not indeed,' I broke out hastily
and earnestly, ' I assure you '

She interrupted me in a very abrupt and
icy manner. ' Pray do not take the trouble.
No man who was such a flimsy creature as
to give me reason for jealousy could possibly
retain a hold upon my affections.'

Of course not,' I assented, in my usual
mean-spirited way, but with a dawning suspicion
that my fiancee's affections would not
prove strong enough for even a less flimsy
creature than I to obtain a firm grip on.

My father and Mrs. Farington will drive
over tomorrow,' Lucy went on ; ' I believe
they intend to ask Mrs. Scott to dinner. I
suppose one must ask the mother too,' she
added dubiously.

It will certainly be better, unless you wish
to insult them both,' I said in an unnaturally
subdued tone the significance of which I think
she failed to notice. ' But in any case the
invitation will have no awful results, for Mrs.
Scott is not well enough to go out to dinners.'

Ah, poor thing, I suppose not. She looks
very ill. It seems almost impossible to believe
what they tell me, that she was once
very pretty. Perhaps she would not look so
bad though if somebody could only persuade
her to dress like other people. Did you
ever see anything like that shawl arrangement
she had on when I first came ? '

Never,' said I calmly. * But I confess I
am barbarous enough to think that a merit.

I

Every lady's style of dress should have something
unique about it.'

Indeed ! Then how about mine ? '
Your style of dress is unique too,' said I
politely.

Miss Farington looked at me doubtfully,
but came, I think, to the conclusion that she
had been disagreeable enough for one day,
even if this compliment were a dubious one.
So she contented herself with begging me
warmly to come early the next day and to
remember that my guests where not to absorb
me too entirely, and then she advanced her
cheek for me to kiss and drove away through
the trees. When I turned back into the house
I found a great turmoil prevailing. ' Mistress
Scott had been on her way to her room
when she had swooned wa' on the stairs,'
Janet said. I stole presently up the staircase
to her door, and Mrs. Elmer came out to
tell me that Babiole had indeed been overcome

by fatigue and had fainted, but that she
was much better now, and would be all right
in the morning after the night's rest.

But I was anxious about the poor child ;
for her pallor during the evening had frightened
me. My Lucy's new departure too had
given me something to think about, so that
sleep for the present was out of the question.
I therefore determined to keep my vigil
comfortably ; going into the study, I threw
another log on the fire which, winter and
summer, was always necessary in the evening,
and, lighting my pipe, stretched myself
in my old chair and gave myself up to
meditation, which resolved itself before long
into a doze.

I woke up suddenly before the fire had
got low, and heard the old boards of the floor
above me creaking repeatedly, as if some one
were hurrying about on them with a soft
tread. The room over my study was that

which had been assigned to Mrs. Scott, so
that I was on the alert at once, afraid that
she had been taken ill again in the night, and
that her mother, who slept in a little room
next to hers, was running to and fro in
attendance upon her.

I jumped up from my chair, with the intention
of going upstairs to ask Mrs. Elmer
whether I could be of any use ; but before I
had taken two steps, in a slow sleepy fashion,
listening all the time, the creaking ceased, and
I heard the sound of a door being opened on
the landing above. The study-door was ajar,
so that in the complete stillness of the night
the faintest noise was audible to me. I
crossed the room softly, creeping nearer to
the door with keenly open ears and with
something more than curiosity in my mind.
For without being at all one of those highly
sensitive persons who can distinguish without
fail one footfall from another, I knew the

difference between Mrs. Kilmer's quick active
step, and the slow soft tread which I now
heard on the polished uncarpeted floor of the
corridor. The steps became inaudible as I
caught the light sound of a skirt sweeping
from stair to stair : then again I heard a slow
tread on the polished floor of the hall. Although
I knew well enough who it was, a long
sigh which suddenly reached my ears and
proclaimed beyond doubt the wanderer's
identity, seemed to pierce my body and leave
a deep wound. It was Babiole, either in
misery or in pain, who was wandering about
the house in the middle of the night. She
was feeling about for something in the darkness
when I opened wide the door of my
study, and let the lamplight fall upon her just
as the chain of the front door rattled in her
hands and fell with a loud noise against the oak.
She glanced back at me in a startled manner,
but proceeded to unlock the door and to

turn the handle. She had on the muslin
dress she had worn during the evening, with
her travelling cloak and bonnet. I saw by
the vacant manner in which her eyes rested
for a moment upon me, without surprise or
recognition, that there was some cloud in her
brain. I advanced quickly into the hall and
laid my fingers upon the handle of the door.

What are you doing down here to-night ?'
I asked in a low voice, but with an air of
authority. 'You ought to be sleeping.'

She drew back a little and looked helplessly
from the door to me.

Now go upstairs again and get into bed
as fast as you can,' I continued coaxingly, 'or
your mother will find out that you have left
your room, and be very much frightened.'

But recalling her purpose, she made a
spring towards the door, and as I stood firm
and prevented her opening it, she fell to wild
and piteous entreaties.

Let me pass, please. I must go, I tell
you I must go, before they know — before
they guess. It will all come right if I go.'

Tell me first why you want to go,' said I
gently.

The lamp-light streamed out from the open
study door upon us, showing me her dazed,
almost haggard face, her disordered dress,
the nervous trembling of her hands. She
looked at me for a moment more steadily, and
I thought she was coming to herself

I can't tell you' she whispered, still
fumbling with the door handle and looking
down at her own fingers.

Well, then, go upstairs now, and you
shall tell me all about it tomorrow,' I said
persuasively.

No, no, no,' she broke out wildly and
vehemently as at first, seeming again to lose
all control of herself as she became excited.
To-morrow I shall be happy again, and I shall

not be able to go. He cannot care for this
girl while I'm here, I know it! I am spoiling
everything for them : I want to go back
to my husband, and not wait for him to come
and fetch me. Don't you see ? Don't you
understand ? '

Even while she babbled out these secrets,
ignorant who I was, her instinct of confidence
in me made her support herself on my arm,
and lean upon me as she whispered excitedly
in my ear.

'Well, but it is night, and there are no
trains till the morning, you know.'

For a moment she seemed bewildered.
Then with an expression of childlike simplicity
she said, ' I shall find my way. God
told me I was right to go. I can pray up
here among the hills, just as I used when I
was a child, and He told me it was right.'

Luckily, perhaps, her strength was failing
her even as she spoke. She swayed unsteadily

on my arm and made little resistance but a
faint murmur of protest as I half carried her
back to the staircase. As her head fell
languidly against my shoulder I saw that
again, as fatigue overcame excitement, she
was recovering her wandering consciousness,
and I made haste to take advantage of the
fact.

Come,' said I, ' you had better go upstairs
and rest a little while — before you start, you
know.'

She looked up at me In a dreamy bewildered
manner as she leant, supported by my
arms, against the staircase, and two tears,
shining in the darkness, rolled down her
cheeks. ' I am afraid,' said she in a broken
whisper, ' that I shall not be able to go at all.'

Then, with a long sigh, she stood up,
twined her arms within mine and let me lead
her upstairs. The door of her room was
open, and the two candles, flickering and

smoking in the draught, cast moving shadows
over a disorder of dress and dainty woman's
clothing flung in confusion about the room.
Babiole glanced inside and then looked up at
me in bewilderment and alarm, like one roused
out of sleep to see something strange and
terrible. I wanted her to go to rest before
her memory should overtake her. So I took
off her bonnet and cloak, and profiting by the
utter docility she showed me, glanced into the
room and said, in a tone of authority, such as
one would use to a child —

Now, I shall come upstairs again in exactly
five minutes and shall knock at your
door. If you are in bed by that time you
are to call out '' good-night." If you are not,
I shall wake your mother up, and send her to
you. Now will you do as I tell you ? '

Yes, yes,' said she meekly.

Then good-night.'

'Good-night, Mr. Maude.'
VOL. II ^2

She knew me then ; but I somehow
fancied, from the old-fashioned demureness
with which she gave her hand, that she behaved
herself to be once more the little maid
of Craigendarroch, and me to be her old
master.

Next day Babiole did not appear at breakfast,
and her mother said she was in a state
of deep depression, and must, her mother
thought by her manner, have had a fright in
the night. I was very anxious to see her
again, and to find out how much she remembered
of our nocturnal adventure. So
anxious was I, in fact, that I forgot all about
my appointment at Oak Lodge at eleven,
and it was not until Mrs. Elmer and I were
having luncheon at two that I was suddenly
reminded of my neglect in a rather summary
fashion by being presented by Ferguson with
a note directed in my frances handwriting,
and told that a messenger was waiting. I

opened it, conscience-stricken, but hardly
prepared for the blow it contained. This
was the note : —

Dear Mr. Maude — ' [The opening was portentous]
' It is with feelings of acute pain that I
address thus formally a gentleman in whom I once
thought I had had the good fortune to discover a
heart, and more especially a mind, to which I
could in all things submit the control of my own
weaker and more frivolous nature.' [Lucy Farington
frivolous ! Shades of Aristotle and Bacon !]
For some time past I have begun to feel that I
was deceived. I do not for a moment mean that
you intended deception, but that, in my anxiety
to believe the best, I deceived myself. Your
growing indifference to the dearest wishes of my
heart, culminating in your positive non-appearance
this morning (when I had prepared a little surprise
for you in shape of a meeting with Mr. Finch,
the architect, with his designs for a model self-supporting
village laundry), leave hardly any
room for doubt that our views of life are too hopelessly
dissimilar for us to hope to embark happily
in matrimony. If this is indeed the case, with

much regret I will give you back your liberty, and
request the return of my perhaps foolishly fond
letters. If, on the other hand, you are not willing
that all should be at an end between us, I beg
that you will come to me in the pony carriage
which will await your orders. — I remain, dear Mr.
Maude, with my sincerest apologies if I have been
unduly hasty, yours most sincerely,

Lucy Farington.'

My first emotion was one of anger against
the girl for being such a fool ; my second vas
of thankfulness to her for being so wise. I
should have liked, in pique, to have straightway
got those letters, which she was mistaken
in considering compromising affectionate,
to have made them into a small but neat
parcel and despatched them forthwith. Instead
of this, I excused myself to Mrs. Elmer,
went into the study in a state of excitement,
half pain and half relief, and wrote a note.

My Dear Miss Farington — Your letter
forbids me to address you in a more affectionate

way, though you are mistaken in supposing that
my feelings towards you have changed. It seems
to be that we have both, if I may use the expression,
been running our heads against a brick wall.
You have been seeking in me a learned gentleman
with a strong natural bent for philanthropy,
while I hoped to find in you an intelligent and
withal most kind and loving-hearted girl, who
would condescend to console me for the " slings
and arrows of outrageous fortune," in return for
my very best endeavours to make her happy.
Well, is the mistake past repairing ? I am not
too old to learn philanthropy under your guidance ;
you, I am sure, are too sweet not to forgive me
for preferring a walk with you alone to interviews
with all the architects who ever desecrated nature.
I cannot come back with the carriage now to see
Mr. Finch ; but if you will, in the course of the
afternoon, let me have another ever so short note
telling me to come and see yoii^ I shall take it
as a token that you are willing to give me another
chance, and within half an hour of receiving it I
will be with you to take my first serious lesson in
philanthropy and to pay for it in what love coin
you please. — Believe me, dear Lucy if I may.

dear Miss Farington if I must, yours ever
most faithfully and sincerely,

Henry L. Maude.'

I saw the groom drive off with this note,
and spent the early part of the afternoon
wandering about the garden, trying to make
out what sort of answer I wished for. This
was the one I got : —

Dear Mr. Maude — The tone of levity which
characterises your note admits but of one explanation.
No gentleman could so address the lady
whose respect and esteem he sincerely wished to
retain. I therefore return your letters and the
various presents you have been kind enough to
make me, and beg that you will return me my
share of our correspondence. Please do not think
I bear you any ill-will ; I am willing to believe
the error was mutual, and shall rather increase
than discontinue my prayers on your behalf, that
your perhaps somewhat pliable nature may not
render you the victim of designing persons. — I
remain, dear Mr. Maude, ever sincerely your
friend, LuCY Warrington.'

When I got to the end of this warmhearted
effusion I rushed off to make up my
parcel : seven notes, a smoking-cap, and a
pair of slippers, which last I regretted giving
up, as they were large and comfortable ; a
book on Village Architecture, and another of
sermons by an eloquent and unpractical
modern preacher, completed the list. I
fastened them up, sealed and directed them,
and sent them out to the under-gardener
from ' Oak Lodge,' who had brought the note,
and had been directed to wait for an answer.
Then, with a sense of relief which was unmixed
this time, I went back to my study,
lit my pipe, and sat down in front of the
parcel my late love had sent me. I was
struck by its enormous superiority in neatness
to the ill-shapen brown paper bundle in which
I had just sent off mine ; and it presently
occurred to me that the remarkable deftness
with which corners had been turned in and

String knotted and tied could never have
been attained by hands unused to any kind
of active labour. Miss Farington, either
too much overcome by emotion to tie her
parcel up herself, or from an absence of sentiment
which might or might not be considered
to do her credit, had entrusted the task of
sending back my presents to her maid.

Mechanically 1 opened the parcel and, not
being deeply enough wounded by the abrupt
termination of my engagement to throw my
rejected gifts with passion into the fire, I
arranged them on the table in a row, spread
out my returned letters (which had all been
neatly opened with a pen — or small paperknife),
and considered the well-meant but disastrous
venture of which they were the relics
with much though fulness. It had been a
failure from first to last : not only had it
failed to draw my thoughts and affections
from the little pale lady who was now the

wife of my friend, but it had also unhappily
resulted in rendering her by contrast a lovelier
and more desirable object than before.
There was no doubt of it : the only unalloyed
pleasure may Jianc^e had afforded me was the
increase of delight I had felt, after nearly
three weeks of her improving society, in
meeting my little witch of the hills once more.
On the whole my conscience was pretty clear
with regard to Miss Farington ; I had been
prepared to offer her affection, and she had
preferred an interest in domestic architecture,
which I had then sedulously cultivated : the
question was, what was to be done now ? I
decided that the most prudent course would
be to say nothing of my rupture with my
lady-love, and if I should be unable to subdue
a certain unwonted hilarity at dinner time, to
ascribe it to other causes.

I had scarcely made this resolution, however,
when I heard light sounds in the hall

and a knock at my door, and I said ' Come
in ' with my heart leaping up and a hot and
feverish conviction that it was all up with the
secret ; for the outspread letters which I convulsively
gathered into a heap, the lace
pocket-handkerchief, the chased gold ,
and other articles for which a
bachelor of retired habits would be likely to
have small use, told their own tale ; while, to
make matters worse, To-to had got hold of
the engagement ring and had placed it on the
top of his box for safety while he minutely
inspected its morocco case, and chewed up
the velvet lining with all the zest of a
gourmand.

One helpless glance was all I had time for
before the door opened, and Babiole came in.

On hearing the soft tap of Babiole's fingers
on the door of my study, there had sprung up
In me quite suddenly a feeling that my anchor
was gone, and the tempest of human passion
which I had controlled for so long burst out
within me with a violence which made me
afraid of myself. There, on the table before
me, lay the eloquent relics of my rejected
suit to the woman I had tried to love. And
here, shut out from me only by the scarcely-closed
door, was the woman I loved so dearly
without the trying, that just that faint sound
which told me she was near thrilled through
every fibre of my body as the musician's

careless fingers sweep the keys of his Instrument
In a lightly-touched prelude before he
makes it sing and throb with any melody he
pleases. I had sprung to my feet and begun
to toss my returned letters one by one with
shaking hands Into the fire, when I heard
Babiole's voice behind me.

I turned abruptly, and it seemed to myself
almost defiantly. But no sooner had I
given one glance at the slender figure dressed
in some plain dark stuff and one into the little
pale face than all the tumult within me began
to calm down, and the roaring, ramping,
raging lion I had felt a moment before transformed
himself gradually before the unconscious
magic of my fairy's eyes into the mild
and meek old lamb he had always been with
her.

'You seem very busy, Mr, Maude,' said
she, smiling.

Surely it was my very witch herself again,

only a little thinner and whiter, who spoke tome
thus In the old sweet voice, and held out
her hand with the half-frank, half-shy demureness
of those bygone, painful-pleasant days
when we were 'engaged,' and when the new
and proud discovery that she was ' grown-up '
had given a delicious piquancy to her manner
of taking her lessons ! I shook hands with
her, and she pointed to her old chair ; as she
took it quite simply and thus had the full
light of the windows on her face, I noticed
with surprise and pleasure that, In spite of the
excitement of the night before, the atmosphere
of her old home was already taking
effect upon her, the listless expression she had
worn in London was disappearing from her
face, and the old child-like look which blue
eyes were meant to wear was coming back
into them again.

'You are better,' said I gently, taking no
notice of her remark upon my occupation.

You have been lazy, madam. I am sure
you might very well have come down to
breakfast. You had a good night, I suppose
? '

Ta-ta, who had followed her into the room,
pushed her nose lovingly into her old companion's
hand, and Babiole hid a sensitively
flushing face by bending low over the dog's
sleek head. I think she must have found
out that morning by the confusion in her room
that something had happened the night before,
the details of which she could not remember
; perhaps also she had a vague
remembrance of her expedition downstairs,
and wanted to find out what I knew about it.
But of course I knew nothing.

Yes, I — I slept well — thank you. Only I
had dreams.'

Did you ? Not bad ones, I hope ? '

She glanced at me penetratingly, but
could discover nothing, as I was fighting with

To-to over the fragments of the morocco
ring case.

No-o, not exactly bad, but very strange.
Do you know — I found — my traveling hat
and cloak — lying about — and I wondered
whether — in my sleep — I had put them on
thinking I was — going back to London ! '

All this, uttered very slowly and with
much hesitation, I listened to without interruption,
and then, standing up with my back
to the fire, nodded to her reassuringly.

Well, so you did, Mrs. Scott, and a nice
fright your sleep-walking propensities gave
me, I can tell you. It was by the luckiest
chance in the world that I didn't brain you
with the poker for a burglar when I heard
footsteps in the hall in the middle of the
night ! '

You did ! ' cried she, pale to the lips with
apprehension.

Yes ; and when I saw you, you muttered

something I couldn't understand, and then
you half woke up, and you went back quickly
to your room again, leaving me considerably
wider awake than before.'

Is that all ? ' asked Babiole, the faint
colour coming back to her face again.

It was quite enough for me, I assure you.
And I hope you will take your walking
exercise for the future in the day-time, when
my elderly nerves are at their best.'

Babiole laughed, much relieved. She
evidently retained such a vivid impression of
the thoughts which had preyed upon her
excited mind on the previous evening that
she was tormented by the fear or the dim
remembrance of having given them expression.
She now looked with awakening
interest at the odd collection on the table.

Are you making preparations for a fancy
bazaar, Mr. Maude ? ' she asked, taking up
a case which contained a gold thimble.

But she knew what the exhibition meant,
and she was glad, though neither of us looked
at the other as she put this question, and I
made my answer.

No ; the bazaar is over, and these are
the things left on my hands.'

Then I am afraid — the bazaar — has not
been very successful ? ' she hazarded playfully,
but in a rather unsteady voice.

Not very. My customers were discontented
with their bargain, and wanted their
money back.'

Babiole's sensitive face flushed suddenly
with hot indignation.

How dare she ' she began passionately,
and stopped.

My dear Mrs. Scott, these girls dare anything
! ' said I lightly, in high spirits at the
warmth with which she took up my cause.
There is no respect left for the superior sex
now that ladies out-read us, out-write us, out-vol.
II 33

shoot US, and out-fish us. And the end of it
is that I wash my hands of them, and have
made up my mind to die a bachelor ! '

If she could have known how clearly her
fair eyes showed me every succeeding emotion
of her heart and thought of her brain, as
I glanced with apparent carelessness at her
face while I spoke, she would have died of
shame. I had thought, on that night when
I met her in London when she had charmed
and yet pained me by her brilliant, graceful,
but somewhat artificial manner, that she was
changed, that I should have to learn my
Babiole over again. But it was only the
pretty little closed doors I had seen outside
her shut-up heart. When the heart was
called to, the doors flew open, and here
was the treasure exposed again to every
touch, so that I had read in her mobile
face indignation, affection, jealousy, sympathy,
and finally contentment, before she

remarked in a very demure and indifferent
manner —

On the whole I am not sorry, Mr. Maude,
that it is broken off. She wasn't half good
enough for you.'

Not good enough for me ? ' I cried in
affected surprise. I was thirsting for her
pretty praises. ' I'm sure everybody who
knew me thought me a very lucky man.'

Nobody who knew both well could have
thought that,' she answered very quietly.
Wasn't she rude to mamma, whom you
treated as if she were a queen ? Is she not
hard and overbearing in her manner to you,
who have offered her the greatest honour
you could give ? And wasn't she, for all the
cold charity she prides herself upon, distant
and contemptuous to me when she knew I
had been the object of your charity for seven
years ? '

Not charity, child '

Oh, but it was. Charity that was real,
full of heart and warmth and kindness, that
made the world a new place and life a new
thing. Why, Mr. Maude, do you know
what happened that night when you met us
in the cold, outside the theatre at Aberdeen,
when the manager had told us he didn't want
us any more, and we knew that we had hardly
money enough when we had paid for our
lodging for that week to find us food for the
next ?'

There was colour enough in her face now,
as she clasped her hands together and leant
forward upon the table, with her blue eyes
glistening, her sensitive lips quivering slightly,
and a most sweet expression of affection and
gratitude illuminating her whole face. I gave
her only an inarticulate, guttural murmur for
answer, and she went on with a thrill in her
voice.

You spoke first, and mamma hurried on.

not knowing your voice, and of course I went
with her. But though I scarcely looked at
you, and certainly did not recognise you,
there was something in your manner, in the
sound of your voice, though I couldn't hear
what you said — something kind, something
chivalrous, that seemed to speak to one's
heart, and made me sorry she didn't stop.
And then, you know, you came after us, and
spoke again ; and I heard what you said that
time, and I whispered to mamma who you
were. And then, while you were talking to
her, and I only stood and listened, I felt
suddenly quite happy, for a minute before I
had wondered where the help was coming
from, and now I knew. And I was right
you see.' She bent her head, with an earnest
face, to emphasise her words. ' So that
when poor mamma used to warn me afterwards
of the wickedness of men it all meant
nothing to me. For I only knew one man,

and he was everything that was good and
noble, giving us shelter and sympathy and
beautiful delicate kindness ; and to me time
and thought and care that made me, out of a
little ignorant girl, a thinking woman. If
that was not charity, what was it ? '

Now I could have told her what it was ;
indeed with that little tender flower-face looking
so ardently up into mine it did really
need a strong effort not to tell her. In the
flow of her grateful recollections she had forgotten
that, the grandfather manner I had
cultivated for so long perhaps aiding her ; but
I think, as I kept silence, a flash of the truth
came to her, for she grew suddenly shy, and
instead of going on with the list of my benefactions,
as she had been evidently prepared
to do, she took up the lace pocket-handkerchief
which had been one of my gifts to Miss
Farington, and became deeply interested in
the pattern of the border. After a pause she

continued in a much more self controlled
manner.

If Miss Farington's charity had been real,
she would have been interested in the people
you had been kind to.'

Now you do the poor girl injustice. She
took the greatest possible interest in you, for
she was jealous.'

Jealous ! Oh no,' said Babiole with unexpected
decision; and she caught her breath
as she went on rapidly. ' One may hate the
people one is jealous of, but one does not
despise them. One may speak of them bitterly
and scornfully, but all the time one is
almost praying to them in one's heart to have
mercy — to let go what they care for so little,
what one cares for one's self so much. One's
coldness to a person one is really jealous of
is only a thin crust through which the fire
peeps and flashes out. Miss Farington was
not jealous ! '

It was easy enough to see that poor Babiole
spoke from experience of the passion ; and
this conviction filled me with rage against
her husband, and against myself for having
brought about her marriage with such an
unappreciative brute. It is always difficult to
realise another person's neglect of a treasure
you have found it hard to part with ; so I sat
silently considering Fabian's phenomenal insensibility
for some minutes until at last I
asked abruptly —

Who did he make you jealous of ? '

Babiole, who had also been deep in thought,
started.

Fabian ? ' said she in a low voice. Then,
trying to laugh, she added hastily, ' Oh, I was
silly, I was jealous of everybody. You see I
didn't know anything, and because I thought
of nobody but him, I fancied he ought to think
of nobody but me — which of course was unreasonable.'


I don't think so,' said I curtly. ' Unless
I gave a woman all my affection I shouldn't
expect all hers.'

Ah, yozi / ' she exclaimed with a tender
smile. ' There was the mistake ; without
knowing it I had been forming my estimate
of men on what I felt to be true of you.' I
did not look at her ; but by the way in which
she hurried on after this ingenuous speech,
I knew that a sudden feeling of womanly
shame at her impulsive frankness had set
her blushing. ' But really Fabian was
quite reasonable,' she went on. ' He only
wanted me to give to him what he gave
to me — or at least he thought so,' she
corrected.

And what was that ? '

Well, just enough affection to make us
amiable towards each other when it was impossible
to avoid a tete-astute!

But he can't have begun like that ! He

admired you, was fond of you. No man
begins by avoiding a bride like you ! '

Ah, that was the worst of it ! For six
weeks he seemed to worship me, and I — I
never knew whether it was wet or fine — warm
or cold. Every wind blew from the south
for me, neither winter nor death could come
near the earth again. We were away, you
know, in Normandy and Brittany — when I
try to think of heaven I always see the sea
with the sun on it, and the long stretches of
sand. Before we came back I knew — I felt
that a change was coming, that life would
not be always like that ; but I did not know, of
course I could not know, what a great change
it would be. Fabian said, " Our holiday is
over now, dearest, we must get to work again !
My Art is crying to me." Well, I was ready
enough to yield to the claims of Art, real Art,
not the poor ghost of it papa used to call
up ; and I was eager for my husband to take

a foremost place among artists, as I knew and
felt he could do. But when we got back to
England — to London — to this Art which was
calling to us to shorten our holiday, I found
or thought I found — that it had handsome
aquiline features, and a title, and that it wore
splendid gowns of materials which my husband
had to choose, and that it found its own husband
and its own friends wearisome, and —
well, that Fabian was painting her portrait,
which was to make his fortune and proclaim
him a great painter.'

Who was she ? ' I asked in a low voice.

She named the beautiful countess whose
portrait I had seen on Scott's mantelpiece
on the morning when I visited him at his
chambers.

She came to our rooms several times for
sittings, as she had gone to his studio before
he married me. But she found it was too far
to come — Bayswater being so much farther

than Jermyn Street from Kensington Palace
Gardens ! — and he had to finish the picture
in her house. How the world swam round
me, and my brain hammered in my head on
those dreadful days when I knew he was with
her, glancing at her with those very glances
which used to set my heart on fire and make
me silent with deep passionate happiness. I
had seen him look at her like that when he
gave her those few sittings which she found
so tiresome because, I suppose, of my jealous
eyes. I never said anything — I didn't, indeed,
Mr. Maude, for I knew he was the
man, and I was only the woman, and I must
be patient ; but the misery and disappointment
began to eat into my soul when I found
that those looks I had loved and cherished
so were never to be given to me again. At
first I thought it would be all right when this
portrait was painted and done with ; this
brilliant lady's caprice of liking for my clever

husband would be over, and I should have,
not only the careless kindness which never
failed, but the old glowing warmth that I
craved like a child starving in the snow.
But it never came back.' A dull hopelessness
was coming into her voice as she continued
speaking, and her great eyes looked yearningly
out over the feathery larches in the
avenue to the darkening sky. ' When that
picture was finished there were other pictures,
and there were amateur theatricals to be
superintended, where the 'eye of a true
artist " was wanted, but where there was no
use at all for a true artist's wife. And there
were little scented notes to be answered, and
their writers to be called upon ; and as I had
from the first accepted Fabian's assurance
that an artist's marriage could be nothing
more than an episode in his life, and that the
less it interrupted the former course of his life
the happier that marriage would be, there was

nothing for me but to submit, and to live on,
as I told you, outside.'

But you were wrong, you should have
spoken out to him — reproached him, moved
him!' I burst out — jumping up, and playing,
in great excitement, with the things on the
mantelpiece, unable to keep still.

I did,' she answered sadly. ' One night,
when he was going to the theatre to act as
usual — he had just got an engagement — he
told me not to sit up, he was going to the
Countess's to meet some great foreign painter
I forget his name. The mention of her
name drove me suddenly into a sort of frenzy;
for he had just been sweet to me, and I had
fancied — just for a moment, that the old times
might come back. And I forgot all my
caution, all my patience. I said angrily,
The Countess, the Countess ! Am I never
to hear the last of her ? What do you want in
this idle great lady's drawing-rooms when your

own wife is wearing her heart out for you at
home ?" Then his face changed, and I shook
and trembled with terror. For he looked at
me as if I had been some hateful creeping
thing that had suddenly appeared before him
in the midst of his enjoyment. He drew
himself away from me, and said in a voice that
seemed to cut through me, " I had no idea
you were jealous." I faltered out, '' No, no,"
but he interrupted me. " Please don't make
a martyr of yourself, Babiole. Since you
desire it, I shall come straight home from the
theatre." '

He ought to have married Miss Farington
! ' said I heartily.

Babiole went on : ' I called to him not todo
so ; begged him not to mind my silly words.
But he went out without speaking to me
again. All the evening I tortured myself
with reproaches, with fears, until, almost
mad, I was on the point of going to the

theatre to Implore him to forgive and forget
my wretched paltry jealousy. But I hoped
that he would not keep his word. I was
wrong. Before I even thought the piece
could be over he returned, having come as he
said, straight home. I don't think he can
know, even now, how horribly cruel he was
to me that night. He meant to give me a
lesson, but he did not know how thorough the
lesson would be. Seeing that he had come
back, although against his wish, I tried my
very utmost to please, to charm him, to show
him how happy his very presence could make
me. He answered me, he talked to me, he
told me interesting things — but all in the tone
he would have used to a stranger, placing a
barrier between us which all my efforts could
not move. In fact he showed me clearly
once for all that, however kind and courteous
he might be to me, I had no more influence
over him than one of the lay figures in his

Studio. That night I could not sleep, but
next morning I was a different woman. A
little water will make a fire burn more fiercely ;
a little more puts It out. Even Fabian,
though he did not really care for me, could
not think the change in me altogether for the
better ; but his deliberate unkindness had
suddenly cleared my sight and shown me that
I was beating out my soul against a rock of
hard immovable selfishness. He was nicer
to me after a while, for he began to find out
that he had lost something when I made
acquaintances who thought me first Interesting
and presently amusing. But he never
asked me for the devotion he had rejected,
he never wanted it ; he is always absorbed In
half a dozen new passions ; a Platonic friendship
with a beauty, a furious dispute with an
artist of a different school, a wild admiration
for a rising talent. And so I have become,

as I was bound to become, loving him as I
VOL. II 34

did, just what he said an artist's wife should
be — a slave ; getting the worst, the least
happy, the least worthy, part of his life, and
all the time remaining discontented, and
chafing against the chain.'

Yet you have never had cause to be
seriously jealous ?'

Babiole hesitated, blushed, and the tears
came to her eyes.

I don't know. And — I know it sounds
wicked, but I could almost say I don't care.
I am to my husband like an ingenious
automaton, moving almost any way its possessor
pleases ; but It has no soul — and I
think he hardly misses that!'

But that is nonsense, my dear child ; you
have just as much soul as ever.'

Oh yes, it has come to life again here
among the hills. But when I go back to
London '

'Wells'

I shall leave It up here — with you — to
take care of till I come back again.'

She had risen and was half laughing; but
there was a tremor in her voice.

Where are you going ? ' I asked as I saw
her moving towards the door.

I am going to see if there is a letter from
Fabian to say when he is coming. I saw
Tim come up the avenue with the papers.'

'But Fabian can't know himself yet!' I
objected. However that might be, she was
gone, leaving me to a consideration of the
brilliant ability I had shown in match-making,
both for myself and my friends.

When I joined Mrs. Elmer and her daughter
that evening, I found that the former lady
was oppressed by the conviction that ' something
had happened,' something interesting
of which there was an evil design abroad to
keep her in ignorance. She had been
questioning Babiole I felt sure, and getting
no satisfactory replies ; for while there was
a suspicious halo of pale rose-colour — which
in my sight did not detract from her beauty
about the younger lady's eyes, her mother
made various touching references to the
cruelty of want of confidence, and at last,
after several tentative efforts, got on the

right track by observing that my ' young
lady ' was not very exacting, since I had not
been near her that day. This remark set
both her daughter and me blushing furiously,
and Mrs. Elmer, figuratively speaking, gave
the 'view halloo.' After a very short run I
was brought to earth, and confessed that — er
Miss Farington and I — er — had had a — in
fact a disagreement — a mere lover's quarrel.
It would soon blow over — but just at present

that is for a day or two, why

Mrs. Elmer interrupted my laboured
explanation with a delighted and shrill little

And so you've had a quarrel ! Well,
really, Mr. Maude, as an old friend, you
must allow me to take this opportunity —
before you make it up again, you know — to
tell you that really I think you are throwing
yourself away.'

The truth was that the poor little woman

had been smarting, ever since Miss Darlington's
visit, from the supercilious scorn with
which that well-informed young lady had
treated her. I protested, but very mildly ;
for. Indeed, to hear a little gentle disapprobation
of my late too matter-of-fact love gave
me no acute pain.

I wouldn't for the world have said anything
before, you know, for If, of course, a
person's love affairs are not his own business,
whose are they ? But having known
you so long, I really must say, now that
I can open my lips without Indiscretion, that
the moment I saw that stuck-up piece of
affectation I said to myself: 'she must
have asked him ! " '

I assured Mrs. Elmer that was not the
case, but she paid little heed to my contradiction.
She had relieved her feelings, that
was the great thing, and It was with recovered
calmness that she Inquired after the friends

who had made my yearly shooting party in
the old times. I knew little more of them
than she did ; for that last gathering, when
Fabian won my pretty witch's heart, had
indeed been the farewell meeting predicted
by Maurice Brown. That young author
having shocked the public with one exceedingly
nasty novel, had followed it up by
another which would have shocked them still
more if they had read it ; this, however, they
refrained from doing with a unanimity which
might have proved disastrous to his reputation
if a well-known evening paper had not
offered him a good berth as a sort of inspector
of moral nuisances, a post which the
clever young Irishman filled with all the
requisite zeal and indiscretion. As for Mr.
Fussell, he had done well for himself in the
city, and now leased a shooting-box of his
own. While Edgar, my dear old friend and
chum, had fallen back into the prosperous

ranks of the happily married, and was now
less troubled by political ambition than by a
tendency to grow fat.

The ten days which followed the rupture
of my engagement to Miss Farington passed
in a great calm, troubled only by a growing
sense of dread, both to Babiole and me, of
what was to come after. She got well
rapidly, quite well, as nervous emotional
creatures do when once the moral atmosphere
about them is right. For it was the
loving sympathy of every living being round
her, from her mother down — or up to Ta-ta,
which worked the better part of her cure,
though I admit that the hills and the fir-trees
and the fresh sweet air had their share
in it. She went out every day, sometimes
with her mother and me, oftener with me
and Ta-ta, as Mrs. Elmer's strong dislike to
walking exercise did not decrease as the
years rolled on. As for Babiole, I thank

God that the pleasure of those walks in the
crisp air up the hills and through the glens
was unallayed for her. The tarnish which
want of warmth and sympathy had breathed
on her childlike and trusting nature was
wearing off; and her old faith in the companion
to whom she had graciously given a
place in her heart as the incarnation of kindness
had only grown the stronger for the
glimpses she had lately had of something
deeper underneath. I even think that in the
languid and irresponsible convalescence of
her heart and mind from the wounds her
unlucky marriage had dealt to both, she
cherished a superstitious feeling that now I
had returned from my travels it would come
all right, and that I should be able to mend
the defects of the marriage by another exercise
of the magical skill which had brought
it about. So she chattered or sang or was
silent at her pleasure, as we walked between

the now bare hedges beside the swollen Dee,
or climbed on a thick carpet of rustling
brown oak leaves up Craigendarroch, and
noticed how day by day the mantle of snow
on Lochnagar grew wider and ampler, and
how the soft wail of the wind among the fir-trees
in summer-time had grown into an
angry and threatening roar, as if already
hungering for those days and nights of loud
March when the tempest would tear up the
young saplings from the mountain-sides like
reeds and hurl them down pell-mell over the
decaying trunks which already choked up
the hill-paths, and told of the storms of past
years. She would look into my face from
time to time to see if I was happy, for she
had got the trick of reading through that
ugly mask ; if the look satisfied her, she
either talked or was silent as she pleased, but
if she fancied she detected the least sign of
a cloud, she never rested until, by sweet

words and winning looks, she had driven it
away.

I, poor devil, was of course happy after a
very different fashion. The blood has not
yet cooled to any great extent at six and
thirty, and blue eyes that have haunted you
for seven years lose none of their witchery at
that age, when the demon Reason throws his
weight into the scale on the side of Evil, and
tells you that the years are flitting by,
carrying away the time for happiness, and
that the beauty which steeps you to the soul
in longing has been left unheeded by its
possessor like a withered flower. But
Babiole's perfect confidence was her safeguard
and mine, and like the wind among
the pines, I kept my tumults within due
bounds. I was, however, occasionally distressed
by a consideration for which I had
never cared a straw before — what the neighbours
would say. If I, an indifferent honest

man, really had some trouble in keeping unworthy
thoughts and impulses down within
me, what sort of conduct these carrion-hunting
idiots would ascribe to a man, whom
they looked upon as an importer of foreign
vices and the type of all that was godless
and lawless, was pretty evident. They
would all, in a commonplace chorus, take the
part of the commonplace Miss Farington,
and unite in condemnation of poor Babiole.
Now no man likes to let the reputation of
his queen of the earth be pulled to pieces by
a cackling crew of idiots, and, therefore,
though I had not enough strength of mind to
suggest giving up those treasured walks, I
began, torn by my struggling feelings, to
look forward feverishly to the letter which
Fabian had promised to send off as soon ashe
knew on what date he would be free to
come north. His wife herself showed no
eagerness.

He Is the very worst of correspondents,'
she said. ' He will probably write a letter
to say he is coming just before starting, post
it at one of the last stations he passes
through, and arrive here before it.'

It did not comfort me to learn thus that
he might come at any moment. My conscience
was pretty clear, but I wanted to
have a fair notice of his arrival, that I might
receive him in such a manner as to prepare
the peccant husband for the desperately
earnest sermon I had made up my mind to
preach him on what his wife called neglect,
but what I felt sure was infidelity.

A very serious addition to the cares I felt
on behalf of my old pupil came upon me in
the shape of a rumour, communicated by Ferguson
in a mysterious manner, that a strange
figure had been seen by the keepers in the
course of the past week, wandering about the
hills in the daytime and hovering in the

vicinity of the Hall towards evening. I
spoke with one of the men who had seen
him, and from what he said I could have no
doubt that the wanderer was the unlucky
Elmer who, as I found by sending off a
telegram to the lunatic asylum where he had
been for some time confined, had been missing
for four days and was supposed to be
dangerous. I at once gave orders for a
search to be made for him, being much
alarmed by the possibility of his presenting
himself suddenly to either of the two poor
ladies, who were not even aware of his condition.
The first day's scouring of the hills
and of the forest proved fruitless, however,
while Babiole was much surprised at the pertinacity
with which I insisted that the wind
was too keen for her to go out. On the
second day I think she began to have suspicions
that something was being kept from
her, for on my suggesting that she had better

Stay indoors again, as the keepers were out
shooting very near the Hall, she gave me a
shy apprehensive glance, but made no remonstrance.
As I started to ' make a round
with the keeper,' as I truly told her, though
I did not explain with what object, she came
to the door with me, making a beautiful picture
under the ivy of the portico, her whitethroat
rising out of her dark gown like a lily,
and the pink colour which the mountain air
had brought back again flushing and fading
in her face.

Well,' said I, looking at her with a great
yearning over the fairness and brightness
which were so soon to disappear from my
sight, to be swallowed up in the fogs and the
fever of London life, * Well, I shall call at the
post-ofhce, and see if I can't charm out of the
post-mistress's fingers a letter from Fabian.'

Ah, you want to get rid of us !' said she,
half smiling, half reproachful.

No-0,' said I, looking down at my gaiters,
Not so particularly.'

Then we neither of us said any more, but
stood without looking at each other. I don't
know what she was thinking about, but 1
know that I bean to sorrow blind and deaf
even to the sight of her and the sound of the
tapping of her little foot upon the step ; the
roar of the rain-swollen Muick In the valley
below seemed to have come suddenly nearer,
louder, to be thundering close to my ears,
raising to tempest height the passionate excitement
within me, and shrieking out forebodings
of the desolation which would fall
upon me when my poor witch should have
fled away. I was thankful to be brought
back to commonplace by the shrill tones of
Mrs. Elmer, who had followed her daughter
to the doorstep, and who encouraged me with
much banter about my shooting powers as I
set off*

The gillie who accompanied me was a
long, lank, weedy young Highlander, silent
and shrewd, who was already a valuable servant,
and who promised to develop into a fine
specimen of stalwart Gaelic humanity before
many years were over. We made the circuit
of that part of the forest near the Hall which
had been appointed our beat for the day, but
failed to find any trace of the fugitive. Jock
was not surprised at this.

A mon wi' a bee in's bonnet's nae sa daft
but a' can mak' the canny ones look sat if a'
will,' said he with a wise look.

And his opinion, which I apprehensively
shared, was that the fugitive would not be
secured until he had given us some trouble.

It was a cold and gloomy day. The

chilling penetrating Scotch mist shrouded the

whole landscape with a mournful gray veil,

and gave place, as the day wore on and the

leaden clouds grew heavier, to a thin but
VOL. II 35

Steady snow-fall. I left Jock, as the time
drew near for the arrival of the train that
brought the London letters, to return to the
Hall without me, and got to Ballater postoffice
just as the mail-bag was being carried
across from the little station, which is just
opposite. In a few minutes I had got my
papers, and a letter for Babiole in her husband's
handwriting. The snow was falling
faster by this time, and already drifting
before the rising wind into little heaps and
ridges by the wayside and on the exposed
stretch of somewhat bare and barren land
which lies between Ballater and the winding
Dee. I walked back at a quick pace, scanning
the small snow-drifts narrowly, measuring
with my eyes the progress the soft white
covering was making, and wondering with
the foolish heart-quiver and miracle-hunger
of a school-boy on the last day of the
holidays, whether that snow-fall would have

the courage and strength of mind to go on
bravely as it had begun, and snow us up !
If only the train would stop running — it did
sometimes in the depths of a severe winter —
and cut off all possibility of my witch being
taken away from me for another month. I
had worshipped her so loyally, I had been so
good,' as she used to say — I couldn't resist
giving myself this little pat on the back — that
surely Providence might trust me with my
wistful but well-conducted happiness a little
longer. And all the time I knew that my
solicitous questionings of sky and snow were
futile and foolish, that I was carrying the
death-warrant of my dangerous felicity in my
pocket, and that if I had a spark of sense or
manliness left in my wool-gathering old head,
I ought to be heartily glad of it.

The notion of the death-warrant disturbed
me, however, and when I burst into the
drawing room where Mrs. Elmer was darning

a handsome old tapestry curtain, and looking,
with her worn delicate face, pink with interest,
rather pretty over it, I felt nervous as I asked
for Babiole. She entered behind me before
the question was out of my mouth, and I put
the letter into her hands without another
word, and retreated to one of the windows
while she opened and read it. She was
moved too, and her little fingers shook as they
tore the envelope. I felt so guiltily anxious
to know whether she was pleased that I was
afraid if I glanced in her direction she would
look up suddenly and detect my meanness.
So I looked out of the window and watched
the snow collecting on the branches of the
firs outside, while Mrs. Elmer, without pausing
in her work, wondered volubly whether
Fabian wasn't ashamed of himself for having
left his wife so long without a letter, and
would like to know what he had got to say
for himself now he had written. Then suddenly

the mother gave a Httle piercing cry,
and I, turning at once, saw that Babiole,
standing on the same spot where I had seen
her last, and holding her husband's letter
tightly clenched in her hands, seemed to have
changed in a moment from a young, sweet,
and beautiful woman into a livid and haggard
old one. She had lost all command of the
muscles of her face, and while her eyes, from
which the dewy blue had faded, stared out
before her in a meaningless gaze, the pallid
lips of her open mouth twitched convulsively,
although she did not attempt to utter a
word.

Her mother was by her side in a moment,
while I stood looking stupidly on, articulating
hoarsely and with difficulty —

The letter ! Is it the letter ! '

Mrs. Elmer snatched the paper out of her
daughter s hands so violently that she tore it,
and supporting Babiole with one arm, read

the letter through to the end, while I kept my
eyes fixed upon her in a tumult of feelings I
did not dare to analyse. As she read the last
word she tossed it over to me with her light
eyes flashing like steel.

Read it, read it !' she cried, as the paper
fell at my feet. ' See what sort of a husband
you have given my poor child !'

The words and the action roused Babiole,
who had scarcely moved except to shiver in
her mother's arms. She drew herself away
as if stung back to life, and a painful rush of
blood flowed to her face and neck as she
made two staggering steps forward, picked up
the letter, and walked quietly, noiselessly, with
her head bent and her whole frame drooping
with shame, out of the room. Mrs. Elmer
would have followed, but I stopped her.

Don't go,' I said in a husky voice.
Leave her to herself a little while first. If
she wants comforting, it will come with more

force later when she has got over the first
shock. What was It ?'

'Oh, nothing,' said Mrs. Elmer, who had
become more acid on her daughter's behalf
than she had ever been on her own. 'Nothing
but what every married woman must expect.'
'Well, and what's that ?'
She gave a little grating laugh.
You a man and you ask that !'
I'm a man, but not a married man, remember.
Don't impute to me the misdemeanours
I have had no chance of committing.
Now what was it? Fabian wrote
unkindly, I suppose.'

'Oh, dear no. It was very much the
kindest letter from him I have ever seen.'
Did he put off his coming then ?'
Not at all. He made an appointment to
meet his darling in Edinburgh.'

Edinburgh ! ' I echoed in amazement.
'Why Edinburgh?'

'Why not, Mr. Maude?' said she, in a
harder voice than ever. 'It's a very pretty
place, and two people who are fond of each
other may spend a pleasant enough time
together there. Only Mr. Scott spoilt his
nice little plan by a stupid mistake. Into the
envelope he had addressed to his wife he
slipped his letter to another woman!'

With a glance of disgust at me which was
meant to include my whole sex, Mrs. Elmer,
with the best tragic manner of her old stage
days, left me stupefied with rage and remorse,
as she sailed out of the room.

At the time when the mind is oppressed by
a long-gathering cloud of passionate yet
scarcely defined anxiety, the awakening crash
of an event, even of an event tragic in its
consequences, is a relief. This miserable
letter, therefore, exposing as it did in unmistakable
terms Fabian's infidelity, shook
me free of the morbid imaginings and unwholesome
yearnings to which I had lately
been a prey, and set me the more worthy
task of devising some means of helping both
my friends out of the deadlock to which
I myself had unwittingly helped them to
come.

For the first time I was sorry for Fabian.
A serious fault committed by a person whom
accidents of birth or circumstance have
brought near to one's self sets one thinking of
one's own 'near shaves,' and after that the
tide of mercy flows in steadily. How was I,
who had never been able to conquer my own
love for an unattainable woman, to blame this
man of much more combustible temperament,
whom I had myself induced to form a marriage
with a girl whom I had no means of
knowing to be first in his heart ? I would
take no high moral tone with him now ; I
would speak to him frankly as man to man,
hold myself blameworthy for my own share
in the unlucky matrimonial venture, and
appeal to the sense and kindness I knew he
possessed not to let the punishment for my
indiscretion fall upon the only one of us three
who was entirely free from blame. There
crossed my mind at this point of my reflections

an unpleasant remembrance of the
manner in which Fabian had received a
somewhat similar appeal from me years ago,
and down at the bottom of my heart there
lurked a conviction that he would hear whatever
I might say without offence, and neglect
it without scruple. However, it was impossible
to be silent now ; and as the gray day
dissolved into darkness, and the only light in
the study, to which I had retreated, came
from the glowing peat-fire, I got up from the
old leather chair which was consecrated to
my reveries, and with one glance through
the eastern window out at the great woolly
flakes of snow that were now falling thickly,
I left the room and went in search of Mrs.
Elmer.

I heard her voice in her daughter's room,
and knocking at the door, called to her softly.
She came out at once, and by her gentle
manner I judged that she was already contrite

for having treated me so cavalierly atour
late interview.

How is Babiole ? ' I asked first.

She is quiet now and much better, Mr.
Maude. Would you like to see her ? '

'Well, no; I couldn't do her so much
good as you can. I wanted to speak to you.
I've been thinking; of course Fabian wrote
two letters, and put them into the wrong
envelopes. Then the letter he intended for
his wife told her when he was coming, while
the other letter made an appointment on the
way. Can you find out by the letter which
has come to your hands when he expects to
arrive here ? '

It was written the night before last ; the
appointment was for last night,' answered she
with a fresh access of acidity.

Then he probably meant to come on here
to-day. I think I'll go to Ballater and meet
the six o'clock train ; I shall just have time.

And if he doesn't come by that I'll telegraph
to Edinburgh. What address does he give
there ? '

Royal Hotel. But you don't suppose
that he will dare to come on here when he
finds out what he has done ? '

I don't suppose he will find out till he
gets here.'

I hope, Mr. Maude, if he does come, you
will persuade Babiole to show a little spirit.
She seems inclined at present to receive him
back like a lamb.'

I was sorry to hear this, because it suggested
to me that her feeling for her husband
had declined even below the point of indifference.
I left Mrs. Elmer and went downstairs
to put on my mackintosh and prepare
for my tramp in the snow. The lamp in the
hall had not yet been lighted, and I was fumbling
in the darkness for my deer-stalker on
the pegs of the hat-stand when I heard my

name called in a hoarse whisper from the
staircase just above me. I turned, and saw
the outline of Babiole's head against the faint
candle-light which fell upon the landing above
through the open door of her room.

Mr. Maude,' she repeated, trying to clear
and steady her voice. ' Where are you
going ? '

Only as far as the village,' said I in a
robust and matter-of-fact tone.

Are you going to meet Fabian } '

Yes, if he is anywhere about.'

Ah, I thought so ! ' burst from her lips ina
sharp whisper. She came down two more
steps hurriedly : ' You are not to reproach
him, Mr. Maude, you are not to plead forme,
do you hear ? What good can you do
by interceding for a love which is dead } I
was jealous when I read that letter, but not
so jealous as shocked, wounded. And now
that I have thought a little I am not jealous

at all ; so what right have I to be even
wounded ? This lady he wrote to he has
admired for a long time, and though I never
knew anything before, I guessed. She is a
beauty, her photograph is in all the windows,
and a little fringe of scandal hangs about her.
She has dash, eclat, brilliancy ; I have heard
him say so. So he is consistent, you see,
after all. I can acknowledge that now, and
I don't feel angry.'

Her voice was indeed quite calm, although
unutterably sad. But I noticed and rejoiced
In the absence of that bitterness which had
jarred on me so painfully in London.

I do though,' I said gruffly.

But you must not show it. You cannot
reconcile us through the heart, for you cannot
make him a different man. You must be
satisfied with knowing that you have made
me a better wife. I am just as much stronger
in heart and mind as I am in health since I

have been up here ; I wanted to tell you that
while I had the opportunity, to tell you that
you have cured me, and to — thank you

As she uttered the last words in a low,
sweet, lingering tone, a light burst suddenly
upon us and showed me what the darkness
had hidden — an expression on her pale face
of beautiful strength and peace, as if indeed
the quiet hills and the dark sweet-scented
forests and the two human hearts that cared
for her had poured some elixir into her soul
to fortify it against indifference and neglect.

A little dazzled and fooled by her lovely
appearance, I stood gazing at her face without
a thought as to where the idealising light
came from, until I heard at the other end of
the hall a grating preliminary cough, and
turning, saw that it was Ferguson, entering
with the lamp, who had brought about this
poetical effect. He had something to say
to me evidently, since instead of advancing

to place the light on its usual table, he
remained standing at a distance still and stiff
as a statue of resignation, as his custom was
when his soul was burning to deliver itself
of an unsolicited communication.

Well, Ferguson ! ' said I.

Yes, sir said he, with another cough.

But he did not come forward. Now I
knew this was a sign that he considered
his errand serious, and I moved a few steps
towards him and beckoned him to me.

Anything to tell me ? ' I asked ; and as he
glanced at Babiole I came nearer still.

'Jock has just been in to say, sir, that a
gun has been stolen from his cottage.'

Babiole, who had not moved away, overheard,
and must have guessed the import of
this, for I heard behind me a long - drawn
breath caused by some sudden emotion.

When did he miss it .'^ ' I asked in a very
low voice.

VOL. II 36

'Just now, sir. He came straight hereto
tell you of It. It must have been taken
while he was out on his rounds this afternoon.'


I did not think the poor crack-brained
creature whom I guessed to be the thief was
likely to do much mischief with his prize.
But I told Ferguson to put all the keepers on
their guard, and to take care that such crazy
old bolts and bars as we used In that primitive
part of the world should be drawn and
raised, so that the unlucky fugitive should
not be able to possess himself of any more
weapons. I also directed that the search
about the grounds should be kept up, and
that If the poor wretch were caught, he was
to be treated with all gentleness, and taken
to the now disused cottage to await my
return.

It was now so late that If Fabian had
come by the four o'clock train he must by

this time be half way from the station. But
it was possible that he had already discovered
the mistake of the letters, and had felt a shyness
about continuing a journey which was
likely to bring him to a cold welcome ; so I
stuck to my intention of going to Ballater
either to meet him if he had arrived, or to
telegraph to him if he had not. When I had
finished speaking to Ferguson, I found that
Babiole had disappeared from the hall. I was
rather glad of it ; for I had dreaded her questioning,
and I hurried the preparations for
my walk so that in a few moments I was out
of the house and safe from the difficult task
of calming her fears.

It was already night when I shut the hall-door
behind me and stepped out on to the
soft white covering which was already thick
on the ground. The snow was still falling
thickly, and the only sound I heard, as I
groped my way under the arching trees of

the avenue, was the occasional swishing noise
of a load of snow that, dislodged by a fresh
burden from the upper branch of a fir tree,
brushed the lower boughs as it fell to the earth.
I am constitutionally untroubled by nervous
tremors, and I was too deeply occupied with
thoughts of Fabian and his wife to give much
grave consideration to possible danger from
the unhappy lunatic who was now in all probability
hidden somewhere in the neighbourhood
with a weapon in his possession ; but
when in the oppressive darkness and stillness
the tramp of footsteps in the soft snow just
behind me fell suddenly on my ears, I
confess that it was with my heart in my
mouth, as the dairymaid say, that I turned
and raised threateningly the thick stick I
carried. It was, however, only Jock, gun
in hand as usual, who had run fast to overtake
me, and had come upon me sooner than
he expected, the small lantern he carried

in his hand being of little use in the darkness.


What made you come, Jock ? ' I asked,
not, to tell the truth, sorry to have a companion
upon the lonely forest road which
seemed on this night, for obvious reasons, a
more gloomy promenade than usual.

'Mistress Scott bid me gang wi' ye, sir,'
answered he. ' She said the necht was sae
dark ye might miss the parti by the
burn.'

We walked on together in silence until,
having left the avenue far behind us, we
were well in the hilly and winding road
which runs through the forest from Loch
Muick to the Dee. At one of the many
bends in the roadway Jock suddenly stopped
and stood in a listening attitude.

Deer ? ' said I.

Nae,' answered he, after a pause, in a
measured voice, ' It's nae deer.'

He said no more, but examined the
barrels of his gun by the light of the lantern,
and walked on at a quicker pace. I had
heard nothing, but his manner put me on
the alert, and it was with a sense of coming
adventure that, peering before me in the
darkness and straining my ears to catch
the faintest sound, I strode on beside the
sturdy young Highlander. Warned as I
was, it was with a sickening horror that, a
moment later, I too heard sounds which had
already caught his keener ears. Muffled by
the falling snow, by the intervening trees,
there came faintly through the air the hoarse
yelping cries of a madman. I glanced at
the stolid figure by my side.

'Was that what you heard, Jock?' I
asked stupidly, more anxious for the sound
of his voice than for his answer.

I cinna ken, sir, if ye heard what I
heard,' said he cautiously.

All the while we were walking at our best
pace through the snow. It seemed a longtime
before, at one of the sharpest turns of
the road, Jock laid his hand on my shoulder
and we stopped. There was nothing to be
seen but trees, trees, the patch of clear snow
before us and the falling flakes. But we
could plainly hear the noise of tramping feet
and hoarse guttural cries —

I've done It, I've done it ! I said I
would, and I've kept my word! I've done
It, I've done it, I've done it ! '

The tramping feet seemed to beat time
to the words. I had hardly distinguished
these cries when I started forward again, and
dashing round the angle of the road with a
vague fear at my heart, I came close upon
the wild weird figure of the unhappy rriad-
man who, with his hat off and his long lank
hair tossed and dishevelled, was dancing uncouthly
in the deep shadow of the trees and

chanting to himself the words we had heard.
On the ground at one side of him lay the
stolen gun, and at the other, close to the
bank which bordered the road on the left,
was some larger object, which in the profound
darkness I could not at first define. With a
sudden spring I easily seized the lunatic and
held him fast, while Jock lifted the lantern
high so as to see his face. As the rays of
light fell upon me, however, Mr. Elmer,
who had been too utterly bewildered by the
sudden attack to make sign or sound, gave
forth a loud cry, and staring at me with
starting eyeballs and distorted shaking lips
stammered out —

'It's he, he himself! Come back! Oh
my God, I am cursed, cursed ! '

In the surprise and fear these words inspired
me with I released my hold, so that he
might with a very slight effort have shaken
himself free of my grasp. But he stood

quite still, as if overmastered by some power
that he did not dare to dispute, and allowed
himself to be transferred from my keeping
to Jock's without any show of resistance.
As soon as my hands were thus free, the
young Highlander silently passed me the
lantern, which I took in a frenzy of excitement
which precluded the reception of any
defined dread. I fell back a few steps until
the faint rays of the light I carried showed
me, blurred by the falling snow, the outline
of the dark object I had already seen on the
white ground. It was the body of a man. I
had known that before ; I knew no more now ;
but an overpowering sickness and dizziness
came upon me as I glanced down, blotting out
the sight from before my eyes, and filling me
with the cowardly craving we have all of us
known to escape from an existence which
has brought a sensation too deadly to be
borne. Every mad impulse of the passion

with which I had lately been struggling,
every vague wish, every feeling of jealous
resentment seemed to spring to life again in
my heart, and turn to bitter gnawing remorse.
I think I must have staggered as I stood, for
I felt my foot touch something, and at the
shock my sight came to me again and I knelt
down in the snow.

Fabian, Fabian, old fellow ! ' I called in a
husky voice.

He was lying on his face. I put my arm
under him and turned him over and wiped
the snow from his lips and forehead. His
eyes were wide open, but they did not seeme
; they had looked their last on the world
and on men. The blood was still flowing
from a bullet wound just under the left ribs,
and his body was not yet cold.

Mad Mr. Kilmer, in the snow and the
darkness, had mistaken Fabian for me. He
had sworn he would kill the man who should

destroy his daughter's happiness, and fate or
fortune or the providence which has strange
freaks of justice had banded his poor crazy
eyes and enabled him most tragically to keep
his word.

I STAYED beside the body of my dead friend
while Jock, by my direction, returned to the
Hall with the unhappy Elmer, who had
already fallen into a state of maudlin apathy,
and was crying, not from remorse, but from the
effects of cold, hunger, and exposure on his
now wasted frame. He allowed himself to be
led away like a child, and seemed cheered
and soothed by the promise of food and fire.
I wondered, as I watched him stagger along
by the side of the stalwart Highlander, that
the spirit of a not ignoble revenge should have
kept its vitality so long in his breast in spite of
enfeebled reason, poverty and degradation.

It was a terrible vigil that I was keeping.
I knew by my own feelings that the shock
of this tragic return to her would be a hundred
times more severe to Babiole than if her
bosom had been palpitating with sweet expectancy
for the clasp of a loving husband's
arms. Instead of the passionate yearning
sorrow of a woman truly widowed, she would
feel the far crueller stings of remorse none
the less bitter that her conduct towards him
had been blameless.

As for me, I remembered nothing but his
brilliancy, his vivacity, the twinkling humour
in his piercing eyes as he would stride up
and down the room, pouring out upon any
inoffensive person or thing that failed in the
slightest respect to meet with his approval
such vials of wrath as the less excitable part
of mankind would reserve for abandoned
scoundrels and nameless iniquities. With all
his faults, there was a charm, an exuberant

warmth about Fabian that left a bare place in
the heart of his friends when he was gone.
As I leant over his dead body and gazed at
the still white face by the light of the lantern,
I wished from the depths of my heart that
Elmer had shot down the man he hated, and
had left this poor lad to enjoy a few years
longer the beautiful world he loved with such
passionate ardour.

The snow-fall began to slacken as I waited
beside him, and when Jock returned from
the stable with Tim and another man, the
rising moon was struggling out from behind
the clouds, and giving promise of a fair night
after the bitter and stormy day. We laid
my dead friend on a hurdle and carried him
home to the Hall, while old Ta-ta, who had
come with the men, sniffed curiously at our
heels, and, divining something strange and
woeful in our dark and silent burden, followed
with her sleek head bent to the glistening

snow, and only offered one wistful wag of
her tail to assure me that If I were sad, well,
I knew she was so too.

I learnt from Jock that Mrs. Elmer had
met her husband, and that, after the manner
of women, she had led him in and ministered
to his bodily wants while taking advantage
of his weak and abject state to inflict
upon him such chastisement with her voluble
tongue as might well reconcile him to another
long absence from her. But Jock thought
that the poor wretch's wanderings were nearly
over.

I coot if as been will see the morning' licht
again,' said the gillie gravely. * A' speaks i'
whispers, an' shivers an' cries like a bairn. A'
must be verra bad, for a' doesna' mind the
lady's talk.'

'And Mrs. Scott, does she know ?'

Jock looked solemn and nodded.

Mester Ferguson told her, and he says

the poor teddy's crazed like, an' minna speak
nor move.'

I asked no more, and I remember no
further detail of that ghastly procession. I
saw nothing but Babiole's face, her eyes looking
straight into mine full of involuntary reproach
to me for having unwittingly brought
yet another disaster upon her.

Ferguson met us at the door of the Hall,
and told me, in a voice which real distress
made only more harsh and guttural, that Mrs.
Elmer had had the cottage unlocked, and
had caused fires to be lighted there for the
reception of her husband, the poor lady believing
that he would give less trouble there.

How is Mrs. Scott ? ' I asked anxiously.

Ferguson answered in a grating broken
whisper.

She went away — by herself, sir — when I
told her — let her guess like — the thing that
had happened.'

They were taking Fabian's body to the
Httle room where he used to sleep during our
yearly meetings. As the slow tramp, tramp
up the stairs began, I opened the door of my
study, and entered with the subdued tread
we instinctively affect in the neighbourhood
of those whom no sound will ever disturb
again. The lamp was on the table, but had
not yet been turned up. The weak rays of
the moon came through the south window ;
for the curtains were always left undrawn
until I chose myself to close out the night -
landscape. The fire was red and without
flame. I advanced as far as the hearth-rug
and stopped with a great shock. On the
ground at my feet, her head resting face
downward on the worn seat of my old leather
chair, her hands pressed tightly to her ears,
and her body drawn up as if in great pain,
was Babiole ; even as I watched her I saw
that a shudder convulsed her from head to

VOL. II-i^"]

foot, and left her as still as the dead. Every
curve of her slight frame, the rigidity of her
arms, the evident discomfort of her cramped
attitude, told me that my poor child was a
prey to grief so keen that the dread of her
turning her face to meet mine made a coward
of me, and I took a hasty step backwards,
intending to retreat. But the sight of her
had unmanned me ; my eyes were dim and I
'lost command of my steps. I touched the
screen in my clumsy attempt to escape, and
To-to, disturbed from sleep, sprang up rattling
his chain and chattering loudly.

Babiole, with a low startled cry that was
scarcely more than a long - drawn breath,
changed her attitude, and her eyes fell upon
me. I stood still, not knowing for the first
moment whether it would frighten her least
for me to disappear unseen or let her see that
it was only I. But no sooner had she caught
sight of me than she turned and started up

upon her knees with a look on her face so
wild, so unearthly in its exaltation that my
heart seemed to stand still, and my very blood
to freeze with the fear that the mind of the
little lady had been unable to stand the shock
of her husband's death.

Babiole, Babiole,' I said hoarsely ; and
moved out of myself by my terrible fear, I
came back to her and stooped, and would
have raised her in my arms with the tenderness
one feels for a helpless child alone in
the world, to try to soothe and comfort her.
But before my hands could touch her a great
change had passed over her, a change so
great, so marked, that there was no mistaking
its meaning ; and breaking into a flood of
passionate tears, while her face melted from
its stony rigidity to infinite love and tenderness,
she clasped her hands and whispered
brokenly, feverishly, but with the ardour of
an almost delirious joy —

Thank God ! Thank God ! Then it was
not you ! They told me it was you ! '

I stepped back, startled, speechless, overwhelmed
by a rush of feelings that in my
highly-wrought mood threw me into a kind
of frenzy. Drunk with the transformation of
my despair into full - fledged hope, and no
longer master of myself, I stretched out a
madman's arms to her, I heard my own voice
uttering words wild, incoherent, without
sense or meaning, that seemed to be forced
out of my breast in spite of myself, under
pressure of the frantic passion that had burst
its bonds at the first unguarded moment, and
spoilt at one blow all my hard-won record of
self-control and self-restraint. She had sprung
to her feet and evaded my touch ; but as she
stood at a little distance from me, her face
still shone with the same radiance, and she
looked, to my excited fancy, the very spirit
of tender, impassioned, exalted human love.

too sweet not to allure, too pure not to command
respect. There was no fear In her
expression, only a shade of grave gentle
reproach. As she fixed her solemn eyes upon
me I stammered and grew ashamed, and my
arms dropped to my sides as the recollection
of the tragedy which had brought us here
came like a pall over my excited spirits. Then
she came round the table on her way towards
the door, and would have gone out without a
word, I think, if the abject shame and self-disgust
with which I hung my head and
slunk out of her way had not moved her to
pity. I was afraid she would not like to
pass me, savage beast as I had shown
myself to be, so I had turned my back to the
door and moved towards my old chair.
But Babiole was too noble-hearted to need
any affectations of prudery, and to see her
old friend humiliated was too painful for her
to bear.

Mr. Maude,' she called to me in a low
voice, and the very sound of her voice brought
healing to my wounded self-esteem.

I turned slowly, without lifting my eyes,
and she held out her little hand for me to
take.

I am a great rough brute,' I said hoarsely.
It is very good of you to forgive me.'

'You are our best friend, now and always,'
she said, holding her hand steadily in mine.
She continued with an effort : ' You are not
hurt ; then it is '

She looked at me with eyes full of awe,
but she was prepared for my answer.

Fabian,' I whispered huskily.

He is dead ? ' I scarcely heard the words
as her white lips formed them.

Yes.'

God forgive me ! ' she said brokenly, while
her eyes grew dark and soft with sorrow and
shame ; then drawing her hand from mine,

she crept with noiseless feet out of the
room.

I remained in the study for some time, a
prey to the most violent excitement, In which
the emotions of grief and remorse struggled
vainly against the intoxicating belief that
Babiole loved me. I strode up and down
what little space there was in the room, until
the four walls could contain me no longer.
Then for an hour I wandered about the forest,
climbed up to the top of a rock which overlooked
the Dee and the Braemar road, and
came back in the moonlight by the shell of
old Knock Castle, from which, three hundred
years ago, James Gordon went forth to fight
for his kinsman and neighbour, the Baron of
Braickley, and fell by his side In one of the
fierce and purposeless skirmishes which seem
to have been the only occupation worth
mentioning of the Highland gentlemen of
those times. When I returned home I saw

Babiole's shadow through the blind of the
little room where her husband's body was
lying. It was long past my dinner hour, and
I was so brutishly hungry that I felt thankful
that neither of the unhappy ladies was present
to be disgusted with my mountain appetite.
I had scarcely risen from table when
Ferguson informed me that Mrs. Elmer had
sent Tim to beg me to come to the cottage
to see her husband, who she feared was dying.
Remembering the poor wretch's ghastly and
haggard appearance when we found him, I
was not surprised ; nor could I, knowing the
fate that might be in store for him if he lived,
be sorry that his miserable life would in all
probability end peacefully now.

I found him lying in bed in one of the
upper rooms of the cottage with his wife
standing by his side. His eyes were feverishly
bright, and the hand he let me take felt
dry and withered. He said nothing when I

asked him how he was, but stared at me Intently
while his wife spoke.

He wanted to see you, Mr. Maude, just
while he felt a little better and able to speak,'
said she, ' to tell you how sorry he is for the
foolish and dreadful thoughts he had about
you, when he did not know the true state of
the case, and when his head was rather dizzy
because he had lived somewhat carelessly, you
know.'

Poor little woman ! it was to her all my
sympathy went, to this brave, energetic, fragile
creature whose worst faults were on the
surface, and who, to this bitter shameful end,
valiantly worked with her busy skilful hands,
and made the best of everything. She looked
so worn that all the good her late easy life
had done her seemed to have disappeared ;
and from shame at her husband's conduct,
though her voice remained bright and shrill,
she did not dare to meet my eyes. I went

round to her, and held one of her thin work-worn
hands as I spoke to her husband.

And you've persuaded him that I'm not
an ogre after all,' I said cheerfully.

Mr. Elmer, after one or two vain attempts
to answer, got back voice enough to whisper
huskily, with a dogged expression of face —

She says I was wrong — that if Babiole
was unhappy, it was the fault of — the other
one. Well, if I was wrong then, I'm right
now. You'll marry her ? '

eyes.'

He gave a nod of satisfaction, and looked
contemptuously at his wife.

And she says I was mad ! Perhaps so.
But I was mad to some purpose if I shot the
right man.'

With a hoarse weak laugh he turned away,
and as she could not induce him to speak to me
again, I bade him good-night and held out
my hand, which, after a minute's consideration,

he took and even pressed limply for a moment
in his hot fingers. I had scarcely got to the
door when his wife began to scold him for his
ingratitude, and he startled us both by suddenly
finding voice enough to call me back.
He had struggled up on to his elbow, and a
rush of excitement had given him back his
strength for a few moments.

She shall hold her tongue ! ' he growled
angrily, by way of prelude, as I returned to
the bedside. ' By your own showing you have
loved Babiole seven years ? '

'Yes.'

And during these long walks I have
watched you take with her lately on Craigen-
darroch and through the forest, you have
never told her so ? '

Never. One can't be a man seven
years to be a scoundrel the eighth, Mr.
Elmer.'

Then which of us two ought to be the

most grateful now, I for your lending me a
roof to die under, or you for my bringing
back to you the woman you were a fool tolet
go before. '

It was an impossible question for me to
answer, and I was thankful that the dying
man's ears caught the sound of footsteps on
the stairs, which diverted his attention from
me and gave me an opportunity to escape.
Outside the door I met Babiole, who flitted
past me quickly as I went down. I saw
no more of the ladies that night, for both
stayed at the cottage. But next day when
Ferguson came to my room, he informed
me that the poor fugitive had died early that
morning.

I was sincerely thankful that the unfortunate
man had slipped so easily out of the
chain of troubles he had forged for himself,
since, as I expected, intelligence of the affair
had already got abroad, and two police officers

from Aberdeen came down early in the
afternoon, and were followed soon after by an
official of the asylum from which Elmer had
made his escape.

Then there were inquiries to be held, and
a great deal of elaborate fuss and formality
to be gone through before the bodies of my
poor friend and his crazy assailant could be
laid quietly to rest. I sent the two widowed
ladies away to Scarborough to recover from
the effects of the torturing interrogatories of
high - dried Scotch functionaries and gave
myself up to a week of the most dismal
wretchedness I ever remember to have endured,
until the half-dozen judicial individuals
who questioned me at various times and in
various ways concerning details, of most of
which I was entirely ignorant, succeeded in
reducing me to a state of abject imbecility in
which I answered whatever they pleased,
and went very near to implicating myself in

the double catastrophe which was the subject
of the inquiry. A tragic occurrence must
always have for the commonplace mind an
element of mystery ; if that element is not
afforded by the circumstances of the case, it
must be introduced by conjecture and ingenious
cross-questioning of witnesses. Therefore,
when at last the ' inquiry ' was ended,
and victim and assailant were both buried in
Glenmuick churchyard amid the stolid interest
of a little crowd of Highland women
and children, I found that I had become the
object of a morbid curiosity and horror as
the central figure of what had already become
a very ugly story.

I suppose that Fabian's death, the terrible
circumstances which surrounded it, and the
barrier they formed between myself and
Babiole, combined to make me more sensitive
than of old. It is certain that popular
opinion, about which I had never before

cared one straw, now began to affect me
strangely ; that my solitude became loneliness,
and although the old wander-fever burned in
me no longer, I began to feel that the mountains
oppressed me, and the prospect of being
snowed up with my books and my beasts, as
I had been many times before, lowered in my
horizon like a fear of imprisonment. I had
heard nothing from Babiole except through
her mother, whose letters were filled with
minute accounts of the paralysing effect her
husband's death seemed to have had upon the
younger lady. These tidings struck me with
dismay ! I began to feel that I had underestimated
the effect that such a shock would
have on a keenly sensitive nature, and to fear
that his tragic death had perhaps done more
to reinstate Fabian in the place he had first
held in her heart than years of penitent devotion
could have done. This conjecture became
almost conviction when, just as I had found

a pretext on which to visit the ladies, I received
a letter from Babiole herself which
struck all my hopes and plans to the ground.
It was written in such a constrained manner
that the carefully-chosen expressions of gratitude
and affection sounded cold and formal ;
while the purport of the letter stood out as
precise and clear as a sentence of death to me.
She was going away. She found it impossible
to impose longer upon my generosity, and
she had obtained the situation of companion
to a lady who was going to Algeria, and before
the letter announcing the fact was in
my hands, she would be on her way to
France.

I confess I could have taken more calmly
the burial of Larkhall and all it contained
under an avalanche. That she could go like
that, with no farewell but those few chilling
words, on a journey, to an engagement to
which she had bound herself, so she said, for

three years, was a shock so great that it
stunned me. To-to and Ta-ta both knew
that night there was something wrong, and
we sat, three speechless beasts, dolefully
round the fire, without a rag of comfort
between the lot of us. There was no use in
writing ; she was gone ; besides, I wasn't
quite a serf, and if she had no more feeling
than that for me now that she was free, well
at least she should not know that I was less
philosophical. So I doggedly resolved to
give up all thoughts of roaming, lest my ill-disciplined
feet should carry me where I was
not wanted ; and, presenting a respectful but
firm refusal to give up my lease of Larkhall
to a certain great personage who had taken a
fancy to it, I wrote a stupid letter to Mrs.
Elmer highly applauding her daughter's
action, and settled myself down again to the
bachelor life nature seems to have determined
me for.

VOL. II ^8

But the winds blow more coldly than they
used to do across the bleak moors, the mists
are more chilling than they used to be, and
the broad lines of snow on Lochnagar, that
I once thought such a pretty sight in the
winter sun, look to me now like the pale
fingers of a dead hand stretching down the
mountain side, the taper points lengthening
towards me day by day, even as the keen
and nipping touch of a premature old age
seems to threaten me as the new year creeps
on and the zest of life still seems dead, and
like a foolish woman who neglects the pleasures
within her reach to dream idly of those
she cannot have, I sneak through the deserted
rooms of the old cottage when the sinking of
the sun has allowed me to be maudlin without
loss of self-respect, and I won't answer for it
that I don't see ghosts in the silent rooms.
And after all, what right has a man of nearly
forty, and not even a decent-looking one at

that, to ask for better company ? Poor little
witch ! Let her wake up to love and happiness
with whom she will, after the feverish
dream of disappointed hope which I unwittingly
encouraged, I'll not blame her, and it
will go hard with me, but I'll bring a cheerful
face to her second wedding For a first love
which has not burnt itself out, but has been
extinguished at its height, leaves an Inflammable
substance very ready to ignite again on
the earliest reasonable provocation. And as
for me, I have To-to, Ta-ta, my books and my
pine-woods, and may be the spring will bring
me a better philosophy.

April.

PS. — Spring has done it ! Surely never
was such a spring since the hawthorn buds
first burst on the hedges, and the pale green
tips of the hart's-tongue first peeped out of

the fissures in the gray rocks by the Gairn.
It all came at once too — sweet air and sunshine,
and fresh bright green in the dark fringe
of the larches. Yesterday I swear we were
in the depths of as black and hard a winter as
ever killed the sheep in their pens, and splitting
the earth with frost, caused great slabs
of rock to fall from their place on Craigen-
darroch into the pass below ; but this morning
came Babiole's letter, and when I went out of
the house with that little sheet of paper against
my breast, I found that it was spring. She
is back in England ; she ' would be glad to
see me ' ; she * hopes I shall soon find some
business to take me to London.' I rather
think I shall ; my portmanteau is packed indeed,
my sandwiches are cut, the horse being
harnessed. And I haven't a fear for the end
now ; the embers are warm in her heart forme,
me to set glowing. The great personage
may have the lease of Larkhall at her pleasure ;

To-to and Ta-ta, and the rest of my small
household must follow me to a warmer home
in the South. For my exile is over, and I
am reconciled to my kind.

Babiole wants me ; God bless her !

THE END

G. c. a^ Co.

Printed by R. & R. Clark, Edinburgh

Monthly at all Booksellers and N'eivsagents, price \s.

The Temple Bar Magazine.

Who does not welcome TEMPLE Bar— John Bull.
PRICE One Shilling.

TEMPLE BAR is always good.— 6"/. Stephen's Review.

TEMPLE BAR is exceedingly readable.— 5^r?V0'.

TEMPLE BAR has capital contributions, fiction, fact, and fancy.
The World.

TEMPLE BAR continues to sustain the high prestige which
belongs to it. — County Gentleman.

TEMPLE BAR contains Biographical Notices.

TEMPLE BAR contains short stories complete in each number.

The ever-welcome story-tellers of TEMPLE BAR.— Jewish
World.

TEMPLE BAR very happily unites the best contents of the
magazine as it was known and flourished a decade and more since with
the features which readers demand in the modern review. The result
is very happy. — Starting and Dramatic.

TEMPLE BAR is invariably good. It is renowned for its high-class
fiction. — Bolton Guardian.

TEMPLE BAR is the most readable of magazines.— i'.z// Mall
Gazette.

TEMPLE BAR is of all English magazines the one which most
cunningly blends fiction with fact. — Figaro.

TEMPLE BAR is as good as usual. Few keep their level more
equally. — Spectator. July ii, 18S5.

TEMPLE BAR'S Biographical Papers are always interesting. —
Glasgow' Herald.

TEMPLE BAR contains Literary Articles.

Essays of the TEMPLE BAR type, solid yet vivacious, not too
learned, but not too superficial. — Manchester Examiner.

TEMPLE BAR contains Historical Reviews.

TEMPLE BAR has a well-established fame for admirable
Historical Articles. — Western Daily Mercury.

TEMPLE BAR has articles on French Literature.

French Literature and Literary Characters are always welcome in
Item PLE BAR. —Morning Post.

TEMPLE BAR is as good as ever, and that is saying a good
deal. — Lady's Pictorial.

TEMPLE BAR is sparkling and brilliant. It might command a
constituency by its fiction alone, but it takes so much care of its more
solid matter that, if there were no stories at all, there is enough to
interest the reader. — English Independent.

A Magazine for the Million. — Standard.

RICHARD Bentley & SOX, New Burlington ST., London.
